
      
         
            
            
            TWO LETTERS OR EMBASSIES.
            The one Sent by the States of Bohemia, to the Elector of Saxony: The other from the Popes Holines to the Emperour, concerning the Troubles of Germany.
            
            Printet, at Amsterdam. 1620.
         
         
            
            
            To his assured Friend, H C. at his Lodging neere Bishops-Gate in London.
            
               Sr. If I should send you ouer the Relations both in Latin, Dutch, and French, which come to this Towne concerning the variety of Newes about the troubles of Europe, I should weary you with the multiplicity of Bookes, and my selfe with the cunning of transportation: Besides, I am sure to bee preuented in sending you Newes, because it will bee stale ere it come to your handes by my meanes: Therefore I desist from either troubling you or my selfe in that kinde, and yet haue I chanced on something, which I am sure none can helpe you to, but by my meanes: So it is then, that there, came to my hands two seuerall Coppies of seuerall Letters, one from Wittenberg, as the summe of an Embacy from the States of Bohemia to the Duke of Saxony, concerning his Desertion of the King in these tumultuous times: another from Mr. Fodringham in Vienna, written by the Pope to the Emperour, concerning the pacification of the Troubles, and admission of a Peace (if the motiue might bee correspondent to his Honour) rather then aduenture to bee terrified with so much effusion of Blood, or hazard the Dignity of the Empire, by letting the Warres goe forward. And these as you see I haue Printed heere in Amsterdam, and they are so pleasing to the Inhabitants heere, that I presume, they will bee as

acceptable there to all the welwillers of the Bohemian Affaires: and so wishing your Contentment in the ouerreading, bee bolde that whensoeuer any thing comes worthy of you, you shall not fayle of it. For I am still your Friend:
            
               WILLIAM BARLOW.
            
         
         
            
            The Introduction.
            RVmor hauing played a true womans part through the Citty of Prague, concerning the Duke of Bauaria's comming to Lintz, and the Duke of Saxonyes declaratiue Letters to the Emperour, that the Marquesse Spinola was approaching with a formidable preparation to assist him, and hee himselfe would not be behinde in any duty, which belonged to his obseruation, or the Dignity of the Empire: thrust herselfe at last into the presence of the King, and the greatest Councellors of Estate, but in such a manner, as if she durst iustifie her lauish tongue, and tooke a pleasure in the ampliation, which yet briefly had these maine passages:
            
               1 First, that Saxony and Bauaria combined themselues to illustrate the glory of the House of Austria, and by no meanes to leaue either Emperour, or Empire in the cruell hands of reuolters, if either they could procure their deliuery, or by any prouidence conserue their renowne:
            
               2 That the Marquesse Spinola had more forcible reasons in his approaches, as resoluing to reduce the Subiects of Bohemia (whom hee termed Rebels to the Emperour) to their pristinate obedience, wherein if hee found any retardance, hee would shew them the angry faces of 20000. men, so prouided out of the storehouse of Power and Pollicy, that the world should record it as a remarkable president, and they be confounded to vnderstand, what their wilfulnes had incurred.
            
               3 That presently Don Lewis de Velasco, hauing fortified Wesell, and left a sufficient Garrison both in it and other Townes subiect to surprises vpon the aduantage of his

absence, should follow him, as a second in the prosecution of greater Designes.
            
               4 That the Catholicke Bishops, and other secular Princes, would fill vp this well bound sheafe with their Arrowes, and make the Hierogliphick an absolute resemblance of indissolluble and vnresistable strength.
            
               5 That these free Cittyes of the Empire would open their Gates, yea breake downe their walles, rather then this Sinons Horse should stand without, and not offer sacrifice in the Temple of Pallas.
            
            Thus was this Mattachene of report danced euen in the Kings Castle and Pallace, and if mischiefe had had a tricke to affright them indeed, or startle their resolutions from standing in their firmnesse, it so fell out, that it ranne like a voyce of Thunder, and meant to follow one another in sequence. But it should seeme, no arme of Flesh could turne the frame of Heauen about: and there was a stronger hand ready to throw a stone to strike Nabuchadnezars Image in peeces: For they were all so farre from being daunted, or terrified with imposturing apparitions, that they were rather exasperated, and encouraged to Opposition: Yea it is saide, that the inuincible and Heroyick Queene kneeled downe with lifted handes to Heauen, desiring God to accept of her, as a propitiary Sacrifice, rather then his Iustice might not haue her prosperous course in the punishment of sinnes, or the now glory of her Husband suffer diminution, or so much as a controll from the Enemies of the Gospell, and aduersaries of the Kingdomes prosperity: To this (besides the admiration at her magnanimity) both King and Nobles, Cittizens and Commons, Gent. and Souldiers, Protestants and Papists, Priests and Cleargie men, yea all that had participated with

the particulars, combined themselues to shake off these drops of threatning rumor, and be sheltred from the greater storme of a publike Enemy.
            Notwithstanding it was thought conuenient to send an Embacy to Iohn George Duke of Saxony, and Prince Elector, to put him in minde of the auncient League and amitie, which euer continued betweene the Bohemian State and the House of Saxony, and to knowe from a personall information, how he stood affected in this Warre, or disposed to the assignation of his Forces, or what might bee the cause of his desertion in this so great a busines, which concurred with the propagation of the Gospell, and the Liberty of oppressed people. Whereupon there were two out of each of the three States of Bohemia deligated to this imployment with an orderly proportion of attendants, besides a Secretary of eminency, who came in good time to Presula, and there found the Duke.
            It is said, that at the first, there was some difficulty in their entertainment and admission, as from a King indeed: For 1. whether priuate emulation against the Palsgraues aduancement, whom before hee held in equall rancke with himselfe. 2. Or sinister occasions like vntoward weedes choked vp the growth of better Corne, 3. Or neernesse of Consanguinity drawing his loue to the Emperour. 4. Or a iealousie concerning the diminution of the greatnesse of the Common-wealth, beeing thus dilacerated and diuided. 5. Or a superstitious blindnes in the case of the Roman Religion wrought him out of the possession of better thoughts, or diuerted him from that respect so meritorious a Prince excited, I will not now dispute: onely I am sure hee would neither willingly allow them the titles of such a Kings Ambassadors; nor affoord them that audience, which their message

both imported and deserued, till at last his Councell beeing most of them well affected to the King, and his Religion, ouer wrought him to condiscend to the Law of Nations and Liberty of all royall Prouinces: So they had a Day of audience, and the Duke for all his minde was intangled with an intricate businesse, and farre reaching Proiects, yet heard them the sooner, the sooner to bee ridde of them, and so the Secretary thus began:
            
               FREDERICKE by the grace of God King of Bohemia, Duke of Bauaria, Palatine of the Rhine: and so as followeth in his Maiesties iust Titles, with the three States of the Common-wealth of Prague, and Protectors of the Incorporated Prouinces, sendeth greeting to the High and Mighty Prince IOHN GEORGIVS, Duke of Saxony, Iuliers, and Cleues, Elector of the Sacred Empire, &c.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Most Mightie & Illustrious Prince,
               
            
            WEe cannot Coniecture, except it please you to enlarge your selfe, wherin any aspect of ours hath bene maleuolent toward you, or occasion raised it selfe to such an height, that you thinke it meete, either with a rough hand to keepe it vnder, or forcible arme to bring it to humiliation.
            As for the particulars of the Kingdome, & all our suffrages in this so well contriued Election, I hope you expect not more at our hands now, then you haue receiued diuers times by priuate Letters, or daily read out of iustifiable Treatises: As for the secret of preseruation, which comes from instinct of nature, and glorious manumition of distracted subiects; I hope you make no question of the lawfulnes, & necessitie of our well begun Courses. As for the grieuances of the Commons, and convulsions of the Prouinces, wherin no man liued secure, while the tyrannie of our Gouernours lasted: The opening of our graues, the disquieting of buried soules, the displacing of setled offices, the teares of Widowes, the cryes of Orphanes, the wringing hands of Matrons, the rauishing of Virgins, the outrages in euery Citie; and in a worde, the complaints of rich and poore haue long before this, Ecchoed in your Eares, & drawne commiseration from your Hart.
            As for the secrets of Gouernment, what can be more implyed out of all prescription, then the glory of God, 2. The honor of a Kingdome, 3. The good of the People, 4. And the renowne of the Prince. In

all which, it is well knowne our Princes haue fayled; As 1. dishonouring God by a manifest approbation of thinges contrary to his worde, 2. Disgracing the Kingdome, by violating her Lawes, abrogating her Priuiledges, threatning her Peace, subiecting her to strangers, and tying her as it were to the whipping-Poasts of crueltie and injustice, 3. Abusing the People, by affrighting them with the rages of exorbitant actions, and suffring no man in the securitie & benefit of his owne possessions, 4. As defaming themselues, by the scandalous Imperiousnesse of wicked Counsellors, and weaknes of Iudgement to be ouer-awed in all their actions, by the passionate wilfulnes of such as were enemies to God and men.
            As for the cause of Religion, Remember I pray you what the Statist Steephen King of Poland was wont to say, That he was a King of men, but not of Consciences; A Commaunder of bodies, but not of soules: And what vnheard-of mischiefs haue the Iesuites bred, the Inquisition procured, the Pope contriued, the Emperors continued; and all long of that terrible Vow the Iesuites caused him to make; rather to loose the Dignitie of his Tytle, the benefit of his Diademe, and the comfort of his Life, then a Protestant should enioy the liberty of his Conscience, or a Church publiquly opened for the exercise of true Religion.
            As for the Emperor himselfe, if your Loue were neuer so great, or your passion transported beyond limitation; what gouernment did euer admit of the Vsurpation of strangers? and how dangerously haue the hartes of all Kingdomes beene eaten vpon by

the hungry teeth of mercinary Souldiers?
            Were not the Gothes and Vandales brought in as auxiliary to the Emperors of the East, and when they learn'd their Discipline, and had possession of their Armes, they learn'd also to turne their Pikes into the brests of the weaker side, and so was Europe subiected? Thus againe was Brittany diuers times Conquered, Spayne ouer-runne by the Mores, and the rest brought vnto all vnrest by this course.
            For what can we expect lesse then desolation and dissolution of Gouernment & Religion? If either the Emperors had continued in their former outragiousnes, or Ferdinand who doth now attempt to fill your free Cities with Garisond Spanyards, or allow of the vsurpation of such as would deride our miseries, and tryumph to see vs feed vpon one an others bowels, with a rauening desire of confusion.
            As for reputing vs Rebels, or the diminution of the Emperors Tytles and glory of the Austrian Famely, we haue only from being slaues, made our selues subjects of a Lawfull Prince, wherein the proofes are extant from all times and authoritie; and neither that, nor any thing heere spoken, need illustration from the Lawes of our Country, or the credit of Authors, who haue diuers times seene a King of Hungary, a King of Bohemia, and an Emperor of Germany, in seuerall distinct Persons: Nor doe we see why Austrias few yeares of possession, should debarre all other Famelies from the Empire it selfe, especially damme vp our encloasures, that we shall not giue libertie to our owne immunities and Priuiledges.
            
               And therfore is there neither such cause of repining in you, nor cruelty in him. For alas, what must be the end of these dissentions, but the pulling of Germaines peace & prosperity in peeces, and the filling our fields with the slaughtered Carkasses of Innocents, whose Fatherlesse Children will crye for vengeance, till the heauens powre it downe vpon the heads of the delinquents.
            As for any thing else, which either you haue, or can obiect; it hath bene long since answered: and although Princes neede not giue an account of their actions, yet haue wee published our iustifications, and written both to your selfe, the Emperour, and Bauaria: So that if the warre continue, God knowes, we are meere defendants, and our King is his substitute for Religion and the Common-wealth, and would bee loath to see you bring fuell to the flames of this disturbance, or make the tyranny and ambition of another a pitt to praecipitate your selfe in without recouery.
            Therefore (Most Illustrious Prince) seeing these thinges are so, and autentically approued by all sufficiency; why should your disallowance either manifest a willingnes to infringe the amity, and Confederation with the Bohemian State: or show a tumor of some priuate passion against an immaculate Prince, and louing Neighbour, or the Vnion of other Princes, who haue combined themselues to withstand a publicke Enemy.
            So that if neither the generall cause of the Empires peace; the blessed worke of the Propagation of the

Gospell; the priuate respect of our grieuances; the auncient combination of the Prouinces; the extraordinary worth of our King; nor any other motiue bee the threed, to leade you out of the Laberinth of this disquiet, yea manifest seduction to eternal confusion: Remember your owne Ancestors, and the glorious actions, whereby they haue shined like faire mouing Planets in perspicuous Orbes, from whose influence could proceed nothing but sweet presages.
            O what a Story is registred of your FREDERICKE Duke of Saxony, about the yeare 1520. for Luthers security and defence against the then malicious aduersaries of the Ghospell! euen when the Popes indulgences and Pardons brought remission of sinnes, and plenary freedome out of Purgatory! when the Dragon watched the woman, that her birth might bee deuoured! when fire and vengeance was threatned against the Heretickes, and the Emperour himselfe proued the Churches Champion, and tooke vpon him for Romes sake, to Curse and fulminate against Zealous professors, or any innouators of the Papisticall Hierarchy.
            
            Then did the Noble Fredericke guard Luther to Wormes, and in the presence of the Emperour demaunded of Erasmus, whether his reasons and arguments were consonant to the word of Truth? and they might (as the Bereans did) try the Doctrine by the Scriptures. Then were the Prophesies of Hierom of Prague, & Iohn Hus remembred and Disputed vpon, as if euen now they had their time of expiration. Then was Iohn Hilton a Monck imprisoned for discouering the abuses

of the Roman Clergie, and released againe for continuing constant in the case of the reformed Religion, both against the will of the Pope and Emperour, and all by a Duke of Saxony. Then was Veselus, Picus Mirandula, Laurentius Valla, Erasmus of Roterdam, and many others acceptable to your Ancesters, and they gloried in nothing more, then the protection and patronizing of such Saints of God. Then could that worthy Prince hearing of a storme, that strucke the Angell on the top of the Popes Pallace to the ground, praesage, it was an ominous signe of the fall of Babilon, and decay of the Popes glory; and when not long after hee heard of 31. Cardinals made at a time, yea in such a time, when a Lightning & Thunder struck the Childe out of the Virgins armes, and the Keyes out of Peters handes, being both Images in the Church, his Zeale and deuotion burst out, that sure God was offended with them, and would reduce their ambition, and prophane Ceremonies to a better humiliation and conformity: And this was Fredericke of Saxony.
            
            After him succeeded Iohn Fredericke, of whom the Emperour was as suspitious as the other: and therefore as it were to serue him into the amity and league of Spaine and Austria, they contriued to marry him to Lady Katherine the Emperours sister, and so thought themselues secure of him: Notwithstanding when he was sent for to beare the Sword before the Emperour at Masse, he would not goe, till hee was resolued of diuers Diuines, whether hee might or no with a safe Conscience: I will not (saith he) make a president of immitation of Naamans the Syrians going into

the Temple of Rimmon with the King, to pollute my selfe with an vnlawfull mixture: whereupon they resolued him, that he might goe, because he was sent for, but not endure Masse, because it was so grosse a sinne, and filthy an Idoll.
            I will not name the release of the Lantsgraue of Hesse, nor other disceptations against the Emperour, and all wrought by the House of Saxony, euen to make sad againe the hearts of elated men, who at last grew disaffected with their owne glory: So that when Charles the 5. saw their resolutions to deny him a succession in the Empire for his Sonne Phillip, he tooke a calmer course, and left his Brother Ferdinand to wrastle with the Germane Protestant Princes, and went himselfe directly into a Monastery.
            With what a faire and euen course were the affaires of Rodulphus Emperour carryed, as aduised by your Princes to proclayme the Confession of Auspurg, which they had bought out with great summes of money of Maximilian and Ferdinand his predecessors? whereby the Protestants had many sweet entercourses to heare the worde of God, and thought no pleasure of the world comparable to the blessed society of Gods people; but to neerer times.
            How carefull was your Brother Christian the 2. late Elector of Saxony, of the peace of the Empire, and in a manner iealious of the liberty of the Protestants, least it might fall into the handes of Violence? This made him write to Mathias King of Hungary, concerning the eleuation of the House of Austria, that sure hee tooke a wrong course both with the Church and Common-welth,
               
especially our selues, whome he found startling frō the obedience of a tyrannous Gouernment, and affrightings of vnconscionable Vsurpation. For said he, what will you get by your Spanish Garisons, and Spanish factions in those Kingdomes, but an vnwilling & enforced obedience to your present Authority, and vtter rejection to your future Posterity? what will the tyranny of the Inquisitiue Iesuites come to, but a plaine infatuating and imposturing of your Zeale and Deuotion, and the peoples manifestation of murmurings and grudges against so fearefull a worke? what will the bringing in of the Inquisition it selfe contriue, but in the beginning, cursses and repinings from euery mans mouth, and in the end hate and rebellion in euery mans heart?
            To this effect were your Brothers Letters, and what hath followed, I neede not enlarge; seeing now the clamours of Warre on euery side eccho out the same, and our iustifications haue beene as a Bonarges, or the sound of many waters.
            Nay, did not Duke Iohn Ernestus not long a goe send to his owne Vniuersitie of Iena, and then they of Iena to the Vniuersitie of Wittenberg, and therein to persons of name Iohn Maior Superintendent, and Iohn Gerrard, Doctors of Diuinitie for the sollution of certaine difficulties in 
                  〈…〉
                Designes, especially the waging of 
                  〈…〉
                of Forces? who returned answers, that 
                  〈…〉
                to the worde of God, either to assist the Papists against the Protestants and professors of true Religion, or according to your owne State positions (which you would now haue the

busines of the Empire) to bring in Strangers to tyrannize ouer the peace of contracted Neighbours, wherin the Law of Nations haue beene alwayes so preualent, and the Customes of Germany so powerfull, that euen opposite Princes haue laide aside for the time all ill will and vnkindnes, to vnite their Forces against a common Enemy, or propulse vnusuall innouation. This act was played by the Triumuiri at Ierusalem against the Romans, by the dissentious Brittons against Caesar, by your owne Prouinces against the Gothes and Vandalls, till they were quite driuen into Italy and Spaine.
            
            And what vnkinde hand hath now throwne filthines or durt into the pure streame of your former resolutions? or what fearefull incantation hath vnbound you from the mast of constancy, to hearken to the Syrens song of ambitious deceiuers, who are resolued to shed the blood of Innocents, and vnder the colour of reuenging the wrongs, wherein wee are supposed delinquents, and foraging the Palatinate with pretence to diuert the Warre thither, as by Spinola's formidable approaches may appeare, lye in waite for nothing, but the generall diminution of Germaines happines, and particular pollution of Gods altar with the trumperies of mens inuentions?
            Oh hearken not to su
                  〈…〉
               : nor giue way to a contamination, 
                  〈…〉
                wiped off: For though you could bee 
                  〈…〉
                to forget Vs, yet remember your selfe: Though you could giue way to the desertion of Bohemians amity, yet there is no forsaking of mercy, nor the loue of God and heauen:

Though you could reioyce in the sincking and beating downe of an enemy, yet be not an enemy to your owne soule, nor hazard the losse of eternall reward: For it is now Gods cause, and the people will liue and dye in the defence of their Religion: Oh that the Emperour himselfe would hearken to the voyce, that told Saul, there was no kicking against the pricke! and if a Lightning from Heauen strucke him from his horse and made him blinde, what shall the armies of Gods Angels doe, when hee meanes to deliuer his people? Be not therefore transported to fight against God, or with the olde Gyants to begin a new warre, and throw the mountaines against Heauen. For I am fully perswaded, that you thinke, how Antechrist is not onely discouered, but know, he shall be punished, yea laide open in this world to the hissing of all the passengers; and then woe to the Princes of the earth, that haue worshipped the Beast, and drunke of the Cup of the Strumpet, that rideth vpon the Beast.
            But leauing Religion, which yet will not be left out of Gods account, What stumbling blocke of offence hath bene further laide, or who hath cast these rubs in your smooth walke to amity & former combination?
            Is it the person of our King you maligne? Oh say not so: For if euer Titus was called Deliciae generis humani, He may well be proclaymed the Prince of happines and Peace, as a man composed by Nature, ordayned of God, selected by Prophesie, confirmed by Miracle, and established by all our suffrages, as if the Dignity belonged vnto him, as a Prince, and other blessings, as a happy man.
            
               Is it our reuoltings you disalow of, as if either the rejection of Ferdinand were not lawfull, or ratification of this our choyse suspencible? Why, wee haue answerd it to the whole world, that when Mathias had his owne endes in the adoption and inauguration of this man to the Kingdome of Bohemia, for which he left him a pledge of his loue the Towne of Budwis: It was absolutely contrary to his owne Oath, and our immunities and Priuiledges. For neither did the incorporated Prouinces know of it, nor wee our selues condiscended to the agreement: but onely certain Iesuites the firebrands of Hell, ran vp and downe to set all in combustion, and with Meleagers mother tooke the torch of his Life in a rage, and held it downeward, till the flame was extinguished, and other traytors of our owne, molded to another Impression by the warming handes of Spanish Papists, and all to let out the blood of their Mother, I meane their Countrey and Common-wealth, to see her languish and perish before their faces for priuate respects, or some praedestinated vengeance to fall vpon their owne heads.
            Is it the obseruation of the Emperour himselfe, or respect to his Family? wherein hath he deserued better of reputation, then your selfe, or other Princes of Germany? or what hath beene done these 100. yeares for the good of Christendome? or why shall this glowing meteor or exhalation darken the light of truer starres, and more radiant Planets? Hath he not abused the trust committed vnto him, by betraying all your Princely liberties into the handes of Strangers, and setting vp the Spaniards Monarchy in the Westerne
               
world to the terrifying of all Christian Princes? For what Nation haue they not beene tampering withall, euen to the placing of Soldiers and garisons amongst them. I hope Italy hath knowne them, and the Ilands of those Seas. Ireland hath had them, and felt some endurances for them. France bin tormented by them; the Grisons haue still their forte Fuentes: The passages of some Mountaines are kept by them. Sauoy is full of them. Hungary is not yet freed of them. Austria swarms with them: our selues are but newly ridde of them, some Imperiall townes, as Wesell and others possessed by them, and euen at this instant is hee calling in of greater troopes amongst you.
            Is it the care of the Empire you shoot at? how can that be? when by these Warres all Gouernment must be turmoyled, and that natiue beauty of our peace and prosperity made adulterate by Iesabels paintings and the thicke laide colours of wicked pollicy, when the slaughtered Armies of Christians shall pollute your fields & Cities, and fill your swolne eyes with tears for the losse of Parents, Husbands, Children, friends, &c.
            Is it the Popes Curse you are afraide of? Why thats impossible, considering that hee now resembles a fire in a painted cloath, which neither yeeldeth warmth nor lustre. For his Fulminations are now made ridiculous, and his Cursings proue like Balaams corruption, who for all the King of Moabs promises, sang a Parable of blessings to Ifraell: nay you may be assured, that the time of his desolation is comming faster on then the winde, and the Prouinces are falling away like vntempered Morter from a wall.
            
               Is it Spaines mightines you stand in awe of? Be not amated! He hath many Territories indeed; but may thanke the endeauours of other Princes, as also the slacknes of some, who gaue way to his owne seruitors, whē they had first offred the West Indyes to themselues: He is rich indeed, but hath much to doe with his money, and greater charges to defray, then present reuenues can supply! He is strong indeed, but is beholding to the Peace of other Kingdomes, and the honesty of such Nations, as make a conscience in infringing of an Oath.
            Is it the Marquesse Spinola's Army which terrifies you? I answer briefly with Elisha to his seruant, there are more with vs then with them: and it is but the opening of eyes to see Chariots and the horsmen of Heauen on the mountaine tops: But I could say thus much further, that you haue the more cause to adhaere to the Princes of the Vnion, and propulse a common enemy, of whom I will onely apply that, which Count Meloun assured the English in the later time of King Iohn, that if Lewis of France had preuailed, hee was resolued to destroy all such first, as prooued Traytors to their Countrey, and led him by the Arme to trample on the bruised body of England: So say wee euen to the Catholicke Bishops themselues, whether Warre or Peace, they will repent this hard bargaine with disturbance, and when they see their exaltation depressed, or liberty vsurped, cry out vpon the first cause of their troubles, and name the Iesuites, as so many Incendiaries of a Common-wealth.
            For had they not bene better to haue continued in

their Electiue powers for the choyse of their Emperours, and let the Confession of Auspurg alone to the freedome of mens Consciences, and the quieting of free Citties? Then now to bee assured, that the Protestants will neuer be reclaymed, nor taught other lesson then to Fight for their Religion, and the glory of the Gospell; yea to hazard their owne Liues and Dignities: So that whether wee, or strangers preuaile, it lyes in the will and choyse of the Victors, to deale with the vanquished at their pleasures.
            Is there any thing else! you make a scruple of? Oh that there were nothing else, then might these Obiections bee easily answered, and a iudicious man soone satisfied: Yet if you conceale the same, it must prooue like the Oyntments shut vp in boxes, which seldome are smelt to the refreshing of the sences, till they bee vncouered or powred out: Oh doe not therefore Exaestuate your griefes by suppression, but let the wounds be opened, and gently searched, least they grow vlcerous, ranckle and proue incurable! And if any imputation lye vpon vs, wee will be bolde to say (sauing the Dignity of our King) wee will easily descend to acknowledgement, and you shall quickly finde the benefit of satisfaction.
            Therefore for Gods sake, for Religions sake, for your owne sake, for your Ancestors sake, for your Countries sake, let there bee a better reposednes, and recollection of those contracts of amity, which euer were betweene your House and Bohemia, yea with faster bindings, and more reciprocall obseruation, then with any other Prouinciall Prince. Oh let the Liberty

of the Germaines, and the glory of their Citties be exposed vnto you; which must otherwise feele a kinde of torture by the racking handes of compulsion and hostility! Oh let the beauty of Concord (if it be possible) shine, that beginneth to hide her head vnder the thickning cloudes of trouble, and mischiefes! I spare instances of moderne times, I spare examples of olde times, I spare precepts of all times, I spare your owne relations from the rending a sunder, by disagreement; nay I spare to put you in minde of the present necessity, concerning the good of all Christendome.
            For although hee that holdeth the Windes in his handes, hath also held the rages of the Turke from those formidable extentions of ambition and tyranny, which haue formerly beene displayed in the Countries of Asia, and Greece; in the fieldes of Hungary; before the walles of Vienna; at the siedge of Malta; and many other obsessions: Yet you heare, how he hath of late visited Italy; brought 80. Gallies into the gulph of Venice, landed 2000. Ianisaries, sacked the Towne of Manfredonio in Brutia, and carryed away the inhabitants; so that while poore Christians looke vpon one another, with longing hearts for the pacification of these affrightings, hee ouerlookes Vs all with polliticke eyes to pry into our weaknesse, and take aduantage of our dissentions. Yea, for all his League with Bethelem Gabor Prince of Transiluania, and praefixed day to Crowne him King of Hungary, yet without controuersie doth hee make vse of the troubles of Germany, and is not to be trusted in his best reconciliation.
            
               I could name and set downe the very manner of gratefying our King, with animating him in his best prosecutions, as if he had bene distasted with the Emperours vaine-glorious insulting ouer vs; but they be thinges beyond our C
                     •
                  mmission, and so impertinent to our purpose in hand?
            For we onely come to moue your Princelines to the renouation of former Leagues, and combination of a perpetuall Amity, or manifestation of some cause for this your desertion in the time of such expectation. Nay, wee are ready to attend you, though you exemplifie no reason at all, but a glorious Spirit to manifest your Greatnes, or wilfulnes to prepare your liberty to support whom you please? For if it be so, there may be some hope of the compassion which will follow, when necessity shall whisper preseruation in your eares, and draw commiseration from your heart to preuent the slaughters of so many Christians, and peraduenture the captiuity of your freest Citties: Whereas now there is not so much as a thought of prouidence, nor a worde of preuention, nor any Positions of State, among whome this is Autenticall, that weake beginnings, and the worst sort of men may be instruments to set mischiefe on worke, but troubles are not pacified without iudgement, and men of approued wisdome.
            Therefore once againe (most Illustrious Prince) we beseech you, let vs returne to our King, as the explorators of Canaan did to the Israelites: For although tenne of them did talke of Enakims and Giants of iron gates and high walles; of strong Cities & formidable

passages; yet did Caleb and Iosua assure them of a plentifull Country and Vberant Vineyards, of sweete increases and many blessings; of well erected Citties and rich Terretories; of pleasant Fields and excellent Fruites: of all which they came to a diuision, and a the fulnes of time glorified God for their exaltation.
            Now the same God worke vpon your heart to admit of some lenatiue impression, and send vs home with a happy message, that the publicke good of Christendome hath ouer-wrought you, not onely to wish well to Zion, or peace to Ierusalem, but to endeauour a pacification of these miseries, and some Noble prosecution, whereby the Emperour may bee cooled in the heate of his reuenges.
         
         
            
            To his approued Friend Mr. William Barlow, now dwelling in Amsterdam.
               GOod Sr.
            
            according to the reciprocall contract between vs of Writing to one another, concerning such thinges as may pleasure either, I thought good once againe to acquaint you with something worthy of your acceptation, and my report, which is the Coppy of a Letter written from the Pope to the Emperour, concerning the pacification of the troubles of Europe: For although the counterchangeable oppositions of these great Princes, haue made Report flowe like a sea with the Accidents of the times, as in all Countries and Languages is apparant: yet for any thing wee either heare or see in Vienna, neither are the Pope, Emperour, nor angry Iesuites, so confident of successe, but if they could perswade their polliticke Honours, aswell as their affrighted Soules, they would bee glad to hide their eyes from effusion of Blood, & keepe their harts within the bounds of some Charity and humaine affection, as by this Letter may appeare, which I wish with all my heart were published. For I am resolued the true hearted Christian will make vse of it to Gods glory, and his owne comfort: And so I referre it and my selfe to your kinde admission of my indissolluble Loue, which sendeth you greeting from Vienna, this 26th. of October: and from your assured Friend,
            
               THO: FRODRINGHAM.
            
         
         
            
            Pope Paulus Quintus sendeth greeting to the Emperour FERDINAND, and King of the Romans:
            
               Sacred and Imperiall Sonne;
            
            I Remember a speech of Tacitus, that it was a signe of Treason, or trayterous disposition, when a Generall meant onely to write to his Enemy, when with like facillity hee might haue repulsed him by force of Armes: so may you obiect against me, that you wonder at a Letter, when you expected both men and money: But then you must wonder at the alteration of times too, and peraduenture the necessity of our Fortune: For it fareth not now with vs, as when the Empire it selfe came as it were from our donation, and the Diadems of Princes were the Vtensels of our Houshold, as when Charles the Great dissipated the cloude of Vengeance, with the Gothes and Lombards, thickned against the shining sunne of our Prelacie, as when the Prouinces and Kingdomes of Europe were affraid of our Curse, and Excommunication of our Church: as when Religion was locked vp in our Conclaue, and not opened without Peters Keyes, as when a Sonne for our sakes would chastice the rebellion of a Father, and one Nation scourge another at the intercession of a Legat: The examples are so plentifull, that euen Heretickes, haue gotten them in their mouthes to spit in our faces: It fareth not with vs, as when true deuotion tyed the Consciences of men to the obseruation of

our pleasure, and no vpstart Familist durst broach a strange Doctrine to our preiudice: When Faith was predominant in our hearts, and honest simplicity liued out our liues and actions, beleeuing onely what the Church did teach, and practising nothing but with modesty and obedience: then were the Halcion dayes of our glory, and how euer Heretickes haue characterd them with ignorance and superstition, yet questionles as in Martiall discipline Soldiers must not bee acquainted with euery secret, but simply yeeld obedience to their Commanders: so in the matters of the Church, men were neuer at so much peace of Conscience, as when they knew not how to trouble their soules beyond their vnderstandings: In a word, it fareth not with vs, as when the Vnity of Church and Common-wealths resembled a sheaue of Arrowes, strongly bound together, which was that way indissolluble, but diuided a sunder they were easily snapped in peeces one by one; then were the Kingdomes of Europe of one vnanimity, and if any vpstart Heretickes brake out, or furious Scismatickes approached to the holy Altar with violence, they were quickly enforced backe, and taught a lesson of obedience, either by generall Councels, whereat many times 400. Bishops were gathered together, or the power of an Army, which came at our becke from all the quarters of Christendome.
            But now, and in your owne particular Most deare Sonne, 1. The times are altered, 2. Religion is confounded, 3. And the Prouinces are deuided.
            1 First concerning the times, you see, that Princes

are so iealious one of anothers Greatnes, that neither law of Marriage or Conscience can detaine them within the limites of humanity, especially Charity, as reioycing in the good one of another, but they will confederate euen with those, they hate, to cast blocks and hinderances in the way of one another, if there be but a suspition, that he runneth on too fast to Greatnes: This began (for our moderne times) in the time of Charles the Fift, with whome England and many other Prouinces ioyned against the French: but no sooner was the King taken Prisoner at Pauy, but they fell backe againe to a commiseration of his affliction, and began to assist him in a new recouery. This hath continued against your House of Austria, and my Sonne of Spaine: For euer since Burgundy and yee haue beene Vnited, whereby Charles left the Empire to his younger Brother, you see the world hath cryed out, that Spaine would bee the Monarch of the West, and the Iesuites by his assistance vsurpe the dignity of the Church, and by a new superintendency ouertop the Authority of the Papacy. This hath made seuerall Kinges oppose themselues against Spaine, and now seueral Prouinces fall from your obedience, as if the Angels prophesie against Ismael, were verified; That his hand should be against euery man, & euery mans hand against him. Yea this will end against the Low-Countries themselues, who fill the Seas with formidable Nauies, and haue such strong Citties, Ramparts, and Armies, that already they begin to be feared, and already fall vnder the hand of watching and ouerlooking. Beleeue it then, that in this point alone of suspition of your

Greatnes, not naming other collaterall causes of hate, Cruelty, oppression, defending our Supremacy, enriching your selfe and such like, there will euer remaine a tricke of pollicy, if not to trip vp your heeles for running at all, yet to pull you backe as it were by the sleeue from making too much hast, so that I see no remedy, but that you must be contented to yeeld to the time, and rather to keepe somthing, then loose all: For howeuer the greatnes of your Spirit may commaund obedience, and the goodnes of the cause plead possession; yet necessity is a predominant mischiefe, and they are fooles that will perish in an obstinacy, repugnant to Fortune: Remember that Hanniball had possession of Italy 17. yeares, and might haue tryumphed in Rome, if he had taken his time: but when Scipio diuerted the Warre, Carthage was besieged, and Carthage knew not, how to bee relieued, till Hanniball was recalled: so the great Captaine was disapointed in his Proiects, and compelled to yeeld to the Roman glory. I speake not by way of Prophesie but precept, that in all extremities the law of preseruation comes from instinct of Nature, and to preuent a greater mischiefe, men must, and may endure some inconuenience; and so much for the time.
            2 Concerning Religion, which yet is not the Emperours plea, nor the Empires cause, you see the alteration: many good Mothers bring forth bad Daughters, Truth begets hatred, Familiarity contempt, Charity idlenes, and Knowledge presumption, with such like. For euer since the common people haue beene licenced to reade the Scriptures, and make

their owne interpretations, they haue startled from the obedience of the Church, and cryed out vpon liberty, as though their Consciences like vntam'd Heyfers were let loose, and they tyed vnto no rules and Lawes but of their owne deuising: this hath made so many mechanicke men presumptuous, and silenced women audacious; that a poore ignorant Cobler dare compare with a Father of the Church, and a tatling woman instead of being instructed by her Husband, take vpon her to rule both husband and family: This hath set on worke certaine strange spirits to rayle vpon order and conformity, euen in the Churches of Heretickes themselues, that they haue denyed them to be Churches, but the vnswept roomes of Antechrist, because of some enormities, and imperfections in men and Gouernment, which are, were, and shall be in this militant Church, till the comming of Christ to Iudgement. This hath deuided the Countries of Europe, and taught hipocrites and foolish Libertines a glorious lesson of defending the Gospell of CHRIST and his Saincts, whereby they haue vaine-gloriously taken vp Armes against the Church, and their Prnces; so that if successe haue not smoothly looked vpon them, but Iustice submitted them to the punishment of Impiety, they haue confounded Treason and Martyrdome together, and taught their blasphemous tongues to cry out, Sanguis Martirium semen Ecclesiae, as though euery rebell and raging pesant, punished for transgression, must bee therefore Charactered a Saint of God; so that this Gangren is spreading ouer the whole body, and for any thing I see remediles, vnlesse wee could

cut off that poysoned ioynt where it began. Againe, if their commotions and Convulsions of the Empire it selfe haue thriued with aduantages of victory, and preuailing; then haue they dared to publish the right of their Cause, and exclaime against Rome for Babilon, against our Holines for the man of Sinne, against our Church for Antechristian, against our Sonnes the Catholicke Princes for the Kinges that haue drunke of the Cup of abhomination, and against your Imperiall Maiesty, as the Beast with 10. hornes spoken of in the aenigmaticall Prophesie of St. Iohn: nay these thinges are so imprinted in the mindes of most men and Nations, that euery man is almost so farre from retraction, or a seeming sorrow of doing amisse, that (so they may haue the name of Religion in their mouthes) they are ready to take vp Armes against their natiue Lords, and thinke it a glory to colour their hipocriticall disobedience, with maintaining the cause of the Gospell, and taking part (as a new deuise of Rebellion) with the Princes of the Vnion: And so much for Religion.
            3 Concerning the Prouinces: I cannot now compare them better, then to a Wall set vp with vntempered morter, ready to fall a sunder for lacke of cementing. For alas such is the impetuosity of rumor at this houre against you, that it is more fearefull and terrible, then the winde that shooke the foure corners of Iobs houses, and threw them downe on the heads of his Children. To begin with the North, if we name Saxony and his neighbour Bishops to assist you: they counterprize Denmarke, Sweden, Brandenburg,

Brunswick, and many of that side: If we talke of Poland, they tell you, that all that way, there is Lusatia, Silesia, Morauia, as a hedge betweene Bohemia and it; nay they drawe a longer shaft, and a stronger bowe of Hungary, Transiluania, and the Turkes confederacy and combination: If wee mention your Vnckle the Arch-Duke, or more familiarly the Marquesse Spinola his Liefetenant, they stop the gap with the Truce, with the Peace with England, or else with the Armies of the States, the affinity of the Prince of Orenge, and the indissoluble loue of a King to his Daughter,King Iames.
                which I onely feare is vnanswerable, and must needes say vnpossible to be resisted, if hee either remember what a Sonne in Law he hath, or what Subiects proportionable to his Greatnes, that without imposition (if hee giue them leaue) long to be tampering with the Indyes themselues: If wee expect Collen, and the Bishops belonging to our obedience, they present vs the Lantsgraue of Hesse, Franconia, and the Palatinate it selfe: If we relye vpon Bauaria, they neighbour him with Wittenberg, and other Protestant Princes: If wee resolue vpon Austria, they cry alas what is that to Bohemia, and the deuided Countries of your inheritance? If wee boast of money, they answer directly, there is no want in their Army, but your Soldiers repine for lacke of pay: If we whisper of France, they talke aloude, there is enough to doe to answer their owne proportions. For Queene, King, and Princes gaze vpon one another in the behalfe of Fauorites, factions, and people: If wee reioyce for Spaine, they depresse the insulting, with alas, what can Spaine doe? Spaine is too remote,

               Spaine can spare no men: Spaine hath many Garisons to tend, as so many Nurse Children to pay for: Spaine hath many yrons in the fire, but as fast as one heates, another cooles: Spaine is tyred with the multiplicity of busines, and must be more then tyr'd, if hee could come ouer the Alpes: Spaine is in hazard of loue, and good opinion in the world, as rather enuyed, then feared, and maligned then obserued: In a word, Spaine hath many millions and great Treasure: but I may well compare him to a glorious Steward of a House, who must defray the charge of a 1000.l. a yeare expences, but the Lord will but allow his seruant 800. toward it. If we recken vp our own Prouinces, I cannot liken them better, then to Argos his eyes, whereof the one halfe wakes, while the other sleepes. For Sauoy neither dares trust Spaine, nor truly loue vs: must keepe his Frontiers, and watch Geneua, lookes vpon the Marquisate of Salusse with soare eyes, and vpon Prouince with a hungry heart; dares not speake aloude against France, though he whisper for some indignities receiued: but either to succour you, or our selues, he is both vnwilling and vnprouided. Mantua and Modena runne the same course, but with slower pace, and indeed because no body regards them, as able to doe either hurt or good, they are made the wiser to looke to themselues, and not to meddle with other folkes busines. Millaine is like a bird in a golden Cage, that may sing to answer proportion with nature, but if the casement be open, shee will take the benefit of her liberty: so that howeuer they seeme Religious, yet hath Spaine much adoe to ouer-watch them. Genoa is not

worth the naming for your busines, for if it were as rich againe, it hath much a doe to pay the Marchants debts. Venice is a fearefull and polliticke State, maketh vse of our Religion, but loueth her owne Greatnes so well, that shee is both jealious of Spaine, and loathsome to Vs: for wee feare her reuolt dayly, and because she is got into the number of the Princes of the Vnion, will not number a man, nor a peece of Gold for your reliefe. Florence and Leuca, will lend you what money they can, but alas they haue neither men nor Gallyes, and if they had, the Venetian is so dogged he will not let them passe into the Gulph. Naples and Sicilia, could spare you men, though they want money, and many of their Nobles are willing to assist you, but to come through the Grison passages it is a long and terrible iourney, and to passe into Histria, puls the Venetian Dust into their eyes. The Swisse are very indifferent, and for money will serue either party, but considering their combination, and confederacy with the Protestants, I doe not see, how they are to be trusted, or relyed vpon. In a word wee our selues are yours, and yee shall haue our Men, if we knewe which way; our Money as it comes euery way; our Prayers as true deuotion inciteth; our Curses against your enemies, as their Contentions increaseth; our Priests amongst your Subiects, as their affection decayeth; our Pardons for your sinnes, as holy Church instituteth; and our Benediction for your busines, as your affaires concurreth: Onely bee patient and ouercome your disasters with wisdome. For to that end were Vertues framed, or else why doe we name Fortitude,

Magnanimity, Patience, Temperance, and such like Concomitants of glory and blessednes.
            Seeing then your case so stands, and that Bohemia hath put a tricke of reuolt vpon you. First grounding vpon some fundamentall positions of an Electiue Prouince, making the world beleeue they haue a purpose to reduce it to her pristinate Gouernment.
            Secondly relying vpon Hungarias examples, whose vnconstancy hath yet as it were dilacerated her Kingdome, and shewed the Turke a way to prey vpon her prosperity, as you shall read of Prometheus on Mount Caucasus, on whose entrals a Vulture continually gnaweth, so that he is euer dying, and euer liuing.
            Thirdly, emboldened by Bethelem Gabor Prince of Transiluania, with whome you see the Turke hath contracted a Truce and couenant of Peace, that he might the better make Warre against any disturbers of his friends and confederates: For when at first the Bohemians cast themselues into his embraces, he would not close his armes, but gaue them leaue to returne to faster holdings, and in amanner nominated the Palatinate for their Prince.
            Fourthly pretending some grieuances from your selfe, and Mathias, not onely that you tooke a wrong course with their obedience, playing the vnskilfull Surgeon with them, to feare, cut, and Cauterize their wounds, which might haue bene fairely healed with lenatiue Cataplasmes, but also that you ouer-stretched your owne stringes to a higher tune then the instrument would beare, and so presuming to command all, you came at last to enioy nothing, according to our

               Italian prouerb, Chitutto a braccia nessuno strenge.
            
            Last of all, proiecting the youth, brauery, and alliance of this man (especially that the King of great Brittaine, a nominated Prince in all Prophesie, and conference for the enemie to Papistrie) would neuer stand still, and looke vpon those rude hands, which should pull downe the frame of so goodly a building, they came at last to this maine point of reiection of you; which must needes be their fault, and electing him, which cannot chuse but be his fortune: so that in a word considering what I haue said, Beleeue it, they that dared once to conceit the starting aside frō your authority, were not so barren of vnderstanding, but to consider what might happen, either war or peace, and so haue prepared both to shut you out of their walks of their loue and submission, & to keepe you off as far as they can by a steely arme and forcible detention, wherat you cannot be dismayed, for this maine reason, that they which wil confesse themselues aduersaries to God, care not to professe themselues enemies to men.
            Now in this point alone all our hopes are disappointed: For first, they haue traced our supremacy after Luthers owne steps, and placed the stout Hereticks: that though with Hercules in his Cradle they did not strangle the Serpents, yet with Hercules in the Tragedie, that killed his owne children, they haue like refractary delinquents set vpon their father & their mother. Me their father the supreame Bishop, and the Church their mother, the blessed spouse of Christ. 2. Secondly, they haue denied our indulgences, and scorned our Pardons, not caring for their sicke soules,

but willing to dye in desperation, as a frantick man in a Feauer, that striketh his Phisician, and casteth the Potion on the ground. 3. Thirdly, they haue pulled downe our Images, and abrogated that constitution of the Church, as if they meant to be Anathemataes, and enemies to Religion, by taking away all the meanes of deuotion. 4. Fourthly, they haue banished the Iesuites. It may be they are suspected amongst our owne Priests, and haue imputation rather of pollicie, then piety: but what is that to the cure of soules? and the estate of Lay men? I pray God I may not say by them, as Demosthenes tale is betweene the Sheepe and the Wolues, who were offended at the Sheepes entertaining great dogges amongst them, whereby they liued secured from their ruine: but when they had betrayed them to their dimission, then did these cruell Wolues, more cruell by the aduantage of exasperation, returne to their former prey and violence. Last of all, they haue bewitched the foster spirited men with manswetude and good vsage, whereby the Priests themselues are growne to commend their gouernment, & the Catholickes in generall to shew their obedience: so that they, which in former times repined to pay our Officers the tribute of the Church, disburse both money and Armes to the sustentation of our enemies: and whereas we had euer much adoe to worke vpon their soules, these Bohemians (though of a contrary Religion) haue brought both soules and bodies to their beck, and authority.
            Thus (Deare sonne) for any thing I see, the matter is remedilesse, and to complaine against God, men, fortune,

treasons, and such like, will rather discouer a distemperature of passion, then magnanimity of spirit: nay, though there were hope of reformation. Therefore be aduised by me, though patience in some things be a poore vertue, and onely fit to draw on heauier burthens: yet in other businesse, and most occasions it reduceth the minde to consideration, and setleth the iudgement for the preuention of greater mischiefe. It bringeth the sences to order, and keeps both soule and body in temperature: as for imputation of cowardise, and basenesse, when high and glorious designes propose themselues to prosecution, remember the story of Fabius, and Minutius, against Hanniball. The Senate indeede gaue eare to the aspersions of his retraction and delay, as if either he durst not fight, or knew not how to proceede, and so deuided the Generalship betweene them, but that diuided the successe of the businesse: for Minutius fayling in the heat of his forwardnesse, was glad to retire vnder the shadow of Fabius his moderation: For as sometimes the doltishnesse of an aduersary doth animate weake troupes to giue the onset: so at all times the wisedome, and discipline of an enemie, doth keepe in awe euen equall forces for aduenturing too farre, and being too forward.
            This is your case, and my feare: your case, For what can you now get by this warre, considering the mightinesse of your foe, and the diuision of your people; but in the preuailing an eternall hate against your house and family? and in the failing, such contumely and disgrace, that how euer you are sure of me and my Bishops, yet the name of Emperour shall be but a titular

dignity, and the obumbration of your glory bring forward at last obliuion of your greatnesse; nay, peraduenture the losse of that Character of Emperor it selfe: For it fareth with the fortune of vnfortunate Princes, as with ruinous walls; when a man perceiues their decay and weaknesse, euery one runnes aside for mistrust of falling vpon them: or else they are compared to a mans tumbling downe a paire of staires, who if hee once loose his first footing, commonly neuer stayes himselfe, till hee come to the bottome. Againe say, your aduersary be subiect to a defeat, as his friends encrease, his forces will be renued, and then hee returnes with greater violence, as in those dayes the Souldiers were wont to doe with their machinations, who pulled backe their rammes and engines, of purpose to run forward with the greater fury, and more impetuosity. But if you (which God forbid) should be subiect to the inconstancy of Fortune, or if you will (as many good men haue beene) to the chastisement of diuine prouidence, and suffer dissolution of your Army: how will you renue the same, considering the remotenesse of your friends, the weaknesse of confederates, the convulsion of your people, the infection of your Subiects with Lutheranisme, the repining of Stiria, Curniola, and Carinthia: the murmuring of the Swisse and Grisons; and in a word, the shaking of the whole frame of your gouernment, as you see a high and heauy topped tree loosened in the root, and standing on vnfirme ground wauering, and ready to fall, & so much for your selfe.
            Concerning my feare: say that successe (for it is a wisedome to presuppose the worst) should bring them

forward into the walke of preuayling, would they not runne thinke you without interception? Nay could the Alpes Barricado the way, or the Venetian Gulph deny them transportation, the high Hilles and white Cliffes of Ancona would be a Sea marke to bring them directly to Rome, & the Appenine is but a poore mountaine in respect of those they haue passed: But you will say, our Friends about the Mediterranian Sea, will come in apace to preuent this mischiefe, and a 1000. Ships and Gallies will keepe the Ostia of Tiber, after they haue landed our Friends in our behalfe; I thinke and hope so too; yet I would be loath to put it to such an aduenture. For the straights of Gibralter are wider, then the Gates of the Citty that Sampson carryed on his shoulders, and they that cannot bee detained from going to the Indyes, will not be denyed to come into the Leuant: Our enemies haue more Shipping then our selues, and our Friends are far fewer then our Opposites, they that know the way for traficke, and commutation of Marchandize, will know the way to spoile and getting of riches so easily: Againe, our aduersaries are constant, sure and exasperated with zeale and fury against Vs: They march like Iohn the Sonne of Nimshi, and cry aloude to cast Iesabell out of the window: our Friends are wauering, vnconstant, and fearefull of alteration, so that to relye vpon them is but to trust Egiptian reedes, or a broken staffe: In a word; they haue Prophesies and calculations in their mouthes, wishes of reuenge, and eternall hate in their hearts, fury and bloody executions in their actions, and all against Rome.
            
            
               Some talke of the Scriptures, and compare the vomiting of the Priests at their tables spoken of in the Prophets to the feasts of Cardinals, and banquettings in our Court: some tell a tale of Bell and the Dragon, and when they come to the deuouring of so much meate, they say, that Daniel sifted Ashes in the place, and discouerd the footsteps of the Priests, their Wiues and their Children, and all against Rome: some coniecture of Pauls Epistles to Timothy and Titus, concerning the Doctrine of Deuils, the man of sinne, Antechrist and Idolatry: some descant of the Apocalips, and dare name Iesabell, Babilon, Rome in Italy, the Whore vpon the Beast; the Cup of Abhomination, & all against Rome: some repeate the Prophesies of the Sybels, the Praedictions of Moncks and Fryers, the praedil;sages of Nunnes and Saincts, the foretelling of Martyrs, and the persecuted vnder Tyrants, and all against Rome: Which though it end with blasphemous inuectiues, yet hath made such impressions in the hearts of Heretickes, that as they haue set their blacke mouthes on worke with contagious rayling, so they long to set their soule handes on worke, with our vncharitable destruction, and is not this a iust cause of our feare?
            Therefore (Deare Sonne) for Gods sake, for my sake, for the Churches sake, for your owne sake, for our Friends sake, and in a word, for the generall cause sake both of Peters Chayre, and Caesars Throne, Be contented to mingle a little water with your Wine, and coole the heate of your passion with some sweeter compounds, then rage and reuenge: Hearken to a Treatise of pacification, though it sound not such a

               Diapason of musicke, as will answer proportion, and satisfie the cares of your Maiesticke greatnes, Admit of a Peace in this case of extremity, and remember how Abimelech though a Heathen idolater, when hee saw Abraham so prosper in his enterprises, descended to contracts of amity, and came so lowe, as to allow him for a Prince amongst them.
            As for the Aspersions of disparagement, and extenuating the worthines of so great a Monarch, let all bee wiped away with the hand of Charity, and the auoyding effusion of Christian blood: blot out the exaggeration of your enemies mischiefe against you, or the conceit of their trayterous reuolts amongst themselues: Bee wise in your owne harmes, and for your owne good: Let Spaine and your kindreds example induce you to immitation: they haue pollitickly kept their distances, and for aduantage made Truce with their owne rebels, I meane the Low-Countries, and contracted Peace with them, whom not long agoe they thought to swallow vp: I meane England it selfe, which now to shoot against, will returne their Arrowes in their owne bosomes.
            If this be harsh and vnpleasant, as curbing the Heroycknes of your Spirit by descending so lowe, as making the first proffer, wee will goe another way to worke, and rather then faile of this Blessing of peace, put on Esaus hairy necke, & rough hands, and bring to Isaac his Venison, though the voyce bee Iacobs: I will send a Legate: Spaine an Embassador: France an Intercessor: England a Mediator, yea it shall bee so contriued, that all the States of Christend
                     •
                  me shall make you beleeue at least, they wish you prosperity, and their

owne good, and how euer the Children of Edom will cry downe with it, downe with it, yet shall the Natiues of Iudea speake peace to Zion, and wish Ioy to the gates of Ierusalem. You shall reade amongst the Prophets in a certaine Vision, that there was a great Thunder and noyse, but the Lord was not in it; a great Lightning and earthquake, but the Lord was not in it; a great winde and shaking of the Trees, but the Lord was not in it: A soft and gentle murmuring of the Leaues, and the Lord was in that; so when you heare of Warres, of the marching of Soldiers, of the raising of Armies, of the thundring of Canons, of the sound of Trumpets, of the demolution of Cities, rauishment of women, & the murthering of men, with thousand of other outrages vnnamed: Beleeue it the Lord is not in, or among them; but when they mention Peace, quietnes, loue, charity, remitting of iniuries, pacification of troubles, and such like, the Lord is and will be there. As for the swelling tumour of Greatnes, losse of renowne, disgraces, giuing way to rebellion, diminution of honour and such like, It resembles but the Imposturing incantation of Sathan to Eua, that made her taste of the forbidden Fruit, to the vtter subuersion of all Mankinde; so that I will say no more, but if God doe come with this murmuring sweetnes of Peace vnto you, hearken to his voyce, that tuneth such pleasant notes to your soules and Consciences. But if Sathan wish you to bee vnderstanding men, and like God himselfe to know good and euill, hearken not vnto him; your first Mother was deceiued, and your last ruine is a contriuing.
            FINIS.
         
      
   