
      
         
            
            
            The Gentlemans Academie. OR, The Booke of S. Albans: Containing three moſt exact and excellent Bookes: the firſt of Hawking, the ſecond of all the proper termes of Hunting, and the laſt of Armorie: all compiled by Iuliana Barnes, in the yere from the incarnation of Chriſt 1486. And now reduced into a better method, by G. M.
            LONDON Printed for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules church-yard. 1595.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Gentlemen of England: and all the good fellowſhip of Huntſmen and Falconers.
            
               GEntlemen, this Booke, intreting of Hawking, Hunting and Armorie; the originall copie of the which was doone at Saint Albans, about what time the excellent Arte of Printing was first brought out of Germany, and practiſed here in England: which Booke, bicauſe of the antiquitie of the ſame, and the things therein contained, being ſo neceſſarie and behouefull to the accompliſhment of the Gentlemen of this flouriſhing Ile, and others which take delight

in either of theſe noble ſports, or in that heroicall & excellent ſtudy of Armory, I haue reuiued and brought again to light the ſame which was almoſt altogether forgotten, and either few or none of the perfect copies thereof remaining, except in their hands, who wel knowing the excellency of the worke, & the rareneſſe of the Booke, ſmothered the ſame from the world, thereby to inrich themſelues in priuate with the knowledge of theſe delights. Therfore I humbly craue pardon of the preciſe and iudicial Reader, if ſometimes I vſe the words of the ancient Authour, in ſuch plaine and homely Engliſh, as that time affoorded, not being ſo regardful, nor tying my ſelf ſo ſtrictly to deliuer any thing in the proper and peculiar wordes and termes of arte, which for the loue I beare to antiquitie,

and to the honeſt ſimplicitie of thoſe former times, I obſerue as wel beſeming the ſubiect, & no whit diſgracefull to the worke, our tong being not of ſuch puritie then, as at this day the Poets of our age haue raiſed it to: of whom, & in whoſe behalf I wil ſay thus much, that our Nation may only thinke her ſelfe beholding for the glory and exact compendiouſnes of our longuage. Thus ſubmitting our Academy to your kind cenſures and friendly acceptance of the ſame, and requeſting you to reade with indifferency, and correct with iudgement; I commit you to God.
            
               G. M.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  ¶The maner to ſpeake of Hawkes from an egge till they be able to be taken.
                  
                     TO ſpeake of the firſt original beginning of Hawkes, firſt they be egges, after they be diſcloſed they are Hawkes, & moſt commonly Goſhawkes be diſcloſed as ſoone as they chough, or kadow, and in ſome places more timely, according to the hote climate of the country, which the rather infuſeth a timely breeding. And we ought to ſay, that Hawkes do eire, and not breede in the woods or rocks: alſo that they draw, when they beare that wherewith they build their neſts, and that in their loue or courting humour they call and not kanke, and that in the action it ſelf they treade: when they are diſcloſed and beginne to feather in any ample maner, by a naturall inſtinct and kinde they will drawe ſomewhat out of the neſt, coueting to clamber vpon the boughs, and then come to the neſt againe, and they be called Boweſſes. After S. Margarets day they will flie from tree to tree, and then they are termed Branchers, at which is the moſt conuenienteſt time to take them, and ſeuen nights before ſaint Margarets day, & ſeuen nights after is the beſt time for taking Sparrow hawkes.
                  
                     
                     How you ſhall take Hawkes, with what inſtruments, and how you ſhall kidde them.
                     What gentleman or other whoſoeuer will take Hawkes he muſt haue nets which are called vrines, and they muſt be made of good ſmall threed, which would be died either greene or blew, for feare of the Hawkes eſpying of the ſame, then muſt he haue needle and threede for the inſeeling of ſuch Hawkes as are taken, and in this manner they muſt be inſeeled: take the needle & threede and put it thorow the vpper eie lidde of the one ſide, and ſo likewiſe of the other, and make it faſt vnder the Hawkes beake: ſo as ſhe may not ſee at all, and then ſhe is inſeeled as ſhee ought to be: ſome vſe to inſeele Hawkes by the nether eie lidde, faſtning it aboue the beake almoſt vpon the head, but that is approoued ill, for by all reaſon the vpper eie lidde cloſeth more iuſtly than the neather, becauſe that it is much larger: when you haue ſeeled your Hawke, and brought her home, caſt her on a pearch, and let her ſtand there a night and a day, and on the next day towardes euening, take a knife, and with great care ſee you cut the threedes inſunder which inſeele hir, and take them away ſoftly for feare of breaking her eie liddes, then beginne in gentle manner to feede her, and vſe all the lenitie and meekeneſſe you can vnto her vntill ſhe will ſit quietly vpon your fiſt, for by much ſtriuing you ſhal hurt her wings which were not a little dangerous: and then the ſame night after the feeding, watch her

all night and all the next morrow from any ſleepe or reſt, which will occaſion hir to be reclaimed with leſſe difficultie: yet note, that the firſt meate which ſhe ſhall eate be hote, and let her take enough thereof without troubling.
                  
                  
                     When your Hawke may be drawne to reclaime, and the manner of her diet.
                     If your hawke be hard penned, ſhe may be drawn to be reclaimed, for the while ſhe is tender penned, it is hurtfull to reclaime her. And if ſhe be a goſhawke or a Terſell which ſhall be reclaimed, euer feed them with waſhed meate at the drawing and at the reclaiming, but looke that it be hote, and in this manner waſh it: take the meate and ſwill it vp and downe in the water, and then wring the water out and feed her therewith if ſhe be a brancher, but if it be a Ieſſe, then muſt you waſh your meate much cleaner than for a brauncher, and wiping it with a linnen cloth ſo feede her, and euermore the third day giue her caſting: if ſhe be a Goſhawke or Terſell in this ſort, take new flannell cloth, and cut fiue pellets thereof of an inch long at the leaſt, then take the fleſh, and cut fiue morſels, and with your knifes point cut a hole in euery morſell, and put therein the pellets of cloth, then lay them in a diſh of faire water, and take your hawke, and giue her a bit of warme meate ſo bigge as halfe her caſting, then take one of them which lieth in the water and giue it her, and ſo one after another, and then feede her for all night.
                  
                  
                     
                     How to feede your hawke and know her infirmities.
                     A ſparrow hawke would alwayes be fedde with vnwaſhed meat, and her caſting would be plumage: and haue an eſpeciall care that the ground bee cleane vnder her pearch, whereby in the morning you may the more readily finde her caſting when ſhee hath caſt, by which you ſhal know whether ſhe be ſound I or no, for ſome caſting wil be yelow, ſome greene, ſome clammie, and ſome cleare: and if it be yellow, then ſhe engendereth the frounce which is a canker which riſeth in the mouth or cheeke, and if it bee greene it betokeneth the rie, the propertie of which euill is this, it wil ariſe in the head and make it ſwel, her eies wil be heauy and darke, and but it haue preſent remedy it will fall into the legs and make them impoſtume, and if it reuert from the legges vnto the head againe, then is it mortall: if it be clammie and roping, then is it the apparant ſigne of a diſeaſe called the Cray, which cauſeth a hawke that ſhe cannot mute: but if it bee cleare and bright, then is there great aſſurance of her ſoundneſſe.
                  
                  
                     When your Hawke ſhall bathe.
                     Once in three dayes during the Summer let not your hawke faile to bathe, and once a weeke in the winter, if the weather be faire and conuenient, and not els, and euery time your hawke batheth giue hir a bit or two of hote meate vnwaſhed, of what kinde ſoeuer your hawke be.
                  
                  
                     
                     How to make your hawke flee with a corage in the morning.
                     If you haue a determination that your Hawke ſhall flee in the morning, then feede her the night before with hote meate, and waſh the ſame meate in vrine and wring out the water cleane, and that ſhal adde vnto her a luſt and courage to flee in the next morning to your contentment.
                  
                  
                     How to make a Hawke flee well which is full gorged.
                     If your hawke be full gorged, and yet notwithſtanding you would faine haue a flight, take three cornes of wheate, and put them in a morſell of fleſh and giue it vnto your hawke, and immediately ſhee will caſt all that is within her, which as ſoone as ſhe hath caſt, looke you haue a bit or two of ſome hote meate to giue her, and then you may boldly flee her: this medcine alſo is excellent for a Hawke that is ouergorged.
                  
                  
                     The true Termes and Titles belonging to Hawkes.
                     The firſt true Tearme and Title a Falconer ought to learne, is to holde faſt at all times, and eſpecially when ſhe batteth, or ſtriueth to flee away. It is called batting, in that ſhe batteth with hirſelfe without cauſe: the ſecond is, rebate your hawke to your fiſt, and that is when ſhe batteth the leaſt moouing that

you can with your fiſt will rebate her backe againe vppon your fiſt: the third is, feede your Hawke, and not giue her meate: the fourth is, a Hawke ſmiteth or ſeweth her beake, not wipeth her beake: the fift, your hawke iouketh, and not ſleepeth: the ſixt, your hawke pruneth, and not piketh, and ſhe pruneth not but when ſhe beginneth at her legges, and fetcheth moiſture like oile at her taile wherewith ſhe imbalmeth her feet, & ſtrikes the fethers of hir wings thorow her beake: and it is called the Note then when ſhee fetcheth the oile: and note, that in any wiſe a Hawke ought not to be troubled whileſt ſhee is in pruning of her ſelfe, for, when ſhee pruneth ſhee ſhewes her ſelfe to bee luſty and in courage, and when ſhee hath done ſhe will rowze her ſelfe mightily: ſometimes your Hawke countenances as ſhee piketh hir ſelfe, and then ſhe pruneth not▪ wherefore you muſt ſay, ſhe reformeth her fethers: the ſeuenth, your Hawke collieth, and not beaketh: the eight, ſhe rowzeth and not ſhaketh her ſelfe: the ninth, ſhe ſtreineth, and not clitcheth or ſnatcheth: the tenth, ſhe mantleth, and not ſtretcheth when as ſhe putteth her legges from her one after another, and hir wings follow after her legges, for then ſhee doeth mantle her, and when ſhe hath mantled her, and croſſeth both her wings together ouer her backe, you ſhall ſay your Hawke warbleth her wings, which is a terme moſt proper for that purpoſe: the eleuenth, you ſhall ſay your Hawke-muteſſeth, or muteth, and not skliſeth: the twelfth, you ſhall ſay, caſt your Hawke to the pearch, and not ſet your Hawke vpon the pearch.
                  
                  
                     
                     Termes to commend ſundrie properties in a Hawke.
                     Firſt you ſhall ſay, this is a faire Hawke, an huge hawke, along hawke, a ſhort thicke hawke, but not that ſhee is a great Hawke: alſo you ſhall ſay, this hawke hath a large beake, or a ſhort beake, but call it not a bill: an huge head, or a ſmall head faire ſeaſoned: you ſhall ſay your Hawke is full gorged, and not cropped, and your Hawke putteth ouer and endueth, and yet ſhe doth both diuerſly, as thus: ſhee putteth ouer when ſhee remooueth her meate from her gorge into her bowells, and thus you ſhal know it: when ſhee putteth ouer ſhee trauerſeth with her body, and chiefly with her necke as a crane doth, or an other bird: ſhee endueth neuer as long as her bowelles be full at her feeding, but as ſoone as ſhee is fed and reſteth, ſhe endueth by little and little, and if her gorge be voide, and the bowel any thing ſtiffe, then you ſhall ſay ſhee is embowelled and hath not fully endued, or, ſo long as you can feele any thing in hir bowels it is dangerous to giue her any meate. You ſhall ſay an Hawke hath a long wing, a faire long traine with ſixe barres out, and ſtandeth vpon the ſeuenth, this hawke is enterpenned, that is to ſay, when the feathers of the wings be betweene the body and the thighes, this hawke hath an huge legge, or a flat legge, a round legge, or a faire enſered legge.
                  
                  
                     
                     To know the Maile of an hawke.
                     Hawkes haue a white Maile, canuas maile or a red maile, and ſome call a red maile an yron maile, a white maile is eaſieſt knowen, a canuas maile is betweene a white maile and an yron maile, and an yron maile is exceeding red. A goſhawke or tercell in their ſoreage haue not their mailes named, but it is called their plumage, and after that cote it is called their maile, and if your hawke flee for reward you ſhall ſay, caſt the Hawke thereto, and not let flee thereto.
                  
                  
                     Nommed or ſeaſed.
                     And if your hawke nomme a foule, and the foule breake away from her, ſhee hath diſcomfited many feathers of the foule, and is broken away, for in true Falconers language you ſhall ſay, your Hawke hath nommed or ſeaſed a foule, and not taken it.
                  
                  
                     Why a Hawke is called a Rifler.
                     It happeneth many times through eagerneſſe or fooliſhneſſe, that a hawke when ſhe ſhould nomme a foule, ſhe ſeaſeth but on the feathets onely, whereby her flight is effectleſſe, looke how oft ſhe ſo doth, ſo oft ſhe rifleth, and for that cauſe ſuch hawkes are called Riflers.
                  
                  
                     
                     Diuers proper names to the feathers and other parts of an Hawke.
                     The formoſt bearing out feathers of a hawke are called the breaſt feathers, the feathers vnder the wings are called plumage, thoſe vnder the beake are called the barbe feathers, and thoſe which are at the ioynt of the hawks knee, & ſtand hanging and ſharp at the ends, thoſe be called the pendant feathers, the feathers of the wings next the body are the flagge or flags fethers, the long feathers of an hawks wing are the beame fethers, & thoſe that ſome call the pinion feathers of an other foule, are in a hawke called the ſercell feathers. Beſides this, you ſhal vnderſtand if a hawke be in the mew that ſame ſercell feather is alwaies the laſt that ſhe wil caſt, and til that be caſt ſhe is not abſolutely mewed, yet it hath beene ſometimes ſeene that hawkes haue caſt it firſt (as report maketh mention) but the other rule is moſt generall: and when ſhe hath caſt her ſercels in the mew, then, and not before it is time to feed hir with waſht meat, and to beginne to inſeam her: which word inſeame in a hawke betokeneth greace, and but it be taken away by feeding with waſhed meate and otherwiſe as it ſhall be mentioned hereafter, ſhe will gather a pannell which may turne to her vtter confuſion: moreouer, if ſhee do flee therewith and take blood and colde it is preſent death, there are alſo certaine feathers which cloſe vpon the ſercelles and they are called the couerts or couert feathers, and ſo likewiſe are all the feathers tearmed which are next ouer the long beame feathers and the flagge

feathers vppon the wings, the feathers vppon the backe are called the backe feathers, the Hawkes beake is the vpper part which is nooked, the neather parte of the beake is called the Hawkes clappe, the holes in the Hawkes beake are called her nares, the yellow betweene the beake and the eies is called the Sere: Hawkes haue long ſmall blacke feathers l
                           •
                        ke haires about the ſere, which are properly called Crynits.
                  
                  
                     Of the ſoreage of a Hawke.
                     The firſt yeare of euery Hawke whether ſhee be called brancher or eyeſſe, that ſelfeſame firſt yeare is alwayes called her ſoreage, and during that yeere ſhe is called a Sore Hawke, for and if ſhee doe eſcape that yeere all impediments, with good feeding and orderly regarding, ſhe is likely to endure long.
                  
                  
                     How to reclaime a hawke.
                     If you will reclaime your Hawke, you muſt parte one meale into three meales, till ſuch time that ſhee will come to reclaime, which when ſhee doth to your contentment, then encreaſe her meales euery day better and better: and haue chiefe regard that ere ſhe come to reclaime, by no meanes ſhe ſoare, for albeit ſhe be perfitly reclaimed, yet it may happen ſhee will ſoare ſo high into the aire, as you ſhall neither ſee her, nor finde her: and as a generall principle if your hawke flie at the partrige, looke that you enſeame her before ſhe flie, whether ſhe be brauncher, eyeſſe, or menod hawke.
                  
                  
                     
                     Why a Hawke is called an eyeſſe.
                     An Hawke is called an eyeſſe of her eies, for a hawke that is brought vp vnder a Buſſard, Puttocke or Kite, (as there be many) they alwayes haue watery eies, for when they are diſcloſed and kept in forme vntill they be full ſummed, you ſhall knowe them moſt aſſuredly by their waterie eies, neither will her looke bee ſo quicke, liuely, and ſharpe as a brancher is: and thus becauſe the beſt knowledge is by the eies, all ſuch hawkes as are extraordinarily brought vp not vnder their owne dams, are called Eyeſſes: Againe, you may knowe an eyeſſe by the paleneſſe of her ſeres of her legges, and the ſere ouer her backe, and alſo by the taints vppon her taile or wings which taints come for lacke of feeding when they be eyeſſes.
                  
                  
                     What a Taint is.
                     An ataint is a thing which goeth ouerthwart the fethers of the wings and of the taile, like as if it were eaten with the wormes, and it beginneth firſt to breed at the body in the pen, in ſuch ſorte that ſome pens will fret in ſunder and fall away thorowe the ſame taint, and then is the hawke diſparaged for all that yeere inſuing.
                  
                  
                     An outward ſigne to know when your hawke is enſeamed.
                     This rule is infallible and moſt certaine, looke

how long your hawkes feete be blackiſh and rough, ſo long ſhe is full of greace and glut, but euer as ſhee enſeameth ſo her feet wil wax yellow and ſmooth.
                  
                  
                     How to demeane your ſelfe when your hawke is ready to flee.
                     When you haue enſeamed your hawke and reclaimed her, and ſhe is ready to flee to the partrige, take then a partrige in your bag, & go into the field, and there let your ſpaniels range for a couey of partriges, and when they are put vp and begin to ſcatter, looke that you haue about you well eied markers to ſome of them, then couple vp your ſpaniels, which done, let ſome one of your company priuilie take the partrige out of your bagge, and tie it by the leg in a paire of creance, then caſt it vp as high as he can, which as ſoone as the hawke ſhall perceiue ſhee wil flee thereunto, if your hawke ſeaſe the partrige aboue giue her a reward therefore, and go after that by leaſure to the partriges which were marked, and do thus as I wil teach you: If you haue a chaſed ſpaniel which wil be rebuked and is a good retriuer, vncouple him and no more of the ſpaniels, then goe to a ſingle partrige of the couey ſo diſperſed, and be as nigh as you can vnto the riſing thereof, and if your hawke deſier caſt her vnto it, which if ſhe take, then is ſhe made for that yeere, and of the ſame partrige which ſhe thus killeth reward her in manner as here followeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     How you ſhall reward your Hawke.
                     Take a knife and cut the head and the necke from the body of the partrige, and ſtrippe the skinne away from the neck, then giue the ſame to the hawke and couer the body of the foule with a hat or other garment and lay the ſame head or necke therevpon, and if ſo be ſhe wil forſake the foule ſhe plumeth vpon and come to the reward, then ſecretly take away the partrige, and reward your hawke with the brain and the necke, but haue heede ſhe eate no bones, for they be exceeding euill to endure, and they wil take from her luſt and courage in fleeing, and in this maner reward her of as many as ſhe ſhall kill, only haue that diſcretion, that her rewardes be not too great, for feare you make her full gorged, and then can ſhe flee no more for that day.
                  
                  
                     How your Hawke ſhall reioyce.
                     When your Hawke hath to your contentment killed a foule, and is by you rewarded (as aboue ſaid) let her not by any meanes flee againe til ſhe haue reioyced her, which is to ſay, till ſhe haue ſewed, ſuided, or cleanſed her beake, or elſe rowzed her, and when ſhee hath done any of theſe or all: then may you boldely at your pleaſure flee her againe.
                  
                  
                     
                     How you ſhall doe that you rebuke not your hawke when ſhe killes.
                     Learne one thing perfitly, and haue great heede thereof, that is, when your hawke hath nommed or killed a partrige, ſtand a good way off and come not too nigh her, and be ſure to keepe backe al your ſpanielles for feare of rebuking her, for many hawks cannot endure ſpaniels, and alſo many ſpaniels will teare the game from the hawkes foote, which is an extreame miſchiefe: and whileſt your hawke plumeth, come ſoftly towardes her by little and little, but if you ſee ſhe leaue pluming, and fix her eies vpon you, then ſtand ſtill and checke her and whiſtle her till ſhe plume againe, and in this manner do till you come cloſe vnto her, then leaſurely and without trouble fall downe vpon your knees, and priuily whileſt ſhe plumeth put vnder your hand, and be ſure of her geſſe, for, hauing that ſure, you may rule all things elſe at your owne pleaſure, which if you ouerſlip or forget, then the leaſt feare will make hir indeuour to carry away her game, or elſe forſaking it let it aſcape, which is but loſſe both to your ſelfe and your hawke.
                  
                  
                     An opinion of Oſtrengers.
                     Oſtrengers hold opinion, that if you feede your Hawke continually with Porke, with Iaies, with Pies, or beare her abroad much in rainie weather, ſhe will vndoubtedly prooue lowſie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Oſtrengers, Speruiters, and Falconers.
                     Becauſe that now I haue ſpoken of Oſtrengers, you ſhall vnderſtand, that they be called Oſtrengers which are the keepers of Goſhawkes or Tercelles, and thoſe which keepe Sparrow hawkes or muskets are called Speruiters, and thoſe which keepe any other kinde of hawke being longwinged are termed Falconers.
                  
                  
                     Of the Geſſe, Lewnes, Tyrrits, Bewits, Creance, and how they are faſtned.
                     All hawkes haue or ſhould haue about their legs geſſe made of leather, and many times ſome of ſilke, which ſhoulde be no longer than that the knots of them ſhould appeare in the midſt of the left hand betweene the long finger and the leaſt finger, becauſe the lewnes ſhould be faſtned to them with a paire of tyrrits, which tyrrits, ſhould reſt vppon the lewnes, and not vpon the geſſes for feare of faſtning or hanging vpon trees as ſhee flies, and thoſe ſame lewnes you ſhall faſten about your little finger ſlackely in compaſsing the ſame in foure or fiue fould like to a bow ſtring which was neuer vſed, and the tyrrets ſerue to keepe her from winding when ſhee battes. Laſtly, thoſe ſomewhat broad leathers to which her belles are put vnto, and ſo buttoned about her legs, you ſhall call Bewits. The Creance is that line to which you faſten your hawke when you call her to reclaime of what ſort ſoeuer it be.
                  
                  
                     
                     How a man ſhall take a Hawke from the Eyree.
                     Whoſo will take a hawke out of the eyree, it behooueth him to be very circumſpect in bringing it vp eaſely, and to keepe it from colde or hurting of the bones, for they are firſt very tender and muſt haue great reſt, neither may they haue ſtinking or filthy aire, but as ſweete and good as is poſsible, and euermore muſt you giue them cleane meat and hot, and a little, yet often, many times chaunging their meate, yet alwayes ſo as it be hot, let the ſame meate be cut into little morſels, for they ought not to tire on bones till they be of abilitie to flee. But when as they beginne to penne, and plumeth, and ſpalcheth and picketh themſelues, put them in a cloſe warme place into which no fulmerds, weeſels or other vermine can come, neither winde nor raine can annoy, and then ſhe will ſoone ſom her ſelfe, yet euermore giue her hote meate, for it is better for a man to feed his hawke while ſhe is tender with hote meates, and ſo make her good with ſome coſt, than to feede her with euil meate and make her naught with no coſt, and as ſoone as ſhee is ſommed then let her bathe.
                  
                  
                     When to put you Hawke in the mew.
                     If you haue a loue or care of your hawke, keep her wel, & put her not late in the mew: whoſoeuer for couetouſneſſe of his hawkes fleeing pleſure looſeth the time of her mewing, hee may after put her in

the mew at aduenture, and haue her mew at inſufficient leiſure: the beſt time therefore to put a hawke into the mew, is in the beginning of Lent, for if ſhe be then well kept, ſhe will be mewed by the beginning of Auguſt.
                  
                  
                     How to diſpoſe and ordaine your mew.
                     Diſpoſe your mew ſo as it be free from weeſel or poulcat, or any other vermine, and that it be not annoyed either with winde or cold, or extreame heat, yet let one part of the mew ſtand ſo as the Sun may come in for the moſt part of the day, let alſo the ſcituation be ſo appointed as your hawke may not bee troubled with much noiſe nor tumult of men, neither let any perſon come vnto her, but onely he that feedeth her: prouide to haue in your mew a feeding ſtocke for your hawke, and a long ſtring tied therevnto to make her meate faſt withall, for elſe ſhe wil carry it about the houſe, and ſoile it with duſt, and many times hide it til it ſtinke and be vnwholſome, inſomuch as it may occaſion her death, and therefore when it is bound to the feeding ſtocke, neither in the feeding, nor in the tiring, neither at her lighting downe, nor at her riſing vp ſhall ſhee doe her ſelfe anye hurte or preiudice, then when as ſhee hath fedde, take away whatſoeuer ſhee ſhall leaue, and at the next time giue her freſh and ſweete meate, for ſtale and long kept meate engendereth manie euill and mortall ſickeneſſes, and looke that you neuer go to your mew, but when as you doe intend

to giue her meate, or bring her water wherein ſhee may bathe, neither ſuffer any raine to wette her at any time for diuerſe cauſes: and for her bathing, that ſhall occaſion her to mew well.
                  
                  
                     The manner how to put a Hawke into the mew.
                     Firſt before you put your hawke into the mew, haue an eſpeciall care, that if ſhe haue any ſickeneſſe or infirmitie in her, you cure her before you put her into the mew, for it is an infallible principle, a ſicke hawke ſhall neuer mew well, or if ſhe doe mew, yet ſhall ſhe not endure any longer than whileſt ſhee is great and fat, for as her eſtate waſtes, ſo her life conſumes. Some men without any medicine will inuent howe to mew their hawkes, ſome will putte their hawkes into the mew at high eſtate, ſome when they are very lowe, ſome when they be full, ſome when they are empty and leane, and ſome when they are miſerably leane, but of al it is no great matter ſo ſhe be ſound: neuertheleſſe, this is my opinion, both as I haue ſeene and learned, whoſoeuer putteth a goſhawke, a tercell, or ſparrowhawke into the mew, ſo high as ſhee can poſsibly be no higher, ſhe will holde her long in the point before ſhee will mew any feather, and who ſo putteth his hawke in leane, ſhe wil be as long ere ſhe be remounted, and whoſo puts her into the mew too hungry, and too leane, if ſhe haue meate at will ſhe wil eate too greedily, and ſo through ſurfet die ere ſhee come to any mewing. But whoſo will haue his Hawke endure

and mew kindly, my beſt counſell is, that ſhe be neither too high nor too low, neither in great diſtreſſe of hunger, but in ſuch caſe or plight as ſhe ſhould be when ſhe is at hir beſt flying: this obſerued, obſerue after, that the firſt day ſhe comes into the mew ſhe eate not too much, vntill ſuch time as her ſtomacke be made ſtanch, which perceiued you may then giue her ſuch meate as I ſhall ſet downe here following.
                  
                  
                     How to feede your hawke in the mew▪
                     
                     With what meate ſhe hath bene moſt commonly vſed to be fed, with the ſame feed her eight daies continually, and in thoſe eight dayes giue her birdes enow both morning and euening, and let her plume vppon them well, and take caſting of the plumage which will cleanſe her and make her haue an exceeding good appetite: alſo it will ſcower her bowels, which being ſcowred, you may after aduenture to giue her what meate you will, ſo it be cleane and freſh: yet the beſt meate for to make a hawke mew ſoone without medicine is the fleſh of a kidde, of a yong ſwanne, or of a chickin, but aboue al, the fleſh of a ratte, goſlings are good, or any ſuch like, which are of themſelues hote: if you take gobbets of great freſh eeles, and principally that next the naurll, and dippe it in the hote blood of a mutton, it will make a hawke mew ſoone, and all other things, it will make her white after her ſoreage: theſe meates before mentioned are the beſt to mew a hawke with, and to keepe her in good ſtate, but it muſt bee your care that ſhe haue ſome euery day, ſo that ſhe rather

leaue ſome thing then want any thing, and euerie third day let her not faile to bathe if ſhe be ſo diſpoſed: and when ſhee is almoſt firme, then giue her hennes fleſh, fat porke, or dogges fleſh, any of theſe three is good. An hawke is not full firme or readie to drawe out of the mew till ſuch time as her ſercell be ful growen, yet haue I ſeene ſome men take them out of the mew when the ſercell was but halfe appeared, but I am againſt it, and thinke it perillous, becauſe they are not then hard penned: ſome men vſe when a hawke hath caſt her ſercell to begin and waſh her meate, and feede her ſo in the mew with waſhed meate a moneth or ſixe weekes before they draw her, but I am not of that opinion.
                  
                  
                     To know when a Hawke tireth, feedeth, gorgeth, beaketh, rowſeth, endueth, muteth, pearcheth, ioiketh, putteth ouer, pruneth, plumeth, warbleth, and mantleth.
                     A hawke ſhe tireth vppon rumps, ſhe feedeth vpon all manner of fleſh, ſhe gorgeth when ſhee filleth her gorge with meate, ſhe beaketh when ſhe ſeweth, which is to ſay, ſhe wipeth her beake, ſhee rowſeth when ſhe ſhaketh al her feathers and her body together, ſhe endueth when her meate in her bowelles falles to digeſtion, ſhe muteth when ſhe auoides her ordure, ſhe percheth when ſhe ſtands on any manner of bough or perch, ſhe ioiketh when ſhe ſleepeth, ſhe puts ouer whē ſhe auoyds her meat out of her gorge into her bowels, ſhe proineth when ſhe fetcheth oile with her beake out of her taile & annoints her feete

and her feathers, ſhe plumeth when ſhe pulles off the fethers from any foule, or from any other thing and caſts them from her, ſhe warbleth when ſhe draweth both her wings ouer the midſt of hir back, and there they meete both, and ſoftly ſhaketh them, and lets them fall againe, and ſhe mantleth when ſhe ſtretcheth one of her wings along after her leg, and afterward the other wing, which moſt commonly ſhee doth before ſhe warbleth her.
                  
                  
                     The true names of a Spar-hawke, as Oſtrengers, and Speruiters haue thought.
                     There is a queſtion whether a man ſhall call a ſparehawke, a ſpere-hawke, or an aſpere-hawke, to which Oſtrengers and Speruiters anſwer ſhe may be called by al the three names for three reaſons▪ firſt, ſhe may be called a ſpere-hawke, for of al the hawkes that are ſhe is moſt ſpere, that is, ſhe is moſt tender to keepe, for the leaſt miſdiet or diſorder whatſoeuer kils hir. Secondly, ſhe may be called an aſper-hawke, by reaſon of the ſharpnes of her corage, & her quick looke, & alſo of her fleeing, for ſhe is moſt aſpere and ſharp in all things which belong vnto her more than anie other hawke. Laſtly, ſhe may be called a ſparehawke for two reaſons, one is, ſhe ſpareth goſhawkes and tercels both, ſuch as be in their ſoreage vntill ſuch time as they may bee reclaymed and made readie to flee, as alſo all goſhawkes or tercels which are not fully mewed till ſuch time as they may be cleane enſ
                           •
                        amed & ready to flee, for al the while they be vnable the ſparehawke occupieth the ſeaſon of the yere, and kills the partrige excellently wel, which is from

Saint Margarets day till Lammas, and ſo foorth in the yeere, ſhe will alſo flee wel at yong feſants, yong heath cockes in the beginning of the yeere, and after Michaelmaſſe when partriges through greatneſſe paſſe their daunger, I haue then ſeene them made, ſome to flie the pie, ſome the teale vppon riuers, ſome to flie the woodcocke, and ſome for the blacke birde or the thruſh: the flight at the woodcocke is a cunning flight, and asketh great craft, therfore when you come to a wood or a quetch of buſhes, caſt your ſparrowhawke into a tree, and beate the buſhes, then if any woodcocke ariſe ſhee will aſſuredly haue it▪ yet you muſt firſt make her therevnto, or to any other foule caſting one firſt in a ſtring out of the buſhes whereby ſhe may know her paſtime, and ſhe muſt ſit aloft as when ſhe is made for the partrige: again, (as before I haue ſaide) you may call her a ſparrowhawke for this other reaſon, which is, if there were a ſhippe laden full of hawkes and nothing elſe, and if there were one ſparrowhawke amongſt them there ſhould be no cuſtome be paide becauſe of her, and ſo for the moſt common name they are called ſparrow hawkes, as prooue the reaſons before mentioned.
                  
                  
                     How a hawke flieth.
                     An hawke flieth to the riuer diuerſe wayes, and killeth the foule diuerſly, that is to ſay, ſhee flieth to the view, to the beake, or to the toll, and all is but one, as you ſhall knowe hereafter, ſhee flieth alſo to the qu
                           •••
                        e, to the creep, and no other way, and ſhe

nymmeth the foule at the fere iuttie, or at the iuttie fere.
                  
                  
                     To know what Huffe, Iuttie ferry, Mount, Randon, Creepe, Ennewed meanes.
                     A Goſhawke or a Tercell that ſhall flee to the view, to the toll, or to the beake, is taught in this manner▪ you muſt finde a foule in the riuer or in a pit, and then ſet your hawke a good way off vpon a moll hill, or on the ground, and creepe ſoftely towards the foule, and when you come almoſt where the foule lieth, looke backward toward the hawke, and with your hand make ſigne for your hawke to come to you, and when ſhe is a comming and commeth lowe by the ground almoſt at you, then ſmite your hawkes poule, and crie huffe, huffe, huffe, and make the foule to riſe, which when ſhe ſhall ſee, doubt not her forwardneſſe in fleeing, but if ſhee nyme or take the further ſide of the riuer or pit from you, then ſhe ſlaieth the foule at fere iuttie: but if ſhe kill it on that ſide that you are on your ſelfe as many times it chanceth, then you ſhall ſay ſhee killed the foule at the iutty ferry if your hawke nime the foule aloft, you ſhal ſay ſhe tooke it at the mount, or at the ſonce, but if the foule riſe not but flee along cloſe by the riuer and the hawke nyme it, then you ſhal ſay, ſhe killed it at the randon: when you haue your Hawke on your fiſt, and creepe ſoftly to the riuer or to the pit, ſtealing ſoftly to the brinke thereof, and by that meanes ſlay a foule, then you ſhall ſay it was

killed at the creepe either at the fere iuttie, or iuttie fery as is aboue mentioned, but if it chance, as it doth many times, and moſt often, that the foule for feare of your hawke riſe and falles againe into the riuer ere the hawke can ſeaſe vppon her, and ſo lieth ſhe and dare not riſe, you ſhal ſay then your hawke hath endewed the foule into the riuer, and ſo you ſhal ſay alſo if there be moe foules in the riuer than that the which your hawke nymeth, if they dare not ariſe for feare of your hawke.
                  
                  
                     A theefe.
                     You ſhall vnderſtand, that a goſhawke ought not to flee at any foule vpon the riuer with belles at her feete in any wiſe, by which meanes a goſhawke is called a theefe.
                  
                  
                     Querre.
                     If you ſee ſtore of mallards ſeparate from the riuer and feeding in the fielde, if your hawke flee couertly vnder hedges, or cloſe by the ground, by which meanes ſhe nymeth one of them before they can riſe, you ſhall ſay, that foule was killed at the Querre.
                  
                  
                     Marke this terme Drawe.
                     There be many Falconers which doe miſuſe this terme Drawe, and ſay that their hawkes will drawe

to the riuer, where that terme Draw is properly aſſigned to that hawke which wil kill a rooke, a crow, or a rauen ſitting vppon a land, wherefore it muſt be ſaide, that ſuch an hawke will drawe well to a rooke.
                  
                  
                     How a man ſhal make a hawke to the Querre.
                     Take a tame mallard and ſet him in a faire plaine, & let him go whither he wil, then take your hawke vppon your fiſt and go to that plaine, and being a good diſtance off hold vp your hand, and ſee if your hawke can eſpie the mallard yea or no by her owne corage, and if you finde ſhe haue diſcerned the foule and deſire to flee thereto, let her kil it and plume wel thereon, and in this ſorte ſerue her three or foure times, and doubt not but ſhee is perfitly made to the Querre: I haue knowen gentlemen, that whenſoeuer and whereſoeuer they ſee any tame duckes, and if their hawkes would deſire to them, they woulde let them flee, which they found encouraged their Hawkes to bee well fleeing to the Querre an other time.
                  
                  
                     A prety deceit to take an hawke that is broken out of the mew, or any foule that ſitteth in trees.
                     Looke where an hawke pearcheth for all night in what place ſoeuer it bee, and ſoftly and leaſurely clime vp to her with a ſconce or lanthorne which

hath but one light in it, and let that light be toward the hawke, ſo as ſhe ſee not your face and in that maner you may come to her, and take her either by the legges or any other part, for ſhe will not in any wiſe mooue from the light, and in this ſort may you take any other fowle.
                  
                  
                     Of Hawkes belles.
                     The bells which your hawke ſhal weare, looke in any wiſe that they be not too heauy, whereby they ouerloade hir, neither that one be heauier than an other, but both of like weight: looke alſo, that they be well ſounding and ſhrill, yet not both of one ſound, but one at leaſt a note vnder the other: alſo, that they be whole and not broken, and chiefly in the ſounding place, for if they bee crackt, there the ſound will be dul and naught, of ſpar-hawkes belles there is choice enough, and the charge little, by reaſon that the ſtore thereof is great: But for goſhawks ſometimes belles of Millaine were ſuppoſed to bee the beſt, and vndoubtedly they be excellent, for that they are ſounded with ſiluer, and the price of them is thereafter, but there be now vſed belles out of the lowe Countries which are approoued to be paſsing good, for they are principally ſorted, they are well ſounded, and ſweet of ringing, with a pleaſant ſhrilneſſe, and excellently well laſting.
                  
                  
                     
                     To what Honour all Hawkes do belong, and firſt to an Emperor.
                     Firſt, there is an Eagle, a Bawter, and a Melowne, the worſt of theſe three will kill an hinde calfe, a fawne, a roe, a kidde, an elke, a crane, a buzzard, a ſtorke, a ſwanne, a foxe in the plaine ground: and theſe are not enlured neither reclaimed, becauſe they be ſo exceeding ponderous to the pearch portatiue, and theſe three by their proper natures belong to an Emperour.
                  
                  
                     What to a King.
                     Vnto a King belongeth at his pleaſure tributaries a Gerfalcon, and a tercell of a Gerfalcon which is moſt commonly called a Gerkin.
                  
                  
                     To a Prince.
                     There is a Falcon gentle, and a Tercel gentle, and both of them belong euery way to a Prince.
                  
                  
                     To a Duke.
                     There is a Falcon of the Rocke, and that belongeth (in the opinions of all Falconers) to a Duke.
                  
                  
                     
                     To an Earle.
                     There is one other falcon, and that hawke is called a falcon peregrine, which by the beſt iugements is bequeathed to an Earle.
                  
                  
                     To a Baron.
                     To a Baron and his degree belongeth a Hawke which is called a Baſtard.
                  
                  
                     To a Knight.
                     There is a Sacre and alſo a Sacret, and both the one and the other do belong vnto a knight.
                  
                  
                     To an Eſquier.
                     The Lanar and the Lanret, hawks of exceeding hardneſſe do both belong to an Eſquier.
                  
                  
                     To a Ladie.
                     There is an Hawke called a Merlin, both Iacke and Formale, and they belong vnto a Lady.
                  
                  
                     To a Yongman.
                     To euery Yongman is due the Hawke called the Hobbie, and theſe be all the long-winged haugs or

hawkes of the Tower, and all theſe are by lure both called and alſo reclaymed.
                  
                  
                     Of ſhort winged Hawkes.
                     Of ſhort winged hawkes, which are hawkes of another kinde, there is firſt a goſhawke the which is for a Yeoman.
                     There is a tercell of a Goſhawke which is for a poore man.
                     There is a Sparre-hawke which is for a poore man.
                     There is a Musket, which is (as olde Authours haue entitled them) for a holy water Clarke: and theſe be the ſhort winged hawkes, of an other kind from the former, for they flee to the Querre, and to fere iuttie and iuttie ferry.
                  
                  Thus endeth the proceſſe or diſcourſe of Hawking, and now followeth the moſt excellenteſt approued receits and medicines belonging to all manner of diſeaſes and other impediments in Hawkes whatſoeuer.
               
               
                  
                  How the Frounce commeth, and a medicine therefore.
                  THe Frounnce commeth not by any thing ſooner than by feeding your hawke with vile and naughtie meate, as with porke, or elſe with cattes fleſh, which is the worſt of all: the cure thereof is thus, take a ſiluer ſpoone and put the ſmall end in the fire til it be hot, then hauing your hawke held faſt, open her beake and burne the ſore, then anoint it with the marrow of a gooſe which hath laine ſo long till it ſtincke and it will ſoone be whole, but if the frounce be waxed as great as a nut▪ then ſhal you find a worme therein, wherefore then you muſt cut it with a razor in this maner, let one hold the hawke and ſlit the ſore, and you ſhall find there as if it were the maw of a pigeon, take it all out whole, and take a paire of ſheares and cutte the hole of the ſore, and make it as cleane as you can with a linnen cloth, wiping the blood cleane away, then annoint the ſore place with balme foure daies together, & afterward with populion till it be whole.
                  
                     How the rie commeth, and the cure thereof.
                     The want of hot meate, and ignorance, not ſuffering your hawke to tire much, is that which occaſioneth the rie: the cure is, take daſie leaues and ſtamp

them in a morter and wring out the iuiſe, then with a pen put it in the hawks nares once or twice when ſhe is ſmall gorged, and immediatly thereupon giue her tiring and ſhe will be ſound: or elſe take parcely rootes and ſerue her with them in the ſame maner, and when ſhe tireth hold rew in your hand with the tiring, and that will make her voide the naughtie humour, but it is dangerous to vſe it too often for feare the iuice ſpirt into her eie and hurt her.
                  
                  
                     How the Cray commeth, and the cure therefore.
                     The Cray commeth by giuing your hawke meat waſhed in hote water when you want hote meate: it commeth by means of threeds in the fleſh that the hawke is fed withall, for though you picke the fleſh neuer ſo cleane, yet you ſhall finde threedes therein: the cure is, take and chafe with your hands the fundament of your Hawke with luke warme water a long time, & after that take the poulder of ſaxifrage or elſe the poulder of rew, and a quantitie of Maie butter, and temper it well together till they be well mingled, then put it in a little boxe and cloſe it faſt, and as often as you feed your hawke a whole meale annoint her meate a little therewith, and that ſhall make her loue the meate the better, becauſe of the ointment, and it will keepe her from the Cray, and from diuerſe other ſickeneſſes which ingender in a hawke. If you take the hote heart of a ſwine or of a pigge and feede your Hawke therewith two dayes together it will cure her.
                     
                        Alſo, if you take porke and dippe it in the hote milke of a cowe and feede your hawke therewith, it will helpe the cray, and make her mute cleane.
                     Againe, porke with the marrow of the bone of the buttocke of a ſwine, being giuen both together ſhall make her mute well and cleane.
                     Alſo, if you vſe her now and then vnto freſh butter, you ſhall finde it paſsing good for the cray.
                     Alſo, one meale, or two at the moſt, of the hote liuer of a pigge will make her mute wel, but beware you giue her not too great a gorge thereof, for it is a perillous meate.
                     Alſo, take the white of an egge, and beate it well with a ſpoone till it be like water, then let the meat which ſhall be for your hawkes ſupper lie in ſteepe therein all the day before, and at night feede her therewith, and that which ſhall be for her dinner in the morning, let it lie all night and if the meate that is ſo ſteeped be porke, it is much better, for ſo it hath beene approoued.
                  
                  
                     Medicines to enſeame your Hawke.
                     Take the roote of raſue and do it in cleane water, then lay the fleſh therein to ſteepe a great while, and after giue it to your hawke to eate, and if ſhe do eate thereof, doubt not but it will take away her greace, neither ſhall ſhe much bate therefore.
                     Alſo, take puliall and garlike, and ſtampe them well together, and wring out the iuice into a diſh, and then wet the fleſh therein and feed your hawke

there with, and within foure daies without all faile it▪ will clenſe and enſeame your hawke, but bee ſure euery day to make new iuice, and alwaies when you feede her, wet your meate therein. Alſo take the iuice of parcelie moris, otherwiſe called parcelie rootes, aad the iuice of hyſope and waſh your fleſh theeein, and your hawke ſhall bee enſeamed kindlie without anie great abate to your hawke.
                     Some vſe to lay their fleſh in water almoſt a day, and to giue the ſame to the hawke at ſupper, and that which ſo lieth all night to giue to her in the morning, and thus to feede her in the mue before ſhe be drawne about a month or ſixe weekes, and ſo to enſeame here ere ſhee come to the fiſt, which is very good, and when ſhee hath caſt her ſercell then is the time to begin to feede her in that manner.
                  
                  
                     A medicine to make a hawke caſt which is troubled with caſting in her bodie.
                     Take the iuice of Saladine, and wette a peece of fleſh therein to the bigneſſe of a nut, and giue that peece to the hawke, and it will preſently make her caſt the old caſting, and ſaue the hawke.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for a hawke that wil ſoare.
                     Waſh the fleſh that your hawke ſhall feede with in the iuice of fenell, and it will take away that pride

from her, and make her to leaue hir ſoaring, whether ſhee be leane or fatte, and many times a hawke will ſoare, only for want of bathing.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for a hawke that is lowſie.
                     Take quickeſiluer and put it in a baſen of braſſe, and put thereto ſaladine and aſhes and mingle them well togither til the quicke ſiluer be ſlaine, and mixe therewith the fatte of bones, and annointe the hawke therewith, and hang it about her necke till it fall away, and that ſhall kill the lice. Alſo powder of orpment blowne vpon a hawke with a pen will kill the lice.
                     Alſo take a peece of a rough blanket vnſhorne, and hold it to the fier till it be thorow warme, and then wrap the hawke therein, and holde her ſoftlie for hurting her in your handes, and all the lice will creepe into the cloth.
                     Alſo hold her in the ſunne in a faire day, and you ſhall ſee the lice creepe out vpon her feathers, then take a knife and wet the one ſide of the blade thereof with your mouth, and alwaies as they appeare lay the wet ſide of the knife vpon them, and they will cleaue thereto, and ſo you may kill them.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for a hawke that will caſt fleſh.
                     Put the fleſh that your hawke ſhall eate in faire water, and feede her therewith three daies, and ſhee ſhall hold her fleſh at the beſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     A medicine for an hawke that hath loſt her courage.
                     An hawke that hath loſt her courage, a man maie knowe if hee will take good heede, for this is her manner, when ſhe is caſt to a fowle, ſhe flieth a wayward, as if ſhee knew not a fowle, or els ſhee will purſue it a little way, and immediatly giue it ouer, then for ſuch a hawke, this is a good and an approoued medicine: take of oile of Spaine, and temper it with cleare wine and the yolke of an egge: which being done, put biefe therein, and giue to your hawke thereof fiue morcels and then ſet her in the ſunne, and at the euening feede her with an olde hot doue, and if you doe but feede her thus three or foure times, you ſhall finde that the hawke was neuer more luſtie, or of better courage in her life, then ſhee will be. Others make a powder of meckles, which ſtincketh, and puts the powder on the fleſh of a peacocke, and mingles the blood of the peacocke with the powder, and ſo giues it to the hawke.
                  
                  
                     A medicine that a hawke lie not in the mew for vnluſtines.
                     Take ferne rootes which grow on an oake, and oake apples, and make a iuice of them, and feed your hawke therewith three or foure times, and ſhee will leaue her lying.
                  
                  
                     
                     A medicine for a hawke that hath the teyne.
                     An hawke which hath the teyne is eaſily known if a man take heede, for this is her manner, ſhee will pant more for one batting, then an other hawke will for three, and if ſhee ſhould but flie a little ſhe would looſe her breath, whether ſhe be hie or lowe, and alwaies ſhee is of heauie cheere, the cure whereof is thus, Take a quantitie of the rednes of 
                           •
                        aſſell with the pouder of a raſne, and peper, and ſomewhat of ginger, and make thereof with freſh greaſe three pellets, then holde the hawke to the fier, and when ſhee feeleth the heate, make her to ſwallow thoſe pellets by force, then knit faſt her beake that ſhee caſt them not out, and in doing this thriſe, ſhee will bee ſound.
                     Alſo take raſne and rubarbe, and grinde them togither, and make a iuice thereof and wet your hawkes meate therein, and giue it her to eate, and it will cure her. Alſo take Alyſaunders and the root of a primroſe, and ſeeth them in butter, and giue your hawke three morſels euery daie vntill ſhe be whole.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for a hawke that caſt wormes at her fundament, what wormes ſoeuer they bee.
                     Take the lymaile of iron and mingle it with the

fleſh of porke, and giue it your hawke to eate three daies togither and it will cure her.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for the Aggreſtine.
                     When you ſee your hawke hurt her feete with her beake, and pulleth her traine, then ſhe hath the aggreſtine, the cure is, take merde of a doue, and of a ſheepe, and of an allow, and ſtrong vineger, and do all ſoftly, in a braſſe baſon and mingle them well togither, ſo as they may ſerue three daies togither, and giue her the fleſh of a coluer or ſtocke doue with honie and the powder of peper, and then ſet her in a darke place, and doe ſo nine daies, and when you ſee new feathers come in her taile let her bathe, for ſhe is ſound.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for the crampe, and how it commeth.
                     For the crampe in a hawkes winges, take a white loafe of breade ſomewhat colder then it commeth out of the ouen, and holding the hawke ſoftlie for feare of hurting her, cut the loafe almoſt thorough out, and diſplaie her winge eaſilie and hold it betweene the two partes of the loafe, and let it bee ſo held the ſpace of halfe a quarter of an houre and ſhee ſhall be eaſed. The crampe commeth to an hawke by taking of cold in her ſoreage, wherfore it is good to keep a hawke warme both when ſhe is yong and old: and this medicine is approued good at all times whether ſhe be yong or old.
                  
                  
                     
                     A medicine to make a hawke mew timely without hurt.
                     There are in woods, or in hedges wormes called adders, which be by nature redde, and there are alſo ſnakes of the ſame nature, and they are very bitter, take two or three of them, and cut off their heades and the ends of their tailes, then take a new earthen potte which was neuer vſed, and cutting them into ſmall gebbets, put them therein, and in leaſurely ſort let them ſeeth a good while, and let the pot be cloſe couered ſo as no aire may come out, or go in: and let thoſe peeces ſeethe til they be all turned to greaſe, then caſt it out and doe away the bones, and gather vp the greaſe and put it in a cleane veſſell, and as oft as you feede your hawke, annoint her meate therewith, then let her eate as much as ſhee will, and by meanes of that meate, ſhee will mew at your pleaſure.
                     Alſo take wheate, and boyle it in the broath that the Adders were ſodden in, and when you ſee it beginne to breake, take it out and feede hens and chikens therewith, and with ſuch hennes and chikens feede your hawke.
                  
                  
                     A medicine that a hawke fall none of her feathers.
                     Take powder of canell, and the iuice of frankcoſt, with the iuice of paranie, and wette therein three or foure peeces of fleſh, and make your hawke to ſwallowe

them, and in vſing this often, it will preuaile.
                     Alſo take the skinne of an Adder or a ſnake, and cut it into ſmal pieces and temper it with hot blood, and make your hawke many times to feed thereon, and ſhe will not mew.
                  
                  
                     For the gowt in the throate.
                     When you ſee your hawke blowe manie times, and that it commeth not of batting, then maie you bee aſſured that ſhee hath the goute in the throate: the cure whereof is, take the bloode of a peacocke and incenſe Mirabolana, and cloue gilleflowers▪ canell and ginger, and take of all theſe a like, and mingle them with the peacockes blood, and ſeeth it till it be very thicke, and thereof make morcels, and giue your hawke thereof euery daie at midmorne, and at noone.
                  
                  
                     For the gout in the head and reines.
                     When you ſee your hawke cannot endue her meate, nor remount her eſtate, then it is like ſhe hath the gout in the heade, or reines: the cure whereof is, take momyan, otherwiſe called momy of the appoticaries. And the skinne of an hare, and giue it to your hawke to eate nine times with the fleſh of a colt, and if ſhee can holde that meate it will cure her.
                  
                  
                     
                     A medicine for the falera.
                     When you ſee your hawkes talents waxe white, then is it a ſigne ſhee hath the falera, the cure is, take a blacke ſnake and cut away the head and the taile, and take the middle and frie it in an earthen pot, then take the greaſe and ſaue it, and annoint the fleſh of a peacocke therewith, and giue it to the hawke for to eate eight daies togither, but if you haue not a peacocke, take a ſtocke doue, and after the eight daies end, giue her a chicken, waſh a little chiefly the tendereſt part of the breaſt, and ſhe will be whole.
                  
                  
                     For the crampe in the thigh, legge, or foote of a hawke.
                     When you ſee your hawke lay one foote vpon another, then is it a ſigne ſhee hath the crampe, the cure thereof is, draw her blood vpon the foot which lieth vpon the other foote, and vpon the legge alſo, and it will extinguiſh the crampe.
                  
                  
                     For the cough, or poſe.
                     For the cough, take pouder of bayes, and put it vpon the fleſh of a ſtockedoue, & giuing it to your hawke it will helpe her.
                  
                  
                     
                     For the podagree.
                     When your Hawkes feete are ſwollen ſhee hath the podagree, the cure is, take freſh Maie butter and as much of oile oliue, and of allume, and chafe them well together at the fire, and make thereof an ointment and annoint her feete foure daies together, and ſet her in the ſunne, and giue her the fleſh of a catte, and if you ſee it auaile not, 
                           〈◊〉
                         the cutting of a vine, and wrappe it about the ſwelling, and let her ſit vppon a colde ſtone, and annoint her with butter till ſhe be whole.
                  
                  
                     For inward ſickeneſſe vnſeene.
                     A man may knowe by the cheere and vnpleaſantneſſe of an hawke this infirmitie, but yet it is ſtrange to knowe things which a man can not ſee, in what ſickeneſſe or what maner they be greeued, and chiefly when a man knoweth not whereof it commeth, the cure is, feede your hawke well vpon a henne, and then make her to faſt two dayes after to empty her bowels well, the third day take hony ſodden, and fill her body full, and binde her beake that ſhe caſt it not out againe, and then ſet her out in the ſunne, and when it draweth towardes euening, feede her with ſome hote foule, for I haue heard my maiſters ſay, if this helpe her not, then nothing will.
                  
                  
                     
                     For the paſsion which go ſhawkes haue faſting.
                     Take the roote of ſmall ruſhes and make iuice of them▪ and moiſtening your fleſh therein, let your hawke eate it.
                  
                  
                     For Hawkes that are wounded.
                     Take away the feathers from about the wound, and take the white of an egge and oile oliue & mingle them togither and annoint the wound therewith bathing it in white wine, but if you ſee any dead fleſh ariſe then put into the ſore Eſcome ſalt till it be eaten away, after take inſence and wax, as much of the one as of the other and mixe them together on the fire, and when you will annoint the ſore, warme it, and then annoint the place with a penne till it be cleane skinned, but if the dead fleſh encreaſe, lay venecreeke thereon, and it will cure it ſound.
                  
                  
                     For the Artetike.
                     When you ſee your hawke fat about the breaſt, it is an vndoubted ſigne ſhe hath the artetike, wherefore let her blood in the originall veine, and after giue her a frogge to eate, and it will helpe her.
                  
                  
                     For a Hawke that is troubled in her bowelles.
                     When your hawke is troubled in her bowels, you ſhal know it by hir eies, for they wil be darke, and ſhe

will looke vnpleaſantly, and her muting will defile her fundament: the cure is, annoint her meate with the poulder of cammell and ferne, let her eate it and no other.
                  
                  
                     For the gowt in generall.
                     Giue your hawke three or foure meales of a new ſlaine vrchine and it will inſtantly helpe her.
                  
                  
                     For mites.
                     Bathe your hawke in the iuyce of wormewoode, and it will kill all her mites.
                  
                  
                     To make a hawke flee craftily al the yeare.
                     When you go to the field in the latter end of hawking, and deſire that your hawke ſhal flee craftily, vſe her in this ſort, let hir kill a foule, and let hir plume it as much as ſhe will, and when ſhe hath plumed inough, go to her ſo as you fright hir not, and reward hir on the foule, and after that you may caſt her on a pearch, and by that incouragement ſhee will vſe her craft all the yeare.
                  
                  
                     For the ſtone.
                     Anoint hir fundament with oile & with a holow ſtraw put in the pouder of allum: alſo take an hearbe which is called Caſtis lardder, and annoynt the inſide of her mouth, and it wil help her. Alſo take ſmall flam
                           •
                        s rootes and polipody, and the nerues of ſpinage and grinde them well, and ſeeth it in butter, and

ſtraine it through a cloth, then make three pellets as bigge as a nut, and put them in your hawkes mouth in the morning, and looke that ſhee be voyde, and then let her faſt till the euening, then feede her by little and little till ſhe be whole.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for vermine.
                     Bathe your hawke in the iuice of fennell rootes, and it will kill vermine of what ſort ſoeuer.
                  
                  
                     For the rheume.
                     When you ſee your hawke ſhut her eies and ſhake her head, then hath ſhe the rheume in her head, therefore giue her the larde of a goate the firſt day, and the ſecond giue her epatike with the fleſh of a chicken, and it will helpe her.
                  
                  
                     A medicine to keepe hawkes moiſt that are drie.
                     Take the iuice of horehound, and wet your hawkes meate therein, and feede her therewith once or twice, and then ſhee will bee moiſt enough inwardly.
                  
                  
                     For ſickeneſſe in the intrailes of Hawkes.
                     A hawke whoſe intrailes are ill is more than ordinarily ſicke, for if ſhe hold not her meat, but caſt it, it is a token of foule glut or ſurfet of feathers taken in

hir youth, and appeares when ſhe commeth to much fleeing ſhee will haue much deſire to reſt, and will ſleepe when ſhe putteth ouer her meate, and the fleſh which ſhe hath in her gorge if ſhe caſt it, will looke as if it were ſodden, ſhe will many times aſſay to put ouer her meate, but cannot: wherefore, if ſhe caſt it, ſhe may be holpen, if not, ſhe dieth: the cure is, take the rawe yolkes of egges, and when they be wel beaten, put thereto Spaniſh ſalt and honny, and wet therein the fleſh which your hawke muſt eate for three days, but if ſhee refuſe to eate it, then holding her, enforce her to ſwallow three or foure morſels euery day: or elſe vſe this, take hony at the changing of the moon, and a keene nettle, and thereof make fine poulder, and when it is well ground, take the breaſt bone of a hen, and an other of a ſtockedoue, and hacke them with a knife. then doe away the skin, and lay thereon the poulder, and all hote with the poulder feede her, do thus thrice, and it is enough.
                  
                  
                     For ſwelling.
                     If your hawke haue a felon ſwolne on her that a man may heale it, and keepe the hawke from death, doe thus, take the roote of comfory and ſugar, of ech a like quantity, and ſeethe it in freſh greace, with a third part of hony, and then draw it through a cloth, and lay it to your hawke and it will helpe her.
                  
                  
                     
                     For blaines in hawkes mouthes called frounches.
                     The frounce is a dangerous diſeaſe in hawkes, and bringeth her to death withholding her ſtrength, and men ſay it comes of colde, which doth hawkes great hurt, making fleugme fall out of the head, her eies will ſwell and looke dead, and if ſhe do want ſpeedie help, nothing will kill ſooner: take therefore of fennell, mariall, and kerſis, of each a like quantitie, then ſeethe them, and ſtraine them through a cloth, and now and then waſh the hawkes head therewith, and chiefly the roofe of her mouth, and it wil foorthwith help her.
                  
                  
                     For a hawke that hath the agrum.
                     When your hawke hath her mouth and cheekes blubbed, then ſhe hath the agrum, therefore take a ſiluer needle and heate it in the fire, and burne her nares throughout, then annoint her with oile oliue till ſhe be whole.
                  
                  
                     How to make a hawke great and fat.
                     Take a quantity of porke, hony, butter, and clarified greace, and ſeathe them al together, and annoint fleſh therein and feede your hawke therewith and it will fatte her, or elſe take the wings of an eued and feede her and keepe her from trauell, and it will fat your hawke though you vſe nothing elſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     For botches in the Iaw of a Hawke.
                     Cut the botches with a knife, that the matter may haue iſſue, and then mixe them and fill the hole with the poulder of arneme
                           •
                        t Ibrent, then on that pouder do a litle larde which is raiſed and it will heale it.
                  
                  
                     For a hawke that wil not reclaime.
                     Take freſh butter and put thereto ſugar, and put it in a cleane cloth, and reclaime her to that, and keepe it in a boxe in your bagge.
                  
                  
                     For a hawke that is refrained.
                     When you ſee your hawke neezing, and caſting matter through her noſtrils or her nares, then doubtleſſe ſhe is refrained: the cure is, take graines of ſhaffelgree, and of pepper, and grinde it well, and temper it with ſtrong vineger, and then put it into her nares and into the roofe of her mouth, then giue her hote meate to eate and ſhe will be ſound.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for hawkes that haue paines in their croups.
                     You ſhall take faire Morſum, and the poulder of gelefre, and mingle them together, and giue them to your hawke to eate, and if ſhe hold it paſt the ſecond day ſhe will be ſound.
                     
                        〈8 pages missing〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     For the ſtone in the fundament.
                     When your hawke cannot mute then ſhe hath the ſickeneſſe called the ſtone, for cure whereof take the heart of a ſwine, and ſwines greace, and mixing it with the heart let her eate it.
                  
                  
                     A medicine for the drie frounce.
                     For this ſicknes take the roote of polipody which groweth vpon oakes and ſeethe it a great while, then take it from the fire and let it ſtand vntill it bee luke warme, then waſh your fleſh therein, and feede your hawke three times and ſhe will be perfitly ſound.
                  
                  
                     A medcine for the wormes called Anguellis:
                     Take preſſure made of a lamb which was yeaned vntimely, and make thereof three morſels, and put it in a gut of a ſtockedoue and feede her therewith, and looke the hawke be voide when you giue her this medicine.
                     Alſo take iuice of Dragons and put ful the gut of a pigeon, then cut it and part it ſo as a hawk may ſwallow it, which done, cloſe vp her beake for feare of caſting it vp againe: alſo, giue her the dowſets of a bucke, as hot as they can be cut out, and make poulder of the pizle, and caſt it vpon the fleſh of a cat, and feede her therewith and it is a preſent remedy.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  A TREATISE of Hunting.
                  LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules church-yard. 1595.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  As before in the booke of Hawking, is truly noted and ſet downe the skill appertaining vnto a Falconer or Oſtringer: ſo in the ſame manner, in this Booke is duely and preciſely taught the Termes belonging to that noble ſport of Hunting or Venery. 
                  
                     Beasts of Ʋenery.
                     
                        THere be onely foure beaſts of Venery: the Hart, the Hare, the wilde Roe, and the Woolfe: and theſe and none other by the antient laws of Sir Triſtram you may onely call Beaſts of Venery.
                  
                  
                     Beaſts of the Chace.
                     There be fiue beaſts which we cal beaſts of chace: the Buke, the Doe, the Foxe, the Marterne, and the Roe: all other of what kinde ſoeuer, terme them Raſcall.
                     
                        And firſt becauſe of all other beaſts, of Venery be the moſt worthy, the Hart, and (as we may terme him) is the moſt noble and taketh the firſt place, we will ſpeake of the termes belonging to him:

                           At the firſt yeare you ſhall call him a calfe.
                           The ſecond yeare a brocket.
                           The third yeare a ſpayad.
                           The fourth yeare a ſtagge.
                           The fift yeare a great ſtagge.
                           The ſixt yeare you ſhall call him a Hart.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     To know the head of a Hart.
                     Thou ſhalt call the head of a Hart Auntelere, Riall, and Surriall, and when you may knowe him by the toppe, you ſhall call him forked a Hart of tenne: and when he beareth three in the top, you ſhall call him a Hart of twelue, and when he beareth foure, you ſhall call him ſummed a Hart of ſixteene: and from foure forward you ſhall call him ſummed of ſo many as he carrieth, how many ſoeuer they be.
                     Of Hart, Hinde, Bucke, and Doe, you ſhall euer ſay, a heard: of Roes you ſhall euer terme a beuie: of wilde Swine a ſounder: of Wolues a rowt.
                     Either of red deere or fallow you ſhall call vppon the view twenty a little or ſmall heard: fortie you ſhall call a middle heard: and foure ſcore you ſhall euer call a great heard, be they male deere, Hindes, or Does.
                     
                        Vpon the view of a hart, if he be a goodly deere, you ſhall neuer call him faire, but a great Hart: and ſo likewiſe a great Hinde, a great Bucke: but onelie of a Doe, you ſhall terme her a faire Doe: euer haue a great care of this as you will be counted a perfect Woodman.
                  
                  
                     A beuie of Roes.
                     Sixe Roes or vnder is euer called by Hunteſmen, a ſmall Beuie, betwixt ſix and tenne is a middle Beuie: twelue is a great Beuie: And ſtill the greater the number is, the greater is the Beuie.
                  
                  
                     A ſounder of Swine.
                     Twelue or ſome leſſer number be called a Sounder of wilde Swine: ſixeteene is a middle Sounder: but twenty may very well be termed a great Sounder.
                  
                  
                     Of the Roe hunting, breaking, and dreſsing.
                     When you ſhall hunt the Roe, you ſhall ſay, He croſſes and treſones before the houndes, or if you ſay, he doubles, it is not much amiſſe, although by the lawes of ſir Triſtram it is hardly permitted, you ſhall not ſay, This is a great Roebucke, but a faire Bucke, and a faire Doe. Dreſsing of the Ro is called the Herdlenge of a Roe by the termes of Venerie which you ſhall performe in this ſort: you ſhall lay

the head betwene the two farther legges: then take the two hinder legges, and croſsing them put them on the two contrary farther legges, faſtning them by the looſning of the former ioynts, onely taking out the bowels with the blood, and cutting off the feete wherewith you ſhall reward your hounds, diuiding ech foote into foure peeces with your fawchon or woodknife, and putting them amongeſt the bowels and blood: And this of the Roe is tearmed a Rewarde.
                  
                  
                     Of the age and vndoing of the Bore.
                     Now to ſpeake of the Bore, the firſt yeare hee is called a pigge of the Sounder, the ſecond yeare he is called a hogge, the third yeare a hog ſtere, the fourth a Bore, for then, if not before he departeth from the Sounder, and then he is termed a Singler. When you haue the Bore, you ſhall vndo him, firſt, not taking off the skinne, and in dreſsing him orderly diuide the fleſh into two and thirtie breades, as wee terme it in Venerie: if he be ſlaine by the ſtrength of the hounds, you ſhall giue them the bowelles in the place vppon the ground where the Bore was ſlaine: and this is likewiſe called a Reward.
                  
                  
                     Of the Hare.
                     The Hare is the King of al the beaſts of Venerie, and in hunting maketh beſt ſport, breedeth the moſt delight of any other, and is a beaſt moſt ſtrange by nature, for he often changeth his kinde, and is both

male and female. And this is a ſtrange thing in the female, and onely peculiar to this beaſt of all other: after ſhe hath taken the Bucke and commeth to kindle ſhee bringeth foorth two leuerets rough and in perfite ſhape, and retaineth two other in her ſtill, which ſhee bringeth foorth before the two firſt bee well able to releeue, and ſhe is knotted for her third leueret, and all this at one time: we terme the place where ſhe ſitteth, her forme, the places through the which ſhe goeth to releefe, her muſet, and when we finde where ſhe hath gone, we call it the pricking of the Hare: her deceits and ſhifts before the houndes we terme, her doubling: wee terme her feeding her releefe. The Hare beareth ſewet and greace, ſhee fimaſheth, crottiſes, and rounges, although amongſt the Huntſmen of theſe latter times theſe termes bee worne out of vſe, onely we ſay, ſhe crotiſes: when the Hare is gone to her fourme, we ſay euer ſhee is gone to her ſeate: and we ſay the hare ſitteth, where ſpeaking of other beaſts we ſay, they lie, & the reaſon is, becauſe ſhe euer hucketh vpon her legges, as though nature had taught her to haue her feete euer in a readineſſe, of all the other beaſts beeing moſt watchfull. And ſhee naturally deſireth to runne vp the hill, becauſe her legges be ſhorter before than behinde: and her ſewet and greaſe which ſhe beareth lieth ouer the leine betweene the chine and the taile.
                  
                  
                     
                     The termes of a Huntſman to the kennel according to the French, from which they were at firſt only deriued.
                     When the Huntſman commeth to the kennell in the morning to couple vp his hounds, and ſhall iubet once or twice to awake the dogs: opening the kennell doore, the Hunteſman vſeth ſome gentle rating leſt in their haſty comming forth they ſhould hurt one an other: to which the French man vſeth this worde Arere, Arere, and we, ſoſt ho ho ho ho once or twice redoubling the ſame, coupling them as they came out of the kennell. And being come into the field, and hauing vncoupled, the Frenchman vſeth, hors de couple auant auant onſe or twiſe with ſoho three times togither: wee vſe to iubet once or twice to the dogges crying, a traile a traile, there dogges there, and the rather to make the dogs in trailing to hold cloſe together ſtriking vppon ſome Brake crie ſoho. And if the hounds haue had reſt, and being ouerluſtie, doe beginne to fling away, the French men vſe to crie, ſwefames ſwef, redoubling the ſame, with Arere ames ho: nowe we to the ſame purpoſe vſe to ſay, ſoſt ho, heere againe ho, doubling the ſame, ſometimes calling them backe againe with a iubet or hallow: poynting with your hunting ſtaffe vpon the ground, ſaying ſoho.
                     And if ſome one of the hounds light vpon a pure ſcent, ſo that by the manner of his eager ſpending

you perceiue it is very good, yet ſhall the ſame hounds crying, there, now there: and to put the reſt of the crie in to him, you ſhall crie, ho auant auant, liſt a Talbot, liſt liſt there. To which the Frenchman vſeth, Oyes a Talbot le vailant oyes oyes, troue le coward in the ſame manner with little difference. And if you find by your hounds where a Hare hath beene at relefe, if it be in the time of greene corne, and if your hounds ſpend vppon the troile merily, and make a goodly crie, then ſhall the Huntſman blow three motes with his horne, which hee may ſundry times vſe with diſcretion: when hee ſeeth the houndes haue made away: A double, and make on towards the ſeate: now if it be within ſome field or paſture where the Hare hath beene at relefe, let the Huntſman caſt a ring with his houndes to finde where ſhe hath gone out, which if the hounds light vppon, hee ſhall crie, There boyes there, that tat tat, hoe hicke, hicke, hicke auant, liſt to him liſt, and if they chance by their brainſickneſſe to ouerſhoote it, he ſhall call to his hounds, ho againe ho, doubling the ſame twice. And if vndertaking it againe, and making it good, hee ſhall cheare his hounds: there, to him there, thats he, that tat tat, blowing a mote. And note, that this word ſoho is generally vſed at the view of any beaſt of Chaſe or Venerie: but indeede the word is properly ſaho, and not ſoho, but for the better pronuntiation and fulnes of the ſame we ſay, ſoho, not ſaho. Now the hounds running in full chace, the Frenchman vſeth to ſay, ho ho, or ſwef alieu douce alieu, and wee imitating them ſay, There boies, there auant there, to him there, which

termes are in deede deriued from their language: now we finde the olde and antient Huntſmen had diuers termes vpon the view of the pricking of the Hare, which although I finde not very needefull, yet for the loue I beare vnto Antiquitie, I wil not omit: as when the Hare hath gone ouer ſome graſſie place where her prickes cannot be ſeene, but only by ſtraying the graſſe, or by breaking ſome looſe mould, we ſay ſhe ſorths or reſorths: but theſe terms I will leaue to the indifferent opinion of the skilful Huntſman.
                     Now the reaſon why they ſay, the Hare fumaies and crottes or crottiſeth is this, we ſay the Hare fumaies, becauſe he beareth ſewet, and crottiſeth, becauſe he beareth greace, and becauſe ſhe croucheth on the houghes when ſhe letteth it go: ſo that wee ſay all beaſts that beare tallow, and ſtand vpright remaine as they goe, all that crouch or ſtoupe doe.
                  
                  
                     The hounds rewarde.
                     When your hounds by force haue killed the hare you ſhall rewarde them with the ſhoulders and the ſide, with the head, and with all the intrailes ſauing the gall: which being dealt them, is called the hallow of all good Huntſmen, but the loines is moſt excellent meate in mine opinion, being finely dreſſed is the moſt dainty veniſon that England hath: And to tell what manner of beaſts relefe, this is a thing worthy to be noted of all good Huntſmen, that the Hart from the Annunciation of our Ladie

till Saint Peeters tide, is ſaide to relefe as well as the Hare.
                  
                  
                     Of flaying and ſtripping of beaſts.
                     When beaſts are ſlaine which ſhall be flaied and which ſtript according to their natures and kindes, know ye, that al that beare ſewet and rounge, according to the olde Engliſh, or chawe, ſhall be ſaid to be flayed, only the Hare excepted, which ſhall bee ſaide to be ſtripped or caſed, which termes ſhal be vſed to all beaſts of relefe.
                  
                  
                     Now of the Roebucke.
                     The firſt yeare he is a kid ſucking on the damme: the ſecond yeare he is called a gerle: the third yeare a hemule: the fourth yeare a Roebucke of the firſt head: the fift yeare a Roebucke. He vſeth to caſt his hornes at Saint Andrews tide, and his nature is to hide them in ſome moore or ſome marſh, that they are very ſeldome found: at Saint Iames tide he euer goeth to the Roe, which when he doeth, we ſay, he goeth in his turne: and if you kil a Roebucke which is hie in greace, you ſhall dreſſe the veniſon as of a Hart or a Hinde: wee vſe to ſay a Hart bellowes, a Bucke groanes, a Roebucke kelles, which they vſe in the time of their rutte, and we vſe to ſay the Foxe and the Woolfe do barke and howle.
                  
                  
                     The ſeaſon of all ſortes of Venery.
                     The time of greace beginneth at Midſummer day, and laſteth till Holy roode day.
                     
                        The ſeaſon of the Fox from the Natiuitie till the Annunciation of our Lady.
                     The ſeaſon of the Robucke laſteth from Eaſter til Michaelmaſſe.
                     The ſeaſon of the Roe beginneth at Michaelmas, and laſteth till Candlemaſſe.
                     At Michaelmaſſe beginneth the hunting of the Hare, and laſteth till Midſummer.
                     The ſeaſon of the Woolfe is as the Foxe.
                     The ſeaſon of the Bore is from the Natiuitie to the Purification of our Lady.
                     Now in the hunting of the hart being a princely and royall chace, it giueth an exceeding grace vnto a Huntſman, to vſe the termes fit and proper vnto the ſame, which I here ſet downe as receiued from Antiquitie. Firſt, when wee ſee where the Hart hath gone, we vſe to ſay here, he breaketh: and when the Hart entereth a riuer or poole which wee call the ſoile, we ſay, he deſcendeth, and when wee finde where hee hath leapt into the riuer we ſay, he profereth, becauſe wee are vncertaine whether hee goeth out at ſome other place, or returneth the ſame way againe, and if he turne againe the ſame way, he reproffereth, and when we finde where he hath come out of the other ſide of the riuer, we call it the ſoile, and being come out of the water which filles his footeſteppes wee call it defouling.
                  
                  
                     
                     How you ſhall vndo a Hart.
                     After his fall, and that the Huntſmen be come in together, and haue blowen the death of the Hart, you ſhall lay him vpright vppon his hornes, which wee call ſuing of the Hart, then let the beſt man in the company, or ſome perſonage of account take the aſſay before the aſſembly: then firſt cutte off the coddes: then beginne at the iawes, and ſlitte him downe to the aſſay, and directly to the place of the coddes: which being done, beginne firſt to ſlit the left legge before, and next the left leg behinde, which you muſt not forget in any hand before you goe to the right ſide, which you muſt performe next in the ſame manner: the which being done, beginne at the cheeke on the left ſide, from which directly take off the skin downe to the breaſt, and ſo downe to the aſſay, and to the place of the cod: then begin at the other ſide and do the ſame in like manner, but cut not the taile of the beaſt away in any hand, but cut off the skinne, and let it remaine to the haunches: then ſpreading the skin abroad, let the body be laide open vpon the ſame, and beginne firſt to make the erbere, then cutte off the ſhoulders, opening the belly and take out the ſewet which is moſt excellent and needefull for Surgeons. Then putting in thy hand vnder the breaſt bone take out therber, & turning out the panch take away the rate filling it with the blood and ſewet, hauing a needle and a threede ready to ſow it vppe with, then ſearching into the

ſmall guttes take out the maw: And next, the liuer, laying them vpon the skinne, next after theſe the bladder: then going to the vmbles, firſt looſen the auanters which leane to the necke, and taking the throat and weſant, looſen the fillets charily which falles to the vmbles, and muſt be gathered and ſtripped vpon the weſant with the ſame with the naues, and ſewet, and the fleſh along the midriffe, then take the midriffe from both the ſides, and ſo like a Huntſman make vp the vmbles with all theſe together, only keep the lights vpon the skinne and bid the querry: This being done, ſlit the skinne wherein the heart is infolded, and take away the haires which grow about the ſame, in keruing the heart you ſhal find a bone therein, which hath the vertue to cure the malady and griefe of mans heart: then cutting away the looſe skertes and fill them with blood to ſaue the melting of the greace: then cutte away the necke from both the ſides, and take the head away from the necke, taking out the tongue and the brain, laying them with the lights, the ſmal guts and the blood vpon the skinne to rewarde the hounds, which is called the querry. The left ſhoulder of the Hart is his fee which dreſſeth him, the right is the Forreſters fee.
                  
                  
                     Of the termes of the vmbles of a deere.
                     That part of the vmbles which cleaue vnto the throat-bole is called the Aduancers, and the hinder-moſt part of the vmbles be called the Forchers, the

other called the Crookes of the vmbles: now in the heart the chiefe part and ſubſtance is called the Gargilon, and the other part be called Crookes and Rundelles.
                  
                  
                     To vndoe the wilde Bore.
                     You ſhall make two and thirtie breades of the Bore, the firſt and principall is the head, the next to that is the choller which is the beſt of the ſwine: then two ſheelds and the two ſhoulders, and diuide ech ſide of the ſwine into three parts, the peſtles, and the gambones accounting as two: then the two fillets, the legs and the feete diuided into eight partes, diuiding the chine in foure ſundrie peeces: then put the greace of the Boore into his bladder, and preſerue the ſame as a thing paſsing medicinable.
                  
                  
                     Of the vauntlay, the lay, and relay, with forloining termes vſed in Venerie.
                     This is properly called a Vauntlay in hunting, when the houndes are in chaſe of a Hart, and that you either doubt their ſpeede, or find them farre caſt behind, you do vncouple freſh hounds, and hallowing them in to the deere, force him to more ſpeede than before, which may be a means to caſt off the other hounds which be behind. An alay is this, when the Hart is in full chace, thou lying neere to ſome couert, doe ſo ſhake off ſome freſh hounds into the crie, to ſupply and make it the ſtronger, if ſome

ouerhaled dogges ſhould happen to ſinke in the latter end of the chace. A relay is, when you ſhall vncouple ſome freſh houndes and cheare them, when as the reſt of the dogges be already gone away with the Hart, and almoſt out of the hearing of the crie, and this is called a relay. Forloyning is when thou findeſt any chaſe within ſome couert, and ſome mewet or light cunning hounds fall in with the ſame, being ſtollen out of the couert, this is called forloyning, when they driue the chace ſo faſt on before as the Huntſmen can not lay the reſt of the crie in with the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Of the deſcreuing of a Bucke.
                     The firſt yeare he is a fawne ſucking vppon his damme, the ſecond yeare a pricket, the third yeare ſorrell, the fourth a ſore, the fift a bucke of the firſt head, the ſixt yeare a great bucke.
                  
                  
                     Of the hornes of a Bucke.
                     The hornes of ſuch a fallow deere muſt be ſummed or euer he be a Bucke, he muſt haue two palmed branches, and foure and twenty eſpelers, which when hee hath, you may well terme him a very great Bucke.
                     And this we ſee, that oft in hunting of the Hart or the Bucke: the houndes towardes the fall of the

chace holde together and come ſtrongly, the reaſon is this, and for three cauſes which makes the hounds continue, and incourageth them much: the firſt is, that when the Hart or Bucke beginneth to bee imboſted, he caſteth out of his mouth a froth which is wonderfull ſweete to the houndes, which he leaueth vpon the hearbs and buſhes: the ſecond is, when he ſweateth, the ſweat commeth downe from his body to his cleis, which the hounds finding knowe well he ſincketh: the third is, that by reaſon of his lazineſſe and toile, the ſcent is very ſtrong and hote, and eaſily entreth the noſes of the dogges which maruellouſly incourageth them to his death.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Certaine proper termes belonging to all chace.
                  
                     A heard of Harts.
                     A heard of all maner of Deere.
                     A beuie of Roes.
                     A ſounder of Swine.
                     A rowt of Woolues.
                     A trip or heard of Goates.
                     You ſhall ſay, an Hart harboureth.
                     A Bucke lodgeth.
                     A Roe bedeth.
                     A Hare ſeated or fourmed.
                     A Conie ſitteth.
                     A Foxe kenelleth.
                     An Ot
                           •
                        er kenelleth.
                     A litter of Cubbes.
                     A neſt of Rabbets.
                     
                        You ſhall ſay, the Deere is broken.
                     The Foxe is caſed.
                     The Hare is caſed.
                     We ſay, diſlodge the Bucke.
                     Start the Hare.
                     Vnkennell the Foxe.
                     Rowze the Hart.
                     Bolt the Conie.
                  
                  
                     〈4 pages missing〉
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE BOOKE of Armorie.
                  LONDON Printed by Valentine Sims for Humfrey Lownes, and are to be ſold at his ſhop in Paules church-yard. 1595.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The Booke of Armorie The Preface.
                  
                     HEre in this booke following is expreſsed the genealogie of coate-armors and how a perfit Gentleman ſhall bee knowne from an imperfit clowne, both howe bondage began in angels, and after ſucceeded in mankind, as inſueth in the ſtories of the children of Adam and Noah, with the diuiſion which Noah made of the world in three parts, to his three ſonnes, alſo of the three colours in armes figured by the nine orders of angels, and in the colours is made mention which is royall, & which worthy, & of royalties which

is noble, which is excellent. In this diſcourſe ſhall not be omitted, the vertues of Chiualrie, nor any other notable or famous thing, fitte for the pleaſures of renowned perſons, as the Worke, not my report ſhall witneſſe: therefore who ſo liketh, let him reade, and leaue to reade when he leaues to like, the gray haires this workes aged tropheis, ſhal promiſe graue matter, no light delight, therfore for his age do him reuerence, and for thy profit loue: In whoſe concluſion ſhall follow the blaſing of all maner of armes in Latin, French, and Engliſh.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  Jncipit Liber Armorum.
                  
                     BEing worthy to beare the honor of Armes, by royal, noble, or gentle bloode, from the higheſt to the loweſt degree, come hither, and bee inſtructed by me to diſſeuer gentlenes from vngentlenes, light from darknes: and in that all gentleneſſe which is excellency, commeth from the great good of heauen, I wil therefore with heauen beginne, where were in the beginning nine orders of Angels, and nowe are reſident but nine in the knowledge of coate armors, crowned full high with pretious ſtones, whereas Lucifer with millions of angels fell out of heauen into hell, and other places, where they are held in a continuall bondage, yet all created in heauen, and of gentle nature. A bondman, peſant, or churle will ſay, that all are iſſued of Adam, therefore all alike for excellency: ſo Lucifer may ſay with his company, all wee are come from heauen, therefore all heauenly: but the wiſe knowe to the contrary. Adam, the beginning of mankinde, was as a ſtocke vnſpread, or vnfloriſhed, in whoſe braunches is diſcouered rotten and greene boughes.
                  
                     
                     The difference twixt Churles and Gentlemen: Noahs diuiſion of the world.
                     There was neuer gentleman, nor churle ordained, but hee had father and mother: Adam and Eue, had neither father nor mother, and therefore in the ſonnes of Adam and Eue, firſt iſſued out both gentleman and churle. By the ſonnes of Adam and Eue, to wit, Seth, Abell and Caine, was the royall blood diuided from the rude & barbarous, a brother to murder his brother contrary to the law, what could be more vngentlemanly or vile, in that therefore became Caine and al his of-ſpring churles, both by the curſe of God, and his owne father? Seth was made a Gentleman through his father and mothers bleſsing, from whoſe loynes iſſued Noah a gentleman by kinde and linage. Noah had three ſonnes truely begotten, two by the mother, named Cham and Sem, and the thirde by the father called Iaphet, euen in theſe three after the worlds inundation, was both gentlenes and vilenes diſcerned, in Cham was groſe barbariſme founde towardes his owne father in diſcouering his priuities, and deriding from whence hee proceeded. Iaphet the yongeſt Gentlemanlike reproued his brother, which was to him reputed a vertue, where Cham for his abortiue vilenes became a churle both through the curſe of God and his father Noah. When Noah awoke, hee ſaid to Cham his ſonne knowſt not thou how it is become of Caine the ſonne of Adam, and

of his churlelike blood, that for them all the worlde is drowned ſaue eight perſons, and wilt thou nowe begin barbariſme againe, whereby the world in after ages ſhall be brought to conſummation? well vpon thee it ſhall bee, and ſo I pray the Great one it maie fall out, for to thee I giue my curſe, and withall the north part of the world, to draw thine habitation vnto, for there ſhall it be where ſorrow care, colde, and as a miſchieuous and vnreſpected churle thou ſhalt liue, which part of the earth ſhall be termed Europe, which is the countrie of churles▪ Iaphet come hither my ſonne, on thee will I raine my bleſsing, deare inſteede of Seth: Adams ſonne, I make thee a gentleman, and thy renowne ſhall ſtretch through the weſt part of the world, and to the end of the Occident, where wealth and grace ſhall flouriſh, there ſhall be thine habitation, and thy dominion ſhall bee called Aſia, which is the cuntrie of gentlemen. And Sem my ſonne, I make thee a gentleman alſo, to multiply the blood of Abell ſlaine ſo vndeſeruedlie, to thee I giue the Orient, that part of the world which ſhal be called Affrica, which is the country of temperatenes: and thus diuided Noah the world and his bleſsings. From the of-ſpring of gentlemanly Iaphet came Abraham, Moyſes, Aaron and the Prophets, and alſo the king of the right line of Mary, of whom that only abſolute gentleman Ieſus was borne, perfite God and perfite man, according to his manhood king of the lande of Iuda and the Iewes, and gentleman by his mother Mary princeſſe of coat armor.
                  
                  
                     
                     How long coate armours began before Chriſts incarnation.
                     Iaphet was the firſt that euer made target, and therein he made a Ball in token of al the world, and afterward two thouſand eightene yeares before the incarnation of Chriſt, coate armor was made, namely at the ſiege of Troy, where the firſt beginning of the law of armes was ſeene, as is prooued in the Booke called Geſta Troianorum, and that lawe was begunne before any law in the worlde▪ but the lawe of Nature, and before the ten commaundements of God. And this law of Armes was grounded vppon the nine orders of Angels in heauen, crowned with nine ſeuerall pretious ſtones, differing in colours and vertues, nine ſeuerall waies, from which are taken the nine colours in Armes, as ſhall follow.
                  
                  
                     Of the firſt ſtone called Topaſion, ſignifying gold in armes.
                     This ſtone Topaſion is a ſemi ſtone and is called gold in armes, the vertue thereof is, that gentleman which ſhall leaue this ſtone in his armes, ſhall bee a ſure meſſenger to his king in the day of battaile becauſe this ſtone was reſerued in the angels crowne which was a true meſſenger and firme in the heauenly battaile againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the ſecond ſtone.
                     The ſecond ſtone is called Smaragdus, and is called vert (that is, greene) in armes the vertue therof is, the gentleman which beares it in his coate armour ſhall bee valiant, ſtout, and coragious in his kings battaile, the which ſtone was reſerued in the archangels crowne, which was moſt puiſſant in the conflict with Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     Of the third ſtone.
                     The third ſtone is called an Ametiſe, and it is Bruske in armes, the vertue thereof is he which beareth it in his coate-armour ſhal be fortunate to conqueſt in his kings battaile, which ſtone was reſerued to the vertuous crowne, which was fortunate and vertuous in the heauenly combate againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     Of the fourth ſtone.
                     The fourth ſtone is called a Margaret, a cloudie ſtone, & is called in armes plumby, the vertue therof is, whoſo leaues it in his coate-armour, hee ſhal haue great gouernement in his kings conqueſts, the which ſtone is reſerued in the poteſtates crowne, which were the commaunders in the heauenly battaile againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the fift ſtone.
                     The fift ſtones is called a loys, and in armes ſanguine or ſynamer, the vertue thereof is, the gentleman which beares it in his coate armour ſhall bee mightie of power in his kings battaile, the which ſtone was reſerued in Dominations crowne that were only powerfull in the king of heauens battaile againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     The ſixt ſtone.
                     The ſixt ſtone is called a ruby, and is in armes gules, the vertue thereof is, the gentleman which beareth it in his coate armor, ſhall be hot and full of vigor in his kings battaile, the which ſtone was reſerued in the principalleſt crowne, who were fiery hot in heauenly battaile againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     Of the ſeuenth ſtone.
                     The ſeuenth ſtone is called a Saphyr, & in armes Azure, the vertue whereof is, the gentleman which in his coate armour beareth that ſtone, ſhall be wiſe and vertuous in all his actions in the battaile of his king, which ſtone was reſerued to the crowne of the thrones which were wiſe and vertuous in the heauenly battaile againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the eight ſtone.
                     The eight ſtone is a diamond a blacke ſtone, and called ſable in armes, the vertue thereof is, the gentleman which beareth it in his coate armor ſhall be durable and vnfainting in his kings battaile, which ſtone was kept in the Cherubins crowne, which neuer fainted, or ſhrunke in the warre againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     Of the ninth ſtone.
                     The ninth ſtone is called a carbuncle, a ſhining ſtone, and in armes is called ſiluer, or argent, the vertue thereof is, what gentleman ſoeuer beares it in his coate armor, ſhall be doughty, glorious, and ſhining in his kings battaile: which ſtone was reſerued to the Seraphins crowne who were full of might, glorie, and brightnes in the kings battaile of heauen againſt Lucifer.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine colours which is worthy, which royall.
                     Of theſe nine ſundry colours due to coat armors, there are fiue worthy, and foure royall, the fiue worthy are theſe, Golde (otherwiſe called Or) Vert, Brusk, Plumby, and Sanguin, and the foure royall are theſe, Gules, Aſure, Sable, and Siluer. But nowe according to the blaſers of armes there are but ſixe colours of the which two are mettall, and foure coulours, gold and ſiluer for mettall, vert, gules, aſure,

and ſable, for colours, and no other vſed.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine ſtones, which noble, which of dignitie.
                     Of the nine pretious ſtones before ſpoken of, fiue of them are noble, and foure of dignitie, the fiue noble ſtones are theſe, the Topaſion, Smaragdus, Amatis, Margaret, and Aloys, the foure of dignity are the Ruby, Saphyre, Diamond, and Carbunckle.
                  
                  
                     Of the orders of Angels.
                     Of the nine orders of Angels, there are fiue Ierarchy, thronely, the fiue Ierarchy, are Angel, Archangels, Vertues, Poteſtats, and Dominations the foure thronely be theſe, Principalles, Thrones, Cherubins and Seraphins.
                  
                  
                     Of the dignities of Regaltie.
                     There are nine dignities of regaltie, fiue noble, & foure excellent, the fiue noble are theſe, gentleman, ſquire, knight, barron, and Lorde: and the foure excellent are, Earle, Marqueſſe, Duke, and Prince.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine vertues of pretious ſtones.
                     There are nine vertues of pretious ſtones, fiue generall, and foure ſpecial, the fiue general are theſe, a ſure meſſenger, valiant and ſtoute, fortunate to

conqueſt, great in gouernement, and mightie in power, the foure ſpeciall are, hot in courage, wiſe & vertuous, durable, and vnfainting, and doughty, and glorious.
                  
                  
                     Of the foure vertues of chiualry.
                     Chiualry hath foure vertues, the firſt, iuſt in his actions, cleanenes of his perſon, pitty to the poore, gratious in priſon, reuerent and faithfull to his God: the ſecond is, that he be wiſe in battaile, prudent in his fighting, hauing his wit alwaies in a readineſſe: the third is, that he be not ſlow in his warres, regard that his quarrell be true, thanke God euer for his victorie, and to haue meaſure in his ſuſtinaunce: the fourth, to be ſtrong and ſtedfaſt in his gouernment, to hope of victory, not to fly the field, nor ſhame his coate armor, alſo that hee bee not boaſting proud of his manhood, looke that he be curteous, lowly, and gentle, and without ribawldry in his language.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine articles of gentrie.
                     There are nine articles of gentrie, of which fiue are amorous and foure ſoueraigne, the fiue amorous are theſe, lordly of countenaunce, ſweet in ſpeech, wiſe in anſwere, perfitte in gouernement and cherefull to faithfulnes: the foure ſoueraigne are theſe fewe, oathes are no ſwearing, patient in affliction,

knowledge of his owne birth and to feare to offend his ſoueraigne.
                  
                  
                     Of nine vices contrary to gentlemen.
                     There are nine vices contrary to gentlemen, of which, fiue are indeterminable, and foure determinable, the fiue indeterminable are theſe, to bee full of ſlouth in warre, to bragge of his proweſſe, to be cowardly to his enimy, to be lecherous in body, and to be alwaies drinking and euer drunke. The foure determinable are, to reuoke his owne challenge, to kill his priſoner with his owne handes, to runne awaie from his colours in the field, and laſtly to tell his ſoueraigne vntruthes or lies.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine ineſtimable reioynings in armes.
                     Theſe are the nine ineſtimable reioynings in armes, firſt is, for a gentleman to bee made a knight in the field at battaile, the ſeconde is, liuelyhood of him to receiue after manhood, the third is, chiualrie to do before his ſoueraigne, the fourth embaſſage to be put vnto him for wiſdome, the fift is proweſſe of knighthood done before aliens in honor of renown, theſe in armes as called the fiue authentique, nowe followe the foure ending ſtremitalles perſonall, the firſt, a poore knight to be married to the blood royall, the ſecond is, to haue thankes of his ſoueraigne perpetuall, the third is, to keepe his coate armor vnſhamed

in triall, and the fourth is to keepe all the pointes of his knighthoode, as Geſta 
                           •
                        royanorum declareth.
                  
                  
                     Of the two orders, wedlocke and knighthoode, and how knighthood was made before coate armor was ordained.
                     The two firſt orders that euer were ordained, was firſt wedlock, and then knighthood, & knighthood was before any coate armor, for Olibion was the firſt and primere knight that euer was, whoſe father Aſteriall came by the right line of Iaphet, who ſeeing the people multiply without any gouernour, and that the curſed race of Cham warred againſt them, Olibion being the ſtrongeſt and moſt manfull in thoſe times, the people cried on him to bee their maiſter and gouernour, there were in thoſe daies one thouſand multiplied of the line of Iaphet, whereupon Aſteriall made for his ſonnes heade a garland of nine ſeuerall pretious ſtones, for a ſigne that he was the gouernour of a thouſand men: and to this daie the name of a knight in latine ſignifieth the gouernour of a thouſande men, then Olibion kneeled to Aſteriall his father and required his bleſsing, who tooke Olibions ſword which was Iaphets, Fawchion made by Tuball before the flood, and ſmote flatling nine times on the right ſhoulder of Olibion in token of the nine vertues of the foreſaide pretious ſtones▪ and gaue him his bleſsing with a charge to keepe the nine vertues of charity which hereafrer follow.
                  
                  
                     
                     The articles which knights ſhould keep, to wit, fiue temporal, and foure ghoſtly.
                     Charity hath nine vertues, fiue temporall, and foure ghoſtly, the fiue temporal vertues are theſe: the firſt, he ſhal not turne his backe to his enemie for to flie: the ſecond, hee ſhall truely keepe his promiſe to his friend, and alſo to his foe: the thirde, he ſhall be bountifull in hoſpitality and thoſe about him: the fourth, he ſhall maintaine and vpholde all maidens rites: and the fift, that he defend widowes from oppreſsion: the foure ghoſtly are theſe, the firſt, he ſhal honour his father & mother: the ſecond, he ſhal not wrong the poore: the third, he ſhal be mercifull: the fourth, he ſhall mainetaine the ſtatutes of the great God of heauen. This done, Aſteriall gaue Olibion a target of Oliue tree, with three corners triangular, two aboue his face, and one downe to the earth: in token that Olibion was the chiefe of all the bloode of the three ſons of Noah, by the oliue tree he ment victory to winne by the point of his target to the ground-ward the curſed brother Cham, by the corners of his target aboue, the further ſignified Sem, that next him the true gentleman Iaphet, of whom God and man iſſued by the right line.
                  
                  
                     Of the ſeuerall maners of Knighthood.
                     There is two maner of knighthoods, one with the ſword, the other with the bath▪ but the bath is worthieſt, bicauſe of foure royalties, one is when a yong Prince is made knight, or to be crowned king: the ſecond is, when a King or an Emperour is crowned:

the third is when a Queene or an Empreſſe is crowned, the fourth when a King or an Emperour talke with Embaſſadours of forraine Countries.
                  
                  
                     Of nine ſortes of gentlemen.
                     Firſt, there is a gentleman of anceſtry and blood.
                     A gentleman of blood.
                     A gentleman of coat-armour, and thoſe are three, one of the kings badge, another of lordſhip, and the third of killing a Pagan.
                     A gentleman vntriall: a gentleman Ipocrafet: a gentleman ſpirituall and temporall: There is alſo a gentleman ſpirituall and temporall, and all theſe are better ſet downe hereafter.
                  
                  
                     The diuers maners of gentlemen.
                     There are foure maner of gentlemen, to wit, one of aunceſtrie which muſt needes bee of blood, and three of coate-armour, and not of blood: as one a gentleman of coate-armour of the Kings badge, which is of armes giuen him by an Herauld: an other is, to whome the King giueth a Lordeſhippe, to a Yeoman by his letters pattents, and to his heires for euer, whereby hee may beare the coate-armour of the ſame Lordeſhippe: the Hinde is, if a Yeoman kill a gentleman, Pagan, or Sarazen, whereby he may of right weare his coate-armour: and ſome holde opinion, that if one chriſtian doe kill an other, and if it be in lawfull battell, they may weare eache others coate-armour, yet it is not ſo good as

where the Chriſtian killes the Pagan. And againe if the King make any yeoman knight, that ſame knight is a gentleman of blood by the royaltie of the king and knighthoode.
                  
                  
                     Of a gentleman ſpirituall.
                     A churles ſonne being made a Prieſt is a gentleman ſpirituall to God but not of blood: but if a gentlemans ſonne be made a prieſt, he is both a gentleman ſpirituall and temporall: Chriſt was a gentleman by his mothers ſide, and bare coate-armour by aunceſtry: the foure Euangeliſts are teſtimonies of his workes in the Goſpell, together with the Apoſtles, they were Iewes and iſſued from Gentlemen by the right line of that famous Conquerour Iudas Machabeus, but that through the ruine of times their kinreds fell to pouertie after the deſtruction of Iudas Machabeus, whereby they fell to labour, and were eſteemed for no gentlemen: and the foure doctours of the holy church, ſaint Ierome, ſaint Auguſtine, Ambroſe and Gregorie were Gentlemen of blood, and of coate armour.
                  
                  
                     Of the nine diuiſions of coat-armours.
                     There are nine diuiſions of coate-armours, fiue perfit, foure vnperfite: the fiue perfite are theſe, Terminall, Colaterall, Abſtract, Fixall, and Baſtard: and of theſe fiue I will ſpeake more largely, with their differences.
                  
                  
                     
                     Difference Imbordring.
                     Terminall is called in Armes all the brethren of the right line either by father or mother, may beare the right heires coate-armour, with a difference called Imbordring.
                  
                  
                     Difference Iemews.
                     Colaterall is called in Armes, the ſonnes of the brethren of the right heire bearing the coate-armors of their fathers with a difference Iemewes.
                  
                  
                     Difference Mollet.
                     Fixall in Armes is called the third degree by the right line from the right heire by line male, they may beare their fathers coate-armour with a difference Mollet.
                  
                  
                     Difference Countertreuis.
                     The baſtard of Fixall ſhall beare his fathers coate armour Countertreuis, that is to ſay, whatſoeuer he beareth in his field, he ſhall beare in the ſame ſeuerall colours, and no more.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the foure coat-armors imperfit.
                     Foure coate-armours there are imperfit, and are borne without any difference, the firſt coat-armor is if a Lordſhip (as before ſaide) be giuen vnder pattent by the King, if he died without heires his coat-armour dieth with him: the ſecond is, when the King giueth a coate-armour, if he die without heire his coate dieth alſo, and if either of theſe coate-armours haue iſſue, the fift degree of them bearing line by male, are Gentlemen of blood by lawe of armes: the third being the coate-armor of a Pagan, if the chriſtian die without heire his coate-armour dieth, but if he haue iſſue alſo, the fift degree in like ſort after him are gentlemen of blood▪ the fourth coat armour, of the chiefe blood if hee die without any iſſue, then the whole coate-armour is loſt, and becommeth a coate-armour of the vnperfite. All the baſtards of all the coate-armours, ſhal beare a feſſe, or (as ſome call it) a baſton of one of the foure dignities of colours, except the baſtardes of the fixialles, the baſtard of the brethren of the chiefe blood, where the inheritance is diuided to euery brother alike, theſe baſtards ſhall adde more badgie vnto his armes, and take away a badgie of armes.
                  
                  
                     Who ſhall giue coate armours.
                     Not one of the nine orders of royaltie, but onely

the ſoueraigne King ſhall giue coate-armour, for it is impropriat to him by law of Armes: and yet the King ſhall not make a knight without coate-armor before: and euery knight chiefe generall in the field may make a coate-armour knight.
                  
                  
                     Where a Knight may onely be made.
                     In fiue ſeuerall places may a knight be made, as in muſters in the land war, in marching vnder baners, in liſtes of the bathe, and at the ſepulchre.
                  
                  
                     A laced coate-armour is on the mothers ſide.
                     A laced coate-armour is called the coate of a gentlewoman maried to a man hauing no coat-armor, her ſonne may weare her coate with a difference of Armes during his life by the curteſie of the lawe of Armes, but his ſonne ſhall beare no coate-armour, except that the gentlewoman be heire, or the next of blood to the coate-armour, or elſe doe deriue her birth from the blood royall, and then ſhall her heire beare her coate-armour.
                  
                  
                     
                     How Churles are made gentlemen, and called Vntriall, and Ipocrifat.
                     Churles are made two ſorts of gentlemen which are neither of blood, nor coat-armour, one is called in armes a gentleman vntriall, which is to ſay, made vp amongſt religious men, as Priors, Abbats, or Biſhops, the other is called in Armes a gentleman apocrifat, that is to ſay, made vp, and ſo intitled by the liuery of a gentleman or man of honor.
                  
                  
                     Of the ſixe differences in Armes.
                     There be ſixe differences in Armes, two for excellent, foure for the Nobles, Labell, and imborduring, for excellent, Iemews, Mollets, flower de luce, and Quintfoiles for nobles.
                  
                  
                     Of nine Quadrats in blazing Armes.
                     In blazing of Armes are nine quadrates, fiue quadrates finiall, and foure royall, the fiue finiall are Gereri, Gerundi, Fretly, Geratly, and Endently, Gereri is called in Armes when coate-armours haue nine quarters diuers colours: Gerundi is called in armes when the coate is of nine ſeuerall colours, and a fuſi-target within the coate of what colour ſoeuer it be. Fretly is called in Armes when the coat is counterſeiſed. Geratly is called in Armes when the coat-armour is powdred: but the blazer ſhal not ſay, he beareth ermin, ſiluer powdred with ermin, but he ſhall

ſay, hee beareth ermin, or elſe in ſome Armes hee muſt ſay demi ermin, which is to ſay, whitly ermin. And now for that in the fifth quadrate finiall, it is determined touching the ſignes of armes: before I proceede vnto it I will ſhewe what manner of ſignes a man may weare, for a gentleman may not weare ſignes of Armes but of ſtayning colours, that is to ſay, his coat-armour ynyat or elſe gerat▪ Gerating hath nine badges of coate-armours, firſt with croſlets, and of them there are foure ſortes, namely, croſſe fixily, croſſe paty, croſſe croſlets, and croſſe flory: the ſecond badge is flowre de luce: the third is croſlets: the fourth is primeroſe: the fift is quinfoiles: the ſixt is diaclis: the ſeuenth is chaplets, the eight is mollets, and the ninth is creſſents, which is halfe moones, and theſe are the powders of coat-armours.
                     The fift quadrate is called Endently of three ſeuerall wayes, which is Bebally, Lentally and fieſly: Bebally is called in armes when a coate-armour is endented of two ſeuerall colours in the length of the coate-armour: Lentally is called in armes when the coate-armour is endented with two ſeuerall colours in the breadth of the coate: fieſly is called in armes three maner of wayes, feſſy badge, feſſy target, feſſy general: feſſy badge is when ſignes of armes are diſſeuered from the chiefe of the coate-armour to the right ſpleier in the field▪ feſſy target is when a ſcutchion is made in the midſt of the coat-armor: feſſy generall is called in armes when the coat-armour is endented with two ſeuerall colours, from the laſt point of the coate-armour to the ſpleyer, the chiefe

is called in armes the midſt of the coate of the right ſide: Quadrate in armes is called when the field is ſet with ſome token of armes: a quadrate finiall is called in armes when the field is diſcoloured with ſignes of armes, hauing no beaſt in the field: a quadrate royall is when the fielde occupieth the ſigne of a beaſt, or any other ſigne ſet within the coate-armour to the number of fiue: the firſt quadrate is a token of armes onely ſet: the ſecond quadrate royall is bearing in his coate three things called the ſignes of armes, that is to ſay, three flower de luces, three fiſcialls, three roſes, three chaplets, three libbards, three lions: and ſo the fourth quadrate royall is to beare a beaſt rampant, bebally, lentally, and feſſely.
                  
                  
                     What coats reſtriall be, and where the Blazer ſhall beginne to blaze.
                     There are three coats called reſtriall in armes, one is when a coat is barry of diuers colors to the point, and what colour the point is, of that colour is the field, and there the blazer ſhall beginne: the ſecond coat reſtriall is, when a coate is paly, of diuers colors to the point, then what colour the point is, the ſame is the fielde, and there ſhall the Blazer beginne: the the third coat reſtriall is called in armes when a coat is ſentry of diuers colours to the point, and what the point is, that is the field, and ſo the Blazer ſhall blaze from that colour to the next colour on the left ſide of the coate and blaze the colour ſentry.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of diuerſe woordes of Art in Armes.
                     A ſenter in armes is called ſtaker of tents:
                     Fixiall in armes, is called milne pickes:
                     Mangis in armes are called a ſleue: gorgis bee called in armes water budgettes: Elynelles bee called in armes foure quadrates trucholles: Oglis in armes are called gunneſtones: tortlettes are called in armes Waſtell: Diaclys are called in armes ſcopperilles: Myrris are called in armes mirrours or glaſſes: Feons are called in armes broade-arrowe heades: Tronkes are called in armes anie beaſtes heades, or neckes: Demi in armes is called halfe of anie thing: Countertreuis is called in armes, when halfe the beaſt is of one colour, and the other halfe of an other. Euerie coate that beareth a croſſe to the point, the pointe is the fielde, as Saint George beareth gules foure anglettes of ſiluer, but againſt this rule there are ſome heraldes repugnant, as ſhall be ſhewed in the booke inſuing▪ Theſe three tearmes, of, and, with, ſhall not bee rehearſed in armes but cure anie of them.
                  
                  
                     Of the diuerſe bearings of fieldes.
                     There bee diuerſe bearings of fieldes: as one is bearing whole fielde, and that is called in armes

Claurie. The ſeconde is bearing two fieldes, and it is called in armes countlie. The thirde is bearing two fields in foure quarters, and it is called in armes quarterlie.
                  
                  
                     Of three coate armors grittie.
                     There are in armes three coates grittie, one called checkie, that is, when the fielde is checked with ſundrie colours: the ſecond is called windie, that is, when as the fielde is made like waues of one or of diuerſe colours. The thirde is called verrie, when the fielde is made like goblettes of ſundrie colours.
                  
                  
                     In armes are two pinions, alſo what claurie, counterlie, and quarterlie is.
                     There are in armes two pinions one is when the fielde is a ſaultire, or Saint Andrewes croſſe which maie bee claurie counterlie, or quarterlie: claurie is called plaine of one coulour, counterlie is when colours quarterlie bee two colours ſette in two quarters.
                     The ſeconde pinion is called cheffrounce, that is, a couple of ſparis, and, that maie be claurie, counterlie, quarterlie, gerery, or byallie.
                     
                        Gerery is when three cheffrounce be together or moe.
                     Byall is when a barre is betweene two cheffrounce.
                     Here endeth the moſt ſpeciall things of the book of the genealogie of coate armours, the true inſearcher, to diſplaie gentlemen from churles, and nowe ſhall follow, the exact booke of blaſing of all maner of armes whatſoeuer, both in latin, french, and engliſh.
                  
                  Explicit prima pars.
               
               
                  
                  
                  The title of Barons growne in England by diſcent to the daughters and heires thereof.
                  FIrſt the auncient and laudable cuſtome of this Realme agreeable to the Realme of France and Spaine, and their Dominions where women are capable of the Feodales, and that the husbandes in right of their wiues paſſeth their Feodall dignities, ſtiles and titles.
                  That cuſtome is a ſufficient and the chiefeſt rule to determine this queſtion, is prooued by the common principle, Conſuetudo in vnaquaque regione eſtomnium dignitatum & iuriſdictionum origo firma et principium. And by Baldwine Conſuetudini ſtandum eſt diſponendi de nobilitate, et conſuetudines loci faciunt quem nobilem qui alias non eſſet nobilis.
                  
                  
                     To proue the antiquitie and continuance of that cuſtome in this Realme, appeareth by an Abſtract of many examples in euery kings reigne,

chuſing (of many) one perſon, hauing the dignitie of a Baron by the right of his wife, as followeth in euery Kings gouernement ſince the conqueſt.
                     William Conquerour: Iohn Talbot a Norman came into England with William the Conqueror, and married Mawd daughter and heire of Richard Lord Talbot of Longhope in England, in whoſe right the ſaid Iohn was Lord Talbot of Longhope, of whom the Earle of Shrewsbury is deſcended.
                     William Rufus: Euſtace fitz Iohn the ſonne of Monoculus Lord of Knaresburgh married Beatrice daughter and heire of Yuan Lord Veſcy, in whoſe right the ſaide Euſtace was Lord Veſcie, of whome the Earle of Cumberland is deſcended, and writeth himſelfe Lord Veſcy.
                     Henry the firſt: Ioceline ſonne to the Duke of Brabant married Agnes daughter and heire to William Lord Percy, in whoſe right he was lord Percy, of whom the Lords of Northumberland are deſcended.
                     King Stephen: Morice fitz Harding maried Alice daughter and heire to Robert Lord Barkeley, of Whom is deſcended the Lord Barkeley.
                     Henry the ſecond: Iohn Molton knight maried Mawd daughter and heire of William Meſchines Lord Egremond, in whoſe right he was Lord Egremond, whoſe heire generall was married to the L. Fitzwater, of whom is deſcended the Erle of Suſſex, and writeth himſelfe Lord Egremond.
                     Richard the firſt: Adam de Port lord of Baſing

married Iſabell daughter and heire of Robert Lorde Haya of Haluna, of whom deſcended the lord Saint Iohn of Baſing aunceſter to the marqueſſe of Wincheſter.
                     King Iohn: Iohn de Placetis maried the daughter and heire of Walleram Earle of Warwicke, in whoſe right he was Earle of Warwicke, which Iohn died without iſſue, after whoſe death the ſaide counteſſe of Warwicke was maried to Maſter Mandret baron of Hauſhap, who alſo was Earle of Warwike in her right, of whom are deſcended the Earles of Huntington, warwicke, Leyceſter, and others.
                     Henry the third: Henry haſtings knight, maried Ione daughter and heire of Maſter Cantilyp Lorde of Aburgauenie, in whoſe right he was Lord of Aburgauenie.
                     Edware the firſt▪ Roger Lord Clyfford maried Iſabell daughter and heire of Robert Dipount Lord of Weſtmerlande, in whoſe right he was Lorde of Weſtmerland.
                     Edward the ſecond: Sir Iohn Charlton knight maried Auis daughter & heire of Owen ap Griffith Lord powys, in whoſe right he was Lord Powys.
                     Edward the third: Iohn Fitz Allen ſonne to Richard Earle of Arundell maried Mary daughter and heire of Iohn Lord Matrauers in whoſe right hee was Lord Matrauers.
                     Richard the ſecond: Sir Warrin Gerard knight, maried Iſabel daughter and heire of Iohn Lord Lile in whoſe right he was Lord Liſle.
                     Henry the fift: Sir William Louel knight maried Elinor daughter and heire of Iohn Lorde Morloy,

in whoſe right he was Lord Morley.
                     Henry the fift: Iohn Tuchet maried Ione daughter and heire of Nicholas Lord Awdley, in whoſe right he was Lord Awdley.
                     Henry the ſixt: William Bourchier maried Margaret daughter and heire of Richard lord Barnes, in whoſe right he was Lord Barnes.
                     Edward the fourth: Iohn Grey Knight, maried Elizabeth the daughter and heire of Iohn Talbot, Vicount Lyſle, in whoſe right hee was Vicount Lyſle.
                     Henry the ſeuenth: George Lord Stanley maried Ione the daughter and heire of Iohn Lorde Strange, in whoſe right he was Lord Strange.
                  
                  
                     The names alſo of diuers perſons (taken out of an infinite number) within other realmes which in right of their wiues haue enioyed all maner of noble and princely titles.
                     Otheline erle of Burgoin was in right of his wife Earle of Artoys.
                     Philip the Long, in right of Iane daughter to the ſaid Otheline was Earle of Burgoine.
                     King Henry the ſecond of England, was in right of Elenor his mother, Duke of Guyenne, and Erle of Poictow.
                     Endo Duke of Burgoine was in the right of Iane his wife daughter and heire to Philip the Long, & Iane his wife Earle of Burgoine.
                     
                        Philip the ſon of Eudo was in the right of Iane his wife Earle of Artois and Boloigne.
                     William Godfrey, in the right of his wife was Earle of Tholous.
                     Philip le Grand Erle of Flanders was in the right of Elizabeth his wife Earle of Vermandois.
                     Bauldwine Earle of Henault in the right of Margaret his wife ſiſter and heire to Earle Philippe was Earle of Flanders.
                     Fernand ſonne of Sanctiz King of Portugall, in the right of Iane his wife was Earle of Flanders.
                     Thomas of Sauoy ſecond husband to the ſaide Iane, was in her right (although hee had no iſſue by her) Earle of Flaunders.
                     Maximilian Archduke of Auſtria (before hee was elected emperour) was in right of Mary his wife, the heire general of Charles duke of Burgoine and Iſabell of Burbon duke of Burgoine, of Zotnih, of Brabant, of Limbourgh, Earle of Flaunders, Artoys, Burgoyne, Henault, Holland, Zeland, Lord of Salignis, and Malignis.
                     Philip of Burgoine by Bona his wife was earle of Ew.
                     Godfrey Duke of Bullen, in the right of Mawde his wife was head Lorde of Ieturia, Marqueſſe of Antona, Piſa and Luques.
                     Hugh ſonne to Henry the firſt King of Fraunce, was in the right of his wife Earle of Vermandois: and Ralfe his ſonne was by his mother Earle after him.
                     Peter Earle of Alanſon, in the right of Mawd his wife was earle of Bloys.
                     
                        Hugh Earle of Saint Paule, by the right of Marie his wife was Earle of Blois, and Iohn his ſonne erle of the ſame after him.
                     Hambert ſurnamed Blandemaine Earle of Brittaine, and ſo was Geffrey Plantagenet in the right of Conſtance his wife.
                     Guy earle of Spaine, was in right of his wife erle of Neuers: and ſo Adolfe Duke of Cleue Earle of Neuers by his wife.
                     Charles the ſecond of Fraunce, was in right of Suſan his wife Duke of Burbonnois, of Auuergne, earle of Cleriuſt, viſaſt of Charlot and Marrot, lorde of Beumolois chaire and chamberlaine of France.
                     Emanuell Philibert now duke of Sauoy in right of his wife Spannage is duke of Berry.
                     The Prince of Orange by his wife while ſhee liued was earle of Buer: and their ſonne now Earle by his mother.
                  
                  
                     Now, after theſe examples both at home and abroad followeth the particular proofe by matter of record, viz. that the aforeſaide cuſtome hath euer taken place in the Baronies of Willoughby and Eresby, &c.
                     ANd that ſir Richard Welles ſonne of the Lord Welles was Lord Willoughby in the right of Ione his wife daughter and heire of Robert lord Willoughby.
                     And alſo ſir Richard Haſtings knight in the right of Ione his wife daughter and heire of the ſaide Richard Welles and Ione, was both Lord Welles and

L. Willoughby reputed, called, and written immediatly after the death of Richard Welles lord Wells and Willoughby before any parleament called or ſummoned, as appeared in their Court rolles and other euidences.
                     And if the ſaid ſir Richard Haſtings had been called thereto by Writ, he could not after the forme of the writ be ſummoned, but by denominatiō of one of the baronies, who vſing both the titles of the Baronies, then he muſt of neceſsitie be reputed to hold the other in right of his wife.
                     And if ſir Ri. Welles and Rich. Haſtings had bin created, then ſhould the dignitie haue deſcended to the heires of Wels & Haſtings, and not reuerted to the houſe of Willoughby, neither could Chriſtopher Willoughby the grandfather, neither William lord Willoughby father of the ducheſſe nf Suffolke haue vſed as they did (and may be prooued by euidence, & matter of record) the ſtile of L. Willoughby before they were called by Writ to parleament.
                     Furthermore, after the death of William L. Willoughby, the ſaid ducheſſe as his ſole daughter and heire enioyed the title & ſtile of Lady Willoughby, deſcended to her from her father, at which time ſir Chriſtopher Willoughby knight, yonger ſonne of lord Chriſtopher, and brother to the lord William Willoughby claimed the dignitie as heire male and the claim being heard, the title was adiudged to the lady Katherine now ducheſſe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  ¶ Here beginneth the Blazing of Armes.
                  
                     I Haue ſhewed to you in the former Booke how Gentlemen beganne, and howe armes were firſt ordained, and how many colours there bee in coate-armours, and the difference of coate-armours, with many other things which heere are needeleſſe, to be rehearſed. And now I entend to proceede to coates caried in Armes, and the blazing of all armes: But by the way, ſhould I ſtand vpon all ſundrie deuiſes borne in Armes, as the Peacocke, the Pie, the Dragon, the Lion, the Dolphine, with leaues and flowers, I ſhould rather cumber and tire the Reader with friuolous circumſtance, than any way inſtruct him in that which I vndertake: Therefore I ſhall ſhortly and truely teach you to blaze all Armes: if you giue diligent intention to the rules that I doe preſcribe which ſhall not be many, but paſsing effectuall: And becauſe the Croſſe is the moſt worthie coate or marke which is carried in Armes, I wil beginne with the Croſſe, in which the renowmed and valiant Prince king Arthur had ſuch great truſt, ſo that he left his armes which hee bare of the three dragons, and another coat he bare of three crownes and tooke to his armes, a Croſſe of ſiluer in a fielde of vert, and on the right ſide an Image of the virgin

Mary with her Sonne in her armes, and vnder that ſigne of the croſſe he atchieued many great & wonderfull conqueſts: of which our Chronicles at this day make mention: alſo I haue read this ſigne of the croſſe to be ſent from God to that bleſſed man Mercurie, as Vincentius ſaith in his Speculo historiali of the maruellous and ſtrange death of Iulian the apoſtata emperour lib. 15. ſaith, that an Angell brought to the aforeſaid Mercury, al

armour neceſſary, with a ſhield of azure, and a croſſe flouery with foure Roſes of golde in this manner as is here ſet downe: 
                        blazon or coat of arms
                      and I neuer heard that euer any Armes came from heauen, but in them was the ſigne of the Croſſe, except onely the Armes of France, which Armes were ſent by an Angell from heauen, three floures in maner of ſwords in a ſhield of azure, which

Armes were giuen to the King of France in ſigne of euer-laſting trouble, that he and his ſucceſſors ſhould euer be puniſhed with wars and ciuill broiles. 
                        blazon or coat of arms
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Armes in which are carried the ſigne of the Croſſe.
                     Now I turne againe to the ſigne of the Croſſe and aske a queſtion, how many Croſſes be borne in armes? To which queſtion, vnder any certaine number I dare not anſwere, for Croſſes innumerable are now borne daily: but deſcending to euery Croſſe which I haue ſeene before, and heere meane to ſet downe, the plaine croſſe ſhall be firſt deſcribed, of which croſſe more doubts be made than of many other Croſſes. Foraſmuch as wiſe men in blazing of Armes hold for a certaine rule that you muſt begin to blaze at the loweſt point of the ſhield. If the point be of one colour: and ſo that colour that is in the point of the ſheelde is the fielde of the armes.
                     But in that rule to remooue away all doubtes ye muſt very diligently obſerue, that that ſame rule is true with a little addition, that is to wit, that in Armes to be blazed, it is alwayes to beginne at the point of the ſhield, if the point bee of one colour, then that is true: if the colour of the point be more copious or greater in thoſe Armes, and then without doubt you ſhall beginne there, or elſe not. And when the colours be equall parted, either in length or ouerthwart, then euermore you ſhall beginne to blaze thoſe Armes in the right ſide, and in that caſe you ſhall haue no reſpect to the point.
                     
                        And if it be asked, how beareth Saint George? it is to be knowen that hee beareth: Portat vnum ſcutum de argento cum quadam cruce plana de rubio. in French, Il port d'argent vn cros plain de gules, in Engliſh, hee beareth a field of ſiluer with a plaine Croſſe of gules, as here appeareth

in theſe Armes. 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
                     
                     And in the ſame manner all Armes, hauing a plaine Croſſe, are to bee blazed: Therefore they that ſay S. George beares the fielde of gules with foure quarters of ſiluer do erre, for by thoſe reaſons a plaine Croſſe ſhould neuer be found in armes, nor well nie any difference in armes.
                  
                  
                     Of a Croſſe of an equall length in euery part.
                     A plaine croſſe is found in armes differing from the firſt: and it is of an equall length on euery parte, as it appeareth here:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and

theſe armes be harder than the other to blaze, for the ends of this croſſe touch not the hemmes or vtter part of the ſhield in no part, in which you ſhall ſay, that he that beareth theſe armes, in Latin

                        Ille portat de aſuro cum vna cruce plana aurea aequalis longitudinis ex omni parte: in French, Il port d'azure vn cros plain d'un longre per tont: in Engliſh he beareth azure with a plaine croſſe or of equall length on euery part. And this is the difference in blazing, that the endes of this croſſe are in equall length, which cannot be ſaide in the plaine croſſe before where the foote is the longeſt part if it be well made. And this difference ſhal appeare better in a coate-armour then it doth in a ſhield, And this is the euident difference betweene the croſſes aforeſaide.
                  
                  
                     Of a plaine croſſe ſtraight.
                     There is an other croſſe equaller ſtraight in the middeſt then in the ends, as in this coate with open corners, and not touching the border and vtmoſt part of the ſheeld in any part, and it is called a croſſe patent.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And you ſhall blaze it in this maner in Latine, Ille portat vnam crucem argentatam patentem in campo nigro: in French, Il port

de ſable vn cros pate d'argent, in Engliſh, he doth beare ſable a croſſe paty of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a croſſe patent fixible.
                     This croſſe patent is made ſharpe in the foote of the ſame: and it is called a croſſe patent fixible, becauſe it may be fixed in the

earth, in the which croſſe three partes are open in the corners and broader than in the middeſt: and the foote thus pointed to be faſtened in the earth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         thus to be blazed, in latine, Portat de rubeo cum vna cruce fugitiua de albo: in French, Il port de gules vn cros patee fichie argent, in Engliſh, Hee beareth gules a Croſſe paty fixible of ſiluer: And there bee many croſſes which may be made fixible, as it ſhall be ſhewed to you in diuers examples heereafter following.
                  
                  
                     Of a plaine Croſſe cordid.
                     Amongſt other Croſſes one is found called a corded croſse, as is ſhewed in this coate inſuing, which is called a corded croſse, for it is made of cordes, the which I lately ſawe carried by a noble man, whoſe aunceſter indeede was of mechanicall trade, and a Roper by his occupation, as hee himſelfe reported vnto mee: the which Armes I doe blaze thus in latine,

                        Ille portat gules cum vna cruc
                              •
                            plana cordata de argento, in French, Il port de

gules vn cros plein cordee d'argent, in Engliſh, Hee doeth beare gules a Croſſe plaine corded of ſiluer. 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Of a Croſſe plaine perforated.
                     There is an other croſſe which differeth maruellouſly from the croſſe of Saint George. And heere it is to bee noted, that the opinion of ſuch is to be reprehended, which doe affirme, that this coate is checkered, for Armes may not bee checkered, but at the leaſt in the number of foure, but more vſuall in a greater number, as heereafter ſhall bee ſhewed.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore this coate is to be blazed thus, in Latine, Ille portat vnam crucem argenteam perforatam in campo nigro, and in French,

Il port de ſable vn cros d'argent partee, in Engliſh, he beareth ſable a croſſe perforated of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a beſanted Croſſe.
                     We haue another croſſe carried in Armes which is called a beſanted croſſe,

for it is made of all beſants: as for beſant in this coate:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And the colour of example ſhall not bee expreſſed in blazing, for it is needleſſe to ſay, a beſant of gold, for except they be of golde they bee not beſants: Therefore ſuch a coate is thus to be blazed in Latine, Ille portat vnam crucem talentatam in campo rubeo: in French, Il port de gules vn cros beſantee▪ in Engliſh he beareth gules a croſſe beſanted.
                  
                  
                     A croſſe floury fixible.
                     Now followeth an other croſſe floury which is ſo called, becauſe it hath floures on the point of euery of the croſſes, and this croſſe flourie is ſometime borne in armes, fixible as in this coate, and then we properly call it a croſſe floury fixible, for in three of his endes hee is flouriſhing, and in the foote pichable or fixible.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore we truely blaze it, in Latine, Portat vnam crucem

auream floridam in campo a ſur
                              •
                           o, in French, Il port d'azure vn cros floritee d'or, in Engliſh, hee beareth azure a croſſe flourie of golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a croſſe floury patent in armes.
                     Now followeth a croſſe which is called a croſſe floury patent: and it is ſo called, becauſe it hath the endes open, and in the midſt of euery end appeares a threed in manner of a flower, as is ſhewed in this coate: 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         therefore it ſhall be

ſaide, that hee which beareth theſe Armes beareth in this wiſe, in Latin, Portat vnam crucem floridam patentem in campo aſureo, in French, Il port d'azure vn patee floritee d'or, in Engliſh, he beares azure with a croſſe patent flouerie of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe wauie or vndie.
                     Moreouer you ſhall vnderſtand that there is another plaine croſſe which is called wauy or vndy, for it is made in the maner of

water troubled with the wind, as is ſhewed in this coate heere ſette foorth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore he which beareth this coate ſhall be ſaid to beare it thus, in Latine Portat vnam crucem planam vndoſam de argento in campo rubeo, in French, Il port de gules vn cros plain vndee d'argent, in Engliſh,

he beareth gules a plaine watery croſſe of ſiluer: or a plaine croſſe vndy of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of the croſſe inuecked.
                     In armes alſo there are found croſſes of colours inuecked or indented, as

here in this coate appeeres, and it is called a croſſe inuecked, becauſe it hath two colours one put or lincked within another:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and of him that beareth theſe Armes it ſhal be ſaid he beareth thus, in Latine, Portat vnam crucem planam inuectam de coloribus albis & nigris in campo rubeo, in French, Il port de gules vn cros plein verre d'argent et ſable, in Engliſh, he beares gules a croſſe of ſiluer and ſable inuecked.
                  
                  
                     Of the croſſe croſlet.
                     Now followeth an other croſſe which is called a croſſe croſſet or croſlet, & he is called croſſet becauſe at euery end he is croſſed as appeares by this coate:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but this croſſe is not borne ſo

oft in armes by himſelfe as other croſſes neuertheles many times it is borne in diminutiues, that is to ſay, in little croſses croſset, and then the armes are poudred with litle croſses cruciated and of him which beareth theſe armes you ſhall ſay, hee beareth

thus, in Latine, Portat vnam crucem cruciatam de argento in campo aſureo, in French, Il port d'azure vn cros crocee d'argent, and in Engliſh, he beares azure a croſse croſſet of ſiluer: and when ſuch croſses diminutiues are borne without any certain number, they are called in French Croſſets.
                  
                  
                     A Croſse maſculet.
                     There is an other croſse which is called a Croſse maſculet, as is ſhewed in this

coate which here I ſet down, which is made of maſculies, of which I will ſpeake more at large when I ſpeake of maſcules and lozenges:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and thus I blaze this coate, firſt in latin, Portat vnam crucem maſculatam de argento in campo aſureo, and in French, Il port d'azure vn cros maſculee d'argent, in Engliſh, he beareth azure a croſse maſculet of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſse maſculet and perforated.
                     And this croſse maſculet is ſometime borne perforated in the maſcules, as is ſhewed in this coate,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and is thus to be blazed, firſt

in Latine in this wiſe, Portat vnam crucem perforatam de rubeo in ſcuto argenteo. in French, Il port d'argent vn cros de gules maſculee perſee, in Engliſh, he beareth ſiluer with a croſse of gules maſculet peerſed.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of the Millers Croſſe or mill Nut.
                     There is a croſſe which is called the Millers cros, for it is made in the proportion of a certaine inſtrument of yron which beares the mil-ſtone, by which the ſtone in his courſe is born equaly that he fal not, nor decline to the right ſide, nor to the left: and hath beene giuen to Iudges to beare in their armes, ſignifying thereby, that as that inſtrument ſupporteth the mill ſtone equally that it fall not vnto one parte more than to another, ſo theſe Iudges are bound to giue equally euery one his

right.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And thus it ſhall be blazed in Latine, Portat crucem molendinariam argenteam in cāpo rubeo, in french Il port gules vn crois molein d'argent, in Engliſh, he beareth gules a Millers croſſe of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe returned.
                     There is a croſſe which is called a croſſe turned, becauſe the endes of this croſſe on euerie ſide turne backe with a kinde of bending like to the horne of a Ram:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         he that beareth theſe

armes is ſaid to beare them thus, in Latin, Portat crucem vnā auream reuerſam in ſcute aſureo, in French, Il port d'azure vn cros recercilee d'or in Engliſh, he beareth azure with a cros reuerſed of gold
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a croſſe forked.
                     There be ſome which beare in their Armes a certaine forked croſſe, and it is called forked, bicauſe the endes of it are clouen and

forked.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore hee which beareth this coate ſhal be ſaide to beare this, firſt in latin, portat vnā crucem furcotam de auro in campo Aſureo, In French, il port d'azure vn cros d'or, in Engliſh: he beareth Azure with a Croſse forked of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe engrayled or engraded.
                     Alſo there be ſome which in their coate armours cary a croſſe engrayled or engraded, it is called engrayled, becauſe it is endented

all ouer, as well ouer the length, as ouer the breadth,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but in the blazing of Armes wee doe ſaie, this croſſe is engrailed, not endented, and thus we blaze ſuch a coate in latin, portat vnam crucem ingradatam de albo in campo

Rubeo, in french, Il port de Gules vn crois ingrailee d'argent: in Engliſh, he beares gules a croſſe engrailed of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of a ragged or truncated croſſe.
                     There is an other croſſe borne which is called a croſſe truncated or Ragged croſſe becauſe it is in maner of two lopped trees.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore it is ſaide: He which beareth this armes

beareth thus, in Latine, portat vnam crucem truncatanum, de argento in campo rubeo, in French, Il port de gules vn crois recompee d'argent, in engliſh, he beareth Gules with A croſſe truncated of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of a knottie croſſe.
                     There is an other croſſe borne in Armes which is called a knottie croſſe, becauſe on euerie end of the ſame croſse it hath certain

knottes in forme of this coate which heere I ſet downe:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which is thus blazed, in latin, portat vnam crucem auream nodulatam in ſcuto Aſureo: in french, Il port d'azure vn crois

Botone d'or: he beareth azure with a croſse knotty of golde.
                     And this croſse is found ſometimes fixible, as I haue ſhewed in other coates before.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſse flourie knotted.
                     There is another croſse which is called a flourie knotted croſse, as is this coat which here I ſet down hauing both flowers and

knots on euerie end of ech croſſe.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And of him which beareth this coat, it is ſaid he beareth thus: in latine, portat crucem▪ nodulatam, floridam, auream in campo de aſuro, in French, Il port d'azure vn crois floritee botone d'or, in Engliſh, he beareth azure a croſse floury knotty of gold.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe double parted.
                     There is alſo founde in diuerſe coate armours a double partited croſſe, and it is ſo called double parted, for if it bee deuided or parted after the longe waie, or the broade vvaie, yet it

is ſtill a double croſſe as we ſee heere, and of this croſſe manie doubtes haue riſen, and queſtions growne of this Armorie,

yet by Generall opinion at length alowed. 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore hee which beareth theſe armes is ſaid to bear thus in latin, in campo nigro, in french, il port ſable vn cros double petty d'argēt, in Engliſh: hee beareth ſable, a croſſe double partited of Siluer.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe double parted flouriſhed.
                     This croſſe double parted is varyed ſometimes and then it is a croſſe double parted floriſhed as here:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         neuertheleſſe it is called a

croſſe flourie, improperlie as ſome do hold, for it faileth in the midſt of the flower, as you ſhall ſee in the next armes following which certaine midſt by no maner of wiſe may be in the croſſe double partited, therefore hee which beareth theſe armes, is ſaide to beare them thus: in latine: portat crucem duplam partitam auream in campo Rubeo, il port de Gules vn crois double partie flouretee

d'or: hee beareth a gules a Croſſe double partited floury of gold.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſſe tripartited floriſhed.
                     As before I haue ſhewed you the Coate double floriſed for there faileth in the midſt of the croſſe, by which the croſſe floriſhed is made perfect, but as in this coate amidſt put thereto it ſhall bee rightlie called a croſſe tripartited,

floriſhed, and ſo it is rightly blazed, for diuide it by the length or breadth, it is euerie waie three folde in the midſt of the croſſe, and open in the pointes:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and therefore hee which beareth theſe armes, beareth thus firſt in latin: portat crucem tripartitam de argento in campo de aſuro: in french, Il port d'azure vn crois trefois partee floritee d'argent: in Engliſh he beareth azure with a croſſe tripartited floury of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of the mill nut or millers croſſe ſhadowed or vmbrated.
                     There hath beene made a doubte of this vmbrated croſſe, and it is called a ſhaddowed or vmbrated

croſſe, becauſe the ſhadow is euermore of blacke, of what colour ſoeuer the field bee of, and the bodie of the ſhadow is of the ſame

colour of the fielde:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therfore hee which beareth theſe armes, is ſaid to bear in latin, portat crucem vmbratam in campo aureo in french, Il port d'azure vn crois molein vmbree: hee beareth golde with a millers croſſe vmbrated or ſhaddowed.
                  
                  
                     Of a croſse floury Patent vmbrated.
                     Now this coate I here ſet downe for the vmbration of a certaine croſſe, and this croſſe is called, a croſſe floury vmbrated, as

here appeareth,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but indeed it is no Croſſe, but a ſhadow of ſuch a croſſe, & the reaſon is, for the body of the ſame croſse is of the colour of the field and ſo the colour in the fielde ſheweth by all the bodie of the ſaid ſhaddow: and he that beareth theſe armes, is ſaid to beare in latine, portat crucem floridam patentem vmbratam in campo rubeo, in French, Il port de Gules vn crois patee floritee vmbree, in engliſh he beareth Gules, a croſse patent floury vmbrated.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a croſse floury patent vmbrated and perforated.
                     And alſo this croſse which here I ſet downe is caried in coate armours which blaſing rightly, they ſay it is floury patent vmbrated and perforated.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And it ſhall bee ſaide, that hee

which beareth this coate, in latin, portat crucem floridam patentem vmbra am perforatam cum rubeo in cāpo aureo, in French, Il port d'or vn cros patee floritee vmbree partee de Gules: Engliſh, he beares gold, a croſſe patent, floury ſhadowed, and perced with Gules.
                     Therefore they which will vndertake to blaze, muſt beware of theſe armes vmbrated, of which manie rules be ſhewed before: for there be manie families in England to this day which beare ſhaddowes (diuerſly in their coate armours) of the Lyon, the Antelop, and other beaſts Therefore leſt the ignoraunt or vnskilfull ſhoulde by this miſtake the rule mentioned before of colours tranſmuted, hee which beareth ſuch a Lyon in his coate, ſhalbe ſaid to beare: in latine, Portat voum leonem vmbratum in campo aureo: in french, Il port d'or vn leon vmbree, in Engliſh, he beareth of golde a Lyon vmbrated: and there bee ſome skilfull in armorie which are of opinion, that ſuch as doe carrie theſe vmbrated Armes,

had their aunceſters carrying the ſame whole, and without ſhadow at all, but their poſseſsions and patrimonies deſcending to other men, their nephewes and kinſemen, onely hauing the honour without the land, bare the Armes vmbrated, leauing all other differences, diſguiſing their coates in ſuch ſort, thinking it better to beare the armes vmbrated then whollie, vntill fortune ſhould againe raiſe them to the eſtate of their progenitors: bearing it rather as ſome diuice or Empreze, then a coate in armes.
                  
                  
                     Of the hemmed or bordered croſse.
                     There hath riſen ſome queſtion, amongſt heraldes of the difference betwixt this croſse fimbrated or bordered as heere appeareth, and the foreſaid croſse vmbrated, becauſe they are ſo much like, and at the firſt ſight ſeeme to

bee all one.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         But if a man behold them well he ſhall finde great difference, for the border of this croſse is varied as well from the colour of the Croſse, as from the colour of the field. And therefore it ſhall be ſaid of him which beares theſe armes in latine, portat crucem nigram perforatam floridam patentem fimbriatam ſiue borduratam cum argento in campo Rubeo: in french, Il port de Gules vn

crois floritee patee percee de ſable bordure d'argent: in Engliſh, he beareth gules with a croſse floury patent pearſed of ſable bordered with ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of the Ermine croſse.
                     There is an ermine croſse, of which there happened a diſputation at London betweene a Herauld of Brittaine and one of our nation, betwixt whome it was prooued and determined, that this Croſse in armes could be of no other colour than it is here ſet downe:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and hee which beares theſe Armes ſhall be ſaide to beare them thus, in Latine, Portat crucem erminalem, in the French. Il

port vn crois erminee: in Engliſh, He doth beare a croſse ermines, without other circumſtance in blazing of the ſame, becauſe they muſt be only blacke and white, which is their proper colour.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Now that we haue ſpoken ſufficiently of Croſses (as before) it followeth that we intreate of diuerſe Armes quartered as heereafter ſhall be ſhewed.
                  ANd to ſpeake of armes quartred, there be ſome Armes quartered plaine, ſome engraded, ſome irrazed, ſome inuecked, ſome indented, of the which we wil ſpeake as they fall in their places: and firſt of armes quartered plaine.
                  Armes may be quartered three manner of wayes, the firſt manner is open, when two diuerſe Armes are borne quarterly, as may

be ſeene here in the Armes of France and England, 
                        blazon or coat of arms
                      of which it may be ſaide, Portat arma regis Franciae et Angliae quarterata, in Frenche, Il port les armes de Francie e d'Angleterre quartelees, in Engliſh, Hee beareth the armes of France and England quarterly: And it ſhal

not be offenſiue to any man, that Fraunce is put before England in blazing, for we haue a generall rule, that whenſoeuer in armes two colours or more bee in the point of the ſhield, then you ſhall not begin at the point to blaze them, but in the right ſide or part of thoſe armes, though it be not the moſt worthieſt coate, but becauſe of the place you ſhall begin to blaze there.
                  
                     Of Armes quarterly borne.
                     Now to ſpeake of armes quarterly borne, when foure ſundry armes or coates be quartered, as heere is ſhewed,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         it ſhall be ſaide,

in Latin, portat quatuor arma diuerſa quarterata, in french, Il port quater armes diuerſes quarterlees, in Engliſh, he beareth foure coates diuerſly quartered. And if it be asked how theſe Armes muſt be blazed: The Blazer muſt beginne in the hieſt part of the right ſide, firſt blazing the Armes in the right ſide, and then to the left: And you muſt note, that theſe be plaine Armes quartered.
                     There is an other maner of bearing Armes quartered when as two Armes quartered be borne quarterly: and it is borne moſt in Armes of Queenes: euen ſo bare that moſt Noble Queene of Englande

Queene Anne wife to that royall Prince king Richard the ſecond which bare the Armes of England and France, and of the Emperour of Almaine quarterly in ſixteene parts, that is to ſay, in the right ſide of the ſhield: in the firſt quarter ſhee bare the armes of France, three flower deluces of golde in a field of azure: in the ſecond quarter three lions of golde in a field of gules: in the third quarter, a ſplayed Eagle with two neckes: and in the fourth, a blacke lion ramping in a field of ſiluer: and ſo changeably ſhee bare theſe Armes in ſixeteene quarters, which is ſeldome ſeene in any Armes.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes quartered and engrailed.
                     Now to ſpeake of Armes quartered and engrailed, that is to ſay, when any Armes in his quarter is engrailed, as it appeareth in

this coate here ſet downe,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhall be ſaide of him which beareth theſe Armes thus, in Latine, Portat de 
                              •
                           uro et rubio arma quarterata et ingradata, in French, Il port d'or et gules quartilee engralee, in Engliſh, He beareth gold and gules quarterly engrailed: and they are called Armes engrailed, becauſe they bee of two colours, yet thus runne one into an other, as you ſee in this coate.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Armes quartered and irrazed.
                     Of theſe Armes quartered

and raſed, as by this coat appeareth, they be ſo called razed, bicauſe the colors be irrazed, as one colour in blazing were taken awaie from another.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And it ſhall be ſaide of him which doth beare theſe armes thus: in Latine, Portat arma quarterata irraſa de albo et nigro, in French, Il port d'argent et ſable quarterlee irraſee, in Engliſh, hee beareth ſiluer and ſable quarterly irrazed.
                  
                  
                     Of armes quartered and inuecked.
                     There be armes quarterly inuecked, or as ſome ſay, they be armes quartered of colours enuecked, as here appeareth, for in them

are two colours quarterly put the one into the other, and ſo one colour inuecked within an other:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         therefore it is ſaide of him that beares theſe armes, in Latine, portat quarteratum de aſurio et auro inuectis, in French, port quartrelie verre d'azure & d'or, in Engliſh, Hee beareth quarterly inuecked azure and golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Armes quartered indented.
                     There be diuers Armes which be quartered indented the two colours one

indented into the other, as is ſhewed you in this ſhield:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and thus you ſhal blaſe ſuch Armes, Portat arma quarterata indentata de rubio et auro, in French, Il port quartilee indentee de gules & d'or: in Engliſh, he beareth quarterly indented gules and golde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of Armes parted after the longeſt way.
                  
                     I Intend nowe to ſpeake of Armes diuided after the longeſt way, which is in ſundry maners and ſorts: the firſt partition is of two colours in armes after the longeſt way in plaine maner.
                  The ſecond, a parting of Armes of two colours ingraded.
                  The third, a parting of Armes of two colours irraſed.
                  The fourth, a parting of Armes of two colours inuecked.
                  The fift, a parting of Armes of two colours indented.
                  The ſixt, a parting of Armes of two colours clouded or 
                        •
                     ubulated.
                  The ſeuenth, a parting of Armes of two colours wauie or vndie.
                  And although there be yet more than here we ſet downe, yet we will onely ſhew theſe coates at this time.
                  
                     FIrſt, of the plaine parted

Armes in two colours equally diuided as in this coate,  
                        blazon or coat of arms
                      which ſhal thus be blazed, portat arma partita ſecundum longum de aſurio et albo, in French, Il port d'azure et argent plein partee, in Engliſh, He beares azure & ſiluer plaine parted
                  
                     Of armes the longeſt way engrayled.
                     Of the ſecond ſort of Armes engrayled as is ſaide before of armes parted in colours plaine, of which, and the reſt of this ſort, I

will not ſtand long, onely ſetting downe the Coates with their blazons whereby the maner may eaſily be diſcerned, hauing had the termes explaned to you before by example in the quartred coates before going.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And it ſhall be ſaide of him which beareth theſe armes he beareth thus, in Latine, portat arma partita ſecundum longum ingradata de argento et nigro
                        ▪ in French▪ Il port d'argent ingrailee et ſable partee du long, in Engliſh, he beareth ſiluer and ſable engrayled parted after the long way.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of armes parted irraſed.
                     The third ſort of armes parted of two ſundrie colours and irraſed, as before of quartered Armes irraſed:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and he which beareth

theſe armes thus, in Latine, Portat arma partita ſecundum longum irraſa de argento et rubio, in French, Il port patee du long d'argent et du gules racee, in Engliſh, He beareth ſiluer and gules parted on length irraſed.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes inuecked.
                     The fourth ſorte of Armes parted or borne the long way in two ſundry colours be inuecked, as is ſhewed in this coate,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which

ſhall ſhew you howe much they differ from the coate before irraſed, wherefore it is ſaide of him which beareth theſe armes, Portat arma partita ſecundum longum de coloribus albo & rubio inuectis, in French, Il port partee verre du loin d'argent et de gules, in Engliſh, Hee beareth armes party inuecked in length ſiluer and gold.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Armes the long way indented.
                     The fift manner of bearing Armes in this ſort is called party endented, as is ſhewed to you in this coate, in like maner before,

as in the quartered Armes indented:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And it ſhall bee ſaide of him which beareth theſe armes, portat arma partita ſecundum longum de argento et nigro indentata, in french Il port partee indentee du loin d'argent et ſable, in Engliſh, Hee beareth partie indented on length of ſiluer and ſable.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes parted, cloudy, or nebulated.
                     The ſixt part of theſe Armes borne, parted the long way be clouded or nebulated, as is ſhewed to you in this ſcutchion, called

ſo, nebulated, becauſe the coulours are mixed in manner of cloudes:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore hee which doth beare theſe Armes ſhall be ſaid to beare this, Portat arma partita ſecundum longum de argento aſureo in nebulata, Il port partee du loin d'argent et d'azure

innuble, in Engliſh, He beareth party at length of ſiluer and azure innebulated.
                  
                  
                     Of armes parted wauie.
                     Moreouer, beſides theſe Armes aforeſaide, yet there are armes borne diuided the long way, which are parted wauy or vndy, the colours bounding one vppon an other like to water

troubled with winde,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which Armes ſhall be thus blazed: portat arma partita ſecundum longum de argento et rubio, in Frenche, Il port partee du loin d'argent & gules vndee, in Engliſh, Hee beareth parted of ſiluer and gules vndie.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Now to ſpeake of Armes diuided ouerthwart.
                  
                     HEre now it followeth to ſpeake of armes diuided ouerthwart, the which partition is done in many and ſundry manners, that is to ſay, plaine, ingrailed, irraſed, inuecked, indented, nebulated, and vndated, as in the armes before quartered,

and parted:  
                        blazon or coat of arms
                      and firſt I wil begin with the plaine armes of this ſort, which I ſhew in this Scutchion, & ſhall be blazed in this ſort, Portat arma partita ex trāſuerſo plana de auro et aſureo, in the French, Il port partee tranſuerſee d'or et d'azure: Hee beareth gold and azure parted ouerthwart: now you muſt knowe, that here is no doubt of the firſt rule that is, that a man ſhould beginne at the point of the ſhielde, for heere is as much colour of golde as of azure.
                  
                     
                     Of Armes irraſed ouerthwart.
                     Now will I ſpeake of an other manner of partition of colours in Armes, as

ſhal appeare by this ſcutchion of armes ouerthwart irraſed▪  
                        
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhal be ſaide of him that beares this armes, in Latine, portat arma partita ex tranſuerſo, irraſa de auro et rubeo, in French, Il port partee tranſuerſee irraſee d'or et gules, in Engliſh, He beareth armes parted ouerthwart, irraſed of gold and gules.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes parted ouerthwart indented.
                     Of armes indented and parted ouerthwart I doe meane to ſpeake, and they be called indented, by reaſon of the intermizture

of the colours in ſuch manner of indentings:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and ſuch armes are blazed in this maner, Portat arma partita ex tranſuerſo indentata de auro et aſureo, in French, Il port partiee de trauers d'or & d'azure endentee, in Engliſh He beareth golde and azure parted ouerthwart and indented.
                     
                        And now to ſpeake more of Armes parted ouerthwart, it ſhall be needeleſſe being ſufficiently declared before in the rules of Armes quartered and parted, holding this maxime, inutilis est repetitio vnius ad eiuſdem: And I do beleeue it ſhal be hard to find many more Armes parted at length or ouerthwart than bee heere rehearſed, neuertheleſſe, if any bee found, the ſame rules ſhall be obſerued in them as are before rehearſed.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes borne in a chiefe.
                     Now ſome men there be, who would haue theſe Armes which heere I haue

ſet downe in this ſcutchion to be termed parted armes:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but in this they erre very much, for that there is no equall partition of colours, nor any likeneſſe in diuiding the ſame, for in Armes parted, it is alwayes required, that the colours ſhould be equall in quantitie, which altogether faileth in this, becauſe three partes of the ſheelde be of one colour: therefore this coate ſhalbe blazed in this wiſe, Portat de argento et caput ſcuti de aſureo cum duabus maculis perforatis de auro, in French, Il port d'argent vn chiefe d'azure et deux mulletties partees d'or, in Engliſh, He beareth ſiluer a chiefe of azure and two mullets perforated of golde.
                     
                        And moreouer, you ſhall vnderſtand, that no Armes can rightly be called parted Armes: But if they be of two colours, once parted, and no more: for in theſe Armes paled, or

party paled, as in this ſcutchion heere ſet downe appeares, although they be of two colours:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         yet for that theſe Armes be diuerſly diuided in the forme of pales, they be called paled armes, which coate is truely thus blazed, Portat arma palata de auro et aſureo, in French, Il port palee d'or et azure, in Engliſh, Hee beares pale gold and azure.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes paly vndated.
                     Armes paly vndated be often borne when as the pales thus mixe themſelues with other colours, wherewith they be borne, with a kinde of ſwelling like vnto waues, as is

ſhewed heere in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which Armes are rightly blazed thus, Portat arma palata vndata vel vndoſa de rubie et argento
                        ▪ in French il port palee vndee de gules et argent, hee beareth paly vndated of gules and ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of armes paled, irraſed, or crooked.
                     And you ſhall vnderſtand, that theſe paled armes be borne diuerſly, and in diuerſe manners, as is ſhewed in this Booke, yet ſhal

you hardly finde them in a ſtranger ſorte than in this ſcutchion which heere I ſet downe, when the two colours paly are mixed in this raſed and crooked manner:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore it ſhal be ſaide of him which doth beare this coate, Portat arma palata tortuoſa de nigro et argento, Il port pale daunſete de ſable et d'argent: Hee beareth pale crooked ſable and ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of armes plaine barred.
                     As before hath already beene ſpoken of paled armes, nowe I intend to ſpeake of Armes barred: and you ſhall vnderſtand, that Armes in this ſorte may be barred in ſundrie manner of wiſe. But firſt I doe intend to ſpeake of Armes plaine barred: in the blazing of the which, it is altogether vnneceſſary to ſay, hee beareth Armes plaine barred. But onely in blazing an other coate, to ſhew how that differeth from plaine barred armes, for ſome be blazed with a lion, greyhound, or other beaſt, and ſome

be powdered with croſse

croſſets, mullets, creſcents, ſmall birds or other differences.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         But blazing the plaine Baron, you ſhall ſaie thus, portat arma barrata de argento et nigro, in french, Il port barre d'argent & ſable: in Engliſh hee beareth barry ſiluer and ſable.
                  
                  
                     Of barred armes vndated.
                     As in the coats of armes before declared and ſpoken of, quartered, parted, and paled, ſo haue you likewiſe armes barred vndated, as heere is ſhewd to you in this ſcutchion:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         the colours

meeting togither in the manner of waues, which coate you ſhal blaze thus: portat arma barrata vndata nigro et albo: in frēch, Il port barri verree de ſable & argent: in Engliſh, he beares barri vndated of ſable and ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of barred armes inuecked.
                     Barred armes inuecked are borne of diuerſe gentlemen with colours inuecked: how they be borne barry wiſe, I ſhew you how in this ſcutchion: and

he which beareth theſe colours in this wiſe ſhall bee ſaid to beare thus:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
                        Portat

arma barrata de coloribus rubio et albo inuectis, in french, Il port barri verre de gules & d'argent, hee beareth barri inuecked of Gules and ſiluer, and I beginne with gules becauſe that coloure is the firſt in the right corner.
                  
                  
                     Of armes barry crooked or ſharpe.
                     There bee ſome which beare armes crookedlie barred as appeareth in this ſcutchion, and you ſhall make the like difference in

this, as in the eolours borne in armes, paled after the ſame maner,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and he which beareth theſe armes ſhall bee ſaide to beare in this ſort: Portat arma barrata tortuoſa de nigro et auro: in French, Il port barri d'auncete du ſable & d'or: he beareth barry crooked ſable and golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of armes bendi barred.
                     Now to ſpeake of armes bendie barred ſo called, becauſe the two colours

bee ioined togither bendy wiſe, as is ſhewd to you by example in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and therefore it ſhall bee ſaid of him which beareth theſe armes. In latin, Portat arma bendaria de rubeo et auro. Il port barri bendee de gules & d'or: he beareth barri bended of gules and gold.
                     And you muſt be ware and haue an eſpeciall care in blazing armes paled barred or bendy, otherwiſe you may eaſily miſtake, and be deceiued in the ſame, for that coat is rightly paled in, which the pales of both colours be equal in number, and if ſo be they be not equall as I preſcribe, you cānot in blazing tearm them paled: & I find in diuers coats two pales of one colour, & three of another, as in this ſcutchiō which here I ſet downe, where as the gules ſeemeth to bee only the field,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         therefore

the gentleman which beareth theſe armes ſhall bee ſaide to beare this: Portat duos palos aureos in campo reubio: Il port de gules, e deux pales d'or, he beareth gules two pales of gold.
                     
                        And you ſhall commonly and vſually finde in armes a barre betwixt two little barres or barrets as we tearme them in armorie both the lines or little barres, beeing of the ſame colour of the great barre betwixt them: 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         as you perceiue

by this ſcutchion which coate ſhall bee thus blazed: portat vnam Barram et duas Barrulas de albo in campo de Reubio: in french, Il port de gules vn barree & deux barrelettee d'argent: in Engliſh hee beareth gules, one barre betwixt two little barrets of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of armes barred with barrets flourie.
                     And thoſe barres or ſmall lines be ſometimes floriſhed, as here in this ſcutchion you maie ſee, and ſo called floriſhed, for that

they be made in the manner of floure deluces,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which coate ſhall bee blazed in this maner, portat vnam barram et duas barrulas floridas albas in ſcuti de aſurio: il port d'azure vn barree et deux barrilettes floritees d'argent: he beareth azure, a barre betwixt two barrelets of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of bends borne in armes.
                     And now comming to ſpeake of bendes borne in armes, you muſt vnderſtand that it is called a bende which beginneth at the

right corner of the ſheelde and deſcendeth to the left, as here I ſhew in this ſcutchion which is a note ſufficient to ſhewe the difference betweene a bende, & a fiſure or little ſtaffe of which it ſhall bee ſpoken of hereafter.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And of him which beareth theſe armes it ſhall be ſaid thus: portat vnam bendam de Reubeo in campo de aureo: in french, Il port d'or, vn bend de gules: he beareth gold a bend of gules.
                     And as I ſhewed you before of certaine little bars borne in armes, in the like manner are certain little bends borne in armes, and

they bee called bendils or bendilets:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and where a bend is charged in armes with two ſuch bendils, as heere I ſhewe you in this ſcutchion, you ſhall thus blaſe the coate: portat vnam bendam et duas bendulas de auro in campo de aſuro: Il port

d'azure vn bend & deux bendilets d'or, hee beareth azure, a bend betweene two bendilets of golde. And theſe bends be ſometimes floriſhed as is ſhewed before in the coate of barres and ſometimes the bendilets be found inchained, & ſomtimes powdred with mullets, & ſomtimes with other differences which were needleſſe to be ſhewed here.
                  
                  
                     Of armes paly bended.
                     And certainely the beſt manner of bearing of ſundry armes in one ſhielde, is in theſe bends eſpecially for him that hath a patrimony left him by his father, and other lands deſcending to him by his mother, to which lands of his mother

armes are appropriate of olde time, and that the Armes with lande fall to her by diſcent, then maie a man beeing heire if hee will, beare the armes of his father in his ſhielde, and in ſuch a bend beare his mothers armes, in ſuch forme as appeares in this,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhall be ſaide of him which beares theſe armes, in latin thus, Portat arma palata de argento et reubio cum vna benda de nigro, Il port palee d'argent & de gules & vn bend du ſable: he beareth palee of ſiluer and gules, with a bend of ſable.
                     And ſometimes we find theſe bends charged with three maſcules or mullets of gold.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of armes bendy fuſilled.
                     Moreouer there be found in armes other certaine bends much differing from theſe as here I will ſhew you in this ſcutchion, of a

bend fuſelled of the manner of which fuſels I will ſpeake on hereafter.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And it ſhall be ſaid of him which doeth beare theſe Armes, Portat vnam bendam fuſillatam in campo de aſurio: il port vn bendee fuſillee d'or, he beareth azure, a bend fuſilled of gold.
                  
                  
                     Of borders in armes.
                     There are diuers and ſundry borders founde in armes, of which ſome be plain, ſome engrayled, ſome talented, ſome plain powthered, ſome checked, ſome gobonetted, ſome inuecked,

of which euery one ſhal be ſpoken of in order.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         But firſt I wil ſpeake of plain borders as appeareth in this ſcutchion, and it is tearmed a plaine bordure where it is of one coulour alone. And thus it

ſhall be ſaid of him which beareth this coate, portat tres roſas rubras in campo argenteo cum vna bordura de reubeo, Il port d'argent trois Roſis de gules & vn bordure de gules: he beareth ſiluer, three roſes of gules and a border of gules.
                  
                  
                     Of armes bordered engrailed.
                     Armes with a border engrailed are vſually borne as I ſhall ſhewe you in this ſcutchion which heere I ſet downe, and it ſhall bee needleſſe for me to ſhewe you what ingrayling in armes is, hauing ſufficientlie declared the ſame in other

coates already blazed.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         But nowe comming to ſpeake of armes with a bordure engrayled, I wil blaze this coate which heere I ſet downe, portat arma de auro fimbriata ſiue bordurata de nigro ingradata, cum tribus maculis perforatis de nigro: in french: Il port d'or trois mullettes perforatees de ſable vn bordure engraylee de ſable: he beareth golde three mullets perforated of ſable and a bordure engrayled of ſable.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of armes bordered, tallanted, or beſanted.
                     There are alſo borne in Armes a Bordure beſanted or tallented, as in this

ſcutchion, which heere I ſet downe:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but it ſhall bee needeleſſe in blazing to expreſſe the colour of the tallents or leſſantes, becauſe they be euer of gold: therefore it ſhall be ſaide of him which beareth this coate, Portat vnum ſignum capitale de rubio in campo albo borduratum cum rubio talentatium, Il port d'argent vn cheueron de gules bordure de gules talentee, in Engliſh, Hee beareth ſiluer a cheueron of gules bordered with gules talented.
                  
                  
                     Of armes bordered hauing two cheuerons.
                     And oftentimes we finde in armes, that bordures are borne powdered in diuerſe

manners, ſometimes with mullets, ſometimes with croſſets, otherwhiles with beſants, and diuers other changes.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And then it is called a border powdered with that which is in the border, and theſe ſignes, as

mullets, roſes, and other are not comprehēded within any number in blazing exceeding the number of nine. And thus it ſhall be ſaid of him which beareth theſe armes, Portat ſcutum de Rubio cum duobus ſignis capitalibus de Albo & vna bordura pulueriſata cum talentis: Il port de gules deux cheuerons d'argent & vn bordure de gules powdree talentee, hee beareth Gules two cheuerons of ſiluer and a border powdered with Beſants.
                  
                  
                     Of a border checkered.
                     We haue yet another bordure in armes which is called a border checkered: and ſo called, becauſe it is checkerwiſe in two colours, as here appeares in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhall bee

ſaide of him which beares theſe armes in this maner: Portat vnam crucem rubinam planam in campo argenteo cum vna bordura ſcaccata de nigro et argento: Il port d'argent vn crois plain de gules borduree checkee du ſable & d'argent, he beareth ſiluer, a plaine croſſe of gules, a border checkie with ſiluer and ſable.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of borders gobonated.
                     Moreouer and beſides the armes which I haue ſpoken of with borders, there is a border gobonated as in this ſcutchion next following: and it is called gobinated for it is made of two colours in quadrats or quadrately of blacke and white, and whoſoeuer beareth theſe armes, ſhall be ſaid to beare thus: Portat de argento et duas bendas de nigro cum vna bordura de albo et nigro gobinata: Il port d'argent: deux bendees de ſable, & vn bordure de ſable & d'argent: he beareth ſiluer, two bendes of ſable

with a bordure gobinated of ſiluer and ſable:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and this ſame bordure bare that noble prince the Duke of Gloceſter, brother to that famous warriour, King Henry the fifth, the which royall Duke bare in his coate the whole armes of France and England quarterly with a bordure gobinated of ſiluer & ſable, as in this ſcutchion ſet down.
                  
                  
                     Of bordures inuecked.
                     There bee yet Bordures in armes of two coulours inuecked as heere in this ſcutchion appeareth, and the reaſon why it is tearmed inuecked: I haue ſhewed you in other armes before: then of him which beareth theſe armes it ſhall

bee ſaide thus:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
                        Portat arma

quarterata de rubee et auro, cum vna bordura de argento et nigro ſimul inuectis. Il port quartilee de gules et d'or oueſque vn bordure verre d'argent et du ſable: He doth beare quarterly gules and golde with a bordere inuecked of ſiluer and ſable.
                     But of theſe bordures there hath riſen ſome doubt amongeſt ſuch as haue pretended themſelues to be skilfull in Herauldrie,

as in the armes of the Earle of March, as heere in this ſcutchion:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         there hath growen a queſtion, whether this ſhoulde be called a border or not: but ſome haue affirmed, that Roger Mortimer Earle of March when as hee liued bare Armes in this manner: Portauit arma palata, barrata, et contraconata de aſureo et auro, cum vno ſimplici ſcuto de argento, in French, Il port pale barree girone d'azure et d'or et vn eſcu ſimple d'argent, in Engliſh, He doth beare pale barrie countercoined of azure and golde with a ſimple ſheelde of ſiluer.
                     
                        And this opinion before rehearſed in the blazing hath pleaſed many, the which in no maner of wiſe can be true, for if theſe armes (as it is ſayde before) were countercoined, then the loweſt corner or coine of the Armes, that is, the loweſt point of the ſheelde ſhoulde not be of one colour as it is of azure.
                     But beſides theſe proofes before rehearſed, it is certaine, that in all armes countercoyned, all the coines of what colour ſoeuer they be, meete together by their points in the middeſt of the ſheelde, as in the next ſcutchion it ſhall be ſhewed: Therefore (in mine opinion) except greater aucthoritie can be ſhewed to the contrary: but they ſhall thus be blazed, Portauit arma barrata, et caput ſcuti palatum et angilatum de aſurio et auro, cum ſcuto ſimplici de argento, Il port barree vn cheiff palee cunectee d'azure et d'or et vn eſtu ſimple d'argent: in Engliſh, Hee beareth barrie and a chieffe paly angulated of azure and gold with a ſimple ſheelde of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of armes countercoined.
                     There be diuers families

which beare Armes countercoined, as heere in this ſcutchion appeareth,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and theſe armes be called countercoined, becauſe the coins meete all together in one point in the middeſt of the ſheelde, for euery border

triangular is properly more of length, then of bredth wherefore the opinion of ſuch as ſaid that the armes before ſpoken of belonging to the Earle of March, were palie barry, and counter-coyned are to be reprooued, becauſe the colours accord not, as of neceſſity they ſhuld accord, if the aforeſaid opinion were true. Therefore it ſhall be ſaid thus of him which beareth theſe armes: Portat arma contraconata de aſureo et albo: Il port Girone d'azure & argent▪ he beareth countercoynd of azure and ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of armes pyled.
                     For as much as we haue ſpoken of armes in which the colours meete togither in the midſt of the ſhield now it followeth of certain

armes in which three pyles meete togither in one point,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         as in this ſcutchion which ſhall be thus blazed: portat tres pilas nigras, in campo aureo: Il port d'or trois piles de ſable, hee beareth golde three pyles of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of balles in armes.
                     Neuertheleſſe you muſt note the difference in the blaſing of theſe armes before, and thoſe that come after, when you blaſe them in the latine tongue, for ſometimes this woorde pila in latine is taken for a peece of timber to be put vnder the pillor of a bridge as in the ſcutchion before, and ſometimes this word pila is taken for a ball ſuch

as wee plaie with, then it is called pila manualis, as in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         otherwhiles a foote ball which is in latin pila pedalis, therefore it ſhal bee ſaid of him which beareth theſe armes in latin, Portat tres pilas argenteas in campo reubio, Il port de gules trois peletees d'argent: hee beareth gules three balles of ſiluer.
                     And you muſt note this, that ſuch balles haue all coulours, but the coulour of golde, for if they bee of golde, you ſhall terme them beſants.
                  
                  
                     Of tortels in armes.
                     There be alſo tortelles that be little cakes which

be greater than balles, as

in this ſcutchion appeareth,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which tortelles be euer of a greater compaſſe than the balles in the Armes before ſet downe: and hee which beareth theſe tortels ſhal be ſaid to beare this, in latine, Portat tres tortellas rubias in campo aureo, Il port d'or et trois torteulx de gules, in Engliſh, Hee heareth golde three tortelles of gules. And you muſt note this, that Balles, Beſants, and Tortelles in Armes are alwayes whole round figures, and not perforated.
                  
                  
                     Of Fountaines and Welles borne in armes.
                     There be certaine other round figures borne in armes, of white mixed ſometime with azure, ſometime with ſable vndated, or after the manner of waues, which markes or

figures be called fountaines or welles: and therefore cary the colour of that which they repreſent, like water troubled with the winde:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And of him which beareth theſe armes thus it ſhall be ſaide, Portat tres fontes in

campo viridi, Il port di vert et trois fountains: he beareth vert three fountaines.
                  
                  
                     Of Rings borne in Armes.
                     Now after theſe round figures aboue rehearſed, there be other which bee perforated as rings or anlets, as is ſhewed vnto you

in this ſcutchion:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And of him which beareth theſe armes, it ſhal be ſaide thus: Portat tres anulos aures in campo nigro: in French, Il port du ſable et trois anulettes d'or, in Engliſh, He beareth ſable and three rings of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of Tracts in Armes.
                     Hauing ſpoken before of bordures in armes, now it followeth to intreate of Tracts or lines: and firſt of a ſimple tract, as in this

ſcutchion heere ſet downe,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it is called a tract or line becauſe it drowneth not the colour of the ſheeld, but that the ſame appeareth as well within the charge as without, as it were repreſenting the bordure of a

ſheelde, Portat vnum tractum ſimplicem planam auream in campo aſurio, in French, Il port d'azure vn tracee plein d'or, He beareth azure a plaine tract of gold.
                  
                  
                     Of a tract ingrailed on both ſides.
                     A tract or line is ſometimes engrailed on both ſides, as heere in this figure

appeareth,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhall bee ſaide of him which beareth theſe Armes in this wiſe: Portat vnum tractum ex vtraque parte ingradatum de auro in campo rubeo, in French, il port de gules vn tracee engraile de cheſtim coſte d'or, in Engliſh, Hee doth beare gules with a tract ingrailed on both ſides of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of a tract double and flouriſhed.
                     This tract is ſometimes borne double and flouriſhed, as in the armes of the

King of Scotland, and as heere in this ſcutchion appeareth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which armes bee blazed in this manner, in Latine, Portat duplicem tractatum cum floribus gladioli contrapoſitis vno leone rapaci de reubio in campo aureo, in the

French, Il port d'or vn double tracee flouretee countree et vn lion rampant de gules, in Engliſh, He beareth a double trace flouriſhed contrary, and a lion ramping of gules.
                  
                  
                     Of Tracts triplatite and quadriplatite.
                     Alſo you ſhal finde more diuerſitie of theſe tracts before rehearſed, for there are ſome families which beare theſe tracts triplatite,

as in this figure:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and of him which beareth this coate in this ſort you ſhall ſay thus: Portat tractum tripl
                              •
                           tatum de albo in campo aureo, in french, il port d'or vn tracee triplee d'argent, He beareth gold a trace triplatite of ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a tract ſimple of two colours inuecked.
                     There bee other families which beare a tract ſimple with two colours inuecked, as heere I haue ſet downe in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and the poſſeſſour thereof ſhall be ſaid to beare

in this wiſe: Portat vnum tractum ſimplicem de coloribus aſureo & argenteo inuectis in ſcuto aureo: in French, Il port d'or vn trace ſimple verre d'azure et d'argent, in Engliſh, Hee beareth gold a tract ſimple inuecked of azure and ſiluer.
                  
                  
                     Of fiſures or ſtaues.
                     Hauing ſpoken of Bendes and their differences, now wee will ſpeake of fiſures or ſtaues: the which doe euer beginne at the left corner of the ſheelde beneath, contrary to bendes,

which beginne at the right and are drawen to the left:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And you ſhall vnderſtand, that theſe fiſures bee borne as many and ſundry wayes, as bendes be: There be fiſures plaine, engrailed, inuecked, and fuſillated, as I

haue ſaide before in the place of Bendes: And theſe ſtaues Baſtardes are woont to beare, or ſhould beare them: but moſt commonly wee do call it a fiſure, becauſe that it doeth cleaue the Armes in two parts, ſignifying thereby, that the baſtard is diuided from the inheritaunce of his father. And ſuch a Baſtarde is forbidden for to beare the whole Armes of his father, becauſe of the reuerence of blood: Therefore if hee will beare them, hee muſt beare them with this difference, thereby to ſhew his baſtardie, from the naturall and lawefull heire of his father: and when you haue any ſuch fiſure in Armes ingrailed, inuecked, or fuſillated, you ſhall blaze the ſame as is already taught you in the Chapiter of Bendes going before. And the baſtard the which beareth theſe Armes ſhall be ſaide to beare them in this manner: in Latine, Portat vnam fiſuram ſiue bacculum aureum in campo aſurio, in French, Il port d'azure vn fees d'or, in Engliſh, He beareth azure a fiſure or ſtaffe of golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Armes borne with a head or a chiefe.
                     And you muſt knowe, that it is called a head or chiefe in Armes, when as the higheſt part of the ſheelde is of one colour or diuerſe, and that it doe not extend vnto the middeſt of the ſheelde, as it is ſhewed you in this ſcutchion.
 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
And this chiefe is often borne in armes, by reaſon that oftentimes men haue landes deſcended vnto them by their mothers, and that hee as heire to her may beare the Armes belonging to his mother, the which oftentimes they doe carrie in this ſort: But if hee be a man well deſcended, and hath inheritance by his father, then may he beare his fathers coate in ſuch a chiefe, and his mothers in the lower part of the ſhielde. And in this manner it ſhall be ſaide of him which beareth this coate, Portat vnum ſignum capitale de nigro in campo aureo cum vno capite rubio et tribus talentis in eodem, in French, Il port d'or vn cheueron de ſable et vn cheef de gules et trois beſantes in le meſmes: in Engliſh, hee beareth golde a cheueron of ſable with a cheefe of gules and two beſants therein.
                     And there are ſome noble families which beare

in a ſheelde of golde (as is ſaide before) a cheueron of ſable, or ſome other colour, and three red roſes or white, or ſome other deuiſes or markes, as croſſes, creſſents, birdes, flowers, in a cheefe ſome of ſable ſome of other colour with mullets or ſuch like, and there ſhall euery one be blazed in his order, as the field and colours require, as if ſome man happely ſhal beare thus: he beareth ſable, a cheueron of golde, three roſes of gules in a cheefe of azure: or three mullets of vert perforated, and thus of all other differences.
                  
                  
                     Of armes paly with a quarter or canton of another colour.
                     Now there be ſome families which doe beare in their armes one quarter or canton of an other differing from the colour or colours of the ſheelde, as heere you may perceiue in this ſcutchion:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which, whoſoeuer beareth ſhall bee ſaide to beare in this manner: in Latine, Portat

arma palata de aſureo et auro cum vna quartera ermetica, in French, Il port palee d'azure et d'or vn quater d'ermine, in Engliſh, He beareth paly azure and golde with one quarter ermine.
                     
                        And you muſt euer be reſpectiue to the colour of that pale which ſhould aſcend to the right corner of the ſheelde, if that quarter were not there, and in that colour you muſt euer beginne to blaze thoſe Armes as if that canton were not.
                  
                  
                     Of Armes checkered.
                     Now to ſpeake of armes checkered, as in this ſcutchion I ſhew you, and they be termed checkes when they be made of two

colours in the manner of a checke boorde,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and theſe armes are borne with many differences, with cheefe, quarters, cheuerons, and bendes, as ſhall be ſhewed you heereafter, but firſt theſe armes are blazed thus, in Latine, Portat arma ſcakata de aſurio et auro, in french Il port skakke d'azure et d'or, in Engliſh, he beareth checke of azure and golde.
                  
                  
                     Or cheuerons borne in Armes.
                     Nowe to ſpeake of cheuerons borne in Armes, which in Latine are called, Signa capitalia vel ligna,
                        
and indeede they be a couple of ſparres ioyned together, as in this ſcutchion

heere ſet downe you may perceiue,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which ſignes, as it ſhould ſeeme were firſt borne of Carpenters or Architects, and the reaſon is, becauſe a houſe is neuer made perfect vntill that the ſparres be laied: and ſometimes two be borne, ſometimes three, and ſometimes foure, as it is knowen: and of him which beareth theſe Armes it ſhall bee ſaide thus, in Latine: Portat de rubio et dua ſigna capitalia de auro cum tribus talentis, in the French, Il port de gules et deux cheurons d'or et trois talentes: in Engliſh, he beareth gules two cheuerons of golde with three beſants.
                  
                  
                     Of a cheueron engrailed.
                     Alſo this cheueron is

ſometimes borne ingrailed, as heere in this ſcutchion is ſet downe:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which then ſhal thus be blazed, in Latine, Portat vnum ſignum capitale ingradatum de albo in campo aſurio, in French, Il port d'azure vn cheueron d'argent engraylee, in Engliſh, Hee beareth azure a cheueron of ſiluer engrayled.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of cheuerons tranſmuted.
                     Moreouer in theſe markes or ſignes of cheuerons there be found borne tranſmuted and of diuerſe colours, as in this ſcutchion

which here I ſet downe it appeareth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and the cheuerons borne in this ſort ſhall thus be blazed, in Latine, Portat arma quarterata de nigro et argento cum vno ſigno capitali de dictis coloribus tranſmutatis, Il port quartilee de ſable et d'argent vn cheuron changee loin de laltre: in Engliſh, Hee beareth quarterly fable and ſiluer with a cheueron of the ſaide colours tranſmuted.
                  
                  
                     Of cheuerons tranſmuted or counterchanged the long way.
                     There be alſo cheuerons borne in Armes tranſmuted after the long way, as it may moſt plainely appeare in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        &

ſhall be blazed thus: in latin, Portat arma partita ſecundum longum de coloribus aureo et rubeo cum vno ſigno cvpitali de dictis coloribus tranſmutatis, in French, Il port partee du loin d'or et de gules vn cheueron changee lun de laultre, in Engliſh, Hee beareth

party after the long way two colours gold and gules with a cheuron of the ſaid colors tranſmuted.
                     Now to ſpeake of this coate which heere in this ſcutchion I ſet downe,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         I

haue knowen ſome doubt ariſe about the ſame among ſuch as pretended to haue great skill in armorie, ſome holding one opinion, ſome an other about blazing of the ſame: neuertheleſſe, I do not thinke it a thing wherof there ſhoulde growe ſo great a queſtion: and thus I blaze this coate, in Latine, Portat duas partes capit
                              •
                           s ſcuti de reubio & caeteram partem de albo admodum ſigni capitalis et tres roſas de coloribus tranſmutatis, in French, Il port les deux partees du cheif de gules et le troiſeme d'argent partees in maniere de cheuron et trois roſes l'un de laltre, in Engliſh, Hee beareth two partes of the head of the ſheeld gules, and the third part ſiluer in the manner of a cheueron, and three roſes of the ſame colours tranſmuted.
                  
                  
                     Of fuſils borne in armes.
                     There hath ſundry noble families borne fuſils in their armes: amongſt the number of which my L of Gloceſter that noble prince vncle to king Henry the ſixt was one, who bare in his armes three fuſils of gules in the maner of a bar in a field of ſiluer: which armes this Duke bare, by reaſon of certaine landes

belonging to the mount:
 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
And here in this ſame ſcutchion I haue ſet downe the like coate in forme althogh not in their colours: the which ſhall be blazed after this manner, in Latine: Portat de reubio et tres fuſillos de argento, in the Frenche, Il port de gules et trois fuſills d'argent, in Engliſh, Hee doeth beare gules three fuſilles of ſiluer: and otherwhiles theſe three or foure fuſilles be borne in maner of a pale.
                     And this is to be noted, that if theſe fuſilles doe exceede the number of nine, you ſhal ſay euermore, the Armes bee powdered with fuſilles: and ſo generally if any ſuch markes or ſignes be borne aboue the number of nine, you ſhal ſay, the coate is powdered with the ſame.
                  
                  
                     Of one fuſill borne in Armes.
                     Sometimes one fuſill is

borne in Armes, as heere in this figure it appeereth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         yet haue I heard ſome Herauldes doubtfull thereof: Neuertheleſſe I knowe the armory is good, and ſuch a coate is truely thus blazed: in Latine, Portat de rubio cum vno fuſillo de auro, in French,

Il port de gules vn fuſill d'or, in Engliſh, he beareth gules a fuſil golde.
                  
                  
                     Of a fuſill of diuerſe colours.
                     Alſo theſe fuſilles are ſometimes borne of diuers colours, as here in the ſcutchion ſet downe appeareth:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         but yet it is more doubtfull how theſe Armes ſhoulde bee blazed than the other: but you ſhall blaze them thus, in Latine,

Portat arma partita ex tranſuerſo de albo et nigro cum vno fuſillo ex eiſdem coloribus tranſmutatis, in French, Il port partie de trauers d'argent et ſable et vn fuſil de meſmes colours lun de laultre: in Engliſh, He beareth armes parted barry of ſiluer and ſable with a fuſill of the very ſame colours tranſmuted.
                  
                  
                     Of fuſilles in the manner of a bend.
                     And you ſhall finde, that ſuch fuſilles are often times borne in the manner of a bend, as you ſhall

perceiue in this ſcutchion:
 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
which armes are thus to be blazed, in Latine, Portat vnam bendam fuſillatam de auro in campo rubio, in French, Il port de gules vn bend fuſill d'or: in Engliſh, Hee beareth gules a bend fuſilled of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of a barre fuſilled.
                     Alſo you ſhall finde in armes in the manner of a barre fuſilled, as in this ſcutchion it doth appeare: 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and it ſhall be ſaide of him

which beareth ſuch Armes, in Latine, Portat de reubio cum vna Barra fuſillata de argento, in French, Il port de gules vne barre fuſillee d'argent: in Engliſh, He beareth gules a barre fuſilled of ſiluer.
                     Some haue held opinion that ſuch Armes began of Weauers, becauſe this fuſill or ſpindle is proper to their trade.
                  
                  
                     
                     The difference betwixt fuſils, maſcules and lozenges.
                     And you muſt vnderſtand, that the differences betwixt fuſilles and maſcules are theſe: firſt the fuſils be euermore longer and ſmaller than maſcules, the maſcules be euer broader, and not ſo long as the fuſilles be, as you may

perceiue by the maſcules in this ſcuchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         which I blaſe in this manner, in Latine, Portat de reubio et ſex maſculas de auro, in French, Il port de gules et ſex maſcules d'or, in Engliſh, Hee beareth gules ſixe maſcules of golde, and very often you ſhall finde theſe maſcules perforated.
                     Alſo there are Armes borne maſculet, as in this figure following is ſhewed you: and you ſhall vnderſtand that thoſe armes be called maſculet, in the which the aforeſaide Maſcules beginne moſt plenteouſly in the right angle of the ſhield, and are ended toward the left part, which

indeed are paled, and are diuided into three pales, if they be rightly done: 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and of him that beares theſe armes ſhalbe ſaid, Portat arma maſculata de argento et aſurio, Il port d'argent et d'azure maſculee: he beares ſiluer and azure maſculet.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of lozenges, and how they be made.
                     Now to knowe the true and perfite difference betweene Maſcules and Lozenges, you muſt take this for a generall information and inſtruction, that the lozenge euermore ſtandeth vpright, ſo that one of his pointes is euer directly towardes the toppe of the ſheelde, and his other point towardes the bottome or loweſt part of the ſame, and that both the pointes of the ſides of the lozenge ſtand directly towardes the ſides of the ſheelde: and ſtanding rightly in the ſheelde they doe ſtand in the fourme and manner of bends, as you

moſt plainely perceiue in this ſcutchion which here I haue ſet downe:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And furthermore you muſt obſerue, that neither fuſilles nor lozenges be euer found perforated.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a Saltary borne in Armes.
                     There is alſo a ſigne or marke borne in Armes which is called a Saltarie, and it is made in the maner of Saint Andrewes Croſſe, as moſt plainely it appeareth in this ſcutchion

here ſet downe.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And this Saltarie was a thing vſed in olde times in parkes, which was of great compaſſe and largeneſſe to take Deere or wilde beaſts in, which being once forced into the ſame, they coulde not get out againe. Wherefore in olde times theſe markes were giuen vnto rich couetous men or great farmours, that in what manner ſoeuer they came by their wealth, could neuer bee forced to part from the ſame: Which coate is to be blazed in this wiſe, in Latine, Portat de aſureo et vnum ſaltatorium de auro, in French, Il port d'azure vn ſaltiere d'or, in Engliſh, Hee beareth azure a ſaltarie of golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of a ſautory engrailed.
                     Now you muſt vnderſtand that theſe ſautories be otherwhiles ingrailed, as

heere in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and then they be caled ſauteries ingrailed: which armes are euer blazed: portat vnum ſaltatorium ingradatum de auro in campo aſurio, in French, Il port d'azure vn ſaltiere d'or engrailee: He beares azure a ſaltary of gold ingrailed.
                     Sometimes there are many ſauteries engrailed in one ſheelde, ſometimes two, otherwhiles three, as in this ſcutchion appeareth,
 
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        
and of him that beares theſe Armes thus it ſhall be ſaide: Portat vnam barram planam et tria ſaltatoria ingradata de auro in campo rubio, in French, Il port de gules vn barre plein et trois ſaltiers engrailees d'or: in French he beareth gules, one barre plaine, and three ſauteries engrailed of golde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of Crownes in armes in maner of a pale.
                     And it is diligently to be noted, that ſpeaking of ſuch crownes in Armes, we muſt euer haue a regard howe they bee borne:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         for

ſometimes they be borne in the manner of a pale, as you may ſee in this ſcutchion which is thus blazed, in latine, Portat tres coronas de auro palatas in campo aſurio, in French, Il port d'azure trois corones palees, in Engliſh, hee doth beare azure three crownes of gold paled.
                  
                  
                     Of crownes borne barred.
                     Theſe three crownes be

ſometimes borne barred, as appeereth in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and you ſhall blaze it thus: Portat tres coronas aureas in campo aſureo, in French, Il port d'azure e trois corones barres d'or: in Engliſh, he beares azure three crownes of gold barred.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of three Crownes borne in the corners of the ſhielde.
                     Now to ſpeake of theſe three Crownes borne in the corners of the ſheelde, as in the ſcutchion here ſet downe you muſt note, that this is the moſt worthy fourme and manner of

bearing ſuch Armes, and the moſt auncient:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         therefore you ſhall ſay of him that beareth theſe crownes in this wiſe, in Latine, Portat de aſureo tres coronas aureas, in French, Il port d'azure trois corones d'or, in Engliſh, Hee beareth azure three crownes of gold.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Of Fiſhes borne in Armes.
                  NOw to ſpeake of fiſhes borne in Armes, you muſt vnderſtand, that

in times paſt ther was one Peter de Rupibus Biſh. of Wincheſter, which did beare in his Armes three roches after his own name:  
                        blazon or coat of arms
                      In which armes it is doubted whether it be enough to ſay in blazing of them, that hee bare three fiſhes alone, as in this ſcutchion: which (in mine opinion) I thinke not, for the rule going before: but it ſhall be ſaide thus of the Armes of the ſaide Peter de Rupibus, in Latine, Portauit tres piſces argenteos natantes in campo nigro, in French, Il port de ſable et trois roches natantes d'argent: in Engliſh, Hee beareth ſable three roches of ſiluer ſwimming.
                  And nowe to ſpeake of the Armes of Galfride Lucie, which here appeareth in the ſcutchion, and

carrieth three pikes or Lucies,
 
                        blazon or coat of arms
                     
it ſhal be ſaide thus, in Latine, portauit tres lucios aureos in campo reubio, Il port de gules et trois luces d'or: in Engliſh, he beareth gules three lucies of gold, which blazing is ſufficient without any more adoe, becauſe theſe fiſhes are borne in the moſt worthy maner.
                  And in like maner to blaze the armes of this gentleman, which beareth two barbels turning their backes together, as here appeareth

in this ſcutchion:  
                        blazon or coat of arms
                     
                     Portat duos barbellos aureos adinuicem terga vertentes, in ſcuto azorio pulueriſato cum crucibus cruciatis figitiuis de auro, Il port d'azure powdree des crois croiceles fiches e deux barbeulx dors an dors d'or, in Engliſh, He beares azure poudered with croſſes croſ
                        •
                     ets fixed, and two barbels of gold backe to backe.
                  
                     Of Frets borne in armes.
                     A certaine noble man, the lord Awdeley of England bare in his armes a frect, which frects in like maner

are borne of diuers gentlemen of great houſes in all colours, as in red, in blacke, in golde, otherwhiles ſingle, otherwhiles double, and ſometimes triple, and ſometimes ouer

all the ſheeld:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and you ſhall find great differēce betwixt armes bended, & theſe frets wherefore it is to be noted, that in bended armes the colours equally are diuided: but in theſe frets the field euer abides whol, as in theſe armes of the L. Awdley: Portat arma frectata de auro in campo reubeo, in French, Il port de gules vn frect d'or, He beareth gules a frect of golde.
                  
                  
                     Of beaſts ſalient or ramping borne in Armes.
                     Diuerſe families beare beaſts ramping or ſalient in their armes, of which as yet I haue made no mention:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         Therefore to

ſpeake of a Lion or other beaſt borne in ſuch manner as heere in this ſcutchion is ſhewed, I will thus blaze this coate, in Latine, Portat de reubio vnum leonem de argento, in french, Il port de gules vn lion ſalient d'argent: hee beareth a lion ramping of ſiluer: and hee is properly

caled a lion rampant or ramping, foraſmuch as his right foot aſcendes to the right corner of the ſhield: and this rule is obſerued in all beaſts, hauing foure feet, as lions, leopards, beares, dogges, and ſuch like.
                  
                  
                     Of Barres and Labelles borne in Armes.
                     Firſt note wel the armes

of a father as in this ſcutchion,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and then you ſhall ſee the difference as it ſhall bee borne by his children: for wee may ſee many beare Labelles in their Armes, as you ſhall perceiue in the Coates nexte following: And you ſhall knowe, that ſuch Labelles are not properly markes or ſignes in Armes, but differences in thoſe markes or ſignes, as when a man hath diuers

ſonnes, the eldeſt ſonne ſhall beare the whole armes of his father with ſome little creſcent in the ſame,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                        ſignifying thereby, that he is ſtill in hope of augmenting his eſtate▪ or hee may carry the coate with ſome other little difference, as a croſſe croſlet, a mullet, or the like.
                     
                        The ſecond brother ſhal

beare the Armes of his father,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         with theſe three labelles to the difference, to ſignifie thereby, that hee is the third which beareth thoſe Armes.
                     Alſo the third brother in like manner ſhall beare iiij. labels, in token he is the fourth that beares thoſe armes,  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         of whom the father

is the firſt, the heire the ſecond, the ſecond brother is the third, and ſo the third brother is the fourth which beareth theſe armes: and for this cauſe the third brother ſhall beare foure labelles, as appeereth in this ſcutchion: and ſo if there be more brothers, you ſhall increaſe your labelles after the forme before ſhewed you.
                     And the ſons of thoſe

ſame brothers ſhal beare the ſame labels:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and in caſe that the ſecond brother which beareth three labels haue two ſonnes, the elder ſonne of thoſe two which is heire vnto his father ſhall beare the

whole armes of his father, with ſo many labelles as his father did, with a little

difference, as heere appeareth in this ſcutchion:  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         and the ſecond brother ſhall beare the whole Armes of his father, with the ſame labels his brother bare, and no more, with a border, as here in this figure next enſuing ſhall be ſhewed vnto you, and as it is ſpoken of before in the chapter of Borders. And if there be a third brother, then he ſhall beare his fathers armes with the ſame labelles, and a border of an other colour

for a difference, as in this ſcutchion which here I ſhewe vnto you.  
                           blazon or coat of arms
                         And the children of thoſe men ſhall beare their differences, not in their fathers armes, but in borders and diuiſions diuers.
                     And like as the children of the ſecond brother, bearing three labels, haue their differences by their ſignes and borders, ſo the children of the third brother, bearing foure labels, beare the ſame armes their father did, and ſo many labelles, and they haue alſo their differences by their ſignes and borders, as before is rehearſed, and diuers other, as a lion ramping, one part blacke, and another part red.
                     
                        For, of all the markes and ſignes which be found in Armes, as flowers, leaues, and other deuiſes, it were too long and tedious to ſpeake of, they be ſo innumerable: but for ſuch rules as generally holde in Armourie, obſeruing theſe which here I haue ſet downe, I doubt not but you ſhall finde them ſufficient to blaze the hardeſt coate. Therefore take you heede to theſe rules: and although they touch not euerie particular in Armourie, yet ſhall you finde them to profite much, and ſhew you a neare way to ſome perfection in this knowledge.
                     And nowe laſtly I wil proceede to this queſtion, that is, Whether the Armes by the graunt of a Prince, or other great Lorde be of more dignitie, than thoſe Armes which a man taketh by his owne aucthoritie, when it is lawfull for him to take him Armes at his pleaſure. By which queſtion you ſhal well knowe that wee haue Armes foure manner of wayes.
                     The firſt of the which is the Armes which wee haue by deſcent from our fathers or mothers, or our predeceſſours: the which manner of bearing of Armes is moſt vſuall, and moſt famous, vppon the which I intend not to ſtand long, being ſo wel approoued.
                     
                        The ſecond manner wee haue Armes by, is by our merites, as plainely appeareth by the addition of the Armes of France to the Armes of England, wonne by that victorious prince Edward the eldeſt ſonne of King Edward the third then king of England, after the taking of King Iohn of Fraunce in the battaile of Poicters, which Armes are rightly and lawfully borne▪ and in the ſame manner may a priuate ſouldier take ſome great Lorde in battaile, the ſame ſouldier may carry the Armes of his priſoner▪ and his heire ſhall in his fathers right carrie the ſame Armes.
                     The third manner is, when wee haue Armes by the grant of a Prince or ſome other great Lord: and it is to bee vnderſtoode, that theſe Armes which wee haue by the grant of the Prince receiue no queſtion why a man doeth beare ſuch a coate, for the Prince will not that ſuch a queſtion be asked, whie hee gaue to any man ſuch Armes? Becauſe whatſoeuer pleaſeth the Prince, hath the ſtrength of the lawe, ſo it be not to ouerthrowe the lawe: except any man bare thoſe Armes before, becauſe that that which is a mans owne by a right title, may not bee taken from him, nor may the Prince doe it without doing wrong.
                     The fourth manner is, when wee beare Armes which we take by our owne proper authoritie, as we ſee in theſe daies, how many men by their grace,

labour, fauour, or deſeruing, are made gentlemen, ſome by their wiſedome, ſome by valour, ſome by their ſtrength, ſome by arte, ſome by vertue: and of theſe men, many by their owne aucthoritie haue taken Armes to be borne by them and their heires, whoſe names I thinke it needeleſſe to repeate: neuertheleſſe I thinke thoſe Armes ſo taken may bee lawfully borne: but yet they are not of ſo great dignitie and authoritie as thoſe Armes which be granted by the authoritie of a Prince or great Lord. And it is the opinion of many, that a Herald of Armes may giue Armes: But I ſay, if any Armes be giuen by a Herauld, that thoſe Armes be of no more authoritie than thoſe Armes taken by a mans owne authoritie.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   