
      
         
            
            
            Workes of Armorie, deuyded into three bookes, entituled, the Concordes of Armorie, the Armorie of Honor, and of Coates and Creastes, collected and gathered by Iohn Bossewell Gentleman.
            In aedibus Richardi Totelli.
            Anno domini. 1572.
            Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum
         
         
            
            
            To the right honorable and his singuler good lorde, Sir William Cecil Baron of Burghleigh, Knight of the moste noble order of the Garter, Lorde highe Treasorer of Englande, master of the courtes of wardes and Liueries, Chauncellour of the Uniuersitie of Cambridge, and one of the Queenes Maiesties priuie Counsaile, Iohn Bossewel wisheth long healthe with encrease of honor.
            
               RIght honorable, and my singuler good Lorde, I haue marueled vpon occasion, of late, that amonge the numbers of bookes, in their seueral kyndes, not onely by their auctors diligently deuised, but surely by the printers of these dais, for the most part procured, and to theire exceeding great charges, faythfullye & exactlye published: I finde so fewe, that I coulde almoste haue saide none, to haue written in our natiue tongue, of the science and skill of Armory. Truely in my oppinion, a very fruitefull necessary, and honorable argument, but might I deeme, or were it rashnesse, as Tullye in his Tusculans, in the comparison betweene the Romains & Grecians, which might excede other, or be more auncient in knowledge, sayth of such, as of thē lay neglecte, Honos alit artes omnes
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   incendunt' ad studia gloria, Surely not vnlike, but as in al other things, so in science, what auayleth seruice, where soueraigntie is neglected, what actiuitie where men lie downe to sleepe, with sloth: what loue, what frendship, where no man buildes on fayth or credyt, so takè honor from lawe, rewarde from Phificke, admiration from Mathematicalls, humilitie and zeale, from heauenly science, and who sets his sonne to schoole for them: no doubt Tully saide ful wisely, keepe backe rewarde, and learning adew. Yet somme there are, that feede not altogether of this humor, and they rake together the fewe sparcles of knowledge hyd, and almoste dead in the ashes of obliuion, and eyther them selfes builde a fyer

therof, or geeue occasion to others, such one was of late specially in this kind of Herehaultry, a very fruteful and worthy writer master Gerard Leigh, and suche do I offer my self at this presēt meaning to adde somewhat farther, or geeue occasion to others, not drawen by hope of reward, which rather would haue kept me back, but honor of the science, loue of my coūtrey, and especially my bounden and duitifull estimacion of your honorable fauor: wherunto as I do with reuerence offer and dedicate thys simple thing (scarce worthe the reading in respect of the handeling, yet for the substāce, not to be altogether neglected) so I most humbly beseech your honor to accept the same, and bee Patron thereof: wherby you shal not onely staye, and rere vp this declining knowledge, to your great renowme, but bind me for euer, by al maner of duities, and specially to pray for your honorable estate, long to continue in fauor with God, credyt with youre soueraigne, honour wyth your countrie, fidelitye wyth your Peeres, and loue towardes Armorye.
         
         
            
            Cilenus censure of the aucthor, in his high court of Herehaultry.
            
               A Court ther stāds twixt heauē & erth, al gorgeous to behold
            of royal state, in second spheare, a hugie building olde,
            Portcolized & bard with bolts, of gold resplendant bright,
            of glistering gēmes, through Pallas power, bedazeling eche
            yt no mā may com in except he haue ye perfit skil, (mās sight
            of Herehauts art, and climbed hath, Parnassus sacred hill.
            Within this stately court, like number roomes are founde,
            like number flags, like number armes, as realmes vpon ye ground.
            About ye walls more wōderous work, then framd by mortal hād,
            eche Herehauts liuely counterfet, in seemely sort doth stand.
            within these seuerd romes, through wals, ibuilt of Christal cleare
            Eche thing that longs to Herehauts art, doth perfectly appeare.
            There leger bookes, of auncient gestes, ywrit by Pallas hand,
            there campinges, mornings, musterings, there pedegrees do stand.
            There cūbats fierce, there sūmōs bold, there triūphs passing braue
            of trowning kings, of dubbing knights, the orders ther they haue.
            Both single coates, and martialed of eche renowmed wight,
            with visitacions, which allottes to ech desert his right.
            Reuersed coates (not hidden there) bewray disloyall deedes,
            Caparisons ther fixed hang, and bardings strong of steedes.
            With armors fully furnished, and gauntlets vnredemd,
            suche vncouth sights, eche office holdes, as cannot be estemde.
            At vpper ende of al this court, as seuerd from the rest.
            with flaunting Penon standes a house, as famous as the best.
            Where portraied are ye English armes, frō which depēdeth braue.
            a golden garter in the whiche, a golden George they haue.
            Unto this place assembled was, eche wight within this hall,
            and did admire a golden booke, whiche fell amongst them all.
            Blown vp by blast of flying fame, which tooke her tromp in hand,
            of burnisht golde, whereto she plyde, her lips as she dyd stand
            in Brutus realme, whereon when they a litle space had pride,
            abashed at the hidden skill, which in that woorke they spide
            They stāpt, they starde, they fret, they fumde, & al in one they ioīd
            vpon the aucthor to complaine, because he had purloind
            Their secresies: when sodainly from highest regall throne
            was drawne a trauerse ritche, wherwith they whusted euery one.
            Within this, farre more stately court, are rich acheuemēts braue
            and none but Gods, or fellow mates to gods as there may haue
            there armes
                  •
               there both Alcides spoiles & Iason
                     •
                  
                fleese remaynde,
            with Gorgons hedd and Perseus prayse, & whoe so earst had gaynd
            A noble name eternizd was, for there did splendant shine
            the auncient Pegasus, whiche earst Minerua dame diuine
            
               To inner Temples martyall gaue, to whose redoubted grace,
            in honor Ioue, in prowes Mars, in wyt her selfe geues place▪
            
            No god ne wight, of worthy fame, but hath purtraied there,
            the field, the shield, the coat, ye crest, which he of right should beare.
            Their shiuered shafts, and broken bow, beres Ioue subdued in field,
            and Mars that sind with Venus once, his dreadful geuly shield.
            hath chargde with furs, a note whereby to knowe a lechers life,
            
               Thiestes there a difference hath, which lay with brothers wife.
            Eche vice detected there, by blazons arte, at point deuise,
            and all the walles with imagery, were grauen storie wise.
            The siege of Thebes, the fall of Troy, in beaten massie golde,
            dan Vulcane hath set out at large, full geazon to beholde.
            Eche thing that hapt vntill this day, did plainly there appeare,
            Thenthronizing of Ioue, and eake Saturnus mornful cheare
            that was exilde, & how the gods bewailde that dismoale day,
            when Mars and Venus wounded were, by Diomede in fraye.
            And Phebus wayling 
                  〈◊〉
               , and pomp of triumphs proude,
            for daunt of Giatm
                  •
               s sterne, which fall of mightie Ioue had vowde.
            All this engrauen was, in precious stones of proudest price,
            Ech thing set out in colours due, to thinke a quaint deuice.
            In midst whereof, Cilenus sits, instalde in grauest sort,
            In stately chaire of A
                     •
                  athist which vertues fower support.
            U
                  •
               cegerent god, in Palla
                     •
                  e place, which moude with tumult rare,
            the cause of sturre in English house bad Gerard Leygh declare.
            O god (ꝙ he) in humblest wise, right now blown vp by Fame,
            
            behold a booke which breedes these broiles, pervse I pray ye same.
            He takes the booke, & as about he cast his glauncing eye,
            beholding winged Pegasus, by chaunce he doth espie
            A wight in snow white gown, & crownd wt braunch of laurel tree,
            that Allen Sutton had to name, come Sutton come sayth hee
            Which were not in thy coūtrey known, as thou deseruedst of late,
            whose snow bright skil, by snow procurde: the Fates to hast thy fate
            Yet mauger Deathe thou here shalt liue, eternized for aye,
            do reade this woorke that seemes so strange, this noueltie display.
            And as he reades, they all admire, but moste admireth he,
            here Ferond
               ▪ sayes, he hittes my grace, loe here he steales from me.
            Then A
                     •
                  ciate lyketh Bosvvels vayne, but laste he doth deface,
            his worke, for why, loe here sayeth he, he takes from me my grace.
            Then Vpton blames him for the like, then Plin
                     •
                  e ginns to speake,
            and euerie one in fine on him, doth thus his anger wreake.
            When Maiestie cries whus
                  •
               e: and sad Cilenus thus dothe saye,
            tush hold your peace, content your selues, if wel the case you way,
            iust cause haue you to prayse the man, that aydes your art so wel,
            in blazon, and in natures skill, who doth so muche excell.
            By whom you liue, more cause haue I, and Pallas to complayne,
            which feare least Ioue, some other impe, hath fostred in his brayne.
            
               Or that some other Maia hath brought forth some other sonne,
            Surpassing Pallas and my selfe, and then we are vndoone.
            Which hath conspirde in spight of vs, and flowring Greece to frame,
            In Brytayne soyle a Helicon from whence this Aucthor came.
            Which sayde: he flies to skies, hereof to take aduice,
            The court brake vp, they claude their eares, & parted with a trice.
            
               ¶Nicolas Roscarrocke.
               
            
         
         
            ¶The names of the aucthors aswell Latines as others, out of the whiche these workes are chiefelye collected and amplified.
            
               ¶Latine aucthors.
               
                  Alciatus Emblem.
               
               
                  Aristoteles de animalibus
               
               
                  Aulus Gellius Noc. Attic.
               
               
                  Bartho. de propri. rerum
               
               
                  Bartholus de insigniis
               
               
                  Boccatius
               
               
                  Carion
               
               
                  Caelius antia. lectionum.
               
               
                  Cicero
               
               
                  Diescorides
               
               
                  Diodorus Siculus.
               
               
                  Erasmus.
               
               
                  Epius de Ro. gestis.
               
               
                  Franciscus Patritius.
               
               
                  Gaguinus super Franc. ges.
               
               
                  Herodot.
               
               
                  Horatius.
               
               
                  Isidorus Etymolog.
               
               
                  Iustinus
               
               
                  Leonicus de varia histor.
               
               
                  Lucan.
               
               
                  Mantuan. Buco.
               
               
                  Nauclerus
               
               
                  Ouidius.
               
               
                  Plinius natural. hist.
               
               
                  Pollidorus Angl. hist.
               
               
                  Plutarch. vitis.
               
               
                  Quintus Curtius.
               
               
                  Rauisius tex. Natu. his.
               
               
                  Sebast. Munsterus.
               
               
                  Theophrastus de plantis.
               
               
                  Vegeseus de re militari.
               
            
            
               ¶Frenche aucthors.
               
                  Frossard.
               
               
                  Gabriell Simeon
               
               
                  Iehan le Fe
                        •
                     on.
               
               
                  Paradin.
               
            
            
               ¶Englishe writers.
               G. Chaucer.
               Io. Gower.
               S. Tho. Eliot.
               Io. Lidgate.
               D. Wilson
               Gerard Leigh.
               Rychard Grafton.
               Io. Maplet.
            
            And out of diuers other auncient writers, whose names are not certainly knowne.
            
               Facessat Calumnia.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The Concordes of Armorie, with the description of the foure Cardinall vertues, and other preceptes and rules, necessarie to be known of all those, which would accōpt them selues to come of gentle blood.
            
               BEfore I will begynne to blaze or descriue anye parte of Armes, or the termes therunto appertaynynge, it shalbee showed, what these woordes, Arma, or Insignia (being latyne wordes) do signify.
                  Arma. Insignia.
                
               Arma, (as Isidore sayeth) generaliter omniū rerum instrumenta sunt. And Arma, be not taken onely for the instrumentes of all maner of craftes, but also for harneys, and weapon, also Standerdes and Banners, some tyme Battles.
                  Heraulte.
                In all whiche thinges the Heraultes, especially before others, haue the secrette intelligence, and vnderstandyng thereof: as also of seuerall languages, moste meete for theire calling, in suche hyghe seruice. Insignia, are signes, & tokēs of honor, which cōmonly of Heraultes be called Armes,
                  Bage.
                or Badges of gentlemen. They bee also called Symbola heroica .i. signes,
                  Symbola Heroica.
                prices, or markes appertainyng to noblenesse: and whereby euery estate, or man of great aucthoritie is knowē: the noble, from the ignoble, the gentle from the vngentle: and the free man, from the bond. And these Armes or Ensignes (as diuerse aucthours do affirme) do occupy 9.9. sondrie 
                        •
                     ieldes.
                sundry feldes, of the which 7. of them be termed colours, & two Mettalles, as ensue.
            
               
               Mettalles. 2.
               Golde, & terme them Or &
               
               Siluer. terme them Argent.
               
            
            
               Colours. 7.
               Red. terme Gules.
               
               Blue. terme Azure.
               
               Blacke. terme Sable.
               
               Greene. terme Vert.
               
               Uiolet. terme Purpure.
               
               Orenge Tawney & terme Tenne &
               
               Murrey. terme Sanguine.
               
            
            9 Planettes, and Starres, which are compared or lykened vnto the sayde Metalles and Colours, and are vsed in Blazon.
            
               Planettes.
               The Sunne is compared to Golde.
               
               The Moone. is compared to Siluer.
               
               
                  Mars is compared to Gules.
               
               
                  Iupiter is compared to Azure.
               
               
                  Saturne is compared to Sable.
               
               
                  Venus is compared to Verte.
               
               
                  Mercurie is compared to Purpure.
               
            
            
               Starres.
               ye Dragons head, is compared to Tenne.
               
               ye Dragons taile. is compared to Sanguine
               
            
            
               
                  Precious stones. 9.9 Precious stones, of dyuers colours and vertues which the Herehautes do vse in Blazon, for & in the name of the 9. colours in Armes, and are thus likened. videlicet.
            
            
               Precious stones 9.
               The Topace. 1 to Golde. 1.
               The Pearle. 2 to Siluer. 2.
               The Rubye. 3 to Gules. 3.
               The Saphire. 4 to Azure. 4.
               The Diamonde. 5 to Sable. 5.
               The Emeraude. 6 to Verte. 6.
               The Amatiste. 7 to Purpure. 7.
               The Iacinthe. 8 to Tenne. 8.
               The Sardonix. 9 to Sanguine. 9.
            
            
               THE natures, operations, and vertues of the sayde Planettes, Starres, and precious Stones, may partlye be seen and redd in the booke of late made by Master Gerarde Legh, entytuled, The Accidence of Armorye. Yet I wishe the reader hereof, diligently to note and vnderstand, what is written of the saide 9. precious Stones, by Isidore,
               
                  Isidore.
                in his 16. boke Ethimologiarum. Cap. 7.8.9.10. & 13. which I haue drawne out of the same Author, as he writt them in Latine, for that no person which would couet to haue the name of a gentleman, ought to be altogether ignorant in the same tongue.
            
               De praedictis 9. gemmis.
               
                  TOpazion,
                  
                     The Topace.
                   
                  ex virenti genere est omni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      colore resplendens, in uenta primum in Arabiae insula, in qua Trogloditae praedones fame et tempestate fessi, cum herbarum radices effoderent, eruerunt. Quae insula postea quaesita, nebulis cooperta, tandem a nauigantibus inuenta est. Sed ob hoc locus & gemma nomen ex causa accepit. Nam Topazin Trogloditarum lingua, significationem habet quaerendi. Est autem amplissima gemmarum: eadem sola nobiliū limam sentit. Plinie saieth, that this Gemme is of grassie colour, although that in Germanie, it is founde like to Golde: and otherwhere, of that bygnes and quantitie, that Philadelphus is saide to haue framed thereof and made an Image in length of foure Cubites.
               
                  MArgarita prima candidarum gemmarum, quam inde Margaritam aiunt vocatam, ꝙ in conculis marinis hoc genus lapidum inueniatur. Inest enim in carne Cochleae calculus natus, sicut in carne Ostrcae praeciosissima Margarita reperiri dicatur: vel sicut in cerebro piscis lapillus. Gignitur autem de celesti rore, quem certo anni tempore concule hauriunt. Ex quibus Margaritis quaedam Vniones vocātur,
                  
                     The Pearle Vnions.
                   
                  aptum nomen habentes, ꝙ tantum vnus, nunquam duo vel plures simul reperiantur. Meliores autem candidae Margaritae, quàm que flauescunt. Illas enim aut

iu
                        •
                     entus, aut matutini roris conceptio reddit candidas: has senectus, vel vespertinus aer gignit obscuras. Pearles, were the onely meate, wherewith the Iewes liued long, hauinge nothing els to eate, when the Citie of Ierusalem was besieged by Tytus, as witnesseth Iosephus.
               
               
                  OMnium ardentium gemmarum principatum Carbunculus habet. Carbunculus autem dictus ꝙ sit ignitus vt carbo, cuius fulgor nec nocte vincitur.
                  
                     The Carbun
                        
                           •
                        le, or Rubye.
                   
                  Lucet enim in tenebris adeo vt flammas ad oculos vibret. Genera eius duodecim, sed prestantiores qui videntur fulgere, & velut ignem effundere. Carbunculus autem Grece Anthrax dicitur. The Carbuncle, so warreth with the eye sight, that it sheweth manyfolde reflexions. It is founde in Libia.
               
               
                  
                     The Saphyre.
                  THe Saphire, is a Gemme skye coloured or Blewe, like to the Skye in the most faire wether. Amongest all the kyndes of Gemmes, it is one of the noblest and most royall, and therefore mete to be worne onely vpon Kynges and Princes fyngers. Nothing in the worlde doth more recreate or delight the eyes then the Smaradge, & Saphire doe. It is meruelous effectuous agaynste all venyme. Wherfore, yf thou put a Spider into a Boxe, it beyng shutt, & vpō the mouth therof thou layest the true Saphire, and do kepe the Spider within the same but a very short tyme, the Spider beyng vanquished and ouercome by the vertue thereof, dyeth sodenly. Isidore saieth, ꝙ Saphirus caeruleus est cum purpura, habens pulueres aureos sparsos: optimus apud Medos, nusquam tamen perlucidus. It is also rekned by Isidore, to be one of the kyndes of the Amathistes. Albertus Magnus sayeth, that he proued it twise, that with the onely touchyng of this precious Stone, the partie so diseased, hath bene ridde of the greuous sore the Carboncle. The Saphire for his soueraignetie, is called of the Lapidarie, the Gemme of Gemmes. In olde tyme it was consecrated onely to Apollo.
               
               
                  
                  ADamus Indicus,
                  
                     The Diamōd.
                   
                  lapis paruus & indecorus, ferrugineum habens colorem & splendorem Crystalli. Nunquam autem vltra magnitudinem nuclei avellanae repertus. Hic nulli cedit materie: nec ferro quidem nec igni, nec vnquam incalescit: vnde et nomen Greca interpretatione, ind
                        •
                     mita vis accepit. Sed dum sit inuictus ferri, ignis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      centemptor, Hircino rumpitur sanguine, recenti & calido maceratur, sic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      multis ictibus ferri perfringitur. Cuius fragmentis, sculptores, pro gemmis insigniendis perforandis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vtuntur. Hic autem dissidet cum Magnete lapide, intantum vt iuxta positus ferrum, non patiatur abstrahi Magneti: aut si admotus Magnes comprehenderit, rapiat at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      auferat: fertur quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in Electri similitudine venena deprehendere, metus vanos depellere, maleficis resistere artibus. Diascorides sayth, that it is called the Stone of reconciliacion and loue: for (sayth he) That woman that hath withdrawne her loue from her husbande, by this, is brought to loue him anewe: yea it goeth further: for it is saide to giue proofe, whether she be chaste or no. For if she be say they, she shall whilest she is in sleape embrace her husbande, through the workyng of this Stone, yf not, she shall flye, and go backe frō him. Sir Thomas Eliot in his Dictionarie, saith, that Adamas is the Diomonde, and that Magnes the lode Stone, that hath vertue to drawe Iron vnto hym, is of some vnproperlye called the Adamant.
               
               
                  OMnium gemmarum virentium Smaragdus principatum habet.
                  
                     The Smaragde, or Emeraude.
                   
                  Cui veteres tertiam post Margaritas & Vniones tribuunt dignitatem. Smaragdus a nimia viriditate dicitur. Omne enim satis viride Smaragdum dicitur. Nullis enim gemmis vel herbis maior quàm huic austeritas est. Nam herbas virentes frondes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      exuperat, inficiens circa se viriditate repercussum aerem. Sculpentibns quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gemmas nulla gratior oculorum refectio est. Cuius corpus si extentum fuerit sicut speculum, it a imagines reddit. Quippe Nero Cesar gladiatorum pugnas in Sma
                        •
                     ragdo spectabat. The Smaradge passeth both the leafe and boughe of anye tree or plante, his colour is so freshe and greene, and in this poyncte triumpheth alone, neyther ys

the Sunne by his sunne Beames any lett or hynderance to this his shewe. There is no greater refection to the eyes, than the sight of this excellent Gemme.
               
               
                  
                     the Amatiste
                  
                  INter purpureas gemmas principatum Amathistus Indicus tenet. Amathistus purpureus est: permixto violaceo colore: & quasi rosae nitor, & leniter quasdam stammulas fundens. The Amathiste his force or vertue auayleth agaynst dronkennesse, it keepeth a man wakyng, and dryueth awaye ill thoughtes, and sharpeneth the vnderstanding also.
               
                  
                     the Iacynthe.
                  
                  HIacynthus, ex nominis sui flore vocatur. Hic in Ethiopia inuenitur: ceruleum colorem habens: optimus qui nec rarus est, nec dēsitate obtusus, sed ex vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      temperamento lucens purpura
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      refulgens: hic autem non rutilat aequaliter, sed cum facie caeli mutatur. Sereno enim perspicuus est at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      gratus: nubilo coram oculis euanescit at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      marcescit. In os missus frigidus est: in sculpturis durissimus, nec tamen inuictus. Nam Adamante scribitur & signatur. The Iacinth is taken to be medecinable, and to giue vigor or strength to the Lyms, to encrease the Synewes, and to prouoke quiet & sound sleape.
               
                  
                     the Sardonix
                  
                  SArdonix appellata ꝙ habeat in se permixtum candorem in similitudinem vnguis humanae. Graeci enim vnguem Onycem dicunt. Hanc India vel Arabia gignit. The Sardonix saieth Isidore also is three coloured, black about the botom, white in the middest, and redd at the toppe. Hec sola in signando nihil cerae avellit. The Lapidarie sayeth, it is bredd & borne of the Sardye, which is the father to him, & Onyx. Sardonyx ex duum nominum societate vocata est. Est enim ex Onycis candore & Sardo. In workyng it maketh a man lowlye, & shamefaste in his doinges.
               Of the 9. diuerse coulours, planettes, and precious stones before rehearced, which be assigned for the fielde of Cote armoure. There be moste vsually vsed in the blazon of oure English ensignes, but 6. videlicet.
               
               
                  
                  Or, and for mettalles.
                  
                  Argent. for mettalles.
                  
                  
                     Gules. for Colours.
                  
                     Azure. for Colours.
                  
                     Sable. for Colours.
                  
                     Verte. for Colours.
               
               Purpure, may bee added to make the 5. coloure, but it is rare in vse with vs. Of the 9. precious stones aforesaide, these are frequented, and most ennoblish blazon.
               
                  The Topaze.
                  Pearle.
                  Rubye.
                  Saphire. vj.
                  Diamonde. vj.
                  Emeraude. vj.
               
               And for Purpure, the Amatiste obteineth of stones, his place also to make the seuenth.
               These Planettes likewise maye cōpare with the others for theire ryghte, in the ordre of Blazon. videlicet.
               
               
                  the Sunne.
                  the Moone.
                  Mars.
                  Iupiter.
                  Saturne. vij.
                  Uenus. vij.
                  Mercurie. vij.
               
            
            
               ¶Degrees of Rulers.
               ¶Gentleman. Esquyre. Knyght. Baron. Lorde. Earle. Marques. Duke, and Prynce.
               ¶ To theise degrees aforesayde,
                     Cardinall Vertues.
                   no man can worthely atteine, but by the fower Cardinall vertues, whiche are, Prudence, Iustice, Fortitude, and Temperance. For the knowledge whereof, and what they bee, lett euery gentleman diligently reade ouer, the three bookes of Tully hys offices: and in especially the firste booke, wherein hee moste excellently (as the father of all eloquence) describeth the sayde fower vertues, and the braunches that spryng oute of the same. Notwithstandyng I shal briefely declare the definition and efficacie thereof, as the gentle reader maye partely bee satisfied, at the first sighte.
               
                  
                  The firste therefore of the sayde foure vertues called Prudence,
                  
                     Prudence.
                   Tully defineth to bee, rerum expetendarum fugiendarumque scientia, that is to saye, the knowledge of thynges, whiche ought to bee desired and folowed: and also of them, whiche ought to bee fled from, or eschewed: and it is called of the Grekes, Sophia. Also it is named of Aristotle, the mother of vertues, of other Philosophers, it is called the capteine or mastresse of vertues, of some the huswyfe, for so muche as by her diligence she doth inuestigate and prepare places apte and conuenient, where other vertues shal execute their powers or offices. Wherfore as Salomon sayeth,
                     Prouerb. 27. 
                  Sicut in aquis resplendent vultus prospicientium, sic corda hominum manifesta sunt prudentibus. Like as in water bee shewed the visages of them that beholde it, so vnto men that bee prudent, the secretes of mēs hartes be openly discouered. Thys vertue then is so commodious to man, that it is as it were the porche of the noble palace of mans reason, whereby all other vertues shall entre, and haue theire beynge. Prudence also (as sayth Byon the philosopher) so moche excelleth other vertues, as the sighte excelleth the other senses, for the eyes beare lighte to all the bodye, neyther is there anye vertue without wisdome. Nam quomodo iustus reddet cui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      suum,
                  
                     Apath. Eras. li. 7. apo. 23. 
                  nisi prudentia commonstret cui debeatur? Thus ye may see the force of Prudence, in qua in est indagatio atque inuentio veri, eius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      virtutis hoc munus est proprium, Vt enim quisque maximè perspicit

quid in re quaque verissimum sit,
                  
                     Cice. Offic. lib. .1. 
                  quique & acutissimè & celerrimè potest videre & explicare rationem, is prudentissimus & sapientissimus rit
                        •
                      haeberi solet. Prudence, is a vertue, that is occupied euermore in searching oute the truthe. Therefore, (O ye gentlemen) whiche bee desirous to beare the noble ensignes of youre auncestours, studie with toothe & nayle to bee prudente: and when ye thincke ye haue attayned the same, let it bee ioyned with Iustice, for of them two (as Tully sayeth,
                     Offic. lib. 2. 
                  Iustice is of more power, ad fidem saciendam. Because it, without Prudence, haith sufficient aucthoritie, Prudence without Iustice is nothinge worthe to get credit. For the subtiller, and the craftier a man is, so moche the more is he hated, and suspected, whan the opinion of hys honestie is pulled away.
                     Iustice.
                   Wherfore Iustice ioyned with vnderstanding, shall haue asmoche power as it liste, to purchase credit: Iustice withoute Prudence shalbee of moche power, Prudence without Iustice, shalbee nothing worthe.
               
                  Thus it appeareth, that the moste excellente and incomparable vertue, called Iustice, is so necessarye and expedient, for the gouernoure of a publicke weale, that without it, none other vertue maye bee commendable, ne witt or any maner of doctryne profitable. Tully sayeth. At the begynning whan the multitude of people were oppressed by thē that abounded in possessions and substāce, for refuge they fledd to some one, which excelled in vertue and strengthe: who whan hee had defended the poore

men from iniurie,
                     Offic. lib. 2. From whence the name of a kyng first proceded.
                   by ministring equitie, retayned together, and gouerned the greater persons with the lesse, in an equall and indifferent ordre of Lawe. Wherefore they called that man a Kyng, which is asmuche to say as a Ruler. And as Aristotle sayeth, Iustice is not onelye a porcion or spice of vertue, but it is entierly the same vertue. And therof onely sayeth Tully, boni viri nominantur, men bee called good men:
                     Iustice.
                   as who sayeth, without Iustice, all other qualities and vertues, can not make a good man.
               
                  
                     Iustice what it is.
                  
                  Iustice is a vertue, gathered by lōge space, geuing euery one hys owne, mindyng in all things, the common profite of our Countrey, whereunto man is moste bounde, & oweth hys full obedience. The auncient Ciuilians saye, Iustice is a will perpetuall and constante, which geeueth to euerye man hys ryghte. In that it is named constante, it importeth Fortitude: In discerning what is right or wronge, Prudence is required. And to proporcion the sentence or iudgement in an equalitie, belongeth to Temperance. All these together conglutinate and effectually executed, maketh a perfecte definition of Iustice.
                     Offic. lib. 1. And Tully differethe not moche from the same definition of Iustice, where hee saiethe, it is alwayes occupied, eyther in preseruinge the felowship of men, geeuing vnto euery bodie that which is hys owne,
                     The excellency of Iustice.
                   or keping a faythfulnes in contractes. He saieth also, that the foundacion of perpetual prayse and renome, is Iustice, without the which nothing may bee commendable: whiche sentence is verefied by daily experience. For be a man neuer so gentle, bounteous, valiante, or liberal, bee hee neuer so wise, familiar, or courtaise, yf hee bee once sene to exercise Iniustice, or to do wrong, it is then well noted, and often remembred: yea, all vertues (where Iustice faileth) lacke theire commendation. I harde of late, as I traueled by the waye, a gentelman praysed for sundry vertues which were in hym, as that he was gentle and meke, pleasaunt and faire in wordes, wise, wel learned, modeste, and sobre: but I harde no remembrance made of hys Iustice,

For immediately one present in the company reported hym to be an vsurer, a person deceiptfull, couetous, an oppressor of the poore, and no keper of hospitalitye, yet hauinge fower or fiue fermes in hys handes and more, yt hee was a decayer of houses of husbāderie, a rerer of retes, & a cruel taker of fynes. These vices did deface all hys other vertues:
                     Offic. 2. for as Tullye saith, it is the parte of Iustice to offre men no violence, to vse them sobrely and skilfully with whom we be conuersante, not to be tempted with money, but to study by all meanes to profite euery man. Iustice despiseth, and noughte regardeth those thinges, whereunto most men enkendeled with gredynes be hated.
                     Iustitia, est iniustitie prinatio.
                   It is iuste also in euery matter of berganyng, biyng, selling, hyring, or lettyng: true in euery couenante, bergayne or promise, playne and simple in all dealynge: And that simplicitye is proprely Iustice. And where any man of a couetous or malicious mynde, will digresse purposely from that simplicitie, taking aduantage of a sentence or worde, which might bee ambiguous or doubtefull, or in some thyng eyther superfluous or lackynge in the bergayne or promise, where he certainely knoweth the truth to bee otherwise, thys in my opinion is damnable fraude, beyng as playne against iustice, as it were enforced by violence: for Iustice will helpe all men,
                     Offic. lib. 3. and wittingly offende none. She is of all vertues the Ladie and Queene: keping the sounde and expresse forme of the lawe: hating & abhorring all stealinge, auoutrie, poysonyng, falsheade, disceyt, briberye, gyftes, rewardes, couetousnes, false witnes, oppression, murder, extorcion, and periurie. The whiche vices and crymes, by no meanes maye bee ioyned to the perfecte vertue named Iustice, which is the cheefe of all vertues more wondreful than the bright starre Hesperus & Lucifer. And here at this tyme I leaue to speke anye more of that most Royall and necessarie vertue, called Iustice.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Fortitude.
                  
                  The most propre vertue belonging to a man, is Fortitude, called Manlynesse, whiche is well defined of the Stoikes, wher they saye, it is a vertue, propugnantem pro aequitate, that fighteth in defence of equitie.
                     Offic. 1. Wherefore no man sayethe Tully, that hath obtayned the glorye of Manlynes, euer got prayse by wylie traines & craftynes, for nothinge maye bee honest that is voyde of Iustice. A valiante man (sayeth Aristotle) susteaneth,
                     Aristotle.
                   & dothe that, whiche belongeth to fortitude, for cause of honestie. And a little before hee sayeth: a man that is valiaunte, aswell suffreth, as dothe that, which agreeth with hys worship, and as reason commaundeth: So no violence or sturdie mynde, lackyng reason and honestie, is anye parte of fortitude. Wherefore hee may bee called a valiaunt man, that doth tollerate or suffre that,
                     Who may be called a valiaunt man.
                   whiche is needefull, and in such wise as is nedeful, and for that which is needeful, and also whan it is nedefull. And hee that lacketh anye of thys, maye bee called hardie, but not valiant▪ It is the propretie of manhode, to fighte for the common safetie of hys contrey, and not for hys owne priuate profite. And whosoeuer is forwarde to put hymselfe in danger, rather for hys owne gredynes, to opteyne spoyle, than for the safegarde of hys owne person, what hee then dothe, maye rather beare the name of lewde and folish hardynes, than of Manlynes. For (as Tully sayeth) to entre into battaile, and to fight vnaduisedly, immane quidàm & beluarum simile est,
                  
is a thynge wilde, and a maner of beastes: but thou shalt fighte valiantly, whan tyme requireth and also necessitie. And alway death is to bee preferred before seruitude, or any dishonestie. Wherfore, who wold bee accōpted manly men and stoute harted, those same shulde haue the prayse to bee good and playne men, louers of truth, and nothing at all deceiptefull: for bee a man neuer so myghty, haute, and of vnconquerable corage, yet what hee doth without discrecion or forecaste, defaceth al hys manhode and stoutnes. A manly corage and a greate, contemneth outwarde thinges, desireth nothing but that is honest, and will not vnsemely yelde to none, neyther man, nor affection, nor change of fortune but setteth lighte by those thynges whiche do seme precious and gorgeous to the greater nō
                  bre, and also despiseth the same, with a stedfast and grounded iudgemente. And likewise it is a signe of a myghtye corage, and great stedfastnes, so to beare those thynges, quae videntur acerba,
                  
                     Offic. 1. 
                  quorum multa & varia in hominum vita fortunaque versantur, as nothing hee swarue from the ordre of nature, nor the worthynes of a wyse man.
               Finally to bee shorte, that Manlynes is worthie to bee praysed, which woorketh by the strength of the mynde, & not of the bodie: and yet not to faynte in corage, but to be constante, not fearing the roughe stormes of any aduersitie, neyther the sharpe brontes of the warres, or the crueltie of bitter death.
               And like as an excellent Phisicion, cureth most dangerous diseases, and deadely woundes: so doth a man that is valiant, aduaunce hymselfe as inuincible, in thinges that do seeme most terrible, not vnaduisedly, and as it were in a beastely rage, but of a gentle courage, and with premeditacion, either by victorie, or by death wynning honor & perpetual memorie, the iuste rewarde of theire vertue. For as Curtius sayeth: Effugit mortem, quisquis contempserit, timidissimum quenque consequitur.
                  
                     Q. Curtius▪ lib. 4. Whosoeuer contempneth death, escapeth death, and death ouertaketh such, as do flye

from death.
                     Vir.
                   A man is called in Latyne Vir, whereof saieth Tully, vertue is named. And the most propre vertue belongyng to a man, is Fortitude, whereof bee twoo excellent propreties, that is to saye, the contempte of deathe, and of grefe. Therfore he playnly declareth afterward, that verye fortitude is, little to esteme all humayne thinges, not to regard death, and to thinke all labours and paynes tollerable.
               
                  
                     Temperance.
                  
                  Nowe remayneth to speake of the fourth vertue called Temperance, whyche is a firme & moderat gouernance of reson agaynste sensualitie and other vicious affections of the mynde.
                     Offic. 1. 
                  Tully cōmendeth Temperance & sayth that it is ornatus vitae, an ornament of mans lyfe, omnisquè saedatio perturbationum animi, and all mittigacion of passions of the mynde. Aristotle defineth this vertue,
                     Aris. Ethi.
                   to bee a mediocritie in the pleasures of ye bodie, specially in taste and touchyng. Therefore he that is temperate flyeth voluptuous pleasures, and with the absence of them is not discontented, and from the presence of them he willingly absteyneth.
               
                  
                     Plotinus.
                  
                  Plotinus the Philosopher sayeth, that the propertie and office of Temperance, is to couet nothing, which may be repented, also not to excede the boundes of Mediocritie, and to keepe desire vnder the yoke of reason.
               He that practiseth this vertue is called a temperat man, and he that doth the contrary thereto, is named intemperate:

betwene whome and a person incontinent, Aristotle maketh this diuersitie, that he is intemperate, whiche by hys own election is ledde, supposing the pleasure that ys present, shoulde alway be folowed: But the person incontinent supposeth not so, and yet he notwythstandynge, doth folow it.
               The temperate man delyteth in nothynge contrarye to reason, and will do nothing for bodely pleasure, whyche shall stande agaynst reason. Temperance, as a sadde and discrete matrone and reuerent gouernesse, awayteth diligently, that in no wise incontinencie or cōcupisence haue any preheminence in the soule of man. Therefore as intemperance (being a vice moste vnpure, stynkynge and filthie) is of all estates and degrees, and in all ages, to be eschued, auoyded, and abhorred: So Temperance, at all tymes and in all thynges, is to be folowed, embraced, and loued, whych will cause vs to do nothyng for bodely pleasure, that shalbe hurtfull or contrary to the health. It will rule all our appetites, and corrupt desires, causinge vs to desyre the thinges which we ought to desyre, and as we ought to desire, and when we ought to desyre. Temperance (as Patricius sayth) helpeth much,
                     Patricius. li. 3 de Iusti. re. pub.
                   and so much shyneth in all our doynges, Vt earum rerum moderatrix at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      auriga esse videatur. Hec est quae tam diuturna laude extulit sententiam illam Solonis, quae praecipit. Ne quid nimis.
               
               Thus I haue briefely spoken of the saide foure Cardinall vertues, Prudence, Iustice, Fortitude, and Temperance, (which as the same Patricius affirmeth in his 5 Booke de Institutione reipub.) are as foure sisters, Mutuis nexibus colligatae. They are neuer seperated: One of them without another cannot be perfecte: sed manta omnino & inchoata esse videtur. Nam Fortitudo sine Prudentia temeritas est. Prudentia sine Iustitia calliditas est, & mala quaedam malitia. Temperantia sine Fortitudine ignauia est. Iustitia autem sine Temperantia crudelitas est. Vnde illud Ennij poetae, Summum ius summa iniuria est. Therefore these foure vertues do agree

together, as it were in a swete songe, and consonant armonye, and are principally and especially to bee delyted, and inwardely embraced of all noble gentlemen, since that without them, they can not bee worthie to haue the tytle, or name of gētelmen, neither can they worthely beare the ensignes, or armes of theire auncient progenitours, without they specially bee endowed and adorned with these foresayde vertues, called Cardinales: whiche are so named, for that they bee cheefe or principall of all other vertues: for out of them as out of a founteine, all other vertues haue theire springing, flowing, & proceding.
            
            
               ¶ Of Cheualrye, the vertuous preceptes.
               FIrste, gyue due reuerence and seruice vnto almighty god, with all faythfulnes. Haue pitie on the poore. Bee iuste in all thy promises. Bee gracious and fauourable to them whiche are captiue. Kepe clennes of thy bodye and person. Kepe moderate dyete. Bee not slouthfull in the warres, but stronge and valiaunt, with desire to auenge thy princes quarrell, geuing alwayes thankes to god for the victorie. Bee wise in leading the battaile, & prudent in thy fighting. Knowe the order of the fielde, & bee perfecte therein. Studie well also to rule and gouerne the charge committed vnto the. Auoyde not from the fielde, ne do thou anye thyng to shame thy cote armoure. Boste not of thy manhoode. Bee courteous, lowly, and gentle, and also without rebaudrie in thy language. Haue audacitie, but not excessiuely to do such actes, as are not to bee ieoperded. Dreade infamie and reproche. Bee valiaunte, so shall no terrible aduentures resolue the into waylinges or desperations. Wynne honor by deathe for thy countrey, the iuste rewarde of thy vertue. Use reason and honestie, and bee not violente or sturdie mynded.
            
            
               ¶ Preceptes of gentlenes.
               BEe not ouer Lordely in thy countenaunce. Bee treatable in language, wyse in answer geuinge, perfect in

gouernance, and also cherefull to perfourme thy faythe and promise. Feare God, and obey his Lawes. Dreade to offende thy Soueraigne. Use fewe othes in al thy communication. Knowe thine owne byrth, and beare not thy selfe aboue thine estate. Shewe thy countenance gentle, so shalt thou be beloued: for hautie countenance procureth hatred.
            
            
               ¶ Vices, whiche are repugnant to Generositie, and not to be frequented, and vsed of any, whiche would haue the name of a Gentleman. Videlicet.
               Sluggishnesse, boastinge, cowardnesse, swearinge, lecherie, and dronkennesse. Also to reuoke thine owne chalenge. To slea thy prisoner. To flee from thy Soueraignes banner in the fielde, and to tell thy Soueraigne false tales. To be vengeable, and not to be entreated, &c.
            
            
               ¶ Heauenly Preceptes. Videlicet
                     •
                  
               
               To doo right. To haue pleasure in louing kindenesse. To be lowly.
                     Mich. cap. 6. And to walke with God.
            
            
               ¶ Preceptes Heroicall.
               Aboue,
                     Preceptes.
                   and before all thinges worship God. Honour thy kinge. Obey the lawes. Be mercifull. Desire honour and glorye for vertue. Be not highe minded. Refraine from fowle language. Perfourme what so euer thou promisest. Ensue the vertues of thy good auncetors
            
            
               ¶ Graces woorthy.
               To be meeke in countenance. To haue manly harte in deedes, and therein longe continuance. Not to weene

owne witte more excellent then others. Not to scorne, or scoffe at others deuises. That worship is in mercie, pitie, and humilitie. To be lyons in the fielde, and lambes in chamber.
                     Boetius.
                   Eagles at assaultes, and maydens in bowre. Foxes in counsaile, and still in their games. To folowe peace, and loue, where is hate.
            
            
               ¶ Giftes heauenly.
               To knowe thy selfe. To abstaine from couetise. Hauinge no wronge, to care for those that are wronged. To keepe close secrete counsaile. To doo nothinge contrary to the Lawe. To take in good worth, aduersitie after prosperitie. Regarde heauenly thinges, for this our Countrie abideth but a while. Continue in pacience. Doo nothing in anger.
            
            
               ¶ Preceptes iusticiarie.
               Remember, that God dothe looke alwaie vpon thee. Studie to be learned. Receiue no bribes. Let thy maners agree with thy callinge. Feare to doo euill. Auoide idlenesse. Doo that is iuste. Be no lyer. Myxe not thy power with thy will. Be discrete without spotte of vice, constante, and vncorrupte.
                     Aul. Gell. Nor. Atti. lib. 14. cap. 4. Be not flattered by any meanes Be not intreated againste the obstinate. Auance the truth through the power of Iustice.
            
            
               ¶ Reioisings in Armes.
               A Gentleman to be made knighte in the fielde at battaile. For his manhoode to receiue a great rewarde at his Princes handes. To doo valiantly in Chiualrie before his Soueraigne. To be an Embassadour for his wisedome. To shewe prowes, and to doo knightly before Alyantes, in the honour of his Prince. A poore Gentleman to be

married to one of highe parentage. To haue thankes for good seruices done to his Soueraigne. To keepe his Cote armour vnshamed in triall thereof. To keepe all pointes of knighthoode, as Gesta Troianorum, doo declare.
            
            
               ¶ Lawe of Armes, whereof it is grounded.
               It is to be knowen, that almightie God is the originall authour of honouringe Nobilitie, who, euen in the heauens hathe made a discrepance of his heauenly Spirites, giuinge them seuerall names, as Ensignes of honour. And these heauenly Spirites, when they are sent of God, are called, Angeli, Angels: whiche in the Greeke tongue signifieth, sent. Propterea, quod de coelis ad annuntiandum hominibus mittuntur. And in the Latine tongue, they be interpreted, Nuntij, Messengers, Ab eo quòd Domini voluntatem populis nuntiant. Angelorum autem vocabulum, officij no men est, non naturae: semper enim Spiritus sunt: sed cùm mittuntur, vocantur Angeli.
                  
                     Angeli. Nuntij. Isidorus.
                   And howe many orders be of them, the holy Scriptures doo witnesse. Id est, Angeli, Archangeli, Throni, Dominationes, Principatus, Potestates, virtutes, Cherubin, & Seraphin. And wherefore they be thus called, and distinct, as it were into sundrie orders, and dignities, it maie be fully readde in the seuenth Book of Isidore, which he entituleth, Ethimologiarum, cap. 5. whiche for breuitie I omitte here, for that it dothe not appertaine to the matter, whereof in this place I doo entreate. But this is to be noted (as I finde in aunciente writers) that the Lawe of Armes was by the auncient Heraultes grounded vpon these orders of Angelles in heauen, encrowned with the pretious stones, of colours, and vertues diuerse, as in the firste parte of this Book hathe bene declared, with the colours compared vnto them. For as the Angels, precious stones, colours, and Planettes aforesaide are distincte in dignitie, vertue, power, preheminence, and working: So here in earthe men are also distincte, in degrees, offices,

gouernance, and power, euery one seruing their heade in their vocation, and callinge.
            
            
               ¶ Sixe sundrie differences in Armes for brethren.
               
                  
                      Files with Lambeauxes.
                  
                      A Cressante.
                  
                      A Mollet of 5. poyntes.
                  
                      A Martelet.
                        Differences.
                     
                  
                  
                      An Anulet,
                  
                      A Flowre de Luce.
               
               Note, that if there be any moe then sixe brethren, the deuise, or assignment of further difference, onely appertaineth to ye kings at Armes, especially when they visite their seuerall Prouinces: & not to the father of ye children, to giue them what differēce he list, as some without authoritie doo alledge.
               Euery difference oughte to be placed in the moste euidente parte of the Cote armour: Videlicet, in that place, where the same maie soonest be seene, or perceiued.
            
            
               ¶ Seuen signes, or tokens whiche are figured in Armes round, and are blazed properly with seueral termes.
               
                  
                      1. Is of golde, and is called a Beausante.
                  
                  
                      2. Is of siluer, and is called a Plate.
                  
                  
                      3. Is of Sable, & is termed a Pellet, or an Ogresse.
                  
                      4. Is of Azure, and is termed an Hurte.
                  
                  
                      5. Is of Gules, and is called a Torteauxe.
                  
                  
                      6. Is of Uerte, and is called a Pomeis.
                  
                  
                      7. Is of Purpre, and is to be termed a Wounde.
                  
               
               
                  These most vsually are found borne in Cotes Armours.
            
            
               ¶ Proper termes for diuerse tokens borne in Armes.
               The tokens whiche of many are called Millers pikes, some terme them Shettles, which is the chiefest instrument of the weauer: And the Frenche Heraultes terme them fusilles,
                  
                     Fusilles. Manche. Pheons.
                   
                  videlicet, Spindles: for fusus, or fusum, in Latin is a Spyndle, and so I take them to be termed most properly. Manche maltale, is taken in Armes, to be a sleue, vnshaped, and vnsowed. Pheons, be commonly called, broade arrowe heades, or darte heades.
               When the heade of any beaste, or byrde, is, as it were torne of, terme the same to be rassed, or erased: and if it be, as it were, cut of plaine, call it then, Coped.
               
               
                  Dimie, is but when halfe of any beaste is seene in the fielde.
               A Cressante in armes,
                     Cressante.
                   is commōly called the halfe moone. But it is the moone in her pryme, or els as wee call it the newe moone.
               An Incressante,
                  
                     Incressante.
                   is the moone from the pryme, till after the firste quarter, and yet lacketh of the full.
               A Decressante,
                  
                     Decressante.
                   is the moone from the last quarter.
               A Pile in armes,
                     Pile.
                   is a thyng that maketh all foundacions vpon vnsure grounde, to bee very firme and sure. Leighe.
               
               And here lerne a Rule.
                     Woordes in Blazon to be noted.
                   There are fower woordes, whereof you maye not name any of them twise in the blazon of one cote armoure, and these bee they.
               
                  
                     Nota of, These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of anye one cote armoure. Yf they bee, it is of the Heraultes accōpted a great faute. And yf one might forbeare, to name none of them it were better, as I haue rede in dyuerse Aucthours.
                  
                     Nota on, These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of anye one cote armoure. Yf they bee, it is of the Heraultes accōpted a great faute. And yf one might forbeare, to name none of them it were better, as I haue rede in dyuerse Aucthours.
                  
                     Nota and, These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of anye one cote armoure. Yf they bee, it is of the Heraultes accōpted a great faute. And yf one might forbeare, to name none of them it were better, as I haue rede in dyuerse Aucthours.
                  
                     Nota with These may not be reherced more then once, in descriuing of anye one cote armoure. Yf they bee, it is of the Heraultes accōpted a great faute. And yf one might forbeare, to name none of them it were better, as I haue rede in dyuerse Aucthours.
               
               
                  Descriue,
                  Displaye,
                  Or blaze,
                  Armes,
                        Termes of Blazon.
                     
                  
                  Ensignes, of honor, worship, & gētree.
                  and Tokens,
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Sundrie wayes to blaze Armes.
               
                  By mettall and coloures,
                  By planettes, and sterres,
                  By precious stones.
               
               The vse of these three in blazon of armes, are as aū
                  cient as from the firste begynning of armes bearing.
            
            
               ¶Three superlatiues, or degrees in Armes.
               Moste ryche, is whan the felde is Or, and the thing that occupieth the fielde, Sable.
               
               Moste faire, is whan the fielde is Argent, and that whiche occupieth the fielde is Sable.
               
               Moste glitteringe, is whan the fielde is Or, & that whiche is conteyned in the same, is Verte.
               
            
            
               ¶Poynctes in escocheons.
               ¶ Dextre poyncte, Sinistre poyncte, Base poyncte, Chiefe poynct, Dextre base poyncte, Sinistre base poynct, The honour poyncte, Fesse poyncte, and the nombrill.
               These poynctes may bee learned by experience, yf ye diligently note the sondrie particions vsed in escocheons.
            
            
               ¶Particions in Escocheons.
               ¶Partie per pale, Partie quarterly, Partie per fesse, Partie per bende dextre, Partie per bende sinistre, Partie per Cheuron, Partye per Saltier, Partie per Pyle in poyncte, and partie per Gyron.
               Experience shall teache you these particions, takynge hede to the examples thereof, sett forth in the seconde boke of Armorye next folowing.
            
            
               ¶Honorable Ordinaries
               
                  
                     Crosse.
                  The firste, especially is the Crosse. The contente thereof is the fifte parte of the fielde, excepte it bee charged, then it must conteyne the thirde parte.
               
                  
                     Cheife.
                  The seconde, is a Cheife, and conteyneth the third parte of the fielde. The Cheife maye bee diminyshed, and then it must bee termed otherwise,
                     Fillet.
                   as a Fillet, the whiche conteyneth the fower parte of the cheefe, and standeth no where, but onely vpon the Cheife poyncte. The cheife aforesayde maye not bee emeaded or halfed.
               
                  
                     Pale.
                  The thirde honorable Ordinarie, is a Pale, and conteyneth

the third parte of the fielde, and maye not bee enlarged, though it bee charged. But it maye be diminished, as frō a Paile,
                     Pallet.
                   to a Pallet, which is ye halfe of the Paile, & may not be charged with any thing quick or dead, neyther may it bee parted,
                     An Endorce.
                   but it may be diminished, & thē it is called an Endorce, which is the fourth parte of the Pallet, and is not vsed but when a Pale is betwene twoo of them.
               The fowerth of the nyne honorable Ordinaries aforesaid, is a Bende,
                  
                     Bende.
                   which conteineth in bredthe the fifthe parte of the fielde, and when it is deuided, it is called in sondrie wise,
                     Bendelet.
                   as a Bendelet, whiche at the most conteyneth but the sixt parte of the field. A Gartiere,
                  
                     Gartier.
                   conteyneth halfe the bende aforesayde, and maye not bee charged, but with floures or leaues.
                     Coste.
                   A Coste, is the fourth parte of the bende, & halfe of the Gartier,
                     Cotise.
                   and is called at somtime a Cotys, somtyme a Batune,
                  
                     Batune.
                   as by practise may rather be learned, when it is to bee called the one,
                     Rybande.
                   and when the other. A Ribande, conteyneth in bredth the eighte parte of the bende, and is also called a Fissure,
                  
                     Fissure.
                   and then it parteth the fielde into two colours, & is of it selfe mettall, & so beyng it is a secret.
               The fith honorable Ordinarie,
                     Fesse
                   is a Fesse, conteyning in bredth the thirde parte of the fielde, and may not be diminished. The Fesse hath ben taken of olde, for a girdle of honor, whiche standeth with good reason. For in the cote armoure, it is in the myddest betwene two equall partes.
               The sixt,
                     Escocheon,
                   is whē in ye field is an Escocheon. The same must cōteyne ye fifth part of the fielde, & may not be diminished.
               The seuenth is a Cheuron,
                  
                     Cheuron.
                   whiche muste containe the firste parte of the fielde.
                     Cheuernell.
                   A Cheuernel containeth halfe the Cheuron, and there maie be no moe, but three in one fielde, except partition.
                     Copleclose.
                   A Copleclose muste containe the fourth part of the Cheuron, and is not borne but by payres, except there be a Cheuron betwene twoo of them.
               The .8. honorable ordinarie,
                     Salterye.
                   is a Salterye, which muste cōtaine ye firste parte of the fielde, excepte it be charged wt any thing, thē it shal cōtaine ye third parte of the Escocheon.
               
               
                  The ninth honorable ordinarie, is a Barre, and containeth the firste parte of the fielde.
                     Barre. Closset. Barrulet. Barres Genewes.
                   A Closset is the halfe of the Barre, and tenne of them maie be borne in one fielde, and are very good Armorie. A Barrulet is the fourth part of the Barre aforesaide. And Barrulettes (excepte they be parted with a Barre, or Fesse) muste stande alwaies by couples, and then they must be called Barres gemewes.
               Touchinge the honorable ordinaries generall, the rebatinge of Armes for diuerse vngentle deedes vngentlemanly donne, the sundrie furres and doublinges, the diuerse mes
                     •
                  es, and other worthy partitions vsed in Armes, &c ye shall haue examples sufficiente in M. G. Leighe his Booke, entituled, The Accidence of Armore.
               
            
            
               ¶Of the fiue Greeke letters Mysticall.
               The first of the saide Greeke letters is Y. Ypsilon, which betokeneth mannes life, and is called Pythagoras Sameus letter. For he firste fourmed the same, Ad exemplum vitae humanae. And the saide letter hathe three pointes, twoo aboue, and one beneath,
                     Isidorus. li. 1. cap. 3. signifyinge sundrie ages. That whiche is vnder, sheweth the firste age, whiche age is vncertaine, whether it will giue and apply it selfe to vertue, or vice. And the two aboue, beginne from the youth: the righte parte whereof is harde, but yet tending to a blessed life.
                     Pithagoras Sameus letter
                   And the lifte more easie, but leadinge to destruction. Of the whiche letter Perseus thus saithe: 
                     Et tibi quae Sameos deduxit litera ramos:
                     Surgentem dextro monstrauit limite callem.
                  
The whiche verses I haue thus metrized in Englishe.
               The branches of the letter first in Samea founde, of mans life doth showe the high way & ground.
               
                  
                     Thetae.
                  The second letter is called Theta, Θ. whiche signifieth deathe. For Iudges in olde time did note, or set the same letter on their names, or, as we nowe call it, heades, who were condemned to die.
                     Capitaines.
                   Likewise did Capitaines in their

Briefes, wherein were contayned the names of theire Souldiers.
                     Heraultes.
                   By whiche note or marke, they, and the Heraultes, when they did looke on their said Briefes, could certainely knowe, and make true reporte vnto their Soueraigne, howe many were slaine in the battaile. And therefore it is called Theta, à morte: that is so saie, of death. For it hathe in the middest thereof a darte (as is before figured) in token of deathe. And it is thus written of the same letter:

                     O multum ante alias infoelix litera Theta. 1.
                     O muche before others, I saie,
                     Thou vnhappy letter, Theta.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Perseus of the same thus saithe:

                     Et potis est nigrum vitio praefigere Theta. 1.
                     To write eftsoones power did not lacke,
                     For his offence, Theta, all in blacke.
                  
               
               The third letter is Tau,
                  
                     Tau.
                   a figure of the Crosse of Christ, and in Hebrewe it is interpreted, a signe, or marke. Of the whiche it was spoken to the Angell whiche Ezechiel sawe in spirite. Goe thy waie through the Citie of Ierusalem,
                     Ezech. 9. and set a marke vpon the foreheades of them that mourne, & are sorie for al the abhominations that be done therein. By which marke, or token, they were preserued, and not touched in the middest of them which were slaine and destroyed for their Idolatre, in the wratheful displeasure of the Lorde. And this letter also, Apud veteres, was vsed of the Heraultes & Capitaines, and signed on their names, who remained aliue after the battaile. So that the letter Θ, was vsed as the marke of deathe, or of them that were iudged to die, and Τ, of life, or of them that were by the Iudges quitte from deathe. This letter Τ, as well the Greekes, as the Latines, vnto our time, haue pictured, and set forthe, as the true marke, or signe of the Crosse of Christe.
                     C. Paradi
                           •
                        us Symbol heroic
                   
                  Hoc igitur verum, ac proprium sub Christi ecclesia eouscriptorum, ac militantium, Symbolum, signumue est.
               
               The other twoo of the Mystical letters, beinge the first

and laste of the Greek Alphabet, onely Christe dothe chalenge to him selfe: for he is the beginninge, and the endinge, where he saithe,
                     Alpha. Omega. Apoc. 1. cap.
                   
                  Ego sum Alpha, & ω. Principium, & finis, qui est, & qui erat, & qui venturus est omnipotens. No letter goeth before Alpha, for it is the firste of all letters. And so is the sonne of God: Ipse enim se principium Iudaeis interrogantibus esse respondet. And therefore S. Iohn in his Apocalyps moste properly putteth the same letters,
                     Iohn. 22. cap.
                   the Sonne of God to be Alpha,
                  
                     Nido. li. 7. ca. 2 and Omega, the firste, and the laste. Primus, quia ante eum nihil est. Nouissimus, quia nouiso simum iudicium ipse suscipiet.
               
            
            
               ¶Sentences concerning generositie, collected out of sundrye Aucthors, and firste certayne verses, made by G. Chaucer, teaching what is gentlenes, or who is worthy to bee called gentle.
               
                  ¶The firste stocke father of gentlenes,
                  What man desireth gentle for to bee
                  Must folowe hys trace, and all hys wittes dres
                  Vertue to loue, and vices for to flee:
                  For vnto vertue belongeth dignitie,
                  And not the reuers safely daire I deme,
                  All weare he mytre, crowne, or diademe.
               
               
                  Thys firste stocke was ful of righteousnes.
                  True of his worde, sobre, piteous, and free,
                  Cleane of his ghoste, and loued busines
                  Againste the vice of slouthe in honestie:
                  And but his heire loue vertue as did he,
                  He is not gentle though he riche seme,
                  All weare he mytre, crowne, or diademe.
               
               
                  
                  Vices maye well bee heyre to olde ryches,
                  But there may no man, as men maye well see
                  Bequethe his heire his vertues nobles
                  That is appropried vnto no degree
                  But to the firste father in maiestie
                  That maketh his heires them that is Queme
                  All weare he mitre, crowne, or diademe.
               
               
                  Non census, nec clarum nomen auorum,
                  Sed probitas magnos,Ouid. 1. de Ponto. ingenium
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      facit.
               
            
            
               ¶Scogan in his worke which hee writte vnto the Lordes and gentelmen of the kynges house.
               
                  Take hede (he saieth) how men of poore degree
                  Through vertue haue bene sett in great honor,
                  And euer haue lyued in great prosperitie
                  Through cherishing of vertuous labor.
                  Thyncketh also, how many a gouernoure
                  Called to estate hath be sett full lowe,
                  Through misusing of righte and of erroure
                  And therfore I counsaile you vertue to knowe.
               
               
                  Virtus omnia in se habet,Plaut. in. 7. Amphi. omnia adsunt bona,
                  Quem paenes est virtus.
               
            
            
               ¶Nobilitie is from God.
               
                  Omne hominum genus in terrisBoetius lib. 3. de cōso. philo.
                  
                  Simile surgit ab ortu:
                  Vnus enim rerum pater est
                  Vnus cuncta ministrat.
                  Ille dedit Phaebo radios
                  Dedit & cornua Lunae.
                  Ille homines etiam terris
                  Dedit & Sidera caelo.
                  Hic clausit membris animos
                  Celsa sede petitos.
                  Mortales igitur cunctos
                  Edit nobile germen.
                  
                     Quid gen' & proauos strepitis,
                  Si primordia vestra
                  Auctorem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      deum spectes
                  Nullus degener extat
                  Ni vitijs peiora fouens,
                  Proprium deserat ortum.
               
               
                  
                     Birthe of all men, one.
                  ALl the lynage of men that bene in earthe bene semblable of byrthe: for certes one aloue is the father of thinges: and there is one alone that ministreth all thynges: he gaue to the Sunne his beames, he gaue to the Moone her hornes, he gaue to men the earth, and the sterres vnto the firmament, he inclosed the soule of man with membres of the bodye, whiche soule came from the hyghe seate of heauen, Than yssue all mortal men of noble seede or beginnyng .i. from God. Why bable ye then, or boste your selfe of your elders birth? For, yf ye beholde God, your begynnynge & maker, than is there no liuyng creature of mankynde vngentle, but yf he norishe his corage or senses vnto vices, and so declyne from hys propre birth. These doe Boetius write, and much more touchyng the name of gentlenes, and what it is, to whome the renowne and clerenes thereof is to be referred, and what praysing come to gentlemen by the desertes of their auncestors &c: Whiche I woulde wishe all gentlemen to reade, as they are written in his third boke, De consolatione philosophiae. But nowe yet heare what M. G. Chaucer,
                     Chaucer.
                   oure noble poete of thys Realme doth write touching gentlenes of birthe, in hys taile of the wife of Bathe. These are hys woordes.
               
                  But for ye speake of suche gentlenesse
                  As is descended out of olde richesse
                  That therefore shullen ye be gentlemen,
                  Suche arrogance is not worthe an hen.
                  
                     
                        Greatest gentleman, who.
                     Lo, who that is moste vertuous alwaye
                  Preuie and aperte, and moste entendeth aye
                  To do the gentle dedes, that hee can.
                  
                     Take hym for the greatest gentelman.
                  Christe wolde we claymed of hym oure gentlenesse
                  Not of our elders,
                        Heritage.
                      for theire great richesses
                  For though they giue vs all theire heritage
                  For which we claymen to be of hye parage,
                  Yet may they not bequeth,
                        Vertuous lyuing may not be bequethed.
                      for nothing
                  To none of vs, theire vertuous liuyng,
                  That made them gentlemen I called bee
                  And baddevs folowe them in such degree.
                        Daunte the Poete.
                     
                  
                  Well can the wise Poete of Florence
                  That hyghte Daunte, speke in thys sentence
                  Lo, in suche maner Ryme, is Dauntes tale.
                  Full sele vpriseth by hys braunches smale
                  Prouesse of man,
                        Prowes.
                      for God of hys goodnes
                  Will that wee claime of hym our gentelnes:
                  For of our elders may we nothing claime
                  But tēporal things, that men may hurt & maime.
                  Eke euery wighte wote thys aswell as I
                  Yf gentlenes were planted naturally,
                  Vnto a certayne linage downe the lyne
                  Preuie & aperte, than woulde they neuer fine
                  To donne of gentlenes the faire office,
                  They might donne no vilanye ne vice.
                  Take fier & beare it into the darkest house,
                        Fire.
                     
                  
                  Betwixt thys & the Mounte Caucasus
                  And let men shutte the dores, & go then
                  Yet will the fire as fayre lye & brenne
                  As twenty thousand men myght it beholde
                  His office naturall aye will it holde
                  Vpon perill of my lyfe, till that it dye,
                  
                     
                     
                        Gentrie not annexed to possession.
                     Here maye ye see well how that gentree
                  Is not annexed to possession
                  Sithen folke doe not their operacion
                  Alwayes as doth the fyre, lo in his kynde
                  For God it wote, men may full often fynde
                  A Lordes sonne donne shame and vilanye.
                  And he that will haue prayse of hys gentree
                  
                     
                        Elders noble.
                     For that hee was borne of a gentle house,
                  And had his elders noble and vertuous,
                  And will hymselfe donne no gentell dedes
                  Ne folowe hys gentell auncetrie that deade is,
                  He is not gentle be he Duke or Erle
                  Fye villanes, synfull dedes maketh a cherle:
                  
                     
                        Gentlenes.
                     For gentlenes is but the renomye
                  Of thyne aunceters, for theire hyghe bountie
                  Which is a strong thing to thy person
                  Thy gentlenes cometh from God alone
                  Than commeth our verie gentlenes of grace
                  It was nothing bequeth vs with our place.
               
               M. G. Chaucer, lamenteth in hys second Booke (which hee entituleth the testament of loue) that Iaphetes children for pouertie in no lynage bee reckened,
                     Cayn. Iaphet. Noes childrē.
                   and Caines childrē for richesse bee maked Iaphetes heires. Alas (sayeth he) thys is a wonderfull change betwene these two Noes children, sithen that of Iaphetes ofspryng comen knyghtes, and of Cayne descended the lyne of seruage to hys brothers children.
                     Seruage.
                   Lo howe gentlenes, and seruage as Cousens, both descended out of two brethern of one bodie. Wherefore I saye soothenes, that gentlenes in kynred maken not gētle lynage in succession, without deserte of a mans own selfe. Of what kinred bene the gentles in oure dayes,
                     Kynrede.
                   I trowe therefore yf anye good bee in gentlenes, it is onelye that

it seemeth a maner of necessitie to be put into Gentlemen, that they shoulde not varye from the vertue of their Auncetours.
                     Gentle.
                   And therfore that he will be accompted gentle, he must dawneten his fleshe from vices that cause vngentlenesse, and leaue also reignes of wicked lustes, and drawe to him vertue,
                     Vertue. Auncetours. Gentlenes.
                   that in al places gentlenesse Gentlemen maketh. Then gentlenes of thine Auncetours, that foraine is to thee, maketh thee not gentle, but vngentle, & reproued, if thou continuest not theire gentlenesse. And therfore a wise man once saide:
                     Kynnes gentlenes.
                   Better it is, thy kinred to be by thee genteled, then thou to glory of thy kinnes gentlenesse, and haste no desert thereof thy selfe. Haec Chaucerus.
               
               A Prince that couetethe perpetuall memorie,
                     De principe.
                   must note fiue thinges, which he must haue in his life: that is to saie, to be pure in his conuersation, vpright in iustice, aduenterous in feates of Armes, excellente in knowledge, and welbeloued in his Prouinces.
            
            
               ¶Of fiue kindes of Nobilitie, whereof the laste was added by Aristotle.
               The moste noble and wise Philosopher Plato,
                  
                     Kyndes of nobilitie.
                   and they that folowed him, (of whom Aristotle seemeth not to be the least) did set forthe vnto vs, foure kindes of Nobilitie.
               The firste is of them, whiche of longe continuance are spronge, and borne of Noble, and righteous Auncetours.
               The second is of them, whose Parentes were Princes, or men of greate power, and authoritie.
               The thirde is of them, whose Progenitours did florish, and excell in Chiualrie, and prowesse, prowesse consistinge of valiante courage, and Martiall policie, worthy of glorye and praise, either in theire owne countrye, or abroade.
               The fourthe kynde of Nobilitie, is saide to be that, whiche of all others is moste excellente: as when anye

man dothe exceede, or farre passe others in honestie, gentlenesse, or noblenesse of harte: and dothe trauaile by the puissance of his owne renoume. And he truely is to be called Noble,
                     Noble who
                   whom, not other mennes, but his owne vertue hathe aduanced vnto glorie.
               To these foure kindes, Aristotle addeth the fifth, that is to saie, of them which did florishe in highe learninge, and knowledge of thinges wonderfull:
                     Learning.
                   and suche by righte ought to be called Noble men,
                     Noble men.
                   because they doo not only ennoblish their owne Houses, whereof they descended, but also make honorable the Cities,
                     Iuba.
                   and Coūtries wherein they were borne, as for example. Iuba the sonne of Iube kinge of Numidia, beinge a childe, and also a captiue, Iulij Caesaris triumphum Africannm secutus est. And although he thus had loste his Kingedome, and libertie, and was spoyled of all his honour, and glorie, yet he thought not vtterly to lose all his estimation.
                     Study of good learning.
                   Wherefore he earnestly applied him selfe to the studie of good learnynge, wherein he so muche profited, that in fewe yeares he attained to such knowledge, as thereby he was accoumpted amongest the moste learned Writers of all Greece. So that what so euer fortune had abated of his Nobilitie, the same did the learning of good artes more abundantly restore, to the greate augmentation of his honour. Semblably, Hannibal of Carthage,
                  
                     Hanniball.
                   in his greate miserie, aduersitie, and olde age, learned the Greeke tongue, and became so eloquent, that he moste wisely did bothe write the actes, and deedes of certaine Emperours, and also noble Bookes of Martiall policie: whereby he deserued righte highe commendation, and aduancemente to his former Nobilitie, whiche consisted not in the ancient Linage, or dignitie of his Auncetours, but in the greate learninge, wisedome, and vertue, which in him was very Nobilitie: and that Nobilitie brought him to dignitie. Virtute decet, non sanguine niti.
               
               
                  
                  Nam genus, & proauos, & quae non fecimus ipsi,
                  Vix ea nostra voco.
               
               The woordes of that prince of Oratours, Cicero, in his second Booke of Offices, which he writte vnto his sonne Cicero, doth admonish vs, not onely to consider the name, or fame of our parentes, or Auncetours, but that we must diligently take heede, that we commit nothinge, whereby we maie be thought vnwoorthy to beare the Ensignes of our Progenitours. These are his woordes vnto his sonne. If any from the beginninge of his youthe, hathe the title of honorable name, either receiued of his Father (which to thee my Cicero I thinke to haue happened) or by any chaunce, or fortune, on him all men caste their eyes
                     •
                   and of him there is seachinge what he doothe, and howe he liueth. And so, as thoughe he shoulde leade his life in moste open lighte, neither woorde nor deed of his can be vnknowne. Thus it is proued, that Noble men muste haue especial regarde, that they maie be thought woorthy to beare that, whiche they receiued of theire Grandsiers. For their faultes, or vices, are of all men, euen of the basest sorte, bothe noted, and reported: and for theire honorable doinges and deseruinges, are likewise of them commended & praised. Wherefore it is expediente for all those of the Nobilitie, and suche as desire to beare the names of Gentlemen, especially aboue all others, to be circumspecte in their liuinge and manners, and to walke as in the day lighte.
               
                  Nobilitas sola est, atque vnicae virtus.
               
            
            Finis Libri primi.
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     NVMER. 2.
                  
                  Euerie man of the children of Israell shall pitche vnder his owne Standerde, and vnder the Armes of their Father Houses.
               
            
            
            ¶ The second boke entituled, The Armorie of Honour.
            
               ¶What they were, who in olde time did beare tokens, or signes of Armes.
               
                  NObilitie, as Boetius in his thirde Booke De Consolatione Philosophiae, defineth it, Est laus quaedam, proueniens ex meritis Parentum.
                  
                     Definitions of Nobilitie.
                   It is also a dignitie of Byrthe and Linage. Aristotle saithe in his fourth Booke Politicorum, that is, Virtus, & diuitae antiquae. The whiche definitions teach vnto vs the true knowledg of very Nobilitie, which diuerse & sundrie persons haue, and doo yet attaine vnto by the name and good fame of their parentes, other by chaunce or fortune, some for theire studies, some by feates of armes,
                     Nobilitie for Vertue.
                   some for their great possessiōs, or long continuance of theire bloude, and aunciente house in one name and lynage, and also many for their vertues onely, which aboue al other ought euer to haue preheminence in praise & commendation. And therfore to yt kind or lynage of those men, were armes first giuē, as to them which excelled al others in vertue, prowes, & goodnes of kind: and such were called noble persons or gentle:
                     Noble persons.
                   & they did beare in their shields, & on their helmetꝭ, or other armor, certain signes or tokens to be knowne by, Vt passim videre licet apud Poetas.
               
               
                  Pallas, that mightie Goddesse of Battaile & wisedome, for because shee woulde seeme more terrible in battaile,
                     Nobilium insignia.
                   did beare for her Ensigne, the monstrous, and Serpentines

heade of Gorgon.
               
               
                  Bacchus, the sonne of Iupiter, by Semeles daughter of Cadmus, (who wente a greate parte of the world, destroyinge Tyrantes, and Monsters, and conquered the Countrie of India) did beare vpon his Helmet, the hornes of an Oxe,
                     Creaste.
                   whiche was his Creaste, as it is nowe termed of the Heraultes.
               
                  
                     Lyons skins.
                  
                  Mars & Hercules, for that theire strengthe, power, & force shoulde be well knowne, did beare on theire Armour the skinnes of Lyons, in Latin called, Leonum exuuiae.
               
               
                  Iupiter also, the sonne of Saturnus, who for his prowes, & wisedome, after his death, was of all the Greekes honoured as a God, & called Father, & kinge of Gods, did beare for his Ensigne a Swanne his heade with the necke. All whiche Ensignes,
                     Swanne his heade.
                   and tokens by them deliuered to theire successours, Nobilitatis, & quòd ab heroibus nati essent, specimen dabant.
               
               
                  Porus, the king of the Indians, when he ordered his battaile against ye greate Alexander, did beare in his standerd the Image of Hercules,
                  
                     Hercules his Image.
                   for an encouragement of his souldiers to fight well, & for a note of reproufe, and infamie to them that shoulde flye from the same: and losse of life to them, that left it in the fielde. Suche veneration, and Religion the Indians conceiued of Hercules,
                  
                     Q. Curt. li. 8 that sommetime had bene their enimie. Thus by whom tokens of Armes in old time were borne, may partly be perceiued. But yet the goodly order, & trade in bearing, & ordering of them, was not then suche, as it is nowe. For of these before recited, I finde no mention made of mettall, colour, terme, or any other rule, in what fourme they did beare them.
            
            
               ¶ Of the fourme of Scutcheons.
               To sette foorthe here the fourme of Scutcheons it needeth not. For of sundrie fashions thereof, & in especially mene, may plainely be seene in the booke entituled, The

Accidence of Armorie. And therefore firste I will declare in howe sundrie wise Escocheon, Shieldes, &c. are termed in the Latine tongue, they be so necessarie to bee knowne of all Gentlemen.
               
                  Albosia, Shieldes, or Tergates.
               
                  Clypeus, a shield, Tergate, or buckler for a footman. Et dictus est clypeus, ab eo quod clepet .i. celet corpus, periculisque subducat.
               
               
                  Scutum is also a Tergate, or shield, in especially for an horseman.
                     Isidor. Lib. 18 Ethimo.
                   
                  Isidore saithe, that it is called Scutum, Eò quòd à se excuti at telorum ictum. Scutum autem equitum est: Clypeus peditum.
               
               
                  Ancile, a Shielde without corners, suche an one in the time of Numa, seconde kinge of Rome, was seene fall out of the skie: and was kepte by the Priestes of Mars, called Salij. Vide Vitas Plutarchi.
               
               
                  Pelta, is a Tergate, or Buckler like an halfe Moone, of the whiche, the booke of the kinges maketh mention, that Salomon caused to be made, Ducenta Scuta de auro puro: & trecentas Peltas ex auro probato.
               
               
                  Cetra, is a light Tergate, whereof the Poete makethe mention: Leuam Cetra tegit.
               
               
                  Parma, is also a Tergate whiche footemen did vse.
               Next vnto this, it is expedient for gentlemen to knowe the Latin for Standerdes, Banners, Auncientes, &c.
               
                  Signifer, is he that beareth standerd, or Banner in ye field.
               
                  Signa infesta, Standerdes, or Banners aduaunced in battaile, in marchinge againste enimies.
               
                  Signa, be also Standerdes in warre, or Auncientes.
               
                  Vexillum,
                  
                     Romulus his Standerds.
                   is likewise a Banner.
               I reade, that Romulus, firste kinge of the Romaines, vsed Fasciculos faeni, that is to saie, a grippe, or knitche of hay bounde together at the ende of a longe staffe, and so the same was borne in the fielde, in the steade of a Standerd.
               The principall tokens, or signes whiche were vsed of old time in the Standerdes, or Ancientes of Emperours, and Kinges, were three.
               
                  The firste, and chiefe was the Eagle, whiche hath to diuers Emperours appeared,
                     Eagle.
                   as a signe or token of victorie, that shoulde fortune to them in theire warres. The which the Emperours of Rome doo yet aduaunce in their Standerdes. And who so euer beareth the same, is called Aquile fer, id est, the Standerd bearer of the Romaines.
               The seconde principal token, which both the Grecians, and Romaines vsed in their Standers, was the Dragon.
               
                  
                     Dragon.
                  The third, and principall token that the Emperours of Rome vsed, was that whiche in Latine is called Pila, a round Ball,
                     Pila.
                   or Globe, as a figure to declare the Nations that were subiecte vnto them in the whole worlde.
               Nowe shall ensue accordinge to my entended purpose, diuerse, and many Cote armours, which I haue collected, and gathered out of sundrie Authours, as well Latines, as Frenche, and Englishe.
               Therefore, first and aboue al others, the Armes of our moste dreade soueraigne Ladie, Queene Elizabeth, that nowe is our chiefe Gouernour vnder Christe, ought of al estates to be knowne, and knowne to be reuerenced, and honoured, as thereby we maie woorthily confesse, and acknowledg ye Soueraigntie, Royaltie, Preheminence, and Dignitie of her, and her Auncetours magnificence, in vnitinge, and knittinge together the whole Iurisdiction, Right, and Title of the most noble Realmes of England, and Fraunce into one: and so vnited, are quarterly borne in one fielde.
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  First on the right quarter is seene ye armes of France, the fielde whereof is Azure, three Floures de Luce, d'Or. And in the seconde Englande, the field wherof is Gules, three Lyons Passant, Gardant, d'Or. The thirde as the second, and the fourth as the firste. All within her Garter of heauenly hewe, adorned with the golden Poeme: Honi soit qui maly pense, ensigned with the Emperiall Crowne of her Noble Maiestie.
               Thus, who readinge, & marking the order of the blazon of the said moste noble Armes, and seinge the same afterwarde in any Churche, Castle, or other place, but by & by he will know the same, and remember the reuerence therunto due: and not that onely, but wil breake out, and say, God saue the Queene, God saue her Grace. Whiche woordes so saide, and hearde of others, bringeth all the hearers in remembrance of their obedience, and duetie to her, being our most lawful Prince, and Gouernour. And these Armes are of all men, liuinge vnder her, & her Lawes, and within all her Dominions, to be extolled, and set vp in the highest place of our Churches, houses, & mansions, aboue all other estates & degrees, who so euer they be. And this example of our Soueraignes Armes, I first put forthe, as principally aboue all others to be knowne, for the causes aforesaide.
            
            
               ¶Of Signes borne in Armes.
               
                  
                     Beastes.
                  There be diuers, & sundrie signes borne in Armes, as of beastes, the Lyon, Tyger, Panther, Parde, Leoparde, Rhynoceron, Eliphante, Gryphen, Cameleon, Cameleoparde, Linx, Beuer, Beare, Wolfe, Greyhounde, Hound, Foxe, Ape, Satyre, Histrix, Euydros, Leontophon, Musion, &c. These properly be called beastes, and no other. For (as Isidore saithe) Bestiarum vocabulum propriè conuenit Leonibus,
                  
                     Isidor. Li. 1
                        •
                     . Cap. 2. Etym.
                   
                  Pardis, Tygribus, Lupis, & Vulpibus, & caeteris, quae vel ore, vel vnguibus saeuiunt: exceptis Serpentibus. Bestiae autem dictae, à vi quae sauiunt.
               
               Also euery other beast, thē these especially before named, ought not to be tearmed in Armes, Beastes, but by theire

proper names, as a Bull, a Busse, in Latin called Tarandulus, an Horse, Mule, Asse, Ramme, Goate, Hart, Hynd, Bucke, Bore, Hare, Conye, &c. These in Latin are called Pecora, aut Pecudes, Iumenta, & Quadrupedia. Armenta equorum, & boum sunt, quòd his in arm
                        •
                     s vtimur. And howe they differ in, or touching their names, maie easily be vnderstande by Isidore, who so will reade him, Libro 12. Cap. 1. Etymo. titul. De Pecoribus, & Iumentis.
               
               There are seene also in Armes, the signes of Serpentes, as the Dragon, Coluber, Basiliske, of somme called the Cockatrice, Salamander, Amphibene, Stellion, Prester, Ceraste, Hyder, Aspe, Adder, Snake, Iacule, the Chelyder, &c. Quae quatuor pedibus nituntur, sicut Stelliones, &c. non Serpentes, sed Reptilia nominantur.
               
               Of Fisshes,
                     Fishes.
                   these are especially borne, the Delphine, Luce, Whale, Bocas, Pearche, Roche, Glade, Mullet, Amyon, Melanure, Balene, Mugill, Crabbe, &c. And of Shell fishe, the Escalop is chiefely borne in Armes.
               Of Fowles,
                     Fowles.
                   or Byrdes these are principally borne: the Eagle, Gossehauke, Fawcon, Marlet, Swanne, Crane, Storke, in Latin called Ciconia, Curlewe, Ostriche, Phenix, Pellicane, Peacock, Hernesewe, in Latin called Ardea. The Rauen, Crowe, Pye, Backe, otherwise called Uespertilion, or Reymouse. The Nightingale, Turtle, Kaladre, Owle, Kite, Swalowe, Onacracle, Martyn, Myredromble, Lare, Phesante, Partriche, &c. These birdes, & many moe are borne in Armes. Yea the Bee, Butterflie, Grashopper, & Waspe are borne of diuers: as also ye 
                  Scarabie,
                  
                     Trees.
                   which is a fly hauing hornes like to an harte.
               Of trees are borne in Armes, the Palme, Oliue, Oke, the Lawrell or Bay tree, Sene, in Latin called Collutea, Ceder, Cypres, Beech, Walnut, Mulbery, Sicamor, Figtre, Iuye, &c. And yet these trees are not so ofte borne, as their braunches, fruite, & leaues be: as by examples hereafter shall folowe.
               Of Floures,
                     Floures.
                   Hearbes, & their Leaues, an infinite number are borne: as ye Rose doble & single, Alleluya, Marigold

the Lily, ye Safron floure, Celidō, Amomū, Merche, in Latin called Apiū, Artemesia, Agnus castus, ye herbe called Diptanū, or Diptanus in latin, in english Diptanee, or Detanee: Milfoile ye great, Lupoine, ye floure de Luce, Cinquefoile, Quaterfoile, Trifoile, Daisy, Iacinth, Senuy, Uiolet, &c.
               
                  
                     Fruites.
                  Of fruitꝭ especially are borne the Pomgranade, in latin called Malū granatū, the Oreng, Peare, Apple, the bery of the tree called Morus, & the leafe also is borne in armes, &c.
               Of dead thingꝭ are borne an infinite nūber in armes, as Crownes, Coronetꝭ, Maces, Pillers, piles, globes, Cheurons, Bars, Bendes, Helmets, Gauntlets, swordes, daggers or pugiōs, Launces, Fauchons, Sithes, Billes, crosses, Bokes, Letters, Beasantes, Plates, Torteauxes, Pellets, Saltries, Chequers, Castles, Toures, Rockes, ships Galthropes, Scocheons, Formales, Mollets pierced and whole, Sufflues, Harpes, Bels, Lampes, plomets, Ropes or funes, Bowes, Arowes, Dartes, water Bowges, Losenges, Mascles, Buckles, Fusils, Frets, Billets, wheles Oges, Cuppes, Ewers, Combes, Saltes, Phiols, Garbages, Pheons, Ballances, Maunches, Gorges, Bugles, Trompets, Lures, Bernacles, Harrowes, Rowels, trewels, in latin called Trullae, Annulets, Ankers, Portculesses Keies, Boltes, &c. And here is to be noted, that al thinges bearinge life, of what nature so euer they be of, excepte Crownes Imperial, are to be preferred for their estimation, and dignitie in signes of Armes, before al those which haue no life. As of beastes, the Lyon is to be commended & preferred before all others, who so euer beareth him, for that he is king of all beastes: but whether whē he is borne passant, gardant, or regardant, rampant, saliant, seiante, couchant, or dormant, be moste worthiest, or auncient in Armes, I refer that to the Heraultes: yet not altogether, for I dare boldly affirme the bearing of him one way to be most of honor & souerainty: as when he is passant, gardant. And nowe the reste I commit to their iudgemente, who are mine elders. Of Byrdes or Fowles, the Egle,

Pellicane, Phenix, and Swanne haue chiefe dignitie.
               
                  Of Serpentes, the Basiliske and Dragon.
                  Of Fisshes, the Delphine, Luce, and Glade.
                  Of Trees, the Palme, and Oliue. Of some the Lawrel is preferred.
                  Of Floures, the Rose, Lilye, or Floure de Luce.
                  Of Deade thinges, Crownes, and Beasantes.
                  Of Fruites, the Pomgranade beareth the preheminence.
               
               Thus I haue shewed vnto you of diuers & sundrye signes borne in armes, & the right opinion of ye worthines therof. So that now is to be shewed the blazon of al those signes in armes, with many other mo, not before remembred. Wherunto I would wish al & singuler estates, who would haue the name of gentlemen, endeuour thē selues Manibꝰ, pedibus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      (vt aiunt) to the knowledg of these which ensue. And because the Crosse is ye most triumphant signe and worthiest, the same shall firste haue place.
               
                  Kinge Arthur, that mightie conquerour, & worthy, had so greate affection & loue to this signe,
                     Kinge Arthure his Armes.
                   that he lefte his Armes whiche he bare before, wherein was figured 3. dragons, an other of 3. Crownes, & assumpted, or tooke to his armes, as proper to his desire, a Crosse Siluer, in a field vert: & on the first quarter therof, was figured an Image of oure Ladye, with her sonne in her armes. And bearinge that signe, he did many marueiles in Armes, as in his Bookes of Actes, and valiant Conquestes are remembred.
               Thus in olde time it maye be perceiued, what Princes thoughte of the Crosse. So hathe it beene thoughte

good to the wisedome of God, that Christe shoulde subdewe the vniuersall worlde throughe the Hornes of the Crosse.
                     Eras. in Luc. 24. c.
                  
               
               Many of the Iewes, whiche crucified that innocente Lambe, and our Sauioure Iesus Christe on the Crosse, when he was deliuered vnto them,
                     Idem in Matth. 27. c.
                   wisshing his bloude to light vpon them, & their children, to ye destruction of themselues, and their successours, did afterwardes worship the Crosse, which before cried in the multitude, Up with him, vp with him, crucifie him. The Crosse being afore odious & a thinge of reproche,
                     Idem Iohan. 19. ca.
                   was made by Christ, a triumphant signe, wherunto the world boweth down the head, which Angels doo worship, & Diuels doo feare. Hereon he vanquished the power of the tyran Sathan, & all the puissance of this world. In this signe it behoueth vs therfore to get the victorie, & not otherwise to triumphe, then vnder this standerde of our Heauenly Prince, which is Christe.
               
                  It is also to be read, that this signe of the Crosse was sente from God to that blessed man Mercurie,
                  
                     Crucis sign
                           •
                        
                        ̄.
                   as Vincentius in Speculo historiali,
                  
                     Beati Mercurij insignia
                   of the maruelous deathe of Iulian the Apostata, Libro. 15. saithe, that an Angell broughte vnto the saide Mercurie, all armoure necessarye for him, with a Shielde of Azure, and thereon figured a Crosse flowrie, betwene foure Roses, Golde. As it is written, that this Shield, with the signe of the Crosse therein, was sente from Heauen: so I reade in the Chronicle of Gawyne, whiche he writeth Super Francorum gestis, that in the time of the Frenche Kinge Charles, the seuenth of that name, the Sunne shininge, and the Elemente beinge

fayre and cleare, there appeared, and was seene bothe of the Englishe men, and Frenche, a white Crosse in the cleare firmamente. Whiche heauenly signe so seene on bothe Nations, they of the Frenche, whiche as then moued Rebellion againste theire Prince, did take as an admonishemente from Heauen, of theire duetie and obedience due vnto him. Suche veneration by them was giuen vnto the signe of the Crosse, fearinge the persecution, and pounishemente that woulde fall vpon them, for suche theire Rebellion, as they had then alreadie committed.
               Thus it maie be seene,
                     Religion conceiued of the signe of the Crosse.
                   that the Religion whiche they conceiued at the sighte of the signe of the Crosse, didde so alter theire mindes, and mollifie theire hartes, that they did returne from theire wicked practises of Rebellion, vnto theire obedience, with crauinge pardon.
               As this signe of the Crosse was then sene of the French in the Elemente, whiche was (as I collecte) in the time of the noble and puissant Prince, kinge Edwarde the third. So the saide Gaguine reciteth in his Chronicles, that the Armes which the Frenche kinges nowe beare, were sent from Heauen to Clodoueus then kinge of Fraunce,
                     Lilia coelo demissa. The Armes of the French kinge.
                   when he was baptised, & became a Christian. id est, 3. Lilia aurea quibus subest caeli sereni color, quem Azurum Franci dicunt. That is to saie, three Lilies Golde, in the coloure of the fayre, and cleare Frmamente, whiche in Frenche is called Azure.
               And of the saide miraculous Ensignes Gaguine writeth these twoo verses, as ensue.
               
                  Haec sunt Francorum celebranda insignia Regum,
                  Quae demissa Polo, sustinet alma fides.
               
               It were too longe to write, or place here all the verses, whiche Iodocus Badius Ascensius doth rehearse in the ende of the saide Gaguine his Chronicle, De Insignibus Franciae. Wherefore, omitting the greatest parte therof, take these fewe folowinge.
               
                  
                  At nobis caelica dona,
                  Et pia Francorum placeant insignia Regum.
                  Aurea caelesti primum suffulta colore
                  Lilia, Caesareis olim iam credita ceruis.
                  Auri flamma dehinc, veterum victoria Regum.
               
               These yet remaine to the French kinges for their Ensignes: where before Clodoueus time,
                     Buffones. 3. they did beare three Todes, as witnesseth the saide Gaguine in the first booke of his Chronicles. Fol. 5. pag. 2.
               And of their Auriflambe ye same Gaguine writeth thus. Traditum quoque est pannum sericeum rubrum,
                  
                     Auriflamma.
                   
                  instar signi militaris quadratū, miro fulgore splendentem diuinitus esse exceptū. Quo in expeditionibꝰ contra fidei christiane hostes pro signo Franci Reges vterentur, buic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vexillo nomen Auriflammā hactenus permāsisse. Deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      à Dionisianis caenobitis asseruatā esse. Sed abutentibus signo aduersus Christicolas Regibus illud euanuisse. Thus of their Armes and Auriflambe, howe they had the same, appeareth. Yet here is to be noted, that when they aduanced their Auriflambe, which was their standerd, in battaile against the Christians, it vanished awaie (as Gaguine declareth) and they had the same no more againe. For what commeth, or is sente from Heauen (as they allege the same was) muste be godly, rightuously, and vertuously borne, vsed, and ordered. Yet notwithstanding when that was gone, they did newe make an other (as he reporteth) Non dissimili forma: Not vnlike vnto the first, whiche was halowed by theire Bishoppes, and kepte, Inter sacra.
               
               Thus thir owne Chronicler dothe declare, howe theire Auriflambe did vanishe awaie, Almightie God being displeased with them, when they aduanced the same against their Christian neighbours, and were gladde to counterfeite an other. Euen so likewise for theire vntruthe, infidelitie, and treacherie, he hathe taken from them theire Armes, (whiche also they saie were sente them from Heauen) and hathe iustely, as a rightuous Iudge, giuen them

to our kinges of this Realme of Englande, to enoblishe them withall, and as theire owne righte, and Enheritaunce, whiche moste puissantly, and valiauntely they haue borne, and doo beare, he therefore be praised, Qui est Rex Regum, & Dominus dominantium.
               
               
                  Nowe to retourne to the signe of the Crosse, from the whiche I haue so muche digressed. The Armes whiche of olde Heraultes are called Saincte George his Armes,
                     Crux Sancti Georgij.
                   are thus to be blazed, Latinè, Portat vnum Scutum de Argento cum quadam Cruce plana de Rubio. Anglicè: He beareth a Shielde Argente, thereon a plaine Crosse Gules.
               The Ensigne of the noble Cittie of London hathe the like fielde and Crosse,
                     Insignia Ciuitatis London.
                   sauing that on the dexter parte thereof is seene a Daggare, colour of the Crosse.
               
                  Semblablye the Cittye of Yorke hathe the same fielde,
                     Insignia Ciuitatis Eboraci.
                   and Crosse, bothe in mettall, and coloure, but the Crosse is charged with fiue Lyons Passante, Gardante d'Or, as here appeareth.
               
                  
                  This noble Baron beareth Argēt, a Crosse ragueled Sable. I find it blazed in French thus: Le Syre Sandes, port d'Argent, vne croix recopee Sable. This Crosse is two trees,
                     L. Sandes.
                   the boughes beinge cutte of.
               Of other Crosses there be borne a greate number, bothe charged, and not charged: and of some of them I will make description. Wherefore nexte to the plaine Crosse before spoken of, take these ensuinge for example.
               
                  
                     Crosse Molyne.
                  
                  A Crosse Molyne, is called ye Crosse of a Myll: for it is made to ye similitude of a certaine instrument of yron in the nether stone of the Myll. The whiche instrumente beareth, & guideth the ouer Myll stone equally, & directely in his course, that he decline not ouer much on the right part, nor on the left part, but ministringe to euery parte that, that is equall, & withoute fraude. And this Crosse might conueniently be assigned, & giuen to Iudges, Iustices, & to suche others, who haue iurisdiction of the Lawe, as a signe, or token for them to beare in their Armes. That is to saie, as the foresaid instrument is there placed, to direct the Myll stone equally, and without guile, so all Iudges are bounden, and tied in conscience, to giue equally to euery man, that whiche is his righte. And it is to be saide, that the possessour of these Armes beareth Azure, a Crosse Molyne d'Or.
               
                  It is to bee knowne, also, that the sayde crosse, (as many other signes in armes) maye bee shadowed. That is to saye. That of whatsoeuer colour the fielde is of, the vmbre or shadowe of the token or signe borne in the fielde, is traced of a contrarie color,
                     Crosse vmbre
                   and the bodye of the thinge shadowed, is of the color with the fielde. And this crosse so vmbrated, is thus to bee blazed. A. beareth Or, a crosse Moloyne Umbre.
               Yet here is to bee noted, that yf anye suche cote armoure be honored with a chefe, the thing so borne in cheefe shall not bee vmbrated, but abyde perfect in metall and coloure as it was before, leste suche a cote should lose all together hys dignitie, or worthynes. Therefore Blazors of armes must bewaire of these ensignes which are borne vmbrated,
                     Chiefe.
                   and not to thincke of them, as of coloures transmuted:

For as I fynde written in an auncient aucthor, there haue bene certaine nobles, and gentlemen in thys realme, the whiche did bere diuerse shadowes in theire armes, as of the Lyō, Antelope, Greyhounde, &c. And of hym that beareth suche a Lyon, thys is the blazon. M. beareth Sable, a Lyon rampant, Umbre.
               And it is to bee considered, that suche gentlemen, as did beare theire armes shadowed, had theire progenitours, bearinge the same not shadowed, but whole and perfecte. And because theire possessions and patrimonyes descended to other men, then the neuewes or kynsmen of suche gentlemen, lyuynge in good hope, and trustinge to haue the possessions and patrimonies so descended to other men agayne, did in the meane while beare theire progenitors

armes vmbrated, leauing all other differences. For when at anye tyme suche theire inheritance, to them reuerted, then myght they beare that Lyon, or other beaste, in suche forme, fielde and coloure, as theire progenitors did firste beare the same. And note, it is more worship and moche better for them, to beare theire armes so vmbrated or shadowed, then wholy to leaue th'ensignes of theire progenitours. But yet in my iudgement, they myghte alwayes (with conuenient differences) haue borne the same whole, and not vmbrate: and inespecially they must be so ordered at theire funerals, notwithstanding the bearinge of them otherwise in theire lyfe tyme. And herein the iudgemente and sentence of the kynges at armes,
                     Kinges at Armes.
                   muste chefely take place, and haue vigor and force: for the distribucion of this difference before spoken of, onely belongeth and apperteineth vnto them.
               
                  Yet there remaynethe one crosse to bee descriued, which I did se on a graue stone in the North ende of the Mynstre of Yorke, the name of the bearer I haue forgotten, but the fielde of his cote armoure was Gules, on a Crosse Sarcele D'or, fiue mollettes of the firste, persed. But thys Crosse, and others, I fynd so often not well figured, that it maketh me doubteful of the certayne names thereof. Wherfore, it is very needefull for all payntors, cutters, grauers, glasiers, and embrodurers diligently to see, and weightely to consider the cote Armors, whiche are put to them to bee paynted, cutte, graued, englassed, or embordured, that they committe no offence therein, contrary to the forme and ordre prescribed to them by th'officers at armes, who haue by most auncient lawe the correction, yea

and the direction therof, whan they can iustely fynde any faulte in thynges apperteynyng to Armorie.
               And thus I will passe ouer Crosses, there bene so many of them, and those of diuerse other formes, degrees & charges, then before are blazed: as Crosses, enuecked. entrayled, forked, paled, and trunked Crosses, Potonce, Mascule, Besāte, vairee, vndee, nebulee, cordee, botonye, Batune, formye, vrdee, pomelle, furshe, nowye. Crosse taue, checkey, waue, Frette, humette, and fitche. There are also to bee founde and seene in armes Crosses doble partited, semyed, quartered of the fielde wherein they stande, contrecomponed, persed, graded, & voyded &c. These maye the better bee throwly perceaued, yf the reader hereof will diligently note, and beare awaye, what is sayde of them by master Leighe, in hys Accedence of Armorye, where he largely entreateth of sondrie and diuerse sortes of Crosses, borne in sondrie wise, as maye appeare, fol. 29.30.31. &c.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of Armes quartered.
               
               1. Beareth quarterly Gules, and Or, one Mollet d'argent, on the firste quarter. These appertaine to the right honourable, the Earle of Oxeforde, by the name of the L. Ueer.
                     L. Veer.
                  
               
               2. Beareth quarterly Golde, and Gules, an Escarboncle, Pomette, Fleurettie, Sable, Brochant sur le tout. This is the sixte Cote, borne, and marshalled in the Cote Armour of the right honourable, Sir Henrye Sidney, knight of the moste honourable Order of the Garter, and

Lorde Presidente of the Queenes maiesties honourable Councel in Wales.
               3. Beareth Or, and Gules, a Bende varie argent, & Azure,
                     Sackuile.
                   by the name of Sackeuile, Baron of Buckehurste.
               4. Beareth Or, and Gules quarterly, on a Bende Sable,
                     Euers.
                   3. Escaloppes d'argent, by the name of Euers.
               Armes also which are quartered as aforesaide, for their diuersitie, maie in some respecte seeme to be twoo Cotes, borne quarterly: where, Secundum veritatem, they are but one. As in example.
               
                  He beareth quarterly, Sable, and Argent engrayled, Billettie. Here needeth no further Blazon, to saie, that the Billettes be conterchāged, or transmuted of the fielde, or as of the one quarter, or ye other, since there is descried Bilettie ouer all. Touchinge that the quarters in the diuision of the Escocheon, be engrayled, that terme is so frequented, because two colors, or any mettal, or colour be gradately inferred one into the other, that no partition, but onely the Purflue, maie be seene betwene them.
               
                  
                  He beareth Argent, and Sable quarterly, Rasie. These be called quartered Armes, rassed, for ye twoo colours be rassed, as thoughe the one were rente from the other. And as these are borne rassed, so likewise are borne in Armes quarters, borders, &c. Enueckeckie, or dentillie. Whereof ye maye finde examples in the Accidence of Armorie.
               
                  The moste auncient bearing of twoo Colours, or Mettal, and Colour, quarterly in one Cote Armour, is to beare the same plaine, and neither engralee, rasie, enueckie, or dentillie. As for example: The L. Saye beareth quarterlye,
                     L. Saye.
                   Or, and Gules.
               And these suffise for Armes quartered, which are alwaies to be taken for single Cotes, yet of greate antiquitie, as to the Heraultes are beste knowne.
            
            
               ¶Of Armes parted per Pale.
               Armes parted the long way, or on length, being of two colors in one Escocheon, equally parted from the middest of ye highest part therof vnto the lowest point, are in Blazō termed Partie per Pale. And of the olde Heraultes, Latinè, Partita planè secundum longum. Gallicè, Partee du longe. And thereof shalbe shewed 7. sundrie partitions

moste vsed in Armes Paled: videlicet.
               
                  Firste, when any Gentleman beareth twoo colours, equally parted plaine waie, ye shall blaze his Armes thus. A. beareth Argent, and Sable parted per Pale.
               B. beareth Argent & Sable, parted per Pale, engrale.
               C. beareth Or and Gules parted per Pale, rasee.
               D. beareth Argent and Azure, parted per Pale, enueckee.
               E. beareth Sable and Or, parted per Pale, dentee.
               F. beareth Argent and Uerte, parted per Pale, nebule. It is called Nebule, for that twoo colours are put together by the maner of Cloudes.
               G. beareth Or and Gules, parted per Pale, vndee. It is termed Undee, because two colors are caried one into an other, by the maner of water troubled with ye wind.
               
                  A Cote Armour parted per Pale Dente, or otherwise, is often found charged with one token or twaine. But of antiquitie one is moste receiued, as one of the Hungerfordes hathe,
                     Hungerforde his Cote.
                   who beareth Gules, & Uerte, parted per Paile Dentille, a Cheuron, Or. This Cote is of dignitie muche the more, because, besides ye Cheuron, the fielde is occupied with no other signe.
            
            
               
               ¶ Of Armes parted per Fesse.
               Euen (as next before) ye may reade of ye Armes parted on the length of the Escocheon: So maie ye vnderstand, that there be partitions also made ouerthwarte the Escocheon, euen in the middest of the same, equall, of twoo colours from the righte side, to the lefte: and is termed in Blazon, Partiè per Fesse. Gallicè, Partie transuersee. As in example: H. beareth Argent & Azure, Partie per Fesse. And so descriuinge the colours of any Escocheon, ye may saie, as before, of the Armes parted per Pale.
               
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse engrale,
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse rasie,
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse enueckye,
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse dentie
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse nebule,
                  
                     videlicet. Partie per fesse vndee &c.
               
               Note also that these particiōs per fesse, are to be seene often charged with one tokē of armes, or with two, as the diligent searcher shal fynde, yf hee take hede therunto, in thys booke.
               
                  
                  
               
               Howe these particions maye bee in sondrye wyse charged, take these fewe folowing for examples.
               1. beareth Or, & Sable, parted per fesse, vndee ij. Lyōs Dragōs, trāsmuted of ye field. I terme these lyōs transmuted because ye Lyō first placed in ye fielde, is Sable, in Or, & the other is Or, in Sable. Thys maye be taken for ij. cote armoures, without breathe of any Rule in Armorye. And is called of olde heraultes lentallye: whiche wherefore it is so called,
                     Lentally.
                   ye may reade in M.G. Leyghe hys Accidence of Armorye, where he treateth of sondrye particions mesles.
               2 beareth Gules, & Sables parted per Fesse enuecked,

three lyons nayssant argente, crowned.
               3 Yet I fynde an other particion, as thys example teacheth, videlicet. S. beareth Sables, & Gules embatyled per Fesse three Fer de molyns d'Argente.
               
               4 The sayde particions also maye bee charged conueniently with twoo tokens, and the same of two natures & kyndes, as thus it maye bee deuised .R. beareth. Sable, and Argente parted per Fesse nebule, two Faucons volante, and a Greyhounde cursante, contrechanged of the fielde. Here the Fancons are argente volante in Sable, and the Greyhounde is Sable cursante in Argente, & thys is good armorye. These examples may suffise for armes parted per Fesse, although there be sene diuerse other particions, as partye par Cheuron, par Pile, par Bēde &c. whiche are both auncient,
                     Particions.
                   and ryght commendably borne of diuerse in sondrie maners, formes, & ordres. Therefore here I ceasse to write anye further of them, vntill I shall speake generally of signes borne in armes.
            
            
               ¶Of a cheife in Armes.
               WHosoeuer beareth a Cheife in hys Armes, it is placed in the hyghest place of the Escocheon, as a thing honorable to be borne, & the fielde beneth is twise so moche as the cheife, & most commonly is seene of an other colour. Therfore certaynely they do greatly erre, which call such Armes parted, althoughe they bee of two coloures: for in parted armes it is required that the coloures bee equall, & so it is not in anye Armes that is honored with a Cheife, or a cheifetaine. And of the same, how in sondry wise they are borne in Armes, take these fewe ensuyng for exāples.
               
                  
                  
               
               1 The Lord S. Iohn beareth Argente,
                     L. S. Iohn.
                   on a cheife Gules, two mollets d'Or persed verte.
               2. Uerrey,
                     Titcheborne.
                   a Cheife, d'Or. Thys is borne by ye name of Tytcheburne, of Titcheburne. Note that thys chiefe is not charged with anye thynge, and therefore is of greate antiquitie. And of the fielde of thys cote I wil speake hereafter, where it shalbe entreated of sondrye furres.
               3. Barrie vndee, of vi. dargent, and Sable, on a chiefe gules, a Lyon passant gardāt d'Or. Here the chiefe is charged noblye which a quicke beaste of honor.
               4. Ermyne, on a chiefe dēted, Gules, thre Crosses taued,

Or. The tricke of this cote I toke, as I found it paynted on a Table,
                     Thurlande.
                   in a parishe churche of Nottingham, & as it is there mencioned, is borne by the name of Thurlande.
               Ermyne, a chefe dented, ermynes. Of these thyngs borne in thys cote, it shalbe spoken hereafter.
               Ermyne, on a chefe indented, Gules, thre crownes Imperiall, d'Or. Here I neded not to haue spokē of the metal of the crownes, for all suche are of golde. The note of thys cote armour I toke in the parishe churche of Tyckehill in Yorkeshire.
               
                  There maye be also borne in cheife, diuerse tokēs of armes, and yet the chefe not altered in colour from the field, as the cotes before blazed are, as for example.
               D. beareth Or, three water bowges Sable in chefe. Here the fielde remaynethe perfecte without alteracion of coloure, and abydeth onely as charged in the chefetaine, whiche is very auncyent Armorie.
            
            
               ¶Of Armes Palee.
               AS I haue sayde before, no Armes ought to bee called parted, but yf they bee made of two colours, once parted and no more. Armes paled, (whereof nowe is to bee shewed, are not, nor ought to bee called partite Armes, although they bee diuided in two coloures. For the coloures in armes palee, are diuersely parted of two coloures to the nombre of 6. payles: and such Armes, be called Armes pailed, for they bee made after the maner of payles, yet in sondrye wyse, as plaine, vndee, daunsete &c. wherof take these fewe for examples.
               
                  
                  
               
               1. A. Beareth palee, of 6. pieces, Or, and Sable.
               2. C. Beareth Palee dansetee of fower Sable & Argente, or thus, hys fielde is of Payles dauncie Sable, and Argente. These Payles bee called dansetee, because they bee crooked and sharpe, and so put together one into an other. And note, that these cotes Armoures bee termed Paled, because therein are founde so many Pales of one coloure, as is of the other.
               3 In diuerse armes of gentlemen be founde, one, or two Payles of one coloure, and what coloure is founde more, is the fielde, and of one Payle, take thys for example.
               
                  G. Beareth Argente a Pale, bendee d'Or and Sable, And of him that beareth two Pales, it must be said thus.
               4 Beareth Gules .ij. Pales d'Argent. These pales maye bee borne vndated, which is as moche to saye, as watered with a floode, and also engraled, dented, vaire &c. Whos
                     •
                   marketh well these two last sheildes, shall playnely perceaue, that both the dextre parte, and sinistre of the escocheon, abyde perfecte of one metall or coloure, and so shall hee not fynde of armes Palee, for what coloure thereof is founde of the right parte of the sheilde, the contrarye is founde on the lefte.
            
            
               Armes Barrie.
               
                  As armes Palee are borne, so may they bee borne barrye, and of hym that beareth suche Armes, it is thus to bee sayde. He beareth barrie of vi. peces d'Argent and Azure.
               William the cōquerour,
                     William Conquerour.
                   what tyme hee entred thys Realme, hee did beare thys Coate Armoure, but after hys conquest, he tooke to hym other Armes, videlicet two Leopards of gold in a field Gules. For as I reade, Henry the seconde was the firste kynge that dyd beare three Lyons.
               Also, it is to be knowne, that armes may in diuerse wise be Barred, and the firste maner is playne and streyghte, as is next before exemplefied. Yet in the blazon of them, ye shall not saye, hee beareth playne armes barred, But yf they bee otherwise borne, ye than must nedes declare the blazon of them, how they differ frō playne armes barrie, for some are borne Barrie vndee, barrye verrye, or enuecked, barrye dauncye, or Bendye &c. Others also be barred

with a Lyon rampaunte, a greyhounde, or other Beaste. And some bee barred otherwise, as hereafter partely shalbe shewed by sondrye examples folowing, videlicet.
               
               
               1. D. Beareth barrie vndee, of 4. sable and Or.
               2. E. Beareth Ermyne iij. barre ways verrye d'Or and Guyles.
               3. F. Beareth Sable, twoo barres Daunsetye, d'Argente: And of a cote Armoure barry bendee. Reade in M. Gerarde Leighe hys Accidence, wher he entreateth of cotes commixt with two of the honorable Ordinaries.
               
                  4. Beareth barree of viij. pecis, argente, and verte, an Orle of Marlettes, Sable.
               And note that these cotes barriez, are moste commonly borne of 6. and 8. pieces, but neuer aboue, as Upton witnesseth: Yet when you se anye armes, hauing mo pieces, blaze them on thys wise.
               
                  Hee beareth on x. barrulettes, Argent, and Gules
                     •
                  , a Lion rampant, Sable, armed, langued, and accolle d'Or, brise d'vne Croix de mesme en l'espaule.
               
               The Frenche Heraultes blaze thys cote, Face de dix pieces, and whether there be two Barres, three or mo, they terme them all, Facee.
               
               
                  Moreouer our Barre is verye often placed in Armes, euen from the middest of the Dexter parte, to the Sinister of the Escocheon, so that the fielde muste containe twise so muche aboue the Barre, and as muche beneath, as ye Barre is of it selfe. And therefore it conteineth but the fift parte of the fielde. As in example: B. beareth Argente, a Barre Gules.
               Here note, that a Barre maie be borne with twoo Barrulettes, one aboue, and the other beneath the Barre. And Barre, as I saide before, containeth but the first part of the fielde: and the Barrulet is a Diminutiue thereof,

and is but the fourth parte of the Barre. And these Barrulettes are often founde Florie, or Flored, for that they be made after the maner of Floure de Luces, issuinge out of them as diuerse otherwise, whereof take these nexte for examples.
               
               The firste beareth Uert, a Barre and twoo Barrulettes, Or.
               The seconde beareth Argent, a Barre, with two Barrulettes Floritie, Sable.
               The thirde beareth Gules, a Barre betwene two Clossettes, d'Or. The Closset is the halfe of the Barre. And

these two halfes thus deuided, haue ye force of two Barres in the fielde, for moe, by the name of Barres, it maie not containe, and keepe equall diuisions.
               The fourth beareth Argent, three Barres Gemewes, Sable.
               
                  He beareth Gules two Barres D'or, ouer all a Cheuron, Sable. Gallicè sic: Portoit de Gueulles a deux faces D'or, au Cheuron de Sable sur le tout. I place this Cote here in the end thus charged, that the gentle Reader maye more plainelye vnderstande the same to be equally deuided into fiue partes, accordinge to the Rule aforesaide.
            
            
               ¶ Of Bendes.
               
                  There is oftentimes found in Armes, one Bende, and the same is borne of diuerse noble Gentlemen, bothe charged, & otherwise. And thei are called Bendes, because they beginne aboue an highe, at the Dexter angle of the Shielde, and descende to the Sinister parte of the same, and muste containe of the fielde, as before is shewed in the Concordes of Armorie.
               And of him that beareth such a Bende, ye shal say thus. Uidelicet:
                     L. Scroupe.
                   The L. Scroupe of Bolton beareth a Bende,

Or, in a fielde, Azure. I here firste blaze the Bende, for the honour of the mettall that he is of, and yet the fielde is of the colour of the moste faire and cleare Firmament.
               These Bendes maie be borne with Bendelettes of diuerse fourmes, some plaine, some faire, some with Cotizes bothe plaine, or daunce, &c. As in example.
               
               Firste beareth Argent, a Bend Wauie Sable, these appertaine to the right worshipfull Sir H. Wallop of Wallop in the Countie of South K.
                     Wallop.
                  
               
               The seconde beareth Uert, a Bende Uiurie Dargent.
               The third beareth Or, a Bend sinister, engraled Gules.
               
                  The fourth beareth Azure, on a Bende Argent, cotized with twoo Cotizes d'Or, a Lyon Sable, armed and langued Gules.
               Moreouer, there be founde in Armes, certaine other Bendes, to some straunge, from these aforesaide, as these twoo whiche ensue.
               
               Firste bearethe Fusilles, whiche are so termed, for that they be made like Spindles. As in example: Sidenham beareth Argent, a Bend Fusillie Sable, or fiue Fusilles in Bende Sable.
                     Sidenham.
                  
               
               The other beareth Sable, a Bende Brettesse de Or.
               Fusilles in Bendes, are commonly borne of Gentlemen in Burgondie, and as they be borne in Bende, so maie they be borne in Fesse, &c.
            
            
               
               ¶ Foure Cotes of sundrie deuises.
               
                  
               
               
                  1. Beareth Sable, a Bende Argent, with twoo double Cotizes, Potences, and Conterpotences of three peces d'Or.
                  2. Beareth Bendie of sixe pieces d'Or, and Uert, on a Fesse Argent, three Floures de Luce Azure.
                  3. Beareth Sable, sixe Battunes d'Argent.
                  4. Beareth Azure, a Crosse Sarcele d'Or, with a Batune, componie d'Argent, and Gules.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Differences betwene Fusilles, Lozenges, and Mascles.
               
                  
               
               
                  1. Beareth Gules,
                        Denham.
                      foure Fusilles in Fesse Ermyne, by the name of Denham.
                  2. Beareth Sable, three Lozenges Argent.
                  3. Beareth Or, and Ermynes Lozengie.
                  4. Beareth Sable, 7. Mascles D'argent voided. 3.5. & 
                        •
                     .
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Cheurons.
               
                  
               
               
                  1. Beareth Ermynes, a Cheuron D'argent.
                  2. Beaerth Sable, a Cheuron betwene three Huchettes D'argent, lye de Uert.
                  3. Beareth Ermyne, twoo Cheurons Azure, charged with sixe Estoiles of eight poyntes D'or.
                  4. Beareth Cheuronie of sixe D'argent, and Sable.
               
               
                  
                  He beareth d'Or, a Cheuron Uersie d'Azure, in Chiefe, an Eagle displayed with twoo heades of the seconde, membred, and beaked Gules. This Cheuron may be borne frettie with an other, and the same contercoloured, as I haue seene in diuerse Bookes of Armorie.
            
            
               ¶ Of Armes enbordured, or with bordurs.
               Bordures, many and diuerse are to be sene in Armes, whereof, those whiche be plaine, are moste vsually borne, and of the same, and others diuers, take these ensuing, for example.
               
                  
                  
               
               1. Beareth Fusillie, Bendie, D'or and Gules, a border Azure.
               2. Beareth Argent, one Lyon saliant d'Azure, armed, langued, and crowned Gules, a Border dentelle Sable. As this Border is dented, so it maie be borne, engraled, enuecked, goboned, vaire, &c.
               3. Beareth Gules, one Crosse Patie D'or, betweene foure Beasantes, with a Border D'argent, semie trefolie propre.
               4. Bendie of sixe, Azure and Argent, on a Scocheon Sable, an Hartes heade cabazed D'or, with a Plate in

Chiefe. Here the Cutter was negligent, in omittinge a Bordure d'Ermyne, contrarie to his instructions.
               These Bordurs also are borne, charged with diuerse & sundrie signes or tokens, as ye maie perceiue by these ensuinge.
               
               1. Beareth Uerte, fiue Fermaulxz in Crosse D'or, a Border d'Argent, charged with eight Ogresses: or after the Frenche blazon, Ogressee de huit pieces.
               
               2. Beareth Argent, fiue Torteuxes in Saltier, a border de Gules, Fermaille D'or, de S. pieces.
               3. Beareth Or, one Crosse botonye d'Hermines, betwene

fower hurtes, with a Bordure Sable, semie billetti d'Argent.
               
               4. Beareth d'Argent, one Saltier engrayled Sable, betwene fower pomeis, on a bordure Azure, viij. Escocheōs d'Or, charged with as manye Crosses, crossettie fitche Gules.
               Hee beareth Sable, a Lyon rampant d'Argent, with a bordure gobonie de l'vne & l'autre.
               
               Many other Bordures are to be seene, charged with infinite tokens, both quicke and deade. And these Furres, Krouine, Ermines, and Verrey, doe most nobly sett forth these Bordures, to the great beautefiyng of the same. And of Armes borne with Bordures, these fewe aforesaid may suffise for examples.
            
            
               ¶Of quarters & cantons.
               There bee borne in Armes sondrye Quarters or Cantons both charged and not charged, whiche are of moste auncient bearing, and therefore worthye to bee noted.
               
                  
                  
               
               1. Beareth Geronnie of vi. pieces Or and Sable, on a quarter Gules, one mollet d'Argent. I tooke the tricke of thys cote as I founde it in a glasse wyndowe, within the Parishe churche of Lileburne in Leycester shire, but by what name it is borne, I there could not get knowledge.
               2. Beareth sable semye florye d'Argent, and a quarter d'Or.
               3. Beareth d'Or, two barres Sable, a quarter sinistre d'Ermyne.
               4. beares Gules, twoo pales de vaire, on a quarter sinistre d'Or, one fermaulx lozengie, Gules.
               
                  Kyrrell beareth d'Or, ij. Cheurōs gules, a quarter de mesme. They must bee here blazed two Cheurons, althoughe the quarter abateth one halfe of the Cheuron mountant, that is, the ouermoste Cheuron, and thys is a true Rule, whan ye shall see anye token abated, by the dignitie of the Canton: for the token or signe, although it should seme abated yet it abideth perfect in blazon.
               
               1. The fielde is of the Perle, a playne Crosse Diamonde, Canton d'ermyne. For difference one mollet Topazie, signifiyng the third brother of that house from whence in bloode hee is lineally descended. Thys ensigne apperteyneth

to M. Laurence Holenshed,
                     Holenshed.
                   a gentleman endowed with diuerse noble vertues and excellēt qualities, very experte also in blazon deuises heroyques, and a feruent louer of all them, whiche embrace the studie thereof, wherefore worthye he is of such rememberance, and commendacion more ample.
               2. Beareth Argente, one Cheuron Gules, & on a Canton Sable a cinquefoyle d'Ermyne persed. Thys Cote I haue seene borne also without a Canton, by the name of Tyas.
                     Tya
                           •
                        .
                  
               
               3. Beareth Gules two estoyles of eyghte poynctes d'Or, a canton Ermine,
                     Leuerton.
                   by the name of Leuerton.
               4. Beareth d'Or, ix. Muscles vert, voyded two thre, thre, one, on a Canton sinistre, Sable. one Cressante with a Mollet d'Argent persed.
               
                  
                     Basset.
                  Hys fielde of the Topaze, three pyles in poyncte Rubie a Canton d'Hermine.
               
                  
                     Sou
                           •
                        he.
                  He beareth Mars, 8. Beasantes, Solis, 2.2.3. i. a Canton d'Hermyne.
            
            
               ¶Of Armes Checkey.
               MOreouer diuerse signes & tokens in armes are founde to bee compounded of sondrye metalles and coloures, as also Checkey, and thereof whole fieldes are nobly borne: all which, these fewe examples folowing shal playnely teache you.
               
                  
                  
               
               1. Beareth Argent, a demy Lion verte, in cheife d'Or, and Sable contrecomponed.
                     Contrecomponed.
                   Thys cheife is so termed, because it abideth of one metall and one coloure: and but of two Tractes onelye, therefore in no wise maye bee called Checkey, although it appeare like thereunto.
               2. Beareth Or,
                     Checkey.
                   a Fesse Checkey d'Argent and Sable, betwene three escocheons d'Ermynes. This Fesse as it is here of thre Tractes, is right Checkey. And an hole fielde, may be Checkey, saens nombre.
               
               3. Beareth Checkey d'Ermine and Gules, on a Fesse Sable.
                     Incressa
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        .
                   3. Incressants d'Argent. The Frenche Heraultes

blaze thys, troys Croissans tournez.
               
               
                  
                     Cheife.
                  4. Beareth Checkey d'Argent and vert, in Cheife Gules, one Lyon naissant d'Or. Blaze thys by the Planettes thus. The field is checkye, Lunae, and Veneris, a Lyon naissant Solis a cheife Martis. This might bee the cote of some aduenturous knyghte and a louer, for here hee hath the Sunne and Moone, that god and goddesse Mars, and Venus, for patrons in hys ensigne.
               
                  
                     Warren.
                  Hys fielde is Checkey, Saphier, and Topaze. And note, as there is whole fieldes Checkey of mettall and coloure, so are to bee seene, Bendes, Barres, Bordures, Cheurons, Saltiers, &c. Checquey. Also the two furres Ermyne, and Ermynes with anye coloure, doe ennoblyshe all Coates Checked.
               
                  
                     Chesse Borde
                  
                  C. Beareth Sable, a quadrate Checkye d'Argent and Gules. Thys is taken for a Chesse borde, or a Table made for the playe of the Chesse.
               This game was first inuented by Athalus, as Master. G. Chaucer reporteth in hys dreame, saying.
               
                  ¶At the Chesse with me she gan to playe
                  With her false draughtes full diuerse
                  She stale on me, and toke my feirse
                  And whan I sawe my feirse awaye
                  Alas I couthe no longer playe
                  But sayde, Farewell swete Ywis
                  And farewell all that euer there is
                  Therewith fortune sayde, Checke here
                  
                     And Mate in the midde pointe of the Chekere
                  With a Paune errante, alas,
                  Full craftier to plaie shee was,
                  Then Athalus that made the game
                  Firste of the Chesse: so was his name.
               
               The plaie at the Chesse,
                     Chesse. Go. Li. 1 ca. 26 Fol. 81. of all games moste proueth mannes witte. And Sir Thomas Eliot in his Booke, entituled the Gouernour, saithe, That the Chesse, of all games, wherein is no bodily exercise, is moste to be commended: for therein is right subtile engyne, whereby the witte is made more sharpe, and remembrance quickened. And it is the more commendable, and also commodious, if the players haue readde the Moralization of the Chesse, & when they playe, doo thinke vpon it. Which bookes be in English: but they be very scarce, because fewe men doo seeke in playes for vertue or wisedome. In the olde time, it was the playe of Noble men: and therefore the Table thereof is not vnworthy to be borne in armes. Et sic deinsignijs Scaccatis ad presens satis dictum est.
               
               Before in this booke I haue partely touched signes, or tokens borne in armes by diuers Nobles, & other Gentletlemen, which I could not omit, by reason of the vsinge of so many examples. Therfore nowe hereafter shal folowe generally the blazon of beastes, foules, fishes, and other thinges quicke & deade, borne in Cote armour, and of thē ye shal see a great number of examples: as of sundrie diuisions of Cote armours, charged with any of the honourable Ordinaries, especial or general, of Quadrates Royal, and other thinges Armoriall, not vnworthy to be redde, and borne in memorie.
               There are sene & found oftentimes in ye armes of diuers excellent & noble persons,
                     Tractes, or Traces.
                   Tractes, simple, or plaine, & the same otherwhile engrailed on both partes, and enuecked, sometime double traced, & floried, & is then called a double Treasure, or Tressure. As in example.
               
                  
                  He beareth D'or, a Lyon rampant, within a double tressure cuonterflorie, Gules. This is the Cote armoure of the Scottishe kinge.
               I finde the said armes otherwise descriued in Latin,
                     Scottish king his Armes.
                   without mention made of anye tracte, or Tressour Conterflorie: (as in an Epistle whiche a certaine knight named Darius Tibertus, wrote to a Prelate called Iulius Caesar Cantelinus, maie appeare in these woordes.) Tuos Natales Regios non ignorantus ex vtroque Parente. Mater enim ex Banciorum prosapia, Regia est, cum qua affinitatem contrahere Aragonius Ferdinandus non est dedignatus. Cātellinorum verò familiam à Rege ipso Albionis Insulae (quam Scotiam vocant) procedere, tum anuales edocent, tum commune etiam insigne declarat. Ruber nempe in auro erectus Leo patenti ore, cauda ad caput reflexa, coloris Cyanei. The Tressure here omitted in the Latine blazon, I yet finde an other diuersitie of a parte of the Lyon, from that whiche is borne of the Scottishe.
                     Difference in the taile 
                           •
                        f a Lyon.
                   For the Caude, or Taile of this Prelate his Lyon, is coloris Cyanei, of a bright blewe colour. This I thoughte good not to omitte, for the rarenesse of the diuersitie. Also because this Lyon here descriued, is a beaste of moste honour, and also is called kinge of beastes. Leo autem Grecè, Latinè Rex interpretatur: eò quòd sit Princeps omnium bestiarum.
               
               
                  
                     Lyon.
                  I meane somwhat to treat of him, & his excellencie far passinge other beastes. I reade, that at his voice all other beastes dreade, and stinte sodainely. And in his Regalitie he maketh a circle about them with his tayle, so that al the beastes stande in greate feare to passe out ouer the line of his circle. And thus they stande astonied, and afraid, as it were, abidinge the Heste, and commaundemente of their

kinge. Plinie saith, that the Lyon is in moste gentlenesse and Nobilitie, when his necke and shoulders be healed with heare and mayne. This his Nobilitie, especially is espied when he rampeth. And the Lyons that be shorte, with crispe heare or mayne,
                     Etymo. Lib. 12 ca. 2. 
                  Imbelles sunt: as Isidore saith. And suche Lyons fighte not.
               Nowe I will declare howe many, and sundrie wayes they are borne in armes, as Passante, Rampant, Saliant, Seiante, Couchante, Darmante, &c. And also of sundrie fourmes and fashions,
                     Diuersitie of bearing Lyōs
                   as Gardante, Regardante, Dors an Dors. i. Backe to backe, or endorsed, Combattante, Dimidiated, Parted, Couped, Dismembred, Uulned, Bicapited, Bicorporated, Tricorporated, Umbrated, or Shadowed. Their tayles forked, nowed, resignante, reuerberante, descendante, percussed, and contercoloured. In all these fourmes, or likenesses they are descriued, and pictured: as also otherwise ensigned or marked, then here is remembred. Wherefore I will presently write more, bothe of his bearinge diuersly, and of his sundrie natures and properties.
               
               1. Beareth Sable,
                     Segraue.
                   a Lyon rampante d'Argent, crowned, by the name of Segraue.
               2. Beareth Uert,
                     Lyon Salian
                           •
                        e
                   a Lyon Saliante d'Or. The difference, betwene these Lyons, the one Rampante, and the

other Saliante, is plainely in the saide Escocheons figured, accordinge to M. G. Leigh his description, in the Accidence of Armorie.
               The Lyon when he pursueth man, or beaste, vseth to leape, and so he dothe not when he voideth, or fleeth. If a man shoote at him, the Lyon chasteth him, and throweth him downe, but neither woundeth him, ne hurteth him.
               
                  Isidore saithe, that there is one kinde of Lyon, whiche hathe ragged heare and mayne. And suche a Lyon is sharpe,
                     Isidor. Lib. 12 Cap. 2. and fierce of harte. Animos eorum frons & cauda indicat. Virtus eorum in pectore, firmitas in capite. Thus it appeareth, that theire courage, vertue, and stedfastnesse is knowne by their heades, breastes, and tayles.
               
                  The fielde is Gules, a Lyon Rampante, his Quene forked, d'Ermyne. This is borne (as I late sawe it in a Manour, called Chamber house in Berk) by the name of Stokes.
                     Stokes his Cote.
                   Here the Lyon his tayle is forked. For by ye taile his boldenesse, and harte is knowne, as the horse is knowen by the eares. For when the Lyon is wrothe, first he beateth the earthe with hys tayle, and afterwarde as the wrathe encreaseth, he smiteth, and beateth his owne backe.
               
                  
                  K. Beareth Or,
                     Lyon Seiante
                   a Lyon Seiante Sable, within an Orle d'Ogresses. Here he is figured sittinge. In perill the Lyon is moste gentle and noble. For when he is pursued with houndes, and with hunters, he then desireth not to lurke, nor hideth him self, but sitteth in the fieldes, where he maye be seene, and araieth him selfe to defence.
               
                  L. Beareth Sable, a Lyon Couchante,
                     Lyō Couchāt.
                   & three Lyams in chefe d'argēt. Solinus saith, that ye Lyon dreadeth, whē he seeth or heareth a whelpe beatē: and by none other meanes, waies or dealinges, he is chastized, corrected, or made to couche. Circa hominem Leonum natura est benigna, vt nisi laesi, nequeant irasci. Isidor. Ety. Li. 12. Capite 2. de Bestijs.
               
               
                  
                  M. Beareth Uertte, a Lyon Dormant,
                     Lyon Dormāt
                   betwene sixe wheles d'Or. 3.2. and 1.
               
                  Isidore saithe, that the Lyons eies are as though he were awake, when he sleapeth. Cum a
                        •
                     rmierint, vigilant oculi. They dreade noyse, and russhing of wheles, but fire muche more. Rotarum timēt strepitus, sed ignes magis. Modicè dormiunt. Haec ille.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Lyon Ranpant vulned.
                  N. Beareth Gules, a Lyon Rampant, d'Or, vulned with a darte d'Argent. This Lyon is wounded, and when he is so, he takethe woonderfully heede, and knoweth him that firste smote him, and reysethe on the smiter, though he be in neuer so greate a multitude. Vulneratus, percussorem obseruat acutissimè, & in quantalibet appetit multitudine. Isidorus.
               
               
                  
                  O. Beareth Azure,
                     Lyon Passant
                   a Lyon Passante, d'Argente. This Lyon is in the plaine field, accordinge to the highenesse of of his stomake: which is such, that if he happen to come into any Woode, or Couerte, he ronneth out of the same with swifte course, accoumptinge it vile shame, to lurke, or hide him selfe.
               
                  P. Beareth Ermine, a Lyon Passante,
                     Lyon Passant
                           •
                        
                     
                   Gules, armed, & langued d'Azure. This Lyon is nowe goinge to showe him selfe in his Regalitie, keeping as it were, a moderate pase in vieweing of his vassalles that be vnder his obeisance. And in this his kinde, he showeth as it were, his mercie towardes them, in sufferinge them to liue vnder his gouernment quietly.
                     Ety. Isidrr. Lib. 12. cap. 2. 
                  Isidore saith, that their nature is also benigne, or gentle towardes mankinde. Vt nisi laesi, nequeant irasci. Their mercie is known by many, and ofte examples. Prostratis enim parcunt. Captiuos obuios repatriare permittunt. They neuer slea a man, but in greate hunger.
                     Drewe.
                   The saide Cote armoure is borne by the name of Drewe.
               
                  
                  
                     Passant, Gradante.
                  
                  Q. Beareth Sable, a Lyon Passante, Gardante, betwene three keies d'Or. This Lyon here noted, is as it were consideringe his estate, beinge fourmed in his kindenesse. For he is a right kinde beast, and knoweth, and loueth hym that dothe him good. The Lyon (wherof Appian the Grammarian dothe speake) is also straunge for his kindenesse,
                     Plinius Li. 8. cap. 12. & almost incredible. A seruant that had ronne awaye from his Maister, and hidde him selfe for feare in a Caue within a greate Woode, tooke a thorne out of a Lyons foote, whiche then came to him for succoure, as he laye there. Nowe, when he had donne, the Lyon to requite his good turne, broughte suche meate to the Caue, as he coulde kill in the woode. The whiche meate the seruaunte rostinge in the Sunne, beinge in the moste hote Countrie of all Africa, did eate from time to time.
               At lengthe yet beinge wearie of suche a lothesome life, he lefte the Caue, and came abroade, by meanes whereof he was taken againe. And beinge a slaue to his Maister, (who had power of life and deathe ouer him) he was condemned to be caste to the wilde beastes at Rome, there to be deuoured of a Lyon.
               The poore caitife stoode pitiefully in the sight of thousandes, euer lookinge when he shoulde be deuoured. It happened at the same time, when this felowe was thus adiudged to die, that the same Lyon was taken, whose foote he healed in the woode. When the Lyon was put to him, he came firste very terribly towardes this felowe, and immediately knowinge what he was, stoode stil, and at lengthe fawned gently vpon him. The felowe, at first being amazed, began to take harte vnto him afterwardes,

as halfe knowing him likewise, and thus they began both to take acquaintaunce the one of the other,
                     Thākefulnes of a Lyon.
                   and plaide together a good space without all danger. Whereupon the people beinge amazed, muche woondered at the straungenesse of this thinge. And standinge thus astonyed, they sente to knowe of the slaue, what this matter shoulde meane.
                     Vidd Aul. Gel. Noc. Atti. Lib. 5. Cap. 14. Unto whom this poore wretche opened the whole thinge altogether, euen as it happened. When the people hearde this, they not onely reioyced much at the sight thereof, but also they made earnest requeste to his maister for his life. His maister marueilinge as muche as any of them at suche an vnwoonted kindenesse: gaue him, not onely his life, but also his freedome.
               And nowe, to the ende he might haue somewhat whereupon to liue, the people gaue him a Fee for terme of his lyfe. The felowe by and by gotte him a Lyne, and a Coller, and carried the Lyon vp and downe the Cittie, in suche sorte, as Huntesmen carry a Greyhound, or a Spaniell, the people stil woondringe,
                     Leo hospes hominis: homo medicus Leonis.
                   and sayinge euer as he came by: Behold a man that hathe cured a Lyon: behold a Lyon that hathe saued a man.
               Hereby the thankefulnesse of the Lyon is to be noted, and the example to be marked of all suche, as woulde accoumpte them selues, either more naturall, or kinde, then the Lyon. And let vs not doo that, whiche brute beastes haue not seemed to doo, but learne to be kinde one to an other, and thankefull.
               Of the properties, or nature of the Lyon, I neede write no more, but I will you to reade Aristotle, Plinie, Isidore, Solinus, and Bartho. De proprietatibus rerum. And there you shall finde a large fielde of them.
               And who so desireth to knowe the difference betwene Lyons Gardante, and Regardante, &c. then let him peruse M. G. Leighe his Accidence of Armorie, and there he shalbe resolued in the most of them. Yet hereafter shalbe descriued the sundrie bearinge of diuerse Lyons in seuerall

fieldes, and amongest other tokens of Armes.
               
                  The fielde is Sable, twoo Cranes Addorsez proper. In Chiefe, a Cressante d'Ermyne.
               I reade, that there be certaine people betweene Indie, and Cathaye,
                     Pigmei. Cubite.
                   called Pigmei, of stature but one Cubite longe, whiche contayneth one foote and an halfe. And Plini saith, that they bee armed in yron, & fight with Cranes, & do ride on goate buckes, and haue arrowes, and dartes, to shoote and caste at Cranes, that pursue them. In the springe time they gather an Hoste, and comme to the Sea, and destroye bothe theire egges, and byrdes, with all theire mighte, and strength. They make many suche voyages, whiche if they lefte vndone, Cranes would so much there encrease, and be so many, that the Pigmei coulde not withstande them. And somme write, that they arraye them so with feathers, as thoughe they hadde wynges. And of their battaile with Cranes, and of their stature, I finde it thus written:
                     Vide Plin. li. 7. Cap. 2. 
                  Pigmei homuntiones sunt paruuli in India, vnius tantum cubiti statura, vel etiam breuiores, qui cum gruibus auibus assiduè certant, ab eis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vincuntur saepissimè. Isidore (because of their smal stature) calleth them, Nani, Dwarfes. And the Grecians call them Pigmeos:
                  
                     Isidor. Ety. li. 11. Cap. 3. 
                  Eò quòd sint statura cubitales..But who so euer will reade a proper Embleme of them, see Alciate Lib. 1. Emblem. 20.
               Of the nature of the Crane, yee maie reade hereafter, in this Booke, where specially I entreate thereof.
               
                  
                  The field of Cupid, that God of loue, is Sable, a Pomegranade proper. Alciate thus describeth Loue, and hys Ensigne, in these woordes:
                     Cupid his Ensigne.
                   
                  Amor est iucundus labor in lasciuo otio, cuius Signum est Punicum mallum in Clypeo nigro. The interpretation hereof, (the Authour nexte before mentioned) leauethe to euery one, after hys iudgemente, or to iudge of the saide description of Loue, or his Ensigne, as they please. But if yee will haue Loue, or Cupide excellently sette foorthe, euen in his colours, as he is fayned of the Poetes, then reade the saide Alciate his Emblemes, Lib. 1. Commemtar .XCVII. in statuam Amoris, and M. G. Chaucer, especially his booke entituled, The Romante of the Rose.
               
                  The field is Gules, a Mermaid, or Syren proper,
                     Syrenes, or Mermaidens
                   playing on a Harpe, d'Or. The Mermaide is a sea beast, woonderfully shapen. Isidore saith, Li. 11. ca. 3. where he treateth De Portentis,, that there be three Syrenes, somedeale Maidens, and somedeale foules, with wingꝭ & clees. One of them singeth with voice, an other wt shamble, and the third with Harpe. Thei please shipmen so greatly with their songe, that they drawe them to peril, and to shipwracke. The cause why they haue winges & clees, Quia Amor & volat, & vulnerat. Secundum verttatem autem meretrices fuerūt, quae transeuntes, quoniā ad aegestatē deducehant,

his fictae sunt inferre naufragia. In fluctibus commorasse dicuntur, quia fluctus Venerem creauerunt,
               
               
                  Phisiologus speaketh of Syrena, & saith, it is a beaste of the sea, in shape wonderfull, as a maide from the Nauell vpward, and a fish from ye nauel downewarde. This beaste is glad, & mery in tempest, & heauy & sad in faire weather. Shee causeth shipmen to sleape with the swetenesse of her songe: and when she perceiueth them to be on sleape, shee entreth the shippe, and so vseth one of them, whom shee best liketh, as here is not to be spoken, or beleued.
               
                  
                     Sphinx.
                  
                  S. beareth Sable, a Sphinx, d'argent, crined, & pēned d'or. Diodo. Sicul. saith, that this was a monster which did propound a certaine Probleme to them yt passed by her to ye city of Thebes: & by her they were out of hand destroyed, onles they could expound ye same Probleme, whiche at laste, Oedipus filius Regis Thebanorū
                   (passing by ye mountaine, where the saide monster was) did expound. And therefore (as the said Diodore reporteth) Semet ex monte praecipetauit: Shee caste her selfe headlonge downe the hill, where shee did alwaies abide to stop ye passage to those that went to the said Citie. The which Probleme I haue takē forth, as it metrized by Iohn Lydgate, in his woorke whiche he wrote of ye destruction of Thebes that City: In haec verba.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           Probleme.
                        There is a beaste marueilous to see,
                     The which in sooth, at his natiuitie
                     Is of his might, so tender, and so greene,
                     That he may him selfe not sustaine
                     Vpon his feete, though he had it sworne.
                     But if that he be of his Mother borne,
                     
                        And afterwarde, by processe of age,
                     On foure feete he maketh his passage.
                     And then vpon three, if I shall not faine,
                     And alderlaste, he goeth vpright on twaine:
                     Diuerse of porte, and wonderfull of cheeres,
                     Till by length of many sundrie yeeres
                     Naturally, he goeth againe on three,
                     And sithen on foure, it maie none other be.
                     And finally, this is the trothe plaine,
                     He recouereth kindely againe
                     To the matter, which that he came fro.
                     Loe here my Probleme is all idoo.
                     Muse thereupon without warre or strife,
                     It to declare, or els leese thy life.
                  
                  
                     Thilke beaste (ꝙ Oedipus) thou spake of heretofore,
                           Oedipus expoundeth the Probleme, or Riddle.
                        
                     
                     Is euery man into this world ibore,
                     Which may not goe his limmes be so softe,
                     But as his Mother beareth him alofte
                     In her armes, when he dothe crie, or weepe.
                     And after that he ginneth for to creepe
                     On foure feete in his tender youthe
                     By experience, as it is ofte couthe
                     Aforne reckened, his handes both twoo.
                     And by processe, thou maist consider also,
                     With his twoo feete, for all thy fell tene,
                     He hathe a staffe, him selfe to sustene.
                     And then he goeth shortely vpon three,
                     And alderlaste, as it muste needes be.
                     
                        Voiding his staffe, he walketh vpon twaine,
                     Till it so be, through age he attaine
                     That luste of youth wasted be and spente.
                     Then in his hande he taketh a potente,
                     And on three feete thus he goeth againe,
                     I dare affirme, thou maist it not with saine.
                     And soone after, through his vnweeledy might,
                     by influence of natures right,
                     And by experience, as euery man maye knowe,
                     Like a childe, on foure he creepeth lowe.
                     And for that he maie here no while soiourne,
                     To earth againe, he must in haste returne,
                     Whiche he came fro, he maie it not remeue.
                     For in this world, no man maie eschewe
                     This very sothe, shortely and no doubte,
                     When the wheele of kinde commeth aboute,
                     And naturally hathe his course ironne,
                     By circuit, as dothe the sheere sunne.
                     That man, & childe, of high, and lowe estate,
                     It gayneth not, to make more debate.
                     His time is isette, that he must fyne,
                     When Atropos, of malice dothe vntwyne
                     His liues threede, by Clotho first compouned.
                     Lo here thy probleme, fully is expouned.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           The description of Sphinx by Io. Lydgat
                        This Monster had also by description,
                     Body, and feete of a fierce Lyon.
                     And like a maide, in soth was heade and face,
                     Fell of his looke, and cruell to menace.
                  
               
               
                  The description of this Monster is more aptly declared in Latin by Alciate, Embl. 46.
               Although this be a Monster horrible, yet Augustus Caesar, at the firste entrie into his Empire, vsed the same for his singular, or most secret Ensigne: as ye maie reade in ye booke entituled, Heroica M. Claudij Paradini. Fol. 21.
               
                  The fielde is Uerte,
                     Apes called Circopetici.
                   twoo Apes Circopetikes combattante, with tayles reflexed, Golde. Isidore saith, that there ben fiue kindes of Apes. Of the which the Sphing before mentioned is one. And these here next described, are others, and are called Circopetici, which are a kind of Apes hauinge tayles.
               The third kinde of Simies, or Apes,
                     Ape Cenophe
                   are called Cenocephali, whiche are in all proportions of the bodye, like to the common sorte of Apes: but in the face moste like vnto an hounde. Vnde & nuucupati.
               
               The Apes,
                     Ape Satyre.
                   called Satyri, are pleasante in face, and of a merye countenaunce, and often mouinge, and playinge. And these be the fourth kinde of Apes.
               The fifte kinde of Apes are called Callitrices. These in the face haue a longe bearde,
                     Ape Callitrice.
                   and a broade tayle. Apes are wise, or skilfull of the Elementes. They are merye, and reioice at the newe of the Moone, but at the full, and waning, they are triste, and sadde. Their yonge ones, whom they loue beste,
                     Foetus suos impatienter diligit Simius.
                   they carrie before them, and are so impatiently in loue with them, that with muche embracinge, they doo often styfle, and kill the same, as Plinie saithe.
               
                  
                  
               
               The field is Sable, two Herōsewes d'Argēt. And to this Crest vpō ye helme on a wreath d'or,
                     Satyre.
                   & Azure, a Satyr proper, manteled Gules, dobled d'argent. These Satyres (as Isidore saith) ben somwhat like men, hauing croked noses, & hornes in ye foreheade, & feet like vnto goates feete. Such an one sawe S. Anthonie in the wildernes. Qui interrogatus à Dei seruo, respondisse, fertur, dicens: Mortalis ego sum vnus ex accolis Heremi, quos vario deluso errore, gētilitas Faunos, Satyros
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      colit. This Satyre is also called Faunus, aliàs Pan, Deus Rusticorum, et Pastorum à Poëtis fingitur.
               
               
                  Hee deliteth to bee in woodes,
                     Leonic. lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . ca. 24. de var. Histor.
                   and on hyghe hylles. Hee was worshipped as a God of the husbandmen, and herde kepers in Arcadie, whiche countrey is full of hylles, and aboundante of flockes of shepe. Leonicus sayeth, that Fauni, bee the same, whiche are called Satyri, and Syluani, and are monstres in Ethiope, of the shape of man, yet hauing hornes, berdes, and feete like to goates, beyng also very swift and lecherous. Of thys, and manye others, that haue the shape of men and of beastes, ye maye reade in Plynie, Solinus, Paschasius, Isidore, &c. yet of some of them more hereafter shalbe spoken in theire places.
               
                  R. Beareth Azure,
                     Minotaure.
                   a Minotaure, d'Argente, on a bendlet sinistre sable, these lettres S.P.Q.R. d'Or. This is also an horrible monstre, hauyng parte of the shape of man, & parte of a Bull: whereof hee is called Minotau
                        •
                     us: whiche monstre, how hee was conceaued and begotten, and of the Labyrynthe, or of th'obscure and inextricable buyldinge, whiche Minos kynge of Crete, caused Dedalus, that cunnyng workeman to make, wherein the sayde Monstre was hydde, ye maye at full reade and vnderstande of them, in Ouide. lib. 2. de Arte amandi▪ Idem lib. 8. Metamor. Virgil. lib. 6. Aeneid. Thys picture of the Minotaure, the Romaynes of olde tyme, did beare in theire auncientes of warre: as maye appeare by ye fower lettres trāsuersed on the bende moste manifeste: Senatus Populus Que Romanus, declaringe hereby, that the same Minotaure, was the noble token or ensigne of the Senate & people of Rome: as is affirmed by Cicero, & many other learned writers. And what is signified by the bearing thereof, loke Alciate, lib. 1. Embl. 8.
               
                  
                  
                     Centaure.
                  The Centaure is an other mōstre, and taketh hys name (as Isidore sayeth) for that hee is of a mixte kynde, the one halfe of man, the other halfe like an horsse. These were supposed to bee horssemen of the countrie of Thessalia, which pricked vp and down of horsses, and therefore some of them semed that Horsse and man were one bodye: Inde Centauros fictos asseruerunt.
               
               
                  B. Beareth Argente, an Hien saliant Sable, and one Escaloppe sinistre d'Azure.
               
                  
                     Hyen.
                  Thys is a cruell beaste, in quātitie like vnto the wolfe: & he is called Hyena of Hyando, for yt hee reyseth to hys praye with open mouth and voyce, and in hys necke is heare, as in the necke of an horsse, and vpon al the length of hys ridge also. Hee commeth to houses by nyghte, and feyne
                     •
                  h speache of mankynde, and calleth some man by hys name, and when he hath hym without the dores, he deuoureth hym: Likewyse, doth he houndes, as gladly as men, by suche hys feyned speache. It is wondrefull what Plinye, Aristotle, Solinus, &c. writte of thys Beaste.
               
                  C. Beareth Azure, a Barre engraled d'Or, betwene two Tygres passante d'Argent.
               
                  
                     Tigre.
                  The Tygre is abeaste wondrefull in strength, and moste swifte in flighte, as it were an arrowe. For the Persians call an arrowe Tigris. Hee is distingued with diuerse speckes: and of hym the floode Tigris toke the name: ꝙ is rapidissimus si
                        •
                     
                     
omnium fluuiorum. Thys flode is in Armenye, and the Tygre is bredde there also. It is saide, that Bacchus vsed these beastes in hys chariot, for theire meruelous swiftenes in conueyng of the same.
               
                  D. Beareth Or,
                     Panther.
                   a Panther, regardant, propre in Fesse, betwene three Dolfes verte.
               The Panther, is frende to all Beastes, saue the Dragon, for hym hee hateth full sore. This beaste hath on his skinne litle rounde spottes, some blacke, and some white: and all fower foted beastes haue likynge to beholde his colours: And therfore, where hee is, thither will they resorte, because of ye swete sauour that commeth from hym, which the Dragon onely can not abyde. And though the Panthere bee a ryghte cruell beaste, yet hee ys not vnkynde, to them that helpe or succourre hym: as Plinye putteth an example of one, that delyuered and helped vp a Panther hys whelpes, that were fallen into a ditche, & the Panther lad hym out of the wildernes with glad semblāce, and fawned on hym, and as it semed in a maner thancked hym ryght hartely.
               The Parde,
                     Parde.
                   nexte to the Panther, (as Isidore sayeth) is the moste swifte Beaste, & preceps ad sanguinem. Saltu enim ad mortem ruit. Hee hath diuerse rounde speckes in hys skinne, as the Panther. And varieth not from hym in colour, but onely that the Panther, (as Plinie witnesseth) is more full of white speckes.
               The Leoparde also is a Beaste most cruell,
                     Leoparde.
                   and is gendred in spouse breache of a Parde, and a Lyonesse, & tertiam originem efficit, vt dicit Isidorus. Plinye, in hys naturall hystorie, sayeth: that the Lyon gendreth with the Parde,

or the Parde with the Lyonesse, & ex vtroque coitu degeneres partus creari: & of suche gendring commeth vnkinde pardes, as of an horsse, and of a she Asse, or of mare, and a male Asse, is gendred a Mule The Leoparde hath diuerse coloures, as the Parde hath: and pursueth hys praye stertelynge and leaping, and not runnyng. But yf hee take not hys praye in the thirde leape, or in the fowerth: then hee stinteth for indignacion, and goeth backewarde, as though he were ouercome, and is lyke to a Lyon in bodie, tayle, and fete: but in the shape of the heade hee is like to the Parde. Hee is muche lesse in bodye then the Lyon, and therefore hee dreadeth the Lyon.
               
                  G. Beareth Sable, an Unicorne trippynge d'Argent,
                     Vnicorne.
                   in chyefe a maydens heade, crowned verte.
               Thys Beaste of the Grekes is called Monoceron: id est Vnicornis: for that hee hath in the myddle of hys foreheade an Horne of fower fote longe: & that horne is so sharpe, and so strong, that he throweth downe or thirleth all that he reyseth on. He fighteth ofte with th'Elephante, and woundeth hym in the wombe, and so throweth hym downe to the grounde. Also hys strength is such, that hee is not taken with anye power or myghte of hunters, sed sicut asserunt qui naturas animalium scripserunt, A Mayde is set there as hee shall come, who openeth her lappe, and the Vnicorne leauing all hys fiercenes, layeth thereon hys heade, and then falleth on slepe, and so is takē or slayne with dartes of hunters, asthoughe nature had geuen hym no armoure, to defende hym withall.
               H. Beareth Sable and Gules, parted with a Cheuron betwene three heddes Rhinocerontez coped d'Argent.
               
                  This Beaste of the Grekes is called Rhynoceron,
                  
                     Rhynoceron.
                   for that hee hath an horne in hys nosethrille: and differeth but in that one parte from the Vnicorne.
                  
                     Hornes.
                   Hornes bee geeuen to beastes by nature, to defende them with, in steade of armoure and weapon, and bene therfore sett in the ouermost parte of the heade, that they maye alwayes bee readye, to withstande theire enemies, and to defende the wrongs offered vnto them: But to these two beastes next before descriued, nature hath otherwise placed theire hornes, might, and power, as in the middest of their foreheade, and nosethrylles.
               
                  I. Beareth Azure,
                     Elephante.
                   an Elephante d'Argente, portant a turret d'Or. Thys Beaste passeth all other fower foted Beastes in quantitie of bodie. Porus kynge of the Indians, lying in cāpe, on the further side of the Ryuer of Hidaspis, had 85. Elephantes of huge bodie and strength, to let the passage of the greate Alexander, with hys armye, as in the hystorie of Q. Curtius is declared.
                     Q. Curt. li. 
                     
                        •
                     . These Beastes therefore, whan they bee tamed are best in chiualrie, for they without all feare ouerthrowe men of armes, bee they neuer so strongely ranged in battayle, yet they flee a mouse, & dreade the leaste grunte of a swyne. Also when the Elephantes of the sayde kyng Porus, were by the souldious of the great Alexāder,
                     Copidae.
                   with a certaine kinde of weapons called Copidae, sore wounded, and put in great feare, then weare they more hurtefull to theire owne gouernoures, castyng them downe to the earth, and tearing them in pieces, then terrible or fearefull to theire enemies, runnyng out of the battayle like shepe. But their vnwonted crie, bringeth a great

terroure to their enemies, and especially to horsse, that naturally doe feare them. Plinye sayeth, that among beastes, the Elephante is moste of vertue: so that vneth among men is so great redynes founde, they learne so well, and are so easie to bee taughte. In so moche, that they bee taughte to knowe the kynge, and to worshippe hym, yea, to doe vnto hym reuerēce,
                     Elephante his witte & puis saunce.
                   with bowing of their knees. The Elephante which kyng Porus (before named) did ride vpō, was taught to bende towarde the Earthe, as it were submitting hymselfe: whiche when other of the Elephantes sawe, they likewise bowed downe theire bodies. Thys Elephante also, seynge the bodie of hys ruler and kyng vpon the groūde, readie to bee spoyled, and hys harnesse and vesture aboute to bee pulled of, Hee than began to defende hys master, runnyng vpō his spoylers, and wente about, to lyfte hym agayne vpon hys backe. For (as the sayde Q. Curtius reporteth in hys hystorye, whiche hee writte of the actes of the great Alexander). The Elephantes of kynge Porus in the conflict betwixte hym and the same great Alexander, were sene with theire longe Tronckes,
                     Tronckes.
                   (whiche they call Probostides) to take men in theire armoure from the grounde,
                     Probostides.
                   & to deliuer them vp to theire gouernours: and whome they coulde not holde, those they trampled to death with theire fete. These beastes are slowe, & not apte sodeinly to moue, Aiunt Plutoni sacrum hoc animal esse.
               
               Upon these beastes the Persians and Medes vsed to fighte in towers of tree, and out thereof threwe and caste dartes, as it were out of towers or castles. And as it is redde of yt 
                  Elephante, hee is more easie to bee tamed, and more obediēt to man, than any other wilde beaste.
               
                  
                     Elephante.
                  The Elephant his nose is longe and greate, and harde as an horne: and hee vseth hys nose, in steade of an hande, takyng thereby meate and drincke, and putteth it in hys mouth: & est angui similis, vallo munitus eburneo.
               
               The Elephante whan hee sitteth bendeth hys feete, & maye not bende all fower at once, for heuynes and weighte of

hys bodye: but bendeth the hynder legges right as a man. He lyeth neuer downe to sleape, hy reason of the hugenes of hys bodye: wherfore when hee is wearie, he leaneth to a tree, and so resteth hym some what. Hee lyueth three hundreth yeare as Isidore sayeth. Also it is writtē of them, that yf they see a man comming agaynste them in the wildernes, yf hee bee oute of hys waye, for that they woulde not affraye hym, they will drawe themselfes some what oute of the waye, and so passing softely by little and lyttle before hym, they (as it were) teache hym the waye. And yf the Dragon (betwene whom and hym, is perpetuall wrath and stryfe) come agaynst the man, then they defende hym, and fighte with the Dragon. Thys they doe especially whan they haue yonge foles, for they dreade the man seeketh theire foles: And therefore they firste deliuer them of the man, that they maye the more surely kepe and fede theire yonge ones. Apud solam Africam & Indiam Elephanti prius nascebantur: nunc sola eos India gignit.
               
               
               He beareth verte,
                     Griffon.
                   a Griffō sergreāt siluer; winged d'Or.
               ij. Beareth Argente a fesse, betwene three Gryphons heades rassed sable. Thys coate appertaineth to Hals of Kenedon̄ in Deuonshire.
               The Griffon is a beaste with wynges, and is fower foted,

and also like vnto the Lyon in all partes of the bodie, and to the Egle onely in the heade and wynges. Hee is strong enemye to the horsse, and is of suche might as he is able to take vpp an horsse and a man armed vpon hym. Hys Clees or talentes are so great and large, that of them bee made Cuppes, to set vppon bordes or tables of kynges and prynces. Hoc genus ferarum in Hiperboreis montibus nascitur: In these mounteynes, is plentye of Golde & precious stones, as Smaragdus, Iaspis, & Christal, which the Gryffons kepe, and suffer them not to be taken from thence, as dyuerse writers affirme the same. And of an other maner bearyng thys beaste, take here an other example.
               The fielde is d'Or, a Gryffon sergreant Sable, on a mountayne verte. Here hee is displayde in hys proprietie and dominion.
               
                  O. beareth Argente, a Cameleon, propre,
                     Cameleon.
                   betwene fiue Pheons Sable .ij.ij. and one.
               Thys is a lyttle beaste, and hathe not one coloure of hys bodye, but changeth ful soone and often into dyuerse coloures, excepte redde and whyte, hys face is, as it were a beaste compouned of a swyne and of an Ape, beyng like to ye Ewte in the bodye. Hys sydes bee euen longe to the nether parte of hys wombe, as it were a fishe: and hys ridge bones boūche vpward, hys tayle is full longe, & smal at th'ende, hys feete bene shorte, & hath clees, like to ye clees of a Birde, & all his body is roughe & sharpe, as the bodie of a Bardan. Hys most might and strengthe ys agaynste the kynde of Gossehawkes: for hee draweth vnto them, and they flee vnto hym, and so hee taketh them wilfully to other beastes to be deuoured. But what beaste soeuer it bee, he is accompted among cleane beastes.
               
                  He liueth by the ayre: Semper hyans, & aperto ore, quo solo viuit, & nutritur, attrahens, & respirans. Oculos habet semper corpori concolores, eos nunquam claudit, nec pupillam mouet.
               
               
                  P. beareth Or,
                     Cameleopard
                   a Cameleoparde, Sable, Maculé dargent. This beaste is so named, for that he is poudered with white spottes, as the Parde, hauing an heade like to the Camell, the necke of an horse, & feete like a Bugle: Hunc Aethiopia gignit. This beaste (as Plinie saithe) is more worth in sight, then in fiercenesse, and is so mylde, and softe, as a sheepe. He was iudged cleane to meate by Moyses Lawe, but not to sacrifice,
                     Deutero. 14. for he is cloue footed like a Bugle, and cheweth his cudde, as a Camell, and therefore it was lawful to eate thereof.
               
                  Q. beareth d'Argent,
                     Linx.
                   a Linx proper, regardant. This beast is like the Wolfe, and hath the face of a Lyon, the bodye spotted like a Panther, and is of the greatenesse of a Doe. His Urine (as it is saide) turnethe into a Pretious stone, that is called Ligurius. And this beast dothe perceiue the same, and naturally hathe enuie, that it should turne to the vse of man kinde: and therfore he hideth it with sande or earth, when he hathe pissed, whiche causeth it to be sooner harde, and to turne into a stone. Linces (dicit Plinius) extra foetum vnum non admittere secundum.
               
               
                  
                  R. beareth Uerte, a Fiber, Argent. This beaste, Animal est amphibion, because he can liue bothe on the lande, and in the water,
                     Fiber.
                   and maketh houses or dennes, arraied with wonderfull crafte, in the brinckes of Riuers, and waters, as Plinie saithe. He is also named Castor, à castrando. For he geldeth him selfe, when he perceiueth that he is pursued of the hunter, and bitinge of his stones, which are marueilously good in medicines, layeth them in the sighte of the hunter, knowinge by nature, that he is hunted for the same, and so he escapeth deathe. The whiche Cicero in Scauriana affirmeth: sayinge, that he ransometh him with that parte of his body, for the whiche he is moste pursued. Iuuenall also saithe, that he geldeth him selfe, for the desire he hath to escape. This beast in shape is wonderfull, for his tayle onely is fishe, and all the other deale of his body hathe the fourme of a litle hounde. His hynder feete be as it were feete of an hounde, wherewith especially he goeth on the lande: and his twoo forefeete bene as it were the feete of a Goose, and therewith he chiefely swimmeth in the water. In runninge he is very slowe, Ob ventrem tumidum, & ad terram pendentem. His skinne is full pretious, and properly white.
               
                  
                  He beareth d'Argente, fiue Fusilles in Fesse Gules, in Chiefe three Beares heades, Sable. The Beare (as Isidore saithe) is a beaste right strong in the armes,
                     Beare.
                   and loynes. Vnde interdum erecti insistunt. The Beare fighteth with Hartes, wilde Bores, and with houndes, throwing them downe to the grounde, and byting them very soare. He is enimie to ye Bull, and therefore goeth vprighte against him, and oft holdeth his hornes with marueilous strength in his forefete, and so ouercommeth him. He is an vnpatiente beaste in his fighte, and wil be auenged on all those, that hurte him. Vrsus fertur dictus, quod ore suo formet foetus, quasi Orsus. Nam aiunt, eos informes generare partus, & carnem quandam nasci, quam mater lambendo in membra componit. Vnde est illud: Sic format lingua foetum quum protulit vrsa. Sed hoc immaturitas partus facit.
               
               
                  The field is Azure, a wolfe Saliante, d'Argent, langued Gules. Aristotle saith, that the Wolfe openethe his mouthe moste wyde,
                     Wolfe.
                   and that he hathe moste strength in his mouth. And Phisiologus saithe, that the vertue, & strength of ye Wolfe is in the breast, the clawes, & ye mouth, and leaste in the hynder parts. By kind he desireth to eate fishe. Some saie, they are called Lupos, quasi Leopos, because they haue much strength in their feete, as ye Lyon,

that what so euer he treadeth on, it liueth not. And if it happeneth in any wise, that in treadinge vpon stones, he maketh any noyse with his feete, then he forthewith chastiseth that foote with harde bytinge. His eyes shine by nighte, as Lanternes. Rapax autem bestia est, cruoris appetens. De quo rustici aiunt, Vocem hominem perdere, si eum prior Lupus viderit. Vnde & subitò tacenti dicitur: Lupus est in fabula. Certe si se praeuisum senserit, deponit feritatis audaciam. Famem diu portant, & post longa ieiunia multum deuorant.
               
               
                  Phisiologus writethe, that the Wolfe cannot bende his necke backewarde in no moneth of the yeare, but in Maye onely, when it thundreth. Solinus saithe, that in his tayle he beareth a locke of heare, whiche exciteth loue: and dothe it awaie with his teethe, when he dreadeth to be taken.
               
                  
                     Wolfe Ethiope.
                  
                  Isidore saith, that in Aethiopia bene Wolfes with heary maynes in their necke, and on their bodie so spotted with variable colours, that they lacke no manner of colour.
               
                  
                     Wolfe Indie.
                  
                  Aristotle saithe, that in Indie is a Wolfe righte cruell, that hathe the face, or countenaunce of a man, feete like vnto the Lyon, and tayle as a Scorpion. His voice much soundeth as it were a mannes voice. He is as swifte as an Harte, and also full hardie, and fierce.
               
                  He beareth Gules, a Cheuron engrailed, betwene three houndes Seiante,
                     Houndegate.
                   d'Argente. An Hounde, as some iudge, is thoughte to take his name of lowde barkinge, or openinge: Eò quòd insonet: Vnde & canere. Nihil autem sagacius canibus. Isidore saith, that he hath more witte, then any other beaste. For they knowe theire owne names, loue theire maisters, defend their maisters houses, put them selues wilfully in perill of deathe for their maisters: takinge also prayes for

them, yea, forsake not their maisters, euen when they be deade: as by the dogge, or hounde of the Romaine Fuluius appeared, whiche is woonderfull. This Fuluius traueiling by the way, was slaine with slaues, that laie in waite for him. His hounde (for so I thinke beste to terme him) seeinge his maister deade, laie by him two daies. Wherupon, when the man was missinge, and searche made for him, they founde him deade, with his hounde lyinge by him. Some marueilinge to see the hounde lye there by his dead maister, stroke him, and would haue driuen him from the deade corps, and coulde not. Other some seing suche kindenesse in the hounde, and pityinge him, that he shoulde lye there without meate, twoo, or three dayes before, caste him a piece of fleashe: which the hounde taking vp, did carrie the same, puttinge it to his maisters mouth, and woulde eate no whitte thereof him selfe, thoughe hee had forborne meate so longe before. And at laste, when this deade bodye should be caste into the Riuer (according to the manner of the Romaines) the hounde leapte in after, and holdinge vp his maister so longe as he coulde, did chose rather to die with him, then to liue without hym. For certainely houndes loue the companie of men moste entierely, and maie not be without men (as Isidore saithe.)
               The Hounde is a beaste full ingenious, and hath mind of diffuse, and longe waies: so that if they loose their maisters, they goe by furre space of Lands, and Countries to theire maisters houses againe. If an hound by euil bringynge vp, be made to be cruell, yet suche his cruelnesse abateth to a meeke man. For Plinie saithe, that amonge beastes, that dwell with vs, houndes, and horses be moste gratious, and louinge. The said Cote appertaineth to M. Hundegate in Yorkeshire.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Greyhounde.
                  1. The fielde is Saturne, three Greyhoundes cursante, of the Moone, with colours Rubie, studded, and tereted Solis.
               
               This is the aunciente Cote armour of the Mallyuerey of Wodersom in Yorkeshire.
                     Mallyuery.
                  
               
               2. The field is parted per Pale Nebule, Carboncle, and Diamonde, twoo Greyhoundes Saliante Regardante of the Perle. The Greyhounde is righte cruell, & fierce in pursuinge, and takinge of wilde beastes, and is full milde, and gentle to men, and to tame beastes. His Nobilitie, and gentlenesse is knowne by the length of his face, and snowte, as also by the breadthe of his cheaste, & smalnesse of the wombe, and slanke. He is beste to be liked, when he hathe longe eares and plyante, longe legges and small, for they be needefull to cause him to be the more swifte in course and runninge. His tayle is more longe and crooked, then the tayles of other houndes: and hathe lesse fleshe, and shorter heare, and more thinne & smothe. For if he be too roughe, or hearye, he shoulde then be too hote in his game. And if he be flesshie, he then wil runne the woorse.
               
                  
                  The field is parted per fesse embattyled, Topaze, & Emeraude, two Lyciskes Passant conterchaunged of the fielde. Lyciskes are called (as Plinie saithe) dogges,
                     Lycisk
                           •
                        
                     
                   gendered of wolfes, and of such gendering commeth cruell dogges, thus called. Also Dogges gender with Tygers, of which engendringe is brought foorth dogges so egre, and stronge, Vt complexu Leones prosternant.
               
               Such dogges were presented to the great Alexander by the king of the Sophites in India, who, to shewe their force & propertie, put foure of them vnto a greate Lyon, which straite waies caughte him faste. And when the keeper of the dogges woulde haue taken one of them by the legge to plucke him from the Lyon, he woulde not loose his holde, no not when his legge was cutte of with a sworde: but sticked neuerthelesse vnto his game, and so was cutte asunder in peece meale, till suche time as he died: hauinge yet his teethe still fastened in the Lyons fleshe. Suche a feruentnes nature had wrought in those beastes.
               
                  The field is of the Saphire,
                     Musion, or Catte.
                   on a chiefe Pearle, a Musion, or Catte, Gardant, Ermines. This beaste is called a Musion, for that he is enimie to Myse, and Rattes. And he is called a Catte of the Greekes, because he is slye, and wittie: & for that he seeth so sharpely, that he ouercommeth darknes of the nighte, by the shyninge lyghte of his eyne. In shape of

body he is like vnto a Leoparde, and hathe a great mouth. He dothe delighte that he enioyeth his libertie: and in his youthe he is swifte, plyante, and merye. He maketh a rufull noyse,
                     Catte.
                   and a gastefull, when one profereth to fighte with an other. He is a cruell beaste, when he is wilde, and falleth on his owne feete from moste highe places: and vneth is hurte therewith. When he hathe a fayre skinne, (he is, as it were, prowde thereof) and then he goeth faste aboute to be seene. This beaste in Latin is called Felis. Priscis Alanis,
                  
                     Method.
                   
                  & Burgundionibus, necnon Su
                        •
                     uis (teste Methodio) mos fuit signis militaribus praeferre Felem animal carceris impatientissimum. Quo Symbolo, arbitrij ac libertatis appetentiam suam insimulabant.
               
               
                  
                     Pygarge.
                  
                  The fielde is Veneris, a Pygage of the Sunne. This is an horned beaste, like a Goate bucke, but yet greater, & lesse then the Harte. He is a wilde beaste, clouefooted, & of great swiftenesse. He is a cleane beaste to meate, and abideth in Woodes, and Desertes.
               
                  The fielde is of ye Diamond a Bonaze Perle,
                     Bonaze.
                   Unguled topaze. Bonasius is a Beaste in fourme like a Bull, but broader, and shorter: and hathe a mayne like an horse downe to the shoulders, but the heare is softer, and commeth downe to his eies. The heare of his bodye is like a bright sorrel, his mayne is darker colored. The

                  
fleshe of hym is pleasaunte in eatynge, and therefore hee is muche hunted.
               The fielde is Mercury, an Equicerue,
                     Equicerue.
                   of the Moone. Equiceruus, is a beaste in the Orient hauynge hornes, and alōg maine to the shoulders, & a berde vndre hys chynne: & fete rounde like an horsse, & is as greate as an harte.
               
                  The fielde is of the Topaze, a Tarādre tripping,
                     Tarandre.
                   Rubye, vnguled Diamonde. Tarandrus, is a beaste in bodye like a great Oxe, hauing an head like to an harte, and hornes full of branches. Of some hee is taken to bee a rayne deare.
               A Buffe in Latyne is called Tarandulus
                        •
                     ,
                  
                     Buffe.
                   which is a beaste like an Oxe also, but he hath a bearde like a Goate.
               C. Beareth Gules,
                     Bull.
                   a Bull passante, d'Or. Bulles of Inde bene yealowe, verie swifte and cruell, and can turne about their neckes, whiche waye they will, in wondrefull maner. They bee rugged of heare, and also so harde in the backe as flynte: so that the shotte of dartes can not hurte them, and therefore are not ouercome: But when any one of them is tyed vnder a figge tree, hee leeseth all hys fiersenes, and becometh sodeinly sobre and mylde.
               The Bull sauage is alwayes fierse whan hee is taken,

& therefore destroyeth hymselfe, & dieth for indignation.
               
                  D. Bearethe Argente, a Bugle, Sable. The Bugle is called in Latyne Bubalus,
                  
                     Bugle.
                   for that hee is so like to an Oxe, & is a beaste of great strengthe, fierse, and can not well be tamed: but with an Iron rynge put thorough hys nosethrille, by the which ryng he is ladde about, and therewith compelled to take gladly the yoke vpon him. His coloure is black or reade, and hauing hornes, yet he is but thinne heared: & his fleshe is good, not onely to meat, but also to medecine.
               
                  E. Beareth Azure, a Gazel, propre. This Beaste in figure is like a Roo, hauynge shorte hornes,
                     Gazell.
                   also lōg teeth & whyt, about nyne ynches of length, stāding out of hys mouth like a Bore. Of thys beaste commeth Muske.
                  
                     Cammell.
                  
               
               F. Beareth verte, a Cammell passante, d'Or. The Camell is full swifte, as Plinye sayeth: and is therfore good in battayle, also in warre, and to beare charge & cariage. Aristotle sayeth, the Camel moueth first the right fote as ye Lyon doth, cum pes sinister non transit dextrum, sed subsequitur. He is Cloue footed, & hath onely a bonche on his back, & some haue twayne. Camelus proprium inter caeteras quadrupedes habet in dorso, quod tuber appellant: sed ita, vt Bactrianae ab Arabijs differāt. Alteris enim hiua, alteris singula tubera habentur. Hee liueth more than 50. yeares, & equis odio naturali aduersatur. His fleshe is wōdreful swete, and so is the mylke. Cameli feminae. Nonnulli superioris Asia

incolae camelos, vel ad tria millia possident.
               
               
                  G. Beareth Sable,
                     Dromede.
                   a Dromede passante d'or, gesante a branche of the Date tree propre. Thys is after a maner of the kynde of Camelles, but lesse in stature, yet moche swifter in course & rennynge: and hath therefore that name Dromeda, for swifte rennyng, for he goeth an hundreth miles & more of one daye. They be so swifte by reason of their longe pace and large, for they haue moste large pace, and is not ouercharged with moche fleshe or fatnes, yet hee is righte able of membres, hauing legges longe and small, and full of synewes: and is therefore lyghte to moue, and stronge to continue course and runnynge, and eateth not moche: but is suffised with litle meate, louyng well the Date tree, & the stones of the frute thereof: & is contente with thē, after right long iourneyes.
               
                  He beareth Gules, an horsse passante,
                     Horsse.
                   betwen two Lances d'Or. The liuelynes of the Horsse is moche and greate. They be ioyfull in the fieldes, and smell battayles, and with the noyse of Trompettes are comforted thereunto, & suche noyse also exciteth thē to runne and to fighte. They bee sorie whan they are ouercome, and glad whan they haue the victorie. Some also perceaue & knowe theire enemies in battayle, so farfurthe that they areyse, and sett on them, with bityng, and smyting. Some

knowe theire owne Lordes, and forgetteth myldenes, yf they be hurte and ouercome. And other some suffereth no man to ryde on hys backe, but onely hys owne Lorde: as maye bee redde of Bucephalus the Horsse of the great kyng Alexandre,
                     Bucephalus.
                   who woulde not suffre any other man to come on hys backe, but the kyng himselfe, and when hee did but prof
                     •
                  re to gett vp vpon hym, the Horsse then would knele downe vppon hys knees to receaue him: so that hee semed to haue sence t'vnderstande whome hee caried. It is also written that Horsses shede teares, and as it were weepe, whan theire masters bee slayne or deade. Solius equi est propter hominem lachrimari & doloris affectum sentire. Solent etiam ex equorum maestitia vel alacritate euentum futurum diminicaturi colligere. Plinye sayeth, that the Scithian horsse fighteth for hys Lord and master, and knoweth the horsse that will fighte with hym by hys neyng.
               Theire chefe office is to trauell, and to beare men in chiualrie. Hys mortall enemye is the Beare, and contrarie wyse, the Greyhounde is hys frende.
               The fielde is parted per paile, Rubye and Emeraude, an Asse sauage passante of the Perle,
                  
                     Asse sauage.
                   vnguled Diamonde. This beaste of the Grekes is called Onager, whiche by interpretacion is a wilde Asse, and is a free beaste, large of bodye, & not tamed. Hee haunteth in mountaynes and woddes, & by the lyghtenes of his bodye, in rennyng, he ouercometh both the Lyon and the wolfe. Hee maye well awaye with thriste, and suffereth it long. It is written in the Psalmes. Potabunt onagri inisiti sua.
                  
                     Psall. 104. Thys Beaste is wise and wittie, and feruently loueth hys female, hee hateth greately the company of men, and loueth well deserte places.
               The fielde is parted per Fesse, Iupiter and Saturne, a goate saliant of the moone.
                     Goate.
                   The Goate is a beaste, lasciuum & petulcum, & feruens semper ad coitum, cuius oculi ad libidinem in transuersum aspiciunt. Vnde & nomen traxit. Nam hirci, sunt oculorum angul
                        •
                      secundum Suetonium: cuius natura adeò calidissima est vt Adamantem lapidem, quem nec ig
                        •
                     is nec ferri domare

valet materia, solus huius cruor dissoluat. The goate hath vnder the chinne a berde called Armitum.
                  
                     Armitum.
                   The vse of goates & shepe is nedeful to mankynde: for they fede ye hōgrye with mylke and with fleshe, & clothe the naked with fell & with woll, & amende the lande with theire vrine & donge. Also nothing is in the goates bodie, but it is good and profitable, either to the vse of meate, and clothing, either els to the nedefull vse of medicine.
               H. Beareth verte,
                     Ha
                           •
                        e.
                   on a cheife dēted Argente, an Hare propre. The Hare excelleth in lightnes of membres & limmes, & therfore is verie swifte in course & running, to kepe him from houndes & other beastes that pursue hym. Kynde geueth vnto hym moche heare vnder hys fete, that therby hys fleshe is not hurte in renning. Hys hynder legges be longer than the farther, whiche is nedefull, to rere the bodie whan he fleeth, & that causeth hym to be harder to take whan hee runneth against the hill, than whan he runneth downewarde to the valey. The Hare (sayeth Aristotle) is wittie and fearefull, as hartes and conyes are. retro vrinam mittunt, auersa coeunt, vt Leones, Lynces, Leporum etiam faemina

saepènumero marem prior superuenit. Leporum genus quoddā videtur habere bina iecora.
               
               The fielde is Sable, an hartes heade cabazed d'Or, attyred verte, betwene two flasques d'Argente billetie of the firste, & to the creaste on a torce d'or & Gules an Harte regardante d'Argente,
                     Harte.
                   iczante a branche of Dictamie propre, & vulned with a darte verte.
               Hartes bene enemyes to serpentes, & when they f
                     •
                  le them selfes greued with sickenes▪
                  
they goe to the serpentes dēnes, and drawe them out with the breathe of theire nosthrilles: and ouercome the malice of theire venyme, so as they recouer theire sickenes with feadyng of them. Mirantur autem sibilum fistularum: erectis auribus acutè audiunt: submissis nihil. Plinye sayethe, that the harte is a most pleasing beaste, and renneth wilfully, so that whan hee is ouerset with houndes, hee than fleeth to man, as for helpe. Aristotle sayethe, that hee casteth hys hornes euery yere, in the moneth of Aprile, quae cum amiserit occultat.
                  
                     Cornu cerui sinistrum non inuenitur.
                   It is written that hys lyfte horne was neuer founde: occulit enim id tanquam quodam medicamento preditum. Serpentes voyde and flee th'odoure or smell of the brenynge of an hartes horne. And although the harte is armed with hornes, the Hynde thereof, inops mutila
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      est. They dreade most the voyce of a Foxe, and of an hounde.
               
                  
                     Gabriel Symeon Symbolis heroycis.
                  The Harte taught first the vertue of the herbe Dictamum for when they are wounded with arowes or dartes, they seke and fynde out the sayd herbe, and eate thereof: wherby theire woundes are healed, and caste the arowes with the arowe heades out of theire bodies. Thys herbe groweth plenteously in Candie, or in the Isle of Crete. The Harte is a wise deare, for when hee is fatte, quod valde temporis fructuum sit, he departeth into straunge places farre of, as knowing that by reason of hys corpulencie and fatnes, he may the rather be taken and killed. He fleeth into ryuers and waters, Propter aestum atque anhelitum. Caro eorum libidinis tempore vitiatur & faetet, perinde quasi hircorū, Hyeme ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      extenuantur, debilitantur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     . Verè autem vigent maximè ad cursum. He liueth aboue an hundreth yeares, as is to be rede of the hartes that liued in Alexandre the great hys tyme, that were taken an hundreth yeares after hys deathe, the whiche in hys lyfe tyme, hee had ensigned with cheines of golde about theire neckes. And of the lyfe of the Harte, Aristotle thus sayeth. Vita esse perquam▪ longa hoc animal fertur, sed nihil certi ex hijs quae narraentur
                        •
                     , videmus: nec gestatio, aut incrementum hinnuli ita euenit, quasi vita esset prelonga.
               
               
                  I. Beareth Or, on a bende, cotized with two cotizes, Sable,
                     Firrets.
                   thre Firrrets d'Argente. The Firret is a little beaste, as it were a wesil, ful subtil and rauenous. Aristotle sayeth that he hateth horsse and mules, and greueth them moche. But hee fighteth agaynste serpentes, and for that purpose armeth hym with Rue, as doth the wesill, whan he prepareth hymselfe to fighte with the Basiliske.
               The fielde is verte, thre Rooes or Capres sauage, in paile betwene two flasques d'Argente.
                     Rooes.
                   The Capre, or Roo is like vnto an hynde calffe, but changeth not the teth, as the other doth: and hath right fayre and pleasaunt eyne, & also sharpe: and is called in Latyne Capra syluestris, because she is most conuersante in woddes and deserte places. Aristotle sayeth, that these Capres, or Roes (as we Englishmen call them) helpe them selfes wisely whan they bee wounded, & seke the herbe,
                     Dictamum tale est, vires
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ciusmodi possidet.
                   
                  Pulegium ceruinum, and eate therof to drawe th'arowes oute of theire bodies, yf they bee stricken therewith. They are most swifte of mouyng and runnynge, & so moche more is theire fleshe sweter, and tender. They defende them selfes in woddes and laūdes, from hunters and there houndes, not with theire feete, hornes & teeth, but onely by swiftnes of flight.
               K. Hys fielde is d'Ermine, on two Flaunches Gules, two Goates sauage d'Argent.
               Goates are called in Latyne Capri,
                  
                     Goate sauag
                           •
                        
                     
                   and Caprae, a carpendis virgultis. And manye men saye, they are so called, a crepitu crurum: vnde eas creas vocitatas: quae sunt caprae agrestes. And some saye, they haue that name, for that they clymbe on harde cragges, and so hyghe, that vneth they maye be seene with mans eyes. The wilde Goate is verie swifte in runnyng, most lyght in leapyng, most sharpe in sighte, most swete in taste, most tender and wholesome to meate, and most busye to gather hys owne meate. For the Goate knoweth the diuersitie of herbes, of trees, of twigges, of braunches, and of sprays, whiche they eate of, & fede themselfes, by sight, taste, and smell. Haec itaque animalia vt diximus

in petris altissimis commorantur: vt si quando ferarum vel hominum aduersitatem persenserint, de altissimis saxorum cacuminibus sese praecipitantes, in suis se cornibus illaesas suscipiunt.
               
               
               The fielde is of the Topaze, a Basiliske displayed, Emeraude, cristed, Saphire. And for the Creaste vppon the helme an Hiricion passante, of the Diamonde, charged with Grapes propre, sett on a torce, Pearle, and Emeraude,
                  
manteled Rubie, doubled Pearle. The signe displaide in the saide Cote armour, is of somme called a Cocatrice, but of the Greekes he is called Basiliscus.
                  
                     Cockatrice.
                   And the Latines cal him Regulus, for that he is kinge of Serpentes, and Soueraigne ouer them all: Adeo vt cum videntes, fugiant. For with his breathe, and smell he killeth them. Yea, man him selfe, Si aspiciat, interimit. And at his sighte, no byrde that fleeth, escapeth vnhurte. But although they be a farre of, yet are they deuoured with his burninge breathe. Notwithstandinge, he is ouercome of the Weasil,
                     Weasill.
                   
                  Quae quoties dimicatura cum eo est, Rutam comedit: odor etenim eius herbae infestus serpentibus est. The Basiliske, when he seeth the weasil so armed, fleeth: whom shee foloweth, and killeth. Nihil enim parens ille rerum sine remedio constituit. This Serpente is but halfe a foote of lengthe, and enterlined with white spottes.
                     Sibilus.
                   
                  Isidore saithe, that Sibilus idem est, qui & Regulus. Sibilo enim occidit, antequam mordeat, vel exurat.
               
               And as the Basiliske aboue descried, with his Diademe, called in Latin, Cristia, is almoste the leaste amonge other Serpentes, so is the little Hiricion with his sharpe pykes, almoste the leaste of all other beastes. And of vs English men he is termed an Irchin,
                  
                     Irchin, or Vrcheon.
                   or Vrcheon. Latinè, Hericius. A beaste so called for the roughnesse, and sharpenesse of his prickes, whiche nature hathe geuen him in steade of heare. And such his pykes healeth, or couereth his skinne, as the heare dothe the other beastes: and bene his weapon, and armoure, wherewith he pricketh, and greeuethe them, that take, or touche him. Nam statim vt aliquid presenserit, primum se subrigit: atque in globum conuersus, in sua se arma recollit. He is a beaste of witte, and good purueiance: for he clymeth vpon a Uine, or an Apple tree, and biteth of their braunches, and twigges: and when they be fallen downe, he waloweth on them, and so they sticke on his prickes: and he beareth them into a hollowe tree, or somme other hole, and keepeth them for meate for hym

selfe, and his yonge ones.
               
                  Herinaceus, saithe Bartholomeus in his Booke De proprietatibus rerum,
                  
                     Herinaceus.
                   is the same, that Hericius, but he is accoumpted more then he, and is like the Urcheon in all properties, sauing that when he is sufficiently laden with apples on his backe, he wil beare one alwaie in his mouthe. And if, after he is so charged, there happen any to fall from his prickes, then for indignation he throweth from his backe all the other deale, and eftsoones returneth to the tree to charge him againe of newe. The Urcheon is witty, and wise in the knowledge of comminge of windes, Northe, and Southe: for he changeth his Denne, or hole (as Aristotle saithe) when he is ware that suche windes comme.
               There was one sometime in Constantinople, that had an Urcheon, who knewe, and warned others thereby, that wyndes should come, and on what parte: and thereby gotte greate estimation amonge his neighboures, and was accoumpted as one that could tel of thinges to come.
               
                  
                     White Vrcheon.
                  There is also an other Urcheon, that hath a white shel, and white prickes, as Bartlemewe saithe: Sane suo exemplo, & sedulitate animal nos admonet, haud quaquam satis esse, si agros ampliores possideamus, nisi diligentia, & parsimonia vtamur.
               
               
                  
                     Dragon.
                  L. beareth Golde, a Dragon Uerte. Isidore saithe, that the Dragon is the greatest of all Serpentes, or of all lyuinge thinges vpon the earthe. Est autem cristatus, ore paruo, & arctis fistulis, per quas trahit spiritum, et linguam exerat. His greatest strengthe is not in hys teethe, but in hys tayle: Et verbere potius, quàm rictu nocet.
               
               He hathe not so muche venime, as other Serpentes. Betwene him, and the Elephante is perpetuall enimitie, for the Dragon desirous of his bloud, for the temperate coldnesse thereof, to asswage his extreme heate, spaunethe, or wrappeth so his tayle aboute the Elephantes legges, that he cannot escape the deathe. But the Dragon byteth it ful soare: for while he is thus enwrapped with the Dragons

tayle, he falleth vpon him with his huge body, and so they are bothe slaine.
                     Draco dissidet cum Aquila.
                   
                  Gignitur autem in Hispania, & in India, in ipso incendio iugis estus. Dissidet Aquila cum Dracone: vescitur enim Aquila anguibus.
               
               
                  M. beareth Argent, a Salamander proper.
                     Salamandra
                   The Salamander hathe that name, for that he is stronge and mightie against burninge: for he burneth not in fire, but abateth, & swageth the burning thereof. And amonge all venemous beastes, he is the mightieste of poyson, and venyme. Caetera enim singulos feriunt, haec plurimos pariter interemit. For if he crepe vpon a tree, he infecteth all the apples, or other fruite, that groweth theron, with his poyson: and killeth them which eate thereof. Whiche apples also, if they happen to fall into any pitte of water, the strengthe of the poyson killeth them that drinke thereof. Ita contra
                        •
                      incendia repugnans, ignes sola animalium extinguit. For he liueth in the middest of the flames of fire, without griefe, or wastinge, and not onely because he is not burned therein, but that he quencheth the fire. And Plinie saithe, that of all beastes, onely the Salamander liueth in fire, and quencheth it. Likewise Aristotle saithe,
                     Paradinus Symbolis heroicis.
                   that there be many beastes, Quae igne non absumantur, Salamandra claro documento est: quae, vt aiunt, ignem inambulans per eum, extinguit.
               
               This Salamander did the Frenche kinge Fraunces cause to be grauen on the one parte of his coyne, addinge this inscription in the Italian tongue: Nudrisco il bono, & spengo ilreo. Id est, Alor meliore, ac deterius perimo. And the token of the Salamander, he caused also to be pictured in many his Palaices, and places, very pretiously, with this Distiche in the Latin tongue:

                     
                     Vrsus atrox, Aquilae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         leues, & tortilis Anguis,
                     
                        
                           Anagoge.
                        Cesserunt flammae iam Salamandra tuae.
                  
               
               Thus the nature of the Salamander is described, whiche manifestly appeareth,
                     Plinius.
                   
                  Tanto frigore praeditam, vt ignem, velut glacies extinguat.
               
               
                  
                     Iacule.
                  N. beareth Azure, a Iacule d'Argent. This Serpente fleeth as a Darte, and leapeth into trees, and what beaste so euer he meeteth with, he throweth him selfe thereupon, and sleaeth it: Iaculus Serpens volans: vnde & Iaculi dicti sunt. De quo Lucanus: Iaculique volucres.
               
               
                  
                     Stellion.
                  The fielde is Argente, a Stellion proper. Stellio is a beaste like a Lysarde, hauinge on his backe, spottes like starres. And thoughe he be a fayre beaste, yet is he right venemous, as Plinie saithe: Hic autem Scorpionibus adeo contrarius traditur, vt viso eo, pauorem his afferat, & torporem. Inter stellionem, & araneum bellum est. Deuorantur enim aranei à Stellione.
               
               
                  
                     Ceraste.
                  O. beareth Sable, a Ceraste nowey d'Argent. This is an horned Serpente, as Isidore saithe, and hathe hornes in either side of his heade, crooked and wrinkeled, as the hornes of a Ramme. This Serpente sleaethe all beastes, that passe vnwarely by the pathes, where he lyeth with priuie bytinge. And therefore we reade, Fiat Dan sicut Coluber in via, Cerastes in semita.
               
               
                  
                     Aspe.
                  The fielde is Gules, an Aspe obturant her eares d'Or. Aspis vocata, quòd morsu venena immittat, & aspergat. The Aspe, when shee is charmed by the Enchaunter, to come out of her denne by Charmes, or Coniurations: shee not willinge to come forthe, layeth her owne eare close to the grounde, the other shee stoppeth, and couereth faste with her tayle: and so shee heareth not the voice of the Charmer, neither commeth out to him, nor is obediente to his sayinge. And we reade in the Psalmes: Furor illis secundum similitudinem Serpentis:
                  
                     Psalm. 58. 
                  sicut Aspidis surdae, & obturantis aures suas. Quae non exaudiet vocem Incantantium: & venefici Incantantis sapienter.
               
               
                  P. beareth Gold, a Boath, Sable, betwene two barres Gemewes Azure.
                     Boas.
                   
                  Boas is a Snake in Italie, great of bodye, and foloweth Greges armentorum, & bubalos: and guilefully setteth him selfe to the vdders of them, and so suckinge, sleaeth them. Whereof also he taketh his name.
               Q. beareth Argente,
                     Scitale.
                   on a Pale Uerte, a Scitale, proper.
               This Serpente is so called, because he shinethe with suche diuersitie of speckles vpon his backe, that all that looke thereon, haue wonder, and likinge to see him. Et quia reptando pigrior est, quos assequi non valet, miraculo sui stupentes capit.
               
               The fielde is Sable,
                     Amphybene
                   an Amphibene, heade to heade reflexed, d'Argent.
               This is a prodigious Serpente, and is called Amphybena, for that he hathe twoo heades, Vt initio, sic & cauda caput: currens ex vtroque capite tractu corporis circulato. This alone of all Serpentes putteth him selfe to the colde, and goeth before all other. He hath a double heade, as though one mouth were too litle to caste his venyme. Cuius oculi lucent veluti lucernae.
               
               Somme Serpentes haue many heades, some doubled, as this nexte before described, somme trebled, &c. as Isidore saithe.
               R. beareth Geronnie, of sixe pieces, Or, and Azure, a Dipsez Uerte,
                     Dipse.
                   charged on the firste quarter. Dipsas genus Aspidus, quae Latinè Situla dicitur: quia quem momor derit, siti perit. This is the leaste of all Serpentes, and is so little, that vneth he is seene when men treade on him: and his venyme sleaeth ere it be felte: and he that dyethe by that venyme, fealeth no soare. And so Lucane writeth.
               
                  Signiferum iuuenem Tureni sanguinis album
                  Torta caput retro Dipsas calcata remordet,
                        Lucanus.
                     
                  
                  Vix dolor aut sensus dentis fuit.
               
               The fielde is Golde, an Hyder proper. This Serpent hathe many heades,
                     Hydre.
                   & such an one was seene in a Marreis

called Lerna, in the Prouince of Archadia. Haec Latinè excedra dicitur: because that if one heade be cutte of, three other growe out of the place thereof. Sed hoc fabulosum est. For it is perfectly to be readde, that Hydra was a place castinge forthe waters, whiche wasted, and destroyed a Cittie nighe therunto. And in this Hydra, if one heade of the streame were stopped, by and by many other streames did breake forthe. Which when Hercules perceiued, he burned the place, and so stopped the courses of the water. And therefore it is saide, that Hercules did kill Hydra the Serpente with fiue heades. Nam Hydra ab aqua dicta est.
               
               
                  
                     Hydros.
                  
                  Hydros aquatilus Serpens à quo icti obturgescunt, cuius quidem morbum Boam dicunt: eo quod fimo bouis remedietur.
               
               
                  The fielde is of the Saphyre, a Serpente torqued, Topace.
               
                  
                     Serpente.
                  This Serpente I haue descried, as wringled into a wreathe. Whiche he vseth so to doo in the winter season, by reason of his natural coldnesse. And in the sommer, or heate, he looseth him selfe, and then his bitte, or stinge is deadely. Nam quando sunt frigidi, nullum tangunt. And theire venyme, or poyson hurteth more in the daye time, then in the nighte. Torpent enim noctis Algore & merito: quia frigidi sunt nocturno rore. The Serpent is a beaste of great quantitie. For as Magestenes writeth, there be so huge Serpentes in Indie, that they swalow, and deuoure al whole, bothe Hartes, and Bulles. In Italie, in the time of Claudius Caesar, was a Serpent slaine, and in his wombe was founde a whole childe. Alexander the Greate, in his Epistle, which he wrote to Aristotle his maister,
                     Serpentes cristati.
                   
                  De Situ Indiae, reporteth, that he sawe there cristed Serpentes, somme

hauinge twoo heades, somme three. Columnarum grossitudine aliquando proceriores, oribus, squamisque suis humum atterentes. Quorum pectora cum trisulcis linguis fauces exertabant, scintillantibus veneno oculis, quorum halitus quoque erat pestifer. Isidore saithe, that there be many kindes of Serpentes, as, Admodicae, Elephantiae, Chamedrachontes, &c.
               
               The Serpente, for that he deceiued our firste mother Eue, was cursed of God, aboue all cattell, and aboue euery beaste of the fielde.
                     Gene. 3. And therefore vpon his belly shall he goe, and duste shall he eate all the dayes of his life. In naturalibus bonis,
                  
                     Ibidem.
                   
                  quae nobis, et irrationabilibus videmus esse communia, viuacitate quadam sensus Serpens excellit. Vnde & legitur. Serpens autem erat sapientior omnibus pecoribus terrae. The Serpentes heade beinge striken of, yet if it escape with the lengthe of twoo fingers, it neuerthelesse liueth. Vnde & totum corpus obijcit pro capite ferientibus. No beaste moueth the tongue so quickely, as the Serpent dothe, so that thereby he seemethe to haue twoo, or three tongues, when it is but one.
               
                  Serpentes autem diu viuere dicuntur: adeo vt deposita vetere tunica, senectutem deponere, atque in iuuentutem redire perhibeantur. It is saide, that a Serpente dare not touche a naked man. Plurimis verò eorum aduersatur saliua hominis.
               
               There is a little Serpente,
                     Serpens Sacer.
                   whiche of somme is called a Sacer, whiche greate Serpentes, and mightie, flee, and auoide. He is but one cubite longe, Species hirsuta. Quicquid momorderit, continuò circiter putrescit.
               
               
                  
                  5. S. beareth Sable, twoo Delphines d'Argent,
                     Delphine.
                   addorsez hariant, betwene sixe Crosses Botony Fitche. 3.2. and 1.
               The Delphine hath ye name, because he foloweth mannes voice, or for yt he wil harken, & delight to hearethe tune of the Simphoni: and therfore he is called a Symphone, because he hath great liking in harmonie. No fish in ye sea is more swift then the Delphin. For oftentimes they are sene to leape ouer ships: whose leaping so, & playing in the sea, betokeneth that some tempest is at hand. Hi propriè Simonides nominantur.
                  
                     Isidorus, li. 12 ca. 6. Etymo.
                   
                  Est & Delphinum genus in Nilo dorso serrato, qui Crocodylos tenera ventrium secātes interimunt.
               
               The Delphine is most meke, louing, & gentle, not only towards his own kind, but also towardes men, & childrē. When as Arion that excellent Musition & plaier of ye Lute shoulde haue bene drowned for his money,
                     Arion.
                   whiche he had gotten by his art, of the shipmen which should haue caried him into his countrey: The Delphins, which a litle before he was cast into ye sea, had heard him so swetely play vpon his Lute, receiued him, & one of them taking him vpō his backe,
                     Herodot. li. 1. Histor.
                   brought him safe vnto the shoare. Leonicus de var. Histor. Li. 1. ca. 53. dothe reporte, that he sawe a Delphine quickly to come at the accustomed call of a childe, and to take him on his backe, and oftentimes so to carrie him throughe the sea, Collati in se beneficij memor.
               
               
                  
                     Alciat. lib. 1. Emble. 11.This noble fish knoweth by ye smell, if a man drowned in the sea, did eate of his kind. And if the deade man hath eaten thereof, he then eateth him anone. But if he did not eate, he mightily defendeth, and kepeth his body from

deuouring of other fishe: and shewinge it, he bringeth the corpse to some cliffe or drie lāde with all hys power.
                     Arist. de animal. cap. 48. Their loue also towardes theire owne kynde manifestly appeareth, in that one of them beyng taken at Caria, a great multitude of other Delphynes came together vnto the hauen, & taried there vnto the fisherman whiche did take the Delphyne let him loose againe, whome they all receaued ioyfully, and so returned with hym into the Sea. Paruos item Delphinos magnus aliquis semper comitatur custodiae causa.
               
               The fielde is verte,
                     Whale.
                   a whale nayante Argente, pellette Sable. Thys fishe is called a whale for hys hugenes or greatnes of bodie: which is, as it were a mountaine or hill. Suche was the whale that swalowed Ionas the Prophete, hys wombe or belly was so greate, that it might bee called hell: For the Prophete sayeth. Clamaui de tribulatione mea ad Dominum: & exaudiuit me de ventre inferi.
               
               U. Beareth Golde,
                     Balene.
                   a Balene hariante, Azure. The Balene is a fishe greate and huge, moche like to the whale, & is so called, because of hys outcasting and shedinge of water, for they throwe water hyer than other great fishes of the Sea. Such a like fishe or rather a monstre called Balaena, appeared aswell in the sight of the Tyrians as the Macedons, at the siege of Tyre, whiche liynge vpon hys backe aboue the water, came towardes the mole or pere whiche Alexander the great had caused to bee made agaynste the citie of Tyre:
                     Q. Curtius. lib. 4. and beatyng the water, he lifted vp hymselfe at the head of the Mole, and immediately diued vnder the water agayne, some tyme appearyng aboue, and sometyme vnderneath, and when he came nere the walles of the citie vanished out of sighte.
               The fielde is of the Dragons heade,
                     Belue.
                   a Belue, Lune. Thys is a great fishe in the Sea, and is called Belua. He casteth out water at hys iowes, with vapoure of good smell, and other fishe when they fele the same, pursue hym whotely, and delityng after the smell, they enter and come in at his iowes: whom he deuoureth, & so fedeth hymselfe with thē.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     Hippotame.
                  The fielde is of the Dragōs tayle, an Hippotame, Sol.
               
               The water Horsse of the Sea, is called an Hyppotame, for that hee is like an Horsse in backe, mayne, and neaynge: rostro resupinato a primis dentibus: cauda tortuosa: vngulis binis. He abideth in the waters on the daye, and eateth corne by nyghte: & hunc Nilus gignit.
               
               
                  
                     Crocodile.
                  W. Hys fielde is Mercurie a Crocodyle d'Ermyne.
               The Crocodile is so called, because he is of the coloure of Safron. Hee lyueth partely on water, partely on lande, & is in fashion like a Dragon, but he hath small eyes, verie long teeth like to a sawe, and lacketh a tōgue, and moueth onely th'ouermost iawe, & not the nether, and hath greate nayles and stronge on hys fete: there hath ben seene of thē twenty fote longe, and the skynne of hys backe is vnpenetrable. Hee deuoureth not onelye men, but also beastes. Hunc pisces quidam serratam habentes cristam tenera ventrium desecantes interimunt.
               
               
                  
                     Euydros.
                  
                  Enydros, a lyttle beaste so named, for that he frequenteth the waters, is enemye to the Crocodile, whome yf hee finde slepyng, he first tombleth and waloweth hym selfe in dirte and myer, and so entreth through hys mouth into hys belye, and fretynge or persinge all hys inwarde partes, hee commeth forth on lyue oute of hys bowels leauinge hym dead.
                     Crocodilum augeri quandiu viuat.
                   He liueth longe, and groweth bigger and bigger, as longe as he lyueth.
               The fielde is verte, on a scocheon golde, a Phagiō nayante, gules.
               
                  
                     Phagion, or Pagre.
                  Thys fishe the Grecians call fagrum, because he hath so harde teth, that he eateth oysters in the Sea. And therfore

he is also called Dentrix, for the multitude and greatenes of hys teeth, and as it were a fishe strongely toothed.
               He beareth Argente,
                     Mullet.
                   three Mullettes nayante, propre.
               A Mullet is a fishe of meane quantitie, hauyng two barbes or wartes on the nether lyppe, the coloure toward grene, with some yealowe lynes.
               The fielde is of the Sunne,
                     Vermante.
                   a Uermante, Iouis.
               
               A Uermante is a fishe of color blue, and is in lengthe lx. cubites, which hath suche strength, that when Elephantes doe come into the water and do dryncke, hee will take one of them by the nose, and plucke hym into hym.
               Y. Beareth verte,
                     Muscule.
                   a Muscule nayante, betwene two barres gemewes d'Argente.
               Thys is a lyttle fishe, whiche guydeth the whale, that he doe not runne on the rockes.
               The fielde is of the Iacinthe, a pyle in poynte d'Ermyne, betwene two Zyphes hariante,
                     Ziphe.
                   
                  Lunae.
               
               This is a fishe whiche is named a sworde fishe, and hath in his nose a bone, like to the scaberde of a Sworde▪ There is an other fishe, named in Latyne Gladius, and hee is so called, eo quòd rostro maiori nato sit, & ob hoc naues perfossas mergit.
               
               
                  The fielde is partie per bende sinistre, gules and Sable, a Chymere, siluer.
               Thys Chymere is a Beaste or monstre hauing thre heades,
                     Chimere.
                   one lik a Lyon, an other like a Goate, the third like a Dragon, fingunt & Chymeram triformem bestiam: ore Leo, postremis partibus Draeco, media Caprea. Quam quidam Philosophi non animal, sed Cilitiae montē esse aiūt, quibusdam locis Leones & Capreas

nutrientem, quibusdam ardentem, quibusdam plenam serpentibus. Hunc Bellerephōtes habitabilem fecit,
                  
                     Isidorus. li. 11. cap. 3. Etym.
                   
                  vnde Chymeram dicitur occidisse.
               
               Thys Bellerophontes, or Bellerophon the sonne of Glaucus, kynge of Ephyra, a man of muche beautie and prouesse, was ardently beloued of Stenobea, the wyfe of Pretus kyng of Ephyra,
                  
                     S. Tho. Elirt.
                   next after Glaucus, whan she desired hym to cō
                  mitte auoutrie with her, hee fearinge the vengeaunce of Iupiter, god of hospitalitie, and remembring the frendshipe her husbande had shewed hym, refused, and put her awaye from hym: whiche she disdeigning, and being in a wood rage, accused him to her husband, that he had rauished her: but he like a sobre man, woulde not slea hym in hys owne house, but deliuering hym letters to his wiues father, sent hym into Licya, who perceauing the mynde of Pretus, encouraged, & sent Bellerophon to destroye the two monsters, Solymos, and Chimaera, that hee myght be slayne vnder the coloure of a valiaunt enterpryse. But he atchieuing it nobly, retourned with honor. Thys hystorye foloweth more largely sett forth in the Latyne tongue by Stockhamere, in hys Commentaries vpon the Emblemes of Alciate. Embl. cxj. in these wordes.
               
                  Bellerophon filius Regis Glauci, adolescens insignis pulchritudinis & summè virtutis, quem Praetus regno priuatum, sibi seruire iussit. Staenobea vero vxor Praeti eum adamauit, & vt secum stuprum committeret, solicitauit: ille vero lasciuam foeminam repulit, vnde spreta mulier exardens, & dolore repulso indignata, coram Rege, falso illum accusauit, quasi eam fuisset oppressurus: Rex autem hoc audito, & inique ferens, nolens tamen de illo domi paenas sumere, misit eum ad socerum suum Regem Licyae, addita epistola qua crimen continebatur. Rex ille, lectis litteris indignatus, varijs hostibus & periculis Bellerophontem, vt periret, obiecit. Ille vero semper victor euasit, tandem etiam in vltionem criminis missus, vt Chymeram monstrum maximo sub periculo interficeret. Ascendit igitur ille astute admodum Pegasum aequum alatum celerrimum,
                  
                     Strab. lib. 8. 
                  quem ex interfectae Medusae sanguine natum fingūt:

atque de eo expeditionem sumpsit contra Chimeram, quam deuicit ac interemit, ob hoc laudem nanciscebatur maximam, adeo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt Rex ille Lyciae alteram suam filiam ei in vxorē dederit, quod audiens vxor Praeti seipsam occidit. Monemur cuncta mala, iniquos etiam & peruersos superandos esse, & supprimendos animi virtutibus, magnanimitate, consilio, & prudentia.
               
               
                  The fielde is partie per Fesse Saturne,
                  
                     Eagle.
                   and Mars, an Eagle displayed wt two heades d'Argente, an orle of Beasantes.
               Th'Eagle hath principalitie ouer al foules, and is most liberal and free of harte. For the praye that he taketh, oneles it be for hongre, hee eateth not alone, but setteth it forthe in common to all the foules that folowe him: and therfore oftētymes other foules frequente hys companye, for hope and truste to haue some parte of hys praye. But when the praye that is take is not sufficient for hymselfe, than as a kynge, that taketh hede of a comminaltie, hee taketh the birde that is next vnto hym, and geueth it among th'other, and serueth them therewith. The Eagle hath that name Aquila, of sharpenes of eyne. He is right strong, bolde, & hardie, farre passinge the strength and boldenes of other byrdes: and hys strength is most in wynges, tallance, and beake. Also he hath many fethers, and therefore he conteaneth moche lyghtenes. The signe of th'Eagle displayde thus with two heads, after the common opinion, begonne to bee borne in standerdes, auncientes, and Banners, in Charles the great hys tyme,
                     Wolfangus Lazius Romanor. Regis Historiographus.
                   to declare hys empire both in the Oriente and Occident. Or rather as Wolfangus Lazius reporteth, in the tyme of Constantyne the great, which of one publicke weale of the Romaynes, obtayned and made

two th'one at Rome, and the other at Constantinople.
               
                  The fielde is the Rubie, a Cheuron topaze, betwene iij. Eaglettes displaide with two heades,
                     Dyster.
                   of the Pearle.
               The Eagle is a byrde, very great, regall, and noble, quae volucrum Regina dicitur, quia altissimè volat: & Iouis ales, vel quia sola contra Solis radios apertis atque immotis oculis volā
                     do obtuitum non flectit: vel quia solam nunquam fulmine tactam fertur: ideoque etiam Iouis Armiger a Poetis appellatur, vt Higin. lib. 2. The Eagle is of suche sharpe sighte, that fliynge aboue the Sea so highe, as with mans eyes, she can scarcely be sene, yet she seeth the fishe swimme in the Sea, and descending tormenti instar, she taketh her praye, and flyethe therewith to the shoare. She is righte cruell agaynste her owne byrdes, whē as lokyng against the sunne, they close their eyes, for then she supposeth they be not her owne byrdes, and so vt degeneres excludit. The saide coate apperte yneth to master Iohn Dister.
               
                  The fielde is sable, an Eagle displaide wt two heades d'Or. debrused with a barre d'Ermyne.
               The Eagle in age hath darkenes, and dymnes of eyne,
                     Plinye.
                   with heauynes of wynges. And agaynst these euils, she is taughte by kynde, to seeke a well of springing water: the same founde, she then flyeth vp into the ayre, as farre as she may till she be full hote by

heate of the Sunne, and by trauel of flight, so that through suche heate, the pores of her bodye bene opened, and the fethers chafed: and she then falleth sodenly into the wel, and there the fethers bene chaunged, and the dymmes of her eyne is thereby wyped awaye and purged: and thus she recouereth her pristinate vigor and strength. There be also diuerse other kindes of Eagles, and of sondry names, as shalbe declared hereafter.
               The Eagle called Almachor,
                  
                     Egle Almacher.
                   is full quicke and sharpe of sighte, who takyng her byrdes directeth theire sighte euen agaynst the Sunne, whiche yf they doe not stedfastly beholde, she forthwith beateth thē. And yf any of theire eyes do chaunce to water in lokyng agaynste the Sunne, that byrde she sleaeth, a
                     •
                  though he wente out of kynde: and the byrde that stedfastly beholdeth the sunne, and whose eyes doth not watre, hym she loueth, liketh and fedeth.
               Th'Eagle Amachell taketh her praye on the water,
                     Eagle Amachel.
                   and is dredde of no foules, sauing suche as haue theire liuing and conuersation in the waters onely: and is muche degenerate frō the nobilitie and kynde of those Eagles whiche take theire praye in the ayre and on the earthe. Also thys Egle hath one fote closse and whole, as the fote of a Gandre: and therewith she ruleth her selfe in the water, whan she descendeth from an hyghe for her praye: and her other fote is a cloue fote, with full sharpe clees, with the whiche she taketh and holdeth her praye.
               The Egle Athat,
                  
                     Eagle Athat.
                   is a gentle Eagle, and thincketh longe tyme of her byrdes, for when they fly, she flyeth with and about them, takyng hede of them: & is readie to withstande other foules, yf so be they come to greue or anoye her byrdes: and therefore is more kynde than other Eagles be to theire Byrdes.
               
                  
                  A. Beareth Sable, an Ossifrage d'Argent,
                     Ossifraga.
                   bearing a bone d'Or. Th'Eagle hauinge thre byrdes throweth oute one of her nest, leste she should be vnable to fede and norishe them. And this birde Ossifraga, which in the Arabie language is called Cebar, receaueth, feadeth & bryngeth vp the Eaglet so cast out, and so the birde loseth the name of her parentes, and is now by reason of her educatiō in thys wise called Ossifrage, or Cebar. Isidore sayeth, that there is a foule called Ossifrangus, and hath that name, quia ossa ab alto dimittit & frangit. Thys kynde of Ossifrage hath no quicke sighte. But an other kynde, whiche loueth the Sea.
                     Ossifraga marina.
                   
                  Clarissima oculorum acie est, ac pullos adhuc implumes cogit aduersos intueri solem, percutit eum qui recuset, & vertit ad solem. Tum cuius oculi prius lachrimarint, hunc occidit, reliquū educat.
                  
                     Arist. de Animal. lib. 8. cap. 3. 
                  Vagatur haec per mare & littora, vnde nomen accepit: viuit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      auium marinarum venatu, vt dictum est. The Ossifrage is greater in bodie than the Eagle, color ex cinere albicans.
               
               
                  
                     Gossebawke.
                  
                  B. Beareth barrye of eight peces Gules and Ermyne, a Gossehauke d'Or. Thys is a ryal foule, & is armed more wc boldenes, thā wc clees: and asmoche as kynde taketh from her in quantitie of bodye, hee rewardeth her wc boldenes of harte. Thys foule aboue the reste of ye kinde, is moste desirous to take other foules, and therfore she is called Accipiter: hoc est, raptor. Also she beynge

taketh byrdes that be wilde, and as it were, deliuereth, or reserueth them for her owne Lorde: and therefore they be beloued of Noble gentlemen, and borne on fiste, and also dieted, and fedde with greate attendaunce and diligence. Fertur autem Accipitres circa pullos suos impios esse.
                  
                     Accipitres
                   
                  Nam dum viderint eos posse tentare volatus, nullas eis praebent escas, sed verberant pennis, & à nido praecipitant: atque à tenero compellunt ad praedam, ne fortè adulti pigrescant.
               
               
                  The field is Saturne, three Faucons volante Lunae,
                  
                     Faucon.
                   membred, or beaked Solis. Or thus: He beareth Sable, three Faucons volante Argente, membred, and beaked d'Or.
               The Faucon, saithe Isidore, is called Capus, à capiendo. Hūc nostri Falconem vocant: eò quòd incuruis digitis sit. He is a Royall fowle, and desireth praye, and vsethe to sitte on his sinister fiste, that beareth him. He is a gentle byrde, bolde, and hardie: and hathe little fleshe in comparison of his body, but greatly arraide with feathers. For Aristotle saith, Falcula auis pennis plurimum valet. And therefore shee is more light to flee. The Faucon, if he faile of his praie at the firste sight, as it were for shame, he fleeth about in the ayre, and then vneth he commeth to his Lordes hande. For he holdeth him selfe ouercomme, and not kindely borne, if he take not the fowle that he fleeth vnto. This said Cote is borne by the name of Faukener.
               
                  
                  C. beareth Azure, a Pellicane volātd' Or, guttee Gules.
               This is a byrde of Egypte, Habitans in solitudine Nili fluminis. Vnde & nomen sumpsit. The Pellicane feruentlye loueth her byrdes.
                     Pellicane.
                   Yet when thei bene haughtie, and beginne to waxe hore, they smite her in the face, and wounde her, and shee smiteth them againe, and sleaeth them. And after three daies shee mourneth for them, and then strikinge her selfe in the side till the bloud runne out, shee sparpleth it vpon theire bodyes, and by vertue thereof they quicken againe. Hieronymus. Pelicani (inquit) quum suos à Serpente filios occisos inueniunt, lugent, seque et sua latera percutiunt, & sanguine excusso, corpora mortuorum sic reuiuiscunt. Volaterranus saithe, the Pellicane to be the same, whiche Plinie calleth Platea.
               
               
                  The fielde is Sable, in the beames of the Sunne, a Phoenix Uerte.
               This is a byrde of Arabie, and so called,
                     Phoenix.
                   
                  Quòd colorē Phoeniceum habeat: vel quòd sit in toto orbe singularis, & vnica. Nam Arabes singularem, & vnicam Phaenicem vocant. This byrde (as Isidore saithe) liueth aboue fiue hundred yeres, and when shee perceiuethe her selfe so aged, gatheringe the twigges, and drie braunches of sundrie sweete smellinge trees, she maketh thereof, as it were a Beakon: and turninge her selfe therupon towardes the whote beames of the Sunne,

shee clappeth her winges in suche wise, that shee kindeleth fire aboute her, burning her selfe, and so shee rysethe againe of her owne asshes.
               
                  Alanus speaketh of this byrde,
                     Alanus.
                   and saithe, that when the higheste Prieste Onyas had builded a Temple in the greate Cittie of Heliopolis in Egypte, to the fourme and likenesse of the Temple in Ierusalem, and the firste daye of Easter,
                     Vnicae semper auis.
                   when he had gathered muche sweete smellinge woode, and set it on fire vpon the Aultare to offer Sacrifice: euen then to all mennes sighte, came sodainely suche a byrde, and fell into the middle of the fire, and was there burnte anone to asshes, and the asshes remained still, and were diligently kepte, and preserued by the commaundemente of the Prieste. And within three dayes, of theise asshes was bredde a little worme, whiche tooke the shape of a byrde at laste, and did flie into the wildernesse.
               
                  D. beareth Uerte,
                     Kalader.
                   a Kaladre gardante, Argente.
               This byrde is white of colour, and hath no part of blacknesse. His kinde is marueylous. For if a man which hath bene longe holden with greate sickenesse, be like to die, thys byrde then turneth awaye his countenaunce from him. But if the sicke man shal escape the deathe, this byrde then fixeth his sighte earnestly on hym, & beholdeth him cheerefully.
               
                  
                  E. beareth partie per Cheuron enbattailed, Uert & Gules, three Cranes Argente.
                     Crane.
                   The Crane is a bird great of wingꝭ and stronge of flighte, and fleeth highe into the ayre, to see the Countries, towardes the whiche he will drawe. He is a byrde verye louinge ouer his owne kinde, and they liuinge in companie together, haue a kinge amonge them: and flee in order. And when they sitte on the grounde, for their safegarde, they ordaine watches by course amonge them selues, that they maie reste the more surely: and those whiche keepe the watche, stande vpon one foote, holdinge eche of them a little stone in the other, highe from the earthe, that by fallinge thereof, they maie be awaked, if it happe any of them to fall a sleape. Theire age is knowne by theire coloure. Nam senectute nigrescunt.
               
               
                  Aristotle saithe, that the Crane is a ciuill byrde, Quia sub Duce degit.
                  
                     
                        Crues vbi pugnent cum Pigmeis.
                     
                     
                        Arist. de animal. li. 8. ca. 12
                   Cranes flee into verye farre Countryes, Quae ex Scithicis campis ad paludes Aegypto superiores, vnde Nilus profluit, veniunt, quo in loco pugnare cum Pygmeis dicuntur: Non enim id fabula est, sed certè genus tum hominum, tum etiam equorum pusillum (vt dicitur) est, deguntque in cauernis, vnde nomen Trogloditae à subeundis cauernis accepere. Cranes doo many thinges wisely, as Aristotle saithe, Libro de Animalib. 9. Cap 10.
               
                  
                  The field is quartered d'Or and Sable, a Crosse engraled Ermyne,
                     Cocke.
                   betwene foure Cockes, conterchanged of the one, and the other, membred and cristed Gules.
               
                  Gallus à castratione vocatus. Inter caeteras enim aues huic soli testiculi adimuntur. Veteres enim abscisos gallos vocabant. The Cocke breedethe a Pretious stone called Allectricium, like to that stone that highte Calcedonius. And because of the same stone, the Lyon dreadeth, and abhorreth him, & especially if the Cocke be white. For the Lyon dreadeth a white Cocke, as Plinie saith. The Cocke aboue other birdes, is ensigned with a peculiare Creste: Sic enim institutā, vt nec caro sit,
                  
                     Galli post victoriam canunt.
                   
                  nec à natura carnis omnino aliena. The Cock greately reioiceth, when he getteth the victorie ouer an other, and after the clappinge of his winges, he singeth for ioye thereof. Gloriam sentit, noscit sydera, it cubitum cum Sole, imperitat suo generi, & Regnum, in quacunque domo fuerit, exercet. The Cocke is consecrate to the Sunne.
               
                  F. beareth Sable and Or, parted per Cheuron embatailed, in Chief, two Pigeons volante d'Argente.
                     Doue, or Culuer.
                   This byrde is the messenger of peace, ensample of simplenesse, cleane of kinde, plenteous in procreation, floure of meekenesse, louer of companie, and forgetter of wronges. Antiqui eas venereas nuncupabant: eò quòd nidos frequentent, & osculo amorem concipiant. Culuers (as S. Ambrose
                  
saithe) in Egypte and Siria are taughte to beare Letters, and to be as it were messengers out of one Prouince into an other.
               
                  The fielde is d'Or, and Sable, trauersed in foure, per Pale and Cheuron,
                     Owle.
                   an Owle sinister d'Argente. Or thus: He bearethe quarterly d'Or, and Sable Cheurone, an owle sinister d'Argente.
               This byrde in Latin is called Bubo, and hathe that name of the sounde of her voice: and is a wylde byrde charged with feathers, and seethe more cleerely by night, then by day, and then shee is moste stronge, and able to resiste her enimyes, who can not abide her for her shape, songe, and countenaunce. When shee is assayled of other byrdes, shee lyinge vprighte, defendeth her selfe with byting, and scratchinge.
               Shee is friende to the husbandeman in killinge mise, whiche otherwise woulde consume his corne in the barne. Apud Augures malum portendere fertur. Nam cum in vrbe visa fuerit, solitudinem significare dicunt. De qua Ouidius:
                  
                     Faeda
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sic volucris venturi nuntia luctus
                     Ignauus Bubo dirum mortalibus omen.
                  
               
               
                  
                  G. beareth Gold, on a fesse betwene two Swallowes Sable,
                     Swalowe.
                   three fountaines proper.
               This kinde of Swallowes is al blacke, & is greatly dread of other fowles. Yea, the Eagle, and Gossehauke flie from this Swalowe, as it were theire enimye: and dare not fall on theire praye while shee is fleeinge abroade, dreading the bytinge of her. For it is thought to be venemous, as Plini saith. And this I take to be the Swalowe, Quae carne vescitur.
               
               There ben other two kindes of Swalowes, ye one called the house Swalowe, which loueth mannes companie: and the other whiche is lesse, louethe the sea, and maketh her neaste in the holes, and chynnes of Rockes. But bothe of them make their neaste in like, and haue their tayles forked as a payre of sheeres, and differ nothinge in coloure, but that the house Swalowe is seene to haue, Sanguinis maculum in pectore.
               
               And in that I haue descriued three Fountaines on the Fesse in the said Cote armour,
                     Fountaine.
                   I thinke it therefore mete to declare what a Fountaine is. A Fountaine is the head and springe of liuinge water, whiche springeth, and runneth continually oute of the priuie vaynes of the earthe, to the greate nourishinge thereof, and of all mankinde. And therefore it is called Fons, as it were Fouens, nourishinge: or Fundens, pouringe, or shedinge out.
               The Fountaine multipliethe all Riuers, Brookes, and streames with waters, and communicateth hym selfe to many, hidinge it from nothinge: but parteth, and distributeth of his abundance, as wel to Pylgrimes and strangers, as to all other liuinge creatures.
               
                  
                  G. beareth Argente, & Sable, parted per Pile, a Swalowe volante of the seconde, bearinge the Celidon floure,
                     Hirundo domestica.
                   proper.
               The Swalowe taketh not his meate sitting, but fleing in the ayre, & in making of neastꝭ is most expert & cunning: educādis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      faetibꝰ solertissima. She is full of feathers, & therefore is the moste lightest, and swift in flight of all fowles. Other birdes disturbe her not, neither is shee praye to any of them. Maria transuolat, ibique hyeme commoratur. Ouid calleth this byrde, Veris praenuntia. For shee is the firste messenger, that shewethe vs the springe of the yeare. It is readde, that in the yonge Swalowes wombe bene founde twoo stones very pretious. The one white, whiche is the Female, and the other redde, which is the Male, and is more vertuous.
                     Pretious stones called Celidonij.
                   These two pretious stones, are called Celedonij: and they must be taken out of the Swalowes wombe, ere they touche the grounde.
               
                  The fielde is of the Pearle, a Palme tree proper.
                     Palme.
                  
               
               This is a tree of victorye: Procero
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ac decoro virgultu: diuturnisque vestita frondibus: & folia sine vlla successione conseruans. It is a tree noble and famous, alwaies faire and greene: and longe tyme beautified with braunches and leaues, both in winter & sommer. The Prophete saithe, Iustus vt Palma florebit. This noble tree aboundeth,

and is moste fruitefull in India. And therefore Uespasiane the Emperour, caused to be imprinted on the one parte of hys coygne the figure of the Palme tree, to declare thereby hys tryumphant victorie, in subduing and conquering the whole region of Iewrie.
               H. Beareth golde,
                     Laurell.
                   a Laurell tree verte. Thys is also a tree of victorie, and is of singuler excellencie, grace, and vertue. In ye olde tyme, all victorious emperours, kynges, princes and capteines, were crowned with garlandes of Laurell tree, whan they had gotten the victorie ouer their enemies. And to the knyghtes, souldiours, and standerde bearers, whiche had behaued and borne thēselues valiātly and stoutely in the warres, were geuen garlādes also made of Laurell to adorne theire heades, whiche were called Coronae militares,
                  
                     Coronae militares.
                   and were testimonies of their prowes, noble actes, and haute courages, for euer to bee remembred. The Grekes call thys tree Daphnis
                        •
                     ,
                  
                     Daphnis.
                   because it neuer leaueth hys grenesse. It was consecrate to the great Iupiter, & to Apollo Delphicus. It is thoughte that thys tree is neuer touched with lyghtenynge. And therefore the Emperoure Tiberius Caesar, in thondryng and lyghtenyng, vsed to weare a garlande of Laurell tree agaynste the smytyng of the lyghtenyng. Also Plinye reporteth that as the same Emperoure dyd sitt by Drusilla the Empresse in a certein gardē, an Eagle threwe from a ryght hyghe place, a fayre whyte henne, whole and sounde into the Empresse lappe: and the henne dyd holde in her beake a bowe of Laurell tree, full of bays. And diuinors toke hede to the hēne, and did sowe the bays, kepyng them wisely, and of them came a wood, that was called Sylua triumphans,
                  
                     Sylua triumphans.
                   as it were the wodd of worshippe for victorye and mastrie
                     •
                  , for afterwarde the Emperour dyd beare of the Laurel tree in hys hande, and did weare a garlande thereof on hys heade. And after him many others emperours in the same wise should be crowned with Laurel tree of the same wodd, whan they had the victorye, and these theire garlandes were called. Coronae

triumphales.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        triumphales.
                   
                  Hae antiquitus è lauro erant, post fieri ex auro ceptae. Collisa in se durius duo Laurea, ignem concussu reddunt, si Plinio creditur. Idem facere Leonis ossa, pleri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      autumant. Sic & concursu potentiorum certum est oriri grauius periculum.
               
               
                  
                     Olyue.
                  The fielde is of the Sunne, an Olyue tree, Veneris.
               
               Thys is a Royall tree, and in the Latyne tongue is called Olea, the fruite Oliua, succus oleum. It is a tree of peace: for no messengers were sent to Rome, to gete or obteyne peace, without bearing in theire handes the braunches of Olyue tree: neyther yet to profre peace to other men. Remigius sayeth, that the dignitie of thys tree is knowne: for that in token of reconciliation betwene god and man, and of the peace made betwene them, the Doue whiche was sent forth by Noe out of the arke, returned agayne to hym with a token in her mouth,
                     Genes. 8. which was an Oliue leafe that she had plucked, and of none other tree. Plynie sayethe that among the Athenians, victors were crowned with Oliue.
               I. Beareth Argente, an hande Gules, holdyng a branche of Oliue propre. Diodore sayeth, that the tree which beareth the Olyue, is a signe of peace and trāquilitie: gestantibus iudicium erat pacis. The prayse of peace is eloquentely set forth by Ihon Gower, in a treatise which he writte vnto the noble kyng Henry the fowerth: in these woordes.
               
                  
                     Peace is the chefe of all the worldes wealth.
                     And to the heauen it leadeth eke the waye.
                     Peace is of soule & lyfe the mans healthe.
                     Of pestilence it doth the warre awaye.
                     My liege Lorde take hede of that I saye,
                     Yf warre maye be left, take peace on hande.
                     Whiche may not bee without goddes sande.
                  
                  
                     VVith peace standeth euery creature in rest.
                     Without peace, there may no lyfe bee gladde
                     
                        Aboue all other good peace is the best,
                     Peace hath himselfe, whan warre is all bestadde,
                     The peace is safe, the warre is euer dreade.
                     Peace is of all charitie the kaye,
                     Whiche hath the life & soule for to waye.
                  
                  
                     My liege Lorde yf that the liste to seche
                     The soth ensāples, what the warre hath wrought
                     Thou shalt well heare of wise mens speche,
                     That deadely warre turneth into noughte.
                     For yf these olde bookes be well I soughte,
                     There might thouse what thīg the warre hath do
                     Both of conqueste, and conquerour also.
                  
                  
                     For vayne honor, or for the worldes good
                     They that whylom the stronge warres made
                     Wher be they now, bethincke wel in thy moode
                     The daye is gone, the nyghte is darke & fade
                     Theire crueltye which made them then glade
                     They sorowē nowe, & yet haue naught the more
                     The blodde is shed, which no man may restore.
                  
               
               
                  K. Bearethe Or,
                     Oke.
                   an Oke tree, verte.
               Th'Oke tree was hallowed to Iupiter. Sacra Ioui quercus. And it is called Quercus siue quernei ꝙ ea soliti erant dij gentium querentibus responsa dare: Thys tree endurethe manye yeares: sicut legitur de quercu Mambre sub qua habitauit Abraham: quae fertur vsque ad Constātini Regis imperium per multae secula perdurasse. The Oke in

the olde tyme was accompted chefest inter faelices arbores. It is a tree verye hyghe, full of boughes and braunches, hauing a roote moste perfecte and sure, and therefore it best abideth the blastes and shakynges of all tempesteous windes: and for hys myghtynes and strength, is most meete for great and large buyldinges. The leafe of thys tree in some countreyes neuer falleth awaye. Theophraste sayeth, that there is a kynde of Oke, in agro Thurio, vbi Sybaris perspicua, quae nunquam folia dimittit. The frute of thys tree is called.
                     Akecorne.
                   
                  Glandula, or glans quernea, an Akre, or maste of the Oke tree: wherewith men in the olde tyme were norished and fedde, wherfore the Poete sayeth.
               
                  
                     Mortales primi ructabant gutture glandem.
                  
                  
                     Oure fathers of olde thoughte it good,
                     To vse Akecornes for theire foode.
                  
               
               
                  Prius enim quam frumenti vsus esset, antiqui homines glande vixerunt. Boetius remembreth the same, sayinge, faelix nimium prior aetas. &c.
               Wondrefull happy was the firste age of men, whych did holde them contented with the fruites which the verie fieldes brought foorthe, and therefor were not distroyde with filthye glotonye: but were wonte easely to'assuage theire hōgre at euen with the Akecornes of Okes, not knowing what wine mente, yet vsing the moiste hony, and the clere running waters of the streame, whiche caused thē to slepe holesome slepes vpon the grasse liyng vnder the shadowes of the hye pyne trees.
               
                  
                  L. Bearethe Gules,
                     Peare.
                   & verte, parted with a cheuron betwene three peares d Or.
               The Peare hath hys name, because it is shaped as ye flambe of the fire, for a Peare is greate, harde, and brode at th'one ende, and narowe and strayghte at th'other, as ye flame of fyre. Pyrus autem arbor: fructus eius pyra est. Poma pyri iumentis imposita vel si pauca, vehementer onerosa esse dicuntur. I thincke no more to speake of the Peare at thys tyme, nor of the tree, but of the cheuron descriued in the sayde fielde, whiche is a worthye particion, & holdeth in it selfe a great soueraignetie.
               The Frenche call thys signe a Cheueron.
                     Cheuron.
                   In Latyne it is called Signum capitale, & Tignus, or Tignum, in Englishe it is a rafter of an house, which beareth the roofe: and of vs Northerne men, it is called a Sparre, or Sparres, of others the barge coples. The whiche signes by all likelyhode were firste borne of carpenters, and makers of houses:

for an house is neuer made perfecte, till these coples be put vpon it, by the maner of an heade: and two suche ioyned together, make a capitall signe: that is to saye in ye northerne tongue a cople of sparres.
               M. Beareth Argente, twoo Cheurōs Sable, betwene thre figge slippes propre.
                     Figge.
                  
               
               The figge tree is so called, a faecunditate, because it excelleth

others in fruitefulnes. Nam terque quaterque per singulos annos generat fructum: atque altero maturascente: alter oboritur.
               
               Thus it is manifeste that thys tree beareth frute three or fower tymes in one yere, and whyle one rypeth, an other spryngeth anone. Let ye bearer herof in cote armoure, consider what he beareth. The learned can iudge what his condicions shoulde bee.
               And touching the two Cheurons blazed, there can be no mo so termed in one coate armoure: for they conteyne the iuste quantitie of theire ordre in the fielde, for with them the fielde is fiue in all hys contente.
               
                  
                     Rose.
                  
                  O. Beareth gules, & sable, parted per cheuron, nebulee, thre roses d'Argent.
               Amōg all flours of ye world, the Rose is the cheife, and beareth the price. And therefore ye chefe parte of man, whiche is the heade is ofte crowned therwith, because of hys vertues, swete smell and sauoure, for by fayrenes they fede ye sight, and please the smell by odour: and accorde to medecine, both grene and drye. Rosa a specie floris nuncupata: ꝙ rutilanti colore rubeat. Therefore our noble and moste gracious Quene doth, and for euer shall vse thys delectable Poesie or worde. Rutilans Rosa sine spina. Yf I were learned thereunto, I woulde speake more of thys floure. But beyng bolde of Plinye, the Rose shall haue preheminence aboue all floures, and nexte to it, the floure de luce, and the thirde shalbe the violet. These are the floures wherewith the crownes of noble men oughte to bee adorned.
               
                  
                     Partie per Cheuron.
                  And wheras the fielde of the sayde cote armoure is parted per Cheuron, you must take the same, as one of the particions

messes, because one coloure, after the maner of a Cheurō, entremedleth with an other, otherwise than is vsed in simple particions. And my aucthor sayeth, that many haue doubted aboute the Blazon of Cotes Armoures, whan they bee thus parted per Cheuron of two coloures: and such as haue made themselfes verye connyng, in descriuing of armes, haue fayled thereof: some holdinge one opinion, and same an other. And therefore to dissolue the doubte herein, take these nexte ensuyng for example.
               
                  P. Beareth Argent and gules, partie per Cheuron engrailed, three Lyllies,
                  
                     Lillye.
                   
                  deux, vne, contrechanged of the fielde.
               Thys is as fayre a cote, as maye bee deuised of that particion: and the tokē borne in the fielde, is of hys propre coloure. For the Lyllye is of treble coloure, whit, redde, and purple, or yealowe. I thought it good to adde these woordes deux vne in the blazon of thys cote Armoure, for that the Lillyes are transmuted of the same coloures that the fielde is of, for yf the fielde were not so parted, it neded not to haue sayde deux vne. And touching the floure, Plinye sayeth, that the Lillye is next to the Rose in worthynes and noblenes. Nothing is more gracious than the Lillye in fayrenes of colour, in swetenes of smell, and in effecte of workynge and vertue.
                     Lilya.
                   
                  Lillya lactei floris herba: vnde & nuncupata quasi Liolya cuius dum candor sit in folijs: auri tamen species intus effulget.
               
               
                  
                  The fielde is Sable, thre piles in poyncte, d'Or, charged wyth nyne violettes,
                     Violet.
                   propre.
               Thys floure hath hys name of the strongest smell that hee hath, as Isidore sayeth, and the smell thereof abateth the heate of the brayne, and refressheth and comforteth the spirittes. The littlenes thereof is nobly rewarded in greatenes of sauoure and of vertue. Amongst floures, Plinye setteth the violet, next the Rose, and the Lyllye: for that they be the chefe floures (hee sayeth) to beutefie the crownes of noble men. Huius genera sunt tria: purpureum, album, melliuum. The thre piles descried in thys cote armoure, whiche mete together in one coone of the shielde, as in the poyncte thereof, are called in Latine Pilae, which is asmuche to saye as Pillers, that susteyne and vpholde the worke whiche is layde vpon them.
                     Pyles.
                   And of the sondrye bearing of suche in cote armour, hereafter shall ensue diuerse examples.
               Q. Beareth Argēt and verte, parted per pile enuecked, 6.
                     Senuye.
                   leafes de Senuye d'Or▪ 3.2.1. The floure of thys herbe is full yealowe, and hath a good smell. And though all the herbe in substaunce be kene and feruente, yet Bees loue beste the floures of it, and haunte them.
               The fielde is golde, a Pyle in poyncte betwene two slippes of Merche,
                     Merche.
                   verte. This herbe in latine is called Apium, and it is so called, ꝙ ex eo apes .i. caput antiquorum triumphantium coronabatur. Hercules made hym firste garlandes of thys herbe. Cuius radices efficaciter pugnant contra insidias ve nenorum. Thys herbe is alwayes grene, as Theophraste sayethe.
               R. Beareth Sable, a Pile engraled, in bende betwene fower flours of Agnus castus,
                  
                     Agnus caest'.
                   d'Or. This herbe is alwayes

grene: and the floure therof is namely called Agnus castus, for whoso vseth muche to smell thereunto, eyther man or woman, it hathe vertue to kepe them chaste as a Lambe. Therefore the women of Rome, vsed to beare with them the floure of thys herbe, at funeralles, & in seruice of deade men, whan they must nedes lyue chaste, for common honestie.
               
                  S. beareth Ermyne, twoo Gyrons Sable, charged with Cilidon floures proper,
                     Celydon.
                   a Batune Gules.
               This herbe Celidon hath a yealowe floure, and the stalke therof broken, smorcheth them that touche it all with yealow. And it highte Celidonia, for it springeth and bloometh in the comminge of Swalowes. For a Swalowe in the Greeke tongue is called Celidon. Or els, as Isidore saithe, it is so called, because it helpeth Swalowes byrdes, if their eyne be hurte, or blinde. And likewise Plinie saithe, that by the iuyce of Celidon, Swalowes eyes turne againe to theire firste state, if they bene hurte, or put out.
               This hearbe hathe vertues that bene noble and good, whereof ye maye reade in Plinie, Dioscor. and Platearius also.
               
                  
                  The fielde is Lunae, on a Crosse Saturne,
                     Crownes.
                   fiue Crownes Imperiall. The Crosse thus charged, is called of olde Heraultes, the firste quadrate royall, because theron is seene a noble token to the number of fiue. Vide in the Concordes of Armorie. It is to be seene in diuerse Cote armours, that Crownes bene borne in sundrie otherwise, as in Pale, in Fesse, & in the Angles of the Shielde, as it were in triangle, whiche is the moste aunciente, and as mine Authour saith, the most famous maner of bearing of them, or any other signes. And they are verie rare sene borne in Bende, but in chefe they maye bee excellently borne, as before in thys booke is remembered.
               
                  The fielde is of the Rubye, a Crosse betwene fower crownes murall,
                     Crowne murall.
                   Topaze.
               Of the sondrie fashions of Crownes, geeuen by Emperours, kynges, and Prynces, to theire souldiours, for theire good seruice & valiaunte feates donne in the warres, one is named a Crowne murall, whiche was geuen to hym, whiche in the siege of a Citie firste scaled the walles, & entered maugre the enemies, and therfore it was made like 
                     •
                  nbatlementes of a wall. Muralis corona ex auro conflata in sormam muralium pinnarum illi dabatur ab Imperatore exerci
                     
                        •
                     us, qui prius vi & armis hostium mania transcendisset in vrbē.
               
               
                  Thys coate armour is to be nombred, among the worthie particions, for the soueraygnetie of the same.
               
                  The fielde is of the Topaze, on a Crosse parted per Paile, Saphyre and Diamonde, a Crowne nauale, as the firste.
               Thys Crowne was first put on hys heade, whiche in battayle on the Sea, firste borded the shippe that was assayled,
                     Crowne nauall.
                  
and therefore it was made like to the foreparte of a shippe. Nauali praelio qui in classem hostiū armatus, primus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      irruens ingressus esset, Corona aurea Nauali cohonest abatur, rostro rum, aut naualium prorarum adinstar confecta. And an other Crowne called in Latyne Corona Castrensis, was geuen to hym, whiche firste entered by force into the trenche of the enemies campe, and therefore it was made, as it were sett about with payles.
                     Corona Castrensis.
                   And Paradyne sayeth, that Corona Castrensis vallaris, seu palata, ex auro confecta, donabatur ab Imperatore, seu exercitus praefecto illi, qui primus oppugnando vallum hostile occupasset. These Crownes alwayes were of Golde. Yet note, that these and many other suche like, oughte not directely to bee called Crownes: for althoughe Corona in Latyne, is called a Crowne, so is it a Garlande, a Chaplet, a companye of people standing rounde aboute like a Circle, also the circle about the moone:
               
                  
                  He beareth Sable, this lettre Ypsilon Argente,
                     Ypsilon.
                   ensigned with a Crowne Imperial on chiefe.
               
                  Haec littera Pythagorica vocatur. Se in the firste boke, entituled the Concordes of Armorye almost in the ende.
               The bearer of thys signe or token in armes, I meane of the crowne Imperiall, oughte alwayes to bee doynge good, and to se that no harme be donne to none, to be mercifull, and continually exercised in the seruice of almyghtie God. For those, in whose power it is to do good, and doth it not, the Crowne of honor and worshippe shalbe taken from them, and (as Chaucer sayethe) with shame they shalbe anulled, & from all dignitie deposed.2. Reg. 12. cap.
                   When kyng Dauid had gotten the citie of Raba, & had put oute the people that was therin, tormentyng them vpon sawes, yron harrowes, and vpon ares of yron, & thrust them into the tyle kyll, he toke their kinges crowne from of hys heade, whiche wayde an hundred waighte of golde, and in it were precious stones: and it was sett on Dauids heade. Hereby is the power of God declared, how hee dealeth euen with kynges, takynge the crowne and dignitie from one, and geuing the same to an other. He exalteth, and it is he, that deiecteth, he is the auē
                  ger, he is also the sparer, he can wounde, and he can make whole: neyther is there anye that can delyuer hym oute of hys hande.
               The fielde of thys cote Armoure is Claurie, because it is of one propre coloure, without anye particion or change, & it is also the seconde quadrate Royall, for that the fielde is charged, but with no mo tokens.
               The fielde is parted per Fesse Dented, Venus, & Saturne, fiue beasauntes.
                     Beasante.
                   3.2. A beasaunte is also called a Talente:

The sondrie contentes wherof, the Reader maye best vnderstande in Sir Thomas Elyote hys dictionarie, to the whiche I referre hym, and to master Gerard Leyghe, in hys accedence of Armorie.
               The fielde is sable a fesse Cantone d'Ermyne, betwene two plates.
               Plates are of dignitie nexte vnto the beasauntes,
                     Plates.
                   and are rounde in shape as beasauntes are, whiche are alwayes of golden coloure, as ye may rede before. And plates are of siluer, and haue no similitude on them, but are formed readie to coigne. These of them that knowe not the ryght termes of them are called Balles: and they offende not muche some tyme so to name thē, for Pila in Latyne, is not onely a Piller, or frame to bee put vnder any worke to beare the same, but it is also a Ball, or any thinge rounde as a Ball: the whiche is an instrumente seruinge otherwhyle to the hāde, and then it is called in Latyn Pila palmaria, or Pila manualis, otherwise it serueth for the foote, and then it is called Pila pedalis, a foote ball, yet are there other thinges rounde, whyche are neyther beasauntes, plates, or balles. A boule is a very rounde thinge,
                     Boule.
                   and in Latyne is called Globus, and Globum, and is also a token in armes, but not of suche estimacion. There is also an other figure, in all partes equally roūde,
                     Sphere or Globe.
                   and in Latyne is called Sphaera, and is also an honorable deuise in armes. And nowe shall ensue sundrye examples to displaye suche signes or tokens, as are rounde in shape and forme.
               The fielde is Gules.
                     Ermyne.
                   10. beasauntes a canton d'Ermyne. Of the Beasaunte I haue spoken sufficiently before. But the canton beyng d'Ermyne, vnderstande what the same is. It is one of the noble and honorable furres, vsed to be worne of Kynges and Princes in theire robes and mantles, & is the chefest furre. In armes it is called Ermine, proprely, and not siluer or white, poudered with Sable, to the whiche terme there must bee had great respecte, it is so frequēte in armorye. In mātles, (as M. G. Leyghe sayeth)

they are called doblinges. It is the skynne of a lyttle beaste of the lande of Armenye, whereof he taketh hys name. The tricke of thys cote armoure, I did take (as I founde it) in the parish Churche of Lutterworth.
               
                  Here in the fielde Azure, is to be seene the image of the virgin Marie, with her chylde in her armes, standing in the sonne. For the bearinge of these Armes, greate dissention did arise, betwene Sir Ihon Shandos, an Englishe man, and the lord del Claremounte, a Frenche man, they both bearing the saide Armes alike: after a chalenge thereof made by the one, to the other, it was tryed by them, at the ende of ye battel of Poytiers, where the lorde del Claremounte was slayne, and loste hys Banner, by ryghte of armes.
               Suche lyke controuersie dyd chaunce, betwene two valiaunt, knyghtes, Sir Iohn of Sitsilt, and Sir Willyam of Facknaham, for raysinge in fielde the cote Armoure, here, after the antique maner displayed. But the ryghte of the bearing thereof (which they were readie to trie by force of Armes) was adiudged, to Sir Iohn Sitsilt, as to him moste ryghtefully and lyneally descended, by good & lawfull byrthe: as heyre of bloode and of bodie, of Iames Sitsilt, Lorde of Beauporte. For the truthe whereof (gentle reader) here ensueth Verbatim, the copye of the very originall wrytinges, in haec verba.
               
               
                  
                  ¶Iames Sitsilt Lord

of Beauporte, had to hys ensigne in the fielde of ten Barres siluer & Azure, six excocheons sable, with as many Lyons ramping, of the firste incensed Gules.
               
               ¶ Gentle Reader, note well thys Blazon, and you shall playnely perceaue the great knowledge of th'officers at armes in the olde tyme.
               
               
                  ¶C'est a tesmoigner a vous mes Seigniours, pur le determination final, del discention pur vng Ensigne d'Armes perenter Monsieur Iean de Sitsilt, & Willyam de Faknaham Cheualiers, que l'an depuis le nestre de Dieu, mil cent quarante deux, Iaques Sitsilt & ses ancesters seigneurs de Beauport, a le siege de le Chasteau de Wallingford & viues & mortzillonques, & la leueront vng Ensigne, tiel comme l'ensigne de lour sang genereux. C'est a dire, en la champe de dize barretz d'Argent & azure,
                  
                     Pedegre ascendinge.
                   
                  six escochcons Sabels, auec tantes de Lyons rampand, primer incensed Gule, Pere de Iehan Sitsilt, pere de Eustace, pere de Baldwine, pere de Gerarde, pere de Robert, pere de Iaques, Pere de George de Euerwike, pere de Iehan, pere de cestuy Iean Sitsilt Cheualer, heyer de sang & de corps de dit Iaques Seigneur de Beauport, linealment descendu par bon & loyal nestre, de que lygne le dit Willyam n'est my. Et cest pur voier & bon droit tousiours ie seray prest de maintener, a que fayer ie moy oblige par mon seau ci affigé. Donné le quarte iour d'Auril, l'an del reigne du Roy Edwarde le tiers depuis le conqueste. Le Siz.
               
            
            
               ¶ The final determinacion of the controuersie aforesayde.
               
                  A touts Angloys & Francoys, Nous Edwarde de Beaulile, & Iean de Mowbray gret. L'ou grande debate & controuersie ad esté parentre Iean de Sitsilt Cheualier, & Willyam Faknaham, in le champe de Monte holitone, pur vn ensigne d'armes: c'est assauoir tiel, le champe de dize Barretz Argent, & azure, supportez de cinq escocheons Sables, charges ouesque tant de Lyons primers rampantz incensed Gules, que ambideux clamont come lour droict par longe & auncient descent a eux descendu. Et a mayntener lour quarell pur droitriel, ambideux les partyes ont eux mettre sur lour force, & vantont de cest maintener per lour corps. Ci est que il au please a nostre liege seigneur le Roy que Iustice sera fait a ces homes sans sang espandu, per voyer tesmoignes & bons semblances.

Accordant a que auoins oyé & voy moltes ditez & lour escriptes, & les tesmoygnes du Roy d'Armes & dauter lieges le Roy, que le droit le dit Iehan Sitsilt et bien forte maintenent le dit ensigne estre son droict, come le droict de son sang genereulx. Pur que fait cest nostre final dome, q̄ Dieu, le Roy nostre liege & nous, & le dit Iehan Sitsilt defend que iames doresenauant le dit Williā ne soit cy hardy, chalenger, claymer, ou leuer in ascun chāp le Roye, ou sur ascun corse viue ou morte, in ascun leu deins les quatre mers le Roye, ou aillours par my tout Christiantye, les dites armes in ensigne, pyghenoute, guydon, banyer, escocheō, targe, escu, manche, ou elme, sur payne de forfayture, & perder son espeé trenchaut, & ses piques d'Or a toutes iours. Donné le quart iour de Iune, l'an del Roy Edwarde le tierce, depuis le conquest, le Sept.
               
               The whych sayde originall writinges, beyng written in parchement, accordyng to the antiquitie of the tyme, I my selfe haue seene being in the possession of the ryghte honorable the Lorde of Burghley, to whome in blood the same belongeth, whose name beinge written at thys daye Cecill is neuertheles in Wales, both in speche and common writing vsed to be vttered Sitsilt or Sitsild: where the originall house at thys daye remayneth nere Aburgenny.
               
                  The fielde is of ye Diamonde, three plates on chefe, and two barres',
                     Hungreforde.
                   Pearle. Or els thus. He beareth Sable, two barres and three plates, on chefe d'Argente. What these bee, and of theire mettall, ye maye reade in the page nexte before.
               
                  
                  The fielde is of the Sonne, 10.
                     Torteauxe.
                   torteauxes, 3.3.3. & 1. or thus. C. beareth gold .10. torteauxes, 3.3.3. and 1. gules. It neded not here to haue made mencion of what planet or coloure the torteauxes be: for they are found alwayes of redde coloure, and are called of olde blazors, cakes of bredde, notwithstanding they are contrarie in coloure to righte cakes, or wastelles: yet they muste bee named by none other name, then Torteauxes:
               
                  
                     Q. Curt. li. 4.At suche tyme as Alexander the greate layde hys siege to the citye of Tyre, a certayne souldiour of the Macedōs, as he was breakyng of hys breade, there appearrd therein droppes of bloude, whiche by Arystander the deuiner was thus interpreted. Yf the bloude had appeared outwardely, then it had signified yll fortune to the Macedons, but in asmoche as it was founde within, it betokened destructiō to the citye, they wente about to wynne.
               T. Beareth Ermynes, on a chefe Argente indented, 3. Ogresses.
               
                  
                     Ogresse, or Pellet.
                  Th'Ogresse is the same, that we call a Pellet of a gōne, and in armorye is no other coloure then Sable. Wherfore I do omit the worde Sable, because it is the righte and propre coloure incident to a Pellet. But of the fielde of thys cote armour (whiche in my iudgemente shall haue the seconde dignitie of the furres) thys vnderstande, that it is onely to bee called Ermines, and not Sable poudered with siluer.
               
                  
                  And of these two Royall furres, Ermyne, and Ermynes, how they both may be borne in one cote armoure, take thys for example.
               U. Beareth gules, one pyle in poyncte,
                     Ermyne.
                   Ermyne & a chefe d'Ermynes.
                     Ermynes.
                   Thus of the difference of these two furres, this, and the last pagen maye perfectely instructe the, gentle reader.
               W. Bearethe Gules,
                     Hurtes.
                   on a Fesse Argente 3. hurtes.
               Thys shoulde alwayes bee of Azure coloure, and are called hurtes, for that where they appeare, violence hath bene shewed to the bearer, and further I cānot construe of this matter. The Cote armoure is Mars, and the thing conteyned in the fielde is of his power, and charged proprely in a sure Fesse of the Moone. These tokens (beyng rounde in figure) as are next before recited, ought well to be marked and considered, for as they differ in mettall and coloure, so are they chāged in theire names and callyng. Neyther are they founde at any time perforate, that is to saye, persed in the myddest: but they are seene to bee charged sondrye wayes, as with Rowelles, Mollettes, Starres. &c.
               
                  The fielde is Saturne, a bende of the Sunne,
                     Welles.
                   betwene 6. fountaynes propre. What a fountayne is,
                     L. Sturton.
                   ye may reade before. And notwithstanding, it is so called, a Fountayne, or well, yet be they ensigned in cote armoure, rounde in figure: and bee alwayes of white coloure and waterie, for the thinge which they represente: that is to saye, the water of a well,

whiche is white. Thys cote armoure, as it is charged with an honorable bende ordinarie, so the particion whiche the same maketh, causeth ye cote armoure to be more worthie. What commodities come by founteynes or welles, there is no reasonable creature, but he knoweth. Yet the vse of them maye best be knowne, whoso shall reade the historye of the great worthye, and puissante prince, kyng Arthur, kyng some tyme of thys moste noble Realme of Englād. But whosoeuer deliteth to reade of the diuersitie of fountaines, and theire waters, let them reade Isidore, lib. 13. etymologiar. cap. 13.
               
                  The fielde is Uerrey, Perle, & Saphyre, on a bende Rubie, thre annullettes of the Topaze.
                     Annulet. Ringe.
                   These annullettes, or as commonly they be called rynges, are also certayne rounde signes or tokens borne in armes, to the great estimaciō of the bearer: for rynges are tokens of fidelitie and truste, of the sure kepyng of promyse, & othe, and also the remembrā
                  ce of kepyng oure allegiance and duetie. They are also tokēs of victorie and tryumphe. The first that euer dyd were rynge, (as is redde in prophane hystories) was Prometheus, the sonne of Iapetus: and he firste inuented the makynge of Images also, wherfore the Paynyms supposed, that he made men: and fayned that he wente vp into heauen, & there dyd steale fire to make hys Images haue lyfe, wherewith Iupiter beyng wrothe, caused hym to bee bounden on the hyll called Caucasus, and an Eagle standyng by hym, eatynge hys harte, by the whiche is signified, that he was studious, and a great Astronomer. But of hym Isidore thus sayeth. Primus Prometheus fertur circulum ferorum incluso lapide digito circundedisse. Note here, that the firste rynge was

made of yron. Golde I thincke was then scarcely knowne: yet precious stones, and stones, wherein were grauen signes, of beastes, foules, serpentes, &c. were then enclosed in rynges, not of golde, but in rynges of yron. Qua consuetudine homines vsi annulos habere caeperunt. Isidore also declareth the maner howe men at the firste dyd weare rynges. Annulos homines primū gestare caeperunt quarto a pollice digito: ꝙ ea vena quaedam ad cor vsque pertingat: quam ornandam notandam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      aliquo insigni veteres putauerunt. Apud Romanos anuli de publico dabantur: & non sine discrimine. Nam dignitate praecipuis viris gemmati dabantur: ceteris solidi. And thys also was vsed among the Romaynes, that none but the fremā shoulde openly were a rynge of Golde, hee that was franchysed, a syluer rynge, and the bondeman an Iron rynge. But nowe yf a Prentice, or base craftes men haue not a rynge of Golde, he thincketh it not well with hym, yf hee see a gentleman haue one, and he haue not the like, or such an other: so that euery tyncker nowe a dayes will be gētleman like. It was accompted apud veteres, an infamye to haue or weare anye mo rynges, then one: but nowe that ordre is worne out of vse, and not obserued or kepte, and in especially among weomen: Nam illis nunc prae auro nullū leue est atque immune membrum. Thus there is sufficiently spoken of the bearyng and wearyng of rynges, but of the fielde of the sayde cote armoure thys resteth vnspoken. It is one also of the honorable furres,
                     Verrey.
                   and is proprely called Uerrey, and commonly is sene, of the metall, Argente, and the coloure, azure, vel ècontra &c.
               
               
                  The fielde is Nebule, Luna and Saturne.
                  
                     Nebule. Cloudes.
                   The hole contēte of thys fielde is cloudie of two coloures, gules and argent, or

Argente, and gules, geuyng the soueraingtie to the metal. Almyghtie god wente before hys chosen people the childrē of Israel thorowe the wildernes by daye in a piller of a cloude, and in a Piller of fyre by nyghte. They be called Cloudes, ab obnubendo .i. operiendo caelum. Nubes autem aeris densitas facit. Venti enim aerem conglobant, nubem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      faciunt: vnde est illud: Atque in nubem cogitur aer. Cloudes in Armorie, are signes of great dignitie, and declare the bearer of them in cote armoure, to haue a certayne excellencie in hym selfe. Fabius,
                  
                     Fabius.
                   a noble Romayne, beyng made Dictator againste Anniball, so tempered Prudence with manhode or prowesse, that by detracting of battayle, and trayning Anniball from place to place, and at sondrye aduātages skirmishing with hym, he minished hys puissaunce, and preserued the publike weale of hys cōtrye, and caused Anniball to retire, who sayde than to hys hoste, did not I tell you before, that thys Cloude woulde at the laste bringe vs a storme, calling Fabius a Cloude, because of hys houerynge.
               Y. Beareth Ermynes, a twynne araide, Siluer, crowned with a garlande of violettes,
                     Twynne.
                   propre, hauyng hys handes displayde Geminus is a twynne, where many children are borne at one burdeyne,
                     Geminus.
                   although they be three or mo. And how they may be borne in cote armoure, take here an other example.
               F. Beareth Mars. 3. twynnes with armes displayed, of the moone. Studie not (gentle reader) wherefore I haue blazed the twinne and twinnes with theire armes extended. Of truthe it is theire proprety euen from the wombe so to do, desiringe the libertie of theire braunches. I coulde speake here of swadelynge of chyldren, but it belongethe not to my purpose. Wherefore I referre it to weomen and Phisicions.
               A. Beareth Azure, a maste of a shippe d'Argent, and on the chefe thereof,
                     Gemini.
                   the Sterres Gemini. These the gentyles called Castor,
                  
                     Castor & Pollux.
                   and Pollux: whome the Grecians doe call

                  Dioscuros, and suppose that they prosper those that sayle on the Sea, when they appeare sittyng ioyntely together, thone by th'other on the crosse peice, whereunto the sayle is fastened.
                     Paradinus. Simbol. Her
                           •
                        .
                   
                  Si vero corum alter duntaxat eminet, malum praesagire creditur, Preterea potest sub alterius Geminorum solitudi ne intelligi, periculosam esse potentiam absque prudentia. Saynct Paule departed from Melite in a shippe, whose badge was Castor and Pollux. Act. cap. 28.
               
                  The fielde is Azure, a Garbe d'Or,
                     Garbe, or wheate shafe.
                   with a bende Gules.
               Thus is asmoche to saye, in thys fielde, as a sheafe of wheate. Ceres wyfe of Osiris
kynge of Egipte, dyd first inuente sowynge of wheate, and Barlye, whiche before dyd growe wilde amōg other herbes. Prima Ceres cepit vti frugibus in Grecia,
                  
                     Ceres.
                   
                  & habere segetes translatis aliunde seminibus.
               
               Of her, Ouide maketh mencion, saynge.
               
                  
                     Prima Ceres vnco glebam dimouit aratro.
                     Prima dedit fruges: alimenta
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         initia terris.
                  
                  
                     Whiche verses is thus metrized.
                  
                  
                     First Ceres with ploughe did inuente,
                     th'earthe in clottes all to rente:
                     And firste of grayne the trade she founde,
                     how to sowe it in the grounde.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The fielde is of the Diamonde, a Fusil in pale,
                     Fusill, or Spindle.
                   perle. The Fusill is the same, that we commōly call a Spyndle. Arachus, was the name of the woman, whiche firste inuented spinning of Lynnen, and makyng of nettes. There bee certaine noble men, and other gentles, the whiche beare in theire armes fusilles, whiche signes so borne, (as some affirme) beganne of weuers: forasmuche as weuers vse suche fusilles made of sponnen wolle. Certes terme them whether ye wil, fusilles, or spindles, it is no great matter, since in effecte they are both one: and the token of them I dare auowe, are of more antiquitie and ancient bearyng, than some reporte they be of. Whereof I will now put 6. examples of ye bearing of thē sondrie wise, & after diuers ordres.
               
                  The fielde is Argent, three fusilles in Fesse Gules.
               The Fusill in Latyne is called fusum,
                  
                     L. Mōteacute.
                   
                  ꝙ per cum fundatur quod netuni est. What yf ye first bearer of suche ensignes, dyd cause hys wolle to bee sponne by the folkes of hys household whether they were his childrē or seruauntes, is this therfore any reproche to ye master, since hys children & householde seruantes, yea, and he hymselfe, is therby cladde and appareled muche the better? No certaynely, reproche therein can be none, but rather an hyghe commendacion of vertuous exercise, and godly labour.
               It appeareth in ye hystorie of the actes of great Alexādre,

that while he was abroade in the warres, his sisters didde spinne, and make for him garmentes of wollen clothe, whiche they sente him as a greate gifte: and was worne of him at that time, and more esteemed, then all the silkes, and pretious vestures of the Persians.
                     Persian weomen handle no wolle.
                   And although the noble wemen in that countrie take nothinge in more despite, then to put their handes to woll, yet the sisters of the same Alexander the Greate, and the noble wemen of Macedonia, disdeigned not to spinne, and make garmentes thereof, not thinkinge the same to be any blemishe at all to theire Nobilite, or bloude.
               
                  He beareth Azure,
                     Saltier.
                   a Saltier d'Or. Huius Symboli descriptio ad Sancti Andreae quam dicunt Crucem,
                  
                     Paradinus.
                   
                  pertinet, qua & Domus Burgundica signis militaribꝰ prodiens solebat in aciem venire. Tametsi interpretationē non per omnia similem recipiant. This Saltier is made by the manner of a Crosse, called S. Andrewe his Crosse, and commonly of vs Englishe men, is thereunto compared. It is also taken for a certaine Instrumente, whiche hathe heretofore benne made in diuerse Parkes, and is of a greate magnitude or largenesse: and hathe bene well knowne of Noble gentlemen, and hunters. For they were ordeined, and vsed in Parkes and Forestes, as Engynes to take wylde beastes, whiche once entringe by that instrument, coulde not escape awaye in any wise. Wherefore in the old time, these signes of Saltiers were giuē to rich & couetous persons, or niggardes, such as would not gently, or liberally departe from any of their goodes or substance: and yet nowe in these our dayes are borne of righte Honourable gentlemen, who are bothe free, liberall, & bounteous,

and which abhorre all suche auarice, churlishnesse, and niggardshippe.
               Of the bearinge also of suche a token in Armes, take these further for examples.
               The fielde is Gules,
                     Mollette.
                   on a Saltier Argente, fiue Mollettes Sable.
               This is to be taken as a spotte descended from on high, and disperpled into fiue pointes, out of one Still. This cote Armoure is one of the honourable Ordinaries charged.
               D. beareth Argente, a Saltier Azure, betweene foure Rauens winges proper.
                     Rauen.
                   the Rauen in Latine is called Coruus, siue Corax, and shee hathe that name, à sono gutturis, quòd voce coracinet. Fertur haec auis, quòd editis pullis, escam plenè non praebeat, priusquam in eis per pennarum nigredinem similitudinem proprij coloris agnoscat. Postquam verò eos tetros plumis aspexerit in toto agnitos abundantius pascit. The Rauen is enimie to the Bull, and assaileth him on all partes, but his eies especially.
               
                  
                     Frette.
                  E. beareth Uerte, a Frette d'Argente. And to hys Creaste vpon the Helme, on a wreathe Or, and Sable, a Popyniaye Purpre, bearinge a twigge of the Almonde tree proper, manteled Azure, dobled Or. The Fret borne in this Cote armour, is found borne also of diuerse noble Gentlemen, of seueral mettal and colours. And the same is sometime seene in Cote armour simple, otherwhile doble, also triple, and of eighte pieces: and oftentimes they are multiplied ouer all the Shielde.
               And ye muste vnderstande one greate difference betwene Armes Bended, and these Armes, the whiche be made with the foresaide Frettes. For in Armes Bendee, the colours contained in the shielde, are equally diuided: and where these Frettes be, the fielde alwayes abide the whole.
               
                  
                     Popiniaye.
                  And touchinge the Popyniaye, whiche is before descriued for the Creast of the said Cote armour, he is in one of

his proper colours, and bearethe a spraye of his delighte. He is called in Latin Psitacus. Munsterus in his booke of Cosmographie saithe,
                     Psitacorum Regio.
                   that in Psitacorum regione, there be founde Popiniayes of incredible bignesse, as exceedinge in lengthe, an arme and an halfe, and are of manifolde colours.
               He saithe also, that in the Lande of Chalechute, there be Popiniayes of greene colour,
                     Calechute.
                   euen as greene as Leekes, Alij scutulati, alij coloris purpurij. There is also suche plentie of them in that countrye, that they appointe keepers to keepe theire Rice whiche they sowe in theire fieldes, leaste they doo eate it vp. Munsterus reporteth also, that the Popiniayes of Indie,
                     Indiani Psitaci.
                   are for the moste parte of grene but that theire heade is redde, or as the coloure of woade, and shinethe like golde. Theire tongue is greate and broade, Atque ideò vocaliores sunt, and vtter wordes which maie be vnderstande.
               They learne in the firste and seconde yeare, suche wordes as are taughte them, and retaine them longe. They drinke Wyne, and vse theire feete in steade of handes, when they take meate.
               This byrde, saithe Isidore, of nature vseth as it were a certaine salutation, Dicens: Aue, vel chere. Caetera nomina institutione discit. Hinc est illud:
                  
                     Psitacus à vobis aliorum nomina discam.
                     Hoc didici per me, dicere, Caesar aue.
                  
               
               The Popiniaye is in no countrie so greate or bigge, as he is In Psitacorum regione. But those in the Lande of Chalechute, are of greater praise, & estimation, althoughe they moste abounde there.
               F. beareth Argent, a Bende Azure, cotized with twoo cotizes Sable,
                     Allaundes.
                   on the Bende, three Allaundes heades rassed Golde, Mosseled Gules.
               And to his Creaste vpon the Helme, on a wreathe Argent, and Sable, a Beares heade rassed Golde, betweene twoo winges Gules, manteled Azure, doubled Argente.

The signes borne in the said Cote armour, are the heades of three Allaundes, whiche be a certaine kinde of dogges of greate stature passinge all others, whiche are vsed to hunte the Lyon, Tyger, Panther, wilde Beare, & other suche beastes of rauening kinde. And of the same tokens borne in this Cote armoure, and Creaste, I haue sufficiently spoken, where I entreated of Beastes: and where I haue here descriued the heades of two sundrie kindes of beastes, note alwaies, that nexte the bearing of the whole beaste, the bearinge of the heade in Armes, is taken to be the moste worthiest parte, and moste esteemed in Cote armour, as honourable.
               The field is Martis, a Pegasus Lunae, wynged Solis. The Creaste a dimie Chymer, Rampante Saturne, sette on a Torce, Luna and Ioue, manteled of the Rubie, doubled Pearle. There maie be readde of diuerse Horses in Poetrie,
                     Pegasus.
                   as of this Horse Pegasus before blazed, that had winges for to flie, and of Sinon the Greeke his Horse, that broughte Troye to destruction. But this Pegasus exceeded Bucephale, and all other horses in swiftnesse, and celeritie, because he had winges: Quem ex interfectae Medusae sanguine natum fingunt. De quo Ouidius. 4. Metam. Upon this horse did Bellerophon ascende,
                     Bellerophon.
                   when he slewe Chimeram that horrible monster in Lycia, whiche hauinge the head, and face of a Lyon, the middle parte of a Goate, and the hinder parte of a Dragon, breathed, and caste forth great sparkles of fire. And therefore I haue sette this monster, as a Creaste to the saide Cote armoure: and as I thinke, not incongruently, if the circumstances of the Historie, of whome the same dependeth, be rightly considered.
               Also Munsterus the Cosmographer reporteth, (but supposinge the same not to be true) that Pegasus is a byrde in Africa, whiche is saide to haue the bodye, and eares of an Horse, and the winges like a Byrde. Haec ille Lib. 6. Pag. 1151.
               
                  
                  The fielde is Uerte, an hart of a man d'Argente,
                     Harte of mā,
                   pierced with twoo Dartes in Saltier d'Or. In chief an Harpe d'Ermyne stringed proper.
               The especiall token borne in this Cote armoure, is the Harte of a man, whiche in Latin is called Cor, deriued à Graeca appellatione, whiche they name Cardian. Or els it hathe that name of Cura, because that in it abideth all carefulnesse, all regarde of God, and godlynesse, and also the cause of all knowledge and wisedome.
               The harte of man declinethe more towarde the lefte side, then of any other liuinge creature, for to them it is sette in the middle of the bodye. The causes of the one, or of the other, it appertaineth not here to recite. And as the same is of no very great quantitie, so is it in fourme more rounde, then longe. Yet in the lower parte thereof it gathereth sharpe, Exitque pene in mucronem.
               
               It is the well of life, and all fealinge, and mouinge is therein. Amongest al members, the harte of man is most noble, and therefore it is sette in the moste excellente place of the body, as it is moste needefull. For no member is so needefull to the life of man, as is the harte.
               I haue displayed the saide Harte peirced with Dartes, to declare thereby oure mortalitie, in that we see, if the same be striken, wounded, or grieued with sorrowe, wee then can haue no longer pleasure, or delighte to liue.
               I reade also,
                     Aristomenes
                   that Aristomenes, a man of Messene, whiche was called Iustissimus, Moste iuste, when he was deade, was founde to haue his Harte all hearye.
                     Harpe.
                   The Harpe is a token not vnmeete to be borne in chiefe of the saide Cote armoure, beinge an instrumente like to a mannes

breaste. For likewise as the voice commeth of the breast, so the notes comme of the Harpe, and hathe therefore in Latin that name Cythara, for the breaste is called Cythara in Dorica lingua. This instrumente is seene sometime to haue foure corners, but moste commonly three.
               In olde times Harpes hadde but seuen stringes, and so Virgili saithe:

                     
                        Stringes.Septem sunt soni, septem discrimina vocum.
                  
               
               A Stringe in Latin is called Corda, of Corde, the harte. For as the pulse of the Harte is in the breaste, so the pulse of the stringes is in the Harpe.
               
                  Cordas autem primus Mercurius excogitauit:
                  
                     Isidor. Etym. Lib. 3. cap. 21. 
                  idem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      prior in neruos sonum strinxit.
               
               His fielde is of the Saphyre, a Psalterie in Bend sinister,
                     Sawtrie, or Psaltrie.
                   Topaze. His crest a wrest in Crosse, Sol, set on a chap
                     •
                  au Mars, turned vp Ermynes, manteled Rubie, doubled Ermynes. Isidore saithe, that Psalterium, quod vulgo Canticum dicitur, à psallendo nominatum, hathe his name of singynge, Quòd ad eius vocem Chorus consonando respondeat. The Harpe is like to the Psaltrie in sounde, but betwene them this is the difference. In the Psaltrie is an holowe tree, and of that same tree the sounde commeth vpwarde, and the stringes beinge smitten downewarde, Desuper: sonant. And in the Harpe the holownesse of the tree is beneathe.
               The Hebrewes vsed to call the Psaltrie, Decacordon propter numerum decalogum Legis. And this Instrumente hathe but tenne stringes. The best stringes for the Psaltrie are made of Siluer, yet those bene good, whiche bene made of Laton.
               The Wreste in Latin highte Plectrum. And whereas I descriued the saide Wreaste in Crosse,
                     Wreste.
                   yet take the same not to be twoo, but one Wreste, because a certaine holownesse muste be seene at euery pointe of the Crosse, wherewith the pinnes of ye Psaltrie must be wrested diuersly, as they are of bignesse. Mercurius inuented the sundry kindes

of stringes, and he firste streined them, and made them to sounde.
               
                  P. I. beareth Gules, on a Crosse d'Or, Guttie,
                     Guttie.
                   this name Christus within a crowne of thornes, Uerte. This is the Cote armoure of Preto Iohan, quem alij vocant Presto Ioannem,
                  
                     Preto Iohan.
                   
                  alij praetiosum Iohannem, & vulgares Presbyterum Iohannem, non quòd sit Presbyter aut Sacerdos, cum sit Rex, sed quia error est in nomine.
               
               This Cote armoure of the saide Christian kinge, I noted as I founde the same painted amonge the reste of the Cotes of all Christian Princes, vpon the couer of the Fonte in the Cathedral churche of Yorke.
               Yet Munsterus in his booke of Cosmographie, figurethe vnto the same Prince an other Cote armour: Videlicet, a Lyon Rampante vpon a Crosse, the mettall, or colours of the fielde, or tokens borne in the same, he describeth not. The other, as I haue seene the same, is rightly displayed bothe of the fielde, and the signes borne therein. Wherefore, I mynde here to speake but of the droppes vpon the saide Crosse, beinge blazed Guttie, and no mention made of coloure: whiche I thinke needeth not to be rehearsed, for that these droppes are of theire proper coloure, and are to be taken for droppes of bloude.
               And therefore in an other manner take the blazon of the same noble kinge his armes, who beareth Mars, on a Crosse, Solis guttie. This name Christus, of the fielde, within a Crowne d'Espines proper. The droppes also here descriued haue a spirituall interpretation, whiche euery true, and christian harte maie rightly vnderstande, what they signifie.
               
                  
                  
                     Droppes.
                  Other droppes there be, as droppes of raine and dewe. Suche droppes feede, and nourishe fishe in the sea, make Oysters fatte, and breede in them Pearles, and Pretious stones, as Isidore saithe, and namely the droppes of the morninge dewe. And althoughe a droppe be most neshe, yet by ofte fallinge it pierceth that thinge, that is righte harde, as this verse saithe:

                     Gutta cauat lapidem, non vi, sed saepè cadendo.
                     The harde stone is pierced with droppinge,
                     Not by strength, but by ofte fallinge.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Stillie.
                  The fielde is Uerte, Stillie, d'Argente. This is a righte little parte of water, or rayne, departed by somme violence from the whole, and is called Gutta, when it standeth, or hangeth on eauesinges, or of trees: and when it falleth, it is called Stilla: and thereof commeth Stillicidium, as it were a fallinge droppe.
               A droppe hanginge, fallinge, or standinge, is in substance moste cleare, rounde in fourme, small, and strayte in the ouer parte, little in quantitie, and greate in vertue. For it moysteth the earthe that it falleth vpon, and maketh it plenteous, and fruitefull, feedeth, and nourisheth rootes and seedes, and maketh them growe: and quickeneth, and preserueth greenesse in trees, hearbes, & grasse. Therefore I haue descriued these styles in theire proper fielde.
               G. beareth Azure, a Barre Gemewe, Or, betwene three handes sinister,
                     Sinister hand Palme.
                   d'Argente. The Tymbre, a palme of an hande dexter, d'Ermyne, sette on a Wreath Or, and Sable, manteled Azure, doubled Argente.
               The token borne in this Cote armour, is a lefte hand. For it suffereth the righte handes woorke, and hathe that name Sinistra, of Sinere. to suffer..
               And the hande highte Palma, when the fingers benne streithte foorthe, as it were boughes, or braunches sprayed.
               
                  
                  The fielde is Sable, two arming Swordes transuers in barre, poyncte in poyncte at the hilts, betwene thre Trewels d'Argente.
                     Trewell.
                   The people of Israell, whan they were come out of theire captiuitie at Babylon, begā to buylde agayne the walles of Ierusalem:2. Esdr. 
                     
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   and beyng continually hyndered of theire enemies, they were constreyned, as euery one of them dyd holde hys trewell with one hande to worke, so with the other he holde hys weapon to defende hym. And euerye one that buylded, had hys Sworde girde by hys thighe, and so buylded they.
               The Trewell is an auncient addition of Armorie.
               
                  The fielde is d'Or a manche maltale Sable,
                     Manche.
                   semie margarite propre.
               What a Manche is taken to bee, I haue shewed in the first boke entituled the Concordes of Armorie. And touchyng the Margarites wherewith ye sayd Manche is poudered. Chaucer, in hys seconde and thirde bokes, entituled, the Testament of loue, maketh a great processe of them, as gemmes very precious, clere, and little: And thus descriueth them, (as he readeth in the workes of great clerkes, whyche entreate of the kyndes and propreties of

thynges) sayng,
                     Margarite, or Margrit.
                   that the Margarite is a little whyte pearle, throughout holowe and rounde, and verteous. And on the Sea sides in great Britayne in Muscle shelles, of the heauenly dewe, the beste bene engendred: in whiche by experience bene founde thre faire vertues.
                     Chaucer.
                   One is, it geeueth comforte to the felynge spirites in bodely persones of reason .2. It is profitable to health, agaynst ye passions of sorie mens hartes .3. It is nedefull and noble in staunchyng of blode, there els to moche woulde oute runne.
               The bearer thereof shoulde be stedfast, amiable, and in peace, vertuous also, with longe cōtinuance in mekenes, that mother is of all vertues: shewing mercy & pitye with the harte towardes all men, embracing also peace, and folowing it. Therefore let all gentlemen suffer in no wyse thys iewell the Margarite to bee blemished, as nighe as they maye, but with harte and mynde studye to optayne the vertues that thereby are signified, and so through grace, for theire seruice, they shalbe hyghely aduaunced.
               
                  
                     Daisie.
                  H. Beareth Ermyne, a Pale verte, semie de daysie, propre. Chaucer writeth moche of thys floure in many places of hys workes: and in especially in hys preface to the legend of good weomen, where he sayeth of hym selfe beynge in loue with thys floure in the moneth of Maye.
               
                  Leanynge on my elbowe and my syde.
                  The longe day I shope me for to abide
                  For nothing els, and I shall not lye,
                  But for to looke vpon the Deysie
                  That well by reason men it call maye
                  The days eye, or els th'eye of the daye
                  The empresse, and floure of floures all
                  I pray to God that faire mought she fall
                  And all that loue floures, for her sake
                  
                     But natheles, ne wene not that I
                  Make, In praysinge of the floure agayne the lefe,
                  No more than of the corne agayne the shefe.
               
               And the sayd Chaucer writeth in a goodly Balade of hys also of the Daysie, where he calleth it,

                     Daysie of lighte, verie grounde of comforte
                     The sonnes daughter (ye hyghte) as I rede
                     For when he westreth,
                           Sonnes Daughter.
                         farewel your disporte
                     By your nature anone righte for pure drede
                     Of the rude nighte, that with hys boistous wede
                     Of darkenes, shadoweth our emispere
                     Then closen ye, my lyues Ladye dere.
                  
               
               Floures do wel become louers, for that they take therein delite, and therefore are of greate dignitie in signes Armoriall.
               
                  Hys fielde is of the Saphire, the Sunne propre,
                     Sunne.
                   or thus. He beareth Azure, a Sunne d'Or.
               The certayne quantitie of thys Planet is vnknowne to earthely dwellers. The Sonne, but he shine (saieth Chaucer) for sonne is not accōpted: so vertue, but it stretcheth in goodnes or profit to an other, is no vertue, but into hys contrarie, the name shalbe reuersed.
               The fielde is of the Perle,
                     Spurre.
                   two Spurres in Pale, Rubye. Hys creste a mollet blemished Topaze, set on a wreath

Perle, and Diamonde, manteled Saphyre, dobled Topaze. Chaucer sayeth that habite, maketh no mōcke, ne wearing of gyite Spurres, maketh no knyghte.
               
                  F. Beareth Azure, a wheele and an Orle of eight Pheons d'Or. Thys is taken for the whele of that meruelous monstre Fortune,
                  
                     Fortune.
                   as Boetius calleth her. lib. 2. de consolatione Philo. The blynde goddesse Fortune, with her doble visage, and whirlynge whele, cruelly casteth downe kinges, and changeth the lowest to the hyest, & the hyest, to the lowest. She made Cresus kynge of the Lydians to bee caught by Cyrus,
                  
                     Cresus.
                   who woulde haue burnte hym, but that a rayne descended from heauen, that rescowed hym. Thus Fortune deceyuable enhaunceth vp the humble cheare of him that is discomfited, and neyther heareth ne recketh of wretched wepynges. She is so wretched and harde, that she laugheth and scorneth at the teares of them, whom with her fre will she hath made to weepe. Her turning whele declareth her vnstablenes, for if she were accompted stable, she then no lō
                  ger could be called Fortune. She wilbe holden of no man, & when she departeth, she bringeth him to sorowe. For what other thyng is flattryng Fortune, but a maner shewyng of wretchednes that is to come. To some she is peruerse and frowarde, to some agayne she is as good and fauourable: as to Tymotheus,
                  
                     Tymotheus.
                   a noble capteyne of the Athenienses, who for the good Fortune he had in battle, was paynted liyng a slepe, and hauing by hym a nette pitched, wherein Fortune was taken.
               
                  
                  The fielde is Saturne,
                  
                     Bore.
                   a Bore sauage passant Lunae, armed Mars.
               
               These were th'armes of Tydeus,
                  
                     Tydeus hys Armes.
                   the kinges sonne of Calcedonye, whiche hee did beare in hys shielde, at the destruction of the Citye Thebes. The Bore is called Aper, a feritate, ablata F. littera & subrogata P. Vnde & apud Graecos Syagros id est ferus dicitur. Thys Beaste is armed in hys mouthe with two croked tuskes, whiche are right strong and sharpe, and the same he vseth in steade of a sworde, and hys ryghte shulder is harde, brode and thicke, whiche he occupieth as a shielde to defende hym withal, putting that brawne for his chefe armoure against hys weapon that pursueth hym.
               The Bore fighteth with the Wolffe, and hateth hym by kynde. For the wolffe lyeth in awayte for hys chyldren, & stealeth them full ofte.
               The fielde is of the Topaze,
                  
                     Dragon.
                   a Dragon, Emeraude.
               
               Thys was th'Armes of Ethyocles kynge of Thebes,
                  
                     Ethyocles.
                   which he did beare in hys shielde, whan he fought with hys brother Polymyte for the kyngdome, wherefore the one of thē slue the other.
               K. Beareth Azure,
                     Cathedre.
                   a Cathedre, or chaire Royal d'Or, adourned with Rubies propre. Suche a chaire is descryued by Chaucer in the thirde boke of Fame, where hee sayeth.
               
                  Fame satte in a seate Imperiall
                  That made was of Rubye royall,
                  Whiche that a Carboncle is I called.
                  And there she was perpetually istalled.
                        Carboncle.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Bores beade.
                  The fielde is Sol, a Bores heade coped Saturne.
               
               These were th'Armes of Sir Thopas, as in the metre made of hym maye appeare at large, in the workes of Chaucer.
               
               
                  
                     
                        Creaste.
                     And for hys creste he bare a Tower
                  Wherein sticked a Lillye floure
                  Of coloures all most propre.
               
               ¶Here note th'antiquitie of Creastes.
               
                  
                     Annulet.
                  L. beareth Sable and gules parted per Fesse, an Annu
                        •
                      let d'Or,
                     Asterites.
                   hauing the gemme Asterites, propre.
               Thys is a precious stone, and is whyte, and conteanethe as it were lyghte therein enclosed, or lyke a Sterre goyng within it, and maketh the Sunne beames white, whereof also it taketh hys name. Of hys vertues I neade not to speake, hys beautie and fayrenes bringeth hym commendacion sufficient. And of the geuing of Annullettes or rynges, there may be founde diuerse hystories, amongest whō I haue noted thys one.
                     Lucius Silla.
                   
                  Lucius Sylla, beyng dictator of the Romaynes, gaue vnto Roscius a player in Comedyes a ryng of golde, whiche was the token of a knyghte at that tyme, as a coler or cheyne of golde is at thys time. Thys Roscius, for his excellencie in pronunciation and gesture,
                     Roscius.
                   the noble Cicero called hys Iewell, and so muche delited in hym, that he contended with hym, whether Roscius coulde set forthe one sentence in more fashions of gesture and contenance, or he expresse the same sentence in a more diuersitie of eloquente wordes.
               And touching the token borne in the saide cote armour, yf a Crosse, Sterre, Cressante, or anie floure were figured on the same Annulet, it were a great beautefiynge of the sayde Armes, and no lyttle commendacion to the bearer.
               
                  
                  He beareth Argente,
                     Pursse.
                   a pursse gules, doble tasseled d'azure.
               Thys maye bee taken for a good token in armes, as of liberalitie, whā the same is not shutte. But being knitte, and so borne, it is a token of auarice: for so Chaucer writeth in the boke entituled the Romante of the Rose, where he sayeth.
               
                  Auarice helde in her hande.
                  A pursse that hounge by a bande,
                  And that she hidde, & bounde so stronge
                  Men must abide wondre longe
                  Out of the pursse ere there came ought
                  For that ne commeth in her thoughte
                  It was not certaine her entente
                  That from that pursse a penny wente.
               
               And further the same Chaucer, sayth in the sayde boke.
               
                  That a full greate foole is he ywis
                  That both riche & poore & nigarde is
                  A Lorde may haue no maner of vice
                  That greueth more than auarice.
                  For nigarde neuer with strengthe of hande
                  May winne him great Lordshippe or lande.
                  And whoso will haue frendes here
                  He maye not holde his treasure dere.
                  For by ensample tell I this
                  Righte as an Adamante Ywis
                        Adamante.
                     
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                     Can drawe to him full subtillye
                  The yron, that is layde therebye,
                  So draweth folkes hertes ywys
                  Siluer & golde that yeuen is.
               
               M. Beareth verte, a kynge armed at all poynctes d'Argent,
                     Kyng.
                   bearynge a sceptre and crowne, Or, wynged d'Ermyne.
               
                  
                     Mercurie.
                  Thys maye bee taken for the God Mercurie, God of eloquence, for to diuerse he hath appeared, as hauing wynges, so in hystories of hym may be redde.
               
                  
                     Mars.
                  
                  The fielde is of the pearle, Mars all armed on horsseback with spere and shielde, Rubye.
               
               Thys was the Banner of Theseus,
                  
                     Theseus.
                   whan he came to the destruction of Thebes Citye, & slue Creon kynge thereof. And thus Chaucer wryteth of the sayde Theseus hys banner, and penon in these wordes.
                     Penon.
                  
               
               
                  The redde statue of Mars with spere & targe
                  So shyneth in hys whyte Banner large
                  That all the fieldes glitteren vp & downe:
                  And by hys Banner, borne is hys penon
                  Of golde full riche, in whiche there was ybete
                  
                     
                        Minotaure.
                     The Minotaure that he wan in Crete.
               
               
                  
                     Th'antiquitie of bearing armes.
                  Thus it maye appere, that armes were long borne in good ordre, before the siege of Troye: for the destruction of the citye Thebes, was before that siege, as Ihon Lydegate doth affirme. Chaucer also, in the tale of the knyghte, describeth what token Lycurge the great kyng of Thrace dyd beare in the fielde.
                     Lycurge king of Thrace.
                   These be hys wordes.
               
                  
                  In steade of a Cote armour ouer his harneys
                  With nayles yealowe,
                        Beares skin.
                      and bright as any golde,
                  He hath a Beares skinnne, cole blacke for olde.
               
               
                  P. W. beareth Sable, thre Roches nayantes,
                     Roches.
                   d'Argente. These were sometime the armes of an honorable Prelate that had to name Petrus de Rupibus,
                  
                     Petrus de Rupibus.
                   who was many yeares Bishop of Winchester, in the time of Kinge Iohn, & Henry the thirde his sonne. And the saide Roches, myne Authour saithe, he did beare after his owne name, whiche me thinketh, was euill applied thereunto, to giue him Fisshes in steade of Rockes. For Rupes in Latin be called Hilles, Bankes, or Rockes, so steepe down, as no man may clime them. But I take the saide Bishop his name, as then was the vse,
                     Rocke is called Roche in the Northren tongue.
                   to be written, Peter at Roche, or Peter de la Roche. These seeme to drawe moste nigh his name in Englishe, but the Latin name dothe nothinge agree thereto, whiche I referre to their iudgemente, that haue readde of him, or of his name. Polydore Virgill calleth him, Vir integerrimus, and no lesse is to be thoughte, because the charge of the education of the saide Kinge Henry the third was committed to him, as to a Father prudente, and sage in the institution of suche a noble Prince.
               
                  
                  The field is Saturne, a kinges Heade Lunae, crowned Solis. This might be taken for the Armes of somme highe Prince, or other Chiefetaine, whiche had taken some kinge in fight, and helde him as prisoner. Diuerse histories make mention, that when mightye Princes, and valiante Kinges be giuen to sensualitie & pride, not weighinge the good sayinges of the wise, nor harkening to the wholesome counsell of their friendes, they oftentimes fall into the handes of their enimies, and then are eftsoones depriued of theire Kingedomes, and Regaleties, either els suffer imprisonmente, famine, distresse, and other paines and tormentes, endinge so their liues in greate calamitie and miserie:
                     Pausanias.
                   as is readde in one Pausanias, Kinge of the Lacedemonians, who at a banket desired instantly of Simonides, a Poete in Greece, that he woulde then speake some thinge notable, and that sauoured of wisedome. Simonides thereat smilinge, Remember, said he, that thou arte a man. Pausanias tooke that scornefully, and esteemed it nothinge. Afterwarde Pausanias beinge putte in prison in Chalcaeco, and there beinge famished ere he died, remembred the sayinge of Simonides, and with a loude, and lamentable voice said: O my friende of Coeus, (for there was the Poete borne) thy wordes were of greate importaunce, but I, for madde pride, esteemed them nothinge.
               This litle Historie is not vnworthy to be had in remembraunce.
               
                  N. beareth Sable,
                     Ousle, or Blackebirde.
                   three Owsles d'Argente, beaked, and legged, Or. The tymbre, a Bull gardant, Argente, armed, and vnguled Gules, sette on a Wreathe Sable, manteled Azure, doubled Argente.
               The Owsle, or Blacke byrde singeth pleasantly, and therefore is ofte taken, and kepte in cage. This byrde, althoughe shee bee in all Countries blacke, yet in Achaiae shee is white,
                     Bull.
                   as Isidore saithe. This Creaste for the saide Cote armour,
                     Isis.
                   is a white Bul. Iupiter turned him into the similitude thereof, when louinge the faire mayde Isis, he could not otherwise haue his will of her. This signifieth, that beautie maie ouercome the beste.
               
                  The fielde is Mars,
                     Lyon.
                   a Lyon Rampaunte, with a double Quewe d'Argente. In chiefe d'Ermyne, an Eagle displaid with twoo heades Saturne, membred, and crowned d'Or. Alexander the greate, when as he hunted in a great Parke in the countrie Basaria, that had remained vnhunted, duringe the time of foure mens ages, he killed foure thousand wild beastes therein, amonge the whiche there was a Lyon of a rare bignesse, that came running towardes him, whom he did not onely receiue, but killed him with one stroke. Suche was the prowes, and strengthe of so mightye and puissante a Conqueroure. Ouer whose heade also at the battaile he fought with Darius at Arbella,
                  
                     Eagle.
                   there was seene an Eagle, whiche neither fearinge the classhinge of the harneys, nor the cryinge of them that were dying, did stil flye in the ayre directly aboue him, whiche did shew a certaine token of victorie, and euen so it came to passe. And therefore the same Alexander mighte rightely assumpte to him selfe the bearinge of the foresaide Lyon, and Eagle,

in the beste order that coulde be diuised, or sette foorthe agreable to his worthinesse.
               
                  
                     Crosse Clauie
                  
                  The field is Gules, a Crosse doble clauie d'Argent. This Crosse ought to be figured as a double warded key, at euery of the three endes ascendinge to the chiefe of the Escocheon.
                     Key.
                   The key wherof the Prophete Esaye maketh mention in these wordes. And the key of the house of Dauid, will I lay vpon his shoulder,
                     Parad. Symbo. Heroi.
                   so that he shall open, and no manne shall shutte, he shall shutte, and no man shall open. Itidem Iesu Christi Crucem figurabat.
               
               
                  The fielde is of the Emeraude, an Hande armed, holding a Sworde of the Pearle crowned within the point Topaze.
                     Sworde.
                  
               
               The wholesome doctrine of S. Paule, is of all faithfull, and obediente subiectes to be receiued and embraced: where he saithe, Wilte thou be without feare of the power? Doo well then, & thou shalte haue praise of the same: for he is the minister of God for thy wealthe. But if thou doo euill, then feare, for he beareth not the sworde for naught. For he is the minister of God, a taker of vengeance to ponishe him that dothe euill, &c.
               
                  
                     Pillers.
                  His fielde is Iouis, twoo pillers Lunae.
               
               Diuerse Emperours, and puissante Conquerous haue erected Pillers in theire Empiers and kingedomes, for sundrie, and weightie causes and pourposes: some to declare

the extentes, and lymittes of theire Landes, and Kingedomes, somme to shewe the expeditions of theire iourneyes and voyages, somme to sette forthe the places of theire burialles, somme to figure therein theire Actes, and valiaunt deedes, to the encouragemente of those that shoulde succeede them to doo the like. And other somme haue written therein the secret knowledge of certaine sciences and letters, as in diuerse Histories maie be readde. And more of Pillers ye maie reade in the nexte booke folowinge.
               
                  He beareth Ermynes, on a Pale d'Or,
                     Portecullis.
                   a Portecullis d'Azure.
               This in Latin is called Rastrum militare, siue Politicum, & serueth for defense in the gatꝭ of Citties, Castles, Portes, & Towres. For the same being loosed, or let downe, it letteth, or rather oppresseth them that woulde enter thereby.
               
                  Eiusmodi ad portas militare obstaculum Romae factum fuisse scribit Appianus,
                  
                     Appian.
                   
                  Res Roman. Ciuili dissidio vrgente, & Imperium sibi vendicante Sylla. Sustulit hoc maleficium Carboniana turba, quam (dum conarentur per portam Collinam irruptionem facere) Sylla repressit: laxatisque insidiarijs Rastris, intrò latebat, quorum iniuria, & lapsu, Senatores ipsi nonnulli, & qui se in Carbonianam libertatem adseruerant, oppressi sunt.
               
               
                  
                  The field is Saturne, in Saltier twoo Cypres trees raguled Solis,
                  
                     Cypres tree. Iuye.
                   enwrapped with Iuy proper. These trees are truncated, that is to saie, ye boughes cut of from the body, & laide in forme of a Saltier. The endes wherof may not touch the Angles of the shield. The Cypres next vnto ye Ceder tree is most formable, and necessary to the building of Temples, to wres, and for other great & pompous Edifices. It neuer faileth, nor rotteth, but abideth, and dureth alwaies in his first estate & condition. And for the right good sauour, & sweete smel it hath, the Iuy, being of heauie and bitter smel, doth most desire to creepe about him. And his greenesse dothe much beautifie the golden colour of the other. And for that the Iuy is alwaies greene, Poetes were crowned therewith, in token of noble witte & sharpe. It was consecrate to Bacchus God of wine, & to Mars. Plinie saithe, that the greate Alexander crowned his knightes with Iuy, when they had the victorie of Indie.
               
                  He beareth Sable, a Fesse d'Ermine, betwene thre headꝭ de Capres, coped argēt, armed & arnuced d'Or, portant pome aus d'Iuy proper. The leaues of this tree doo make goates fatte, & their bloude medicinable for diuerse diseases. Villus quem habent pensilem in mento, vocatur aruncus, quo si quis vnam carum traxerit, aiunt reliquas stupefieri.
               
               
                  
                  The fielde is Uerte, an Ostriche regardante,
                     Struthion, or Ostriche.
                   Argente, bearinge a Key d'Or. The Ostrich in Latin is called Struthio, & Struthio Camelus, qui ex Struthione & Camelo constat: & is founde especially in Africa. This byrde hathe a head couered with small feathers, grosse eyes and blacke, not vnlike in fourme, & colour to a Camell, a longe necke, a shorte bil and a sharpe, soft feathers, two thighes, & fete with hoofes clouen, Vt terrestre simul volatile
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animal videatur. He cannot fly for the heauinesse of his body, nor extol him selfe higher then the earth: but he goeth swiftly, and in running not much inferiour to an horse, his winges helpe him so much. He dothe swalowe, and digest what so euer he deuoureth, yea, euen the hardest thinges without any choyse.
               When he is pursued of hunters, and seeth he cannot escape, he taketh stones with his hoofe, & casteth againste his enimies, and oftentimes hurteth them. When he is killed, there is founde stones, and yron in his stomake, whiche he consumeth after longe digestion.
               He hatethe the Horse by kinde. I founde him figured in the Cosmographie of Munster, as before is descriued.
               Q. beareth Geules, on a Bende betwene twoo Cotizes, d'Argente,
                     Siphons.
                   thre Siphons, Sable. Isidore saithe, that the Siphon is a certaine vessell, whiche men of the Easte countries vse to occupie, and fill with water, especially when houses beene on fire, to quenche the same. The fourme I haue descriued here, as Paradyne figureth it amonge his diuises Heroiques.
               R. beareth Saturne and Mars, parted per Pale, twoo Partizantes Lunae in Saltier.
                     Partezant.
                   These weapons are commonly

knowne, and borne about the persons of Princes, Nobles, and Captaines.
               
                  The field is of the Diamond an Helmet Pearle, ensigned with a Garlande gramine.
                     Helmet.
                   The Ancient bearers,
                     Crowne gramine.
                   Horsemen, Captaines, Lieutenantꝭ of Citties, Townes, and Portes, whiche had doughtely susteined the siege of theire enimies, & were deliuered from them, in olde time was giuen a Garlande of grasse: in Latin called Corona graminea, siue Obsidionaria: whiche althoughe it were wrought, or laide aboute with grasse, (beinge onely the hearbe, that can, or might be found in a place long besieged) yet neuerthelesse the same garlande gramine,
                     Garlande Gramine.
                   (as Plinie witnesseth) is most honourable, and noble, and to be had in price aboue all others, Golde, Pearle, Oliue, Lawrell, Palme, Oke, and Iuye, geuinge place to common grasse, that Royall hearbe of dignitie. Fabius Maximus corona graminea donatus est ab vniuersa Italia: quandoquidem non pugnando, sed cauendo rem Romanam restituisset: & exercitum sibi creditum conseruasset.
               
               
                  
                     Launce.
                  S. beareth Syluer, a Launce betweene twoo Flaunches, Sable: and on the Flaunches, twoo Gauntlettes, as the fielde.
               The especial token borne in this Ensigne, is taken for a Dimilaunce staffe, whiche beinge the chiefeste weapon of the horseman, is therefore congruently placed betwene twoo Gauntlettes,
                     Gauntlet.
                   the moste especiall armoure of the handes.
               
                  
                     Scocheon.
                  T. beareth Gold, on a Scocheon Gules, a key d'argent, wrapped about with a Serpent Uert. This Cote armour

touching the fielde, is one of the honorable ordinaries charged.
               
                  The fielde is d'Ermyne, on a pale Diamonde,
                     Oxes heade.
                   a Bull hys head of the pearle, araid with a fagotte, Carboncle.
               When as Quintus Fabius,
                  
                     Q. Fabius.
                   (beyng Dictator or principall capitayne of the Romaynes) had trayned & drawne Anniball & hys hoste into a fielde,
                     Anniball.
                   inclosed about with mountaines and depe ryuers, where Fabius had so enuirōned him and hys armye, that they were in ieopardye, eyther to bee famished, for lacke of vitaile, or els in flying, to be slayne by the Romaines, Anniball perceauing these dangers, cō
                  maunded to be brought afore hym, in the depe of the night whan nothing was stirrynge, about two thousande great oxen and bulles, which a little before hys men had taken in forrageyng, and caused fagottes made of drie stickes to be fastened vnto theire hornes,
                     Terror and error.
                   and sett on fyre. The beastes troubled with the flambe of fire, ranne as they were woode vp towarde the moūtaynes, whereas laye the hoste of the Romaynes, Anniball with hys whole armye folowing in araye. The Romaines, whiche kepte the mountaynes, being sore afrayde of this newe and terrible sight, forsoke theire places.
                     Fabius.
                   And Fabius dreading the deceiptfull witte of Anniball, kept hys armye within the trenche, and so through policie Anniball with his hoste escaped without damage. Thus ye maye vnderstande, (as I sayde before) how greatly histories do geue lighte to the hydde secrettes of Armorie.
               
                  
                  
                     Eagle, on an Hartes heade
                  
                  The fielde is Mars, an Eagle regardant with wynges displayde Lunae, insident on the heade of an Harte, Solis.
               
               The Eagle whan he hathe gathered muche duste in hys fethers, doth then withoute feare set vpon the Harte, and falleth euen betwene hys brā
                  ches: and beatinge with hys wynges, so stoppeth the Hartes eyes with duste, vntill at length he falleth hedlonge from some hyghe hyll or rocke, and so becommeth a praye to the Eagle. Industrie, labor, & diligence, is to be vsed, whan difficulte, weightie, & hyghe matters, are to be ouercome.
               P. Beareth Gules and Sable, parted per bende sinistre, a Lyon rampaunt d'Or, vibrante a sworde d'Argente.
               
                  
                     Pompeyus magnus.
                  
                  Pompey the great had suche a Lyon grauen in hys signet. vide in vitis Plutarchi.
               
               The fielde is partie per baste barre vndade, Argente, and Uerte,
                     Shippe.
                   a shippe vnder sayle in her ruffe, Sable.
               The vse of shippes, and of theire ordinance is knowne to all men.
               He beareth Or, thre Anckers in bende sinistre, betwene two Gartiers, azure.
               
                  
                     Ancker. Admirall.
                  Th'Ancker is especially ascribed to Admiralles, in signum (vt apparet) officij sui in expeditionibus, prouincijs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      naualibus.
               
               He beareth partie per pale Nebule, Saturne, and Venus, two maces bellicall Solis circumliged with braunches of Oliue, propre. The token borne in thys cote armoure, is called in latyn Claua bellica, whiche beyng bounde about, Oliuae ramusculo, may exhibite vnto them to whom it is offered, a signe aswell of peace, as of warre, whiche to take, is at his pleasure to whome it is offered.
               
                  
                  The fielde is Gules an Harrowe,
                     Harrowe.
                   d'Or.
               The Harrowe is a noble addicion of Armorie, & was borne (as Froyssarde sayeth) of William, the sonne of Albert duke of Bauarie in hys auncient, about the yere of oure Lord God .1390. And the same Harrowe he did aduaunce, in his voyage with the Cristiās, aduersus Aphricam Barbariae ciuitatem. The office of the Harrowe, is to breake and resolue the harde lumpes and cloddes of earth. Quemadmodū autem glebas, & grumos agrorum proscindit & resoluit rastrum aratorium, ita facilè est vero principi, legum, & Sanctionum, atque cautionum, seu Decretorum aequitate ditionis suae improbos, factiosos, rebelles, & tumultuarios, qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      contra suam autoritatem, ac dignitatem iniquè se opponunt, coercere.
               
               He beareth partie per Cheuron embatiled, Or, & Azure, three Leures,
                     Lewre.
                   contrechanged of the fielde. The tokē borne in thys Scocheon, is well knowne to all gentlemen Fawkeners. The worde, or Poesie that mighte ryghtely be applied to thys cote armoure, is thys: Spe illect at inani.
               
               
                  The fielde is verte, an hyndes heade cabaged d'Argente persed with two dartes d'Or, a Sonne in chiefe.
               The dexteritie of Domitiane th'Emperoure in castynge of the darte,
                     Domitiane.
                   is worthie of remē
                  berance:
                     Darte.
                   who in the huntyng of a certayne wilde beaste, threwe two dartes at hym so directly, that the beaste semed to stande hauyng hornes on

hys heade, wheras nature had geuen hym none. Paradyne figureth the heade of the beaste, as hauyng two dartes in place, where hornes shoulde growe.
               
                  The fielde is Sable, fiue dartes in fasce d'Or,
                     Darte.
                   enwrapped with a serpente verte.
               
                  Plutarche writeth, that when Scylurus Chaeronensis was about to dye,
                     Scilurus Charonensis.
                   hauinge fower score goodly chyldrē, and of greate strength, he offered to euerye one of them a Bondell of dartes or roddes to breake, which whan they endeuored themselfes to doe, they coulde not:
               He than sayde vnto them, that the dartes and roddes so made faste and knitte together, could in no maner of wise be broken.
                     Bondle.
                   But the father vnlosing the Bondle befor thē, did take one rodde after an other, and without any great force or busynes, did breake the same, aduertisinge them hereby, that they all shoulde continue and remayne for euer vnuanquished, and not able to be ouercome, as longe as they agreed, and were surely knitte in brotherly loue, and perfecte concorde. But yf they deuided them selues, or parted with sedition and debate, that then they shoulde perishe, and quickely fall into the handes of theire enemies. A goodly example to embrace concorde.
                     Serpente.
                   By the Serpente about the dartes, may be signified that which Christe spoke in the gospell to his disciples, saiyng. Be ye wise as Serpentes &c. Therfore note, that there be many significatiōs and secrete mysteries in bearing signes and tokens of armorye.
               U. beareth barrie vndie 6. pieces d'Ermine, and azure, the prore of a shippe d'Or in chefe gules,
                     Fore parte of a shyppe.
                   one hounde passante, Argent. The token in thys escocheon is the fore parte

of a shippe, and is garded with a dogge on chefe, as it were to watche the same. Suche a like ensigne did Sergius Galba the Emperour vse to beare.
               W. Beareth per pale Rubye, and Diamonde, an Eagle d'Ermine encorporate with a Dragon,
                     Eagle, with the Dragon.
                   
                  Solis.
               
               These are enemies alwayes the one to the other. The Dragon greately desiring the egges of the Eagle, deuoureth and eateth vp the same: wherefore the Eagle, wheresoeuer he seeth hym, fighteth with him, and in theire fight he is often wrapped with the Dragōs taile, and so falling downe, the one is destroyed of the other. Eadem elatis, ac superbioribus inter se contendentibus ruina solet vsu venire.
               
               
                  He beareth Sable,
                     Cocke, on a Trompet.
                   a cocke d'Argente, pearched on a trō
                  pet d'Or.
               The Cocke is a Royal foule, and naturally beareth on hys heade a creaste of Rubye coloure, in stede of a Crowne or diademe. He distinguisheth tymes, seazons, and houres, both of the daye and nyghte, crowynge, or rather syngyng moste clerely and strongely. The Lyon dreadeth the white Cocke, because he bredeth a precious stone, called Allectricium, like to the stone that highte Calcedoneus. And for that the Cocke beareth suche a stone, the Lyon specially abhorreth hym. Ab Galli alitis tubae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      horologio non difficile relinquitur iudicare, quantum intersit inter belli & pacis conditiones. The cocke is messenger of the daye lyght, he singeth whan he hath the victorye, being ouercome he hydeth hymselfe. Lucem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & hominum aspectum refugit.
               
               W. beareth verte, an arming Sworde in pale d'Argent crowned at the poyncte in 
                     •
                  hefe,
                     Sworde crowned.
                   betwene two floures de

Lucies d'Or. The sworde in thys cote armoure, is a protection to the floures therein borne.
               
                  
                     Tergate.
                  The fielde is Gules, a Tergate d'Or, transfixed with a Raper Argente.
               Thys maye bee taken for the ensigne of some noble capitayne, who had valiauntly behaued and borne hymselfe in the fielde, with losse also of hys lyfe.
               
                  Of this, the fielde is Azure, a Crosse portate in his propre coloure.
               
                  
                     Crosse pottate.
                  Oure master Christe, beyng the sonne of God, and God, was constreigned to beare an heauy crosse on his shoulder, in suche fashion as is before descriued: wherein afterward both hys hādes and fete were nayled with longe and great nayles of yron: and the crosse with hys naked and bloodie bodie, beyng lifte vpon height, was let fall with violence into a mortayse, that all hys ioynctes were dissolued. And notwithstandinge all thys torment, hee neuer grudged, but liftyng vp hys eyes vnto heauen, he prayed for hys enemies, saynge: Father forgiue them, for they knowe not what they do. Thys was the charitie moste incomparable of the sonne of God employde for the redemption of mankynde.
               
                  
                     Piller of Porpherie.
                  Y. Hys fielde is of ye Pearle, two pillers of Porpherie, in Saltier.
               I nede not here to blaze the colour of the Pillers, beynge Porpherie, whiche is a stone alwayes of purple coloure. Let the bearer therof see that he be specially endowed with the vertue, Fortitude.
               
                  
                  Z.
                     Annulie.
                   Beareth Sable, Annulie, d'Or. 4.3.2.1. Thys fielde is charged with rynges.
               
                  Hanniball,
                  
                     Rynges sent to Carthage.
                   for a testimonie of the victorye he had of the Romaynes in Italye, sente 3. Bushels of golden rynges to Carthage, whiche he had taken & plucket of the handes of the Romayne knyghtes, capteynes and senators. Let the bearer of such a coate (as is before displayde) reioyce in aduersitie.
               The fielde is Checkey, gules, and ermynes, a boke Or, with claspes d'Argente.
               A Boke is to be borne of hym,
                     Boke.
                   whiche is studious of anye the sciences or tongues: and which hath a certayne excellencie therein aboue others.
                     Cato Vticensis.
                   
                  Cato, called Vticensis, was so muche enflamed in the desire of learninge, that (as Suetonius writeth) he coulde not tempre hym selfe in readinge Greke bokes, whiles the Senate was sitting.
               Thys Cato was named the chiefe piller of the publike weale of the Romaines.
               
                  The fielde is parted per pale vndade, argente and azure, two demye hyppotames,
                     Hippotame or water horsse.
                   Sable, armed and vnguled, gules.
               These be water Horsses, called Hippotami, and are chefely sene in the studdes of Nile, & Gange. Munsterus describeth these beastes, and sayeth they haue two hoofes like an Oxe, the backe, mayne, and neiyng of an Horsse, a wrigled tayle, & croked tethe like to a Bore.

I haue charged the same beastes, but on halfe wise in the fielde, as it were passinge from the water: whiche note well and marke, and then I doubte not but the deuise of the same will contente some mans fantesie.
               
                  A. Beareth Sable, a Pile in poyncte of the chefe, betwē two wheeles,
                     Wheele. Pile.
                   d'or. Th'especial tokens in thys cote armoure are knowne to all men, as wheeles to be the necessariest parte of Chariotes, wagons, and cartes: and Piles also moste nedefull to make all foundacions vpon vnperfecte grounde, sure and fyrme.
               These are noble ensignes & of great antiquitie.
                     Katerē whele.
                   Yet of wheeles, the Katheren whele, so called of olde, is of moste honor: and must be figured after an other forme than those I haue before blazed Willigise, archebishop of Mogunce in Germanye, assumpted for his ensigne a Cart wheele,
                     Carte wheele.
                   with thys inscription: Willigise memineris quid sis, & quid olim fueris, and afterwarde the same wheele was giuen and confirmed by the Emperoure, to be th'ensigne of the sayd Archebishoprike for euer.
               B. He beareth d'Ermines, and Or, parted per pile in poyncte of the chefe,
                     Pheon.
                   a Pheon, Sable.
               Thys particiō as it is rare sene, so can it not lacke (beyng thus charged) hys due commendacion.
               
                  
                  1 Beareth Argent on .ij. barres Sable, tji. Escalopes de Or,
                     Escallopes
                   and to his creaste on a wreath Argent & Sable, a dragons head rassed Azure portant a braūche of the herb Pulegium propre. The shel of the Scalloppe excelleth the shells of al other fishe which I can reade of, and therfore ys thoughte not vnmeete so adorne ye collers of ye knights euen of Sainct Nicholas order, which order whē it tooke his beginninge, howe many were chosen to bee fellowes of the same order, In what manner the same Escalopes were comixed in the sayd coller, and what was signifyed therby, ye may plainly vnderstand in Simbolis heroicis paradini fol. 15. I reade also that the shelles of certein fyshes were sent emong other ryche giftes to the great Alexander by the kinges of the Indians, as a present of great extimacion & valor. Ptolomeus a nigh kinsman of the sayd Alexander, when he was greeuously wounded by an Indian in his lefte shoulder, dreamed that there appeared vnto him a dragon that offered vnto hym an herbe out of his mouth, for the healing of his wound, and taking awaye of the venim which he had receyued of the weapon wherwith the woūd was made, of the which herbe when he awaked, he shewed both the colour & the facion, affirminge that he could knowe it, yf anye manne coulde finde yt out, the same was sought by so many, that at length yt was found, and beinge put vpon the wound,

the payne straite was ceassed, and the skarre within short space was closed. For this cause therfore did I discriue the sayde dragons heade,
                     Pulegium
                   hauing in his mouth the herbe Pulegium which herbe hath a full sweete smel, and hatht hat name of Pullulando springinge, as Isodore saythe, and ys more precious then pepper amonges the Indes, the vertue therof is to cast out and distroy venim, and some English wryters do iudge Pulegium to be that herbe,
                     Peniriall or Organum
                   whiche wee call Peniriall or Organum
               
               
                  
                     Galthrope
                  
                  He bereth Orc a fesse dancie de Ermynes betweene iij. Galthropes Sable. And to his creaste on a Torce de Argent and Azure, a Rauen volant propre, holdynge in her dexter clawe a clod of earthe Purpure, the said Galthrops bee called Murices in latin, & are made of Iron, hauing .iiij sharpe poyntes equally deuided one from another, and those standynge in a maner crosse wayes, so that wherso euer the same shalbe 
                     •
                  ast, the haue one poinct standinge vp straighte, and are vsed as engins in the warres, to gall ye horse that shal passe by them, Paradine in his booke of deuices Heroiques, setteth forth ye forme therof to be as I haue before discriued. Touchinge a Rauen,
                     Rauen
                   I reade that when as Alexander the great, laied siege to the Citie of Gaza, minding before he would geue an assault therunto, to make Sacrifice after his countrey

maner, and to require the ayde ef the Goddes: It chaunced as he was so doinge,
                     Q. Curti
                           •
                        s
                   that a Rauen flienge aboue, let fall a clod which she caried in her clawes vpon the kings head, where yt brake and resolued in pieces, which being consulted vpon by the deuinours: They iudged that there was some perill towardes the kinges person, And suche a Rauen may be borne in coate armour as is aforesayde, and that to a good purpose, and without any challenge in bearinge him after this forme, as is aboue displayed.
               
                  The fielde is of the Rubie a Diademe Topaze,
                     Diademe
                   hauinge a wrethe about it Pearle and Emeraude, and too hys crest an horse Saturne in the beames of the Sonne, Suche a Diademe as here is spoken of Darius king of the Percians did were when hee marched forwards to the Riuer of Euphrates,
                  
                     Darius
                   against the great Alexander, and is called in the Percian tounge Cidaris, and yt hadde a roole aboute yt of whyte and greene. And the same Darius in his marching had a great horse,
                     Cidaris.
                   whiche alwaies folowed the chariotes that were consecrate to Iupiter,
                  
                     Horse of the Sonne
                   and this horse the Perciās call, the horse of the Sonne. The readinge of thistorie of thactes of the sayde great Alexander gaue me occasion of the deuice hereof. And therefore know this for certeinty, yt the reading of histories shal most quickly geue you help to set forth any deuice heroique
               
                  
                  The field is Barrie Bendie Gules & Or & to his creaste on a wreathe Or and Sable,
                     Barrie bendy
                   a Swanes head rassed de Argent, this said coate after thopinion of M.G. Leigh must alwayes abyde of viij. pieces, and properlye may not otherwise be blased then as aforesaide,
                     Swanne
                   the Swan, whose head I haue discriued for the crest, is a bird dedicated to Appollo the God of wisedom,
                     Cicero lib. i. Tust. quest,
                   
                  Ob presagium finis, or as Cicero saith Quod ab eo diuinacionem habe re videantur, quia prouidentes quid in morte boni sit, cum dulcissimo cantu et voluptate moriantur.
               
               
                  
                     Insignia poetarum
                  The Swanne is the ensigne of the Poets, whose fielde is Azure a Swanne propre. Alciate comendeth this ensigne lib. i. Embl. Cvtj. wherefore I referre what I could write more hereof to Stockhamer his comentaries vpon the same Emblem̄.
               
                  
                  He beareth Argent,
                     Roscarrock
                           •
                        
                     
                   a cheuron betweene twoe Roses Gules, and a sea Tenche nayant d' Azure. Or thus. His fielde is of the pearle, a Cheuron with twoe Roses Ruby in chief, & one Tench marine Saphier nayant en poynte. The Rose springeth out of a thorne, that is harde and roughe, yet receyueth no part of the kinde of the thorne, but arayeth it wt faire colour & pleasant smel. This kinde of Rose sayethe Theophraste, for the most part hath but fiue leaues: some are founde that haue xij. other soome xx. other soome haue farre many mo. There be also saithe he, which bene called hūdreth leaues. those be of moste sweete smelles, and growe especially in Cirena.
                  
                     Rose
                   The rose comforteth and relieueth the sight, through the puretie of the colour, pleaseth the smell by sweetenes of odour, and bothe greene or drye hath vertue and is medicinable against many greeuous sicknesses & euilles, as Plinie witnesseth.
               The Tenche in latin is called Tinca a fyshe as Ausonius describeth it for the poore mans dishe,
                     Tenche
                   for that in auncient time it was a common meate for their diet, and although in theis our dayes it is well accepted and taken for a good kinde of fishe, bothe necessarie for foode, and to medicyne, yet in the olde time, the richest men made litle estimacion thereof, wherefore the comon people were best acquaynted with the same, as the saide author witnesseth in thys

verse or sentence.
               
                  Quis non & videris vulgi solatia,
                  Tincas norit.
                  Who dothe not know in eche degree,
                  a Tenche, the commoners meate to bee.
               
               This Tenche before dysplayed is called Tinca marina, a Tenche of the sea, and lyuethe neyther in mudde or myer, but is cleane from suche infectyons, and therefore is not hurtful. The foresaide fielde & the contentes in the same, do signifie the bearer to haue audacitie, yet in al honestye: and to be curteous with muche discrecion. Then signe appertayneth to the name of Roscarech, alias Roscarrocke in Cornewal. His creaste a Lion rampant propre colour, armed and langued Azure, aboute his necke a Crownall siluer, set on a Torce golde and Azure, as maye appears aboue figured.
               
                  
                     Sithes.
                  
                  He beareth vert. iij. Sithes argent points assendant in chief, his creast ye fishe Odimoliont haryaut Sable, on a wrethe Argent and Azure, the tokens borne in the said coate armoure are of aū
                  cient bearinge, and are instruments not onelye to cutte downe corne or grasse but haue ben vsed in the warres, suche ingines did Alexander the great his soldioures frequent againste the force of the Elephantes. The creast of the saide coate armour is a litle fishe, which cleaueth to a ship, and maketh her to abide as though she laie at anker, be the ship neuer so great, the latines cal the fish

                  Remora eo quod cogat stare nauigia,
                  
                     Remora
                   shee is otherwise called 
                     
                        •
                     
                     cheneis piscis quidem paruulus aspectu niger longitudine que mediocri.
               
               
               The fielde is barrye of vitj. peeces Luna and Mars,
                     Ibis
                   one a canton Iouis the mighty planet Sol, his creaste is Ibis head Saturne couped, erassing a serpent of the Moone, sette on a wrethe Topaze and Saphire, māteled Diamond, doubled pearle. Ibis is a foule of Egipt, & as Aristotle saieth is in that coūtrey

white and at Pelusum onely blacke, it is an high bird, hauing stiffe legges, and a long bill, they bee caried out of Libia into Egipt with a sotherne winde, and do much good there to the countrey in killing and eating of serpents Semetipsam purgat rostro in ann̄ aquam fundens, this bird is like vnto that whiche is called Ciconia.
               
               
               He beare the partye ꝑ pale Saturne & Mars a flower de lize Luna.
                  
                     Alcion̄.
                   And to his creaste vpon the helme on a wreathe Topaze
                  
and saphiere an Alcian volant of the Amatist, mixte wyth Pearle, beaked as the Emeraud, mounted on the nest texed with the slipps of the vine propre, manteled Ruby, doubled Pearle, this is a birde of the sea, little more then a Sparow, which in the colde winter season dothe lay her egges on the sands, and when the sea is most troublous tantam gratiam diuinitus habet that it becometh sodeinly calme, and the stormes and windes do cease vntill the birde haue all hatched, and brought vp her chickens, and made them able to flee, whiche is in the space of .xiiij. daies, whiche the shipmen diligently marke, fearinge no tempest all those dayes, looke sebast. stockhamer his comentaries vpon the .xix. Emblem. of Alciate. The propre colours of the saide bird ar as is before discribed. She lyueth by fishe,
                     Kings fisher.
                   and is taken for that whiche we call the kinges fisher.
               He beareth Azure a cheuron on chiefe betweene twoe decressāts Argent.
                     Ligurinus.
                   The timber, a Ligurines head rassed vert,
                     Grene finche.
                   bearing a thistel Or, set on wrethe Argent & Sable manteled Gules, doubled Or, The birde Lugurinus feedeth muche vpon thistles, and of nature is enemy to the Asse, sed valet vocis amenitate, some suppose this birde to be a greene fynche,
                     Nightingale
                   and as seruius writeth is taken to be the Nightingalle. These deuises Heroique before figured, might suffise for the proofe how cote armours wyth their blason heaume & timbre in sundrie wise be borne, to the honor and comendacion of the bearer: and vppon what ground they haue their originall, the which the officers at armes do cheifly respect in their assignements to gentlemen, and no signe or token armoriall is by thē deuised, but the same is congruent and agreable to the vertues and qualities wherewith the bearer is pryncypally endowed, and with which token he also delighteth, and so he ought to take delight therein, as to defende the same (euen to the death) from all challinge or vituperie, which rule of al the degrees of nobilitie ought neuer to

be forgotten. But nowe what significacion may be truelye collected and gathered of anye Simboll armorial, cō
                  monlye called Armes, and what the colours therein doe represent, by the planets or stones precious, to the renowme and fame of the bearer, one plainly for example nowe nexte doth ensue, the whiche of bounden duety I maye not omit.
               
                  
                  
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  The atcheuement conteyning the sundry coates as they are marshalled and borne by the right honorable Lorde, Sir William Cecill, Baron of Broughley, and knyght of the most honorable ordre of the Garter, is thus to bee blased.
               1 He beareth barruley of .x. Argent and Azure, sixe Escocheons Sable. 3.2.1. charged wyth as manye Lyons rampant of the first, langued Gules, borne by the name of Cecill.
               2 The fielde is parted per pale, Gules & Azure, a Lion rampant de Argent sustayning a tree Uert, borne by the name of winstone.
               3 Beareth Sable, a plate betwene three towers tryple towred with portes displayed de Argent, borne by the name of Cairleon.
               4 His fielde is Argent, on a bend betweene two cotizes Gules three sinquefoiles de Or, borne by the name of Eckinton.
               5 Beareth Argent, a churon betweene three Rockes de Ermines, and is borne by the name of Walcot.
               The sixt as the first, the which, and the seconde are differenced vpon them bothe with a cressant, which signifieth that he is of a second brother to bothe those houses, from whence in bloud hee is lineally descended. All whiche atchieuementes before displayed, is within the Garter cotized of two Lions de ermine, to his creaste vpon an healme on a Torce Or and Azure, a garbe de Or, supported with two Lions, the one Azure & the other Argent, manteled Gules, doubled Argent. To these before discriued, is added his Apothegme or word. Cor vuū via vna, yt is, one hart, one way. The sincerity & tēperāce of this noble baron as there they be by his propre ēsigne openly signified, so his great wisedome & vertue in preferring iustice, and the publike weale of his countrey before anye priuate affection or singuler apetites, are also thereby certeinly declared, the orient Pearle beinge so

often and preciously treasured in the fielde and contents of his coate armour. And truelie that man is most mete to be a nighe counsaillour, in whom sinceritie and temperance be ioyned with wisedome, suche one shal bringe to the pallace of his prince, an honorable remembrance of his iustice and vigilaunce, and as well to noble as to vnnoble shalbe an excellent patterne and president.
               The shields charged wt Lions are of ye Adamant, a stone precious and of such hardines, vt si super incudem positus acerrimo percutiatur malleo ante malleus & incus vulneribus acceptis dissiliant quam ipse frangatur comminaturue, nec fieri solum ictus respuit sed resistit etiam igni cuius ardore adeo non acquiescit num
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      incalescat si Plinio credimus adeo non feodatur vt purior fiat, attamen singularis eximia
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lapidis illius duritia calido hirci Leonisue cruor ita mollescit vt dissoluatur.
                  
                     Cece. offi. li. 
                           •
                        
                     
                   In armorie it representeth fortitude a vertue that fighteth in defence of equitie, Adamas venena deprehendit, et irrita facit. The nobilitie of the Lyon is moste aboue all other beastes to bee marueled at, in that he in his great heate, seketh not the death of any creature that yeldeth it selfe vnto him, iuxta commune prouerbum▪ parcere prostratis sic nobilis ira Leoni: The fielde wherein he abideth is of the Rubie party de Saphiere, two gemes very precious, and of great dignitie. The Rubie dothe demonstrate charitie, the Saphiere loyaltie, the one auayling againste the byting of the Scorpion, the other being maruelously effections againste all venime, but of the twaine, the Saphiere is moste vertuous, Helinandus in his historie this wryteth of it. Saphirus caelo sereno similis est, caste portari vult gemmaqz gemmarum et lapis sanctus dicitur.
                  
                     Io. Ferox,
                   
                  La coulour & piere Saphirique, recomforte le sence de le home, & profit counter les enuies, fraudes, & terreurs, incitant & ꝓuoquant le home a paix et amour victore &c. The portes set open in a fielde Saturne, geeuethe libertie bothe to passe forthe at will, and to come in when it pleaseth, to carry forth, and also to bring in. Porta dicitur quiae

potest importari vel exportari aliquid, proprie autem porta aut vrbis aut castrorum vocatur.
                  
                     Isidor Etimo lib. 15. cap. 2. The cause of theire construction, is to propulse the force of the enemye, for the common safetie of the countrie, and ought alwayes to be in the possession or kepinge of suche personnes, that embrace obedience and loyaltye, and detest treason & treacherie, and the bearing of them in coate armoure, dothe represent no lesse.
               In the fowerth parte is seene on a bende marcial, three Cinquefoiles so called of the nomber of their leues, flowers of great estimacion, and worthye of bearinge, for their auncientie in Armes, for they hauing fiue leaues, do represent fiue sundrye graces,
                     Isidore
                   as to bee perfect in all sences, which are tasting, hearing, seeyng, feelinge and smelling, and learning must be optayned at gods hande to vse these aryght, for that is moste nedefull in a ruler, who aboue other oughte to excell in knowledge for the better gouernment of the people. The flowers aforesaid bee of Golde,
                     Bartho, de ꝓpri rerum. li. 16. whiche resembleth the sonne. Aurum est in corporibus sicut sol inter stellas, sol autem dicitur rex stellarum & lumen earum sic aurum est quasi rex rerum corporalium & mensura omniū, & quanto rubicundius tanto melius est. Or en armorye represente iustice, noblesse, puretie, splendure, droyture, obedience, le home delectable, tractable, clare, & egal, Now ensueth Minerua her poore placynge of these Rocks, in that moste ingenious game of chesse, a game inuented for rulers and magistrates, and not for Momus or his insensate chore, their office is knowne to all that can playe wel at the sayde game, as to garde the kinges and Queenes with all the people on the chesse borde, and signify in armorie, vigilance in defence and suertie of the prince and countrye. The fielde wherein these rockes be placed, beyng of the pearle, betokeneth puritie of conscience, and singuler good will & loue euen to mortall enemies.
               The Garter is de Azure celeste & Saphirique, adorned

with this most noble title (Gallicis verbis) Honye soit qui male pense, which Polidore hath this in latin, vituperetur qui male cogitat.
               
               The Garbe is of the Sonne royally supported with two Lyons, leaste the malignitie and cruell attemptates of the deuelishe rablement, and wicked sowdanes, myght deuour and consume the graine of such an orient sheaff, & so altogether is wt the said noble beastes (in forme first displayed) ryght honorably defended, and valiantly garded, whereby is vttered, how innocents are by this chiualler courteous, his trauell and dilligence as well in comon causes as priuate, defended and assisted, & their causes also daylie moste studiously discussed, Pater est orphanorum et iudex viduanum. Thus for breuitie I cease anye further to protracte the discription of the foresayde ensignes, desiringe almighty god to bee vnto the bearer thereof, a shielde and buckler, a suer castell and strong tower, for his defence against the assaults of all his enemies, that in long life, health felicitie and honour, and also with one hart, one waye, to god, his prince, and her lawes, hee may continue his estate & vertuouslye mainta
                     •
                  n the tokens and prises of noblenes, as by me the collector hereof (rude and voide of all eloquence) are as before simply discryed, and homelye vttered, yet suche as they bee, I eftsones commend them, and those that here ensue to his good lordship as a chosen patron, to whom I may safely yelde & commit these sundrye collectyons of signes armoryal, besechyng him the same in as good part to receyue, as I here againe, do humbly offer them vnder the protection and fauour of his name.
               
                  Sapiens in populo haereditabit honorem, et nomen illius erit viuens in eternum. Ecclesiastes. 37.
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Storke, Ciconia.
                  He beareth partie per fesse Sable and Ermine, in chief a cressant between .ij. letters of S de Argent, and to his Crest vpon the Helme on a wreathe, Or and Azure, a Storks head rassed Argent Pellete, between .ij. winges Sable, beaked Golde, mantled Gules, dubled Argent. The Storke is taken to be that byrde, whiche in Latten is called Ciconia, and is of the figure of an Heron, but is greater and is all white, sauing the tops of his winges, his bill and legges be red, although I haue here discribed

them the contrarye, whiche is but my deuice for example sake, they vs naturall enemies to serpentes and do 
                     •
                  lea them, when they be olde, their birdes feede them, and prouide meate for them, & volandi impotentes humeris gestant, wherefore the Image of them was the token of iustice, and the auncient kings had it in the tops of their septers, whereby theye were admonished to auance iustice and pietie, and to oppresse iniustice & crueltie, Inter omnes alias aues pietatis simbolum gerit, & de immensa earum pietate erga suos pullos refert Isidorus in lib. de natura auium Ciconiae magna cura alunt vicissim parentes iam aetate deficientes sola bonitate naturae ad id agendum impulsae inquit Aelian lib. 15. cap. 4. Of this bird came a greeke word for a prouerbe Antepelargeni, which signifieth to be lyke a storke, which prouerbe is to exort men to bee kinde to their parentes, or to their masters whiche teache and bring them vp, requiting the benefit whiche they receyued of them.
               
                  
                  
               
               The Noble Citie of Excester for thensigne thereof, hath in a fielde parted per pale Mars and Saturne, a castell triple towred Solis, supported of two Pegasus lunae, wyth winges vndie Pearle and Saphiere, Manes and shooes of

the Topaze. The creast vpon an healme on a Torce Sol and Saturne, a demie Lyon Martis crowned, holdinge a Mounde, whereuppon is set a crosse botonie Topace, manteled Rubie, doubled Pearle.
               
               The true fidelitie that this Citie hath alwaies borne to their liege and soueraigne, is most worthely reported in diuers chronicles, to the great and renowmed fame of the Citizens therein inhabitinge, who moste faithfully in the time of diuers auncient prynces, haue manfully defended their citie from the spoile of the rebellious enemy. And amongst other, vnder that most prudēt prince king Henry the seuenth, when it was enuironed & lyke to be enflamed by that traiterous rebel Perken warbek, ouercomming fyer by fyer, and fortifiyng places vnfortefied, at the last, they so couragiously lyke valiant chā
                  pions, defended their portes, posternes, and walles, that after many daungerous assaultes, they droue away the sayde Parken with the rablement of his rebellious army. How much also & how worthely are they to be commended for their faithfull seruis in the time of king Edward the sixt, who being in the middest of rebells, vnuitailed, vnfurnished, vnprepared for so long a siege, dyd nobly holde out the continual and daungerous assault of the rebell, for they sustayned the violence of the rebellious rout, not onely when they had plenty enough of victuall, but also a leuen or twelue daies after the extreme famin came on them, and liuing without bread, weare in courage so manfull, and in duetye so constant, that they thought it muche better to die the extreame deathe of hunger, shewing truth to their king, and loue to their countrey, then to geue any place to the rebell and fauor him with ayde, whose examples god graunt, all cyties may follow and learne to be noble by Excester, whose truethe dothe not onely deserue longe prayses, but also great rewarde.
               
                  
                  
               
               He beareth vert, the wings of an Egle de Argent, and to his creast vpon the healme on a wrethe Or & Azure, an head de cheual rassed de Argent, pellitie betwene two winges Sable, brydebled golde, set on a wrethe Argent and Uert, manteled Gules, doubled Argent. It hath bin & is to be seen, that Angels are painted fetherd and winged, declaring vnto vs thereby (as I read) that they be alien and cleane from al earthly cogitacion, and ben rapt

vp aboue to the inuest contemplacion of the loue of god, and they are also figured hauing winges, to signifie their swift discourse in all things, the windes are said to haue winges, propter velocitatem scilicet, vnde scriptura sacra dicit, qui ambulat super pennas ventorum. Paradine discribethe lightening to haue winges, that god of eloquence Maercurie appeared to diuers winged, I suppose men in these our dayes haue winges also, and flye contrarye to nature, but I doubt they be counterfet winges, as those whom Icarus made to flye with all, whiche when he had set them together with wax,
                     Icarus.
                   and ioyned to his syde faste and suer inough as he thought, hee mounted vp into the ayre, but so sone as ye Sonne had somwhat heated him, and his wax began to melt, hee fell downe into a greate ryuer where hee was drowned out of hand, the whyche water was euer after called by his name, Icarū mare, the lyke fall had Bellerophon, when hee tooke vpon hym to ascend vppon Pegasus the horse that had winges, nowe what other thynge dothe these signifie vnto vs, but that no man shoulde meddle with thynges aboue hys compasse.
               
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                     Candlesticke. Alce.
                  He beareth Azure & Gules, parted with a Cheuron betwene three Candlesticks de Argent. His creast, ye beast Alce propre, leaning to an Oke Uert, set on a torce de Or and Gules, manteled Sable, doubled Or, supported with a Beuer argent, coloured & vnguled Sable, and an Harpie Uert, Wynged de Or. The Alce discribed for the creast of the said coate armour, is a wilde beast in the woods of Germany, in facion & skinne like to a fallowe Deere, but greater, & hath no iointes in his legges: and

therefore he doth neuer lye, but leane to a tree when he doth rest him. The hūters knowing this, do saw ye trees that they vse to leane to,
                     Beuer Fiber. Castor▪ Otter. Harpie.
                   halfe a sunder, wherby they fall downe and be taken. Of the supporters, the one is a Beuer, a beast called in latin Fiber, or Castor, whose stones are vsed in medicine. He hath the taile of a fishe, and in the residue is like to an Otter. The other assistant is an Harpie, a monstruous bird, hauing the visage of a maid, and talons of a maruelous capacitie. I dyd omit to speak any thing of the tokens aboue blazed in the coate armor nexte aforesaide, whyche I shoulde haue firste desplayd, but the vse of candelstickes is very well knowne to all men, and wherefore theye serue. Theye bee called Candelabra, a candelis quasi candelafera,
                  
                     Candelabra. Sir Peter Carew.
                   
                  quod candelas ferant.
               
               
                  The field is Or, three Lions passant, Sable. These appertain to Sir Peter Carew knight, whose coate armoure (as before displaied) hauing the Diamonde set in the worthiest mettal of al other, which is Golde, dothe demonstrate after worldlie vertues, noblenesse, bon vouloir, & recomforte.
                  
                     I. 
                           •
                        eron en le Simboll armoniall.
                   Of the spirituall vertues, Foye. Le Or en armories ha plusours bōs ꝓperties & moult de choses signifie, et represent iustice, force, et attemperance en general. Et ainsi que le Or est viuifie par le home, ainsi li home est viuifie par le Or qui est viuificatif & restauratif, qui iāmes ne est macule par terre, ne dedeins terre, eins de soye clarifie la terre qui demonstre, le primier porters, ou celuy qui le porte par son labour, peine & vertue auoir clarifie son estre.
               
               Gold also as it is ye most principal mettal of al to worldly men,
                     A vicene. lib. 33. cap. 4. so it is the soueraigne guide to marcial affaires. For where Mars can not rule, he taketh place.
               
                  Thus it is prooued that golde is victorious, but assuredly the bearer thereof in coate armour, ought (if his field be al thereof) to be supplyant and meeke.
               The Lions in the said fielde, are in their gentle nature, nor haue any ferocitie in them, beyng passant and ruled by the Sonne, who geeueth them lyght to their trauail, that they may the sooner ouercome the enemye: & theye considering their estate, are enemies to none, for al their hautye courage.
               
                  
                     Holland
                  
                  He beareth Azure, fiue flower de Lize, a Lion saliant gardāt de argent. Plinie writethe that the Lions chyefe nobility is, cum iube colla & armos vestiunt. Id autem aetate contingit, a Leone conceptis. Quos vero pardi generauerūt semper hoc insigni carent, sicut & faeminae. Heare note that all Lyons borne in armes, ought to be figured with maynes couering their necke and shoulders, for so they declare them selues to bee of right birthe, for those whiche are gottē by Pardes, lack the said ensigne, yt is, haue no maynes, as the Leonesse. The Lion alone of al beastes, is borne with open eyes, as witnesseth Democritus, nimimū
                     
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      somno deditum, tradunt signum quod dormitanti cauda iugitur monetur. The saide coate appertayneth to Holland of Deuonshire
               
                  
                  His field is Sable,
                     Wentworth
                   a cheurō betwene iij Leopards heads de Or: & borne by the name of Wētworth, I read in an auncient worke of Armory, that a Cheuron or a Barre doth signify the perfection & finishinge of anye thinge, whiche before was not perfect nor finished, wherin cō
                  sisteth Prudence, the first soueraigne vertue to attayne to honor.
               
                  He bearethe Gules,
                     Fitzherbert.
                   three Lyons Saliant de Or.
               The Lyon liueth long,
                     Clemētia Leonis in prostratis
                   because pleri
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dentibus defecti reperiuntur. The Lyon onelye of all beastes is gentle, and not lightlie angrye, in supplices, nam prostratis parcit, et vbi saeuit, in viros prius quā in faeminas fremit, in infantes non nisi magna fame adactus grassatur. Leonum animi iudex est canda, sicut & equorum aures. If he be moued or stirred, Primum cauda verberat terr
                        •
                     m, deinde crescente ira flagellat tergum. He long reteyneth his wrathe, as it were paciently suffring ye iniurie done vnto hym. Mars occupieth the fielde of the saide coate armour, and the content therin is Solis, wherby prowesse is signified, with desire of fame. It is borne by the name of Fitzherbert.
               
                  
                  
                     Grafton.
                  
                  He beareth partie per Saltier, Sable and Ermine, a Lion rampant de Or, armed and langued Gules. Thys coate I finde otherwise blazed, videlicet, Gerondie of fower Ermine & Sable, ouer all, a Lyon rampant golde, armed and langued Gules. Here ariseth a controuersie, whether there is particion per Saltier or noe, master Gerarde Leighe sayeth, that it is the seuenth particion, and voucheth Vlpianus to be againste those that woulde terme the fielde of the sayd coate armour to be Geronne of 
                     •
                  ower pieces. Of truthe I haue not read Ulpiane, but assured I am, that all the writers of armorie the space of fiftie yeares nowe paste (whiche I haue seene) consent with master Leighe and affirme particion per Saltier, as Io. Feron, Nawclere Paradine &c. and yet notwithstanding the diuersitie of the writers, these particions being the one so lyke the other, for that there is also partie per Gyron, it can not bee but that there is founde an indifferencie of the vse in blazon of the one as of the other, they so nighe approchinge in forme, as for example, who knowing a Cheuron in the fielde of anye coate armour, can otherwise iudge, but that there is particion per Cheuron. So likewise seinge a Saltier, wil denye but there is particion by the same. As these bee true, so muste you consider of the qualities in all particions, as per 
                     •
                  esse, per bende, & per pile &c. This coate armoure is borne by the name of Grafton.
               
                  
                  
               
               1 He beareth two demie Lions passant gardant de Or,
                     Hatche
                   by the name of Hache.
               2 His fielde is de Argent,
                     Dillon
                   a Lyon saliant Gules, debrused with a Barre de Azure, betweene three cressants and as many Estoiles montans of the seconde: borne by the name of Dillon.
               
                  He beareth Sable,
                     Srangwayes
                   two Lyons passant de Argent, palie of sixe Gules. Of the three thinges, Quae bene incedunt yea, of the fower whiche are comely in goinge,
                     Prouerb. 30. 
                  Salamon nameth first ye Lyō, wher he sayeth: Leo fortissimus bestiarum, ad nullius pauebit occursum. The Lyon whiche is strongest amonge beastes, geueth place to no man..
               The said coate armor is borne by the name of Strangwayes.
               
                  
                  
                     Capell
                  
                  He beareth Gules, a Lion Saliant betwene three crosses botonie fitchie de Or. The nobilitie of the Lyon is before sufficiently declared, and this coate armoure is borne by the name of Capell.
               
                  He beareth Argent, nyne Cinquefoiles Gules,
                     Perpoynte.
                   a Liō Saliant Sable, armed and langued of the seconde, yet here remayneth one nature of the Lion vntouched: that is when he flyeth, Non obuertit tergum quasi pauidus,
                  
                     Munstre Cos. li. 6. 
                  sed pedetentim progrediens & murmurans respicit retro. Nō autem nisi laesus exagitatur, aut fame incitetur. The said coate appertayneth to Perpoynte of Holme.
               
                  
                     Leedes
                  
                  He beareth Argent, a fesse Gules, betwene three Eaglettes Sable, membred and beaked of the second. There be sixe kindes of Eagles, as witnesseth Plinie: The firste whereof he calleth Melenatos because of her black colour, wherof she taketh her name, of bodie she is the least, sed viribus omnium praestantissima. She frequenteth moste

the highe mountaynes and woods. This alone of al the kindes of Eagles, norisheth and bringethe vp her yong birdes Aristottle sayeth,
                     Hister. animal. li. 9, ca, 32. that she is Pernix, concinua, polita, apta, intrepida, strenua, liberalis, et non inuida: modesta etiam, nec petulans, quippe quae non clangit ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      lippiat, aut murmuret. The saide armes bee borne by the name of Leedes.
               
                  
                  
                     At Hall yate of Shirburne
                  
               
               1 He beareth Sable, a Cheuron betwene three Sinistre handes copie de argent. This was the coate of Gilbert at Hall yate of Shireburne in Elmet, a Gentlemā of auncient name and also coate armour, as is recorded of him in many writings yet apparant.
               2 His fielde is of Gules, a Fesse betwene three Cressaunts de Or, borne by the name of Okeham.
               
                  His field is de Argent,
                     Okeham. Sacheuerell.
                   on a Saltier Azure, fiue Gorges de Or. Master Gerarde Leighe makethe difference betwene water budges, and these. The cause onely I iudge, because they receyue not one forme & figure.
               The saide coate armoure is borne by the name of Sache uerell.
               
                  
                  He beareth Argent, a Cheuron de Ermines,
                     Sir William Kingsmill knight.
                   betweene three Inkes molyn crusule botonie fitchie Sable, a cheif as the seconde. Of the token borne in thys coate armour I haue sufficientlye spoken of before vpon the blason of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  molyn. Now is therefore to bee declared the dignytie of the fielde of the said armes, which is argent, in Greeke called Argurium, not farre from the latin name and appelation,
                     Argentū post aurum nobilius metallū.
                   it is a royal mettall, Habet autem proximum bonītatis locū ab auro, cui scilicet color est albus & talis natura vt igni liquescere fūdi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      possit Metalla si ad argentum incatinatum coniecta fuerint mutantur nonnihil: argentum vero ipsum remanet purum, attamen vbi diutius arserit, ei aliquid igni deperit: ac deinde acria ipsum corrodunt. Ergo vilius est auro sed durius eo: et quo mollius fuerit, eo est prestantius. Nam minus fragile est, atque ideo laxius dilatatur malleo ictum, minus tamen auro dilatatur minus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      est eo ponderosum. Et propter eam quam habet duriciam, siue percutiatur siue proiiciatur edit sonitum, efficiuntur
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ex eo eadem opera quae ex auro,
                  
                     Monster cosino. li. 1. 
                  sed numero plura. Silner also hath these qualities peculiarly, it is clerae, it is shrill of sound, easelye ductile, a meruelous preseruer of sweete balmes, the Iaspers frend, and with whom the Iasper better agreeth then with golde. It is also medicinable, for his offall or dust remedieth woundes, Sed mirum im modum illud dum candidum sit impressum corpori lineas nigras reddit, The fielde of the saide coate armour signifieth ye bearer to be of conscience vpright in iustice, and desirous to appease strife, and is borne by the name of Kingsmill.
               
                  
                  He beareth Or, two Cheurons betweene three Trefoyles Sable.
                     Isidor. Etil. li. 17. ca. 9 The Trefoil in latin is called Trifolium, Graeci trifillum vocant, quod sit solis trinis per singulas annotaciones It betokeneth the vnion of three in one substance, & the token is much augmēted by the worthines of ye field, being golde which is ye head of al other mettals. The field is Uert, iij. Piles de Or,
                     Trefoile
                   ij. descending, & .i. ascending in point of the fesse, in chiefe a plate betwene .ij. Trefoiles, de Argent. The trefoiles heare in this coate armour, are in their propre field, which is, of that Ladie Vaenus colour Greene.
                     Vaenus her▪ colour.
                   This hearbe is comonly knowne by the name of three leaued grasse, an hearbe excellent, and especial to man and beaste
               
                  He beareth Azure, two Pillers in pile fusile Dargent,
                     Pillers fusile Charles the great.
                   in chiefe a Crowne de Or. Suche pillers of stone, the great Charles caused to bee set vp in ye Palace whych he builded at Ingelheim in Germany, wheras he was borne after ye opinion of most writers, the which pillors were translated thence (as Mūster

sayeth in his time) and nowe erect in the prince Palantine his castle at Heidelberge,
                  
                     Columnae fusiles.
                   
                  in perpetuum artis fusoriae memoriam.
               
               Thus those prises in coates armoures, whiche are of many called Fusils, that is to saye Spyndles, may aptly be taken for pillers.
               Fusille in latin, Columnae fuse, aut fusiles, and so to bee blazed in armes, since that suche a mighty conquerour, and prince moste prudent, as Charles the great was, thought good to erect Pillors fusible of stone verie preprecious, in perpetual remembrance of spynners crafte,
               
                  The fielde is de Argent, and Sable, parted per pale, on a Fesse, de le vn, et le auter two water boudges, transmuted of the fielde.
               This coate beinge charged on the Fesse, beautifiethe it muche, so as the armorie can not bee but perfite and good, if it be well considered of. A water boudge also parted per Pale, of the mettal, and colour aforesaide, maye congruently stande for a creast of the saide coate armour.
               
                  
                     Square.
                  
                  He beareth Sable, a Squire direct from the chiefe, to the dexter parte of the shield, de Argent. This is a principal instrument of the Carpenter, and is called Gnomon vel Norma. In english a squier, without the which nothinge can be rightly done, so nedeful it is to the framing of al workes. The token hereof

seene in coate armour, may signifie good direction, & prudence, vsed with great moderacion, before anye thinge weightie be attempted, and attempted, brought to a perfect conclusion.
               Note also, that there may be vsed in coate armour, particion per Squere, although it be rare seene.
               
                  The field is Gules,
                     Folfarde.
                   a Cheuron de Argent, borne by the name of Folfarde. Of the same ordinarie are these ensuinge.
               
                  1 Argent a Cheuron Gules, borne by the name of Stoket
                  
                  2 Argēt, a Cheuron Sable, by the name of Mordante.
                  
                  3 Or, a Cheuron de Azure, by the name of Clopton.
                  
                  4 Or, a Cheuron Uerte, by the name of Iudge.
                  
               
               
                  He beareth Sable,
                     Cotton
                   a Cheurō betwene iij Griphons heades erased de Argent, by ye name of Cotton.
               Of the like particiō be these which folow, the fields wher of occupy sundry tokens, as the reader maye easelye perceyue the soueraygntie of the same particions.
               
                  1 Argent, a Cheurō betwen thre Martelets Sable, borne by the name of Apton.
                  
                  2 Argent, a Cheuron Gules, betweene three Hurtes by the name of Baskeruile.
                  
                  3 Gules, a Cheuron Argent, betwene three Escallops, de Or, by the name of Chamberleyne.
                  
                     
                     
                        Pudsey.
                     4 Uert a Cheuron betwene three Mulletes de Or, persed, by the name of Pudsey:
                  5 Sable, a Cheuron betweene three Trefoiles de Argent, by the name of Vurgy.
                     
                        Vurgy Violes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The field is Azure, a Fesse nebule de Ermine, betweene three Phyals Dargent, this vessell, Isidore sayeth, is called a Phiale, because it is made of Glasse, and it is a little vessell with a broade bottome, and a small necke. In suche a vessell wyne is especiallye knowne by the colour, and al swete waters are therin put to be preserued. Such tokens may be geuen to seruitours of kynges & prynces, whiche beginne and take assaye of all drinkes before their soueraigne. Let all those persons remember the truste put in them, as in no part they swarue from their duetie, but to be without corruption, and voide of al vncleanes, as they may deserue to beare the noble ensignes aforesaide.
               
                  
                     Heron.
                  
                  He bearethe Gules, a Fesse betwene three Herōs de Argent. This is a birde of the water, quippe quae vivit ex aqua, and yet greately dredeth rayne and tempestes, which in flying on high, shee assayeth to auoide, after the sayinge of Uirgil.
               
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      altam supra, volat Ardea nubem.
               
               The Heron aboue the highe cloudes dothe flye, so as one can scarce her decerne with eye. Vocatur etiam ob id ardea, qd, ardua suo volatu petat. She

maketh her nest on highe trees, and hathe a naturall hatred to the Hauke, Sicut vicissim accipiter exitium illius cō
                     tinuo querít. For they skirmishing on high in the aire, go about this one thing, whether of them in flyinge highest, can exceede the other. If the the Hauke optaine the higher place, she ouerthroweth the Heron vehemently, and sleeth her, but if the Heron do get aboue the Hauke, she defileth her with her excrement and killethe her, for her dung is poyson to the Hauke, and rotteth her fethers. The sayde coate is borne by the name of Heron.
               
                  His fielde is de Or, a Gripe Sable. The Gripe in latin is called Vultur, a foule very rauenous, and a great deuourer of carren, hee hathe an huge body, which causeth him to be slowe in flight, whereof also he taketh his name, but he is of a very sharpe sight, & therfore seeth his pray a farre of. He moste desireth to feede on mans fleshe, before all other birds: & of a singuler wit geuen him by kinde knoweth ye death of mā, pronosticating the same certain daies before. There be that write marueils of him: which is, that in the time of warre, seuen daies before any fight, he doth smell the place where the battaile shalbe, & ioyneth him selfe to that party which he thinketh shal die of the sworde. And therefore the kings in olde time had their deuinours and southsayers, which with great diligence did beholde the eyes of these Gripes or Vultures, markinge to what parte theye dyd turne theire sighte, and which they did forshew shoulde die in the battaile. Saint Ambrose wrytethe, that the Gripe dothe conceyue withoute the seede of the male, and is gendred without coniunction, and that he liueth an 100. yeares, and when he draweth to extreme age, the ouer part of his bill, groweth so close and croked ouer the

nether, that he can not open it to take his meate, and so dieth at last for hunger. For he dothe not make sharp his beake vpon a stone, as the Eagle dothe.
               
                  
                     Sawe. Compasse.
                  
                  He beareth Sable, a Sawe in pale, betwene two Compasses de Argent.
               These instruments are beste knowne to suche as worke in Tymber, and are verie auncient addycions in armorye.
               
                  
                     Goose arborie
                  
                  He beareth Azure, iij. Gees arborie Dargent, beaked, & mēbred de Or, It is read, that ther be certain trees in Scotland, which growinge nere ye bank of a great water, bring forth fruit cōglomerate with leaues, and the same fallinge when it is ripe into the riuer, quickneth, and is turned into a liue birde, whiche theye call Anserem arboreum, a Goose of the tree. And this tree (as some writeth) growethe in the Isle Pomonia, not farre from Scotland, towardes the Northe. The olde Cosmographiers, especielly Saxo Grā
                     maticus maketh mēcion of this famous tree.
                     Anseres arborei
                   Think it not therefore to be a faigned matter deuised or immagined of the new writers. Also Aeneas Siluius wryteth of the same thus. Audiueramus nos olim a
                        •
                     borē esse in Scotia, quae supra ripā fluminis enata fructus ꝓduceret anatarum formā habētes et eos quidem cū maturitati proximi essent sponte sua decidere, alios in terram alios in aquam, & in terrā deiectos putrescere,

in aquam vero demersos, mox animatos enatare sub aquis, & in aere plumis pennis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      euolare. Munsterus, (of whom is made so ofte mencion before) in his booke of Cosmographie, saieth, that he being in Scotlande with kyng Iames, diligently searched where the saide miraculous tree shoulde growe, & at the laste learned, that it was not to be founde in Scotlād, sed remotius apud Orchades insulas. Wherfore the same Gees may also be termed, Gees orchadie, because they are so meruelously brought forth in the same isle.
               
                  The fielde is argent .5. Scocheōs d'azure, passes en saultier.
                     I. Feron. Munster
                   
                  Alphonsus firste kinge of Lusitania, nowe called Portugal, and the first also which recouered Vlixibonam frō the Saracenes, which longe had kepte the same: & ouercame .5. of their kīgs in one battaille, assumpted to beare for hys ensigne fiue scocheōs, whiche he left to hys posteritie, as a monumente of suche hys famous acte.
               
               ¶He beareth quarterly d'or & azure 3. flours de luce on a
                     Bye. Chelcelettes.
                  
                  
a bende of the first & second. The said coate armour apperteineth to master Iohn Bye.
               2 ¶He beareth a shielde quartered of the Topaze & Saphire, a Chalcelet on the first quarter Diamonde.
               Thys birde is seldom seene, for she frequenteth the mō
                  taines, as Aristotle saieth) and is longe and blacke, like to a certaine Hawke called Palumbarius, or to the birde called Ptynge, that flieth the most parte by night, & taketh his praye, more Aquilae, & fighteth so cruelly with the Eagle, that they being wounden together, fall downe both to the groūde, and so are taken of shepherdes on liue. Chalcis non clare videt.
               
               
                  ¶ His fielde is Saturne, an hāde dextre in fesse of the moone, & to his creast a fiste within a garlande of laurell propre.
               The signe borne in thys cote armour is a right hāde, called in latine Dextera, and hath ye name of Dare, to giue, for suretie of peace is geeuen therewith: and it is also the witnesse of faith and truste, & hoc est illud apud Tullium fidē publicā iussu senatus dedi, id est dexteram. And ye apostle Paule saieth, Iames, Cephas, & Ihon, whih semed to be pillers, gaue me & Barnabas the right hāds, (& agreed with vs) that we shuld preache among the heathen, & they among the Iewes &c. The fiste desplaied for the creaste aforesaid, is called Pugnu
                  ▪ in Latine, because the fingers be clighte in. Pugnus autem a pugilla dictus: sicut palma ab expausis palmae ramis.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The fielde is Gules,
                     Barkley.
                   a Ch
                     •
                  uron betwene three crosses partie dargent.
               This coate hath bene borne by the name of Barkley, and whereas in the said martiale fielde, there is displaid three Crosses, the same do put me in remembraūce of a certaine miraculous fortune, whiche happened vnto the Romaine Emperour Tiberius, a prince vpright in iustice,
                     Tiberius. Constantinus
                   pure in life, & cleane in conscience: who gouerned the whole empire so prudently & syncerely, that no man was able to reproue him, if the histories whiche are written of him do not deceiue vs. Paulus Diaconus in hys xviij. booke, which he writte de Romanorum gestis, doth declare that this Emperour Tiberius spent so great treasours about the repairinge his decaied palaces, to redeme poore captiues, to builde hospitals, to erect monasteries, to marie & prouide for the orphanes & widowes, in all which he was so bountiful, that vnneth he had any thing left to mainteine hys Royall estate & householde. Truely thys was a blessed necessitie, for what can be better bestowed, than that which is emploied in the seruice of Christe. And of thys pouertie the Emperoure was not ashamed, but thought it a great glorie, yet one thig greued hym moche, whiche was to see Sophia the empresse reioi
                     •
                  e so moche at hys miserie. For the highe and noble hartes, which feele themselues wounded, do not so moche esteme theire own paine, as they do to see theire enemies reioyce at theire griefe. But God neuer forsoke them that for his sake became poore, as it appeareth by thys: It chaunced one daye that euen as this Emperour Tiberius walked in the middest of his palace, he espied at hys feete a marble stone, whiche was in fourme like vnto a Crosse: and because he

thought it an vnmete thīg to haue the same spurned with soule feete,
                     Crosse
                   whiche was so victorious & triūphant a signe, he caused the stone to be taken vp (not thinking any thing to be there vnder) and immediatly after, they founde an other, wherein likewise was the forme of the Crosse, and thys being taken vp, they founde an other in like maner, and when that was pluck vp from the botome, there was founde a treasure, whiche conteaned the somme of twoo millions of duckettes, for the which, the good Emperour Tiberius gaue vnto almightie God moste highe thankes: & wheras before hee was liberal, nowe afterwardes hee was moche more boūtiful. For all those treasures he vertuously distributed, amongst the poore and nedie people. Whose treasours they were, of thē I fynde thus writtē: Thesauros Iustiniani secundi, & Narsetis Eunuchi, vtcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      congestos miraculose repperit, liberaliter
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in pauperis dispensauit. Let therfore mightie princes & great Lordes see, read, & profit by thys example, & let them thinke them selues assured, that for geuinge almes to the poore,
                     Vitis Caesarū fol. 63. they nede not feare to become poore: for in thende, the vicious man can not call hymselfe riche, nor the vertuous man, can counte hymselfe poore.
               
                  
                     Daubryggecourt.
                  
                  ¶His fielde is d'ermine .iij. Humettes gules.
               The firste that euer did were Ermine in hys royall robes, was (as I reade in an olde worke of Armory) Laomedon, kynge of olde Troye. He thaught Priamus his sonne to weare the same, who being king in the tyme of the warre, & great siege of troye, was euer seene whan he came into the fielde, or whan hee entred into battaille, to weare the saide noble furre of Ermine in his cloke vpon

hys armoure.
                     Hector.
                   Hys eldest sonne also Hector by name, was alwaies seene in place of his father, to haue vpō hym that mantle or cloke furred with Ermine, and in that hee killed manie noble men of the Greekes. Wherfore the Grecians euer saide it was kynge Priamus,
                  
                     Priamus.
                   because hee onely in the fielde did first weare the same. Then the nobles of Troye ordeyned for Hector, an other apparell differringe moche from hys fathers, that the Greekes might plainely perceaue, that there was an other noble & stoute warriour in Troye besides kyng Priamus. They vsed not this apparell but in time of warre,
                     Coates of Ermine.
                   because they were as litle as coates, and beinge not longe or heauie, did nothinge hindre them in fightinge: therefore they were called coates of armes, and of nobilitie, for that they were very pleasant to the sighte, and to be seene farre of, beinge all whyte and blacke. And some writers affirme, that the firste armes were of Ermine, and that kynge Priamus was the firste that bare them: alledging further that after the destruction of Troye, there came a noble man of the stocke of kynge Priamus into Britaine,
                     Armes of Britaine.
                   and there did inhabite: and therefore the duke of Britayne beareth Ermine, because (saye they) hee commeth of that stocke that firste inhabited that countrey, and was the firste Lorde thereof. And so I gather, that the firste bearinge of Ermine in coate armoure, was inuented at the siege of Troy, although the ordering therof was not in so goodly a maner then, as is now in these dayes.
               The Heumettes borne in the armes before des
                     •
                  ried,
                     Heumettes.
                   do admonishe the bearer. Memorare nouissima. They apperteane to Daubrigecourte of Stratfelde Say.
               
                  
                  ¶Hee beareth Or, a Lyon rampannt d'Ermine, debrused with two Barruletes, & fret with the thirde Sable.
               Why so many Lions are borne in Escocheons, Munsterus declareth in these woordes. Principibus enim Belgarum parantibus nouum expeditionem in Syriam, assumpserunt variorum colorum Leones, relictis veteribus insignibus. Of the bearinge of Lions in sondrie wise, I haue spoken sufficiently in the beginning of this booke.
               
                  ¶The fielde is verie .3. arrowes in poincte d'or. The creaste a Pheon d'argent, on a Scallop gules. This coate mighte be borne of some one mā who farre excelled others in shootīg, & so might chaūce to be honored wt suche a creaste for a rewarde, I haue omitted to marshal the same, either with helme, wreathe, or mantle, whiche I haue vsed in the blazon of a greate nōbre of cotes before, because ye may the better vnderstāde what suche achementes bee. But it might be asked of me, what thys worde acheuemēt meaneth. It is (as M. Gerarde L. defineth in his accidence of armorie), th' armes of euerie gentelman, well marshalled, with the supporters,

helme, wreath, & creste, with mantels, & y• worde, of som termed ye poesie, all whiche of heraltes is proprely called blazon, heawme, & timbre. This creste nexte aforesaid I haue so ordered, because antiquitie receaued the one before the other: and that creastes may bee borne, wtout any wreath, & right cōmēdable inough, folowing the opinion of the before named M. G. Leighe, in his said boke.
               The Arrowes standing pile wais in poincte, is one of ye honorable ordinaries general: whiche because they stāde in poincte, bringeth me in remēbraūce of ye coate armour of that noble house of the Poulets,
                     Poulet.
                   who beare Sable, thre

arminge swordes d'argent, pile in poincte, as ye may see here desplaied. Of ye sworde, & why it is so called, looke in the next boke entituled, of Cotes and crestes.
               ¶Hee beareth azure, two barres embatiled, contrebatiled d'Ermine, by the name of Burnebye.
                  
                     Burnebye.
                  
               
               
                  Of the like bearing are these which folow.
               
                  1 ¶Sable .ij. barres embatiled d'Ermine.
                  2 ¶Ermines .ij. barres embatiled contrebatiled d'or.
                  3 ¶Gules .ij. Barres embatiled d'argent.
               
               
                  
                  
                     Baker.
                  
                  ¶He beareth argent, one a saulter engrailed sab, 5. Escalopes of the fielde, a chiefe of the seconde, charged with a Lyon passant of the firste, armed and langued gule. This cote Armoure is borne by the name of Baker.
               ¶He beareth sable, 3. brode arrowes bar
                     •
                  wais d'argent. The latine for an arrowe is Sagitta, so called as Isidore sayeth,
                     Brode arrowe
                  
                  
                  a Sagaci iactu id est veloci ictu. Pennis enim fertur quasi auis: vt celeriter mors percurrat ad hominē. His primū Cretenses vsi sunt. The arrowes borne in the saide cote armoure, are to be takē for suche as we call brode arrowes, yet y• bearing of them in forme as I before haue described, is verie rare to bee seene.
               
                  
                     Crossebowe. Handegōnes.
                  
                  The fielde is vert, a Crossebowe bente d'argente. Isidore saieth that Balista, whiche in Englishe we call a Crosse bowe, hath ye name, ab emito tendo iacula, for whē the same is bent, it casteth from it with great force either arrowes or stones. Sir Thomas Eliot ye knight of worthy fame, in his boke ētituled ye Gouernoure, supposeth that Crossebowes and handgonnes where broughte into thys realme, by

the sleight of our enemies, to the entent to destroy the noble defence of archerye?
                     Archerie.
                   But what woulde hee thinke in these our daies, if he were on liue, to see the same almost vtterly decaied, Certes he would lament with teares, the negligence of his countreymen, that so litle regarde and esteeme the feat of Artillerye, or the due obseruacion of the laws prouided for the defence of their countrey. The bearer of the saide coate armour, may aptlye adde thereunto, this poysie or Apothegme. Ingenium superat vires.
               
               
                  The field is Sable, two bowes bente addorsed de Or,
                     Bowe.
                   stringed Uert, these are to bee taken for longe bowes, wherwith this realm of England, hath ben not onely best defended frō outward hostilitie, but also in other regiōs haue ben seene to preuaile agaynst people innumerable, and inespecially in the tyme of the moste puissaunt prynces▪ Edwarde the thirde, and Henry the fifte, agaynste the French. The bow in latin is called Arcus, eo quod arceat aduersarium.
                  
                     Arcus
                   
                  Item arcus ob speciem: ꝙ sint curuati arctiꝰ.
               
               
                  He beareth Uert & Sable,
                     Towers
                   parted per pale vndade, two Towers embatiled Dargēt. I haue vsed verye ofte thys particion, but heare in thys coate it hath a great superyoritie, the Towers deuyded watried, and in their propre colour, beutyfieth muche the same. Towers are especially builded for defence, & are called in latin Arces,
                  
                     Arces.
                   
                  a quibꝰ

arcentur hostes. It is also verye necessarie to name in the blazon of the saide deuise, of how many peeces the sayde embatlements be made, therefore say, they bee embatiled of three peeces and two halfes. and so they be right.
               
                  He beareth Sable on a Fesse de Or, betweene three Anuieldes, Argent, a demie Lyon passaunt Gules, armed & langued Azure. The Anuild is the chiefest instrument of the Smith, whereon he beateth the Iron and steele, and so worketh it in lēgth, bredth and forme as liketh him. It is an auncient addycion of armory: and is called in ye Northerne tongue a Stethye, in latin Incus, Veteres autem nō incudem vocabant, sed in tudem, eo ꝙ in ea metallum tundatur id est, tendatur. A Sledge or an Hammer, of some called a formall, mighte seeme to be an apte creaste for the saide coate armour.
               
                  The fielde is Or, on a pale bretessee Sable, a Crowne imperiall. This coate is of great excellency, considering ye field to be of that most worthy mettall, Golde. In latin, Aurum, so called, ab aura. i. a splēdore, of shining ꝙ repercusso aere plus fulgeat. This cote armor signifieth vnto y• bearer, cōstācie in euery thyng, also in loue. The same is also a Superlatiue of the highest degree, moste riche because the fielde is of the mettal aforesaide, and the thinge contayned therin Sable. It is also one of the honorable

ordinaries charged.
               
                  Hee bearethe Gules, one Plough de Argent, a chiefe de Ermine. This is an excellent coate, and of bearinge right worthie, the field being of the colour, that best becommeth the warriour: Nam ruber armatos equites exo
                        ••
                     
                     
                        •
                     r amictus. The token borne in the fielde, is the Ploughe, the chiefest addicion that may be geeuen to ennoblish the husbandman, and consisteth of that mighty planet, Luna, the riper and encreaser of fruites, the beuty of the night, and Lady of the sea and times: whose capitall signe is adorned with ye furre of that litle beaste of Armonie, valiante courage and marciall pollicie mighte seeme to aduaunce the bearer of this coate armour, rather then the dignitye or auncient lignage of his stocke and progenie, for that perhaps in him might be base, and of lowe estate: as one called from the Plough, to be a king: Suche was Numa Pompilius kinge of Romaynes. Abdolominus king of Sidon And next to them although not a kinge, Quintius, whoe hauing but thirty acres of lande, and beinge plougheman thereof, the Senate and people of Rome sent a messenger to shew him, that they had chosē him to be Dictator, which was at that time, ye highest dignity among the Romains, and for three monethes, had auctoritie royall, Quintius hearing the message, let his ploughe stand, and went into the citie, and prepared his hoaste againste the Samnites, and vanquished them valiantly, that donne, hee surrendred his office, and being discharged of the dignitie, repaired again to his plough, & applied it diligently. Thus ye may see yt the occupiers of the plough, & husbandry haue atteyned to gret dignity, & to be prīces of people & coūtreis.

Then I saye it can not bee otherwise taken, but that the Plough is a token bothe noble and excellent, wel becomming coate armour.
               
                  
                     Greneuile.
                  
                  He bearethe Gules, three Sufflues de Or, by the name of Greneuile, a coate of great antiquitie, as I haue founde in dyuers auncient Monumentes: for at the firste tyme that euer I saw them, which was in the parishe churhe of Mycham, within sixe miles of London, in the lower part of the church there, towards the west, I marueiled of the signe, what it shoulde be conteyned in the field of the said coate armour, but of long time I coulde not comprehend the same, yet, since I haue harde some boldely affirme it, to be called a Rest, an instrument to guide the horsmans staffe, where in deede it serueth to an other purpose, as to conuey the winde from the Bellowes to all the Pipes of the Organes: and by propre name is called a Sufflue.
               
                  His fielde is Sable, iij. pickaxes de Argent, borne by the name of Pigot.
               This token borne in the said ensigne, may also be diuersly named, wherefore I reade that an Herault, shall beare no blame, thoughe hee see a thing in armes, and can not well declare what it shoulde bee: beinge perhaps suche a thinge as is out of vse, & not often seene or knowne, as an instrument, or other thing frequented in a straunge lande, or a toole of an handye

crafts man, (as this next before descried is) or some strāge tree, leafe, hearbe, flower, and suche other: if hee faile to name the same right, it is no errour, so he fayle not of the colours and nombre thereof, according to the rules of armorye. For by reason (sayeth myne aucthor) there is noe man maye knowe all things, since so diuersly they be called, and in sundry wise described or figured.
               
                  Hee beareth partye per f
                     •
                  sse Or, and Uert, one fusill in pale, transmuted of the field, in chiefe ij. clusters of grapes propre. Let the bearer hereof be especially endowed wyth the vertue Temperance, because his chiefe is of the vine tree, then the which nothing is more profytable to the strengthe of mans bodie, ne more pernicious to voluptuous appetites, if measure shoulde lacke in drinkinge the fruite thereof, Androcides (a man of excellent wisedome) wrote vnto the great king Alexander an Epistle, desiring him to refraine his intemperance, wherein hee sayde. Noble prince, when thou wilt drinke wine, remember then, that thou drinkest the bloude of the earthe, signifyinge thereby (after the oppinion of Sir Thomas Eliot) the mighte and power of wine, as also warning Alexander of the thirste or appetite of bloude, whiche woulde ensue by his imtemperate drinkinge. For Plinie (that wrytethe this historie) sayeth immediately. If Alexander had obeied the precepts of Androcides, he had neuer slain his frindes in his drunkennesse for hee slewe his deere frinde Clytus) (whoe apud granicum amnem nudo capite Alexandrum dimicantem clypeo suo texit: et Rhosaceris manum capiti regis imminentem gladio amputauit) as Curtius in his historie maketh mencion. Here also is to bee noted, that tokens

or signes borne in armes, may admonish the bearers ther of to auoid diuers vices, & to embrace the contrary, which is vertue, as in example, the bearer of the Wolfe, let him beware of rapacitie, for the beast is, cruoris appetens &c.
               
               
                  He beareth Saturn, three Belles Luna, a canton de Ermyne, Touchinge the colours before depicted in thys coate Armoure, Alciate maketh this significacion therof Embl. li. 2. cap, 56.
               
                  Index Maestitiae est pullus color, vtimur omnes,
                  Hoc habitu tumulis cum damꝰ inferias,
                  At sinceri animi, et mentis stola candida pura:
                  Hinc sindon sacris, linea grata viris.
               
               Heareby appeareth that blacke is the colour of sadnes, sorowe or heuinesse of harte, whyche moste frequentlye is vsed at the buriall of the deade: But the whyte Robe or garment, is the token of a pure mynde, and soule vncorrupted and for that cause is moste agreeable for the holye and consecrate to God. To what vse and purpose Belles do serue, is knowne to all men wherefore I do omit to speake here any thing

thereof. The saide coate armoure is borne by the name of Porter.
               Hee bearethe Or, on a bende Gules, three Mollets de Argent.
               These bendes are to be seene charged in sundrye wise, as for example.
               
                  1 Argent on a Bende gules, three Buckes heads cabazed de Or, borne by the name of Beche.
               
               2 Argent on a Bende Azure, three Mollets de Or, persed, by the name of Morby.
               
               3 Gules on a Bende de Argent, three Trefoiles slipped Uert, borne by the name of Haruye.
               4 Argent on a Bende Gules, three Escaloppes de Or, by the name of A
                     ••
                  orell.
               5 Argent, on a Bende Gules, three Garbes de Orge, de Or, borne by the name of Barley.
               
                  He beareth Argent, on a Bende Gules, thre Mascles de Or, voyded.
               I finde also the saide coate thus varied, from that which is before displayde.
               1 hath three Losenges Sables voided, on a Bende de Argent, in a fielde Gules.
               2 Beareth Sable, on a Bēde de Or, three Losenges of the first voided.
               3 His fielde is de Azure, on a Bende Argent, three Losenges Uerte, voyded of the seconde. Heare I needed not to haue sayde voyded of the seconde which is Argent, for whensoeuer ye shall see eyther Losenge, Mascle, or other thynge voyded of the fielde, Fesse, bende &c. whereon theye stande, it is sufficient to saye voyded onelye, as the variation of the firste and seconde examples nexte before put forthe, dothe manifest vnto you, if ye note well the blazon of bothe the same.
               
                  
                  Hee bearethe Argente, a Storke Sable, membred and becked Gules.
               I reade the coloure of the Storke to bee all whyte, sauing the tops of his winges: hys bill and legges be redde. It is written of them that they haue no tongues, theye flea all serpentes, in theire age theye bee fedde of theire yong birdes. The Image of them borne in coate armoure, is the token of Iustice. Of this birde came a Greeke worde for a prouerbe, Antepelargein, whiche signifyeth to bee lyke a Storke, which prouerbe is to exhorte men to bee kynde to theire parentes, or to theire masters, which teach or bryng thē vp, requiting the benefite which theye receyued of them.
               
                  The fielde is de Argent, a Castle triple towered, and v. flowers de Lize Sable, ij.ij. and. one.
               What is signifyed by castles and towers borne in Armes, I haue sufficyently declared before.
               
                  
                  ¶The fielde is d'argent, on a Cheuron sable, three roses of the firste, and are borne by the name of Gilbarde.
                  
                     Gilbard
                  
               
               Whan ye see anye floure borne in coate armoure, ye may indifferently, and wtout breache of anye rule, blaze ye same by the propre coloure that hee is of, as the Rose, to call it a whyte Rose, whā ye wolde terme it d'argent: and a redde Rose, when ye see it of Gules &c. The Barbes of thys floure haue no vsual woordes in blazon, for that they abide alwaies of theire proper coloure, which is greene: & enuiron the leaues of the floure, as it were gardinge thē from falling.
               
                  ¶Hee beareth Gules, a saltier verrey Argent & Azure, betwene twelue Crosses patie fitche d'or, by the name of Champernon.
                  
                     Champernon.
                  
               
               The saide Saltier being of the furre called Uerrey, is alwaies found to be d'azure, and argent, or els d'argent & azure. For (as ma
                     •
                  ster Gerard Leighe saieth in hys accidence of Armorie,) where the matter is doubtefull, there the mettall hath of right
                     •
                   the preheminence. And I finde a Saltier varrey d'argent & azure, in a fielde gules, borne by the name of Willington.
                  
                     Willington.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶F. Hys fielde is parted per fesse Sable & Ermine, a pale contrecharged of ye one and the other, thre Escalloppes d'argente: and for the difference, a Trefoile slipped d'or.
               I finde thys coate blazed otherwise, as thus.
               ¶Hee beareth Sable and Ermine partie per Fesse, & contrecolored in 6. quarters, thre Scallops argent in the firste.
               Where he saith (in the firste) hee meaneth that the Escalloppes stande in Sable, which is first named in the blazon: and the same I do commende, for that he which vsed hys blazon was an Heraulte, and wel learned in theire mysteries.
               These coates thus parted (as aforesaide) are most commendably borne, whan they are charged, but with one token, as in triangle and not with two, which to moche augmenteth the Blazon, the same abidinge in so manye quarters.
               
                  ¶Hee beareth azure, fretie d'argent, a chiefe Gules.
               These also whiche folowe are of the like bearinge in order and cōmixtion, with two of the honorable ordinaries.
               1 Argēt, fretie, gules, a cheife d'azure, borne by the name of Curteyn.
               
               2 Sable, fretie d'or, a chiefe d'ermine.
               3 Uerte, fretie d'Ermine, a chiefe d'argent.
               
                  4 Or. fretie d'azure a chiefe d'ermines.
               5 Gules, fretie d'argent, a cheife d'or.
               I here vse in the blazon of these coates (Fretie) because they be of more pieces then viij. accordinge to the rule of master Gerard Leighe in hys Accidence of armorie, wher he treateth of coates commixte with two of the honorable ordinaries.
               
                  The fielde is azure, a bende engrailed Argent, betwene two Cotises d'or, borne by ye name of Fortescue.
                  
                     Fortescue
                           •
                        
                     
                   Thys (accordinge to master G. Leighe hys rule) I haue set forth, for your better instruction, whā to call thys a Cotise, & when to name it a Batune. And of a Bende not cotized in forme a foresaide, take thys one folowynge for example.
               Hee beareth gules, a Bēde engrailed d'or. Thys was the coate armoure of a noble knight named Sir Williā Marshall. And as these bendes are seene often thus engrailed, so are they founde moste vsually plaine, in thys wise.
               
                  1 Or, a bende sable, borne by the name of Bonauile.
                  
                  2 Argent, a Bende verte, by the name of Kendal.
                  
                  3 Sable, a Bende d'argent, by the name of Antingham.
                  
                  4 Argent, a bende sable, by the name of Malley.
                  
                  5 Or, a Bende dazure, by the name of Carthorpe.
                  
               
               
                  
                  He beareth gules, a cheuron betwene 3. Fores heades rassed d'argent. Thys beaste in Latin is called Vulpes quasi volupes. Est enim volubilis pedibus, & nunquam rectis itineribus, sed tortuosis an
                        •
                     ractibus currit: fraudulentum animal, insidijs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      decipiens. Nam dum non habuerit escam, fing it mortem: sic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      descendentes quasi ad cadauer volucres rapit & deuorat. Let not the bearer of thys coate armoure applye hys minde to deceiptfulnes, and then certes be may beare the same to hys hyghe commendacion, beinge one of the 9. worthie particions, whereof M. Leighe in his Accedēce of armorie maketh mention.
               
                  ¶The fielde is Sable, a Cheurō, betwen three cressantes d'argent, borne by the name of Babthorpe.
                  
                     Babthorpe
                  
               
               ¶What a Cheuron is, & also a Cressant, I haue therof sufficiētly before made mē
                  tion, yet the saide ensigne beynge one of the most worthie particions, take these also to be of ye same bearing, whiche folowe.
               
                  1 Gules, a cheuron, betweene 3. cressantes d'or.
                  2 Argent, a cheuron betweene three cressantes d'azure.
                  3 Uert, a cheuron betwene thre cressants d'argent.
                  4 Ermine, a cheuron betwene 3. cressants d'ermines.
                  5 Azure, a cheuron betwene three cressantes d'Ermine.
                  6 Or, a cheuron betwene 3. cressants vert.
               
               
                  
                  He beareth Sable, a bucks head cabaged de Or, double attyred vert.
               The attire of thys Buckes heade, differeth proprely for challenge.
               
                  ¶He beareth Sable, a frete transuerse in fesse, betwene two Escalloppes, & a cressāt d'or. Thys is a faire coate, & therefore neadeth no further commendation.
               
                  ¶The fielde is d'Ermine. 3. Battele axes gules: and is borne by the name of Denys.
                  
                     Denis.
                  
               
               Thys weapon before displaid, is called Securis bellica, and y• bearer Securige
                        •
                     , which hath bene, and is an office of hyghe credit, especial aboute Princes, & martial affaires. It doth demonstrate aucthoritie, to commitie persons offending the lawes, to the execution of death, for the suertie of ye prince, & quietnes of the common weale.
               
                  
                  He beareth Or, a Cheuron Checkey Ermin & Ermins, betweene three Hobies sauage volanie Sable. Thys kinde of Hauke called ye wild Hobie, especiallye seruethe to kill larkes and quailes, for houering ouer thē, they kepe down on the ground, whiles they, which awaite on y• pray do take them. It is to be supposed that from Thratia came this disporte of hauking. For Plinie maketh mention, that in the partes of Greece called Thracia, men and hankes, as it were by a confederacie, toke birdes together in thys wise, The men sprang the birdes out of the bushes, & the haukes soring ouer them, be 
                     〈◊〉
                  them down, so that ye men might easely take them, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  dyd the men 
                     〈◊〉
                  equally the pray with the 
                     〈◊〉
                  which being 
                     〈◊〉
                  eftsones and of a custome 
                     〈◊〉
                  to suche places, where being alofte, they perceyued men to y• purpose assembled. But (as Sir Tho. Eliot saieth) in what 
                     〈◊〉
                  or whersoeuer the beginning of hauking was, 
                     •
                  ud
                     •
                  udtedly it is a right delectable solace, & being vsed measurably and for a pastime, geueth to a mā good appetite to his supper, and at the least way withdraweth him from other daliance or disportes dishonest, and to body & soule perchance 
                     •
                  nicious
               
                  He beareth Azure and Or, parted per pale Nebule, vi. Martelets of the one and the other.
               This is the ensigne of master William Fleetewood Esquier,
                     Fleetewood.
                   Recorder of ye noble citie of London.
               
                  
                  His fielde is de Argent, two Barres Sable, borne by the name of Breretō,
                     Brereto
                           •
                        
                     
                   
                  alias Bruerton.
               Also Marton beareth argent ij. Barres Gules.
               
                  The fielde is Sable a Bores head coped in Fesse, betwene two dartes barwaies, de argent. Histories make mencion, that diuers noble persons haue atteined ye greatest part of their renowm for fighting with wilde beastes, as Txheseus did, whiche was companion to Hercules, whoe killed the great Boare called of the Greekes, Phera, that wasted & consumed the fieldes of a great countrey. Likewise Meleager for sleyng the great Boare in Calidonia, whiche in greatnes and fairenes excelled all other Boares: and had slaine many noble and valiant persons. Thus (as I haue ofte saide before) histories do muche further (yea altogether) the true disposinge, inuention, and deuise of all good and perfect armorie, and without the which nothing is exactly done in this art, I dare boldly say, for ye defence of histories, loke in Sir Thomas Eliot, his booke entituled the Gouernour. li. 3. cap. 25. fol. 204. pag. 2
               
                  
                  The field of this, is Losengie de Argent and Sable,
                     Gairgraue
                   three Cressauntes on a bende, as of the firste and seconde, and is borne by ye name of Gairgraue. Of the bearing of Losengies reade master Gerard Leighe hys Accedence of Armorie, where he treatethe of coates comirte with twoe of the honorable ordinaries.
               
                  Hee beareth barrie vndee, Sable and Argent, on a 
                     〈…〉
                   might b
                     •
                   taken for the coate armoure of some 
                     〈◊〉
                  prynce, who saued the same in the waters, that hys enemies shoulde not atteine it, as did Iulius Cesar, who at the battaile of Alex
                        ••
                     drie, on a bridge, beinge abandoned of his people for the multitude of his enemies, which oppressed them, when he might no longer sustaine the shotte of darts and arrowes, he boldly lept into the sea, and diuing vnder the water, escaped the shotte, and swamme ye space of CC. paces, to one of his shippes, drawing his coat armour with his teethe after him, whiche marueilously defended him from theire arrowes, so as theye bothe were preserued. This ensigne nexte before blazed, is one of the honorable ordinaries charged.
               
                  
                  His fielde is Checkeye de Or, and Sable, a Fesse Gules.
               The sayde coate is bone by the name of Wynter.
                     Wynter.
                  
               
               Also I finde Argent and Sable Checkey, a Fesse Gules, borne by the name of Akelōd
                     A kelonde.
                  
               
               
                  The fielde is Sable and Ermine parted per Fesse dented, in chiefe a Reyne deeres head cabaged Dargent. Of such coat armours thus parted, and what this particyon is called, I haue spoken of before. Master Leighe sayethe thus of suche a coate, that yf you be a gentleman of a first coate armour, and the prince geue you an addicion, it is at your choise if you will parte your owne with the other on this fashion.
               
                  He beareth Golde on a bend Gules, cotized with two cotizes, Sable, three Phials, Dargent, Isidore sayeth they be called Phialeꝙ ex vitro fiant, because they be made of glasse. The said coate armor as it is my deuise, so I thinke the same not to bee borne of any in suche ordre and forme as I haue aboue descriued.
               
                  
                  His field is de Ermine on a Fesse, engrailed betweene three Griphons heds erazed Sable, a Greyhounde coursāt de Argent, with coler Gules and lyne de Or.
               These perteined to master Frauncis Furbisher of Don caster in the county of York,
                     Furbisher
                   a right worshipful Esquyer, and iust Iusticer: also when hee liued, hee was one of the Queenes Maiesties 
                     〈◊〉
                  rable counsell established in the 
                     〈◊〉
                  partes: a 
                     〈◊〉
                  whiche loued righteousnes and 
                     〈…〉
                   countrey doth worthely reporte of 
                     〈…〉
                   the 
                     〈…〉
                   sent daies.
               
                  The 
                     〈◊〉
                  is 
                     〈…〉
                   Esc
                     ••
                  lops, and a 
                     〈◊〉
                  engratledde Argent, borne by the name of Erle.
                     Earle
                   Of sundry borders ye haue example before in fol. 37. a bordure must conteyne the fifte part of the fielde, and so it requireth, for that it is seene so often charged with sundry tokens, yet I finde in a certaine written boke of armorie, that a bordure shalbee no broder then the seuenth parte of halfe the fielde, which can not be for the cause aforesaide. Howe a coate bordured, is to be marshalled with any other, as to be a mariage with any man, or maried to any woman, or if any coate also that is bordured be honored with a chief, how it shalbe ordered, reade ye accedence of armory, wher is treated of .ix. sundry differences for bretherne.
               
                  
                  The fielde is vert, ij. Cheurons de argent, betwene▪ iij. Papilions, Gules. These doth Isidore accompt among small birdes, & are cōmonly called Butterflies, in latine, Papiliones quae maxime abūdāt florentibꝰ maluis. They haue ben thought of aūcient time as signes worthy bearing in coate armour, and for creast also.
               
                  He beareth Sable, three plates in Fesse, betwene two Combes Dargēt. The cōbe in latin is called Pecten, and is an instrment toothed, and serueth especiallye to kembe the head. The Barbor cannot lacke this instrumente: and it is an auncient addicyon to armorie.
               
                  He beareth Argēt, two barres Azure, in chiefe as ye first, one pale betweene two Esquiers bast dextre, & sinistre of the second, a Comete star Dor. This starre Cōmetes is so called, eo ꝙ commas luminis ex se fundat. The latines call these starres Crinitae, because they cast from them flambes in maner of heares, whyche kinde of starre whensoeuer it appeareth, pronosticatethe, eyther pestilen
                     •
                  e, famine, or warre: Consider of the saide

coate armour, as of coates comixte, and countercoloured, and yet yee shal finde the same to be very auncient & faire.
               
                  He beareth sable, iij. Swordes wauie Dargent, hiltes and pomelles de Or, Alas, it is a greuous fortune, (sayeth Boetius lib. 2. de conso. Phi.) as ofte as a wicked sworde, is ioyned to cruel venime, that is to say, venomous crueltie, to lordship. The said swords wauie, are figured also trāsuers barrewaies in the field.

The field is de Ermin, on a pale sable v. Bi
                     •
                  lets de Or, 2.1.2. These be also very aū
                  cient addicions to armory, & ennoblishe greatly the coate armor wherin they are borne and therefore iudge of the same with aduisement, for this is an auncient ensigne.
               
                  The fielde is de Azure, two winges iointly en Lewre de Argent, oppressed wt a barre Gules, charged with iij. Annulettes de Or. Winges are of aunciēt bearing in coate armour, especially if they be of Angels, Pellicanes, Eagles, Swannes or of Rauens, theye bee the greatest succour to foules, to

helpe theire yong ones the rather to pray for their sus
                  
                     •
                  enance. In armorye they betoken protection.
               
                  The fielde is Sable, a goates heade rassed d'argent, triple coroned d'or, gorged with a garlande of yuie propre.
               Thys deuise is straunge, & moche to be merua
                     •
                  led at, cō
                  sidering that the token borne therein, hath hys head adourned Diadematè modo Romanorum Pontificum. It mighte therefore bee applied to bee th'engsine of some Romishe bishoppe, fraudulently aspiring thereunto, liuyng moste lasciuiously, and therefore deposed worthely. That excellent clerke Bocatius, an Italiā borne, in his treatise which he writeth of the fall of Princes, maketh mētion of a woman that was pope, and what befell of her, and how she was put downe. The whiche hystorie I wil here set forth as it is translated, or rather metrized out of Latine into our English tongue, by Iohn Lidgate, wher he writeth, that after the miserable ende of many notable prouinces.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           ¶Came a creature
                           
                              Like a Bishoppe rounded & shorne,
                              And as a priest she had a brode tonsure,
                              Her apparaile outwarde & vesture,
                              Beīg a womā, wherof Bochas toke good hede
                              Like a Prelate shape was her wede.
                           
                           
                              ¶ She was the same that of yore agon,
                              Vnworthely satt in Peters place,
                              And was afterwarde called pope Iohn
                              A berdeles prelate, no heare seene on her face,
                              Of her birth named was the place,
                              
                                 Magunce a citie not standinge in Itaile,
                              But on the Rhine, full famous of vitaile.
                           
                           
                              ¶In her youth & in her tender age,
                              Forsooke her kinne, & in especial,
                              Caste she wolde for her aduantage,
                              Gyue her to cunninge, bodie, harte, & all,
                              And in the sciences called liberall,
                              In all seuen by famous excellence,
                              By great studie she had experience.
                           
                           
                              ¶Her name couth in manie lande,
                              To shewe her cunninge firste when she began
                              Serching prouinces came into Englande,
                              No wighte supposing but that she was a man
                              Came to Rome, her storie tell can,
                              Taughte Grammer, Sophisterie, and Logick,
                              Red in schooles openly Rhethorick.
                           
                           
                              ¶In the time of Emperour Lotharie,
                              
                              After the death as made is mencion
                              From mine aucthour, if I shall not varie,
                              That the pope which called was Leon,
                              
                              The saide woman by election,
                              Istalled was no wighte supposing than
                              By no token, but that she was a man.
                           
                           
                              ¶The boke of sortes after that anon,
                              Of auenture turned vp so downe
                              She was named & called Pope Ihon▪
                              
                              Of whose natural disposition,
                              F
                                    •
                                 ll by processe into temptacion,
                              Quicke with child, the houre came on her thā,
                              was deliuered at Sainct Ihon Lateran.
                           
                           
                              
                              After put downe for her great outrage,
                              I will on her spende no more labor,
                              But passe ouer all the surplusage.
                              Of her liuing, and of her great errour.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               Of this monstre, it needeth not to shewe any further significacion, the matter whereupon it dependeth, beynge knowne to all that be christians, and whiche abhorre the tiranny of that Romishe Sea. But note heare, touchinge the saide tripled Crowne, wherewith the Goates head is ensigned, I reade, that the kinge and people of that famous citie in Indie the more, called Calechut, woorship the deuill in a wodderfull and horrible forme, moste lothsome to be recited, and hauing a Diademe on his hed, as the popishe prelates vsethe, and that whiche is more, Ternis insignitur cornibus. And this deuill hathe also hys priestes called Bramini, whiche do make cleane and take awaye the spottes of his bodie with Rose water and such odiriferous licour, and perfume him kneelynge) varijs odoramentis, yea with euery thing that sauoreth well: and many moe other deuilishe ceremonies, whereof yea may read in the Cosinography of Munstre, lib. 
                        ••
                     de terris Asiae maioris.
               
               Nowe to conclude, of all the other signes, the whiche are to bee founde or seene in armes, as of beastes, foules, fishes, serpentes, trees, flowers, leaues, and other maruelous tokens quicke and deade, I can not declare here, there be so many of them, but ye shall knowe generally, that for all the armes the whiche lightly anye man hathe seene in his daies, yee haue rules and examples in this woorke, sufficient as I beleue to describe and blaze any of them. Therefore take heede to the instructions aforesaide, if so be they be not a generall doctrine, yet shall they profit you in this arte greatly: and perfect you much in the prices and tokens of armorie.
               
                  ¶A Rule or table declaring how coats of armes may be augmented, multiplied, deuided and parted.
               
               
                  1 Beareth Sable, a Mollet de Argent, by the name of Penhurste.
               
               
                  2 Beareth Sable, two Mollettes Dargent, persed in chiefe.
               
                  3 Beareth Sable, three Mollets de argent. persed.
               
                  4 Beareth Sable three Mollets de argent, persed, in fesse.
               
                  5 Beareth Sable, three Mollets de argent persed, in pale.
               
                  6 Beareth Sable, v. Mollets de argēt persed, in Crosse.
               
                  
                  7 beareth Or, on a Fesse Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed
               
                  8 beareth Or, on a pale Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed.
               
                  9 beareth Or, on a plaine crosse sable, fiue Mollets de Argent persed.
               
                  10 beareth Sable, a Fesse betweene, iij. Mollets de Argent, persed.
               
                  11 beareth Sable, a pale betweene two Mollets de Argent persed.
               
                  12 Beareth Sable, a plaine Crosse betwene sower Mollets de Argent▪ persed
               
                  
                  13 Beareth Or, on a bende Sable, iij. Mollets de Argent, persed.
               
                  14 Beareth Or, on a bende sinistre, Sable, three Mollets de Argent, persed.
               
                  15 Beareth Or, on a Saltier Sable, v. Mollets de argent, persed.
               
                  16 Beareth Sable, a bende betweene two Mollets de Argent, persed.
               
                  17 Beareth Sable, a bende sinistre, betwene two Mollets de Argent, persed
               
                  18 Beareth sable, a Saltier betwene fower Mollets de Argent persed.
               
                  
                  19 Beareth party per pale Sable and Argent, a crosse Furshe of the one and the other.
               
                  20 Beareth party per Fesse Sable & Argent, ouer al a crosse Taue transmuted of the fielde.
               
                  21 Beareth quarterly Argent and Sable, a crosse Flurte, contrechanged as the fielde.
               
                  22 Beareth party per bende, Sable & Argent, three crosses botonie, de le vn et le auter. Likewise partie per bende sinister, is to be blazed.
               
                  23 Beareth party per Cheuron argēt, and Sable, three Crosses patie fitchie contrechanged of the fielde.
               
                  24 Beareth partie per pile in pointe Sable and Argent, a long crosse ragged and couped de Or.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            This endeth the second boke entituled the armorie of Honour.
         
         
            
            ¶ The thirde boke entituled of Cotes & Crestes.
            
               ¶Thys signe of the Crosse,
                  Crosse humet tie ragnelet.
                wherof I haue spoken so moche in my Boke entituled the Armorie of honor, & with the whiche signe the most aunciēt ancthors, who write of the description of thynges Armoriall, ordre the begynnyng of their workes. I can not therfore, but folowing theire trade, take the beginning of thys my rude Booke, entituled, of Cotes and Crestes, with the same marke or signe: the whyche, as it was moste miraculously sene of Constantine the great,
                  Constantyne.
                in hys conflict agaynst Maxentius the Tyraunte whome hee ouercame, and therefore. Magni cognomen meruit, Christum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ab omnibus coli praecepit: So the same signe was vsed of the F. kynge, named Philippus Augustus,
               
                  K. Phillippe Augustus.
                agaynst the Turke, and enemies of the Christian fayth. And in diuerse expedicions against them, the signe of the Crosse hath bene seene in the very elemente, yea, of dyuerse noble Prynces, yet in diuerse colors, and formes,
                  Polid. Vergil. lib. 14. in especially of the valiaunt kynge and prynce, our first Rychard of Englande, Cor leonis cognominatus, who beyng at Donstable, whan hee prepared hym selfe towards hys iorney ad Hierosolymitanum bellum, sawe at noone days in ye ayre, a crosse, & in ea imaginem hominis pendentis. Wherfore, the signe of the crosse hath bene taken to bee borne in sondrye wyse of moste noble kynges and

puissant prynces, yet thys Crosse here, hath bene rare sene borne, beyng humette, and ragueled, notwithstandinge it is of honorable bearing, to whom so euer the same shulde bee assigned. It is no otherwise framed or hewne but of two trees, the bowes roughely cut of.
            
               The Lyon Rampante on a Crosse Crosselet ragueled fitche, is here placed as a Creste for the sayde cote armoure, all vpon thys Poesie or Apothegme, fugiunt crucem tenebrae: the whiche forme, I (for the moste parte) vse here to stāde for the wrethe or torce, in that the same woordes haue relacion, to the thynge borne and seene.
            
               Here is seene in this field Sable, twoo Columbes, or Pillors, d'Argent crowned. Thys myght bee th'ensigne of som prudent and valyaunt kyng, who hauing his cōmon weale and vassals vtterly impouerished and decayde, did by hys Iustice & pietie, twise releaue and susteyne the same from decay or falling, for this cause,
                  Isid. lib. Etimolog. 9. ca. 3. Kynges, apud Graecos, are called Basilei, because tanquam Bases populum sustinent, and therfore Pillors are ensigned with Crounes, as ye here may see. Quanto enim qnis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   magis preponitur, tanto amplius pondere laborum grauatur.
            
            
               
               Thys cognizance, a Lyons heade gardāte, crowned within a garland of Laurell, dothe playnely shewe hys regall admonishement, where he saieth.
                  An olde Prouerbe.
               
               
                  Rex eris, si rectè facias,
               
A kyng thou shalbee of might, Yf thou do, that which is right.

                  Si non facias, non eris.
               
Yf thou doest not that truely, Reigne thou shal not certainly To these agree Horace hys saynges, in hys first epistle of hys firste boke, at pueri ludentes, Rex eris aiunt, Si rectè facies.
            
            And meruayle not of the Laurell garlande, beyng a remedye agaynst poyson, lyghtening, &c. In warre also borne, it is a token of peace and quietnes. Perpetuo viret, Sacraeste Apollini.
            
            
               Thys coate Armor hath 4. armyng swordes on a playne Crosse, all poyncte to poyncte crosseways, and is the firste or chefe honorable ordinary charged. A cote of great excellēcie, for the sworde is a regall weapon,
                  Sworde.
                wherewith Kynges doe Iustice, manteyne peace, and subdue vice.
                  Isid. lib. Etymo. 18. cap. 6. And it is proprely called in Latyn, Gladius, ꝙ gulam diuidit, id est, cernicem saeca
                     •
                  
                And because it cutteth ye heade from the shulders, for that purpose (saythe Isidore) it was firste made. Nam cetera membra securibus magis ceduntur, collum gladio tantum. God graunte that it maye bee more seuerely vsed, agaynst all rude rebels, and tyrannical traytors:

that we may crie to hym with our most noble Gedeō of Englande,
                  Iudges. 7. agaynste those Madianites. The sworde of the Lord, & of Gedeon. Then shall the rablemente of those ragged and ruffyan runnygates flee, & be delyuered with their two cursed Capteynes Oreb, & Zeb into the handes of a daughter of Israel,
                  Persey & Ne 
                        •
                     ell &c.
                who shall choppe of theire heades on the North parte of the water Thamys, to her great renome, and to the honor and glorye of the most hyghest.
            
               The Clubbe is a weapon often vsed of men in the tyme of theire soden insurrection, and borne when theues and felōs are arrested or apprehended, & is a cruell weapon amongst vnarmed men, for vpon whō with violence it lyghteth, hee can not abyde the stroke therof: but eyther is slayne, greuously hurte, or maimed. It is a warlik weapō, & peace there is none where it is handeled. But yet thys Clubbe here, is ensigned wt a marke of peace, for it is bounde about with Olyue, which forsheweth a token of peace, and standeth vpon a Poesie agreable thereunto. That peace is better than force. Oliua, sacra est Mineruae.
            
            
               
               Here is descried in the fielde of thys cote Armour a Beare vulned with a troncheon of a speare, whosoeuer did this acte to the Beaste, was a man of a rare and meruelous strength. I reade in the boke of kynges, that kyng Dauid, father to the peasible & most prudent kynge Salomon, whan hee offered him selfe to go,
                  Kinges. 1.17. c.
                and fight agaynste the huge and myghtye champion of the Philistines, Goliath by name, king Saul thought hym not able to deale wt such a Gyante, who was a man of warre, euen frō hys youth, and Dauid but a child, & of small groeth, yet he aunswered the kyng Saul in this wise. Thy seruaunt kept hys fathers shepe, & there came a great Beare, & after a Lyon, & toke a shepe out of the flocke, & I pursued after hym, & he fiercely assalted me, being al together vnarmed, and I smote him, & toke it out of hys mouth, & when hee aroase agaynst me, I caught hym by the berde, and slue hym, & so thy seruaunt hath slayne ye Beare also. And as thy seruaunt slue them, so truly shall it be done with thys vncircūsised Philistine:

whom in ye name of ye lorde of hostes, he slue at the firste encountre, wt a stone cast out of a sling. Thus of what prowes Dauid was in armes, and how valiant and good a capteine in battle, it may sufficiētly appere to thē that wil reade hys noble actes & atchieuances in the bokes before remembred.
            The Lyon here also figured rampante vpon an harpe doth shewe the regalitie of the said

king Dauid, & hys excellēcie in plaiyng vpō y• instrumente.

Thys Lyon can not wel abide the field, wherfore? because ye woulde take hym to bee a cowarde, not so: in that, hee is simple, gentle, and meke of nature, hee hathe therfore more neede of wynges to flye. Yet the bearing of such an ensigne is noble, and conteyneth in it selfe an hyghe mysterie. A Prynce geeuen to vertue & godlynes, can seldome escape th'assaultes or malignities of hys own vassalles and subiectes, wherfore suche hys innocencie flyeth vnto the heauēs, and there purchaseth an immortall Crowne, for that earthely, whyche woulde haue perished, to the confusion of his enemies, and th'aduancement of the glorye of the hyghe God. The clinging of the sayd Lyon hys tayle betwen hys legges, sheweth that he ys not very fierse or cruel, but is voyd of al spoile & rauyn.
            
               Thys floure hath hys pryce, next ye Rose before all others, for hys beautye & clerenes, & is called in latin Lyllia, an herbe (as Isidore saieth) of the color of milke for ye most parte, wherof it taketh his name quasi Lyolya. whose whitnes although it bee in his leaues, yet within there shyneth ye color of golde. It ys writtē yt the roote of this floure ministred in medecyne, somtyme bringeth presente death, & som other wayes, it spedely restoreth lyfe also. Therefore in it is both death and lyfe, agreyng to the Apothegme or poesie thereon ensigned.
            
               
               After ye particiō of thys fielde, what are seene therein, mou
                  •
                a questiō in Armorie, whether the Saltier and hys particion, or the floures deuided hy the same, shuld haue the dignitie in thys Coate Armoure. It is to bee thought, ye saltier shuld obteine the preheminence, because hee holdeth the 5. parte of the field, and that it is so moche honored by hys particiō. I will not here dissolue the node, ne yet maye not, but referring the same to the great masters of these mysteryes, I will partely declare my simple iudgement therein: that ye floures being of suche prise ought to haue ye Royaltie & preheminēce in ye fielde (although they growe, they I saye) beyng Lyllyes, like swordes, whiche, (as dyuerse writers affirme) betoken to the bearers thereof persecution or punishment (because they haue their springing frō a roote of moche vertue, vnto a floure of excellent beautie and soueraygnetie) they beinge also redolent, thother dead, and of no sauoure.
            
               Thys mollet in no wyse may be taken for a Sterre, because it is already fallen from the firmamēt, or the ayre. And Sterres (sayth Isidore) are so called of stāding. Stellae dictae a stando, because they stand firme in the firmament alwayes, and fall not.
                  Isid. lib. Etymo. 4. ca. lxx.
                
               Nam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   videmus è caelo stellas quasi labi, non sunt stella, sed igni culi ab aethere lapsi
                     •
                  qui fiunt dum ventus altiora petens, aethereum ignem secum trahit qui tractu suo

imitatar stellas cadentes. Nam stellae cadere non possunt. They are vnmoueable, & cum caelo fixa feruntur. They are frequētly borne in armes, and that to good respectes and consideracions to the Heraultes well knowne. Thys Mollet here seene, is for difference persed, on a scrowe of the wordes apparante, that wisdome, or to be wise, is from heauē. Deuyns can best iudge what that Poesie meaneth.
            
               Here nedeth not to speake anye thing of the bende charged in thys fielde, either of the Canton, for that I haue sufficiētly geuē of them examples, in my boke entituled, Th' Armorie of honor. But the Cinquefoyles deuided by reason of ye sayd Bende, are to bee considered well of, because they do not onely beautefie the feelde of the sayd cote Armoure, to ye sight of the beholder, but also doe much encrease and augmente hys worthynes & renoume, who is the bearer: and ought to be a man sure & perfecte in all hys sences. The Cinquefoyle of the Greekes is named Pentaphyllon,
               
so called of the nōbre of hys leaues. Vnde & eam Latini quinquefollium vocant: because it hath fiue leaues. Isidore sayeth, that it ys an herbe so precious or cleane, that it was wonte to bee applyed of ye gētles, to the purification & adourning of their Temples.
            The hande here is figured, holding a penne ful of yncke. But the hande of Valens th'emperour,
                  Gregorius Nazianzenus.
                at what tyme hee had

written many letters about the exile or banishment of S. Basill, and yet could not finish the same: The penne it selfe yelded thre tymes no yncke, notwithstanding hee woulde not refrayne from hys wicked ordynance and decree, or from subscribing to the same, before that a great quakyng and tremblyng dyd apprehende hys hande, wherewith beyng hastely taken, and stricken with great dreade, hee than immediatlye rent in pieces with hys owne hande, whatsoeuer before hee had begonne to write. Therefore, Contra diuinam potestatem, nihil potest humaena.
            
            
               In thys fielde are to be sene twoo of the greatest Planettes, whiche almyghty God of hys infinite goodnes made & created with all the reste, chefely for mans vse & profit. I meane aboue all other Planettes, the Sunne, and the Moone, to be for vs hys creatures, as perpetuall bright Lampes & cādles: th'engenderers, breders, norishers, & comforters of all lyuyng thynges (that are made of the fower elementes, in thys inferiour worlde, both for the daye and for the nyghte. But here th'one is obscured, th'other also hath changed her lyghte, according to the saiynge of the Prophete Iohell. In the laste dayes, the Sunne shalbe turned into darkenes,
                  Iohell. 2. & 3. and the Moone into blood, before the great and notable day of the Lord shal come. The Sunne and Moone also (sayeth the sayde Prophete) shalbee darkened, and the Sterres shall withdrawe theire lighte. Whan Christe suffered hys passion, there was darkenes ouer all the earth,
                  Luc. 23. from the sixt vntill the ninth houre: & obscuratus est Sol &c. which was noted of S. Dionyse Areopagita, being than in Aegipte,
               
                  Isid. lib. 7. Etymol. ca. 22. who seyng the Sunne (Praeter naturae ordinem obscuratum) sayde: Aut Deus naturae patitur,

                  
aut mundi machina dissoluitur. The bearer of ye sayd cote Armoure, oughte to haue good consideracion, and to be myndeful of the laste dayes.
            The Egles heade & winges within a crowne on the Apothegme apparante, maye congruently stande for a Creaste to the sayd cote Armoure, as the learned can quickelye iudge thereof, Christ was called Aquila, (propter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   post resurrectionem ad astrae remouit.
            
            
            I beynge on a tyme in the South parte of Yorkeshire, at an olde decayde Towne, called Bawtrye, within thre myle of the Queenes Maiesties honor of Tyckehyll, and walkyng nyghe the church, there I espyed on the out syde therof, the forme of an Escocheon, and for that I was not able to see what tokē was borne therin, hauing acquayntaunce in the Towne, I called for the keys of the Church, whiche was delyuered to one Charles Morton Esquyer,
                  Morton.
               
               
dwellyng therby: who goyng with me into the Churche, (after a fewe prayers sayde) I sought out for the saide escocheon, whiche I founde, and therein desplayed quarterly, Gules and Ermine, two Goates heades rassed, argent on the firste, & last quarter, beyng in very dede (as manifestly appeared) the cote Armour of the sayd Esquiers aūcetors, whereof presently I toke a note, which taken, he asked me whether the same were not two cotes quartered, meaning the quarters Ermyne, to bee a cote Armoure of it selfe. I aunswered hym, (with aduertisement to haue the kyng at armes of that Prouince aduise therein) that my opinion was, that it was but one cote onely, notwithstanding the sayde quartering therof. And so I thincke of thys abouesaide, where ye maye see quarterly Ermynes and Gules, two Lyons rampante Argent, on the seconde and thirde,

deuised all contrarye to ye sayd Morton hys cote. And euen as I thought first of th'one, so do I yet of the other, videlicet both of them to bee but single cotes. But here is sene an noble charge, whiche is a Lyon. Christ was compared to that noble beaste, pro regno & fortitudine.
            
            Thys Gryphon, is vppon a mountayne in Bactria, & there kepeth gold, and other things (as hee sayeth) vnknowne.
            
               
               Meruaile not of thys sheilde, wherein is three escocheons, charged with sondrye chaūces of the Dice. Nor take not hym to whom such a cote shuld bee assigned vnto, to bee a player at the dice: for theire is here by this deuise nothing lesse mēte. But rather an earnest and perfecte rule and tokē to eschue ye inconueniences that happē to them, which some tyme cōsume or waste, yea, and hazarde all their whole patrimonies and substance, at the franticke & folish playe of the dice. I meane, that as the playe is but folishe of it selfe and vayne, so are the players therof frantike and Bedlem. Therfore, such an one as shoulde possesse these ensignes, vtterly detested the vncertayne chaūces of such ydle games, and doth diligently studye, both to gouerne hymselfe well and discretly, as also the landes and goodes committed and left vnto hym, by the great prouidence and industrie of hys auncetors. Oh, woulde to God the same lawes were in thys Realme nowe in these oure dayes, as was among the Grecians,

& in especially ye Romaynes in olde time: whereof here I purpose not to entreate. But of the prohibitiō of plaiyng at dise, note what Isidore sayeth, in hys 19. boke of Etimologies ca. 68. Ab hac arte fraus & mendacium atque periurium nunquā abest: postremò & odium: & damna rerū: vnde & aliquādo propter haec scelera interdicta legibus fuit.
            
            Thys Sterre with the sonne

beames, conteaneth in it a mysterye of the incarnacion of our sauiour Iesus Christ, as is red in a prose of the church.
            
               Sicut sydus radium, profert virgo filium, pari forma▪
               
               Neque sydus radio, neque mater filio fit corrupta.
            
            The whiche, is thus metrized.
            
               As the sterre sheweth forth the Sunne beame,
               So was a chylde borne of a virgin cleane:
               Neyther with the sonne beame is viciate the sterre,
               Nor yet by the bearing of a sonne, the mother.
            
            
               Here in thys field, Azure is to be sene, fiue Plates in crosse, These are to be taken for perfecte money & good, although they be not signed or stamped with the image or style of any prince, and although they bee not so marked, yet they are money, and ought to be so called (as Isidore sayeth) whilest therein is no fraude or deceite in Mettal,
               
                  Moneta
                or weighte. And coyne it is to bee called, whā it is ensigned with the name & ymage of the Prynce of that realme, for whome purposely it serueth.
                  Numisma:
                Some do writte that kynge Ninus did firste inuente the coyning of moneye, others Phaelon, or the Aeginites. But among the Latynes, Numa kynge of the Romaynes did firste marke the same with the image and title of hys name: of whom also it toke the name in Latin, Numus, for money or coyne: some doe write thys woorde with a doble M.
               
                  Numus.
                It was a Lawe among th'Egyptians, that who so had clipped their coyne (wherby the roundenes thereof was defaced, eyther sorged it,

or countrefaicted the stampe, or abated with filinge the weighte thereof, shoulde haue both hys handes cut of: that suche parte of the bodie as had trespaced, myghte for euer beare the punishment due for suche offence: and that all others takyng warnyng by hys example, might shonne the like. Plates, in cote Armoure, are of verie auncient bearinge.
            
               The Swanne is of all birdes most whitest, of a shyrle voyce, and singeth moste swetely towardes ye time of hys death, as it were to bewaile hys departure and buriall Ouid.
            
            
               Dulcia defleta modulatur carmina lingua.
               Cātator Cygnus funeris ipse sui.
               The Swanne doth tune, with
               mourning breath,
               Most plesaunt metres, before
               hys death.
            
            He is a gentle and quyet birde, Hys mortall enemye is th'Egle, cui tamen fortissimè resistit: and therefore hee deserueth suche iuste rewardes, wherewith hys heade is here adorned. agreable also vnto hys nature. They are consecrate to Apollo, ob praesagium finis, because hee diuineth, or coniectureth whan hee shall dye.
            
               
               ¶Deuises heroiques, of the twelue labours, perfourmed by Hercules.
               
                  1. I wil not here speake how well thys Lyon is differēced, but of his regalitie in ye fielde, standing in the worthest mettall of all other, gouerned of the Sunne, & ennoblished with the genune Topazion.
               
               Thys is a regal Lyon, and a myghtye, for he occupyeth the fielde alone: and therefore hee worthely deserueth y• name.
               The firste of the twelue labors whiche Hercules, sonne of Osiris, and king of Egypt, called Hercules Libyus performed, was (as Diodorus writeth) the slayng of a Lyon in ye wodde Nemea, that farre excelled all other Lyons in greatnes, whiche mought not be slayne with mettal or stone. Wherfore he was constreyned to kyll hym with hys handes.
               
                  2. Of the killing of the monstre Hydra, whiche was hys seconde laboure, I haue spoken somwhat in my boke, entituled th' Armorie of honor. But yet here is to bee seene the Icon of the sayde monstre her heade, as neighe as I coulde coniecture the forme thereof. For Isidore calleth her a Dragon of manye heades, and sayeth that in Latyne, shee is named Excedra, quòd vno caeso tria capita excrescebant: because sayeth hee, that whan

one was stricken of, there did eftsones arise three other heades. Sed hoc fabulosum est. Nam cōstat Hydram locum fuisse e
                        •
                     omentem aquas vastantes vicinam Ciuitatem:
                  
                     Is
                           •
                        d. lib. E
                           •
                        y. 1
                        •
                     . cap. 3. 
                  in quo vno meatum clauso multi erumpebant. Quod Hercules videns, loca ipsa excussit, & aquae clausit meatus. Nam Hydra ab aqua dicta est.
               
               
                  3 Whosoeuer atchieued thys Bore, deserued the beasantes, yf they had bene talentes.
               
                  Hercules hys thirde laboure (taken for the common profite of mankynde (was the taking of the great Bore of Erimanthus, which wasted the coūtrey of Arcadia, & all people dradde hym: but finallye Hercules toke him on liue, and bearing him on his shoulders, brought hym to kyng Euristeus.
               
               
                  4 Centauri, were a people in the Countreye of Thessalye whome the Poetes feyned to bee the one halfe like a man, & th'other like an Horse.
               The fowerth labour, which Hercules (of hys incomparable strength) performed, was the Battle, whiche hee had alone with a great nombre of those men called Centauri, that were of great strēgth and swifte as horses. Centauris, id est hominibus aquo mixtis species vocabulum dedit: quos quidam fuisse aequites Thessalorum dicunt. sed pro eo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      discurrentes in bello, velut vnum corpus aquorum & hominum viderentur: inde Centauros fictos asseruerunt. Isodor. lib. 11. cap. 3. Etymol.
               
               
                  
                  5. Take not this to be the Hart that Gaguyne in his Chronicle maketh mention of, which the Frenche king Charles the sixt of that name, when he was hunting in the woode Siluanectum, did finde, & tooke with a brasen coller about his necke, wherein was this inscription: Hoc Caesar me donauit. But take this as the fifthe atchieuemente of the laborious Hercules, whiche was the takinge of the greate Harte in runninge, that for his swiftnesse had his hornes gilted.
               
                  6. Isidore saithe, that ye byrdes named Stymphalides, are so called of certaine Iles in Arcadie called Stymphali, where are great plentie of them: and affirmeth, that they are Pelagvolucres, byrdes of the sea, and moste frequent those Iles. Againste these byrdes Hercules vsed Dartes, and destroyed them, because they consumed the fruites, and grayne of the Countries adioyninge. And this was the sixte labour that he perfourmed. This Stymphalie here, I haue caused to be figured volante, with a Garbe, agreable to his nature. These byrdes are supposed to be so 
                     •
                  ygge, that they shadowe all the Sunne beames.
               
                  
                  These Bendes sinister vndadie, or waterie, maye foreshowe some notable deuise, or enterprise done by force, violence, or rage of the waters when they were turned, altered, or otherwise broken oute of their olde & woonted course. The seuenth of Hercules his labours, was the making cleane of the Hall of Angeus, beinge full of donge, the whiche by his wisedome, and policie he perfourmed, bringing the Riuer Pygnio through the Hall. Which by the swifte course of the streame, in one day carried awaie the donge without any reproch to Hercules. It maie also be thought, that the bearer of suche, or like Cote armour, had donne some greate enterprise vpon the seas, worthy of perpetuall commendation.
               
                  This Bull is figured of colour blacke, hornes & hoofes redde, a Coller of the beaste of Armonye, with a Chaine of golde. Howe well he is differenced for chalenge, make no regarde thereof. The Symbole, or deuice, proceedethe of Hercules his eighte atchieuemente, whiche was the bringynge of a bull from Creta, into Greece, drawinge him alonge the sea.
               
                  
                  9. Hercules his ninth notable laboure, whiche Poetes write of, that he perfourmed, was the takynge of Diomedes kinge of Tharcia, and casting him to his horses, who feeding them with mans fleashe, was hym selfe of them deuoured. And after Hercules breakinge those wilde horses, & makinge them gentle, broughte them to Euristheus. This Euristheus was a kynge of Greece, & enimie to Hercules, whiche commaunded him to doo moste of his enterprises.
               
                  10. The tenthe of Hercules his labours, whiche he atchieued, was his voyage into Spaine, and sleainge of Gereon and his sonnes, and takinge the great kyne, which he gaue to a kynge in that countrie, who continually afterwarde did yearely offer in Sacrifice to the honoure of Hercules, one of the Bulles, that came of those kyne.
               
                  
                  11. The going downe into hell of Hercules, and fetchinge thence Theseus and Perithous, valiante men, and sometyme his cōpanions, is not so greatlye to bee marueiled at, as in that he brought with him in a chayne, Cerberus the dogge of hell, hauynge three heades. And this was the eleuenth of the notable laboures, whiche Poetes write of, that Hercules atchieued.
               
                  12. Here is to be seene a Dragon, supportinge a tree laden with golden apples. The sleaynge of the terrible Dragon, whiche continually watchinge, kepte the golden apples in the gardens Hesperides, and taking them out therof, was the tweluth, and last labour that Hercules perfourmed. Some saie, those apples whiche were called golden for the bewtie of thē, were shepe, whose fleeces were of golden colour: and the Dragon signifieth the diligence, and strength of the shepheard which kepte them. S. Hierome of the tenth chapter of Genesis writeth, that this Hercules so often before mentioned, called Hercules Lybius, because he conquered Lybia, was he which perfourmed the twelue notable labours, whiche Poetes write of, & not Alcydes, sonne of Alcmenae, who also was named Hercules.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Polycrates was amonge the Samians, a tyran so fortunate, that he neuer suffered any aduersitie or griefe. Wherfore, he at the laste dreadinge the chaunge of fortune, hauinge a Kinge with a stone of excellente value, did caste the same into the sea, to the intente he woulde suffer somme displeasure, and so satisfie fortune. But a fyshe deuouringe the Kinge,
                     Strabo.
                   was shortely after taken of a fisher, and giuen to the kinge for the greatenesse of the fishe: whiche beinge opened, the saide Kinge was founde, and broughte to the kinge, wherat, as well he, as all other about him, marueiled. Soone after the saide tyran was taken of Orontes,
                  
                     Paeradin, Symbo. Hero. Fol. 50. a Duke among the Persians, and hanged. Sic blandimenta, splendorue fortunae (quae mundus hic passim pro foelicitate ducit) nec certa, constantiaue sunt, aut dimansura: sed quo fulgentior apparet, eò verò facilius, ac celerius, quemadmodum & natura fragile vitrum, laeditur. Et iuxta comicum, fortuna vitrea est, quae cum splendet, frangitur.
               
               
                  
                  Argus, whome the Poetes faine, that he had an hundred eies, wherby was signified his wisedome, & circumspection, had appointed him by Iuno, the keeping of Iö, whom shee had transfourmed into a Cowe. But Mercurius (beinge sent by Iupiter) with his swete Harmonie brought Argus on slepe slewe him,
                     Auis Iunonia.
                   tooke Iö from him, and brought her into Egypte. Then Iuno tooke Argus eyes,

and sette them in the Peacockes tayle, wherfore the Peacocke is consecrate to Iuno. When he hathe lost his tayle, whiche happeneth once in the yeare, as all ashamed, hee seeketh where to hide him selfe, vntill it growe againe. He liueth twentie fiue yeares. The Peacocke, and the Doue loue one an other.
               
                  This Fishe in Latin is called Mugilis, a sea fish, of al skaled fishes,
                     Isidor. li. Ety. 12. cap. 6. moste swifte. Nam vbi dispositas senserit piscatorum insidias, confestim retrorsum rediens, ita transilit rete: vt volare piscem videas. He is of coloure white, they are so desirous ech kind of ye other, that when fishers haue taken the Males, and tyed them to a lyne, and let them downe into the sea, al the Females, when they per
                  
                     •
                  eiue the Male, doo gather together, and comminge to them, are taken in the nettes. They are taken aboute Narbon in Fraunce, and are called Muges, in the singulare number a Muge. This fishe maye with more congruence be borne in Armes, then many others, bothe for his celeritie,

& the mutuall loue whiche eche kind beareth to the other.
               
                  
                     Harte.
                  The Harte is at continuall debate with the Serpente, in so much, that he pursueth and seekethe for hym at hys hole, where he lyeth, and with the breathe of his nostrilles compelleth him to come out, and after he hathe of longe tyme foughte with him, he eatethe him. Therfore the smel of the

Hartes horne burnt, driueth vtterly away the Serpentes. They neuer feale the Feuer, but rather are remedied thereof by the eatinge of the Serpente. It is saide, that Hartes fleashe eaten in the morninge, augmenteth mans life. If they be gelded, theire hornes neither fall of, nor growe. They haue no gall: and in Africa there is none of them.
               
                  The Goose in Latin is called Anser, auis, quae vulgò vocatur Anca,
                  
                     Anseres.
                   
                  quod non est Latinum. Anseris nomen anas ded
                        •
                     t per deriuationem, vel à similitudine, vel quod & ipsa natandi frequē
                     tiam habet. The Goose (saithe Isidore) dothe declare manifestly the watches of the nighte, throughe the continuance of his cryinge. And no byrd perceiueth so the sauour, or sente of a man, as dothe the Goose. The whiche of olde time was beste knowne to the Romaines, for as muche as when the Frenchemen besieged the Capitole of Rome, they within being on slepe, the Capitole had bene wonne, if a certaine number of Geese, perceiuinge the enimies, had not cryed. Wherewith the Romaines awaked, and by the valiant prowes of Marcus Manlius, slewe, and draue out the Frenchemen. Wherefore Geese were had in greate reputation: and prouision was made, that they should neuer lacke meate. Geese are of a feruente stomake. They take pleasure in eating waterie and cold grasse. Laurum non attingunt. In time paste theire harte was moste commended amonge the delicate meates at the table. So was theire liuer taken to bee of beste sauour or taste.
               He is a woorthye birde to be borne in Cote armoure. Licet Anser strepere inter olores.
               
               
                  
                  Here is seene three Floures of the hearbe Alleluya, proper, vnited with a scrowe, contayning the word of the Floure. the whiche is well knowne. Alleluya, Praisinge the Lord. Whiche maye stande moste congruently for a Creaste, to the saide Cote armour.
               
                  
                     Fulica▪
                     
                  
                  The Birde Fulica (saithe Rauisius) haunteth the water, and liueth nighe Pooles and Marishes. Her color is darke or blacke, whereof shee taketh her name. Yet her beake, tippe of her wynges, and legges are redde. Shee is litle bygger then a Culuer. One excellent, and moste gentle propertie remaineth in this bird, whiche is, that when the Egle hathe caste forthe of her neaste some of her yonge ones before the time, shee espyinge the same, taketh them, and bringeth them vp. It maye bee thought she doth it for obedience sake to her Soueraigne, because the Eagle is Omnium alitum Regina: and so her nature herein is to be taken. If shee crie in the morninge, it is a greate token, that there shall some tempeste ensue. Et quum ludit in littore. Isidore saithe, shee is called Fulcia, quod caro eius leporinam sapiat. Lagos enim Lepus dicitur: Vnde & apud Graecos Lagos dicitur. Habet nidum in medio aquae, vel in petris, quas aqua circundant: maritimo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      semper delectatur

profundo. Shee is a kinde byrde bothe to her owne, and to the Eagles. Therefore al the byrdes of this nature ought especially to be borne in Ensignes, for the soueraignetie of them, & a greate respecte to be had, to what persons they are assigned vnto. For Eagles are not to be borne of Fooles, nor Lyons of Dastardes: leaste that Diogenes reproue them, as he did the man that was cladde in a Lyons skinne: thinkinge it vncomely, that a man effeminate, or of a childishe harte, should assumpte to weare vpon him the garmente of Hercules.
               
               
                  The Creaste aboue described, is a beast lesse thē a Foxe, in coloure darke yealowe, full of blacke spottes, and is taken to be a blacke Genet, the furre whereof hath bene very much esteemed here in Englande.
               
                  I reade in the first boke of the Machabes, the thirtenth chapter, that Symon after the deathe of Ionathas his brother, made vpon the Sepulchre of his Father, and his brethren, a buyldinge hie to looke vnto, of Free stone behinde and before. Et statuit septem pyramidas, vnam contra vnam, Patri, et Matri, et quatuor fratribus: and set vp seuen Steples one against an other (for his Father, his Mother,

and foure brethren.) And rounde about them he set great Pillers, with Armes vpon them for a perpetual memory: & carued Shippes besides the Armes, that they mighte be seene of men saylinge in the sea. Here appeareth the antiquitie of bearinge of Armes, and longe before this, as maie appeare in the seconde Chapter of the Booke of Numeri, whereas almightie God commaunded Moyses & Aaron, that euery man of the children of Israell should pitche vnder his owne Standerd, and vnder the Armes of their Fathers houses. Whereby dothe manifestly appeare, to what vse the bearinge of Armes serue: verily that one House, and the Progenie thereof mighte be knowne from an other, as wel at home in their own Countrie, as when they serue abrode otherwhere in Martial affayres. Therfore (as Christine de Pyse saithe in the Booke of the feates of Armes) they were first founde, that euery estate might be known in vattaile, one from an othrr, by their Armes or Ensignes.
                     Shippe.
                   The Shippe, who first inuented the same, I finde no certaintie. Some Writers affirme Iason and

                  Typhis to be the inuentors thereof, Secundum Ecclesiasticos Noē. Isidore saithe▪ that the Lydians made the first Ship, Pelagi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      incertae petentes, peruium mare vsibꝰ humanis fecerunt. Some say, ye 
                  Rhodians, or one Paralus. Others, that Argus for his wisedome, called Sapientissimus, primus Nauem condidit.
               
               
                  Pythagoras (as saith Boetius) was the first inuentour of Musicke amonge the Grecians, whiche he founde out by the sounde

of Hammers, whereof he wrote a Booke, whiche Boetius and Apuleius translated into Latin. I cannot, neither yet dare speake any thinge in commendation of the principal tokens borne in this Cote armour,
                     Organ Pipes.
                   whiche are the Organ Pipes, an instrument of Musicke. But what saie I, Musicke? One of the seuen Liberall Sciences? It is almost bannished this Realme. If it were not, the Queenes Maiestie did fauour that excellente Science, Singinge men, and Choristers might goe a begging, together with their Maister the player on the Organes. Yet this Cote Armour dependeth not all vpon Musicke,
                     Musike.
                   for peraduenture good counsell, whiche is a sweete thinge, and delighteth muche him whiche will receiue the same, more then the noyse of any Instrumente, ought to haue his merite, and commendation aboue all tunes, and ditties. And euen so it oughte to haue: and therefore suche a Cote Armoure oughte rather to be assigned to a faithefull Counsellour, then to an vntuneable Musition.
                     Hammer.
                   The Hammer is an Instrumente well knowne, and to be occupied of men of diuerse Sciences, but especially of the Smythe, or Ferrier. And it is called in Latin (as Isidore saithe) Malleus: quia dum quid calet, & molle est, cedit & producit. The Fasce of Palme,
                     Palme.
                   of righte oughte to haue his Bonde of Golde, and to stande within a Crowne, because that it is alwayes greene. And (as witnesseth Plutarchus) of that nature and propertie, that there can no weighte, nor burden oppresse it, but that it will rise vnder it, and stande vp as it shoulde doo. Propterea in certaminibus Palmam signum esse placuit victoriae: quoniam ingenium eiusmodi ligni, est vt vrgentibus, prementibus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      non cedat.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Simonides, a Poete in Greece, was the first that inuented the verses called Lyrici, and was excellente in prouokynge of teares. He on a time when he shoulde take his iourney, espied a dead man, to him vnknowen, lyinge on the grounde, readie to be deuoured of byrdes, and wilde beastes. Stayinge, he tooke the deade body, and as soone as he coulde, buried the same. But when as he was minded to take shippinge, the nighte before, he sawe in his sleape, the man whom he bad buried, admonishinge him, not so to doo: for if he did, he should perish by wrecke on the sea. When he told this dreame to his felowes, they mocked him, and left him alone on the shoare. But when they had a litle launched from the lande, there arose a sodaine tempeste, and loosed so their tackelinges, that theire Shippe broke, and they all perished. And so Simonides, for the pleasure whiche he did to the deade man in buryinge him,
                     Hawmed.
                   receiued the safegarde of his life. The Hawmede in this Cote armour, is a manifeste demonstration of buriall, and is an aunciente token in Armorie.
               I haue here caused to be figured vpon the said Cote armour, a Swalowe, of colour, as ye maie see, on a wreathe, Or, and Uerte. Aristotle saithe, that there be in the Ile Samo, white Swalowes, Quibus excaecatis, lumen iterum restituitur. Cecina Volaterranus comprehensus hirundines, nuntias belli mittebat amicis, in nidum pristinum redire solitas. They will not enter into the Citie of Thebes, because that Citie hathe bene so often taken,
                     Sw
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        we.
                   and ransacked. They are not in daunger to the Rauen of other byrdes, Nec vnquam praeda est. Therefore the Scrowe whiche shee beareth in her beake, manifestly declareth the same, Nulli praeda, that

shee is praye to none. If by mans handes they be caught, they die, because they cannot be broughte to feede on any thinge, but that whiche them selues can catche flyinge in the ayre. Excaecatis Pullorum oculis, herba Chelidonia visum restituunt.
               
               
                  They which haue bene diligēt searchers of ye natures of all things which haue life, write, yt there be certaine byrdes, & other beastes lackinge reason, whiche saue theire liues throughe greate silence, Like as Geese do, whiche leauing the East coasts, for y• greate heate there, & flyinge into the Weast partes, where the sunne goeth downe, when they begin to fly ouer ye grene mountaine Taurus, which aboundeth with Eagles, they fearing those rauenous byrdes, stop vp theire beakes with litle stones, leaste the violence of their vsuall and accustomed cryinge should breake out, and be hearde of the Eagles, whereby they shoulde be in ieopardie of their lyues. But after they (with greate silence) haue 
                     •
                  lowne ouer the toppe, and heighthe of the saide Hill, they refuse, or let fall theire pebble stones, and so they scape awaie more safely with theire noyse, and lowde voices throughe the height of the firmament. Hereby are we taught to keepe silence, and to premeditate what wee will speake to any: and to take good heede it be spoken in conueniente time & place. For as the common prouerbe is, The worde spoken can not be called backe againe. Aristotle, among many

other thinges whiche he taughte his Disciple Calistheues, when he sente him to Alexander the Greate, this especially he enioined him, Vt quàm rarissimè & iocundè admodū apud eum loqueretur, qui vitae necis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      potestatem in acie linguae haberet. Proinde Anserum exemplū potius quàm Calisthenis vtatur: illi enim paruo silentio vitam tutati sunt, hic autem vel modica loquendi licentia, eam amisit, cum nec dicto optimi praeceptoris auscultasset. Oportuni namque silentij maior est laus, quàm intempestiuae orationis. The Creste prefigured is a Pye, sette vpon a Scrowe containinge this Apothegme.

                  Nescit vox mis sa reuerti.
               
               
                  Cyrus, king of the Persians, what time he was readie to die, gaue in charge by his wil to make, or ordayne no other Sepulchre, or Tombe for hym, but only to be buried, and laide in the earth, whiche bringeth foorthe grasse, and floures: then the which no thing can be founde more excellente (
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                  
he) nor that can better become a gaue.
               Thus truely the forme, or fashion of ye anciēt Egyptians their burial is to be laughed at, and mocked. Of the which Diodorus writeth, that they contemninge the state of thys life, called our Houses, Innes, esteming them but as lodginges to receiue a friende, for a shorte & small time. But in buildinge Sepulchres or Tombes, they spared neither labour nor coste. For they iudged such their Sepulchres to be continuall, and euerlastinge habitations. And here is seene a Cote armour, whiche is to be taken of aunciente bearinge, and also good and perfecte Armorie. Here is also displaide for the Creaste vpon an Helme on a Tor
                     •
                  e, Golde, and Uerte, an Arme Coupye, Partie per Pale, Or and Ermine, holding in his hande proper, a Billet Gold, manteled Sable, doubled Argent. This Apothegme, or Posie added: Vana salus ab homine. Theise Armes thus marshalled, oughte not to be borne in this fourme, but of a Dubbed knight. An Esquire ought to beare his Creast, like to the olde auncient order, whiche is, vpon a wreathe

of the colours, which are agreable to the same: and in such fourme, as nexte here before, and in those that folowe, for the most parte, ye shall haue examples.
               The Cofer in Latin is called Scrinium, and is a necessarye thynge made for the safe keepynge of Iewelles, or Ornamentes, as also of Bookes, Euidences, & Recordes of Iudgementes, or Enrolmentes. Plini writeth in his naturall Historie,

that amonge all the spoyles, whiche Alexander the greate gotte of Darius kinge of Persia, he liked one moste especially, whiche was a Cofer of sweete Oyntementes, verye sumptuous, and of great valour, bothe in Golde, pretious Stones, and Pearles: and shewinge the same to diuerse his friendes and louers, he questioned with them, to what pourpose it woulde beste serue. After diuerse, and contrary reasons by them therein declared, & shewed, he saide, it would best serue for the safe keping of the bookes of Homere, as the most excellent worke for the declaration of mans mind, iudging no treasure more pretious then it. Ita visum est iuueni, qui se totum ad exemplar Achillis componebat. Cofers, or Cheastes are for many good purposes, and respectes to be borne in Armorie. For diligence, and vertuous studie is therby signified, & represented, and not negligence, or niggishe keepinge of worldely pelfre, and mucke.
               The Bison here figured for a Creaste, on a Torce Argente, and Gules, is a Beaste, hauinge one horne standinge betweene his eares, and a verye longe mayne. In shape he is like to an Harte, but in somme Countries he is blacke. I reade, that there is greate stoare of them in Germanie. Yet this is not the Beaste, whiche somme take to be the same that is named Bubalus, a Bugle, or wilde Oxe. For the Poete Martialis maketh them vnlike, as this his Uerse folowinge doth declare:

                     Illi cessit atrox Bubalus at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Bison.
                     The fierce Bugle to him gaue place,
                     And also the Bison in his race.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  Solea, as I reade it Englished by Sir Thomas Eliot in his Dictionarie, is a Shooe called a Gallage, or Patten, whiche hath nothing on the feete but onely Latchettes. This manner of Shooe, before all others, hath his commendation, for it greueth not, or vexeth the wearer thereof on hys feete. A Shooe made otherwise close, may wrīg a man: Si pede maior erit, subuertet: si minor, vret.
               
               
                  A shooe too large for thy foote,
                  It cannot but thee ouerthrowe:
                  If too little, it be agayne,
                  It vexeth thee with greater payne.
               
               A Shooe on a mannes foote, maye seeme good, and 
                     •
                  itte, yet where it greeueth, no man can tell, but the wearer. Paulus Aemylius, Sonne of Lucius Paulus, a Consull moste excellente amonge the Romaines, hearinge hys Wife Papyria (the daughter also of a Consull) commended for her beautie, Noblenesse of byrthe, modestie, and fruitefulnesse, shewed his shooe to them, that praised her, and asked howe they liked it. They answeared, it was a good shooe, and well made. Sed qua parte pedem meum distorquet, nescitis. But none of you dothe knowe (saithe he) where it wringeth me. Meaninge, that he alone felte it.
               The Patten is a commendable token, and maie well beseeme a Cote armour. Who is the bearer hereof (as

none is) in fighte on foote muste seeme to haue the maisterie. Here is also seene volante on a wreathe, Or, and Sable, an Agathal d'Argent, guttie, beaked, and legged, Uerte, gesante an Alimon, proper. The byrde called Agathallus, hathe natural enimitie with an other byrde, called Achanthylis: so that if the bloude of them be forcibly mixte together, they will after seuer eche from other. The Herbe aforesaide, which he beareth, is of that nature, that it will not suffer them that taste it, to be hungrye.
               
                  This Beast here figured, is now called a Mouse of Indie, otherwise Icheneuman, a beaste of Egypte, of the greatnes of a Catte, and is fashioned like a Mouse, yet hauinge the tayle, as of a goate, who creepeth into the body of a Crocodyle, when in sleape he gapeth and eating his bowels, sleaeth him, he escapinge aliue. The Egyptians amonge other their Gods woorship this litle beasts also for a God.
               For the Creaste, here is to be seene a Bugles heade, rassed d'Argente, a braunche of Iuniper tree proper.
               This tree accustomably groweth in sandye places. The leaues and braunches therof, is continually grene. It will not putrifie, or stynke. Non floret: It hathe no floures. It is of the same vertue, or strengthe, as is the Ceder tree. The Pithe thereof also is euery where more sounde, then is the Ceder: and the woode principallye

harde, as Mantuane reporteth. It is greate beyonde measure, and huge in Spayne, and growethe beste on the hilles, hauinge prick
                     •
                  es in steade of leaues. It is crooked, and wrapped together. Beinge burnte, it is verye odoriferous, and purgeth the corrupted Ayre. It is a sweete busshe in this Realme, and woorthye greate commendation. In London it is beste solde. Who so beareth this in any signe, or token Armoriall, oughte to be a man of an excellente, and prompte witte, apte to do Iustice without corruption, parcialitie, or fauour. Wherfore this Apothegme is added: Aequitas lucet per se.
               
               
                  Here in this field Sable, is to be seene a great Pyramide in Pale, porte displaide, betwene twoo Croisantes d'Argent.
               This building here described, is in our english tongue to be taken for a Steeple, which is a great buildinge made of stone or other mattier, and is fourmed broade, & foure square beneath, and vpwardes small and sharpe as it were ye flame of fire, whiche endeth sharpe. This is a Cote of greate excellencie, and who so euer should beare the same, ought in al thinges to be found discrete, and constant, and to abide therein.
               The Hybre which here is assigned for ye Crest, is a kind of Haukes, whiche very seldome or neuer is seene to flye in the day time, but seeketh his praye in the night. Pugnat cum Aquila acriter, adeò, vt ambae mutuo assultu implexae, quandoque deferantur in terram.
               
               
                  
                  There are three kindes of Weasels, one called Gales, an other Ictis, and the thirde Meles. But the Weasel called Ictis, is that whiche is here described, and is of colour white, a destroyer of Beestals, and eateth vp their honey. A beaste that of good congruence maye be borne in Armes without any reproche to the bearer, or contempte of the thinge borne. For the Beaste is a louer of man, and defendeth hym sleaping abroade, frō the hurte, byte, or sting of all venemous Serpentes: for to the serpent he is a deadly, and mortal enimie. Cui congreditur commanducata ruta, quam scit esse ipsi Serpenti infensam, & exitialem. The Weasel is woorshipped of the Thebanes. The stones of this beast bound to a woman nigh her time, doo keepe, and preserue her in the byrthe of the childe: or, as some iudge, doo kepe backe, or let the birth of a childe.
               On a Torce Argent and Uert, here is ensigned twoo Armes, sleues, and ruffes Ermyne, set within a Crowne d'Or, holding in the handes proper, two Serpētes, Azure.
               I reade, that Iphiclus, sonne of Alcmena, borne with Hercules at one byrth. But Hercules was gotten by Iupiter, and Iphiclus by Amphitrio. And when twoo Serpentes came to the Cradle of Iphiclus, & slue him, after when they came to Hercules, he tooke in either of his handes one, and slue them. Touching that the Torce is of white, and greene, Darius, the king of Persia, at what time he arayed battaile againste the Greate Alexander, did weare a Roule of the

same colours aboute the Diademe vpon his heade, called by the Persians, Cydaris.
               
               
                  These are properly termed in Armes, Tortcaulxes, wherwith the Crosse is charged, and are to be taken for cakes of bread, yet of heauinesse, beinge turned from their proper colour to bloud. Torta panis, is Latin for a cake of bread, suche as a Cracknell, or Symnell is. Of olde time it was called a Wastle.
               Our Sauiour Iesus, (as the Scriptures doo witnesse) was borne in the Cittie of Dauid, called Bethelem, distante from Ierusalem sixe myles, and was firste called Euphrata, and signifieth in the Hebrewe tongue, the House of Breade. Wherefore the Prophete saithe in his Psalme, Ecce audiuimus eam in Euphrata, &c. Loe, we haue hearde of the same at Enphrata, and founde it in the Woode. The further interpretation hereof, I leaue to Diuines.
               The Ramme here diuised for ye Crest, is quarterly parted S. and Ermyne, armed, & vnguled d'Or. He is a noble beaste, and best knowne in this Realme. Laberius the Poete calleth them, Reciprocornes, for the turning backeward, and eftsoones forwarde of their hornes. They are also called Lanicules, because they haue their skynne couered with woll. Some reporte, & affirme, that of Rammes hornes buried, or hidde in the grounde, is broughte forthe an Herbe, called Asparagus, in Englishe, Sperage.
               Christe was called Aries, a Ramme, Propter Principatum,
                  
for his Soueraignetie, and Dominion.
               
                  The field of this Cote armour, is Geronnie of sixe pieces Argente, and Gules, on the first quarter Sable, three Annulettes, d'Or.
               
                  
                     Ringe.
                  The Ringe is the most principall ornamente to beautifie the hand of man or woman. But in wearing of them oftentimes is found detestable prid, offence, and displeasure bothe to God, and Man. Are not oftentimes gemmes therein enclosed, whiche stir & prouoke the wearer thereof to filthye lust, & abominable vices, are not oftener in place of stones (which are called pretious) known to be enclosed familiar diuels, seruing to worke nothing that is good and godly, but contrary altogether bothe to grace & godlinesse. God graunte, that no Christian man be founde to weare suche Ringes. I reade in a prophane history, that Gyges, seruant to Caudales, kinge of Lydea, had a Ringe of suche vertue, that when the broder part therof was turned to the palme of his hande, he was seene of no man, but he might see all thinges: and when he turned the Ringe of the contrary part, he was him selfe seene openly. By the meane wherof he slue Caudales, and committed adultrie with his wife: and so of a lasie shepheard, he was made a cursed kinge.
               
                  
                     Osprey.
                  The byrde called an Osprey, is of suche whitenesse on his breaste, and winges, that when he houereth ouer any runnynge water, or fishe Poole, all the fishe therein turneth vp theire bellies, and so he taketh his praye. Hee is

taken to be a kynde of Eagles that haunteth aboute the Sea.
               
                  Here is diuised a field Geronnie of twelue pieces Ermyne and Gules, on a Scocheon d'Or, the Beaste Phattaga Uerte, crested Azure. This is a beast in Indie like a Cockatrice, as bygge as a little dogge, hauinge a skalye, and roughe skinne, that cannot be pierced with yron. The fashion of his tayle is like vnto the Lyons, whiche in his fiercenesse he beareth reflexed towards his backe. I haue caused this Escocheon thus charged, to be set in proper mettall, the fielde requiringe no more. For I hold this opinion in Armes, that Ermyne, or Ermynes ought neuer to be laide with the mettal of their colour, because they are Furres, and haue no proper Blazon with any mettall.
               The Bergander is a byrde of the kinde of Geese, somewhat longer, and bigger then a Ducke, liuing in the water, breeding sometime in Conye holes, sometime in hollowe places in Rockes.
               This byrd is here figured, bearing the herbe Hiacinthe, with the floure proper. It hathe leaues like a Porret, an hande breadth in height, lesse then a maydes little finger, grene of colour, ye toppe lying down ful of purple floures, and the roote rounde. The floure springeth out in spring time, with the Uiolet, and before the Rose. It is commonly called here in Englande, Crowetoes.
               
                  
                  In this fielde parted per Pale, Sable & Gules, are to be sene on a Crosse Molyne, d'Or, a Dryme Worme betweene foure Akornes Uerte. This Worme is here figured with the tayle flexed vnder his chinne, and is called Dryimus: a litle worm founde in the roote of an oke, so mischeuous a poison, that if one treade on him bare footed, foorthewith the skinne commeth of, and al the legge swelleth, and (whiche is more to be marueiled at) they that handle him that is hurte, doo loose their skinne. This Cote armoure is Horoique, for the bearer thereof oughte without respecte of person, to execute iustice, & to giue true iudgement after the Lawes: not to be slouthfull in his office, but painefully to maintaine the iust causes of the innocent, keping them with double defense from the violent oppression of the mighty. The office of an ynck Molyne, and to what pourpose it serueth betwene the Myll stones, is, I thinke, knowne to moste men, but to Myllers especially, who in takinge theire tolle, forget oftentimes the Rule taughte them by their myll ynck.
               The Creste here seene, is an Erodye Golde, Guttie, set on a Torce, Siluer & Gules. Calepine saithe, that the byrd Erodius, is the greatest fowle that flyeth, & ouercommeth and deuoureth the Eagle. Other write, that in time of treadinge, he sweateth bloude.
               
                  
                  
               
               The fielde of thys Cote Armoure is verte, three cuppes couered in Pale betwene ij. flasques d' Or, charged with two clustres of grappes, propre. And to the Creste vppon the helme, a kynges heade, with a Diademe crowned, set on a Chapeau Sable, turned vp Ermyne, manteled verte, dobled Argente, cotized of two Equicerues propre, thys Apothegme added, sato prudentia maior.
               
               The torne corpse of Pentheus, and the cause of hys death sufficiently displayeth all the sayde ensignes: who as the fables do reporte, was kynge of the Thebanes, whose father was called Echion, and hys mother Agaue. Thys Pentheus
                  
despised the Sacrifice of Bacchus, the god of wyne, or the droncken god, wherefore hys owne mother Agaue cut of hys heade: and hys sisters with the other companye of women, which than did celebrate the feaste and sacrifice of the sayde Bacchus, and tore hys bodye all to pieces.
               
                  
                     Equicerne.
                  The Equicerne, as I reade, is a beaste in the Oriente, forma cerui & aequi compositum, in forme or shape of an harte, and an horse ioyned together, hauing hornes, & a longe mayne to the shoulders, & a bearde vnder hys chynne like vnto the goate, and fete rounde clouen like an harte, & is as greate as an harte.
               
                  Here is to bee seene in thys fielde sable, an Eale his head, coupie in Fesse, betwen two launces d' Argente. Thys is a beaste in India, like an Horsse, and hath iawes like a Bore, & therein tuskes, a cubite lōge & more, whyche are apte to what vse the beaste will, for they stande not faste, but are bowed as he listeth: so that whan he fighteth,

hee setteth vp th'one, and holdeth downe the other, to th'intente, that yf the one in fighting waxe dull, or be broken, the other shall serue hym.
               Thys Beaste is founde in Indie, about great ryuers. He hath a tayle lyke an Olyphante, in colour blacke, or baye.
               For the Creste it is thus assigned, vpon the helme on a wreathe d'Or and Sable, a Cardnell volante, beaked and legged Argente, all the reste proper, manteled verte, dobled Argente.
               Thys lyttle byrde is here figured, gesante a seade of the thistle, for that she lyueth by the seades of them, vnde illi inditum nomen.
                  
                     Carduel
                           •
                        s.
                   She hath a redde heade, yealowe winges, distincte with white and blacke. Cardnales imperata faciunt, autore Plinio, nec voce tantum, sed pedibus, & ore pro manibus. They are taught to do anye thing, not onely with ye voice, but also with the fete and byll, in steade of handes. Thys Poesie is also added.
               
                  Tendit in ardua virtus.
               
               
                  Here is to bee descryued, on a losenge Gules Crowned, a Lyons heade, rassed Argent. Omphale that mayden & Queene of the countrye of Lidya, was so valiaunte in deedes of armes, that after shee had killed an huge Lyon, she vsed to were the heade of the same vpon her, to declare therby her prowesse, and that she woulde seme to bee rather of the male kynde than female. Hercules did loue thys Quene so moche, that to wynne her fauour, he did at her commaundemēt slea a great Serpent, nyghe the 
                     •
                  lodde of Sagaris, and afterwarde, became so seruiseable vnto her, as yf hee hadde bene her woman seruante. In so

moche, that she compelled hym to pike wolle, and to spynne and carde, and woulde sometyme so abuse hym, that she woulde beate hym aboute the heade, with her Sandale or slipper.
               
                  For the creaste, it is thus deuised, on a Torce, Ermyne & Azure, a Piller fusillye d'Argente crowned, and cotized betwene two Tarandules d'Or, armed, and vnged verte.
               The Tarandule is a beaste, cōmōly called a Buffe, which is like an Oxe, but that he hath a bearde like a Goate.
               
                  Here is seene in thys sheilde the heade of Medusa a Crowne in cheife.
               
                  Medusa, a Ladie of whom fables do reporte, that by Minerua, her heares were tourned into Adders, and they whiche beheld her, were tourned into stones,
                     Perseus.
                   whom Perseus, that noble knyght, afterwarde slewe.
               
                  
                  Take thys to bee a monstre, and not a perfect beaste.
               Almighty God, being greatly displeased with the pryde of Nabuchodonozor, for that hee woulde haue his image honored for god, sodeinly transformed him into an horrible mō
                  stre, hauing the heade of an Oxe, the feete of a Beare, and the tayle of a Lyon, who dyd eate hey as a Beaste. And after he had donne penaunce in that forme, God beyng moued with mercie, and accepting for hym the continual prayers of Daniel the prophete, restored hym to hys pristinate forme, who afterwarde lyued wel, and commaunded that the very god of heauen should bee onely honored.
               Whoso should beare these ensignes, let hym onely feare, serue, obey, and giue al prayse, honor and glory to God for euer and euer.
               
                  
                  The fielde is of the Moone, a Therebinthe tree, Saturne, floured and leafed, Veneris. The wodde of thys tree is blacke, and harde lyke boxe: Oute of thys tree doth runne a Gomme, commonlye called Turpentyne: albeit the common Turpentyne is not it, but an other, which is as clere as glasse, & is a soueraygne medecyne to clense the stomacke, of putrified humors. The floure or blossome of this tree, is full of grapes or beries, like the Olyue, ye Leaues also thereof, are so harde closed together, that they fall not awaye. In Sirya it is aboundante, and fruitefull, in Macedonia. Messibus reddit semen. It yeldeth hys fruite in the haruest tyme: And is a noble token, to bee borne in cote Armoure.
               Thys Byrde deuised for the creaste, hath a long bill and redde legges, whiche drincketh as though it dyd byte the water. She dippeth all her meate in the water also, quem pede ad rostrum veluti manu affert, that is, whiche she conueyeth to her bill, as with an hande. She is moste estemed in Concagena, a parte of Syria, and is taken of some to bee the Pellycane
                  ▪ The Icon, or forme of the same birde, I haue caused thus to bee figured, portant a water Rose propre.
               
                  
                  A. For hys creste beareth an Eagle volante Solis, portant a Crosse patie fitchie, Mars, on a scrowe cōteining thys worde. Obediens ad mortem. This Eagle is of the coloure of the Sunne, nam Sol iustitiae Christus. The Crosse is here sene, quia pro nobis crucem subijt. Touchynge th' Eagle, I haue written partely before in my former treatise, but of the nature of her winges I haue spokē nothing. Therefore thys I reade, that the winge of an Eagle entermingled with any other thyng, will not wax rotten or corrupte. Eius pennae mixtas auium pennas deuorant.
               
               This Eagle also in the breste, is charged with a mans harte propre, wherein ys conteyned a deuyne misterye.
               B. Beareth on a torce, Perle and Rubye, a Meleuete, Saturne, beaked and membred Veneris.
               
               
                  Thys is a kynd of Fawcons, yet very little of bodye, blacke and puyssante: she haunteth the mountaynes, and fedeth her birdes alone, ceterae fugant, others of that kynde driue thē awaye. Sir Thomas Eliot, supposeth it to bee a Merlyan.
               
                  
                  C. Hath to hys creaste, on a wreath Golde & Verte, a Tru
                        •
                     n
                  ▪ volant d' Argent, beaked, and membred Gules.
               Thys Byrde is otherwise called Onocrotalus, and is like to a Swanne, whiche putting hys heade into the water brayeth like an Asse. Whatsoeuer hee eateth, hee gathereth it together in hys iawes, & holdeth it there longe before hee swaloweth it downe: and that hee doth especially in fliyng from the water.
               
                  D. A torce d'Or, and Sable, one Pillor crowned d'Argente, on a mountayne, propre, lettered, 
                     
                        •
                     . T. Y.
               
               I reade that Darius kyng of Persia, what tyme he went into Scythia, 
                  
                     •
                  yght hys pauiliōs, at the heade of a Ryuer in Thracia called Thearus, where hee abode thre dayes: and deliting at the most pleasaunts water of the Ryuer, hee sett in the same place a Pillor grauen, with Lettres of Greke, declaryng hys beyng there, with commendation of the water. Here are to be seene on this Pyllor three especiall Greke Letters, Theta, Tau, and Ypsilon, euery one conteyning in it selfe a misterie, to Grecians well knowen.
               
                  
                  E. Beareth to hys creste a shouelar d'Argente, beaked & membred verte, seazed vpon a pearche propre.
               Thys Byrde is called in latyn Platalea, she followeth water foules, that do take fishes, and doth pecke them so on the heade, that they let go theire praye, whiche she taketh, and liueth therewith.
               
                  F. Hathe to hys Creste a Fox propre, passant vpon an armyng sword.
               Whan it was layde vnto Lysander kyng of Lacedemonia for a reproche, that he gott more by subteltye, than by prowes: hee smylinge sayde. vbi quòd vellet non assequeretur Leonis exunium, ibi vulpinum ap plicandum esse. The meaninge whereof is thys, that where the Lyons skynne doth not a
                  
                     •
                  ayle, a man must tye or sowe a Fox skynne vnto it.
               
                  Quo non perueninet Leonina pellis, vulpinam assuendam esse: quod sic lucidius dixeris, vbi virtus non satis potest, adhibenda est astutia.
               
               
                  
                  G. Hath on thys Poesie, Dulce natale solum, a lage volante, propre.
               Thys Byrde is moste commonly seene in the Alpes, and hath feete roughe, as it were with the heare of an hare, wherof shee taketh her name, and is called Lagopus. Nam Lagos Grecè dicitur lepus Latinè, the residue of her bodie is all whit, and of the bygnes of a Doue: It neuer eateth but in place where it was bredde, and neuer will bee made tame. Pli. Ye may call it proprely, an hare birde.
               
                  H. Hathe to hys Creste, a Verme hariante propre, subsigned about the tayle with a scrowe, conteining thys Apothegme. Est inclyta virtus. which here must thus be Englished. Puissance, is of great renowme.
               Thys is a Fishe, in the riuer of Ganges, and in Latyn is called Vermis, & is in lēgth. lx. cubites, beynge blew in coloure, which hath such strēgth also, that whan Oliphantes come vnto the water to drinke, heewill take one of them by the nose, and plucke hym into hym.
               
                  
                  I. Beareth to hys Creste, a Sycomore tree propre.
               Little Zacheus clymed vp into suche a tree,
                     Paraph
                           •
                        as. Eral. in Luc. cap. 19. to see oure Sauioure Iesus Christe in the waye, there as he was to passe by. Th'euangeliste called it a wylde figge tree, but ryghtely as it is ther named a Sycamore, (because it bringeth forthe sigges of the owne ryghte kynd, that other figge trees bee of, & by reason thereof, it is also called a figge of Egipte, & yet in leafe it ressembleth y• 
                  Mulberie tree) frequens est apud Rhodium locis frumentarijs. It hathe aboundance of mylke, whose frute commeth not out, at the toppes of the boughes, as figges do, sed ex ramis ipsis .i. out of the same boughes, and is swete like a wilde figge. Grana eius sunt minora granis ficum. Nec maturescunt nisi radantur instrumento ferreo.
               
               
                  K. On a wreathe d'Or, and Sable, an Owsell d'Argente, beaked golde, legged Gules.
               Thys Byrde in Latyne, is called Merula. Isidore sayeth, that of auncient and olde tyme she was called Medula, eo quòd moduletur, because she singeth, others, (sayeth he) call her Merula, quia sola volat, because she flyeth alone, and lyueth as it were sole, shee hath a yealowe beake, and is alwayes seene flye alone, and feadeth so lykewise, from a blacke coloure, she groweth to bee redde, she singeth pleasauntly in the

Sommer, in wynter she stamereth, ci
                        •
                     ca Solsticium muta. Thys Byrde (sayeth Isidore) whereas in all places shee is blacke, yet in Achaya she ys white.
               
                  L. Hath for hys Creaste, a Playne tre gold, on an Haw mede, verte.
               I reade that Pithyus a Lydian, was so ryche, and had suche aboundance of Golde, that hee receaued Zerxes king of Persia, with all hys whole Armye, which was innumerable, and that with great magnificence: and that hee gaue to Darius, father to Zerxes, a Playne tree of Golde, and a vyne of the same mettall.
               
                  M. Hath to hys creaste, on a torre d'Argente and Azure, a Meropie volante, Sable, mē
                  bred Gules, portant a braunche of y• herbe Alymon propre.
               Thys herbe is of suche vertue, that it will not suffer thē that taste of it to be hongrye, Plinye calleth the sayde byrde Merops, which by an other name is called Apiastra, because hee doth eate bees. Thys birde hath a large bill, and redde legges, and whose nature it is to kepe theire parentes, whiche neuer come abroade, and to norishe them, as them selfe were norished beyng yong.
               
                  
                  N. Hath to hys creaste on a wreathe d'Or, and Azure, a Rauens heade rassed, portant a Sickle d'Argente.
               The Sickle hath in it a spiritual mysterye, the whyche ys most godly expounded by that famous clearke Erasmus of Roterodame, in hys paraphrase vpon the fowerth chapiter of S. Markes Gospel. Therefore, who so desireth th'exposicion therof, let hym resorte to that place.
               
                  Rauens are enemyes to Bulles, whom when they espie alone, they doe strongly assayle, and of all the bodye, they desire moste hys eyes. They are enemies also to the Cameleon, and kyll hym. Enemye to them, is a lyttle Byrde, called Easalon, which breaketh theire egges. The Rauen is a noble token, to bee borne in cote Armoure, or creste.
               
                  O. For hys creste, hath an Esalon d'Argente,
                     Easalon.
                   seazed betwene the braunches of a Tarandres heade coped propre.
               Thys little byrde before spoken of, is of the kynde of haukes, quae apparet omni tempore. She is otherwise called Butco, the least of the kynde of Bussardes, but more white, & industrious after her praye. It is written that thyse kynde of Hauke, called the Bussarde, hath three stones. Her Byrdes bee destroyed by the Foxe, and likewyse, she kylleth the Foxes whelpes, yf she maye

come by them.
               The Tarandre is a beaste in bodie like to a great Oxe, hauing an heade like to an harte, and hornes full of braunches, the heare roughe, and of the colour of a Beare.
               
                  P. Hath to hys creste, on a Escaloppe d'Or, a Pyne apple propre. The true forme hereof is sett forth in Munster, hys booke of Cosmographye.
               The Pyne apple in Latyne, is called Strobylus. The sayde Escaloppe is charged sufficiently ynough, althoughe it hathe pleased some to charge greater tokens thereon, and the same hauing lyfe, wherewith I can not like, nor as yet 
                     •
                  an fynde, eyther aucthoritie, or reason for the same.
               
                  Q. Beareth a Saker d'Argent, in the Tallons, a spraye of Haythorne, propre.
               Thys Haucke is of a noble prise, to all Faukeners well knowne, & therefore (for me) they shall not onely describe the nature, but also gyue the commendacion therof. Yet in parte I wyll shewe, that rapit praedam non modo sedentem in sublimi, sed etiam volantem in aperto. Hee is called in Latyne, Accipiter hicrax.
               
               
                  
                  R. Hath to hys creste, on a Pillowe d'Ermyne, an arme extended oute of a Crowne, sleues and ruffes d'Or, holding in an hāde propre, a ball d'Argente.
               
                  Alexander the greate kyng of Macedonia, for that on the night seazon hee woulde not committe his armie to the aduenture of Fortune, as lōge as he slept hymselfe, vsed this experience, when he laide him downe to take hys reste: A brasen pott was put vnder hys elbowe, and afterwarde hee put foorth hys arme out of the bedde: & held in his hand a siluer ball, that when dead slepe shoulde louse the strength of hys synewes, the ringing or sounde of the ball when it fell, might so breake hys slepe, & awake hym. Hoc quidem documentum Regem illum excellentissimum a Gruibus accepisse arbitratur, quae nocturnas excubias semper exercent: & ne a somno decipiantur, lapillum altero pede sustinent: quo lapso vel plaga in extensum pedem accepta, vel sono decident is calculi expergefiunt.
               
               
                  S. Hathe on a mounte, a Crayne, standing in watche, all accordinge to hys nature, propre.
               The sence hereof, is brefely declared in Latyne, as next aboue appeareth: Thys Apothegme added also. Plus vigila.
               
               
                  
                  T. Beareth to hys Creste, fiue arrowes in fasce, with Pheons d'Argente, fethered Gules, bounde about with a scrowe, conteyning these wordes, Concordia persto.
               
               
                  
                     Plutarch.
                  I reade that Scylurus Chaeronensis, a man borne in that parte of Grece now called Morea, had fower score sonnes, who whā hee died called them afore hym, and deliuered to euerie of them a shefe of arrowes, commaunding them to breake the shefes incontinente: whiche when they mought not do, he tooke out of the shefes one arrowe after an other, and brake them all lyghtely, declaring therby vnto hys sonnes, that yf they continued and agreed well together, they shulde bee puissante: and yf they varied, and were disseuered, they shuld be feble and shortely destroyed. A matter not vnlike hervnto may be brought forth, which is noted of Plinye, of the nature of the stones, called Cycladici, which as long as they are hole, swimme aboue the water, but beyng broken, they syncke and are drowned. Sit igitur hoc Symbolum sagittarum fascis, a patre commeati, simul
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , memoratorum lapidum haec significatio: Coniuncta, firma
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      faedera eò semper firmiora, durantiora, ac certiora, vbi prudentiam ducem, & consultricem adhibeas.
               
               
                  U. Hath on an Hawmede verte, a Faucon volāte, d'Argente guttie Gules, beaked & legged d'Or, addita subscriptione. ¶ Delectare in domino.
               
               
                  Thys is a noble kynde of hauke, hardye and puissante, well knowen to all Faukeners, wherefore I nede no further to describe hys nature, or sett forth hys commēdacion. And other of thys kynde is called Gyrofalcum, a gyro & cir
                     
                        •
                     uitu, quo in minores vtitur, vt eas agat in praedam.
               
               
                  W. Hath to hys creaste, an arming Sworde d'Argente, hilte and pommell d'Or, impendent from a cloude propre, the blade insigned with a scrowe, conteyning these wordes: potestate & formidine.
               
               Power (as B
                        •
                     etius sayeth) can not put awaye the bityng of carefulnes, nor auoide the prickynges of feare: affirminge that prynces woulde fayne lyue safely but they can not.
               There was a kynge of Sisill named Dionisius, that was ouer sadde, hys familyer asked hym, why hee was not mery: Thereupon hee made a bancket, and caused his familier to sitt thereat, and a naked sworde hanging ouer his head by a smal horsse heare. The man seyng the sworde could not bee merye for feare, to whome Dionysius sayde, suche is my lyfe, euer in feare, yet thou thoughtest it happye: and suche is the lyfe of kynges, alwayes in feare of some euill chaunce, for in hyeste aucthoritie is moste ieopardie.
               Thys Dionysius feared so moche Barbors, that hys daughters were taughte to shaue hym, and to clippe hys heare.
               Referre thys Sworde aboue figured, ad vltionis diuinae gla

dium, perpetuò supra infaelicium peccatorum ceruices, fragili, tenuissimo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      filo impendentem.
               
               
                  X. Hath on a Poesie conteining these wordes, Pacis nuntia a Doue volant, d'Argent, beaked Azure, legged gules, and bearinge an Oliue leafe, ꝓpre. By this Noe did know, that the waters were abated vpō the earth, whan the generall floude was.
               
                  Y. Hath to hys creste, on a torce d'Argente & Azure, a Lyon rampāt, Sable, crowned, vibrante a sworde, d'Or.
               
                  Iudas, otherwise called Machabeus, in hys Actes was like a Lyon, and as a Lyons whelpe roring at hys praye. He foughte with Appolonius, a mygh tie Prynce in Syria, slue hym, and almoste hys whole hoste: hee tooke theire substance, and also Appolonius hys owne sworde wherewith hee fought all his lyfe long. Machab. lib. 1. cap. 3.
               
                  
                  Z. Here is seene on a Pil loure d'Argent, crowned and bazed d'Or, a Spanyell, propre.
               It is written of Diogenes the Philosopher, that hee dyed being bitten of a dogge. After whose death, hys scholers (to declare whiche of them dyd beare greatest good wyll towardes hym) contended who shulde haue hys bodye to burye it. That strife beinge appeased by the magistrates, they buryed hym honorably, & not onely made ouer hym a faire tombe, but also erected a Piller with a dogge standing thereupon, in perpetuall remembraunce of hys death. I haue caused thys dogge to bee formed like vnto a water Spanyell, halfe hearye, th other shorne. For I haue knowne men excellentlye learned, to loue suche Dogges, whiche wee proprely call in Latyne Sagaces canes, Spanyels or houndes.
            
            ¶ Finis.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprynted at London in Fletestrete within Temple barre at the signe of the Hande and starre, by Rychard Cottyl. Anno 1572.
            Cum priuilegio.
         
      
   