
      
         
            
            
            The pryncyples
of Aſtronamye
the whiche
diligently perſcurutyd is in maner a
pronoſticacyon to the worldes
end compylyd by Andrew
Boord of phiſick
Doccor
❧
               ❧ 
               ✚ 
               ❧
               ❧
            
            
               
            
         
         
            
            
            ¶ Thet preface
            
               Hit is gretly to be dolentyd ye
all men almoſt dothe nowe
adnichilat the .vii. lyberall
ſcyences ſpecyally. Aſtrona
mye the whyche of trewth
is. a. neceſſary ſcience And doth illucidat
all other ſcyences, not only ye liberall ſcyē
               ces
as grāer retorick logick Arithmetrick
geometrick and muſick. but alſo hit is an
Introduccyon to philoſophy, phylicke &
diuinite it is not vnknown yt philoſophy
conſyſcyth in naturall phyloſophy & morall
philoſophi. to ye naturalite & moralite
of the which no man can attynge wt out.
Aſtronamy, Alſo Aſtronamy doth illucidat
phiſicke for hypocrates ſayth. Cecus
medycus eſt qui. Aſtronamyam neſcyt yt
is to ſay he is a blynd phyſycyon ye whiche
doth not know Aſtronamie alſo Aſtronamye
doth geue knowlege to dyuynyte
as hyt doth playnly, appere in the fyrſte
Chapter of ye geneſys. and dyuerce other

places wherfor dauid doth ſay Celienatrant
gloriam dei et opera mamum eius
annunciat firmamentum. heuyns doth
ſhew ye glory of god & the fyrmāent doth
ſhew the warkes of god I conſyderyng
thes premyſſes with the gret vtylyte of
the affore ſayd ſ
                  •
               yrnce do mak this boke
to any met al men to haue a reſpect to hit
and to ſludy hit to laude & to prayſe god
in his warkis and wher I haue ometted
& lefft out mani matters aꝑtayng to this
boke latt them loke in a book namyd the
Introduction of knowleg a boke of my
makyng the which ys aprintyng at old
Robert Coplands the eldiſt printer of Ingland
the which doth print thes yere mi
pronoſticacions.
            ¶ Finis.❧
            
         
         
            
            ¶ The Capytles of contences
of thys boock folowth
            
               The fyrſt Capytle doth ſhew the
names of the .xii. ſynes and of the.
vii. planetes. And what the zod. ack and
how many minutes a degre doth cōtaine.
               ¶ The ſeconde Capytle doth ſhew what
ſygnes be mouable, and what ſygnes be
not mouable and which be commone and
which be maſculyn ſignes and whiche be
femynyne and of the tryplycyte of them.
               ¶ The .iii. capytle dothe ſhewe in what
members or places in mā ye ſygnes hath
theyr domynion and how no man owt to
be let blod whan the moone is in ye ſygne
wher the ſygne hath domynyon and alſo
what operacion the ſygnes be of whan ye
moone is in ther.
               ¶ The .iii. capytle doth ſhew of the fortitudes
of the planetes and what influens
they: doth geue to vs.
               
                  
¶ The .v. Capitle doth ſhew the natural
dyſpocycyon of the mone whan ſhe is in
any of the .xii. ſygnes.
               ¶ The .vi. capytle doth ſhew of ye nature
of al ye .xii. ſygnes And what influēce thei
hath in mā. And what fortitudes ye planetes
hath in ye ſignes. wt the names of the
Aſpects.
               ¶ The .vii, capytle doth ſhew ye natural
dyſpoſycions of the planetes. And what
operacyon they hath in mans body.
               ¶ The .viii. Capitle doth ſhew of the. v
Aſpectus. and of theyr operacyon
               ¶ The ix capitle doth ſhew of ye mutaciō
of ye Ayer whan any rayne wind wedder
froſte and cold, ſhold be by the courſe of ye
ſygnes and planetes.
               ¶ The .x. capytle, doth ſhew ye pedyciall
of the aſpectus of the mone and other planets
and what dayer be good. and what
dayes be not. &c.
               ¶ The .xi capytle doth ſhew of flenbotho
my or lettyng of bold
               ¶ The xii capitle doth ſhew how whan
& what tyme a phiſicion ſholde miniſter

medycynes
               ¶ The .xiii. Capitle doth ſhew of ſowīg
of ſeedes & plantynge of trees and ſetyng
of herbe.
            
            Thus endyth the table.
         
         
            
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The fyrſt capytle dothe ꝑtract of ye names
of planetes and alſo of the names of
the ſygnes and what the zodiack
is and how many degrees be
in ye zodiack & how many
minutes adegre doth
contayne.
            THe names of the .vii. planetes be
thes. Saturne Iubiter. Mars ye
Sone. venus Mercury and the Moone.
¶ Thes be the names of the .xii. ſygnes
Aries. Taurus, Gemini. Cauncer Leo.
Virgo. Libra. Scorpyo. Sagittary. Capricorne.
Aquary. & Piſces. The zodiacke
is the Circle in the which the .xii. ſignes
be in namyd the circle of beeſtes. or ye oblique
cyrcle hit may be called wel ye circle
of beſtes for the ſygnes within the cyrcle
hath or be of that dyſpocycyō of the ye beſtes
of whome they doth take theyr names.
or be lykyned vnto. As Aries is lykinned
to the Wedder or Rame. Taurus is lyke
to the Bull. Geminy ys lykned to

.ii. chyldryne borne at a bordyn. Cancer.
is lykened to the Crab or Crauys. Lio is
lykned to the Lyon. Virgo is likened to a
Mayd. Libra is lykened to a payre of
balaunce. Scorpio is lykened to a venemus
worme namyd a Scorpion. Saget
tarms is lykened to a monſterus archer
or ſhoter the which is lycke a man frō
the mydle vpward and lyck a fore
fo
                  •
               ed beſt from the mydle downward.
Caprycornus is lykened
to the watter Piſces
is lykened to fyſhes
Thes ſygnes
geueth influence
to vs
by leke operacyon as the beſtes
be of nature. Euery one of
thes ſygnes is deuydyd
in .lx.
degres
And euery degre doth contayn .vi. mynutes.
So that in ye zodiack is
.CCC.vi. degres.
         
         
            
            ¶ The ſeconde Capitle doth ꝑtract of the
ſygnes which be mouable And which be
not mouable. And which be comone And
which be maculyn ſignes, and which be
feminyn And of the triplycyte of them
            
               Thes ſygnes be mouable. Aries
Caucer. libra. and Capricorne.
And thes ſignes be fixed. Taurus
leo Scorpyo and Aquary.
Thes ſygnes be comne Gemini.
virgo. Sagittary and piſces ¶ Thes
ſignes be maſculin ſignes, Aries. Semyny.
leo libra. ſagittarius and aquary And
thes be femynie ſignes. Taurus. Caucer
vyrgo. Scorpyo caprycorne and pyſces.
¶ Alſother be .iiii. triplycytes. Oriental
meridyonal Occideutal And ye Septrionall
The oryent tryplicite the whiche is
in the eſt is colorycke fyre and maſculyne
And this triplicite hath thers .iii. ſygnes
Aries. leo and Sagittary. The lordes or
planetes of this triplicite is the ſone. in ye
day. And Iubiter in night And Saturne
is in both. And. this triplieite is dyurnall

The ſecond tryplicyte is the meridionall
triplicyte which is in ye ſowth. And this
tryplicite hath other .iii. ſignes. Taurus
virgo an Capricorne This tryplycite is
melancoly & feminyne The lordes or planetes
of thys tryplycyte is venus in the
day And the mone tn ye night And mares
in both And this triplycyte is nocturnal
The therde tryplycyte is the occidentall
tryplycyte, whiche is in the weſt And is
ſanguyn & femynyne And this triplycite
hath other .iii ſignes. Gemyni lybra and
Aquary. The lordes or planetes of thys
tryplicyte is Saturne in ye day marcury
in the nyght And Iubyter in both, And
thys triplicite is dyurnall The .iiii, triplycyte
is the Septemtryonall triplycite
which is flewmatick & femynyne & this
tryplicite hath .iii. other ſygnes. Cancer
Scorpio & piſces. The lordes or planetes
of this triplicite is venus in ye day mairs
in the nyght the Moone in bothe.
         
         
            ¶ The .iii. Capytle doth ſhew in what
members or places in mā ye ſygnes hath

ther domynyon or power And
how no mane owght to
be let
                  •
                blod whan the
moone is in the
ſygne wher
the ſygne
hath
dominyon And alſo what operciō
the ſygnes be of whan the
moone is in them
            
               The .xii. ſygnes hath domynyō
vppon the members of euery
man, for Aries beholdyth the
hed. Taurus the necke. Gemini
the armes & handes Cancer
the breſt Leo the hart. Virgo ye bely. Libra
the raynes & but tokes. Scorpio the
ſecret places of mā Sagittary the thyes
Capricorne the knes Aquary the legges
piſces the feet. Let euery man be ware
ye not flebothomator or letter of blod. nor
no maner of Chirurgyon do tuch hym in
opnyng any vayne or do mak any inciciō
or cutting whan the mone is in any ſigne
wher the ſygne hath any domynyon

dominion or doth regne alſo whan ye moone
ys in a mouable ſenge hit ys good to
tak a vomet and good to tak a Iurney or
to good about any maner of buſynes or to
begin any matter pertayning to worldly
poliſe whan the moone is in a fexed ſigne
hit is good to mak fundacione of howſes
or wailes good to bild & to re
                  •
               difi & to goo
about ſtable warkes whan the moone is
In a comune ſigne hit is not good to mak
no mareg nor to mari nor to mak no bargyn
with out record and ſure wretcing nor
good for ſick men & ſignfieth much in ſtabilite.
         
         
            The iiii capitle doth ſhew of ye
fortitudes of planetes hauing
or geueng theyr
influence
to vs
            THe planetes hath .v. fortitudes or
ſtrengthes or teſtimonialls which
be thes ye howſe ye exaltaciō ye Triplicyte
the terme And the

face. The howſe hath .v. fortitudes, The
exaltacyō hath .iiii. fortytudes. The triplicite
hath iii fortitudes. The terme hath
ii. fortytudes and ye face hath one ¶ Euery
planete in his howſe is as a kinge ſyttyng
in is mageſte in a parlament. Euery
planet in his exaltacyon is lek a kyng
that is a crownyng euery planete in his
replicyte ys as a kyng in actoryte amogs
his lordes which be his helpers in euere
planete in his terme ys as a man
that ys a mongs his frēds and kings folke
the face geueth to a planete roome or
ſpace as a chayer or a ſet is for a maſter.
         
         
            ¶ The v capytle doth ſhew the
naturall dyſpocycyon of
the moone whan ſhe
is in any of the
.xii ſygnes.
❧
               ❧ 
               ✚ 
               ❧
               ❧
            
            
            
            
               WHan the moone is in Ariete.
hit is not good for no ſycke
man no ſickely men to ſhaue
theyr hed or berd. for euery
here hath a hoole. by the
which euyll vapoures be in hauſtyd. Alſo
hit is not good to medyl wt the eres nor
eyes nor tong nor no other place in or aboute
the hed wt no inſtrument of Iron nor
to lett blod or to boxe or cupp any place or
vayne about the hed and necke & be ware
that no blod be exhauſtyd owt of a vayne

namyd Cephalica. But it is good for bathes.
and alſo it is good to begin any thīg
that wolde haue ſhort expedycion & good
to goo about ani matter that a man hath
to do with gret men or rych men
            ¶ Whā the moone is in tauro hit is not
good to medyll with the necke to exhauſt
any blod But this time is fortunat to many
thynges. it is good to bay oxen kyne &
calues hit is good to byld any howſe or
manſyon or to begyn any other thynge it
is good to plant & to Impeor to graf tres
it is good to ſowe al maner of corur or ſeedes
and good to comon with women &c.
            ¶ Whan the mone is in gemini exhauſt
no blod owt of the armes nor hādes it is
good to putt children to ſhole or to any ſcience
or crawght and good for a man to begyn
that thing that he wold haue it reite
ratyd or begon agene.
            ¶ Whan the moone is in cancro a man
may be lett blod without parell and ptholomy
ſayth it is a good tyme to take medſons
ſpecyally electuares alſo it is good

to tak any iorney and to remoue from one
place to an other and from one caſtyll or
manſyon to another
            ¶ Whan the moone is in leone it is good
not to tak any vomyte for hit wyll hurt ye
hart and breſt & it is good to begyn that
thynge that a man wolde haue continew
            ¶ Whan the mone is in virgine it is not
good to mak any incycyons for ruptures
nother to medle with the huckyl boones,
to exhauſt any blod, to mary in this time
is not prayſed leſt ye woman bere no frute
to obtayne the loue of a mayd in the way
of marage is good and Alſo this tyme is
good to ſett chyldren to ſkole.
            
               ❧ Whan the moone is in Libra exhauſt
no blod from the buttockes & tak no medſons
frome the raynes of the bake thys
tyme is good for a man to bay or to ſell &
good to take a iurney & thys tyme refrayne
from all veneryouſe actes alſo this tyme
is good to go about ani matter biſines
workes or of doynges
            
               ❧ Whan the moone is in Scorpione be

ware of al maner of incyſion for the ſtone
for harnyes & for ruptures. And be ware
of bathes this tyme is good for few thynges
or noone.
            
               ❧ Whan the moone is in. Sagittario.
exhauſt no blod owt of the thyes to haue
buſynes wt iudges iuſtices & men of law
it is good & this time is good for Archers
And marchaūtes & good to mak bargins
¶ Whā ye mone is in Capricorne exhauſt
no blod owt or from the knes this is an
euyll tyme to take any medycynes hit is
good to ere and to plante & to ſett herbes
❧ Whan the moone is in Aquari hit is
not good to exhauſt any blod out of ye legges
nor to take no medicens. hit is a veri
good tyme to byld
            ¶ Whan ye mone is in piſcibus. be ware
of exhauſtinge of any blod owt of the fete
and legges nor medyl with no ſicknes or
dyſeſes in the fete or legges this tyme is
good for them that wyll take any iurney
and goode for Feſhers and for them that
vſyth the water.
         
         
            
            ¶ The .vi. capitle doth ſhew of the natur
of all the ſygnes. and what influence
they hath in man. And
what fortitudes the
planetes hath
in the
ſygnes. with the
aſpectes.
            ARies doth gouerne the hed. and is
a maſculine ſigne. and is hure and
hath his dominion in the howſe of deith
and lyef. geuynge influence to them the
which be borne vnder him to haue a loge
neck. a lene face. ſhort eres and ſom what
hery. Taurus doth gouerne the neck and
is a feminin ſigne and is colde & drye leke
to melancoly. And is in the howſe of ſubſtaunce
and poſſeſſion. of gyft and recaite
geuing influence to thē ye be borne vnder
this ſigne to haue a brode face. a gret nose
grete eres gret noſtrells and a gret necke
Saturne in Tauro hath .ii. fortitudes. ye
terme & the face. Iubiter in Tauro hath
one ye is ye terme. Mars in Tauro hath, ii

fortitudes. A triplicite and a terme. The
ſone hath none. Venus hath .iii. ye howſe
the triplicite & the terme. Marcury hath
.ii. The terme and the face. The moone
hath .iii. fortitudes in Tauro exaltaciont
the face. And the triplicite. Gemini dothe
gouerne the Armes and handes. And is
a maſculyn ſyne and is hott & moyſt leik
the Ayer and lyke ſanguyne complexion.
And is in the howſe of Kynred fraternite
and counſell, geuyng influence to them yt
whiche be borne vnder this ſygne to be
bewtyfull and fayer and comly. and ſomnolent.
Saturne in Gemini hath .ii. fortitudes.
A terme. and a triplicite. Iubiter
hath .ii. A triplicite. The face and terme
Mars hath .ii. The face and terme. The
ſone hath one which is the face. & Venus
hath one which is The terme. Marcury
hath .iii. which be thes. The triplicite ye
howſe and the terme and the Mone doth
not poſſes not dyngnite in gemini. Cancer
doth gouern the Breſt the longes and the
ſtomacke. And is a feminine ſygne. And

is colde and moyst lyke the watter and ye
complexion of flewmatyck perſones And
is in the howſe of the father of hoſbonds
and wyues. Cytes. Treſures. buryalles
and herytag. this ſygne is alſo vnſtable.
wyndy and waitery ſhe geuynge influence
to them the which be borne vnder this
ſygne be greoſe byneth and ſlender about
¶ Saturne in cancro hath but one fortitude
which is. The terme Iubyter hath
.ii. fortitudes. The exaltacyō & the terme
Mars hath .ii. a triplicite and a terme.
The Soone hath noone Venus hath .iii
A triplicite. a terme and The face Marcuri
hath .ii. The terme and the face and the
Moone hath .iii. the howſe the triplicite
and the face.
            ¶ Leo doth gouern the harte and ye lyuer
And is a maſculine ſyne. and is hote and
drye lyke the complexion of colerike men
And is in the howſe of honor. and childrē
And doth geue influence to them the whiche
is borne vnder this ſygne to be groſe

aboue and ſlender vnderneth the waſte
¶ Saturne in Leo hath .iii fortitudes. ye
triplicite the face and the terme Iupiter
hath. iii. The. Triplicite the terme and ye
face. Mars hath. ii. the terme and ye face
The Sone hath. ii. ye howſe & Triplicite
Venus hath one which is the terme And
the moone hath noone.
            Virgo doth gouerne ye intrayles or wombe
And is a feminin ſygne And is colde &
dry leek the erth And complexion of melā
               coly
parſons And is in the howſe of ſycknes.
And catell And doth geue influence
to thē ye which be borne vnder this ſigne
to be beuty full hauynge a fayer & louyng
viſage ¶ Saturne in Virgine hath one
fortitude namid the terme, Iubiter hath
one namyd the terme Mars hath. ii The
Triplicite and the terme. The ſone hath
one which is ye face, Venus. iii. The triplicite
the face, and the terme Marcury hathe
iiii. the howſe. the terme. ye exaltacion
and the face. The Mone hath one which
is a Triplicite
            
            ¶ Libra doth gouerne the raynes of the
backe and ye buttockes and is a maſculin
ſigne and is hote and moyſt lyek the ayre
And ſanguine ꝑſons. And is in ye howſes
of mariage theffth. ſtrife and robery. and
doth geue influence to them the which be
borne vnder this ſygne to euyll diſpoticions
onles grace wark aboue nature Saturne
in Libra hath. iiii. fortitudes. The
eraltacyō ye terme ye Triplicite and the terme
and the face Mars hath one which is
the terme. The Sone hath none. Venus
hath .ii. The howſe and the terme. Marcury
hath. ii the Triplicite and the terme
And the Mone hath one. which is ye face
            Scorpio doth gouerne ye ſecret members
of man and woman. And is a femynyne
ſigne. And is cold and moyſte. lick ye watter
& the complexiō of ſlewmatick ꝑſons
And is in the howſe of deth fere.
            
            debate. warre. det labor chaſtyte and wit
And doth geue influence to them the whiche
be borne vnder thys ſygne to haue a
ruddy face ſlender and ſmale leges. And
grete feete ¶ Saturne in Scorpione hath
one fortitud which is the terme Iubiter
hath one which is the terme. Mares
hath. iii. which be thes ye howſe. ye terme
and the triplicite. The ſone hath one whiche
is the face Venus hath. iii. The triplicite
the terme & the face. Marcury hath
one which is the terme. The Mone hath
one which is the triplicite.
            ¶ Sagittarius doth gouerne ye flanckes
And the thyes And is a maſculyne ſygne
And is hotte & drie liek the fyre & colorick
ꝑſons. And is in ye howſe of honour. And
maſter ſhepe by way of offyce. And doth
geue influence to them ye which be borne
vnder this ſigne to be wyſe and to haue
knowledge in. Aſtronami. And ſhold haue
a longe viſage and a bygge bely and not
gretly hered but ſuffycyent and ſtrayght

               ❧ Saturne in Sagittario hath .iii. fortitudes.
The Triplicite The terme and
the face Iubiter hath .iii. the howſe the
Triplicite and the terme Mars hath one
which is ye terme The ſone hath one whiche
is ye Triplicite Venus hath one whiche
is the terme. Marcury hath .ii. ye terme
and the face. The mone hath one whiche
is the face.
            ¶ Capricorne doth gouerne ye knes. And
is a feminye ſygne
                  •
                And is cold & drye as
the erth. and melancoly ꝑſons and is in ye
howſe of lordſhep. honour. and ſubſtance
And doth geue influence to them the whiche
be borne vnder this ſignes to be ſlender
legged. hauynge a drye body & a hery
face. repletyd wt melancolines
            ¶ Saturne in Capricorne hath .ii. fortitudes.
the howſe and the terme. Iubiter
hath .ii. the terme and the face. Mars hath
.iiii the exaltacion ye terme ye Triplicite
and the face. The ſone hath one which is
the face. Venus hath the. Triplicite and

the terme. marcuri hath one which is ye
terme. And the moone hath one which is
ye triplicite Aquarius doth gouerne ye legges
bi neth ye knes to ye feete. & is a maſculine
ſigne And is hote and myeſte as the
Aier lyck to the cōplexeon of ſauguine mē
And is in the howſe of frendſhip and ſubſtance
and doth geue influence to hem the
which be borne vnder this ſigne to be amiable
how be hit the one lege moſt cōmē
               li
is longer than an other or els bigger than
an other and ſuch ꝑſons ſhold be a boſter
and a gret waſter ¶ Saturne in aquario
hath .iii. fortitudes The howſe the
terme and the triplicite Iubeter hath .ii.
the triplicite and the terme, Mars hath
one which is the terme, The ſon hath no
one. venus hath .ii. the Terme and ye face
Marcury hath .iii. The triplicite the terme
& ye face The moone hath one which
is the face
            
            ¶ Piſces doth gouerne the feete. And is a
feminyn ſigne And is cold and moyſte as
the watter liek to fleumatick ꝑſons and
is in the howſe of heuynes and enemyes
and ryding beſtes. And preſonment. And
doth geue influens to them the which be
borne vnder this ſigne to be of alarg breſt
a litle heed and whitly faced rownderes
& of good corag ¶ Saturne in piſſibus
hath .ii. fortiudes The terme and the face
Iubitor hath .iii. the triplicite the terme
and the face The ſon hath noone, venus
ſtath .iii. the exaltacion the terme and ye
tryplicite Marcury hath one which is ye
terme and the ſone hath one whiche is ye
triplicite.
            Now her is to be notid for Aſpectes
wich be thes. A. ſextyl a terme. A
quartyle a coniuctyon and an oppoſicyon
Euer mor haueng a reſpect to ye Aſpectes
of the planetes. And yf the

Aſpectes be good of ye mone. & the ſignes
aboue namyd be good. the matter ſhalbe
of affecte and if the aſpectes be euyll of ye
Moone the matter will take lytle affecte
or none. And which be good aſpectes and
which be euyl. ſhalbe ſhewed in the next
capytle after this that foloweth.
         
         
            ¶ The .vii. capitle doth ſhew of ye nature
of the planetes. and of theyr
operacyon in
man.
            AS neceſſary hit is to know ye nature
of the planetes with ther operacione.
as it is to know the nature and
operacion of the ſygnes. Saturne is the
hygheſt planete which is colde and drye
lyke ye erth hauyng a gret intereſt in malancoli
men. This planet is a maſculine
planete And his howſe in Capricorne. &
this planete hath an intereſt in the clargior
ſpirituallte for he enducithe diugnite
pontificalnes polyce and ingeniouſnes.

how be it he is a ſignifier of ſuch as doth
warke in viſe handy chraftes. & is enimito
ye lyf of man for he is enemy to nature
And is a ſlow planete in fetchynge his
cercuite or curcunference & they yt which
be borne vnder hym be ſlow & not quick
haſty. & malycyouſe except grace warke
aboue nature Saturne doth gouern imā
Melancoly. the ſplen. the gal the bladder
And hath a ꝑticipacion of flume And he
doth ingender thes infrimites. ſplenyticknes
and pricis and the fener etick be cō
               ſumpcyons.
Alſo be is one of the cauſers
of the .iiii. kyndes of leproſnes. The .iiii.
kyndes of the ydropiſes The .iiii. kindes
of the gowtes. The to kyndes of the palſyes
& Roume deſcendyng frome the hed
to the breſt namyd catarrus. And ye Canker
and all maner of ſicknes in the whiche
is any coldnes for this matter looke
in the Breuyary of helth and in the Introduccyon
of knowleg

¶ Iubiter is the ſecond hygheſt planete
which is hoot and moyſt lick to the Ayer
and he is a maſculyne planete hauynge
an intereſt in ſanguine perſons. and hys
howſes be in Sagittari and Piſces and
he is lorde ouer the temporalte. Specialy
of chyualry. and men of eſtate. as a veniuoluſe
planete. how be hit he is ſōe what
ſlow in fetchyng his circuite. and they ye
which be borne vnder this planete. ſhold
be manly. comly. gentyll and honeſt. &c.
Iubiter doth gouerne in man the longes
the nature of man and womā. the boones
with the cartalages. and thes be his ſickneſſes.
The ſquince. periplumōia which
is an impoſtume about the longes. the
plureſe the Crampe The Appoplexe. the
Litarge the Cephalick and the Cardiack
aud ſuch lyek the which doth com by the
occaſion of blode.
            ¶ Mars is the therde planete. whiche
is boote and drye leke to the fyre. And
is a Maſculyne planete. And hath intereſt

in colerick perſons. and his howſes
be in Aries and Scorpion. and he is full
of malyce wrath and vengyons. furicuſe
and full of bate and ſtryfe how be hit he
                  •
               
is indyfferent infetching his cercunference.
and they the whiche be borne vnder
this planet except grace warke aboue nature
ſholde be a lyera robber a morderer
furyouſe and vengable. ful of wrath and
angry haſty and teſty and euell diſpoſed
And he doth gouerne in man & woman ye
vaines and the teſticles of man and colet
And albumeſer ſaith he doth gouerne ye
Lyuer. And I ſay he hath intereſt in the
gall of a man & woman. And thes be his
ſickneſſes the feuer t
                  ••
               ciane ye cen
                  •
               nt wan
& the cauſen and al other hot feuers. &
hot appoſtomacions. Alſo the migrime.
            And womā that be delyuerid befor theyr
tyme and all other infirmytes the which
doth com of extrmee hete. The ſone is in
the mydle of the .vii. planetes. geuynge
as muche lyght vpward to heuen as he

doth downward to vs The ſon is hotte &
drie lyek ye fire & yet he is a frend to blod &
ſinguin perſons And his howſe is in the
lyon he is a maſculin planete beniuolenſe
and good in all thyngs and a confortor of
all terreſtiall thyngs And doth induce naturall
ſtrength and is a frend to gret men
of Honor And he doth fetche his cercuite
ons in a yere. And they the which be borne
vnder the ſone ſhold be ſtrong welfanerd
& luſti wiſe deſcret and riche. and he
doth gouerne in mā and womā the hart.
the brayne. the mari with in the boones
the ſenowes and the ſyght. how be hit
thorow his vehement hete in ſomer he
doth hurt the hed & doth califi or chaffith
ye blod to much of ye which he hath vigor
and ſtrenght,
            ¶ Venus is a pulcrus planet. and is cold
and moyſt lycke the watter and hath intereſt
in blod and fleme ſhe is a feminine
planete and her howſes be in Tauro and
Libra. ſhe is lady ouer louyers. and ſhe
doth fetche hyr cercuite almoſt as ſoone

as the Some She doth induce loue and
veneryonſues. And he or ſhe that is borne
vnder this planete ſhold be a true louer.
Louynge. Merthe melady and muſicke
louyng alſo ſyngyng and dawnſyng 
                  •
               nterludes
games & ſportes and geſtes and
they ſhold be fayer and amyable & full of
bewty and pleſant. And She doth gouerne
in man & woman the ſeed of man the
rydgboones the loynes the matrix and ye
ſecret partes. and the fames in man and
woman and ye ſmellyng. and thes be hyr
ſickneſſes. coldnes of the ſtomacke ye ſlacknes
of the lyuer to dygeſt. the paſſyons
of the hart the Ilica paſſio the colyck the
fyſtyls the plyes ye heinerodes ye ſuffocacyon
of the matryx & other infyrmytes ye
be about the ſecret places of mā & womā
yt commyth of ſuperflug humores, Marcury.
is temperatli hote & dry. good with
goodnes and euyll with euylnes. he is a
maſculyne planete and his howſes be in
Gemini and virgo and he doth fetche his
cercuyte almoſt as ſoune as the ſonne. He

doth induce ingenyoſues & gret knowleg
of dyuers artes. ſacultes & ſcyences. And
good in trauel and meſſages doyng. who
ſo that is borne vnder this planete ſhold
be gentyl & amabell And a gret traueller
and good to ſend or god in meſſages and
he ſholde expert in ſeyences. for he ſholde
haue a good wytt & caſt fare in polytyche
reſon Marcury doth gouerne ye memory
and the long and the gal. And thes be his
infyrmytes. the .iii. kyndes of madnes. ye
iii. kyndes of the fallynge ſycknes. The
cowgh ye percipitacien of the matrix. and
parturbaciō of mynd & other infirmites
the which cōmeth of ſiceite or drynes.
The Moone is the loweſt planete. And is
cold and moyſt lyck the watter. and hath
an intereſt in flumatyck parſons. and ſhe
is a feminine planete and is mother and
a miniſtrix to all moyſter and is lady and
gubernatrix euer the ſees and watters
and her howſe is in Cancer and ſhe doth
fetch her cercuite ons in a mounth. And
the doth induce mutabilite. inconſtance.

Trauell. meſſage ambaſſage. And fortunate
to aquatical maters or byſines. they
that be borne vnder the Mone ſholde not
be ſtabyll wytted. and ſhold be a traueler
and ſeke ſtrang coūtres. The Mone doth
gouerne in man or woman the ſtomacke
and the bely and the ſecret place of womē
and hath alſo an intereſt in the hed. And
thes be her infirmites. comocyon trymblyng
or ſhakynge of members vniuerſall
or ꝑticuler the cardyack the palſes & ſuch
leke. ¶ who ſo euer wolde haue a forder
noticion of the ſygnes and the planetes &
of theyr influence or conſteltacyon. let thē
look in a book that is now a pryntyng at
Robert cooplondes namyd the Introductyon
of knowleg. And he that wyll haue
the knowleg of, all maner of ſickneſſes &
dyſeſys let them looke in the breuyary of
helth whiche is pryntyd at Wyllyam
Mydyltons in flet ſtret.
         
         
            
            ¶ The .viii. Capytle doth ſhew of the
.v. a ſpretes of the planetes.
            
               AS I ſayde in the .vi. capytle
ther be .v Aſpectes of the planetet.
A coniuction. A ſextile,
a trme A qurtile and an oppoſicyon.
A comunctione ꝑpeily
is not takyn for an Aſpect. ſor an Aſpect
is a dyſtance of ſignes. But planetes centunet.
doth not diſtere by diſtance of degrees.
for a coniuctiō amonges ye planetes
is whan the planetes doth draw to gydder
by leſſer dyſtance than .vii. degrees. &
that one of them falldth vnder the bright
beemea of an other. than it is namyd coniunct
to the ſonne. And whan the planete
doth drawenygh to ye ſone by .xv. degres
than is ye planete combuſtid by ye ſplender
or beemes of the ſone. And than dyuerce
times happynith rayne as it doth. whan
the ſone and the Moone be almoſt to gydder
in ther orbs or cercles. than in the end
of that moone ſhold be rayne This aſpect

which is a coniunction And firſt in order
is namyd a beniuolēt or a frendful aſpect
for good to goodnes is in creſyd of a gret
and hygh beniuolence and vertue. And yf
goodnes be Iowned to euil. thā yt euilnes
takyth a way half the goodnes. wherfor
he that wyl go about to do any good thīg
owt to mark the mone ſpecyally yf ſhe be
coniunct to good planetes or els ſeperatid
from euyll planetes And he that wyl go.
about an euil or a ſhrod turne muſt choſe
the tyme whan the moone is coniunct wt
euyl planetes. or els ſeperatid from good
planetes.
            ¶ The ſecond aſpect is a ſextyle. that is
whan the planetes be dyſtant one frome
another by .vi. partes of the zodiack. as
thus in makynge a ſimilitud of .ii. planetes.
that venus be put in the begynnyng
of Aries. and another planet in ye begynnyng
of Gemini Or els one in the the mydle
of Aries and another in the mydle of
Gemini and ſo in leke maner of all other

Planetes. but this. Aſpect is not ꝑfyt in
frendſhep for the aſpect is not certin mor
opyn but pryne
            ¶ The therd Aſpect is a quartyll. And yt
is whan a planete hath an. Aſpect to an
other planete. by dyſtaunce of .iii. ſygnes
the which dyſtance is the .iiii. part of the
zodyack. as thus yf one planete be in the
begynnynge of. Aries and another in the
beginning of Cancer. Or els one planete
in the mydle or end of Aries. and another
in ye mydle or end of Cancer. Such aſpect
is inꝑfit of hatred & enuy and traytery.
            ¶ The .iiii. Aſpect is a tryne. And that
is whan one planete is dyſtant frome an
other by .iiii. ſygnes. the which diſtance
is the therd part of the zodiack as thus,
yf one planete. Ware in the begynyng of
Aries. and the other in the begynnyng of
Leo this is a manifeſt and a perfit aſpect
of frendſhep
            The .v. Aſpect is an Oppoſicion & that
is whan one planete is diſtant from an
other by half of ye whole zodiack as thus

that one planete be in the begyunyngeo
in the midle or end of Aries and the other
be in ye begynnyng mydle or end of Libra
takyng both lyek and ſo is hit in al other
ſignes This aſpect is an euident & manifeſt
aſpect of hatrede of warre and other
diſpleſures

            
         
         
            ¶ The .ix capitle doth ſhew of ye mutaciō
of the Ayer whan any cayne. Wynd thonder
hayle froſt or ſnow ſhall fall.
            
            
               WHo ſo euer yt wyll ꝑnoſticat
of the mutacion of the Aier
he muſt fyrſt mark the .iiii.
tymes of the yere. whiche
be to ſai ver eſtas Autūnus
& hiems that is to ſay, the ſpring ye ſomer
haruyſt. and wyntter. Ver which is the
ſpryng by nature ſhold be hote and moyſt
And in this tyme blod doth moue and in
creſyth with all other naturall thynges,
Eitas whiche is ſomer is hote and dry &
than coler doth moue & increſith. Atūnus
or haruyſt is cold and dry & hath reſpect
to melancoly, hyems which is wyntter
is cold & moyſt & hathe reſpect to flume.
Secundaryly. one muſt mark the nature
and the qualytes of the ſygnes, which be
moyſt which be colde And which be drye
Cherdly one muſt conſider the nature or
ꝓpertes of the planetes. for the howſe of
cornſcacyon is Iubyter. The howſe of
tempeſtes is Mars, & yf they be coniūct
or be in a quartyle aſpect both wil happē
Yf. ſaturne & venus be coniunct, or be in

a ſertyle than hit wylbe cold, Iubyter is
the ſone. or in an oppoſytine aſpectt wyl
haue grett wynd Marcury with venus
cauſyth raine ¶ Forder more a contūcty
on of ſaturne with the mone. maki
                  •
               h mutacyon
in the Ayer forrayne & groſe eloudes
be elenatyd with cold. ſpecially whā
this coniunctyon is in any aquartycal or
tereeſtyall ſygne. ¶ A coniunctyō of Iubyter
with the moone. cauſyth dyuerce &
many whyt cloudes. ¶ A coiunctyon of
Mars with the moone in moyſt ſygnes
caſyth rayne ¶ A coniunctyon of the ſon
with the mone. cauſyth rayne ſpecyally
in moiſt ſignes. ¶ A coniunctiō of Venus
wt the mone in moiſt ſignes cauſith ſwet
dwes and ſoft rayne ¶ A coniunctnon of
the moone to Marcury in moyſt ſygnes
cauſyth rayne wt Wynd. ¶ A coniunction
of ſaturne with Iubiter .iii. daies before
or .iii. dayes after cauſyth gret mutacyō
in the Ayer. ¶ A coniunctyon of ſaturne
with mars in moyſt ſygnes .iii dayes before
and after the Ayer to be coruptyd by

the whch many men women & chyldryn
be infectyd with dyuerce diſeſis ſpec
                  •••
               
with the peſtylence. And dyuerce tym
                  •••
               
cauſyth hayle rayne lyghtuynge & th
                  ••
                dryng.
this coniunctyon for mā or womā
is moyſt worſt ¶ A coniunctiō of ſaturne
with the ſone. cauſith cold rainy wedder
¶ A coniunction of ſaturne with. Venus
coniunct in eny aquatycal ſigne makyth
cold raynes to induce & A coniunction of
ſaturne wt Marcury in aquatycal ſignes
cauſyth rayne And in drye ſygnes cauſy
th. drynes, ¶ A coniunctyon of Mars wt
marcury. in hote ſygne cauſyth. Hete in
dry ſygnes. in aquatycall ſygnes rayne.
         
         
            ¶The .x. capytle doth ſhew the
Iudiciallnes of the Aſpectes
of the Mone another
planetes what
dayes be
good.
&c.
            
            
               A Sextile aſpect of the Moone
to Saturne is a good day to
ſped matters with women &
to take counſell of lernyd men
or wyſe mē. this day is good
to begyn byldyng or to rehedyfy. good to
to tyll or dyg the growne and to ſett and
plant herhes and tres.
            ¶ A sextile aſpect of yt Mone to Iubiter
is a good day for A man to ſpek to a ſpirituall
Iudge & to lawyers. this day after
aſtronamy is good for all matters.
            ¶ A ſextile aſpect of Mars to the Mone
is a good day to ſpeke to any gret man of
nobylyte. and good to comone or talke wt
ſtrenuoſe & armigernſe men of berth. and
good to bay any thyng. And to ſett forth
horſes wt horſemen in war ſeſon.
            ¶A ſextile aſpect of Venus to the Mone
is a good day to mak a maryage. and to
ſeke loue and fauer of any parſon & good
to ſpeke to any noble parſon. A ſextil
aſpect of marcuri to ye mone is a good dai
for a mā to mak a cōpte. & to ſhew or plet
his caues & good for amā to by or ſel or to

mak marchauntes. And good to ſet chyledryn
to lerunyng And good to take a Iurney.
and good to make meter or oracyons
or to prech. or rede a lecture.
            ¶A ſextyle aſpect of ye ſone to the moone
is a good day to mete & to ſalute kynges
and princes and to aſke or deſyer lefull &
lawfull thynges & a good day to ſek owt
ye trewth of a matter. & good to aſſocyatt
with wyſe men
            ¶A tryne aſpect of ſaturne to the moone
is good to be aſſociat or in the company of
old menor womē and good to dydg delue
or ere the growne or to ſowe any ſeedes.
good to plant and to ſet herbes and good
to make fundacyons to byld
            ¶A trine aſpect of Iubetor to the moone
this is a fortunat daye for all maner of
matters or cauſes and very good to ſpek
to iudges and men of lawe ſpecyally of ye
ſpiritualte
            ¶A tryne aſpect of. Mars to the moone
to be with the company of knyghtes and
ſquyers and ſuche lick. And to
            
            ꝓcure ordin & ſpare for all thyngs ꝑteynyng
to wat and good to bay beſtes
            ¶A trine aſpect of the ſone to the moone
is a good day to aſke a pdon of a kyng &
good to ſpek to a kyng ꝓnce lorde or counſellets
            ¶A trine Aſpect of the mone to venus is
a good day to geti frendes and louets & to
make mariags
            ¶A trine aſpect of the moone wt marruri
is a good day to reſon and to mak acōpt
and to mak bargens wt marchaunth and
to put children to ſhole and to mete with
wiſe mē and good to tak a Iurney
            ¶A quartil aſpect of ſaturne wt the mone
lett eueri mā be ware that day a bout
what matter or biſines be goth a bowt.
            ¶A quattile aſpect of Iubiter with the
mone is a good day to cōſull with prelats
and iudges
            ¶A quartile aſpect of Mars with the
moone is an euell day to ſek ane fauer or
frendſhip of knyghts or ſquiers or of mē
of warre
            
            ¶A Quartile aſpect of ye ſone wt ye mone
is an euell day to goo about ani gret matter
            ¶A Quartil aſpect of venus wt ye mone
is a good day to goo about ani thyng and
ſpecialli hit is a good day to mak a mareg
or to gett loue &c
            ¶A Quartill aſpect of Marcuri wt the
mone is a good day to ſend forth ambasſitors
or meſſangers good to tak a Iurney
good to bai or to ſell or to mak marchaū
               tes
or to mak a reckning or acount
            ¶Anopposicion of Saturne wt ye mone is
an euell day to goo about eni gret matter
            ¶An oppoſicion of Iubetor wt ye moone
is a good dai to mak ſewt or ſeruice to ani
gret man ſpirituall or temporall or to god
to him for ani other matter
            ¶An oppoſicion of the mone to Mars is
an euel dai to tak ſeruants or to ſek frend
ſhep for hit is a day of malice anger and
ſtrife and war & euel for other matters
            ¶An oppoſicion of the mone to the ſoone
is an euill day to medell with gret mē or

with any gret matter.
            ¶An oppoſicion of the Mone wt venus
is a good day in all matters to be don.
¶ An oppoſicion of ye Mone wt Marcury
is an indifferent day
¶A coniunction of Saturn with ye men
is a 
                  〈◊〉
                day to goo about ani gret matter

                  〈…〉
               
to medell with old mē or wt
               
                  〈…〉
                or chor liſh perſons
            ¶A coniunctiō of Iubiter with ye mone
is a good day to make pece and to intrete
for any matter how be hit verite & iuſtice
wyll this day haue intereſt.
            ¶A coniunction of Mars with ye Mone
this is a day of anger of warre of ſtryfe
and bete wherfore maryd men that hath
ſhrewes to theyr wyues muſt not dyſpleſe
them for fere of after clappes.
            ¶A coniunctyon of the ſone wt the mone
is an euyll day for all thynges. how be it
it may be good to do that thyng that no
man ſhall knowe
            A cōiunctiō of ye mone wt vēus is a good

to mak a mareges or to get loue of wome
& ſo cōuerſe and good to hire mē & women
to ſaruece
            ¶A coniunction of ye mon wt Murcuri is
good to bay & to ſell & to make marchādis
to take a Iurney &c
            ¶Whan thee is no aſpect nyght to the
mone or far from an euell coniunction yt
day is good for all maner of things
            ¶The mone coniunct in the drogons hed
is veri good And coniunct with the taile
of ye dragon is euell
            ¶The mone Iunct wt good ſteres is good
And Iunct wt euen ſterres is euell
         
         
            The .xi. capitle doth ſhew of flenbothom▪
or letting of blod
            
               WHo ſo euer will choſe a day
to be let blod in firſt he muſt
choſe a fire ſygne which is
hote and dry. as ares Sage
tari And leo And althowth
leo is a free ſigne and is the howſe of the
ſone and the ſone in nature is contrari to
the nature of the moone for ye ſone is hote

and drye the moone is colde and therfor ye
howſe of the ſone whiche is. Leo in hym
is no good lettyng of blod. Secundaryly
he muſt chooſe an Ayery ſh ſygne which
is hote and moſt As the fyrſt medieate of
Libra. And the wole ſygne of Aqury. and
although yt Gemini and ye ſecond mediate
of Libra be Ayeryſh. yet the Galax hath
his courſe that way in ye which be many
ſterres of the nature of Mars. wherfore ye
mooone beyng in that place is combuſtio
And therfore in that ſygnes at that tyme
is not good to let blod Therdli watteriſh
ſygnes which be moyſte and cold begood
to let blod As Cancer & piſces, And Scorpio
althowght of nature he be wateryſh
yet not with ſtonding he is an oppoſitiue
ſygne of the exaltacyon of the Moone for
Taurus is the exaltacyon of the moone &
Scorpio is oppoſitine in deſcendyng of ye
muoe Alſo Scorpio is the howſe of mars
wherfor exhauſtyng of blod in this thīg
is not good Alſo ye coniunctyon of ye mone
wt the ſone .iii dayes before and .iii. daies

after is not good 
                  〈◊◊〉
               . Nor ye coniunctyon
of the moue with ſature. Nor ye
coniunctyon of the mone with mars and
iz. degres before an as many after. Nor
the oppſicyon of the mone with the ſone.
Nor the oppſycon of ye mone with Mars
is not good to exhauſt blod. Alſo a quatile
aſpect of the mone to the ſone. And a quartile
aſpect of the moone to ſaturne. And a
quartile aſpect of the moone to Mars. all
thes aſpectes be not good to miniſhe blod
for the Moone beyng in thes Planetes &
Aſpectes is contrary to the nature of mā
conſyrnyng flebotomy
            ¶ A tryne aſpect and a ſextyle aſpect is
good to let blod ſo be hit the moone be in a
good ſygne ¶ Alſo the moone coniunct wt
Iubyter in a good ſygne is beſt lettynge
of blod ¶ The moone coniunct to venus
or Marcury althowh they be good cōiūctons
yet for as muche as the mone is ver
                  •
               
nyght the coniunctyon of the ſone hit is
not good to let blod ¶ Alſo ye mone being
in a good ſygne hauyng a ſextyle or a tryne

aſpect to Iubiter or venus. 
                  〈…〉
               
is beſt to let blod forthes aſpectes be good
¶ Alſo the monē coniunct with the heed
or tayle of the dragon beyng with in .xii.
degrs befor or after is not good to exhauſt
blod. ¶ Forder more no wayne nor member
of man owght to be tochyd or hurt wt
any inſtermnent or Ierne whan the mon
is in any ſygne that hath domynyon of ye
member. wherfor in all maner of exhauſtyng
of blod from man or woman ye day
and the tyme muſt be electyd & poyntyd
by ſom doctor of phiſick or Aſtronamer.
what vayne, ſhold be opynyd for and yf
aman do lett blod of a vayne namyd cephalica
which is a vayne for the hed & the
ſigne be in Aries. here ye flebothome doth
gret harme thorow his ignorance & thus
in lyek man
                  ••••
                may offend in lettyng▪
blod in any other place of man. ¶ Forder
more ye .iiii. fyre ſygnes be good for ſlemy
tyck parſones for ye ſygnes be of nature
contrary to the cōmplexione therfore Contraria
cōtrariis curāte. So in liek maner
Aieriſh ſignes is good for melancoly mē
               
And watreyſh ſygnes ar good for 
                  •••
               
               ryck
men And I ſay now a dayes
to vſe lettyng of blod except for
the ſquynce ye peſtylence or for
the kyndes of lepery. is not
good. for no mā can exhauſt
euyll blod but he muſt tak
good blod with all. And
ye leyf of man is in ye
blod for ye ſpryt
of man is in ye
blod. And
ther be
other
wayes to clenſe or to puryfy the
blod wtout flebothomy or
lettyng of blod
         
         
            ¶ The .xii. Capitle doth ſhew. how
whā & what tyme a phiſicyō
ſhold mynyſter medycynes
            
            
               HYpocrates ſaith ye phiſicion
is a blynde phiſicion ye knowth
not Aſtrōamie for Aſtronamy
doth ſhew how whā
and what tyme al maner of
medſons owght to be miniſtred wherfor
I do ſay yf an expulcyue medycyne be takyn
inferyally. And the moone beyng in.
Ariete. Tauro. or. Capricorne whiche takyth
theyr name of terreſtyall beeſtes namyd.
The Rame the Bull and the Goote
which hath doble belys. one is molifycatyue
chewyng theyr cud ye other is digeſtiue
mow by reſon of the influence of the
celeſtyal ſygnes of lyek properte. ſhal cauſe
the ſyck parſon other to vomyte or els
ſhall cauſe nauſeons or eructuatiō. or cauſe
the ſubſtance that is in the ſtomacke
to aſcend to the orifice of the ſtomack and
this doth lett ye operacione of ſuche medicynes
ſpecyally yf Saturne by a quartil
Coniuntion or an oppoſicyon dothe geue
theyr fortytudes to ye ſayd ſygnes. Wher
for let phiſicyons be circumſpect in thes

matteres and in all other. for hipocrates
ſayth in his fyrſt pronoſticates. Ther be
certyn celeſtyall thyng in the whiche the
phiſicyon muſt ꝓuyd and he muſt be of
gret ꝓuydence. &c. Wherfor Auicē faith
of celeſtyal & terreſtyal matters hapynth
.&c. Wherfor hit is to conclud that euery
phiſ
                  ••
               on ſhold know yt nature & conplexiō
of ye ſygnes and ye planetes. wt ye aſpectes
of them and to haue in a memory the cretyck
dayes. And not to forgett ye operaciō
of the ſygnes which be attractyue. reten
tyme dygeſtyne and expulcyne ¶ Wherfore
I do ſay that the vertu of actraction
conſiſtith in hete and drynes And he that
wyll confort and help ye vertu of actraciō
muſt do hit whan the moone is in a hote
ſygne as in Sagittary ad Leo. ¶ To cō
               forte
or to helpe the vertu of retencyon. is
whan the mone is in a cold ſigne & dry as
in tauro and virgo. ¶ The ſucur & helpe
the vertu of dygeſtyon is whan the mon
is in a hote ſigne & a moiſt as in Gemini
Libra and Aquary. ¶ To helpe expulcy

ues is whan the moone is in a cold and a
moyſt ſygne as Cancer Scorpio and
piſces. ¶ Whan Venus regnyth
in a good aſpect to purge Coler.
whā the ſone doth regne in
a good aſpect, purge flem
me whā Iubyter doth
regne in a good aſpect,
purge Melancoly,
¶ Whā
ther is a cō
               iunctyon
or a
quartyle aſpect of ſaturne with the
mone miniſter thā no medycyne
uor whā Mars is in a coniunctyon.
&c̄.
         
         
            
            
               
            
         
         
            ¶ The .xiii. capytle doth ſhew of
ſowyng of ſedes. of ſettyng
of herbes. and
plantyng
and
Greffyng of
trees.
            
            
               THe moone beynge in Tauro is
good to ſow ſedes to ſet herbes
to plant and graff trees takīg
the tyme of the yere. beyng in
a ſextile or a tryne aſpect
            ¶ The mone beyng in Cancer is good to
ſow ſedes althowh it be a movable ſigne
And ſo hit is in virgo hauynge a ſextile or
a tryne aſpect wt to Saturne & ptholomy
ſayth in the fyrſt of his quadriꝑtites hit
is good to plante
            ¶ The mone beyng in libra hauīg a good
Aſpect is good to delue & dygg & to gooe
to plow and to ere and to ſow And ſo is ye
moone whan ſhe is in caprycorne
            ¶ The mone being in libra is good to ſet
herbes & to plant tres hauēg good aſpect
            ¶ Hereis to be notid that all thes things
is not good to goo about if Saturne or
Mars haue ani euell aſpects
            
            ¶ Now to conclud I deſier euere mā to
tak this lytil wark for a paſt time. for I
dyd wrett & make this bok. in .iiii dayes
and wretten with one old pene with out
mendyng and wher I do wret ye ſygnes
in Aries in. Taurous & in Leo is for my
purpoſe it ſtondyth beſt for our maternal
tonge
            ¶ FINIS
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Enprynted at London in ye Fleteſtrete
at the ſygne of the Roſe garland by
Robert Coplande.
            
         
      
   