
      
         
            
            ¶ A boke of prayers called ye ordynary faſſhyon of good lyurnge.
            Mathewe .vi.
            ¶ Seke fyrſte the kyngdome of god: And than all thynges ſhall be layde before you.
            ¶ He that wyl lyue wel (ſayth ſaynt Hierome) muſte pray at nyght and in ye mornyng at the leſt.
            ¶ CVM PRIVILEgio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
         
            
            
            
               THIS lytell treaty
                  •
               e is made for the erudicion of the ſimple, and yonge babes of god. And yet nat to be diſpiſed of the great clerkꝭ, & myghty ydel loubers: ye lyue here in earth lyke as hogges do ī wodes: whiche goeth vnder ye crabbe trees, and eate vp the crabbes ye lye vpō ye grounde, & neuer loke vp to the tre from whens they fel but wander on, ſekyng vpō ye groūde for mo, euyn ſo do theſe ydel lobers, ye deuoure ye gyftes of god, & do receyue innumerable rewardes & benefites at his handes: and yet neuer loke vp to gyue him thankes: but lyue here in earth ydelly, & wretchedly (as I may ſay(. This lytell boke therfore ſhal. be to put them in mynde of a peace of theyr dutye. And to exhorte thē to vſe an ordinary faſſyon of prayenge bycauſe they ſhal nat forget theyr dutye vſe therfore prayer at nyght & in the mornynge all buſynes layde a ſyde.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The exhortacyon to the reder.
            MOſt cryſten reder I wyll exhorte the to thre thynges (that is) pray ſe god, feare god, and loue god, auoyde ſynne, and folowe vertue, auoyde I ſaye all ſynnes and the occaſyons of thē. And ſpecially thoſe abhomynable ſynnes which aſke for vengeauns be fore god, as abhomynable Sweryng and blaſphymynge the name of god: deceyuynge the infaunt, the wydowe and the pore man wylfull periury or procuremente of any mannes deathe wrongfully: alſo ſynne agaynſte nature called the dumme ſynne: or wyllyngely to procede and contynue in ſynne contrarye to the inſpyracyon of god: theſe be to abhomynable to be ſpokē of: vſe therfore vertu & meanes to attayne grace (which be theſe.)
            ☞ Repentaunce, prayer, reſtitucyon, reconſylemente, almes and faſtynge,

and ſpecially to exerſyce that vertue which is contrary to the ſynne wherein ye are moſte corrupted (as ſhalbe declared here after) but nowe to retourne to my purpoſe of prayſynge god & fearynge him: Let vs conſyder the cauſe of oure creacyon howe that god hath created vs lyke to his owne Image and hathe gyuen vs a ſoule wyte, reaſon, & vnderſtandynge more then he hathe done to other beaſtes. And why hathe he created man thus verely nat bycauſe he ſhuld only eate and drynke and ſlepe, and take his pleaſure in this worlde lyke a ſwyny or a beſt, or that he ſhulde gather the goodes of this worlde togyther: and ſtryue with his neyghbour for ye giftꝭ and benefytes that god hath ſent: thē lyke as doggꝭ dothe fyght for a bone whiche theyr mayſter hath caſt them: or that he ſhulde onely folow, or occupye his crafte & ſcyence what ſo euer

it be (be it neuer ſo lawful) and do nothyng els: nay god ordayned nat him therfore: but he gaue him wytte and reaſon becauſe he ſhulde prayſe hys lorde god (as the angels do) and gyue him thankes for all hys benefyces: And therfore he gaue vs this cōmaū
               dement: Remember to kepe holy thy Saboth daye: as who ſhulde ſaye thou ſhalt honour me: I made the therfore this is the cōmaūdemēt of god which yf we marke wel we may perceyue the cauſe of our creacion. Let vs therfore prayſe and magnyfye oure lorde god as our dutye is: and lyue in the feare of him, let vs feare him (I ſay) for he is the lorde of power: whiche vtterly abhorreth ſynne. As it appereth in yt he baniſhed Adam from the ioyes of paradyſe bycauſe he agreed to ye ſinne of Eue. Alſo he cauſed almoſt ye hole worlde to be drowned at Noyes floud for ſine. And at another tyme he cauſed

fyre & brymſtone to rayne downe from heuen vpō the cytyes of Sodoma and Gomore for theyr wykednes. And ſo the people ther were brente & the cytye ſanke into the ſee: yea truly god hated ſynne ſo muche, that when chryſt beynge in the boſomme of his father dyd praye hym to be fauorable and to forgyue the ſynne of the world yet he wolde nat be intreated, but cauſed his onely ſōne chryſt to come downe into the worlde: and to take mans ſhape vpon hym. And to ſuffre dethe (he beynge without faute or ſynne) for to redeme vs wretched ſynners: ſo ſtraytely dothe god loke vpon ſyne therfore let vs feare hym & loue hym: Let vs loue hym (I ſaye) becauſe he made vs and created vs lyke to his owne Image, & ſpared nat his onely ſonne chryſt for our ſakes, but ſende hym downe for to make vs fre and to redeme vs: whē as our ſynnes coulde

nat be taken away by any other meanes: but onely by hym yt was without ſinne. And let vs loue him alſo becauſe he taketh vs nat awaye at ye worſte out of this preſēt lyfe: but ſuffreth vs to liue that we myght repente. and ler ne to knowe him: it is he alſo ye preſerueth vs. And dayly gyueth vs meate and drynke & al thynges neceſſary to our lyuyng: when we be ſynners & do nothyng deſerue it, yet dothe he preſer ue vs then & holdeth his holy hande ouer vs: or els the deuyl myght teare vs in peces as we go, or we inyght ſyncke into the earthe for our ſynnes (as we be wel worthy) but onely that god is more mercyfull to vs then we do deſerue, let vs therfore prayſe him & loue hi for his great fauour & mercy ſhewed to vs ſo many waies. As in yt he hath redemed vs by his onely ſō ne Jeſu chryſt. And alſo hath apoynted yt ye ſelfe ſame chryſt our mercyful

lorde (which ſuffred death for vs (ſhal be our iudge at the great daye of iudgemente (here is comforte) who can diſpayre, or what herte wyll nat be in flamed nowe to loue god. And to magnyfye him and thanke him for all his benefytes. And to kepe his lawe euen for very pure loue, conſyderynge hys greate mercy and loue towarde vs ſo many wayes, or who wyll nat feare him conſyderynge the thynges before reherſed: therfore yf thou haſte eyther eyes to rede this, or eares to here it and vnderſtandynge for to perceyue it, then conſyder who hath gyuen the theſe giftes. And who may puniſſhe y• ſodaynly, and take thē away agayne conſyder therfore the goodnes of god and cauſe of thy treacion. And prayſe him contynually. And folowe the example of holy men, as Dauyd Iob. Danyell, & dyuers other whiche vſed cuſtomably to make their prayers vnto
 god at dyuers tymes bothe in the daye and in the nyght, bycauſe they wolde nat forget theyr dutye towarde hym. As Dauyd ſayth Pſal. 42. My herte was troubled at mydnyght, and I called vpon the lorde, and watred my bedde with ye teares of myne eyes (Alſo he ſayth) Pſal. 54. I wyll crye to god. And my lorde wyl ſaue me, at nyght and in the mornynge & at mydday ſhal I pray hertely vnto him that he maye here my voyce. Lo here Dauyd doth preſcrybe thre ſolempne tymes whan a man ought to praye: As at nyght whā he goeth to bedde, in ye mornynge when he ryſeth, & at mydday when he goeth to meate. Danyell alſo the prophete vſed to pray thre tymes in the day, at whoſe example the churche dyd ordayne the thre houres which be ſonge or ſayd at this preſent daye in the churche after pryme. And therof the thre houres toke theyre begynnyg

with diuers other examples which were to long to reherſe: but let vs take an example at thē for to ſerue god in prayer twyſe a day at ye leaſt, ye is at euenyng & mornyng (al buſynes layde a ſyde) accordyng as I haue exhorted you before. And it were conuenyent that we ſhulde alſo gyue thankes vnto hym at our meale tymes, tor who wyll gyue a man his dyner. And wyl nat loke to be thanked of him for it, or who wyl gyue a chylde but anapple, and loke nat to haue thankes for it, muche more arre we bounde to thanke and magnyfie our lorde god that fedeth vs dayly, and aſketh none of our goodes for it, who dar therfore ſytte downe at his table. (excepte he be worſe then a beſt) and eate of the meate that god hath ſente, & nat giue him thankes for it? or who dare ryſe in the mornynge and loke vpon the bryght ſone whiche god hath created

for to gyue lyght vnto vs, & wyll nat thanke hym for it? or who darre go abrode in the worlde amongeſt his enemyes, and amonge the temptacyons of the deuyl? And wyl nat call fyrſte vpō god for helpe: or who dare go to bedde at nyght (lyke a beaſt) without thankes gyuynge to god, for ſuche be nefytes as he hath receyued that day and for ſuche dangers as he hath eſcaped? yea and alſo knoweth nat, whether he ſhall lyue tyl the next morowe or no, let vs therfore repēt euery houre & call vpon god for mercy, & truſte onely in hym. And let vs take an example at theſe holy fathers to vſe an ordynary faſſhyon of prayeng becauſe we ſhall nat forget our dutye. And chefely, let vs folowe the example of our mayſter chryſt: VVhiche prayed vnto god his father dyuers tymes in the mounte olyuete, and alſo when he made he laſt ſoper, & dyd inſtitute ye ſacramente

of his moſte bleſſed body he bothe prayed and gaue thankes to his father in heuen. And alſo he commaunded his diſcyples and apoſtels to pray contynually leſt they ſhuld be led into temptacion let vs therfore to lowe both his example & cōmaundementes, yf we wyl be called his diſcyples or cryſten men. And let vs nat leade oure lyfe lyke beaſtes, but lyke men and remember (as I ſayde fyrſt) the cauſe of our creacyon: and vſe an ordynary faſſhyon of prayenge. And although that I haue appointed thre tymes in the day for prayer: as in the mornynge: at mydday: and at nyghte as tymes moſt cōuenyent, and approbated by Dauyd & other holy fathers yet wolde I that euery man ſhulde pray as ofte as he is moued in ſpryte & nat to deferre it to theſe thre tymes onely: nor agayne I wolde nat that any man ſhulde thynke that I wolde

bynde him of neceſſyte to theſe thre tymes a day: as to a thynge which may nat be lefte vndone, vpō payne of vtter damnacyon (nay truely I wolde nat haue any man ſo ſcrupulous) but yet I wolde nat haue them leaue it vndone, ſpecyally at nyght and in the mornynge. And although yt I oughte nat to teache other mē: but haue more nede to lerne my ſelfe: yet I maye exhorte them as one criſten man ſhulde do an other: for as this ordynary faſſhyon of prayenge. And ſuche other: truſtynge that by my exortacyon they wyl nat do ye worſe: but rather amēde and procede by lytel and lytel to moſt parfyte perfeccyō: to which he brynge vs all: that lyueth & reygneth worlde without ende. Amen.
            
               ¶ In the mornynge bleſſe the and ſay thus.
               
                  
                  BLeſſed be the name of the father, the ſōue, & ye holy goſt nowe & for euer more And bleſſed be the father of heuen that made me: & bleſſed be his ſonne Jeſu Chryſt that redemed me, and bleſſed be the holy goſt that preſerueth me: to thē thre as to one god and one power, which is my lorde and god, in whom I truſte be all honor and prayſe, worlde without ende Amen. Our father whiche arte in heuen. &c.
            
            
               ¶ And then ſaye this prayer folowynge.
               O Lorde I thanke the for all thy benefites: & for that thou haſte preſerued me alyue this nyght and brought me forthe to the begynnyng of this day: beholde therfore lorde I enter into it, all thynges to do accordynge

to thy wyll & pleaſure: kepe me lorde and defēde me, and ſēde downe thy holy ſpryte for to iſtructe me that I may lyue this day in thy ſeruyce.
            
            
               ¶ An other prayer for. mornynge.
               O Lorde my god moſt mighti and mercyfull haue mercy on me wreched liner, lorde I ſay which art the moſt hieſt power, to whome al powere be ſubiecte bothe in heuen and in earth, and knoweth the ſecretes of our hertes, to the O lorde do I cal vpon for helpe, dſyrynge ye to ſtrenght me this day, agaynſt al ye teptacions and aſſaultes of the deuyll and the worlde, and to confyrme me with thy pryncypal ſpryte, that I may cōtinue thys day in thy ſeruice: gyue me therfore lorde theſe gyftes. Gyue me the herte that may repente: the wyll and

deſyre to haue knowlege of thy lawe and cōmaundementes, the eares that wyl be redy to here the, & nat the worlde: the eyes that ſhall beholde ryghtwyſenes and regarde the poore man: the handes (I ſay) that ſhal worke no euyl, the mouth in which ſhalbe foūde no deceyte, ye tonge yt maye euer ſhewe forth thy prayſe, to whō be all honour and glory by the mouthes of all men: worlde withoute ende.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Alſo ſay this prayer.
               LOrde behold me yt am thy handy worke, & put forth thy helpynge hande vnto me.
               
                  ❧ And when ye haue ſayd thus, thē go aboute youre wordly buſynes, remembrynge alwayes this great and ſpecial cōmaūdmēt of god (which is) ☞ Thou ſhalte nat do nor go about to do ye thyng to an other, which thou

woldeſt nat haue done to thy ſelfe.
               
                  ❧ Remember this well, yf thou deſyre to be ſaued.
            
            
               ¶ At nyght ſay theſe prayer folowynge.
               AT nyght knele downe on thy kneys & make thy confeſſion to god: and aſke hym mercy, and repent truly in thy herte.
            
            
               ¶ Repentaunce.
               TRue repētaūce is to lament & be ſory for thy ſynnes, & vtterly to forſake thē, & neuer to vſe thē agayne ☞ But to vſe and practyſe yt vertue which is contrary to the vyce wherin ye arre moſt corrupted.
               ☞ As cōtrary to couetouſnes, make reſtitucyon agayne out of hāde wher as ye haue done wronge, & diſpoſe the reſydue of your gooddes lyberaly to the pore.
               
                  
☞ Contrary to ſwerynge, vſe rather ſcilens & lerne to vſe ſobernes and pa cyens. Contrary to malyce & wrathe, vſe pacyens & ſhewe loue & gentylnes bothe in worde & dede & forgyue, remēbrynge yt chryſt dyd forgyue & ſuffered pacyently the wordes of the Jewes: yea he ſuffred death wrongfully amonge them.
               
                  ❧ And thus in euery degre of ſynne, vſe and practyſe yt vertu whiche is cō trary to ye ſynne wherin ye arre moſte corruptdd. And ſo by vertue ye ſhall ouercome vyce & ſynne: for it is the beſt meanes that can be deuyſed to brynge a man to perfyte lyuynge.
            
            
               ¶ Here folowith a prayer to be ſayde at nyght after confeſſion made and true xepentaunce had. ❧ The prayer of the penytent
               
                  
O Heuenly father yt creatour and maker of all thynges to whom bothe heuen & earth is obedient. And to whom the algels do ſeruyce & do ſynge with a contynuall voyce, Holy holy, & moſt holy lorde god of power callynge the euyn ſo, for thy great power & almyghtynes whoſe excellente maieſtye no thought nor tongue of men or angels cā expreſſe. Now whē I haue ſinned agaynſt the, & do remē
                  ber with my ſelfe, what a lorde of power I do offende, with my great and innumerable ſynnes: then I abhorre mine owne foliſſhenes. And alſo whē I conſyder howe gentyll & louynge a father I haue forſaken. I vtterly diſ pyſe my madnes, & great vnkyndnes And whan I beholde & ſe frō what & howe bleſſed a lyberte my ſpryte is banyſſhed from (which is the ioy yt I was wonte to haue. In the my lorde god) and nowe in what a myſerabte

caſe & bondage of ſinne & the deuyll I haue wrapped my ſelfe in: then am I al togyther myſcontented wt my ſelfe and ſore troubled in my cōſciens. And haue nothynge els before myne eyes but hell, & deſperacyon: for then my cōſcyence trembeleth & feareth much the greate Juſtice of god (whiche in deade is ineuitable) and no man can eſcape it. But yet cōtrary wyſe on the other ſide: when I beholde lorde thy vnmeſurable loue & goodnes toward mākynde. And thy mercy wherin (as the ꝓphetꝭ do teſtifie) thou doſt paſſe & excelle. Which ſadyſt, I wyll nat the deathe of a ſynner: but rather that he ſhulde lyue & be conuerted. I therfore remēbryng thy greate kyndenes (alwayes ſhewed vnto vs) and theſe thy moſt gentyl wordes: do ſaye vnto my ſelfe. A wreche (that I am) why haue I offended ſo mercyfull a lorde: and therat I am halfe aſtoned agayne &

diſcūforte i my ſelfe. But thē cōmeth into my mynde a nother ſwete ſaynge of thy mouth (which ſaydeſt) That in what houre ſo euer the ſynner dothe repente: I wyll no more remember hys vnkyndnes. And therwith I am ſo muche conforted agayne: that I am compelled euen to meruayle and lay with my ſelfe. O the wonderfull loue of god towarde vs for his mercy is without ende. And then I ſaye vnto my ſelfe: why ſhulde I be in diſpayre to haue remyſſyone of my ſynnes at his handes: whiche in the tyme of my noughty lyuynge hathe preſerued me that I myght lyue & lerne to knowe him. And nowe of his owne mere mocyon calleth me to repētance bycauſe he delyteth in me and wolde haue me ſaued: ſor truly he hathe great delyte and comforth. In a repentant ſynner that cōmeth vnto hym as he hath declared vnto vs, by manye parables:

                  As in the .x. Chapter of Luke by the parable of the woman hauynge ten groses whiche yf ſhe loſe one: then ſhe lygh tethe a candell and ſwepethe the houſe and ſekethe dylygently tyll ſhe haue founde it. And when ſhe hathe founde it ſhe calleth in her neyhgbours and lo, uers: ſaynge my frendes reioce with me For I haue foūde the grote agayne that I loſt, euen ſo lykewyſe more ioye and reioyſynge ſhalbe in heuen ouer one ſynner yt repēteth: then ouer nynety & nyne iuſte pſons yt haue nat offēded. And ſykewyſe it is let furth in the parable of the hundereth ſhepe yt were lette vpō the hyll for to go to ſeke one ſhepe yt was loſt: with dyuers other parables: but it is moſt expreſly ſette forthe in the parable of the prodygall ionne whoſe Image I vtterly recognyce & konwlege in my ſelfe for vnhappely lefte I So louynge a father buthryftely myſpēding his ſubſtaūce

and gyftes. And whyles I do folowe ſtyll the carnall deſyres of my owne wyll: vtterly forgetyng, lorde thy pre ceptes. I do tomble my ſelfe all to gy ther in the ſeruytude of vyce: And ſo I beyng blynde & voyde of all bertu brought to extreme pouerte can nat ſe whether to fle. But vnto hi agayne that I dyd forſake for he is the lorde of power & father of mercye. Yes truly I am vnworthy lorde to be receyued of the. Or to lyfte vp myne eyes vnto the: or yt I ſhulde call the by the name of a father: but I moſt humbly beleche the to loke gently towardes me with the eye of thy mercy: for thy gentyl loke & the inſpyracyon of thy ſpryte is of ſuche ſtrength yt it reuyueth a ſynner beyng deade. And it reſtoreth a ſike mā to his helth againe: For truly in yt I am dyſpleaſed nowe with my ſelfe and do perceyue myne owne faute. I muſt nedes referre it

vnto the: for it cōmeth of the grace. And nat of my ſelfe for I beyng long blynde & wanderynge farre out of the ryght way: thou haſt wytſafe to loke towardes me and to reſtore me my ryght agayne: that I may ſe nowe & ꝑceyue in what caſe I am. And what daūger I have eſcaped: And wt what myſcheffes, & trobles. I was laden & cūbred withal: I therfore lord beyng an vnthryfty ſeruant and worthy of muche punyſſhement. Am nothynge worthy to be honored & regarded lyke a ſonne, nor I wyl nat deſyre it, but it ſhalbe ſuffycyent for me. Yf it wolde pleaſe the of thy goodnes but to admytte me into thy ſeruyce. And to accepte me amongeſt the ſympleſte and loweſt ſore of thy ſeruauntes: that I may attayne to Saluacyon through thy mercy: for in thy holy place there be many mencyon places or ſeates. And it ſhallbe ſuffycyent for me yf I

may but ſyt at the feete of thy bleſſed ſeruaūtes: haue merci therfore on me my lorde and father, for I do vtterly abhorre myne olde corrupte lyfe. And am come nowe for to dwell with the. And wyll neuer forſake the agayne: But wyll contynue in thy ſeruyce all the dayes of my lyfe. And I wyl forſake all the pompes and pleaſures of this worlde & a
                     •
                   the deſceytful wayes that I haue vſed. And wyl nat be afſhamed here in this worlde to liue aſter a pore ſorte: and to be acumpted a mongeſt ye moſt abiecte & ſymplew: ſo that I may wynne euerlaſtynge honour with the to whom be al prayſe & glory nowe & foreuer more.
               Amen
            
            
               ¶ The prayer of Salomon.
               O Lorde great ryches: or extreme pouerte gyue me nat: but ꝓuyde for me in the meane: accordinge to thy

wyl & pleaſure for by hauyng the one I ſhall forget the, & by hauynge the other I ſhalbe dryuen to forſake the.
            
            
               ¶ Prayers to be ſayde at meſſe tyme in the begynnynge ſay thus at coufiteor.
               O Lorde I am nat worthy to enter and come into this noble houſe of thyne whiche is ye houſe of prayer: but lorde beholde I come as a penyēt ſynner I do ſaye with the publycane Lorde be mercyfull to me a ſynner: for I haue offended the many wayes and am nat worthy to lyfte vp myne eyes into the: not to lyue vpon the earthe but lorde be thou mercyfull vnto me a ſynner accordynge to the greate mercy and I wyll confeſſe my ſynnes vntd ye which yf I wolde I can nat hyde frō the: for thou arte ye lorde of power yu knoweſte the ſecretes of our hertes: haue mercy therfore on me, O Lorde

accordinge to thy great mercy and let me nat caſt awaye y• thynge throught my wrechednes: which thy almyghty goodnes hath created & redemed: but forgyue me lorde and ſende thy holy ſpryte into me: that I may kepe thy lawe and commaundementes.
            
            
               ¶ A prayer to be ſayd at the ſacramēt of meſſe.
               BLeſſed & prayſed be the father of heuen yt ſēt downe his onely ſōne Chryſt for to redeme vs. And bleſſed be our lorde Jeſus chryſt yt ſhede his blode for our ſakes. And hath lefte his body here amonge vs in fourme of breade & wyne. As a pledge for to witneſſe vnto vs: yt he hathe bene all redy here in the worlde & hath ſhedde his blode plenteouſly for our redempcyon. Therfore O father of heuen I praye the accept his deathe as a ſufficēt

oblacion and ſatyſtactyon for my ſynnes. And ſet his paſſyon betwene thy iudgemente and my ſoule. And loke nat vpon my ſynnes: but haue mercy on me for his ſake, and ſende thy holy ſpirite into me: that I may kepe thy lawes & commaundementes.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ When ye do kyſſe ye pax ſay thus to your ſelfe
               O Lorde gyue me grace to forgyue myne aduerlaryes frely for thy ſake: yt I may kyſſe worthely togither wt my neyghbours in ye holy kyſſe of charyte accordīg to thy cōmaūdemēt.
            
            
               ¶ When ye take holy breade ſay thus to your ſelfe.
               LYke as ther be many graynes of corne in thꝭ brede: euyn ſo be we al mēbres of one bodi ī our lord Jeſꝰ chryſt: in whō there was neuer malyce nor cōtrauerſyfoūd: let vs therfore agre togyther as the members of one

body. And ſo take brede louingly togyther.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ When ye take holy water ſay thus.
               BLeſſed and prayſed be our lorde Jeſus chryſt wich hath waſſhed away our ſinnes in his blode: And is mercyfull to vs for euer.
               
                  ❧ The holy water alſo is a token of our Baptyme.
            
            
               ¶ Grace to be ſayd be fore meate.
               LEt vs eate in the name of ye lorde and ſatyſfye our body temporaly with ſuche meate as he hath ſente.
            
            
               ¶ The anſwere.
               ANd let vs deſyre hym lyke weſe to ſatyſfy our ſoule with y• gyfte of good lyuynge that we may be euer

as redy to all good workes: as we be nowe to our meate.
            
            
               Grace to be ſayde after meate.
               THankes be to our lord god: that hathe ſente vs thus.
            
            
               ☞ The anſwere.
               ANd let vs prayſe hym that cauſeth bothe fiſſhes to ſwymme in the water. And beaſtes to lyue on the earth for our ſuſtenaunce: to hym be prayſe and glory for euermore.
               Amen
            
            
               
                  ❧ A prayer to be ſayd of a ſyke man at the poynte. 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  ath
               O Lorde I thanke the: for yt thou haſt preſerued me from al ſoden death. And haſt gyuen me nowe this ſyckenes and knolege of my death & ende: that I myght repente & beleue

and truſt in the my lorde god: which art mercyfull and doſt all thynges for the beſt: for I knowe that thou loueſt them: whom thou doſt chaſtyſe. And I thāked the yt yu haſt gyuen me know lege and faithe in thy ſone leſu chryſt by whom I knowe that I ſhall be ſaued euyn aſwell as the thefe was, or Mary Magedelyne: or any other creature whiche were ſynners aſwell as I am. I wyll therfore lorde ſynge furth thy prayſe: come forth nowe all people & ſay with me: let vs reioyce in the lorde our ſauynge helth: and lette vs prayſe him in pſalmes and cantycles.
               
               ☞ For he is the great lorde: And is aboue all goddes and wyll nat caſte away his people.
               ❀ For he hath loked from his hyght holy place aboue: yea he hathe loked from heuen into earth.
               ⚜ That he myhht here the greuous ſyghes of the penitēt: and yt he myght

ſaue and delyuer the chyldren of thē that were loſt.
               ¶ Let vs therfore prayſe the lorde: And ſaye that he is good vnto vs: for his mercy is without ende.
               ❀ He hath nat done vnto vs accordynge to our ſynnes: nor he hath nat rewarded vs accordynge to our wyckednes: but as the father ſhuld haue mercy ouer his chyldren: euen ſo hath the lorde taken mercy vpon vs that loue hym and here hym.
               ☞ For loke how far dyſtaunce there is bytwene ye Eaſt & the weſt. And ſo farre hath ye lorde ſet our ſines frō vs
               
                  ❧ Let vs therfore praiſe hi cōtinual ly: yt was borne of the virgyn Mary.
               ⚜ And ſuffred death for vs ſo mercy fully: and aſcended vp into heuen ſo glorouſly.
               ¶ To prepare a waye for vs and to be our medyatour: contynually before god the father.
               
                  
                  ❧ And wyll be our iudge at ye great daye of Judgemente: to iudge vs in mercy is his intente.
               
                  ❧ Into his handes therfore I commytte my ſoule: truſtyng onely in the father the ſonne and the holy goſt: to whom be all prayſe and glorye nowe and for euer more.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Here after foloweth rules of wyſdome & vertue .xx. i nōber.
               
                  MAke thy prayer to god, twyſe in a day at the leaſte.
                  2 ¶ Auoyde ydelnes, & be alwayes occupyed in ſōme honeſt buſynes or ſtudye.
                  3 ☞ Be obedyēt to kynges & princes: and to theyr offycers.
                  4 ❧ Here muche but be nat raſſhe thy ſelfe in ſpekynge.
                  5 ❀ Uſe ſobrenes & humylyte, and thou ſhalt be called wyſe.
                  6 ⚜ Rebuke lyght & wanton ꝑſōs and ſpecyally ſwerers.
                  
                     
7 ❧ Shewe good example of vertuous lyuynge to the people,
                  8 ❀ Order thy houſholde quietly, & inſtructe them in goddes wordes.
                  9 ⚜ Yf thou be called to promocion mynyſter Juſtyce: without brybes or falſe diſſymulacyon.
                  10 ☞ Gyue faire language to all people: and ſpecyally to pore folkes.
                  11 ❧ Be nat percial for fauour or lucre: nor agre nat to wronge doers.
                  12 ¶ Get thy goodes truly: and ſpende them acordynge to thy degre meſurably.
                  13 ¶ In ꝓſperyte beware of pryde remember thy olde eſtate: and lyue in the feare of god.
                  14 ☞ Deſyre ſome frende of thyne to tell the of thy fautes, and ſo ſhalte thou lyue ſuerly.
                  15 ⚜ Here thy frende in wyſedome and myſtruſt euer thyne owne iudgemente.
                  
                     
16 ¶ In matters of wayght: be nat haſty in anſwerynge: but take reſpyte.
                  17 ☞ For of haſty anſweryng par aduēture repentaunce myght folowe but in proces of tyme commethe wyſdome and knolege.
                  18 ❀ In aduerſite forgyue and be pacyent and truſt to goddes helpe.
                  19 ⚜ Studye alwayes howe to be ſtowe thy tyme here: in this worlde to goddes pleaſure.
                  20 ❧ Remēber well thy laſt daye: and thynke often vpon death.
               
            
            
               ❧ FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ Imprynted at London in Fleteſtrete at the ſygne of the George nexte to ſaynt Dunſtons churche by Wyllyam Myddylton.
            
               
                  printer's or publisher's device
               
            
         
      
   