
      
         
            
            
            AN
EXPOSITION
OF THE LAST
PSALME: DELIVERED IN A SERMON
PREACHED AT PAVLS
Crosse the fifth of Nouember,
1613.
            
               By IOHN BOYS, Doctor
of Diuinitie.
            
               Augustine de lib. Arbit. lib. 3. cap. 15.
               Qui Deo non reddit faciendo quod debet, reddet patiendo
quod debet.
            
            
               AT LONDON
Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for
VVilliam Aspley. 1613.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            AN EXPOSITION
of the last Psalme.
            
               PSALME 150.
               O praise God in his holinesse, &c.
            
            
               ALL the Psalmes of Dauid are comprised
in two words,Gueuara. 
               Halleluiah,
and Hosanna, that is, blessed be God,
and God blesse; as being for the
greater part either praiers vnto God
for receiuing mercies, or else praises
vnto God for escaping miseries. This our present
Hymne placed as aLyra in loc. Conclusion of the whole booke,
yea the beginning, middle, end, to which all the rest (as
In loc. 
               Musculus obserueth are to be referred) inuiteth vs in
prescript and postscript, in title, in text, in euery verse,
and in euery Clause of euery verse to praise the Lord.
Teaching these two poynts especially:

                  1. For what
                  2. With what
               God is to be magnified.
            
               For what, vers. 1, 2. O praise God in his holinesse, praise
him in the firmament of his power, praise him in his noble
acts, praise him according to his excellent greatnes.
            With what, euen with all that is

                  
                     Without vs, vers. 3, 4, 5. Praise him in
the sound of the trumpet, &c.
                  
                     Within vs, vers. 6. Omnis spiritus, &c.
Let euery spirit praise the Lord, praise
ye the Lord.
               
            
            
               
This in briefe is the whole texts Epitomie, I come
now to the words Anatomie, cutting vp euery part and
particle seuerally, beginning first at the first, O praise
God in his holinesse. Of which one sentence the Doctors
haue many (though not aduerse yet diuerse) readings,
especially three: Praise God in his saints, praise
God in his sanctitie, praise God in his sanctuarie. S. Hierome,
Augustine, Prosper, andChrysost. Basil. Euthym. Arabs apud Muscul. Lyra. Hugo Card. Turrerecmat. Anonymus. other as well ancient
interpreters as moderne translate here praise God in
his saints. For if he must be praised in all his creatures,
how much more in his new creatures: if in the witlesse
wormes, and senselesse vapours, Psal. 148. much more
doubtlesse (as Theodorit here collects) in men, in holie
men, in saints, vpon whom hee hath out of hisEphes. 3. 8. 16. vnsearchable
riches of mercie bestowed the blessings of
the1. Tim. 4. 8. life present, and of that which is to come.
            First, almightie God is to bee blessed for giuing his
saints such eminent gifts of grace for the good of his
Church, and for the setting foorth of his glorie. So
Chrysostome, Basil, Euthymius, Prosper, Placidus Parmensis
expound it.Iames 1. 17. Euery good and perfit gift is from
aboue descending from the father of lights, a good
thought in a saint is gratia infusa, a good word in a
saint is gratia effusa, a good deed in a saint is gratia diffusa,
through his grace which is the God of1. Pet. 5. 10. all grace
saints are1. Cor. 15. 10. whatsoeuer they are. Wherefore praise the
Lord in his saints, often remember their vertues as
their true reliques, and as it were bequeathedEuseb. Emisen. hom. de S. Maximo. 
               legacies
vnto Gods people. So the wise man, Ecclesiasticus
44. Let vs now commend the famous men in old time
by whom the Lord hath gotten great glorie, let the people
speake of their wisdome, and the congregation of their
praise. So the Confession of Bohemia, chap. 17.See Harmon. confess. sect. 16. pag. 486. 
               Wee
teach that the saints are worshipped truly, when the people
on certaine daies at a time appointed, doe come together
to the seruice of God, and doe call to minde and meditate
vpon his benefits bestowed vpon holie men, and

through them vpon his Church, &c. And for as much as
it is kindly to consider, opus diei in die suo, the worke of
the dayMaior praefat. in Psal. 22. in the same day it was wrought; it is well
ordered by the Church of England, that the most illustrious
and remarkable qualities of the saints are celebrated
vpon their proper festiuals, that on S. Stephens
day, we may learne by S. Stephens example to loue our
enemies: on S. Matthewes day, to forsake the world
and to follow Christ: on S. Iohn the Baptist his day, to
speake the truth constantly, and to suffer for the same
patiently. Thus in stedfastnes of faith and godlinesse
of life (non legere modò sed degere sanctorum vitas, as
Owin epigram. lib. 3. one wittily) to bee followers of them as they were
followers of Christ; is (asSer. on Christmas day preached at Bexterly, & ser▪ on S. Stephens day at Grimstorpe. blessed Latymer was wont
to say) the right worshipping of Saints, and of God
in his Saints.
            Againe, for as much as there is a communion of
Saints, as we cōfesse in the Creed, a knot of fellowship
betweene the dead Saints and the liuing; it is our dutie
to praise God for their good in particular, as theyApocal. 6. 10. pray
to God for our good in generall. It is required on our
part I say, to giue God most humble thanks for translating
thē out of thisPsal. 84. 6. valley of teares into Hierusalem
aboue, where they beApocal. 7. 9. clothed with long white robes,
hauing palmes in their hands, andApocal. 4. 4. crownes of gold on
their heads, euer liuing in that happie kingdome without
either dying or crying, Apocal. 21. 4. and this also
(in the iudgement of Augustine, Hierome, Hugo, Raynerius,
and other) is to praise God in his Saints.
            
            These reasons are the grounds of certaine holy daies
established in England by law, namely to blesse God
for his Saints eminent grace while they were liuing,
and exceeding glorie now they be dead. Wherein our
Church ascribes not any diuine worship to the Saints,
but all due praise to the sanctifier: in celebrating their
memorie (saith Augustine) we neither adore their honour,
nor implore their helpe: but (according to the

tenour of our text) wee praise him alone,De ciuit. lib. 8. cap. 27. who made
them both men and martyrs. In the words ofTom. 2 fol. 118 
               Hierome
to Riparius: Honoramus reliquias martyrum, vt
eum cuius sunt martyres adoremus: honoramus seruos,
vt honor seruorum redundet ad dominum: If thou desire
to doe right vnto the Saints, esteeme them as paternes,
and not as patrones of thy life; honour them only
so farre,Philip Mornaeus de missa, lib. 3. cap. 11. See Melanct. resp. ad art. Bauar. art. 25. that thou maist alway praise God in them,
and praise them in God.
            The gunpowder men erre very much in this one
kinde of honouring God, for either they worship his
Saints as himselfe, or else their owne saintlings, and
not his Saints. In praying to the dead, in mingling the
blood of their martyrs with the precious blood of
their Maker, in applying their merits, and relying vpon
their mercies; it is plaine that they make the Saints (as
Melancthon tels them in hisTit. de sanct. inuocat. Apologie for the Confession
of Auspurge) quartermasters with God, and
halfe mediatours with Christ, I say ioynt mediatours
not of incercession only but ofSee D. Fulke in 1. Tim. 2. 5. redemption also. Nay
they make the blessed Virgin vpon the poynt their only
mediatrix and aduocate, so they sing, and so they say.
They sing in their publique seruice,Bellar. de sanct. beat. cap. 17. 
               Maria mater
gratiae, mater misericordiae, &c. the which is Gods owne
stile, 1. Pet. 1. 10. & 2. Cor. 1. 3. so they likewise say,
Maria consolatio infirmorum, redemptio captiuorum,
liberatio damnatorum, salus vniuersorum.
               Apud Magdeburg. Cent. 10. Coll. 275. 
               Giselbertus
in lib. altercationis Synagogae et ecclesiae, cap. 20. Maria
quasi maria, saith Augustinus de Leonissa, sermon 5
vpon Aue maria, for as all riuers come from the seas,
and returne to the seas againe, Ecclesiastes 1. 7:See Gospell Annunciat. so forsooth
(if you will vndertake to beleeue him) all grace
is deriued from Mary, and ought to be returned again
to Mary. We finde so much in
               Chemnit. exam. Con. Trident. part. 3. pag. 151. 
               Rosario Mariae, reparatrix
& saluatrix desperantis animae, &c. That which
is worse, their owne Pope (who cannot, as they teach,
erre in a poynt of doctrine as Pope) calleth her expresly

               Deam. Pet. Bembus in his epistles written in Pope
Leo 10. name, lib. 8. epist. 17. printed at Strasburg an.
1609. that which is worst of all, in their most approued
Bible: they translate Gen. 3. 15. ipsa conteret caput
tuum: she shall breake thine head, although (as their
owne IesuitIn Habacuc. cap. 1. num. 32. 
               Ribera confesseth honestly) the Hebrew
text, the Chaldee paraphrase, the translation of the Septuagint,
and all good Latin copies reade ipse conteret,
he shall bruise the serpents head, applying it to Christ,
according to that of Paul, The God of peace shall tread
downe Satan vnder your feete, Rom. 16. 20. by this euidence
you may see that the gunpowder crue praise not
God in the saints, nor the saints in God: but on the
contrarie the saints as God.
            Againe these S. Peter men (and as I haue warrant to
terme them on this day Salt Peter men) erre from the
true meaning of our text, because they doe not praise
God in sanctis eius, in his saints: but dishonour God in
sanctis eorum, in saints of their owne making, vsually
praying vnto some who were no men, and to many
who were not holy men. It is doubted by the two
great lights in their glorious firmament, Bellarmine
and Baronius, whether there were euer any such man
as S. George, or such a woman as S. Catharine. Cardinall
Bellarmine lib. de beatitudine sanct. cap. vlt. §. respondeo
sanctorum doth acknowledge that they worship
certaine saints whose stories are vncertaine, reputing
the legend of S. George apocryphall according to
the censure of PopeCan. sanct. Roman. dist. 15. 
               Gelasius: and Cardinall Baronius
ecclesiast. annal. Tom. 2. ad an. 290. according to the
impression at Rome, fol. 650. as also de Martyrologio
Romano cap. 2. confesseth as much of Quiriacus and
Iulitta, declaring plainely that their acts are written either
by fooles or heretikes, and in his annotations vpon
the Romane Martyrologie 23. Aprill, he taketh vp Iacobus
de Voragine for his leaden Legend of our English
S. George, concluding in fine, that the picture of Saint

               George fighting with a Dragon is symbolicall, and not
historicall. If the Scripture be trueRom. 14. 23. 
               whatsoeuer is not of
faith is sinne: then assuredly these men (asTit. 3. 11. 
               Paul speaks)
are damned of their owne selues in their owne conscience,
who (notwithstanding all their doubts) pray still
in their publike seruice,Missal. Roman. ex Con. Triden. decret. restit. in festo Georgij. 
               Deus, qui nos beati Georgij
martyris tui meritis & intercessione laetificas, Concede
propitius, &c. An Idoll as Paul affirmes, 1. Cor. 8. 4. is
nothing, Ergo, the Papists in worshipping S. George
which is nothing, commit (euen themselues being
Iudges) abominable Idolatrie.
            As they worship some who were no men, so many
who were notDr. Sutclif examin. of Rom. cap. 7. holy men, as a reuerendDr. Abbot Antilog. pag. 3. Doctor of our
Church accutely, Non matyris domini sed mancipes
diaboli: the Souldiour who peirced Christs holy side
was a Pagan,Sutclif. vbi sup. neither doth any storie which is authenticall
speake of his conuersion, and yet they worship
him vnder the name of S. Longinus, or Longesse, March
15. Papias (asHist. lib. 3. cap. vlt. 
               Eusebius andCatalog. scrip. in vita pap. 
               Hierome report) held
the heresie of the Millenarians, and yet he is honoured
as a saint in the Romane Calender vpon the 22. of Februarie.
Becket was a bad subiect in his life, and no
good Christian at his death, in that hee commended
himselfe and the cause of his Church vnto S.Houenden annal part. poster. pag. 298. 
               Denys
and our Lady. Yet S. Thomas of Canterburie was honoured
at Canterburie in the daies of popish ignorance
more then either the worlds Sauiour, or the blessed
Virgine his mother: in which relation I appeale to the
records of that Church, as also to the very stones vnder
his shrine worne with the knees and hands of such
as came thither to worship him. Boccace reporteth how
one Sir Chappelet a notorious Italian Vsurer and Cousoner
came to be honoured as a Saint in France. Sanders
among them is a saint, albeit he liued in plotting,
and dyed in acting rebellion against his gracious Soueraigne
Queene Elizabeth of famous and blessed memorie.
Nay Dauus is Diuus, Saul is among the Prophets,

               pater personatus, father Parsons all the daies of
his life was a perpetual Martyr, as his fellowCatalog. scrip. Iesuit. in vita Parsonij. 
               Ribadeneira
termeth him: and yet one (who sometime was
his inner man, and knew him as I presume, better then
euer did Ribadeneira) transposing the letters of Robertus
Pársonius Iesuita, found this anagramme, Personatus
versuti oris abi: the wit-foundred drunkard,
Henry Garnet (who did not according to the Counsell
of1. Tim. 5. 23. 
               Paul vse vino modico: but asEpist. lib. 3. epist. 6. 
               Paulinus pretily
modio) that lecherous treacherous Arch-priest, Archtraitor,
Arch-diuell in concealing, if not in contriuing:
in patronizing, if not in plotting the powder intended
massacre, is returned a Saint from beyond the seas with
Sheldon preface before his motiues. 
               à sancte Henrice intercede pro nobis: his action is iustified,
his life commended, his death honoured, his miracles
and memorie celebrated by that Ignatian spirit,
(Eliens. epist. lector. ante resp. ad Bellar. apol. 
               portentum nominis portentum hominis, hauing a great
deale of name, though a very little modestie) Andreas
Eudaemon Ioannes Cydonius: but notwithstanding his
apologie, the saintship of Henry Garnet is so buffeted
by the replies and antilogies of our accuratlie learned
diuines, as that his straw face will hereafter hardly be
worth a straw. Catesbie, Winter, Rookwood, and the rest
of the Cole-saints and hole-saints (who laboured in
the diuels mine by the Popes mint) are numbred among
the holy ones also: Babilon and Egypt praise
God in them, and for them. I haue heard much of roaring
gentlemen in London and Canterburie, but if the
Lord himselfe had not watched ouer his Church, if the
Lord himselfe had not written England in theEsay 49. 16. palmes
of his hands, if the Lord himselfe had not kept King
Iames as theDeut. 32. 10. apple of his eye,Psal. 124. if the Lord himselfe
had not been on our side (now may Gods Israell in
England say) if the Lord himselfe had not been on our
side, when they rose vp against vs, if the Lord himselfe
had not (out of his vnspeakeable goodnesse toward vs
and our posteritie) broken their snares, and deliuered

our soules out of that horrible gunpowder pit; these
bellowing Buls of Basan, and Canon-mouthed hell-hounds
would haue made on this day such a roare, that
all Christendome should haue felt it, and the whole
world haue feared it.Iudith. 13. 4. 
               O Lord God of all power, blessed
be thy name, which hast this day brought to nought the
enemies of thy people,
               Iudges 5. 31. 
               so let all thine enemies perish O
Lord, that our
               Psalm. 126. 2. 
               mouthes may be filled with laughter and
our tongue with ioy. Sint diui modo non viui, let England
hang such, although afterward Rome hallow such, he
that hath an eye to see without the spectacles of a Iesuit,
will affoord as good credit to the register at Tiburne
as to the Calender of Tyber: for if these be Martyrs,
I wonder who are Murtherers? If these be Saints, I
pray you who are Scythians? If these bee Catholikes,
who are Canibals?
            I passe to the second exposition of these wordes, O
praise God in his sanctitie, so Munster, Pagninus, Beza,
Tremelius and our old translation heere, Praise God in
his holinesse: now God is holy formaliter & effectiue,
holy in himselfe, and making other holy; the Lord is
glorious in holinesse Exod. 15. 11. Wheras other Gods
are famous for their vnholinesse, Venus was a wanton,
Mercurius a theefe, Iupiter a monsterous adulterer, an
ingenious man (asLib. de legend. libris gentilium. 
               Basile writes) would blush to report
that of beastes, which the Gentiles haue recorded
of their Gods. If such imputations are true saithDe Ciuit. Dei lib. 6. cap. 6. 
               Augustine,
quàm mali how wicked are these Gods: if false
quàm malè how wretched and foolish are these men, adoring
the same things in the temple, which they scoffe
at in the theater, in turpitudine
               August. contra faust. man. li. 12. cap. 40. 
               nimium liberi, in superstitione
nimium serui: so that their Gods are not as our
God, euen our enemies being Iudges Deut. 32. 31.
there is none holy as the Lord 1. Sam. 2. 2. calledEsay 1. 4. & 10. 20. often
in holy Scripture the holy one, yea thrice holy; holy, holy,
holy, is the Lord of hosts Esay 6. 3. hisLuk. 1. 49. name is holy,
hisPsal. 19. 7. law is holy, hisMark. 12. 36. spirit is holy, his will holy, his

word holy, righteous in all his waies, and holy in all his
workes Psalm. 145. 17. making vs also which are his seruants
an holy people Deut. 7. 6. an holy priest-hood 1. Pet.
2. 5. his holy temples 1. Cor. 6. 19. our bodies, our soules,
our selues, our whole1. Pet. 3. 2. seruice holy, wherefore praise
God in his holinesse.
            
            
               Idem Genebrard et alij. 
               Luther, Caluin, Vatablus, your English-Geneua bibles,
& our new translation haue praise God in his sanctuarie,
the which in holy scripture signifieth either heuen,
or the temple, heauen is often called in sacred writ
Gods sanctuarie, forEsay 57. 15. thus saith he that is high and excellent,
he that inhabiteth eternitie, whose name is the
holy one, I dwell in the high and holy place. Christ in
comming to vs is said to breake the heauens Esay 64. 1.
and when he went from vs vnto his father a cloud tooke
him vp into heauen Acts 1. and frō heauen he shal come
againe to iudge the quicke and the dead 1. Thes. 4. 16.
That his sanctuarie may be taken heere for heauen, is
gathered out of the very next clause (praise him in the
firmament of his power) the which (asIn loc. 
               Caluin &Bellarmine in loc. other
expositors haue well obserued,) is exegeticall, and expoundes
the former, as if Dauid should haue said, praise
the Lord in his sanctuary, that is in the firmament of his
power, for the heauens declare the glory of God and the
firmament sheweth his handy worke Psalm. 19. 1. let
all people praise God our father in heauen, especially
such as dwell with himGenebrard Agellius Acernensis epist. in loc. in heauen, O praise the Lord
all ye blessed Angels and Saints inhabiting his sanctuarie
which is highest and holiest.
            
               Luther Vatablus chald. apud Genebrard english Com. dedicated to Mr. Herlakinden. Other apply the word sanctuary to the Temple, so
termed for two respects especially. 1. because God manifesteth
his holines toward vs in that holy place more
principally, calling it expreslyEsay. 56. 7. 
               his house. 2. a sanctuarie
in regard of our holy seruice toward God, for albeit euery
day be to the good man a sabbath, and euery place
a temple; yet the God of Order hath appointed certaine
times, and certaine places also, wherein hee will

bee worshipped publiquely, saying Leuiticus 19. 30.
Ye shall obserue my sabbaths, and reuerence my sanctuary.
For our holines toward God concerneth vsHooker eccles. pol. lib. 5. §. 24. one
way in that we are men, and another way in that we
are ioyned as parts to that visible mystical body which
is his Church as men, wee are at our owne choyce
both for time, and place, and forme, according to the
exigence of our owne occasions in priuate, but the
seruice which is to bee done of vs as the members of a
publique body, must of necessity bee publique, and so
consequently to bee performed on holy daies in holy
places. and for this doctrine the scriptures afford both
patent and paterne, the patent is reported by the Prophet
Esay: Chap. 56. vers. 7. and repeated by Christ in
Mark 11. 7. Luke 19. 46. Matth. 21. 13. three seuerall Euangelists: my house shall be called an
house of prayer for all people. The paterns are manifold,
I will enter into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies,
and in thy feare will I worship toward thine holy
temple, saith our Prophet, Psal. 5. 7. The Publican and
the Pharisie went into the temple to pray, Luke 18. Peter
and Iohn went vp together into the temple at the
ninth houre of prayer, Acts 3. Anna fasted and prayed
in the temple, Luke 2. This one word sanctuarie teacheth
vs how we should behaue our selues in the Church
as in Gods presence: Doest thou come to that holie
place to receiue the blessed Supper of our Lord? remember
that the temple is sanctuarium, non promptuarium,
a sanctuarie, not a buttrie,1. Cor. 11. 22. 
               haue ye not houses to
eate and drinke in, despise yee the Church of God? Doest
thou come to pray?Ecclesiastes 4. 17. 
               take heede to thy foote when thou
entrest into Gods house, compose thy knees, and eyes, and
hands, and heart after such a deuout manner: as that
thou maist not onely praise God vpon the loud cymbals,
but (as it is vers. 5.) praise him vpon the well tuned
cymbals also. Doest thou come to heare the sermon?
remember that the preaching of the Gospel is1. Thess. 2. 13. not the
word of a mortall man, but theRom. 1. 6. power of the immortall

God vnto saluation, and albeit the Preacher be neuer
so simple, neuer so sinfull; yet the word is holy, the
action holy, the time holy, the place holy, ordained by
the most holy to make thee holy. Vpon whatsoeuer
occasion thou commest into the temple, remember alwaies
that the ground is holy whereon thou standest,
it is a sanctuarie, the habitation of God, and place of
his holinesse: and therefore not to beCanon. 88. prophaned with
ordinarie though lawfull worlds businesse, much lesse
with vnlawfull pastimes and enterludes, it is a place
for praise, not for playes, O praise God in his sanctuarie.
            
            Or (asIn loc. 
               Martine Luther interprets it) praise God
in his sanctuarie, that is for his sanctuarie, forPsal. 147. 19. shewing
his word vnto Iacob, his statutes and ordinances vnto
Israel, for his adoption, and his couenants, and his promises,
and his seruice, Rom. 9. 4. O praise the Lord for
hisChrist. Corn. in loc. true Church established for the present among the
Iewes, and hereafter in the fulnes of time to be constituted
among Christians vntill the worlds end. For this
clause may bee construed of the mysticall heauen and
temple, so well as of the materiall heauen and temple.
The good man (I meane the true Christian) is not only
GodsHeb. 3. 16. house, but also Gods1. Cor. 3. 16. temple, yea Gods heauen,
asLib. 2. de ser. dom. in mont. 
               Augustine expounds the words of Christ, Our
Father which art in heauen, that is, in holy men of heauenly
conuersation, in whose sanctified hearts hee
dwelleth as in hisBellarm. & corn. in loc. vel hoc dicit de populo, vel de vita sancta Chrysost. Basil. in loc. sanctuarie. Archimedes in his conference
with Hiero said, Giue me a place where I may
stand out of the world, and I will moue the whole earth:
in like manner hee that will be reputed a Saint, and so
take vpon him to remoue men earthly minded from
their worldlinesse, must himselfe at the least haue one
foote out of the world, seeking (as the blessedColoss. 3. 1. Apostle
speakes) the things aboue, thatMat. 5. 16. other may see his
good workes, and glorifie God which is in heauen,
that is (according to the true soule of our text) praise

God in his Saints which are his sacrarie, his sanctuarie,
his house, his heauen.
            Heere then all the three diuers lines (praise God
in his Saints, praise God in his sanctitie, praise God
in his sanctuarie) meete in one centree; namely,
God is to bee praised in his sanctuarie for his sanctitie
conferred vpon his Saints, whereby they shined
asPhilip. 2. 15. lights in this heauen on earth, and now shine
likeDan. 12. 3. starres in that heauen of heauen. If I were not
(according to the text and the time) foreward to prosecute
the gunpowder men as the more dangerous enemies
of God and his Gospell, I might vpon this
ground take vp the bucklers against idle Nouelists, vtterly
condemning the festiuals of holy Saints, established
in our Church by good order of law. Their principall
obiection is taken out of Pauls epistle to the Galathians,
chap. 4. vers. 10. Ye obserue daies and moneths,
and times and yeares, I am afraid of you lest I haue bestowed
vpon you labour in vaine. To which answere is
made, that there is aIlliric. in Galat. 4. fourefold obseruation of
daies

                  Naturall.
                  Politicall.
                  Ecclesiasticall.
                  Superstitious.
               
Of all which onely the superstitious is condemned, as
Aretius and Illiricus, andSee Sir Christo. Heydos answere to Mr. Chambers, pag. 368. and how the fathers answere this. other Protestant Diuines
vpon the place.Bellarmin. de sanct Cultu, cap. 10. Now the superstitious obseruation is
either Iudaicall or Idolatricall, it is apparent that Paul
meant the first hereof especially,English glosse. because the Galathians
after they were conuerted vnto Christ, were seduced
by false teachers vnto the ceremonies of the
Iewes, as concerning the Sabbaths & the new Moones
and the like, the which were figures of Christ, and had
their end in him.Galat. 3. 3. 
               Are ye so foolish that hauing begun in
the spirit, yee would now be made perfit by the flesh? As
for Idolatricall obseruing of times, it is granted easily
that the Pagans (in dedicating feasts vnto false gods,

and in makingSee Ambrose in Galat 4 & August. epist. 119. cap. 7. differences of daies dismall and fortunate,
either by curious arts, or by particular fansies, or
popular obseruations) are worthily reputed superstitious.
And theDr. Fulke in Galat. 4. 10. 
               Papists also (solemnizing holy daies
of the Saints in their Churches with idolatrous worshipping
of the creatures, and their Images: and out of
their Churches with Epicurelike belly-cheere, reuelling,
and idlenes) turne againe to the beggerly rudiments
and fashions of the world: but the festiuals of England
(celebrated according to the doctrine and Iniunctions
of our Church) are very farre from these and all other
kindes of superstition,See Dr. Whitgift defence of his answere to the admonit. fol. 538. 539. for then is God truly worshipped
in the publike congregation, I say the true God is
truly praised in his true Saints, on our holy daies the sacraments
are rightly ministred, the Scriptures are fruitfully
read, the Word is faithfully preached; all which
are maine meanes to withdraw men not only from superstition
and idolatrie, but also from all sorts of error
and impietie whatsoeuer.
            Yea but the words of the Commandement are, sixe
daies shalt thou labour: Ergo, there should be no holie
day besides the Lords day.B. Babington in 4. Com. Caluins Cat. Dr. Whitgift vbi supra fol. 542. & 553. sixe daies thou maist labour. Protestant Diuines answere
that the clause (sixe daies shalt thou labour) is a
permission, or a remission of Gods right, who might
chalenge to himselfe all our time for his worke, and not
a restraint for any man from seruing of God on any
day. For the Iewes beside the Sabbath had diuers other
feasts; as Easter, the feast of vnleauened bread, the feast
of first fruits, Whitsuntide, the feast of blowing trumpets,
the feast of Tabernacles; all which (as we reade Leuiticus
23) they kept by Gods appointment holy, notwithstanding
these words of the law, sixe daies shalt
thou labour. And so the Christian Church in all ages
hath vpon iust occasions separated some weeke daies
vnto the praising of the Lord, and rest from labour.
Ioel 2. 14. Blow the trumpet in Sion, sanctifie a fast, call
a solemne assemblie.
               Perkins aur. Cat. cap. 23. Daies of publike fasting for some

great iudgement, dayes of publike reioycing for some
great benefit, are not vnlawfull, but exceeding commendable,
yea necessarie. Whosoeuer doubtes of the
Churches libertie herein, or of the practise of this libertie,
may peruse the ninth chapter of Ester, in which it
will appeare that Gods people by the commandement
of Mordecai did euery yeare solemnize and keepe holy
the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the moneth Adar,
in remembrance of their great deliuerie from the treason
of Haman. Vpon these grounds the last euer renouned
Parliament enacted, that wee should for euer
spend the prime part of this present fifth of Nouember
in praying and praising the Lord, for his vnspeakable
goodnes in deliuering our King, Queene, Prince, and
states of this realme from that hellish, horrible, bloody,
barbarous intended massacre by Gunpowder. Now
that I may for my part execute the will of the Parliament
(sparing the Nouelists, and referring such as desire
to bee further satisfied in this argument of holy
dayes, vnto the iudicious writings of my most honoured
and honourable maister, Archbishop Whitegift, in
theFrom pag. 538 to 555. defence of his answere to the Admonition) I proceede
in the text, praise him in his noble acts, praise him
according to his excellent greatnes.
            
            
               Vulgar Latine Castalio. Some reade laudate eum in
               
                  Pagnin. In fortitudinibus. 
               virtutibus eius, praise
him in his powers:
               Vatablus Munster. other ob fortitudinem eius, praise
him in his power; and according to these two diuerse
translations, I find two different expositions; one construing
it of Gods gloriousTurrecremat. & Raynerius in loc. Angels, and the other applying
it to Gods glorious acts: for the first, it is euident
in holy writ that there bee certaine distinctions
and degrees of Angles in the quier of heauen, there be
Seraphins Esay 6. 2. Cherubins, Gen. 3. 24. Thrones, dominions,
principalities, and powers, Coloss. 1. 16. in all
which and for all which God is to be praised, as being
hisHeb. 1. 14. ministring spirits for the good of such as shall bee
heires of saluation; as long as wee serue God, all these

serue vs, euen the Cherubins, and Seraphins, Angels,
and Archangels, I say, so long as we serue the Lord,
these pages of his honour and parts of his courts attend
vs, and pitch their tents about vs: a doctrine very
profitable, very comfortable, yet for as much as I hold
it lesse pertinent to the present occasion I thus ouerpasse
it, and hast to that other exposition interpreting
these words (as our Church readeth) of Gods noble
acts.
            
            Now the workes of God are of two sorts, ad intra
& ad extra: some be confined within himselfe, other
extended towards vs: works of the sacred Trinitie
within it selfe (as that the Father begets, and the Sonne
is begotten, and the holy Ghost proceeds from both)
are wonderfull acts of such an high nature that it is our
dutie rather simply to adore, then subtilly to explore
them: all his acts extended toward vs are summarilie
reduced vnto two, namely the works of creation and
redemption.Aduancement of learning lib. 2. pag. 116. The worke of creation is attributed in
the Masse of the matter to God the Father, in the disposition
of the forme to God the Sonne, in the preseruation
of both to God the holy Ghost. So likewise that
of redemption, in election vnto God the Father, in the
consummation vnto God the Sonne, in the application
vnto the holy Ghost, all which are very noble acts▪
                and
God is to be praised in them according to his excellent
greatnesse. The worke of creation is so mightie, that
none could bring it to passe but the Father almightie:
that God should haue nothing but nothing, whereof,
wherewith, whereby to build this high, huge, goodly,
faire frame; is a principle which nature cannot teach,
and Philosophie will not beleeue. The worke of redemption
is of farre greater might and mercy, for the
making of the world was (if I may so speke) onely
lip-labour vnto God, he spake the word and it was done,
be commanded and it stoodfast, Psalm. 33. 9. but Christ
in redeeming the world said many words, and did many

wonders, and suffered also many wounds. It is true
that the least ake of his least finger is infiniti meriti, sed
non definiti meriti, that is of an infinite merit, yet not
that determined ransome for the sinnes of the whole
world. It cost him more to redeeme soules,Rom. 4. 25. 
               he dyed
for our sinnes and rose againe for our iustification, hee
suffered for vs, and that death, and that a violent death,
and of all violent deaths the most accursed death on
the Crosse.
            The worke of sanctification is a noble act also, for
euery man if you rightly consider his making is a wonder,
I am saith ourPsalm. 139. 13 Prophet fearfully and wonderfully
made: but a good man if you consider his new making
is a wonderfull wonder, as1. Cor. 4. 9. 
               Paul speakes a spectacle to
men and Angles, as the vulgar Latine runnes in the 68.
Psalme, at the last verse, mirabilis deus in sanctis, O
God wonderfull art thou in thy Saints.
            But Dauid
               Placid. Parmen. and the english Com. dedicated to M. Herlakinden. here meaneth especially the valiant acts
of God in gouerning & garding his people from their
enemies,Psalm. 66. 4. O come hither and behold the workes of
God, how wonderfull hee is in his doing toward the
Children of men, he turned the sea into drye land so
that his people went on foot thorough the middest of
the sea, theExod. 14. 29. waters were a wall vnto them on the
right hand and on their left; but the waues of the Sea
returned and couered the chariots and horsemen euen
all the hoast of Pharaoh that pursued them. Almighty
God raigned hailstones out of heauen vpon the cursed
Amorites at Bethoran, and they were more (Iosua 10. saith the
text) that dyed with the haile, then they whom the
Children of Israell slew with the sword. And when
Duke Iosua prayed, Sunne stay thou in Gibeon, & thou
Moone in the valey of Aialon: the Sunne abode and the
Moone stood still vntill the people auenged themselues
vpon their enemies. When Zenacherib and his innumerous
hoast came to fight against Hezekiah King of Iuda,
Gods Angell in one night flew an hundred eighty

and fiue thousand Assyrians. 2. Kings. 19.
            And vndoubtedly (beloued) there is no nation vnder
the cope of Heauen hath had greater occasion to
praise God in this kind then England, the preseruation
of the most illustrious princesse the Lady Elizabeth
vnder the fiery triall of her vnkind sister Queene Marie
was a noble act, and the seminary of much happinesse
vnto this kingdome for many yeares after, and
so much the more noble because Philip King of Spaine
hath often confessed that he spared her life (when wildy
Winchester and bloodie Bonner had brought her into
the snare) not out of any pietie or pittie, but onely out
of policie. Her exaltation to the Crowne was another
noble act, so noble that someSee M. Foxe Martyr. in fine. Popish Prelats in their
enuie burst a sunder and dyed for very griefe of heart.
Well might that good Lady sing and say with the blessed
Virgine, He that is mightie hath magnified me, and
holy is his name, he hath put downe the mightie from their
seat and hath exalted the humble and meeke: her flourishing
in health, wealth, and godlinesse, more then 44.
yeares (in despite of all her foes abroad, at home, schismaticall,
hereticall, open, intestine) was another noble
act: for after once the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus had
roared, and his fat Calues had begunne to bellow in
this Island: there passed neuer a yeare, neuer a moneth,
neuer a weeke (I thinke I might say) neuer a day, neuer
an houre, but some mischiefe was intended either against
her person or her people: the resisting of the
rebellion in the Northerne parts of England, was a
noble act: the discouering and so consequently the defeating
of Campians treason a noble act: of Parris treason
a noble act: of the Lupus Lopus his treason, a noble
act: of Squires treason, a noble act. Her glorious victories
against her fell and insolent enemies the Spaniards
in Ireland, in Flanders, in France, in their owne dominions
of Portugal, Indies, and Spaine were noble acts.
It was a wonder of wonders, that a Mayden Queene
               
should at one time be both a staffe to Flanders, and a
stay to France, a terror to Pope, a mirror to Turke, feared
abroad, loued at home, Mistresse of the Sea, wonder
of the world. Shee might truely bee called a Prince of
Peace, for shee was Crowned in Peace, shee liued in
Peace, she dyed in Peace, she was buried in Peace: and
when shee had slept with her Fathers, it was another
noble act of the Lord to send vs in the midst of all our
feare so learned, so meeke, so pious a Prince as King
Iames, in such exceeding sweet peace, that neuer a
sword was drawn, happily neuer a word spoken against
him. All these were noble acts, and ought to be had in
a perpetuall remembrance. But of all other noble preseruations
(Our deliuerance from that intended mercilesse
and matchlesse Massacre both in fact and fiction,
the fifth of Nouember, in the yeare 1605. is most noblie
noble. King Iames on this day might haue said with
King2. Sam. 22. 41. 
               Dauid, O Lord which art my rocke and my fortresse,
thou hast giuen me the necks of mine enemies, that
I might destroy them that hate me, that I might breake
them as small as the dust of the earth, and tread them flat
as the clay of the streete.Psalm. 118. O giue thankes vnto the Lord,
for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer. Let
Israel now confesse that he is gracious, and that his mercy
endureth for euer. Let the house of Aaron now confesse
that his mercy endureth for euer. Yea let all such as feare
the Lord now confesse that his mercy endureth for euer.
All the Congregations of the Saints in the whole
world, haue good cause to thanke God our strength
and deliuerer. Scotland hath good cause, for if England
had been but a Tuesday breakefast, assuredly Scotland
should haue been but a Fridaies drinking, one morsell
as it were for the greedy deuourer. The Churches in
France relieued often by vs, haue good cause to reioyce
with vs. Our neighbours of Holland haue good
cause to triumphe as they doe, for if our house had been
set on fire, their house being the next would haue been

quickly pulled downe. The Churches in Germanie, Denmarke,
Hungarie, Geneua likewise haue good cause to
praise God in this noble act according to his excellent
greatnesse.
            
            More principally the Common-weale of England,
and in it all men of all factions, and all fashions whatsoeuer.
Atheists (if they thinke there be a God) haue
good cause to thanke God, acknowledging his mercie
toward them in sparing vs, and so sauing the bad for the
Gen. 18. 26. righteous sake. Carnall Gospellers haue good cause to
thanke God, confessing that so long asGen. 19. 22. 
               Let is in Sodome,
it cannot be destroyed, and so long as Moses standeth
in thePsalm. 106. 23. gap, andExod. 32. 11. prayeth for his people, Gods
wrathfull indignation cannot deuoure vs. Yea, let the
Gunpowder men themselues (if they haue any sparke of
grace) confesse that God is to bee praised in this noble
act, for suppose (God be thanked we may suppose and
dispose thus of these matters vnto our comfort) I say
suppose, their diuelish plot had been acted, I assure my
selfe our cause had been farre better, and our number
farre greater then theirs, and as for our sinnes (which
are indeede our greatest enemies) they would haue
brought into the field so many as we: so that hauing so
much armour of light, and more armour of proofe then
they:Lucan. 
               Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos.
            
            But suppose the least and the worst part had ouercome
the bigger and the better, yet (if they bee not
hewen out of hard rockes, if these Romanists haue not
sucked the milke of wolues (as it is reported of the first
founder of Rome) they would haue relented to see their
natiue Country made nothing els but a very shambles
of Italian and lgnatian butchers, When Alexander saw
the dead corps of Darius, and Iulius Caesar, the head
of Pompey, and Marcus Marcellus, Syracuse burn; and
Scipio, Numantia spoild, and Titus, Hierusalem made
Lue. 19. 44. euen with the ground; they could not abstaine from
weeping, albeit they were mortall enemies, But aboue

all other in this kingdome the truely zealous, and zealously
true hearted protestants haue greatest occasion
of reioycing, for if the Lord had not (according to his
excellent greatnes, and according to his excellent goodnes
too) deliuered vs out of this gun-powder gulfe, our
bodies happily might haue beene made food for the
foules, or else sewel for the fire, and that which would
haue grieued our posterity more, superstition and Idolatry
might in short time haue beene replanted in this
land, I meane that vpstart Antichristian religion of
Rome, wherein many things, especially foure (as iudicious
Martyr. pag. 1. 
               Fox well obserued) are most abominable.
            
               1. Vnlimited iurisdiction, derogatorie to all Kings
and Emperours.
               2. Insolent titles, preiudiciall to all Bishops and
Prelates.
               3. Corrupt doctrine, iniurious to all Christians.
               4. Filthie life, detestable to all men.
            
            The greater was our danger, the greater was our deliuerance:
the greater our deliuerance, the greater our
thankes should be, for as it followeth in my text, God is
to be praised according to his excellent greatnes. It is true
that our most and best praises are few for the number,
and little for the measure, whereas God is infinite for
his goodnes, and in his greatnes incomprehensible, so
that the meaning ofBasil. Musculus Placid. parmen. in loc. 
               Dauid is that wee should praise
him according to our capacity, and not according to
his immensity: according to the grace bestowed vpon
vs, and not according to the glory which is in him. Ecclesiasticus
43. 30. praise the Lord, and magnifie him as
much as ye can, yet doth he farre exceed. Exalt him with all
your power and be not weary, yet can ye not attaine vnto it.
            
            Now where the Lord giueth a greater meane, there
he requireth a greater measure, where he bestoweth a
greater portion of giftes, he doth expect a greater proportion
of glory: wherefore seeing the Lord hath out
of his abundant mercy conferred vpon this kingdome

inestimable blessings in the preaching of his word for
the space of more then fifty yeares, it is questionles hee
lookes for no little thankes or small praise, but for great
thankes and great praise according to his excellent
greatnes manifested in this our deliuerance. I come
therefore to the second part of this Psalme, shewing
with what God is to be praised, in the sound of the trumpet,
&c.
            
            God is to be praised (saithIn Psalm. 147. 
               Augustine) totis votis de totis
vobis with all your soules, & with al your selues. That
therefore we may manifest our inward affections by
such outward actions as are commendable, where there
bee trumpets, let them sound: where there be lutes and
harpes, let thē strike vp: where there be loud Cymbals and
well tuned Cymbals, let them ring, let thē sing the praises
of God for this our most happy deliuerance, let trumpet
and tongue, viol and voice, lute & life witnes our harty
reioycing in the Lord: If our true zeale were more fiery
within, it would doubtlesse breake forth into moe
publike workes, then it doth against that bloody brood
of the gun-powder crue. There haue beene many collections
in euery dioces for the reedifying of the Churches
of Saint Albanes and Arthuret, the which I assure
my selfe were good workes: there haue bin in this
latter age many gorgeous, I might say glorious buildings
erected about and in this honorable City, to the
great ornament of our Country, the which I thinke you
may number among your good workes: there haue bin
lotteryes to further Virginean enterprises, and these (for
any thing I know) were good workes also: there haue
bin many new play-houses, and one faire Burse lately
built, Paris garden in a flourishing estate makes a great
noyse still, and as I heare Charing Crosse shall haue a
new coat too: but in the meane time while so many monuments
are raised either to the honour of the dead, or
else for the profit and pleasure of the liuing: dic mihi
musa virum, I pray muse and shew me the man, who

ioynes with that euer zealous, reuerend, learned Deane
in founding a Colledge for a society of writers against
the superstitious Idolatries of the Romane Synagogue,
the which happily might be like theCant. 4. 4. Tower of Dauid,
where the strong men of Israel might haue sheildes and
targets to fight the Lords battaile.Haggai. 1. 4. 
               Is it time for your
selues to dwell in your seiled houses and this houselye waste?
            
            Remember I beseech you the words of2. Chron. 15. 2. 
               Azariah
vnto King Asa and the men of Iuda, The Lord is with
you, while you are with him, and if ye seeke him, hee will bee
found of you: but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you. Bee
not cold in a good cause, flie not out of the field, play
not the cowards in the Lords holy wars, for albeit happily
your selues are like for your time to do wel enough
in despite of the diuell and the Pope his darling: yet
your posterity will assuredly rue it, and haue iust cause
to curse their dastardly spirits, and worthlesse progenitours.
I say no more concerning this point, only I pray
with our forefathers in the first english Letany set out in
the dayes of King Henry the 8. from all sedition and priuie
conspiracie, from the tyrannie of the Bishop of Rome
and all his detestable enormities, from all false doctrine and
heresie, from hardnes of heart, and contempt of thy word
and commandement.
            
            
               Good Lord deliuer vs.
            
            Where note by the way that the Popes abominable
tyrannie is hedged in (as it were) on the one side with
sedition and priuie conspiracy, and on the other side with
false doctrine and heresie. I haue another prayer, and for
asmuch as it is in Latine, I must entreat all such (if any
such here be present who loue Bonanentures psalter and
the Romish seruice) to ioyne with vs in this orison.
            Papa noster qui es Romae; maledicetur nomen tuum, intereat
regnum tuum, impediatur volunt as tua, sicut in Coelo
sie et in terra, Putum nostrum in Coena dominicada nobis
hodie, & remitte nummos nostr
                  •
               s quos tibi dedimus ob indulgentias,
sicut & nos remittimus tibi indulgentias, & 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
nos inducas in haeresin, sed libera nos a miseria, quoniam
tuum est infernum, pix & sulphur in secula seculorum.
            The word of God is aHeb. 4. 12. two edged sword, sharp in
a literal, and sharp in an allegoricall exposition. Hitherto
you haue heard the history, now there remaineth a
mistery, nihil enim hic ludicrum aut lubricum saithIn loc. 
               Augustine,
and thereforeProsper Luther Hugo Card. diuines vnderstand here by the
sounding of the trumpet, the preaching of the Gospell,
Rom. 10. 18. whose found went out thorow all the earth vnto the
endes of the world: at the seuenfold sounding of this
trumpet the walles ofIosua. 6. Strictior est tuba ex parte buccinantis quàm ex altera, quia praedicator strictius se debet examinare. Hugo Card. in loc. sericho fal, that is all the pompes
and powers of this world are conquered & brought to
nought, this trumpet is mightie thorough God to cast
downe holdes, and Imaginations, and euery high thing
that is exalted against the knowledge of God. 2. Cor.
10. 4.
            
               Augustin in loc. Other say that the Saints are these trumpets, and
harpes, and Cymbals, and that theirChrysost. Euthym. in loc. members make
this musicke to the Lord, our eyes praise the Lord,
while they bePsalm. 123. lifted vp vnto their maker in heauen,
and waite vpon his mercy: our tongues praise the Lord,
in singingColos. 3. 16. Psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songs
vnto the Lord: our eares praise the Lord, while they
Mat. 13. 9. heare the word of God with attention: our hands
praise the Lord, while they beEcclesi. 7. 32. stretched out vnto the
poore, and while theyEphes. 4. 24. worke the thing that is good:
our feete praise the Lord, when they bee notPsal. 14. 6. swift to
shed blood, butPsal. 122. 2. stand in the gates of Gods house, ready
toPsal. 199. 32. run the wayes of his commandements. In Tympaeno
sicca & percussa pellis resonat, in choro autem voces
sociatae concordant saidPastoral. part. 3. admonit. 23. 
               Gregorie the great: wherefore
August. Cassiod. Hugo. Card. in loc. such as mortifie the lusts of the flesh praise God in tympano,
and they who keepe theEphes. 4. 3. vnity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, praise God in choro: the Brownist in separating
himselfe from the Church though he seeme to
praise God in tympano, yet hee doth not praise God in
choro: and the carnall gospeller albeit he ioyne with the

               Church in chere, yet he prayseth not God in tympano
they praise God in well-tuned Cymbals who tune their
soules before they preach or pray, whosoeuer desires to
bee a sweete singer in Israel must bee learned in the
schoole, before hee be lowd in the temple: the heart
likewise must be prepared for praying, as the harpe for
playing▪ if our instruments of praise be not in tune, then
our whole deuotion is like the1. Cor. 33. 1. sounding brasse or as the
tinckling Cymbal: in Gods quier there is first tune well,
and then sound well, if once we can say withPsalm. 108. 1. 
               Dauid,
O God mine heart is ready, mine heart is ready, then our
lute and harpe will awake right early: let thy soule
praise the Lord, and then all that is either without or
about thee will instantly doe the same.
            
               Let euery thing that hath breath praise the Lord) that
isAgellius▪ 
                  
                     •
                  atablus. 
               omne spirans,Hieron. August. omnis spiritualis,Genebrard & aly plerique. omnis spiritus, let
euery creature praise the Lord for his estate of confection,
euery Christian praise the Lord for his estate of
refection, euery blessed spirit loosed out of the worldes
misery praise the Lord for his estate of perfection, let euery
creature, man aboue all the Creatures, and the
foule of man aboue all that is in man praise the Lord.
Omnis spiritus, i.Hugo. Iunius. totus spiritus,
               Luk. 10. 27. all the heart, all the
soule, all the mind, as the psalmistPsal. 86. 12. elsewhere, I will
thanke thee O Lord my God with all mine heart, euen
with myPsal. 111. 1. whole heart, or omnis spiritus the spirit of euery
man in euery place, for this saying isCaluin. Genebrard. in loc. propheticall,
insinuating that God in time to come, shall not only be
worshipped of the Iewes at Ierusalem with outward ceremonies,
in the sound of the trumpet and vpon the lute
and harpe: but in all places, of all persons in spirit and
truth as Christ expounds Dauid in the 4. of Saint Iohns
Gospell at the 23. verse, whereas vnbeleeuing Iewes are
the sonnes of Abraham according to the flesh only beleeuing
Gentiles are theGalat. 3. 
                     •
                  9. seed of Abraham according
to the spirit, and heires by promise, more Israel saith
Psalm. 148. 
               Augustine then Israel it selfe. The sonnes of Abraham
               
(as Christ tels vs in the
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   8. 39. Gospell, 
                  〈◊〉
                they who doe the 
workes of Abraham, and Abrahams chiefe worke was
faith, Abraham beleeued (saith theGen. 15. 6. Rom. 4. 3. text) and it was
imputed to him for righteousnes, Ergo▪
                the true beleeuer
is a right Isralite, blessed with saithfull Abraham.
Galat. 3. 9.Genebrard. some stretch this further, applying
it not onely to the spirits of men in the Church militant,
but also to the blessed Angels and Saints in the
triumphant, for this Psalme consists of a threefold apostrophe.
            
            1. Dauid inuiteth all the Citizens of heauen, O
praise God in his sanctuarie, praise him in the firmament of
his power.
            
            2. All the dwellers vpon earth, praise him in the
sound of the trumpet, praise him vpon the lute and harpe,
&c.
            
            3. Both and all, let euery thing that hath breath, euery
thing which hath either the life of nature, or of
grace, or of glorie, let euery spirit
               Placidus parmensis & Bellarmin. in loc. whether it be terrestriall
or celestiall, of whatsoeuer condition, age,
sexe, praise the Lord.
            
            It is aGenebrard. 
               Rabbinical conceit that this hymne consists
of 13. Halleluiahs, answering 13. Properties of God
mentioned Exod. 34. 6. 7. verses, and in that our Prophet
after a dozen Halleluiahs hath not done, but addeth
a thirteenth, hee doth insinuate that when all our
deuotion is finished, it is our dutie to begin againe with
Gods praise, for asRom. 11. 36. of him, and thorough him, and for
him▪ are all things, euen so to him is due all glorie for euermore:
as his mercies are from euerlasting to euerlasting,
from euerlasting election, to euerlasting glorification:
so likewise his praises are to bee sung for euer
and euer. In this life we begin this hymne singing (as
musitians speake) in breifs and semibriefs a staffe or two,
but in the world to come standing before the throne of
the Lambe, clothed in long white robes, accompanied
with all the sweet voyces of heauens incomparable melodious

quire: we shall eternally sing; Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almightie, which was, and which is, and which 
is to come,Apocalip. 7. 12. praise, and glorie, and wisdome, and
power, and might, be vnto our God for
euermore. Amen.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   