
      
         
            
            
               AN EPYTAPHE vpon the Death of the Right Reuerent Father in God I. Iuell, Doctor of Diuinitie and Bisshop of Sarisburie. Who deceased the .22. of September. 1571.
            
               
                  If Publique Weale, or Countreies clame,
               might languish and bewayle:
               The late decease of suche Deuines:
               as chiefely did preuaile
               And cleane extirp suche shadowed workes:
               as Antichristians Ire
               Or ARIVS flocke, moste TITYRVS lyke,
               began for to conspire,
               To ouerwhelme the Uerytie:
               then may we Christians saye,
               We doo sustayne a double losse,
               of IVELL at this daye:
               Whose name doth not import so much the value, or the price:
               As is his misse accompted off, by Fathers sage and wise.
               No Pearle, or precious substance may, so much bewailed bee,
               As Countrey soyle hath cause to mone, deare IVELL now for thee.
               Who hath detected prudently, and publisht very playne:
               Suche Errours, as vnworthy are, in Christians to remaine:
               As Warrierlyke, thou IVELL hast, laide Battry to thy foes,
               As HARDYNG, wt like Popish Sectes, that Papists Captain chose
               For to defende their Heresies: By thee his fond Delusion,
               Apparantly as proued is, was brought vnto confusion.
               Thy zealous mind, thy sacred spright: by West, by North, by South,
               Hath driuen of raging Papists Sect, a Snaffle in the mouth.
               Wheron so longe time they haue fed, that Christes Ghospell cleare
               Unto the Laye and common sort, moste brightly doth appeare.
               So that deseruedly of right, by golden Trumpe of Fame:
               Thou doest deserue the Title of a IVELL vnto name:
               For why? by thee most worthily, thy Uertues stood in stead:
               By thee likewise the Flocke of Christ, most preciouslie were fed.
               By thee, the Path of Heauēly health: by thee, true faith was showen
               By thee, the fruites of Charitie, in deedes & wordes were knowen.
               By thee, the in warde man was clad, and nourisht verie well:
               In any soyle, scarse is there founde, suche Iuelles for to dwell.
               Thy deedes agreed with stedfast wordes, fast fownded on the Rocke,
               To Christian state, a Father deare, and Patron to the Flocke.
               Whiche beares the Title of the Church, or Sheepefould of the Lord,
               Approued by testimoniall Actes as Scriptures do record.
               If thus much then, thaccompt, was made, what Creature can denay
               But England she, too soone hath lost, a IVELL at this daye,
               When neither benefite of wealth, could cause to wander froe
               The Compasse of the heauenly Card, his Dutie to bestowe
               Amonge his Bretherne deare in Christ: then as we haue begon,
               Let vs suppose that we haue lost, this IVELL all too soone.
               Desiryng God, that as he is, no doubt with him on hie,
               We may become true Iuelles all, vntill the time we die.
               So shall the heauenly Uerytie, most brightly floorish still,
               And spred her Branches fayre abroade, all ouer Sion Hill:
               Wherby the Popish trayne may fall, that erst hath ben so hie,
               And cleane diminisht frō the Earth, as withered Plants that die.
               Graunt this (O God) for euermore, and pearse thy Pastors hartes,
               That valiantly (as IVELL did,) they playe true Pastors partes.
               And leaue behinde suche worthy workes, to gloryfie Goddes name
               As he hath don: and so confound the Popish Sect with shame.
               That by suche meane no Papist may, the perfect Scripture wrest,
               As HARDYNG hath don heretofore, whom IVELL hath supprest.
               ¶ And thus farewell, (deare IVELL now:) sith Gods good pleasure is
               To haue thee hence from vs among, to his Eternall blisse.
               With teares I ende this simple Uerse, proceedyng of good wyll,
               Let learned sort take Pen in hand, and frame their filed Quill
               To spread this Iuelles fame abroad, though Corps be clad in Clay,
               His worthy Workes & Uertues rare, Dame FAME shal sure display.
            
            FINIS.
            
               N. BOVR.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in the vpper ende of Fleetelane, by Richarde Johnes: And are to be sould at his Shop, ioynyng to the Southwest Doore of sainct Paules Churche. 1571. October. 2.
         
      
   