
      
         
            
            
            An exhortacion to the carienge of Chryſtes croſſe, wyth a true and brefe confutacion of falſe and papiſticall doctryne.
            ☞ 2. Timo. 3.
            ☞ All, that wyll lyue godly in Chryſte Ieſu, muſt ſuffer perſecucyon.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶ The holye ſprite of God▪ whiche is his earneſte pledge, 2. Cor. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . geuen to hys people for their cō
               fort and conſolacion, bee poured into our heartes, by the mightye power and merites of our alone ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, nowe and for euer. Amen
            BEcauſe I perceaue playnly, that vnto the euils fallē vpon vs, whiche profeſſe Chryſtes goſpel, greater ar moſt lyke to enſue, and after them greater, tyll y• meaſure Gene. 15 of iniquitie be vpheaped (except we ſhrynke, and hauyng put our Luke. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               
hand to ye plough, doe loke back, and ſo, with Loths wyfe, fal into Gene. 19. gods heauy diſpleaſure incurably, al whiche god forbid) and becauſe I am perſuaded of you, my dearly beloued brethren and ſiſters, through out the Realme of Englande, which haue profeſſed vnfeinedly the goſpel of our lord and ſauyoure Ieſus Chriſt (for vnto ſuch doe I wryte thys Epyſtle or boke) howe yt, as you haue begonne to take part wyth gods goſpell & truth, ſo thrōugh hys grace ye wyll perſener and goe on forwardes, notwythſtā
               dyng the ſtormes ryſen and to a ryſe: I can not but wryte ſome thing vnto you, to encourage you to goe on luſtelye in the waye of the lord, and not to become faint harted or feareful perſōs, whoſe place S. Iohn appoynteth with Apoca. 21.
               
               
                  •
               nbeleuers, murtherers and idolatours in eternall perdiciō, but cherfully to take the Lordes cup Pſal. 75. and drynke of it, afore it drawe towardes the dregges and botō. Wherof at lēgth they ſhal drink wyth the wycked to eternall deſtruccion, which wil not receaue it at the firſt with gods childrē, wyth whom god begynneth his 1. Peter. 4▪
                iudgemente: that as the wycked worlde reioyſeth whan they lamente, Iohn. 16. ſo they may reioyce whā the wycked world ſhal mourne, and wythoute ende fele woo intolerable.
            
               The. 1. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ What we be / and where we be.
               
               
                  
FIrſt therefore, my dearlye beloued in the lorde, I beſeche you to conſyder, that thoughe ye be in ye worlde, yet you are not of ye world: Iohn. 14. you are not of them, whych looke for theyr porcion in thys lyfe, Pſal. 17. whoſe captayne is ye god of thys world: euen Satan, who nowe 2. Cor. 4. rufleth it apace, as he wer wood, becauſe hys tyme on earth is not Apo. 12. long.
               But you are of them, whyche Heb. 11. loke for a citie of gods own buildyng. You are of them, whyche know themſelues to be here but 1. Pet. 2. Hebr. 13. pilgrems and ſtraūgers: for here you haue no dwellyng place.
               You are of them, whoſe porcion is the lord, and which haue their Pſal. 116 119. hope in heauen: whoſe captaine is Chryſt Ieſus the ſōne of god, and gouernour of heauē & earth.

Vnto hym is geuen all power, yea he is god almighty, with the Math. 28. Roma. 9. 1. Iohn. 5. father and the holy goſte, prayſe worthy for euer.
               You are not of them, whyche receaue the beeſtes marke, whiche Apo
                        •
                     a. 13. Luke. 6. here reioice, laugh and haue their hartes eaſe, ioye, paradiſe & pleaſure: but you are of them, which haue receaued the an̄gels marke, Eze. 9. Math. 5. yea gods marke, whyche here lament, mourne, ſigh, ſobbe, wepe and haue your wildernes to wander in, your purgatorye and euen hel. You are not of them, whiche Eſa. 22. 1. Cor. 15. crye: let vs eate and drynke, for to morow we ſhall dye. You are not of that nomber, whiche ſay, Eſai. 28. they haue made a couenaunte wt death and hell for hurting them. You ar not of them, whyche take it but for a vayne thyng, to ſerue Mal. 3. the lord. You ar not of thē, which

are lulled and rocked a ſlepe in Ieſabels bed, a bed of ſecuritye. You are not in the nomber of thē whych ſay: tuſh, god is in heauē 
                  
                     
                        •
                     z
                        •
                     . 8. P
                        •••
                     . 73. and ſeeth vs not, nor muche paſſeth what we dooe. You are not of the nomber of thē, which will fal down for ye muc
                     •
                   of ye world, to worſhyp the feynde: or for diſpleaſyng Lu
                        •
                     e. 4. of men, to worſhyp the golden ymage. Dani. 3.
               
               Finally, you are not of the nō
                  ber of them, whych ſet more by their pygges, then by Chryſte: Math. 8 Lu
                        •
                     e. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2 whych, for eaſe and reſte in thy
                     •
                   lyfe, wyl ſay and doe, as Antiochus byddeth them doe or ſayr And wyll folowe the multitude to do euil, with Zedechias and y• 
                  
                     
                        •
                     xo. 23. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Reg. 22. 300. falſe prophetes, yea Achab, Ieſabel and y• whole courte, and country. But you be of the nomber of them, whiche are dead already,

or at leſt in dying daylye Roma. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Coloſſi. 3▪
                   to your ſelues and to the worlde. You are of them, whyche haue made a couenaunt wyth god, to forſake themſelues and Sathan in thys world. You are of them, whyche ſay: nay, the lorde hath Mal. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   all thynges wrytten in hys memoriall booke for ſuche, as feare hym and remember hys name.
               You are of them, whyche haue their loynes girded aboute, and theyr lyghtes burnyng in theyr handes, like vnto men that waite Luke. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   for theyr lordes commyng. You are in the nomber of them, y• ſay: the lord loketh down frō heauē, Pſal. 14. 33. 101. and beholdeth al the children of men: from the habitacion of hys dwelling he conſidereth al them, that dwell vpon the earth.
               You are of the nomber of them, Deut. 6. Math. 4. which wil worſhip the only lord

god, and wil not worſhippe the workes of mans handes, though the ouen burne neuer ſo whote. You are in the nomber of them, Daniel. 3. to whom Chryſt is precious and deare: which crye out rather, becauſe 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Pet. 2. your habitacion is prolonged here, as Dauid did, whyche Pſal. 120. Mattathias folowed and ye godly 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Mac. 2. Iewes: whych knew the way to lyfe to be a ſtrayght way, and fewe to goe thorow it: which wil Math. 7. not ſtick to folowe poore Miche as, althoughe he bee racked and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Reg. 22. caſt into priſon, hauing ye Sōne, Moone, ſeuen ſtarres and all agaynſt him. Thus therfore, dearly beloued, remember firſte, that (as I ſayd) you are not of thys world: Satan is not youre captayne: your ioye and paradyſe is not here: your companyons are not ye multitude of worldlynges

and ſuche as ſeke to pleaſe men, and to lyue here at eaſe in the ſeruice of Satan.
               But you ar of another world: Chryſt is youre captayne: youre Phil. 3. Heb. 13. ioye is in heauē, wher your conuerſacion and ciuilite is: your cō
                  panions are the fathers, patriarkes, prophetes, apoſtles, Martirs, virgins, cōfeſſours, and the deare ſayntes of god, which folowed the lambe whether ſoeuer Apoc. 7. he went, dipping their garmētes in hys bloud: knowyng this life Iob. 78. 14. Pſal. 90. 102. and worlde to bee full of euill, a warfare, a ſmoke, a ſhadow, a vapour, and as repleniſh
                     •
                  d, ſo en
                  
                     •
                  ironed with al kid of miſeries. Iacob. 4.
               
            
            
               The. 2. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ Perſecucyon is not ſtraunge.
               
               
                  
THys is the firſt thynge, I would gaue you often and diligētly with your ſelues to conſyder and muſe vpō? namely, what you be, and where you be. Then ſecondarely forget not to call to mynde, that you oughte not to thynte it any ſtraunge thyng, if miſery, trouble, aduerſite, perſecucion and diſpleaſure come 
                     〈◊〉
                   pon you. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Peter. 4.
               
               For how can it other wiſe be, but that trouble and perſecucion muſte come vpon your Can the worlde loue you, whych ar none John. 14. of 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  orldiye men are 
                     〈…〉
                  e 
                     〈…〉
                  urs of your chefe enemi, and can they regarde you? Can Satan ſuffer you to be in reſte, I. Peter. 5. which wil not doe him homage? Can thys way be eaſye, whyche of it ſelfe is ſtrayght? Wyll you Math. 7.
                  
loke to trauayll, and to haue no foule way nor rayne? Wil ſhypmen ſhrinke (or ſaylers of ye ſea) if ſtormes aryſe? Doe they not loke for ſuch?
               And dearly beloued, dyd not we enter into gods ſhippe & arke of baptiſme at the firſte? Wyll 1. Peter. 4. you then count it ſtraunge, if perils and tempeſtes blowe? Are not you traueling to your heauē
                  ly citie of Heruſalem, where is all ioye and felicite? And wyll you nowe tarye by the waye for ſtormes or ſhowers? The marte and fayer wyll then be paſt, the John. 9. Math. 25. nighte wyll fall, ye can not trauayll, the dore wylbe ſparred, & the bryde wylbe at ſupper. Therfore away with deyntie nicenes. Wyll you thynke, the father of heauen wyll deale more gentlye wyth you in thys age, then he

hath done with other his deareſt frendes in our ages? What waie and wether, what ſtormes and tempeſtes, what diſeaſe, trouble and diſquie
                     〈…〉
                  ies founde Abel, Noe, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Iſaac, Iacob and good Ioſeph? Whyche of theſe Gene. 4. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8. 9. &c. had ſo faire a lyfe and reſtefull tymes, as we haue had? Moſes, Aaron, Samuel, Dauid ye kynge and all the good kynges, prieſts and prophe
                     •
                  es in the olde teſtament, at one tyme or another, if not thorowe 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  e their life, did fele a. 1000. partes more miſery, then we haue feite hetherto.
               As for the newe teſtamente, lord god, how great was the affliccion of Mari, Ioſeph, 
                     •
                  achary, Elizabeth, Iohn Baptiſt, thē whom among the children of we Math. 11. men, none aroſe greater, of al the 
                     •
                  poſiles and euangeliſtes, yea of

Ieſus Chriſt our lord, the deare ſonne and dearlyng of god? And ſithens the time of the apoſtles, Euſebius Eccl. hiſt. Tripart. hiſtoria. how many and great are the nomber of martyrs, confeſſours & ſuch, as haue ſuffred the ſheding of their blo
                     •
                   in this life, rather then they woulde be ſtayned in theyr iourney, or lodge in any of Satans ynnes, ſo that the ſtormes or windes, which fel in their trauelynges, myghte not touche them? Wherfore, dearli beloued, lette vs thynke what we are, and how far vnmete to bee matched wyth theſe: wyth whom yet we loke to be placed in heauen.
               But wyth what face can we loke for thys, that are ſo fearful, vnwyllyng and arſward, to leus that, whych, wyll we nyl we, we muſt leaue: and that ſo ſhortli, as we knowe not the tyme whan?

Where is our abrenouncing and forſakyng of the world and the fleſh, which we ſolēpnely ſware in baptiſme? Ah ſhameleſſe cowardes that we be whyche will not folowe the trace of ſo manye fathers, Patriarks, kīgs, priſtes prophetes Apoſtles, Euangelyſtes and ſainctes of god, yeaeuen of the very ſonne of God? How many now goe wyth you luſreli, as I and al, your brethrē, in bandes & exyle for the goſpel? Pray for vs, for (god wyllyng) we wyl not leaue you nowe: we wil goe before you. You ſhal ſee in vs, that we preached no lyes nor tales of tubbes, but euen the 1. Peter. 2. very true worde of God, for the which we, by gods grace a helpe of your prayers, wyll wyllyngly and ioifulli geue our bloud to be 
                     •
                  ed, for the confirmacion of the

ſame: as already we haue geuen liberally oure goodes, liuynge, frendes, and naturall countrye. For now we are certayne, yt we be in the hygh way to heauens bliſſe, as Paul ſayth: By manye tribulacions & perſecucions we muſt enter into gods kyngdom. And becauſe we would goe thether our ſelues and brynge you thether alſo, therfore the deuyll ſtereth vp the coales. And foraſmuch as we al loitered in ye way, he therfore hath receaued power of god, to ouer caſt the wether, & to ſtere vp ſtormes: yt we godes children myghte goe faſter, makyng more ſpede and haſt to goe on forwardes.
               As for counterfeites and ypocrytes, they wyltary and lyngertyl the ſtorme bee paſte. And ſo whan they come, the market wil

be done, and the dores ſparred, it is to be feared. Reade mat. 25. Thys wynde wyll blowe gods children forward, and the deuils derlynges backwarde.
               Therefore lyke gods children let vs goe on forwarde a pace: ye wynde is on our backe: hoyſe vp the ſayles, lyfte vp your hartes and handes vnto god in prayer, Thren. 3. Heb. 6. and kepe your anker of fayth to caſt in tyme on the rocke of gods woorde, and on hys mercye in Chryſt, and I warraūt you. And thus much for you ſecondlye to conſyder, that afflyccion, perſecucion and trouble is no ſtraūge thyng to gods children: and therfore it ſhoulde not diſmaye, dyſcourage or diſcomfort vs, beyng none other thyng, then al godes deare frēdes haue taſted in their iourney to heauen warde.
               
                  
As I would in thys trouble ſōe tyme that ye ſhoulde conſyder, what you be by the goodneſſe of god in Chryſte, euen citizens of heauen, though you be preſently in the fleſhe, euen in a ſtraunge regiō, on euery ſyde ful of fearce enemyes, and what wether and way the deareſt frendes of god haue founde: euen ſo woulde I haue you thirdly to conſyder for your further comfort, that if you Philip. 3. ſhrynke not, but go on forward, preaſſyng to ye marke appointed, al the power of youre enemyes ſhall not ouercome you, neyther in any poynt hurt you.
            
            
               The. 3. Chapter.
               
                  Trouble can not hurte gods chyldren.
               
               
                  
BVt this muſt not you cō
                  ſider according to ye iudgemente of reaſon and her ſenſe, but after the iudgment of gods worde and the experience of faith. Els you marre al. For to reaſon and experyence or ſenſe of the outward man, we poore ſoules (whyche ſtycke to gods worde to ſerue hym, as he requyreth onely) are counted to be vanquiſhed and ouercome, in that we are caſte into priſon, loſe our liuinges, frends, goods country and lyfe alſo at length concerning this worlde.
               But dearly beloued, gods word teacheth other wyſe, and faith faleth accordyngly. Is it not written: who ſhall ſeparate vs from ye 
                  Roma. 8, loue of god? ſhal tribulacyon, or anguiſhe, or perſecucyon, either 
                     •
                  onger, eyther nakednes, either

peryll, eyther ſworde? As it is written: For thy ſake are we kylled al day longe, and be counted Pſal. 44 as ſhepe appoynted to be ſlaīne. Neuertheles in all theſe thyngs we ouercome, thorow hym that loued vs.
               For I am ſure, that neyther death, nother lyfe, neyther aungels, nor rule, neyther power, nether thynges preſente, neyther thynges to come, neither higth, nor loweth nether any other creature ſhalbe able to part vs frō that loue, where wyth God loueth vs in Chryſt Ieſu our lord.
               Thys ſpake one, whyche was in afflyccyon (as I am) for the lordes goſpel ſake: his holi name be prayſed therfore, & he graūte me grace wyth the ſame to continew in lyfe ſufferyng vnto the ende. Thys (I ſaye) one ſpake

whiche was in afflicciō for the goſpell: but yet ſo farre from beyng ouercome, that he reioyced rather of the victory, whyche the goſpel had.
               For though he was boūd, yet the goſpel was not bounde. And 2. Tim. 2 therefore rendereth he thankes vnto god, who alwayes geueth victory in Chryſte, and openeth 3. Cor. 2. the ſauoure of hys knowledge bivs, and ſuche as ſuffer for hys trueth: although they ſhut vs vp neuer ſo much, and dryue vs neuer ſo farre out of our owne naturall country in euery place.
               The worlde for a tyme may dyſceaue it ſelfe, thynkynge it hath the victory: but yet the end wyll trye the contrary. Dyd not Cayn thynke he had the victory, whan Abel was ſlayne? But how ſaye Gene. 4. ye nowe, is it not founde otherwyſe?

Thought not ye old world, that they were wyſe and well, and Noe a fole, whyche woulde crepe into an arke, leauynge hys Gene. 7. 8. houſe, landes and poſſeſſyons? for I thynk he was in an honeſt ſtate.
               As for the world, they iudged that he was a daſtard & a foole. But I pray you, who was wyſe whā ye floud came? Abraham (I Gene. 12. trow) was coūted a fole, to leaue his own own country & frendes, kyth and kine, becauſe of gods word. But, dearly beloued, we know it proued otherwiſe. I wil leaue al the patriarkes, and come to Moſes and the children of Iſraell.
               Tell me, were not they thoughte to be ouercome and ſtark madde whan for feare of Pharao, at gods worde, they ranne into the Exo. 14. reed Sea? Dyd not Pharao and

the Egipcians thynke thē ſelues ſure of the victory. But I trowe it proued cleane contrary. Saul was thought to be wel, and Dauyd 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Re. 16. & c in euil caſe and moſt miſerable, becauſe he had no hole to hid hym in: but yet at length Sauls miſery was ſene, and Dauids felicitie beganne to appeare. The Prophet Micheas, beeyng caſte into priſon for telling Achab the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Reg. 22. trueth, was thought ouercome of Sedechias and the other falſe Prophets. But, my good brethr
                     ••
                   and ſiſtern, the holy 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  orye telleth 
                     〈…〉
                  yſe.
               Who dyd not thynke the prophetes vnhappye in their tyme. For they were ſlayne, priſoned, Iere. 20, laughed to ſcorne, and reſted at of euery man. And ſo wer all the Apoſtles, yea the deare beloued 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Cor. 4. frende of god, Iohn Baptyſte:

who was beheaded, and that in priſon, euen at a dauncynge damoſels deſyer.
               As al theſe, to the iudgement of reaſon, were than counted heretikes, runne agates, vnlearned fooles, fyſhers, publicans &c. ſo now vnhappy and ouercome indede, if Gods worde and fayth dyd not ſhewe the contrary. But what ſpeake I of thoſe? Loke vpon Ieſus Chryſt, to whom we Roma. 8. mu
                     •
                  t be lyke 
                     〈…〉
                   here, yf we wyl be lyke hym els where.
               How ſay you, was not he taken for a moſt foole, a ſedicyous perſon, a newe felow, an heretyke & one ouercome of euery body, euē forſaken both of God and men? But the ende tolde them, and telleth vs another tale. For now is he in maieſtye and glory ioyful. Whan he was led to Pilate or

Herode, or whan he was in priſō in Caiphas houſe, dydde not there reaſon thynke, that he was ouercome? Whan he was beatē, buffeted, ſcourged, crowned wt thorne, hanged vpon the croſſe, and vtterly lefte of all his diſciples, taunted of ye highe pryſtes and holy fathers, curſed of the cōmons, rayled on of the Magiſtrates, and laughed to ſcorne of the lewde heathen: would not a man then haue thoughte, that he had been out of the way, and his diſciples, to folow hym and beeleue hym. Thynke you, y• whiles he lay in hys graue, men dyd not poynt wyth theyr fyngers, wh
                     •
                   they ſawe any that had loued, or beleued in hym and hys doctryne, ſaying: where is theyr maſter and teacher nowe? Whatis he gone? For ſoth if they had

not been fooles, they myght wel haue knowne thys learnyng, he taught, could not long contynue. Our doctors and Phariſees are no fooles, nowe they maye ſe. On thys ſorte men either ſpake, or myght haue ſpoken agaynſte al ſuche, as loued Chryſt or hys doctryne: but yet at length they and all ſuch were proued fooles and wycked wretches. For oure ſauioure aroſe mawgrie theyr beerdes, and publiſhed hys goſpel plentifully, ſpyte of theyr heades and the heades of all the wycked world, wyth the greate powers of the ſame: alwayes ouercommyng, and then moſte of all, whan he and hys doctryne was thought to haue the greteſt fall.
               Now, dearly beloued, the wicked world reioyceth: the papiſts

are puft vp agaynſt poore chriſt and his people, after their olde kynde: now crye they: where are theſe newe founde preachers? Are they not in the tower, Mar ſhalſye, in the flete, in ye kynges benche, in newe gate &c. and beyonde the ſeas? Who wold haue thought that our old biſhoppes, doctors & deanes wer fooles, as they wold haue made vs beleue, and in dede haue perſwaded ſōe already, whych are not of ye wyſeſre, ſpeciallye if they come not home againe to the holy church? Theſe and ſuch lyke words they haue to caſt in our teeth, as tryumphers and conquerours. But dearly beloued, ſhorte is theyr ioye: they begyle thē ſelues: this is but a lyghtning beefore theyr death. As god, after he had geuē ye wicked Iewes a tyme to repēt,

viſited them by Deſpaſian and Euſebius. Eccl. hiſto. Lib. 3. ca. 5 6. 7. 8. 9. Titus, moſt horribly to their vtter ſubuerſion, delyueryng firſte of all, hys people from amonge them: euen ſo (my deare brethre) wyl he doe wyth thys age.
               Whan he hath tryed hye chil dren from amongſt thē (as now he begynneth) ano by ſufferyng, hath made vs like to his Chriſt, and by beyng ouercome to ouercome in dede to oure eternal comfort: thē wil he, if not otherwiſe, 1. Theſſa. 4. come hymſelfe in the clowdes. I meane our deare lord, whō we confeſſe, preache and beleue on. He wyl come (I ſaye) wyth the blaſt of a trōpe and ſhowte of an Archangel, and ſo ſhall we bee caught vp in the clowds to mete hym in the ayer: The aungels ga Math, 13. theryng together y• wicked wretches (which now walter and wa

lowe as the worlde and wynde bloweth) to be tyed in bondels, and caſt into the fier, which burneth for euer moſt paynfullye. There and then ſhal they ſe, who hath the victorye, they or we.
               Whan they ſhal ſee vs a farre of in Abrahames boſome, then Luke. 16. wyll they ſay: alas, we thought theſe folkes fooles, and had thē 
                  Sapi. 3. in deriſion: we thoughte theyr lyfe madnes, and theyr end to be wythout honor.
               But lo, how they are counted among the children of God, and theyr porcyon is wyth ye ſaintes. Alas, we haue gone amyſſe, and would not harke
                     •
                  .
               Suche worde 
                     〈◊◊〉
                   theſe ſhall the wycked ſay on 
                     ••
                  y in hell, though now they triumph as cō
                  querours. And th
                     ••
                   muche for you thirdly to lofe often vpon:

namely, that what ſoeuer is dōe vnto you (yea euen very death) ſhall not daſhe or hurte you, no more then it dyd Abel, Dauid, Daniel, Iohn Baptiſte, Ieſus Chryſt our Lord, wyth other the deare ſaynctes of God, whyche haue ſufferd for hys names ſake. Let not reaſon therfore be iudge in thys matter, but fayth & gods worde: in the which if we ſet before our eyes ye ſhortneſſe of thys The tyme of ſufferi
                        •
                      is but a triffle. preſent tyme, wherin we ſuffer, and conſider the eternitie to cōe, we ſhall fynde it moſt certayne, that our enemyes and perſecutors ſhall be helples in intolerable paynes: and we, if we perſeuer vnto the ende, ſhall be daungerles in ſuch felicite and ioy, as the very hart of man in no poynt 1. Cor. 2. Iſa. 64. is able to conceaue. Conſidering thys (I ſay) we can not but euen

contemne and ſet nothyng by ye ſorows and grefes of the croſſe, and luſtely go thorow thick and thynne wyth good courage.
               Now haue I declared vnto you. 3. thynges, neceſſarye to bee much 
                     ••
                  uſed vpon of euerye one, whych wyl abyde by Chryſ
                     •
                  e & hys goſpel in theſe troubleſome tyme, as I truſt you al wil: namely, firſte to conſyder that we are not of thys world, nor of ye nomber of the worldlynges, nor any reteyner to S
                     ••
                  n: that we are not at home in our own country, but of another worlde, of the cō
                  gregacion of the ſayntes and reteynees to Chryſt, althoughe as Hebru, 2, yet in a region 
                     •••
                  lete and ful of vntractable enemyes.
               Secondly, that we maye not thynke it a ſtraunge thyng to be perſecuted for gods goſpel: from

the which the deareſt frendes of God were in no age free: as indede it is vnpoſſyble they ſhold be any long tyme, theyr enemies beyng alwayes aboute them to deſtroy them, if they could. And thirdly, that the aſſaultes of our enemyes, be they neuer ſo many and fearce, ſhal in no poynt be able to preuayle agaynſte oure fayth (albeit to reaſon it ſemeth other wyſe) where throughe we ought to cōceaue a good courage and comfort. For who wyll be afrayed, whan he knoweth, that the enemyes can not preuayle?
            
            
               The. 4. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ The croſſe is commodyous and profytable.
               
               
                  
FArthermore, for ye more encouraging of you vnto the croſſe, I wyll geue you a fourth memorandum. Nameli, of the cōmodities and profites, which come by the trouble and affliccion now riſē, and hereafter to aryſe vnto vs, whyche be gods chyldren, electe through Ieſus Chriſt. But, here ye may not loke to haue me a rehearſal of all the commodytyes, whych come by ye croſſe to ſuch, as are wel exercyſed therein: for that were more then I can doe. I wyll onelye ſpeake of a fewe, therby to occaſion you to gather and at the length to fele and perceue moo. Firſt, ther is no croſſe, whych commeth vpon any of vs The firſte commodite of ye croſſe. wythoute the counſayll of oure heauenly father.
               As for the fanſye of fortune,

it is wycked, as many places of ſcripture doe teache. Amos. 3. Thren. 3. Math. 10. Sopho. 1. Eſa. 45. Pſal. 145.
               
               We muſte nedes, to the commendacion of gods iuſtice, who in al thiges is rightuous, aknowledge in our ſelues, that we haue deſerued of the handes of oure heauenly father thys his croſſe and rodde, now fallen vpon vs. We haue deſerued it, if not by our vnthankfulneſſe, ſlouth, neglygence, intemperaunce and our ſynnes done often by vs (wherof oure conſcyences can and wyl accuſe vs, if we call them to coū
                  ſayll wyth the examinacyon of oure former lyfe) yet at lefte by oure originall and birth ſynne: as by dowtyng of the greatnes of Gods anger and mercye, by ſelfe loue, concupyſcence & ſuch lyke ſynnes, whyche as we

brought with vs into this world ſo doe the ſame euer abide in vs, Pſal. 51. Hebr, 12, and (euen as a ſprynge) they alway bryng forth ſome thynge in acte wyth vs, notwythſtanding the fight of gods good ſpirite in vs agaynſt it. Gal. 5.
               
               The firſt commoditie therefore, that the croſſe bryngeth, is knowledge, and that duble: of god, and of our ſelues. Of God, that he is iuſte, pure, and hateth ſynne. Pſal. 5. Pſal. 51.
               
               Of oure ſelues, that we are borne in ſine, and from toppe to too deſyled wyth concupiſcence and corrupcion: out of the which Gene. 8. Iere. 17. Eph. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Reg. 8. haue ſprong al the euil, that euer at any tyme we haue ſpoken and done.
               The greateſt and moſte ſpeciall wherof we are, by ye croſſe, occaſyoned to call to mynde, as

dyd the brethrē of Ioſeph their euil facte agaynſte hym, whan Gene. 4
                        •
                     . the croſſe once came vpon them. And ſo by it we come to the ſuereſt ſteppe to get health for our ſoules: that is, we are dryuen to knowe our ſynnes, originall and actual, by gods iuſtice declared in the croſſe.
               Secondlye, the ende, wherefore The ſecond commoditie of the croſſe. god declareth his iuſtice againſt our ſynne original and actuall, & would haue vs by hys croſſe to conſider the ſame, and to call to mynde oure former euyll dedes: The ende herof (I ſaye) is thys: namely, that we may lament, beſory, ſygh and pray for pardon, to the intente that ſo doynge, we myght obteyne and haue ye ſame, by the meanes of fayth in the me rytes of Ieſus Chryſt, his deare ſonne: and that we beeyng humbled,

becauſe of ye euil y• dwelleth in vs, might alſo become thankeful for gods goodnes, lyuyng in continual vigilancy & warenes, and ſuppreſſyng the euil, which lyeth in vs, that it brig not forth frute vnto death at any tyme. Iacob. 1. This ſecond commoditie of the croſſe therfore, muſt not we coūt to be only a knowledge, but alſo Note. a great gayne of gods mercy, wt wonderfull ryche and precyous vertues of fayth, repentaunce, re myſſyon of ſynnes, humilytye, thankfulnes, mortificacion, and diligence in doyng good.
               Not that properly the croſſe worketh theſe thinges of it ſelfe, but be cauſe the croſſe is ye meane and may, by the whych god worketh the knowledge and felynge of theſe thynges in hys childrē: as many both teſtimonyes, and

alſo enſaumples in ſcripture, are eaſely founde of them, that diligently weye what they heare or reade therin. The thirde commoditie of the croſſe.
               
               To theſe. 2. Commodities of the croſſe, ioyne thys thirde, of gods ſyngular wyſdome: that it may be coupled with his iuſtice and mercy. On this ſort let vs ouercome it.
               Whan we ſe the goſpel of god and his churche perſecuted and troubled, as now it is wyth vs: Thus I ſaye let vs conceaue the mater: namely, that becauſe the great learned and wyſe men of the world vſe not their wyſdom to loue and ſerue god, as to naturall reaſon he openeth himſelf māifeſtli in his viſible creaturs: Roma. 1. therfore doth god iuſtly infatuat them, and maketh them foolyſh, geuynge them vp to inſenſyblenes,

eſpeciallye herein. For concerning the affliction, which cō
                  meth for the goſpell vpon ye goſpellers, they reaſon on thys maner: If thys were godes worde (ſaye they) if this people were Mans reaſon concernyng the afflicciō of the church. gods children: ſurely god would then bleſſe and proſpere them and their doctrine.
               But nowe, in that there is no doctryne ſo much hated, no people ſo much perſecuted as thei be therefore it can not bee of God. This is of god, which our quene and olde biſhoppes haue profeſſed.
               For how hath god proſpered and kept them? What a notable victorye hath god geuen to her, where as els it was impoſſyble Succeſſe. that thynges ſo ſhoulde haue cōe to pas, as they haue done? And The duke of North. dyd not the great captayne confeſſe

hys fault, that he was oute of the way and not of the fayth, which theſe goſpellers profeſſe? How many are come againe frō 
                  The relentyng of many. that, whych they profeſſed to be gods worde?
               The moſt part of thys realme (notwythſtandyng the diligēce of preachers to perſuade them, concernyng thys new learnyng, whyche nowe is perſecuted) neuer conſented to it in heart, as experience teacheth.
               And what plages haue come Plages. vpon thys realme, ſithens thys goſpel (as they call it) came in amongſt vs? Afore we had plenty, but now there is nothyng like as was.
               But (to let thys pas) al ye houſes of the parliament haue ouerthrowne Parliamēt the lawes, made for the ſtablyſhing of the goſpell: and

new lawes ar erected for the cō
                  tinuaunce of that, whych is contrary, and was had before.
               Al theſe thynges doe teache playnly, that thys theyr doctrine is not gods worde. Thus reaſon the worldly wyſe, which ſee not gods wyſdome. For els, yf they conſydered that there was with vs vnthankfulnes, no amendmēt The cauſe of our perſecucyon. of lyfe, but all kynde of contēpte of god, alkinde of ſhameles ſynnyng, agaynſt the preachynge of the goſpell: they muſt nedes ſee, that god could not but chaſtiſe and correct. And that as he lette Satan looſe, after he had boūd Apoca. 20. hym a certayne tyme: ſo for mēs vnthankfulnes & to puniſhe the ſame, he hath let thoſe chāpyōs of Satan runne abrode, to plage vs by them. Greate was Godes anger againſt Achab, becauſe he

ſaued Benadad the king of Siria, whan he had geuen him into 3. Reg. 20. hys handes, and afterwardes it turned to his owne deſtruccion. God would, that double ſorowe ſhoulde haue bene repayed vnto them, becauſe of the ſorow that they did to the ſaintes of God. Read Apo. 18. As for ye victorye Cauſes of victorye. geuen to ye Quenes hyghnes, yf mē had ani godli wit, thei might ſe many thynges in it. Firſt that God hath done it, to winne her hart wt kindnes vnto his goſpel: and aſwel becauſe yt they, whych went agaynſt her, put their truſt in horſes and power of men and not in god: as becauſe y• in their doctryne they ſought not the propagacion of gods goſpel. Which thyng is eaſely now ſene, by the cōfeſſyon of ye captain: his harte loued poperye, and hated the

goſpel. Beſydes thys, men maye eaſely ſe, he was purpoſed neuer to haue furthered the goſpel: but ſo to haue handled the liuynges of miniſters, that there ſhold neuer haue been any miniſterye in maner hereafter.
               And what one of the Counſaylours, whyche woulde haue been taken as goſpellers in oure good kinges dayes, declare now that euen they loued the goſpel? Therfore no meruayll, why god fought agaynſt them.
               They were ypocrites, and, vnder the cloke of the goſpel, wold haue debarred the Quenes highnes of her ryght. But god wold not ſo cloke them.
               Now for the relenting, returnyng and recantyng of ſome, frō 
                  Why manirelent and recant. that whiche they haue once profeſſed or pāched, alas, who wold

wōder at it? For thei neuer came to the goſpel but for commodite and gaynes ſake, and nowe for gayne leaue it.
               The multitude is no good argument, The greater ſorte. to moue a wyſe manne. For who knoweth not, moo to loue thys world better then heauen, themſelues better thē their neighbours? Wyde is the gate (ſayeth Chryſt) and broade is ye way, that leadeth to deſtruccion, and many there be, whyche goe in thereat.
               But ſtrayte is the gate, and Math, 7, narow is the way, which leadth vnto lyfe, and few there be that fynde it. Al the whole multitude cryed oute vpon Ieſus: crucifye Math. 27. Iohn. 19. hym, truſſe hym vp: but I trow they were not the better part, although they were the bigger. Al Chaldee folowed ſtil their falſe

gods, only Abraham folowed y• true god. And where as thei ſai, Gene. 12. that greater plages are fallen vpon the realme in pouerty & ſuch Plages. geer, then afore: it is no argumēt to moue others, thē ſuch as loue their ſwyne better then Chryſte. Math. 8. For the deuyl chefelie deſyreth, hys ſeate to be in religion. Yf it be there, then wil he medle with nothyng that we haue, al ſhal be quiete inough.
               But if he be raiſed thēce, then wyl he begg leaue to haue at our pygges. As long as wyth vs he had the ruling of relygiō, which now he hath gotten agayne: then was he a Robyn good felow, he would doe no hurt. But whā he was tombled out of his Throne, by the preachyng of the goſpell: then ſtered he about, as he hath done. Notwythſtandyng, to be

ſhorte, ſurelye effectuall he hath not been, but in the chyldren of Ephe. 1. vnbelefe: them in dede he hath ſterred vp to be couetous, oppreſſours, blaſphemers, vſurers, whoremongers, theues, murtherers, tyrauntes.
               And yet perchaunce he ſuffered them to profeſſe the goſpell, the more therby to hinder it, and cauſe it to bee ſlaundered. How many nowe doe appeare, to haue bene true goſpellers? As for the The parliament. parliament and ſtatutes therof, no man of wyſdome can thynke other wyſe, but that looke, what the rulers wyll, the ſame muſte there be enacted.
               For it goeth not in thoſe houſes by the better parte, but by ye bigger part. It is a cōmen ſayeng, & no leſſe true: Maior pars vincit meliorem, ye greater part ouercō
                  meth

y• better. So they dyd incō
                  dēning chriſt, Nicodemus co
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ſail Iohn. 7. not being regarded. So dyd they in many generall councels, which purpoſli I wil not recite: for al wiſe men know, y• actes of parliamēts are not for gods law in reſpecte of godes lawe, but in reſpecte of the people.
               Now what we are god knoweth, and all the worlde ſeeth: more mete a great deale to haue the deuils decrees, then gods religion, ſo great is our contempte in it. And therfore iuſtly for our ſynnes (as Iob ſayeth) god hath Iob. 34. ſet ypocrytes to raigne ouer vs: whych can no more abyde gods true religion, then the owle the lyght, or blered eyes the brighte Sonne.
               For it wyll haue them to doe their dutyes, and waite in diligent

doyng of the works of their vocacion.
               If gods worde, I meane, had place, biſhoppes could not play Chaūcelours and ydle prelates, as they doe: prieſtes ſhoulde be otherwyſe knowne, then by their ſhauen crownes and typpettes, But inough of this. I wil nowe returne to the thirde commodite commyng by the croſſe.
               Here let vs ſee the wyſdome of god, in makyng the wyſdome of the worlde folyſhe. For it knoweth The ignoraunce of worldly wyſdome. litle of mans corrupcyon, howe foule it is in the ſyghte of god and diſpleaſeth hym: it knoweth litle, the porcion of Gods people to be in another worlde. It knoweth litle the patrone of Chriſtians, Chryſt Ieſus: it knoweth litle the iudgemēts of god, the greate malice of Satan to

gods people, the pryce and eſtimacyon of the goſpel. And therfore in the croſſe it ſeeth not, as gods wyſdome wold men ſhold ſe: namely: that god, in puniſhing them which ſynne leſte, woulde Luke. 13. haue hys anger agaynſte ſynne better conſydered and feared: and that, in puniſhyng hys people here, he kyndleth theyr deſier towards their reſtful and peaceful 2. Cor. 5. home.
               For, in puniſhyng hys ſeruaūtes in thys lyfe, he doth by yt meanes conforme and make them lyke to Chryſte: that as they bee lyke in ſufferyng, ſo they may be partakers Philip. 1. in reygning.
               In puniſhinge hys churche in the world, he doth thereby geue euen a demonſtracyon of hys 2. Theſ. 1. 2. Pet. 2. iudgement, whych ſhall come on al men, whan the Godlye ſhall

there fynd reſt, though now thei be afflicted: and the wicked, now wallowyng in wealth, ſhall bee wrapped in woe and ſmarte.
               In puniſhinge the profeſſours of hys goſpel on earth, he doeth Iob. 1. Actes. 16. 17. 18. &c. by the ſame ſet forth the malyce of Satan, agaynſt the goſpell & hys people, for the more confirmyng of theyr fayth: and ye goſpel to be godes worde in dede, & thē to be gods people. For els ye deuil woulde let them alone. In puniſhynge the louers of hys trueth more then others, whyche care not for it: he thereby putteth Pſal. 119. them in mynde, how they haue not had in pryce, as they ſhoulde haue had, the rule of his worde, and goſpel. Before ſuch trial and experience by trouble, perchaūce thei thought thei had beleued, & had had faith: which now theiſe

was but a lyppe fayth, a mocte fayth or an opinion. All why che thynges, we ſee, ar occaſions for us to take better hede by meanes of the croſſe.
               Therefore thirdly let vs ſe the croſſe to be commodious for vs, to learne goddes wiſedome, and what is mans follyſhnes: gods dyſpleaſure at ſynne: howe the elect deſire to be wyth God, and their conformitie with Chryſte: the general iudgemente: the mas lyce of Satan: hatred of ſynne: the goſpel to be gods word, and how it is much to be eſtemed &c. thus much for thys.
               Howe wyl I brefelye ſhewe you, the croſſe to bee profytable The fourth commoditie of the croſſe. for vs, to learne and beholde better the prouydence, preſence and power of god, that al theſe may be coupled together, as in a cheie

to hange aboute oure nectes: I meane gods iuſtice, mercy, wyſdome, power, preſence and prouydence.
               Whan all thynges be in reſt, and men be not in trouble, thē ar they forgetfull of god cōmonly, and attribute to muche to theyr owne wyſedomes, policies, prouiſions, & diligence: as thoughe they were the procurers of their own fortune, and the workers of their own wealth.
               But whan the croſſe cōmeth, and that in ſuche ſorte, as theyr wyttes, policies and frendes can not helpe: then, though ye wicted dyſpayre, and runne from god to theyr avowryes, ſaynctes and vnlawfull meanes, yet doe the godly therin behold the preſēce, prouydence and power of god. For the ſcripture teacheth, that

al thynges, wel and woo, ſhoulde be conſydered as gods worke: al Amos. 3. Thren. 3. Eſa. 45. Soph. 1. Math. 10. though Satan, the deuil, be the inſtrumente, by whom god worketh iuſtly and mercifully. Juſtly to the wycked, and mercyfulli to the godly: as by ye enſaumples of wicked Saul, and godli Job, The deuyll is gods inſtrumente. we may eaſely ſee gods woorke by Satan, hys inſtrumente in them both.
               The children of god therfore, which before forgate god in proſperitie, are now in aduerſytie awaked to ſee god and his worke, and nomore to hange on theyr owne forecaſtes, power, frends, wyſedome, ryches &c. But lerne to commit themſelues vnto gods prouydence and power: wherby they are ſo preſerued and gouerned, and very often euen miraculouſly deliuered, y• y• veri wicked

can not but ſee gods prouidence, preſence and power, in the croſſe and afflyccyon of hys chyldren: As theſe, hys chyldren I meane, to their ioy doe fele it, therby lernyng to know god, to be ye gouernour Eſay. 45. Oſe. 2, 1. Reg. 2. Luke. 1. Pſal. 139. of al thinges. Be it is that geueth peace: he it is y• ſendeth war: he geueth plenty, and pouer tye: he ſetteth vp, and caſteth down: he bryngeth to death, and after geueth lyfe: his preſence is euery where: hys prouydence is wythin and without: hys power 1. Perer. 5. is the pillour, wherby the godly ſtande: and to it they leene, as to a thyng, no leſſe able to ſet vp, then to caſt downe.
               Whyche thynge full wel the Apoſtle ſaw in hys affliccions: and therfore reioyſed greatly in them, that eminentia virtutis 2. Cor. 1.
                  
dei, gods power, might ſingularly be ſene therein.
               Concernynge thys I myghte bryng forth innumerable enſamples of the afflyccyon of Gods children, both in the old and new teſtament: wherein we maye ſe, how they felt gods preſence, prouydence and power, plentifully. But I wyll omitte enſaumples, becauſe euery one of vs, ye haue bene or be in trouble, can not but by the ſame the rather remember gods preſence, whyche we feele Preſence. by hys hand vpon vs preſently: hys prouidence, whiche leaueth Prouidēce vs not vncared for, wythout any of oure owne prouiſion: his power, Power. whych both preſerueth vs from many other euils, that els would come vpō vs, and alſo maketh vs able to be are more, then we thought we could haue done.

So very oftē doth he deliuer vs by ſuche meanes, as haue bene thought moſt folyſh and litle to be regarded.
               And therfore we ſhake of our ſlepe of ſecuritie and forgettinge of god, our truſte and ſhyffte in our owne policie, our hangynge on men, and on our own power. So that the croſſe, you ſe, is commodious fourthly for vs, to ſe gods preſence, prouydence and power: and our owne negligēce, forgetfulneſſe of God, ſecuryte, loue, truſt and confidence in our ſelues, and in thynges of thys lyfe, to be cut of, as the other ar to be taken hold vpon. And this ſhal ſuffice for the commodities, that come by the croſſe, where through we may be in loue with it for the commodities ſake: whych at length we ſhal fynde,

though preſentli in ſenſe we fele them not.
               No caſtigacion or puniſhement is ſwete or ioyous for the preſent time, but greuous: neuer Heb. 12. the les, afterwarde it bryngeth the quiet frute of rightuouſneſſe vnto them, whyche are exerciſed therin. As we ſee in medicynes: the more wholſome they be, the more vnpleaſaunte often tymes is the taiſte. As in purgacions, pilles and ſuch like bitter thīgs. Yet vpon the phiſicians worde we wil gladly drynke them, for the profit whych cōmeth of thē. And, dearely beloued, although to loſe lyfe, goodes or frendes, for gods goſpels ſake, ſeme a bitter and ſower thynge: Yet, ſeeing our phiſician, whych can not lye (Ieſus Chryſt I meane) telleth vs that it is veri wholſome,

how ſo euer it be toothſome: let vs with good chere take ye cuppe at hys hande, and drynke it merely.
               If the cup ſeme vnpleaſaunt, and the drynke to bytter, let vs put ſome ſuger therin: euē a pece of that, whych Moſes caſte into the bytter water, and made it Exo. 15. pleaſaunt. I meane an vnce or quantitie of Chryſtes afflicciōs and croſſe, whych he ſuffred for 1. Pet. 4. vs.
               If we cal theſe to mynd, and caſt of them into our cuppe (conſyderyng what he was, what he ſuffred, of whom, for whom, to what ende, and what came ther of) ſurely we cannot lothe oure medicine, but wynke and drynke it luſtely.
               Iuſtely therfore drynke ye cup.
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
            
            
               
               mes, where he promyſed to geue abread, euen hys fleſhe: in inſtitutyng Iohn. 6. the ſacrament of the aulter, as they calit, perfourmed the ſame: and that, as in al thynges, which he promiſed, he was foūd true, ſo in thys the Catholyke churche hath beleued, and doeth beleue no les.
               And therfore, ſo ſone as y• prieſt in the maſſe hath fullye ſpoken theſe wordes, thys is my body, if he purpoſe or if his intencyō be as he ſpeaketh (for that is requiſite teach they) then y•, which before was bred, and ſemeth to the eye to be bred, is made in rerye dede Chryſtes body, fleſhe, bloud and bone, euen the ſelfe ſame, whych was crucifyed, roſe againe, and deſcended vp into heauen. So y• he, which beleueth not thys, is a moſte haynous he

retyke, and cut of from the Catholyke churche, and is not mete to receaue thys holy ſacrament: becauſe he can not wythoute thys fayth of Chryſtes natural, reall, corporal and carnal body, vnder the fourme or accident of bred & wyne, otherwyſe receaue thys ſacrament, then vnworthely and to eternal damnacyon. This is a ſhorte ſumme of their doctrine, concernyng the ſupper.
               Now concerning the ſacrifice Of the ſacryfyce. they teache, that though oure ſauyoure hym ſelfe dyd in dede make a full and perfect ſacrifice propiciatorye and ſatiſfactory, for the ſynnes of all the whole world, neuer more ſo (that is to ſay bloudeli) to be offred agaie: yet in his ſupper he offred y• ſame ſacrifice vnto hys father, but vn

bloudely: that is to ſay, in wyll and deſyer, whych is accompted often euen for the deed, as thys was.
               Whyche vnbloudy ſacrifice he commaunded hys church to offer, in remembraunce of hys bloudy ſacryfyce: as the principal meane, wherby hys bloudye ſacrifice is applyed both to the quick and dead, as baptyſine is the meane, by the whych regene racion is applyed, by the prieſte, to the infaunte or chylde, that is baptyſed.
               For in that, the ſupper of Chryſte is to them not onely a ſacramente, but alſo a ſacrifyce: and that not only applicatorye, but alſo propiciatory, becauſe it applyeth the propiciatory ſacrifyce of Chryſte, to whom the pryeſte or miniſter wyll, bee he

dead or alyue. And in that, euen from the begynnig, the fathers, ſay they, were accuſtomed in the celebracyon of y• ſupper, to haue Prayer for the dead. a memorial of the dead▪ and alſo in that thys ſacrifice is a ſacrifice of the whole churche, y• dead being members of the churche, of charitie as they can not but offer for them, euen ſo they can not but pray for them after the en ſample of the Catholyke church: becauſe it is a wholſome thyng, ſayeth Iudas Machabeus, to pray for the dead, that they may be delyuered from theyr ſynnes. Wherevnto, all the doctors doe conſent, ſay thei.
               Now, as for prayeng to ſaintes, they teache, that al be it there is Prayer to ſaynctes. but one mediator of Redēpciō: yet of interceſſyon the holy ſaits of god, departed thys lyfe, maye

wel be counted mediators. And therfore it is a poynt of a lowly hart and humble ſpirite, whiche god wel lyfeth, to call vpon the ſayntes to pray for vs firſt: leſt by our preſumpcion to come into gods preſence, we beeyng ſo vnworthy, and god beyng ſo excellent and ful of maieſtie, we more anger and diſpleaſe god. Where as by their helpe god may be intreated, to make vs more worthy to come vnto hym, and the ſoner to graunt vs our peticions. For if the holye ſaynctes of God, here beeyng vpon the earth, coulde & would pray for the people, obteinyng many thiges at gods hād: it is muche more to bee beleued now (ſay they) that they can and wyll, if we pray to them, obteine for vs our humble and godlye deſyers. And therefore to ye ende

ther ſacrifice propiciatori, which in the maſſe they offer, maye be the more avaylable, they vſe about it, much praying to ſaintes. So of theſe. 4. as of. 4. pillours, theyr maſſe ſtandeth.
               The which maſſe, you may ſe, what it is, and how precious and worthy a pece of worke it is, by theyr doctryne concernynge the ſupper, the ſacrifice, the praying for the dead & to the dead: wherof I haue geuen you a Summe, in the moſt honeſt, godly and religious wiſe, that the beſt of thē doe ſet it forth in.
               For els, if I ſhould haue ſhewed you thys theyr doctryne, as ſome of them ſette it forth: as I knowe you would abhorre it, ſo the ſubtyle papyſtes would ſay, that I rayled and miſreported them.
               
                  
Therfore becauſe they ſhal haue no ſuche occaſyon, nor you by their moſt ſubtile colours be diſceaued, I haue, in the beſt maner I canne, reported a Summe of theyr doctryne.
               The whyche to the ende you myghte the better conſyder and haue, I wyll nowe tell you, as gods worde teacheth, how theſe foure poyntes are to be beleued and receaued. And then wyll I open the fylthines and abomina cyon, whyche in thys theyr doctryne is deuellyſhly conteined.
            
            
               The. 6. Chapter.
               
                  How gods worde teacheth of the ſupper, wyth confutacyon of the Papyſtes hereſie of trāſubſt. about the ſame.
               
               
                  
COncernīg y• ſupper of our lorde, whych Chryſt Ieſus did inſtitute to bee a ſacrament of hys body & bloud, we beleue, that his wordes in the ſame ſupper accordingly are to be vnderſtande: that is, ſacramentally, as he mēt them, and not ſymply, contrarye to hys meanyng, as the papiſtes wreſt them.
               And this is taught vs, not only by innumerable ſuch lyke places, as where baptiſme is called Titus. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . regeneracyon beecauſe it is a ſacrament of it: circumciſion is called gods couenaunt, beecauſe it Gene. 17. is a ſacrament of it: but alſo by ye playne circumſtaunces of ye text, as therof the Euangeliſtes with Math. 26. Mark. 14. the Apoſtle S. Paule doe write

playnly affirmyng, that our ſauyour Chryſt did geue, and hys diſciples did eate that, which he toke and brake, and bad them deuyde Luke. 22. 1. Cor. 10. 11 among themſelues, that is, bred and wyne.
               For we maye not thynke, that Chryſtes natural body was broken, nor that his bloud can be deuided. And playnly our ſauyour ſayth concernyng the cupp, that he woulde not drynke any more Math. 26. Marke. 14 of the frute of the vyne (whyche is not hys bloud, I trowe, but wyne) vntyll he ſhoulde drynke it newe wyth them after hys reſurreccyon.
               But to make this mater more playne: lyke as many thynges in Chryſts ſupper were figuratiuely Iohn. 13. Luke. 22 done & ſpoken: as y• waſhig of the diſciples fete: y• paſchall lābe was called the paſſyon: Iudas

was ſayd to haue lift vp his hele agaynſt hym: ſo doeth Luke and Paul playnly alter the wordes concernyng the cup, calling that the new teſtament, whych Matthew and marke cal hys bloude: yea expreſlye fyue tymes the Apoſtle calleth the ſacramente of Chryſts body, after y• cōſecraciō ſpoken (as they terme it) bred. Is not the bred which we breake (ſayeth he) the communyon of 1. Cor. 10. 11 Chryſtes body:
               Whoſe expoſicion I wil more boldly ſtycke vnto, then vnto all the papiſtes dreames, as long as I ſlepe not wyth them, by gods grace. They haue none other ſentence but theſe. 4. words: this is my body
               But aſke thē what this, this, is, & they wil not ſaye as y• Apoſtle doth, namely that it is bread.
               
                  
No, then they wyl ſay, that we hang all by reaſon, the mater beynge a mater of fayth: Wher as they themſelues altogether hang on reaſon, as though Chryſt can not be able to doe that, which he promiſeth (bred ſtil in ſubſtaūce remaynyng, as the Accidentes doe) except it be tranſubſtāciate. Is not thys, trow you, to make it a mater of reaſon, and to hedge gods power in within the limits of reaſon:
               Yf Chryſtes wordes, that folowe (which is geuē for you) be to bee vnderſtande for whyche ſhalbe geuen or ſhalbe betrayed for you, and not ſo precyſelye as they be ſpoken (for that were to make Chryſt a lyar) why is it ſo hainous a mater with ye papiſts, becauſe we doe not ſo precyſelye take the wordes immedyatly goyng

before: namelye, thys is my body, as to admitte, that if there be bred, then Chryſt is a lyar: Myght not we reaſon and ſaye then: if Chriſtes body at y• tyme was not betrayed (as in dede it was not) nor hys bloud ſhed, thē is Chryſt a lyar.
               But here they wyll ſaye, all men may knowe, that Chryſt by the preſent tence, meante the future tence: and in the ſcrypture it is a moſt vſual thyng, ſo to take tence for tence.
               And I praye you, why maye not we ſaye, that al menne maye know it is moſt common in ſcripture, to geue vnto ſignes y• nams of the thynges, whych they ſignifye: And no man is ſo foolyſhe, but he knoweth, that Chryſt thē inſtituted a ſacrament, whole ſacramentally to be vnderſtande:

that is, that the ſygne, or viſible ſacrament, ſhold haue not only y• name of the thing ſignified, but alſo ſome ſimilitude there with, or els it were no ſacrament.
               But take bred awaye (as the papyſtes do) leauing there but the accidentes onely, whych do not feede the bodye: and then what ſhallreſēble and repreſente vnto vs Chryſtes body, broken for the fode of the ſoule: As wyne com forteth the hart, ſo doth Chriſts bloud, ſhed on the croſſe, comfort the ſoule. But take wyne awaye by tranſubſtanciacy on, as the papyſtes doe, and tell me what ſimilitude remaineth: None at alſo no ſacrament at all: ſo Chriſts inſtitucion is taken away. Wel, doe theireiect gods commaundement Math. 15. for their tradicions ſake: Our fayth therefore is, that the

ſupper of the lord is y• ſacrament of Chryſtes bodi & bloud. Theſe wordes (thys is my bodi, which is brokē for you: this is mi bloud of the new teſtament whyche is ſhed for your ſynnes) are moſte true words and plaine, accordig to Chriſtes meaning, to al them, whych doe as he byddeth them: that is, to all ſuche as take, eate and drynke.
               Which wordes the papiſtes kepe in theyr purſe, or els theyr priuate maſſes could not ſtande. To ſuch, I ſay, as take and eate thys ſacramēt in ſorowinge for their ſynfullyfe paſt, and purpoſyng to amende, aboue al things remembryng and beleuyng, that Chryſtes bodye was broken for their ſynnes, and his bloud ſhed for their iniquities: all ſuche (I ſaye) as verely as they ſee, take,

taiſt and eate bread, and drynke wyne, whyche goeth into theyr bodi, fedeth it and nouriſheth it: euen ſo verely the ſoule & ſpirite by fayth receaueth, not onelye Chryſtes bodye broken, or hys bloud ſhed (for the fleſhe profyteth Iohn. 6. nothyng, it is the ſprite that quickeneth, ſayth Chriſt) but euē whole Chryſte, into whom they are incorporate, and made one wyth hym, fleſhe of hys fleſhe, Eph. 5. and bone of hys bones.
               That is to ſaye: as Chryſtes body is immortal and glorious, euen ſo are theirs now by fayth and hope, and at the daye of the Lord they ſhal be in very dede. Then whych thyng, what can be greater?
               Thys we teache and beeleue concernyng thys ſacrament, dete ſtyng and abhorryng the horrible

error of tranſubſtanciacion, whych maketh bread and wyne our God and Chryſte: and cauſeth men to be gaſers, gapers & worſhyppers, yea ydolators, rather then takers and eaters, as Chryſt cōmaundeth: and whiche maketh Chriſts ſacrifice of none effect, as now ſhalbe ſhewed by gods grace.
               For thys ſhall ſuffyſe to the declaracyon of our faith, concerning the Lordes ſupper, whervnto agreeth the Catholik church and al the fathers.
               As full well thou mayſt ſee in the byſhop of Canterburyes boke: whych is farre from being anſwered, eyther by the byſhop of Worceter his boke in engliſh, or Marcus. 
                     〈◊〉
                   C. in latyn, y• thou nedeſt nomore to confyrme thy fayth in thys mater, but to reade

them wyth an indifferēt mynd, not beyng addict otherwyſe, thē to the deſyer of the trueth.
               As for thys doctryne of tranſubſtanciacyon, it is a newe founde thyng about a. 600. yeares olde: euen then broughte oute, whan Gatā was lattē loſe after. a. 1000 Apo. 20. yeares, that was bounde. Euen then was it eſtablyſhed, whan there was more miſchefe among the prelates, ſpecially the pops, about the ſea of Rome, who cold catche it, then euer there was among the emperours for the empyre.
               In the primitiue church, popes wer martird for Chriſts ſpouſes ſafe, that is the church: but now one poyſoned another, and one ſlew another, for ye roſe coloured Apo. 17. 18 whore of babilōs ſafe, that is, y• popyſh churche. In. 160. yeares

there was nere hand. 50. popes, wheras in no ſuch tyme therwer aboue. 33. emperours. And in the middes of this miſerable ſtate & tyme, thys doctryne of tranſubſtāciacion was the popes beginning, as they might haue ley ſure frō cōſpiring agaynſt prynces, & one agaynſt another, to eſtabliſh it, as the very principal pilloure of al their power: and no meruel. For, thys beyng admytted, then haue they power ouer Chryſte, the king of al kiges, y• he be wher they wyll, whan they wyl and aſlong as they wil vnder their power. Where throughe the other muſt nedes folow, y• if thei haue power ouer Chriſte and that in heauē, to brig him down at their pleaſure: Much more thē oueral earth, emperours, kigs, prices & people. Yea euē ouer ye deuil, purgatory

and hel haue they full power and iuriſdiction, being now goddes in earth, whyche ſytte in the holy place euen as god, yea 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Theſſa. 2. aboue God: to make what artycle of fayth ſhal pleaſe them, as they haue done thys of tranſubſtanciacion: whyche myghte aſwel be denied as graunted, ſaith Scotus ſuper. 4. ſētē. diſt. 11. Gabriel ſuper cā. miſ. Duns, one of their own doctors, and maſter Gabriel alſo, if it ſo pleaſed the holy father and his ſpouſe, the church of Rome. Before thys tyme, all the fathers diligence, labour and care was to call men to the receauynge of thys ſacrament, for the cōfirmacion of their fayth: that as verelye as they dyd eate bread and drynke wyne here, ſo ſhold they not doubt, but that by fayth thei did fede on the body of Chryſt, broken for theyr ſynnes, and on

hys bloud, ſhed for their iniquytyes.
               And therfore ſome times wold they call the ſacrament bread, a figure or a ſygne: ſome tyme would they call it the body and bloud of our ſauiour Ieſus chriſt as the nature of ſacramentes is, to be called with the name of the thynges, whyche they doe ſignifye: that there by mens myndes myght be wythdrawne from the conſyderacyon of ſenſyble and viſible thynges, to thynges heauenly, whych they doe ſygnyfye and repreſente.
               And theyr care, and crying vnto the people, was to receaue it: and therfore they made decrees, that ſuch, as woulde not receaue and be preſent, ſhould be ſparred out of the churche.
               O how erneſt was Chryſoſtō
                  
herein: Reade hys. 61. homilye vnto the people of Antioche. But after that thys decree and doctryne of tranſubſtanciacion came in, no crying out hath ther been to receaue it (no, that is the prerogatyue of the pryeſtes and ſhauen ſhorelynges) but altogether the ende of their crying out was, as now, to beleue tranſubſtanciacion, Chryſte to bee there fleſhe, bloud and bone, at euerye aulter, betwene euerye pryeſtes handes, yea in euerye pryeſtes mouth, whan it pleaſeth them, bee they neuer ſo ſtynkyng, fylthy ſodomites, adulterers, dron kardes, blaſphemers, dycers &c. The crying and teachyng of the cleargy cōtinually hath bene, to beeleue tranſubſtanciacion, and then to come to church to ſe their maker once a dai, to hold vp their

handes, to knock on their breſts, to ſtreke theyr faces, to mutter vp theyr laten prayers, to tak holy water and holy bread, to lyue in obedyence to the holy father and holye churche, hys ſpouſe. Thys was all they required.
               Drinke, dice, carde, fight, ſwere, ſteale, lye: no mater, ſo that in y• mornyng they ſee theyr God, all is well, good catholyke people, no man ſhall hurt them or perſecute them.
               But if any man ſhold not alowe nor worſhippe this god of theyr makig, although he lyued a moſt godly life, and were a man ful of charitie, ſobrietye and very religious: Oh ſuch is an heretike or ſchiſmatyke. Nothynge coulde pleaſe theſe wolfes, but euen the bloud and lyfe of ſuche a poore ſhepe: as men haue felte beefore, and now begynne to fele.
               
                  
Let al the packe of them burden thoſe iuſtlye, whom nowe they impriſon and cauſe to flye the realme, of any other thynge, then onelye of this, that we wyll not ſerue their god of bread & wyne. And then wyll we ſuffer ſhame. But I haue bene to long herein. Now to our doctryne and belef, for the ſecond poynt, concerning Chryſtes ſacryfice.
            
            
               The. 7. Chapter.
               
                  How gods worde teacheth of Chryſtes ſacryfyce, and the popes blaſphemye therein reueled.
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                  ryne and faith, 
                     〈…〉
                  s behalfe, is as in 
                     〈…〉
                  her: that is, accor
                  
                     〈…〉
                   to gods holiword: namely, y• Ieſus Chriſt, the ſonne of god and ſeconde Adam, by whom we receaue rightuouſnes vnto lyfe, as by y• firſte Adam we receaued ſynne vnto death: our fayth is (I ſaye) that thys Chryſt in our fleſhe, whych he toke of the ſubſtaunce of the virgin Mary, but pure and with out ſynne, for the ſatiſfyinge of gods 
                     ••
                  ſt diſpleaſure, deſerued by and in our fleſhe, dyd in the ſame ſuffer vniuſtly all kyndes of miſerye and 
                     〈◊◊〉
                  
                  ryng vp hymſelfe vnto hys eternal father, wyth a moſt willing, obedyent hart and ready mynd, whan he was crucyfyed vpō the croſſe. And therbi as he ſatiſfied

gods iuſtice, ſo he meryted and procured hys mercy, peace, fauor for al them, which either before that tyme were dead, either wer at that tyme preſent, either ſhold afterwarde come and beleue. By and in that offeringe, done for them and theyr ſynnes. So that god the eternall father (I ſaye) woulde be in this their Chriſte, their god and father, and not lai their ſinnes commytted to their charge to condemnacyon.
               This doctrine the holy ſcripture teacheth almoſt eueri wher, but ſpecially in y• Epiſtle to the Hebrues the. 1. 7. 8. 9. Chapters this is moſt liuely ſer forth, how that by one oblacion, once offred by this Chriſt himſelfe, all, that be gods people, are ſanctified.
               For as in reſpecte of them, that dyed in gods couenaunte and eleccion

before Chriſt ſuffred his death & offered his ſacrifice one alone and omniſufficient, neuer more to be offred, he is called the lambe ſlayne frō the begynning Apoca. 13. of the world and the one alone mediator betwene god and man, 1. Timo. 2. whoſe forth commyng was frō the begynnyng: Euen ſo, in reſpect Mich. 3. 5. of the vertue and efficacie of this one ſacrifice to al gods people, continually vnto the worlds ende, the holy ghoſte doeth tell vs, that therby he hath made holy ſuche, as be children of ſaluacion.
               And ſayth not, ſhall make holy, or doth make holye, leſte any manne ſhoulde wyth the papiſtes in dede reiterate thys ſacrifice agayne.
               Although in wordes they ſaye otherwyſe, as anone we ſhall

ſee, if herevnto I ſhewe you the meane, whereby to applye thys ſacrifice, whyche I wil do verye brefely.
               For in the. 17. of S. John our ſauiour doth very playnly ſhew thys in theſe wordes: for theyr ſakes, ſayeth he, I ſanctyfye my ſelfe, that they alſo myghte bee ſanctyfyed through the trueth. I praye not for them alone, but for thoſe alſo, whych ſhal beleue on me throughe theyr preaching. Here our ſauiour applyeth hys ſacrifice, in teachynge and prayeng for them.
               And as he teacheth them, as miniſters, to doe the like, that is, to preache and praye for the applycacyon of hys ſacryfyce to y• churche: ſo doeth he teache them and al the churche, to applye it vnto themſelues by beleuyng it

and by fayth. The whyche thing the Apoſtle S. Paule in manye places, but moſt playnlye in the ſeconde to the Corinthyans the fift chapter in the later end doth teache. Reade it, and ſe. So that now as ye haue Chryſtes one only ſacrifice, whych he hymſelfe on the croſſe offred once, as ſufficient for all that doe beleue, and neuer more to bee reiterated: ſo haue you, that for the applyinge of it to hys church, the miniſters ſhoulde preache and praye, that theyr preachyng myght be effectuall in Chryſt.
               And as Paul was ready him ſelfe, to ſuffer death for the confirmacion of the fayth of the elect: ſo ſhoulde the churche and eueri member of the ſame (which is of yeares of diſcrecion) by beleuyng in Chryſte throughe the

miniſters preachyng, apply it to themſelues. As for infauntes, I nede not in thys caſe to ſpeake of godes eleccion. It is moſte certayne. Thys kynde of applyinge, as it killeth y• papiſtical prieſts, whych hate not the deuil worſe, then true preachyng: ſo doeth it caſt down al their ſoale maſſing and fooliſh foundaciōs for ſuch, as be dead and paſt the miniſterie of godes worde. And alſo it pulleth awaye the opinion of opus operatū and of perſeuerāce in impietie from ſuch, as would enioye the benefite of Chryſtes death.
            
            
               The. 8. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ Of praying for the dead, the true doctryne.
               
               
                  
NOw as concerninge the thirde, that is, of prayeng for the dead and ſacrificing for them, as in the other we confeſſe, teache and beleue accordynge to gods worde: ſo doe we in this. Namely, that in holy ſcripture, thorow out the Canonical bokes of the olde and newe teſtament, we fynde nether precept nor enſample of prayenge for any, whā they bee departed thys lyfe: but that as menne dye, ſo ſhall they aryſe.
               If in fayth in the Lorde towardes the ſouth, thē nede they Eccle. 11. no prayers, then are they preſent lye happye, and ſhall aryſe in glorye. If in vnbelefe, withoute Iohn. 5. the lorde towarde the north, thē are they paſte all helpe, in the

damned ſtate preſently, and ſhal ryſe to eternall ſhame.
               Wherefore, accordynge to the ſcripture, we exhorte men to repent. And whyle they haue time, Gal. 6. to worke well.
               Eueri man ſhal beare his own burthen, euery man ſhall geue accompt Col. 3. Rom. 14. 2. Cor. 5. for hym ſelfe, and not ſir Iohn nor ſir Thomas, that ſyng or pray for them.
               Euery man ſhal receaue accordynge to that he hymſelfe doeth in thys body, whyle he is here alyue, bee it good or bad: and not accordyng to that hys executors, or thys chauntry prieſt, and that fraternite doth for hym.
               Whereby we maye well ſee, if we wyl, that as prayer for the dead is not avaylable or profitable to the dead: ſo is it not of vs allowable or to bee exercyſed.
               
                  
For as they, that ar departed, be paſt our prayers, beyng eyther in ioye or in miſery, as is aboue ſhewed: Euen ſo we, hauyng for rom. 10. 14. it no worde of god, where vpon fayth leneth, can not but ſynne in doyng it, in that we doe it not of fayth, beecauſe we haue no worde of god for it.
               Therfore wyth Abraham, Iſaac, Iacob, Moſes, y• prophets, Chryſt Ieſus and the Apoſtles, we bury the dead in a conuenyent place, & mourne in meaſure, as men hauynge hope of the reſurreccion, 1. Theſſa. 4 not becauſe of them: for that were a great poynte of ingratitude, thei being departed Apoca. 14. out of miſerable condycyon into a moſt bleſſed ſtate.
               Therfore we geue thankes to god for them, prayſe hys name for hys power and myghte ſhewed

on them. And pray, that we maye departe in the ſame fayth, and ioyfully ryſe wyth them in the reſurrecciō, which we deſier and wyſhe the lord would haſtē. We mourne (I ſay) not beecauſe of them, but of our ſelues, that haue loſt the companye of ſuche our helpers and furtherers in ſpiritual and temporall benefytes, by them beeyng admonyſhed of our immortalitie, and of the vanitie of thys lyfe: that we might the more contemne it, and deſier the euerlaſtyng lyfe, where they and we ſhall neuer be ſeparated. Thys is our fayth and doctryne for them, that be departed: who though they be members of the ſame body miſtical of Chriſte, y• we be of: yet ſhoulde they in this caſe be diſcerned from the mylitaunte members, they beyng at

reſte, and hauing finiſhed their courſſe and fyghte, in no poynte 2. Timo. 4. neding any of our helpe, excepte we ſhoulde to arrogantly ſet vp our owne merites and prayers, and pul down Chriſt, as though we were able to get pardon and hyer rowme in heauē for others: where al our ryghtuouſnes, and the beſte thynge we doe, is ſo farre from helpyng others, that thereby we can not helpe oure ſelues, but had nede to crye dimitte nobis debita noſtra: being no better in gods ſyghte, then a Luke. 11. defyled womans cloth, althogh to the ſyghte of menne, they Eſa. 64. maye ſeme gorgyous and gaye. For if the papyſtes would ſaye, as whan they are preſſed wyth blaſphemye, in extollynge theyr owne merytes and workes of ſupererogacion agaīſt Chriſt, ther vſe, that our prayers doe thē no

good in reſpecte of the worthynes of their prayers, but in reſpect of gods goodnes: in y• gods goodnes is not to be loked for other wyſe, thē he hath promiſed, let them eyther ſhewe men hys p
                     •
                  omes, or els in this be half kepe ſylence, and exercyſe themſelues better in doyng their dutyes to their brethren, that be alyue. Towardes whom theyr charytye is verye colde: all thoughe whan they are dead, then ther wyll pretende much, then wyl they praye for them: but yet not for nought and freli, as true charite workth. For no penny, no pater noſter.
               Geue nothyng, and then thei wil neyther ſyng nor ſay Requiem, nor placebo, I warraunt you.
               But of thys ſuffycient. Now to the laſt, of prayeng to the dead, or to ſayntes departed this lyfe.
            
            
               
               The. 9. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ Of praying to ſaynctes.
               
               HEre we confeſſe, teache and beleue, as before is ſayd, accordyng to gods holye worde, that as all Iacob. 1. and euery good thynge commeth only from god the father, by y• means of Ieſus chriſt: ſo, for the obtaininge of y• ſame, Pſal. 50. 1. Timo. 6. Hebru. 13. Pſal. 5. we muſt cal vpō hys holy name, as he hymſelfe commaundeth very often.
               But for aſmuche as god dwelleth in a lighte inacceſſible, and is a conſumyng fyer, and hateth all impietie and vnclennes, and we bee blynde, ſtubble, graſſe,

haie and nothyng but filthy, vncleane and ſynneful: and becauſe that therfore as we maye not, ſo we dare not approche to his preſence: it hath pleaſed thys good god and father, of his loue, to ſēd a ſpokeſman and mediator, an in terceſſor and aduocate betwene hym and vs, euen Ieſus Chriſte his dearely beeloued ſonne: By whom we mighte haue free entraunce wyth boldnes, to come before hys preſence and Throne of mercye, to fynde and obteyne grace and helpe in tyme of nede. For thys our mediator and aduocate Hebru. 2. 4 is with his father of the ſame ſubſtaunce, power, wiſdōe and maieſtye, and therfore maie way wel wyth him in al things: and with vs he is of the ſame ſubſtaunce whyche we are of, euen fleſh and mā, but pure and with

oute ſynne, in all thynges beyng tempted lyke vnto vs, and hauing Heb. 3. 4. experyence of our infirmytyes, that he myght be mercyfull and faythfull on our behalfe, to pourge vs from our ſynnes, and 1. Pet. 2. Math. 3. 17. to bryng vs into ſuch fauor with the father: that we might be not onely dearely beloued throughe him, the only dearlyng of the father, Math. 7. 1. Iohn. 5. Iohn. 14. but alſo obtayne whatſoeuer we ſhal aſke according to his worde and will, in the name of this ſame our mediator, ſauiour, interceſſour and aduocate. So y• eaſy it is to ſee, that as it is an obedyente ſeruice to god ye father, to call alwayes vpon hym in all Pſal. 50. our nede: ſo to come to hys preſence throughe Chryſte, is to the honoure of CHRISTES medyacyon, interceſſyon, and

aduocatſhip. And therfore, as it cannot bee but agaynſte the almightie God and father, to aſke or loke for any thyng els where, at the handes of any that be departed this life, as thoughe he were not the geuer of all good thynges, or as though he hadde not commaunded vs to come vn to hym: ſo we ſee, it is manyfeſtli againſt Chriſt Ieſus our lord, by any other ſaynte, aungell or archangel, to come and moue any thyng at our fathers handes: As though he were not our mediatour, aduocate and interceſſoure, or els not a ſufficiente aduocate, mediatour and interceſſour, or at leeſt not ſo mercyfull, meke, gracyous, louing and readye to helpe, as others.
               Where he only ſo loued vs, as the very hartes of al men and

aungels neuer were able to conceaue any part of ye height, depth Eph. 3. bredth and lēgth of the ſame, as it is.
               If his own harte bloud was not to deare for vs, beeyng hys very enemyes, & neuer deſirous to doe his wil: How is it poſſyble, that he wyl contemne vs, for cōming vnto him with purpoſe and deſyer to ſerue hym? Many other reaſons I could geue you, wherefore the ſaynctes are not to bee prayed vnto: for that pulleth from fayth in Chryſt: It maketh them godes, it is ydolatrye &c. But thys maye ſuffice. So yt nowe you ſee by godes woorde, what oure faith is concernynge theſe. 4. thynges.
               Whyche that you maye the more loue, embrace and be cōtēt to cary wyth you throughe fyer

and water, I wil now goe about by gods grace, as brefelye as I can, to ſhewe, howe abominable their doctryne is: euen out of the ſhort Summe therof, already before by me rehearced.
            
            
               The. 10. Chapter.
               
                  The popiſhe doctryne of the ſacrament confuted more largelye.
               
               FIrſte, where they alledge the Catholyke churche to haue taughte, concernynge the ſupper, the doctryne of trāſubſtāciaciō of Chriſts real and carnall preſence: dearly beloued, know that this is a manifeſt

lie. For as the Catholyke church neuer knew of it for. 900 yeares at the leaſt, after Chriſts aſcenſion: ſo after that tyme, no Tranſubſtancyacyō is a newe doctryne. other churche did obſtynatlye defende, cruelly mayntayne, and wylfullye wreſte the ſcriptures and doctors for the eſtablyſhing of it, ſaue onli the popiſh church, as theyr owne doctors, Duns and Gabriel, doe teache. Reade the byſhoppe of Canterburyes booke agaynſte Wincheſter, and ſee.
               Where as they ſaye, that Chriſte in hys ſupper, by takyng bread & ſpeakynge the wordes of conſecracyon, dyd make it hys fleſhe, accordig to hys promes in Iohn Iohn. 6. (whan he ſaith: and ye bread, y• I wil geue, is my fleſh &c) ſo y• thei wold therbi ſeme to haue. 2. places of Scripture for thys theyr

doctryne of tranſubſtanciacyon and reall or carnall preſence: Although diuerſly I cold improue this, yet for becauſe I wold not be ouer tedious vnto you, euen by the ſame their ſētence you ſhal ſe, how lernedly they lye.
               The ſentence is this: And the bred, that I wil geue, is mi fleſh, whiche I wyl geue for the lyfe of the world. Firſt marke, that he ſaieth: the bread is my fleſh. He ſayth not: ſhalbe my fleſh, but it is my fleſhe.
               Thys I trowe maketh agaiſt them. For the ſacrament a yeare after at the leſt was not inſtitut. Agayne, he ſaith: that the bread is his fleſh, whiche he wyll geue for the lyfe of the world.
               Here woulde I aſke them, whee there Chryſtes death was for y• life of the world, or in vayne. If

they ſay, it was for the life of the world, then why doe they apply and geue it to the ſacrament? Was it crucifyed? Or if it be the ſame ſacrifice (for ſo they ſaye) eyther it was effectuall, or not. If it was effectual, then Chriſts death neded not.
               If it was not effectuall, then Chryſt was not god, and could not doe that he woulde: thus ye maye ſee their vngodly foolyſh: nes, or foolyſhe vngodlyneſſe, I can not tell whyche to cal it wel.
               Where as they require the in tente of the prieſte, to conſecrate Of the prieſtes in tente. Chryſtes bodye: for aſmuche as we knowe not any mans intent, (god only knoweth the hart) yea the wordes we know not, thei ar ſo ſpokē in hucker mucker: I pray you, into what a doubtfulneſſe are we brought, whether it be y•
                  
ſacrament or no? In what perill are we of worſhipping a pece of bred for our Chryſt? Is not this (trowe you) ſwete and comfortable geer, y• a man ſhall alwayes ſtand in doubt, whether he haue receaued the ſacramente or no? Where as they wil haue it bred to the eye, and not to the mouth, iudge thē whether a dogge may not eate Chryſtes bodye: iudge whether the deuyll, if he would come in the likneſſe of a pryeſte, might not ſwalow vp Chryſte & ſo brig him into hel. Frō whēce, beecauſe there is no redempcion there, Chriſtes body ſhoulde neuer come, but be damned. Iudge whether the taiſt of thy mouth, is not as much to be credited, as the ſight of the eye: ſpecially in y• the ſcripture ſo often calleth it bred after ye conſecracyon, as before

I haue ſhewed. Iudge whether Chryſtes body be not verye prety, that it can lye in ſo litle a rowme. Iudge whether Chryſte hath moo bodies then one, when perchāunce the prieſt hath. 20. or 100. before hym. Iudge whether the prieſte breake not Chryſtes bodye in breakynge of it. Iudge whether it bee ſemelye, to chawe Chryſtes body, wyth the teeth. Iudge whether Chriſt did eate hys owne bodye, yea or no: for Chryſt did eate the ſacrament wt hys diſciples. Iudge whether it be ſemely, that Chryſt ſhould be kept ſo in priſon, as thei kep him. Iudge whether it be ſemeli, that Chryſtes body ſhould be ſo dyn dle danled, & vſed, as thei vſe it. Iudge whether y• people knockig and knelynge at the eleuacion of that they ſee (for they ſee but the formes of bred & wyne, and not

Chryſtes bodye, if it bee as the Papyſtes feyne) iudge, I ſaye, whether the people, by the papyſtes owne doctryne, bee not made ydolatours.
               Many moo abſurdities ther be, whyche I purpoſiye omytte. Thys lytle is inough, hereby to geue you occaſyon to knowe the more.
               Where they ſaye, that ye bred is made Chryſtes bodye, fleſhe, bloud &c. That is: that Chriſtes body is made of the bred: As the Byſhopp of Wyncheſter, in his boke for thys mater of the deuils ſophiſtie, and els where doeth affirme: You may ſe; how ſhame leſlye, yea blaſphemouſlye they ſpeake.
               For Chryſtes body crucified was borne of the virgin Mary: euen of her ſubſtaunce. But thei

ſaye, the ſupper is that bodye, which was crucified. Nowe, I trowe, bread is one thynge, and the virgins fleſhe another thing. Therefore in dede they denye Chryſt in the fleſh, that thei may ſtabliſh their Chryſt in the bred: whych is the very note of Antichriſt.
               Laſt of al, where as thei ſay, that they receaue the ſacrament to damnacion, whych doe not be leue their tranſubſtanciacyon: If wyth Paul their wordes wer conferred, you ſhoulde ſee otherwiſe.
               For he ſayeth: they receaue this bread (for ſo he calleth it after the wordes of conſecracyon) vnworthely, whyche doe not eſteme Chryſtes body.
               As in dede the papyſtes do not, whych woulde brynge Chryſte

down out of heauen, for theues and whores to chawe and eate, for mothes, to corrupt, and to be in daunger of mowlynge: as yf thei kepe their hoſtes lōg indede thei wil moulde, and then wyll they burne thē. Doe theſe menne (trow you) eſteme Chryſtes body: Paul playnly ſheweth in y• ſame place, that ye wycked man, whiche receaueth y• ſacrament vn worthely, eateth not Chryſts body, but his own dānaciō: which, I trow, be not Chriſtes bodye. And this ſhal ſerue for this time to ſhew you how ſhameles, fylthy & abominable this their doctrine of tranſubſtanciacion is. If in ſo ſhort a ſūme of their doctrine there be ſo many abominacions, I pray you, howe much is in the whole ſumme of the ſame? Now for the ſacrifice.
            
            
               
               The. 11. Chapter.
               
                  The popiſhe doctryne of the ſacrifice confuted.
               
               FIrſt, in that they graunt Chriſtes ſacrifice on the croſſe, done by himſelfe, to be full and perfecte ynough, we may wel ſe, y• we nede not thys, which they haue foūde out, in dede to make the other vn perfect: for els it neded no reiteracion.
               But ſeing thei reiterate it by this and make it nedeful euen as baptiſme, eaſely may all menne knowe, yt though they ſpeake one thing, thei me
                     •
                  e another: and ſo are dyſſemblers and deſtroyers

of Chryſtes ſacrifice, litle conſyderinge the greate payne that Chryſt ſuffred, ſeyng thei weie it no better.
               Where as they ſaye, that it is the ſame ſacrifice, which Chriſte offred on y• croſſe, but vnbloudely (wherin thei ſeme to deni tran ſubſtanciacion: for els, I trowe, it muſt nedes be bloudi) I wold thus reaſon wyth thē: in aſmuch as Chryſtes ſacrifice on ye croſſe was the only perfect, and al ſufficient propiciatory ſacrifice for the ſynnes of the worlde, as thei confeſſe, thys coulde not be the ſame, becauſe it was done before that vpon the croſſe.
               Or els the ful perfecte ſacryfice was then in the ſupper finiſhed, and ſo Chriſtes death is in vaine and a foolyſh thyng.
               Yf Chryſtes death bee not fooliſh,

but in dede (as it is) the full and perfect ſacryfice for y• ſinnes of the world: Then thys, whiche they feine, that he offered in his laſt ſupper, is not the ſame, prate what pleaſeth them. Or els it is not of value, take whether they wyll.
               Whereas they prate of Chriſtes wyl, that it was accepted before his father for the dead: as they ſhall neuer bee able to ſhewe ſo much as one word, to proue that Chryſt would in hys ſupper, ſacrifice himſelfe to hys father for the ſynnes of the world (for ther is not one worde therof through out the whole byble) ſo doe thei belie god the father, which wold in dede haue hys ſonne to drinke the cupp, that he prayed to be taken from him: or els mak chriſts death fruſtrate, and more then

nede, which is the onely thynge, that all their doctryne tendeth vnto. For if the father alowed his wil for the dede, I pray you, who ſeeth not now, the ded to be more then nedeth?
               Where they ſaye, that Chryſt commaunded hys churche, to offre this ſacrifice to hys father in remembraunce of his bloudye ſacrifice: I woulde praye them to ſhew me, where he commaunded it, and then good inoughe. But, dearlye beloued, they can neuer ſhew it. Yf they wyll ſaye: Hoc facite: to take facere for to ſacrifice, as ſome teache it: then will I ſay, that a boye of. 12. year olde can tel they lye.
               For hoc facite (doe you this) perteineth to the whole action of Chryſtes ſupper, of taking, eatīg and drynkynge of y• ſacramente

&c. And aſwel ſpoken to the laye men as to ye prieſtes. But, I trow they wil not ſuffer the laie men, to ſay maſſe another whyle now for them.
               No, thys were to muche agaynſt theyr honor and gayne alſo. But if one woulde aſke them what they offer to the father, thē a man ſhould ſe their abominacions. For if they ſaye, nothynge, then men woulde take them, as they be, lyars.
               If they ſay: bread and wyne, as indede thei doe in their maſſe horriblye, then in that they ſaye they offre the ſame thing, whiche Chryſte offred on the croſſe, and he offred his bodye: bred muſte nedes be Chryſtes body, and ſo Chriſtes body is bred and wine. If thei ſay yt thei offer vp chriſt, in that the offerer muſt neds be

as good at the leſt, yea better thē the thing offred (for God is no ſtrompet, to like the offer token, and gifte better, then the offerer and geuer) then muſt they nedes ſhew thēſelues opē Antichriſts. For they make themſelues equal wyth Chryſt, yea better then he: whych thyng indede their holy father and graundſire, the pope, doth.
               For where Chryſte woulde take vpon him to teach nothing, but that he had receaued of hys father: And therfore willed men to ſearch the ſcriptures, as al his Apoſtles did, whether their doctryn was not according thervnto: the pope, and his prelates, wil be bold to teach what pleaſe them more, then God byddeth, yea cleane contrary to y•, whyche god biddeth. As it is playne by

al theſe. 4. pointes, tranſubſtanciacion, ſacrifice, praying for the dead and to the dead. But ſee, I pray you, theyr abominacions. The ſacrifice of Chriſt, for the redempcion of ye worlde, was not ſimply his bodi & his bloud: but his bodye broken, and his bloud ſhed. That is, all hys paſſyon and ſufferyng in his bodye and fleſhe.
               In that therfore thei offre, as thei ſai, the ſame ſacrifice, which Chryſt offred: dearely beloued, doe they not aſmuch, as in them is, kyl, ſlaye, whyppe and crucifie Chryſt agayne? Ah wretches and Antichriſtes.
               Who would not deſier to die for his maſter Chryſtes cauſe, agaynſt thys theyr hainous and ſtinking abominacion? Wher as they cal this ſacrifice of y• maſſe

the principal meane, to apply the benefite of Chriſts death to the quick and dead: I woulde gladly haue them to ſhew, where and of whom they learned it. Sure I, am thei learned it not of Chriſt. For whan he ſent hys dyſciples Math. 28. Mark. 16. Luke. 24. abrode, to apply vnto men ye benefyte of hys death, he bad them not maſſe it, but preache the goſpel, as ye meane by the which god had appoynted beleuers to be ſaued. The which thīg Peter tolde Actes. 10. Col. 1. 2. 2. Cor. 5. Cornelius playnly, as Paul alſo teacheth almoſt euery where in hys epiſtles. But in dede preaching they may not away wyth, aſwel for that it is to paynefull, as for that it is nothing ſo gainful, nor in auctorite or eſtimaciō wt the world. Nothīg ſo diſpleaſeth y• deuil, as preaching y• goſpel, as in al ages eaſely we may

wel ſe, if we wil mark, to our cō
                  fort in this age. And therfore by geuinge his daughter, idolatry, with her dowrye of worldlye wealth, ryches and honor, to the Pope and his ſhauē ſhorelings: they haue by thys meanes in many yeares bene begettīg a daughter, which at length was deliuered to deſtroye preachynge: euen the minion Miſſa, meſtres Miſſa, who daunceth dayntelye before the Herodes of the worlde, and is the cauſe, euen whi Iohn Baptiſt & ye preachers bee put in to pryſon and loſe their heades. Thys daunſynge damoſell, the derlyng of her mother, the fayre garlande of her fathers (for ſhe hath many fathers) the gawdye galaunte of her graundeſyre, is trymmed and trycked on the beſte and moſte holy maner or

wyſē, y• can be: euen wt the worde of god the epiſtle and the goſpel: with the ſacrament of Chryſtes body and bloud: wt the pomander and perfumes of prayer, and al godly thynges, that cā be: but blaſphemouſly and horribly abuſed, to be a mairmaide, to amaſe and bewitche men, ſayling in the ſeas of this life, to be enamored on her.
               And therfore, beſydes her aforeſaid goodli apparel, ſhe hath al kynde of ſwete tunes, dityes, melodies, ſinging, playing, rynging, knocking, kneling, ſtandīg, lifting, croſſing, bleſſing, blowīg 
                     •
                  nouing, incēſing &c. Moreouer ſhe wanteth no golde, ſiluer, precious ſtones, Iewels and coſtly ſilkes, veluettes, ſatēs, damaſtes &c. And al kind of things, which ar gorgious in the ſyght of men:

as, if you cal to mīd the chalices, copes, veſtiments, crucifixes &c. you can not but ſee.
               And here to ſhe is bewtyfyed, yet more to be ſhewed, and ſette forth in lying words and titles, geuen to her: that ſhe hath all power in heauen, earth & hell: that ſhe hath all thynges for ſoule & bodye, for quicke and dead, for man and beaſt.
               And leſt men ſhoulde thynke her to coye a dame, lo ſyr, ſhe offerth her ſelfe moſt gently to al, that wil come, bee they neuer ſo poore, euil, ſtinking and foule, to haue their pleaſure on her. Come who wil, ſhe is Ihōe good feloe. And y• not only to make her ſelfe common to them, that wyll: but alſo to plye them plentyfully, wt moſt pleaſaunte promyſes (but falſely) and geuing moſt licen
                     ••
                  
                  o
                     ••
                  
               
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
                  
graffed into hym: ye ſupper, yt we are fed wt Chriſt, ſpirituallye wt his body and bloud, yea that we be incorporated into Chriſt, to be fleſhe of his fleſhe & bone of hys bones, as he, by being borne of ye virgin Mary, was fleſh of oure fleſh, and bone of oure bones. Away therefore wt their abominable doctryne, that the ſacrifice of the maſſe is the principal means to appli Chriſts death to ye quick and dead: wherin al men may ſe that they lye boldly.
               For as the worde of god in the miniſtery perteineth not to the dead (for who wil be ſo made, as to goe and preache on dead mēs graues, yt the dead mē may hear) ſo likewiſe do not the ſacramēts. Litle beholding were menne to Chriſt and to ye Apoſtles, if this were the principall meane to apply

ſaluaciō, y• they would vſe it ſo litle & preache ſo much. Paul, hauing reſpect to ye chefeſt end, wherfore he was ſent, ſaid y• he was not ſente to baptiſe, but to 1. Cor. 1. preach. And often ſaith he, y• he was an apoſtle, ſegregate of god Roma. 1. Gal. 1. 2. Timo. 4. to preach ye goſpel. And y• biſhop Timothi did he warne, to preach in ſeaſō & out of ſeaſon, ſpeaking neuer a worde of this maſſing or ſacrificing Chriſtes body. Laſte of al, wher thei mak a ſimilitud, that as by baptiſme the miniſter applieth to y• child regeneraciō, ſo in this &c. Oh, y• this ſimilitude wer wel loked on, thē wold it make thē to bluſter: for thei ar no more lyke, then an apple lyke an oyſter. In baptyſme the child is alyue, but here y• man is dead: in baptiſme the chylde is preſēt, but here y• man is perchaūce. 40.

miles of if he ſacrifice for ye quit, yea. 100. miles from him: in baptiſme the childe receaueth the ſacrament, but here you muſt loke and gape.
               But beware you take not, for ye may receaue but once a yeare, and then alſo you muſte receaue but ye one halfe, the cuppe he wil kepe from you. In baptiſme is required gods eleccion, if y• childe be an infaunt: or faith if he be of age. And therfore he reciteth the promes, that it maye bee heard: but here is no fayth requyred.
               For how can men beeleue, whan they ar dead? No promes is thē preached or heard. So that euen thys theyr ſimilitude maketh the mater playne inough.
               For baptyſme, al men knowe, to be no ſacrifice.
               But of thys I haue ſpokē a litle

before, that if applying come by the prieſtes maſſyng: then were preachyng in vayne, beleuynge in vayne, godly lyfe in vayne, ye prieſte were goddes felowe, yea Chryſtes ſuperiour, as is afore ſard. Now to the thirde, of praying for the dead: wherin I wilbe brefe.
            
            
               The. 12. Chapter.
               
                  ¶ The confutacion of the papyſtes ſacrificing and praying for the dead.
               
               FIrſt whan they ſay, this applicatory ſacrifice may be called a propiciatory ſacrifice, beecauſe it applyeth the propiciatorye ſacrifice, to whom the prieſt

wyll, bee he dead or alyue: as I woulde haue you to note, howe they graunt, that of it ſelfe it is not a propycyatorye ſacryfyce, whereby they varye from that, which they els where teach, that it is the ſelf ſame ſacrifice, which Chryſte offered on the croſſe, vn bloudely: ſo I praye you forget not, that ye prieſt is gods felowe: for he may apply it to whom he wyll.
               Therfore honor ſir Iohn, and make much of ſir Thomas. For though god could make thee alone: yet alone, wyth oute the prieſte, he can not ſaue thee. Agayne, if ſir Iohn be thy frend, care neyther for god nor the deuill: lyue as thou wylte, he wyll bryng thee to heauen, althoughe thou ſlippe into hel.
               So they wryte, that Gregory by

maſſing did with Traiane y• emperour. It maketh no mater how thou lyue here, ſo thou haue the ſauior of the pope and his ſhaue lynges.
               Wheras they ſay, that the fathers from the beginninge were accuſtomed to make memorials for the dead: thys I graunte to be true, as we doe in our communion.
               But to gather, that therefore they prayed for them: it nomore foloweth, then to ſaye, that oure englyſhe ſeruice doeth alowe it, where it doth not. For ye muſte note, that there is a memorial for the dead aſwel in geuing thanks to god for them, as in praying for them: for to ſaye, to praye for the dead, is a generall worde, includyng in it geuyng of thankes.
               And therfore whan we read in

the aunciente fathers of the primitiue church, of the memorials for the dead or prayinge for the dead, it is not to be vnderſtand, that they prayed for to delyuer them from purgatory (for y• was not founde out then) or frō hell, as oure papiſtes doe in theyr prayers of the maſſe, forther is no redempcion: or for pardon of theyr ſynnes, as thoughe they had it not, for if thei depart with out it, they are damned: or for to get them a hier place in heauen, for that wer iniurious to chriſt, that we ſhould purchaſe places, and hyer rowmes in heauen for others: But eyther for the deſyer of the more ſpedy cōming of Chriſt, to haſten the reſurrecciō, either y• thei might not be thoght negligent or careles ouer y• deed: tyther that the liuing myght be

occaſioned to increaſe in loue to the church here in earth, who ſtil foloweth with good wil & loue, euen men whā thei be departed: eyther to admoniſh the churche to be diligent ouer ſuch as lyue, and careful to extende her loue, if it were poſſible, euen to the deed.
               On this wiſe ſhoulde we expounde not only the former, but alſo y• later fathers, as Auſten, Chriſoſtōe and others. Whyche though in ſome places they ſeme very manifeſtli to alow praying for y• deed, yet they are not to be vnderſtād otherwiſe, thē I haue ſaid for them. For neuer knewe they of our merites & purgatory: for if thei had but dreāed therō, ſurely thei would haue bē much more circūſpect in their ſpeakigs & writinges of this, thē theiwer.

Where they ſaye, that beecauſe thys ſacrifice is the ſacryfice of the whole churche, whereof the dead be members, therfore they ſhould be prayed for: as beefore I haue ſhewed, that we muſt put a difference betwene the mēbers of the churche militaunte here on earth, and thoſe whyche bee now in reſt and peace with god: ſo wold I haue you to note here, that they ſhould pray for none other dead then ſuche, as be members of Chryſtes Churche.
               Nowe in that al ſuch dye in the lord, and therfore are happye, I would gladly learne, what good ſuch prayer doeth to thoſe ſo departed.
               As for purgatory pyke purſſe, they paſſe not vpon it. But that thys is a ſacrifice applycatorye or propiciatory, the papiſtes cā
                  
neuer proue. Where they ſaye, charitie requireth it: I anſwer, that in aſmuche as charitie foloweth fayth, and wyll not goe a fote farther then fayth ſheweth the waye: ſeyng fayth is not but of the worde of god, and goddes Roma. 10. woorde for thys they haue not: eaſy it is to perceaue, that thys praying thus for the dead is not of Chriſtian charitie. But be it y• charitie réquired it, I then meruail why thei ar ſo vncharitable, that wyll doe nothyng herein wt out money. Whye wyll they not pray without pens? If the pope and his prelates were charitable, they woulde, I trowe, make ſwepe ſtake at once wyth purgatorye.
               Where they alledge the ſentence of the Machabees: as all men of learnynge knowe, the fathers

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
alowe not that booke to be gods ſpirite or catholike: ſo doe I wonder, that in al the olde teſtamente this ſacrificing for the dead was neuer ſpokē of before. In all the ſacrifices, that God appoynted, we reade of neuer one for the dead.
               Thys geer came not vp, till the religion was wonderfullye corrupte among the Iewes.
               As wyth vs it was neuer founde out, til horrible corrupcion of religion and ignoraunces of Godes worde came into the churche of god, whan preachyng was putte downe and maſſynge came vp.
               Then fayth in Chriſt was colde, penaunce became popyſhe, and truſt was taughte in creatures, ignoraunce abounded: and loke

what the clergi ſaid, that was beleued. Then came vp viſions, miracles, dead ſprites walkynge and talkynge how they myghte bee releued by thys maſſe, by that pylgremage gate goynge.
               And ſo came vp this pelfe of prayinge for the dead, whyche Paul, the apoſtles and al the prophetes neuer ſpake one word of. For all menne maye eaſelye ſee, that it is a thinge which helpeth much vyce, and hyndreth godlyneſſe.
               Who wyll bee ſo earneſte to amende, to make reſtytucyon of that he hath gotten vniuſtli, and lyue in a Godlye loue and true frare of GOD, beeyng taught that by prayers, by maſſes, by foundynge of Chaunteryes &c. whan he is gone, he ſhall fynde caſe, & releafe, yea and come to

ioye eternall: Chryſtes doctrine is, that the waye of ſaluacion is ſtrayte. But thys teachyng, heapyng of maſſes one vpō another whan we are dead, maketh it voyde.
               Chryſtes teachyng is, that we ſhoulde liue in loue and charite: the Sonne ſhould not go down on our wrath. But this doctrine, to pray for the dead to be delyuered out of purgatory, teacheth rather to lyue in litle loue, in wrath euen tyl our deathes day. For ſyr Iohn can and wil helpe, ſyr thomas, by a maſſe of Scala celi, wyll bryng vs into heauen. Chryſtes doctryne is, that he is the way, but thys doctryne maketh the maſſyng prieſt the way. Away in dede it is, but to hell & to ye deuil. Dearly beloued, therfore take good hearte vnto you

for thys geer: rather, then you would conſente vnto it, to looſe lyfe, and all that euer you haue.
               You ſhal be ſure wyth Chryſt to fynde it, and that for euer, wyth infinite increace.
               Laſt of al, wher they alledge the catholyke churche and conſēt of al doctors in thys mater: as I wyſhe you ſhould knowe, that to be the true and catholyk church, which is grounded vpon gods worde, whiche worde they haue not for them in thys matter: So would I ye ſhoulde knowe, that ther is no membre of the church, but he mai erre. For thei be men, and al men be lyers, as Dauyd ſayeth.
               Now if al the members may erre, then you mai eaſeli ſe, wher to your fayth ought to leene: euē vnto gods wryttē worde. Heare

the churche, and the doctors of y• churche: but none otherwyſe thē as teachers, and trye their teachyng by gods worde. If they teache accordyng to it, then beeleue and obeye them.
               If contrary, then knowe they be but menne, and alwayes lette your fayth leene to gods worde.
               Howbeit, for thys mater of prayinge for the dead, knowe of trueth, that ther be no doctors of 400, or. 500. yeare after Chriſts aſcenſion, but if thei in ſōe places ſeme to alowe prayinge for the dead, yet they would be taken in ſome of the ſenſes whiche I haue ſpecified. In many places doe they by diuerſe ſē
                  tences declare it them ſelues. But of this ynough.
            
            
               
               The. 13. Chapter.
               
                  The refutacion of the hereſye of prayinge to ſainctes, departed out of this world.
               
               NOw to the laſte of prayinge to ſaynctes. Fyrſte where they ſay, there be moo mediators of interceſſion then Chryſt, makynge a diſtinction, not learned out of gods boke in ſuche ſenſe, and for ſuche purpoſe as they alledge: I wyſhe they woulde loke on the. 8. to the Romaynes, and 1. Iohn. 2. & there ſhal they lerne, to take better hede.
               
                  
The one ſayeth: Chryſte ſitteth on the ryght hand of hys father, and prayeth for vs.
               The other ſayth: he is our aduocate, that is, a ſpokeſman, cō
                  forter, interceſſor, and mediator. Now would I aſke them, ſeyng that Chryſt is a mediator of interceſſyon, as I am ſure thei wil graunt: whether he be ſufficient or no.
               If they ſay no, then all mē wil know they lye. But if they ſaye yea, then maye I aſke, whie they are not content wyth ſufficient. What fault fynde ye wyth him? Is there any more mercyful, thē he: Any, more deſyrous to do vs good, thē he? Any, that knoweth our grefe and nede, ſo muche as he?
               Any, that knoweth the way to helpe vs, ſo wel as he? No, none

ſo well. He cryeth: Aſke, and ye ſhal háue: come to me, and I wil Math. 7. Math. 11. Iohn. 16. helpe you: aſke, that youre ioye may be ful.
               Hetherto ye haue not aſked any thyng in my name. Therefore my good brethren and ſiſters: let vs thanke god for thys mediator. And as he is one alone mediatour for redempcion, lette vs take hym euen ſo for interceſſiō. For, if by hys worke of redempcyon, of enemyes we are made frendes: ſurely we, beyng frēdes and hauyng hym aboue on the Roma. 5. Heb. 1. ryghte hande of hys father, ſhal by hym obteyne althynges.
               Where they call it a poynte of a lowly and an humble ſpirite, to goe to ſaynctes, that they maye pray for them: you may caſeliſe, it is a poynt of an arrogaūt here and a falſe vntrue ſprete. For in

aſmuch as god playnly byddeth the, that thou put naught to his Deu. 12. Apo. 22. Pſal. 50. worde, nor rate aught there frō, in that hys worde is, thou ſhalte call vpon him in thy nede: why art thou ſo arrogaūt and proud, that y• wilt goe to Peter or Paul, to praye for thee? Where haſte thou gods worde? Doſt y• think, god is true of hys promes? Whithen doſt thou not go vnto him? Doſte y• thynke, that god at any tyme receaueth thee for thy worthynes? On whom be hys eyes, but vpon hym, that trembleth at Eſa. 65. hys wordes?
               Bleſſed are they, that be pore Math. 5. in ſprite, and thynke themſelues vnworthy of gods helpe. Wherfore hath god ſworne, that he wil not the death of a ſyuner, but y• ſynners myght be moſte certayn 
                     
                        ••
                     e. 33. of his loue & mercy, to be muche

greater, then they be able to conceiue? His mercyes are aboue al his workes. Pſal. 145.
               
               But thou, that rūneſt to ſaincts, thynkeſt that it is not ſo, for els wouldeſte thou goe to hym thy ſelfe: that thou, ſeing his ſo much goodneſſe, mighteſte the more loue him, which thou canſt not, if thou vſe other meanes, then by Chryſt only.
               Where they bryng in the enſaumple of ſaynctes praying for the people, and obteynyng benefytes for them, whyleſt they wer lyuyng here on earth: And ſo gather, that muche more they wyll and can doe it nowe for vs, in that they be wyth GOD, if we wyll pray vnto them: very eaſeli maye we put thys awaye by many reaſons.
               Firſte, that the caſes be not like.

For, whan they were alyue, they myght know the nede of the people.
               But nowe, who can tel, whether they knowe any thyng of our calamities and nede? Eſaye ſaith: Abraham dyd not knowe them, Pſal. 63. that were in hys age. Agayne, if the people had come to them, to haue deſired theyr prayers, as they would haue taken thys for an admoniſhment of their dutye to the people: So woulde they agayne haue warned the people of their dewtye, that wyth them they alſo would pray vnto God them ſelfes. Wheras there be no ſuch reciprocal and mutuall offices betwene the dead and the lyuyng: nowe can not we admoniſhe them and tell them of oure nedes.
               Or if we ſhoulde goe aboute it,

ſurely we ſhould ſtyl ſtande in a doubt, whether they did perceue vs or no.
               For if they dyd perceaue the miſeries of their brethren, ſurely theyr reſte would not bee wythout greate grefe: and of thys we are ſure, that they can tel vs nothyng alſo.
               Beſides this, thys their reaſoning ſmelleth, as it that wente before, of mans reaſon, which is 1. Cor. 1. a foole in gods ſeruice, and of a good intent, whych is not accordyng Roma. 10. to knoweledge. We maye not do after that, which is good Deut. 12. in our own eyes, but accordynge to that, whych God biddeth vs doe.
               In our eyes it ſemeth good, that as to kynges and great men we vſe meanes by men, whyche are of their priuy chamber or ner

about thē, either co come to their ſpech, or to atteyne our ſutes: ſo we ſhoulde doe to Gode by his ſaynctes.
               But to dreame on thys ſorte, wyth god to vſe ſainctes ſo, wer and is vnto fayth very foolyſhe. For god vſeth no ſuch priuie chā
                  bers, to hide himſelfe in. He is at hand (ſaith Dauid) to al that call Pſal. 145. vpon hym.
               And Moſes ſaid before him: god is nere the in all thy praiers. Deut. 4. No nacion hath their goddes ſo nye vnto them, as our god is to vs in all our prayers. He nedeth none to put him in remēberaūce Hebr. 4. Pſa. 33. 95. of vs, for he hath al thynges opē to his eyes: the heigth of ye hilles and the botomes of the depthes are in hys ſyght. Nothynge can hyde it ſelfe from his knowledg. He hath ordayned Chriſt Ieſus

alonely, to be the meane, by whō we ſhal ſpede and receaue our requeſtes, 1. Timo. 2. which be accordynge to hys will: if we open oure purſe mouth, that he may poure into y• ſame, I meane fayth.
               For as a thynge poured vpon a veſſel or other thyng, ye mouth being cloſed, is ſpilt & loſt: ſo if we aſke any thing according to gods wil by Chriſt, ye ſame doth vs no good, except the purſe mouth of our harte be opened, by fayth to receaue it.
               But to make an end, S. Paul telleth Roma. 10. playnly, that wythout fayth prayer is not made. Now in that fayth is due onelye to God (for Hiere. 17. curſed is he, that hath hys fayth in man, ſaynt or aungel) to God onely let vs make oure prayers, but by Ieſus Chryſt, and in his name onely.

For onelye in hym is the father Math. 3. 17 wel pleaſed.
               This if we do, and that often, as Chryſt wylleth (oportet ſemper orare, we muſt praie alway) Luke. 18. then ſhal we vndoubtedly in all thynges be directed by goddes holy ſprite, whom Chryſte hath promyſed to be oure doctor, teacher Iohn. 14. 15. 16. Pſal. 27. and cōforter. And therefore nede we not to feare, what man or deuill can doe vnto vs, eyther by falſe teachynge or cruell perſecucion. For oure paſtor is ſuch one, y• none Iohn. 10. can take his ſhepe out of his handes. To hym be praiſe for euer.
               Amē.
            
            
               
               The. 14. Chapter
               
                  ¶ The knittynge vp of the mater and concluſyon or peroracion, wyth the autors deſier and prayer, for the perſecuted brethren.
               
               ANd thus much, my good brethren and ſiſters in oure deare Lorde and ſauyoure Ieſus Chryſte, I thoughte good to wryte vnto you for your cōfort in theſe trouble ſome daies, and for the cō
                  firmacion of the trueth, that ye haue already receaued. From the whyche if you for feare of man,

loſſe of goods, frends or lyfe, do ſwarue or departe: you departe and ſwarue from Chryſt, and ſo ſnarre your ſelfe in Satans ſophiſtry, to your vtter ſubuerſiō. Therfore, as Peter ſayth, watche 1. Pet. 5. and be ſober: for as a roaring liō, he ſeketh to deuoure you. But be ye ſtrōg in faith: that is, ſtagger Actes. 2. Deu. 20. not, wauer not in gods promiſes and be aſſured that thei perteine vnto you, that god is your God, that he is wyth you in trouble, & wyll delyuer you and gloryfye Pſal. 91. you.
               But yet ſee, that ye call vpon hym, ſpecially that you enter not into temptacion, as he taughte Math. 26. his diſciples to pray euen at ſuch tyme, as he ſaw Satan deſier to Luke. 22 ſift them, as now he hath deſired to ſift vs. O moſt deare ſauyor, preuent hym now, as thou didſt

then with thi praier, we beſech thee: and graunte, that our fayth faynte not, but ſtrengthen vs to confirme the weake: that they deny not thee and thy goſpell, that they returne not to their vomite and puddle of myer in poperie & 2. Peter. 2. ſuperſticion: As maſſyng, praying to ſayntes, prayinge for the dead, or worſhippyng the worke of mens hande, in ſteade of thee their ſauiour. Oh lette vs not ſo runne down headlong into perdicion, Heb. 6. 10. Math. 10. Mark. 8. Luke. 11. Gene. 19. Math. 27. ſtombling on thoſe ſines, from the whiche there is no recouery, but a cauſynge of thee to deny vs before thy father, makig our later ende worſe, then the begynnyng: as chaunced to Loths wife, Iudas Iſcarioth, Frāciſc. Spira in theſe our dayes, and to many other.
               But rather ſtrengthen vs all

in thi grace, and in thoſe things, whych thy worde teacheth: that we may here haſarde our life for thy ſake.
               And ſo ſhall we bee ſure to Math. 16. ſaue it: as if we ſeke to ſaue it we can not but loſe it. And it beyng loſt, what profyt can we haue, if we wanne the whole world? Oh ſet thou alwaies before our eies not (as reaſon doth) thys lyfe, or the pleaſures of the ſame, death of the body and pryſonment &c. But euerlaſtyng lyfe, and thoſe vnſpeakable ioyes, whyche vndoubtedlye they ſhall haue, that take vp their croſſe, and folowe the.
               Set euer before vs alſo the eternall fyer, and perpetuall deſtruccion of ſoule and body, that they muſt nedes at length leape into, whyche are afrayed of the

hore froſte of aduerſitie, that man or the deuyll ſtereth vp, to ſtoppe and hynder vs frō going forwarde in oure iourney to heauens blyſſe: to the whyche, O Lorde, doe thou brynge vs for thy name ſake. Amen.
               Pray for al your brethrē, which be in priſon and exile, and ſo abſent from you in bodye, but yet preſente with you in ſpirite, and hartely praye god, once to proue vs and truſt vs agayne with his holy worde and goſpell: that we may be ſuffred to ſpeke, and you to heare his voyce, as heretofore we and you haue done, but vnthankfully & negligentli (I may ſay) yea very vnworthely & carnally. And therfore is his moſte iuſt anger fallen nowe vpon vs.
               He remember hys mercie towardes vs, in his time, we beſeche hym.
            
            Amen.
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
            
            
               〈1 page duplicate〉
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Contentes of this boke, as they folowe in euerye Chapter.
            
               ☞ The Preface to the Chriſtian reader. folio. 3
               ☞ The. 1. Chapter. ☞ What we bee and where we be. folio. 5
               ☞ The. 2, Chapter. ☞ Perſecucion muſte not bee ſtraunge vnto vs. fo. 11
               ☞ The. 3. Chapter. ☞ Trouble can not hurt Gods children. folio. 19
               ☞ The. 4. Chapter. ☞ The croſſe is commodious and profitable. folio. 33
               ☞ The. 5. Chapter. ☞ How the papiſts holde their. 4. ſpeciall articles, whyche they ſo greuouſly perſecute for. 60
               ☞ The. 6. Chapter.

☞ Howe Goddes worde teacheth of the ſupper, wyth confutacion of tranſubſtanciacyon. folio. 69
               ☞ The. 7. Chapter. ☞ How Gods worde teacheth of Chriſts ſacrifice, with the Romyſh blaſphemye therin reproued. folio. 85
               ☞ The. 8. Chapter. ☞ Of prayinge for the dead, the true doctrine. folio. 90
               ☞ The. 9. Chapter. ☞ Of prayinge to ſayntes. 97
               ☞ The. 10. Chapter. ☞ The Romyſhe doctryne of the ſacramente confuted more largely. folio. 102
               ☞ The. 11. Chapter. ☞ The popyſhe doctryne of the ſacryfyce in m
                     •
                  ſſynge confuted. folio. 111.
               
                  
☞ The. 12. Chapter. ☞ The confutacion of the papyſtes ſacrificing, and prayinge for the dead. folio. 127
               ☞ The. 13. Chapter. ☞ The refutacion of the hereſy of praying to ſaynctes, departed out of thys world. fo. 139
               ☞ The. 14. Chapter. ☞ The knettynge vp of the
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ter and concluſion or peroraciō
                  wyth prayer for the helpe of god in thys tyme of daungers and diuers tēptacions. folio. 149
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   