
      
         
            
            
            THE AVTVMNE PART FROM THE TWELFTH Sundy after Trinitie, to the last in the whole yeere.
            DEDICATED Unto the much honoured and most worthy Doctor IOHN OVERAL Deane of PAVLS.
            
               August. ser. 22. de verbis Apostoli. 
               
                  Sic vigilet tolerantia, vt non dormiat disciplina.
               
            
            
            LONDON Printed by M
                  •…
               LCHISEDECH BRADVVOOD for WILLIAM ASPLEY. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            COLENDISSIMO PATRI, NEC NON ILLVMINATISSIMO DOCTORI, DOMINO IOHANNI OVERALLIO, QVONDAM IN ACADEMIA CANTABRIGIENSI CELEBERRIMO SACRAE THEOLOGIAE PROFESSORI REGIO: NVNC AVTEM AEDIS PAVLINAE LONDON. INTEGERRIMO VIGILANTISSIMO QVE DECANO: IOHANNES BO
                  •…
               TIVS ALIQVANDO DISCIPVLVS ET SEMPER AMICVS HONORIS 
                  •…
               RGO, DO DICO DEDICO.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE TWELFTH SVNDAY AFTER TRINITIE.
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  2. COR. 3. 4.
                  Such trust haue we through Christ to God-ward; not that we are sufficient of our selues, &c.
                  
               
               
                  ALL holy Scripture ioyntly considered is called not vnfitly Gods 
                  
                     Optatus lib 5. aduers. Parmeman. Idem August. in Psam. 21. exposit. 2. 
                  Testament: as being his reuealed Matth. 6. 10. will, and as it were Ardens in loc. written Indenture, containing his couenants and conueiance concerning our Heb. 9. 15. eternall inheritance which is aboue. But the Gospel apart considered, is tearmed in this Text, a new Testament: as neuer waxing old, Deering Lect. 1. Hebr. but alway continuing new, though it were from the beginning: Iesus Christ yesterday, and to day, the same also for euer, Heb. 13. 8. And new, for that it is imprinted after a new manner, otherwise than the letter of the Law: written not with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing God; not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. And new, for that it maketh vs new creatures in Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 17. According to that of 
                     D
                           •…
                         spirit. & lit. cap. 20. Id em contra duas, epist. Pelagian. lib. 3. cap. 4. & in. Psal. 83▪ 
                     Vide rationes alias ap
                           •…
                        d▪ 
                        
                           •…
                        retium. Pro
                           •…
                        egom in Matth.
                   
                  Augustine: Dicitur nouum propter nouitatem spiritus, quae hominem nouum 
                        •…
                     anat à vitio vetustatis: It is new for that it teacheth vs how to cast off the old man, and to put one the new man, Eph. 4. 22. 24. S. Paul therefore commends heere the worthy function of such as are made able to minister the new Testament two waies:
               
                  
                  1. Positiuely, Such trust haue we through Christ to Godward, &c.
                  2. Comparatiuely, preferring the preaching of the Gospell before the ministery of the Law,

                        In respect of Grace: For the letter killeth, but the spirit giueth life; the Law being the ministration of condemnation, but the Gospell the ministration of righteousnesse.
                        
                        In respect of Glorie: If the ministration of death thorough the letters figured in stones was glorious, &c. how shall not the ministration of the spirit be much more glorious?
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Such trust] Our Apostle did esteeme the Corinthians his 2. Cor. 1. 14. 
                  glory, the 
                  1. Cor. 9. 2. 
                  seale of his Apostleship, and as it were the very letters testimoniall of his sincerity. For thus hee speakes in this present chapter at the second verse, Ye are our epistle. 
                  Erasm. Paraphras. Such as are false teachers, need epistles of recommendation vnto you, and letters of recommendation from you: but 
                     •…
                  , Caluin. 
                  Silvanus and Timothie desire not the like, for that the Church of Corinth is our certificat, your selues are our walking pasport: Hieron. epist. ad Furiam. 
                  Detrimentum pecoris ignominia pastoris: It is the Pastors infamy when the people grow worse, but his Oecumen. in l
                        •…
                     c. honour when they be rich in the graces of Christ, and in all kinde of knowledge, 1. Cor. 1. 5. Whereas therefore your faith and holy conuersation is renowned in all the world, ye be to vs Theophylact. Anselm. Aquin. instead of an Epistle: yea better then any letters commendatory; for they runne in and out of our eyes, and eares, here and there: but yee are Written in our heart, that is, in our Hieron. & Primasius. consciences, hauing this testimony, not as other about vs onely, but in vs also, residing euer in our bosomes. And whereas Caietan. other Epistles in Hebrew, Greeke, Latine, are read of none but such as vnderstand their seuerall Idiome; this Epistle is vnderstood and read of all men. It is so plaine, that (as the Prophet Cap. 2. ver. 2. 
                  Abacuck speakes) he may runne that readeth it: in that ye are manifest to be the Epistle of Christ ministred by vs, 
                  English Glosse. as Gods

pen, and written not with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshly tables of the heart. Yee are Christs epistle primarily, Aquin. 
                  principalit
                        •…
                      & authoritatiuè, for Matth 23. 8. one is your Doctor, and that Doctor is Christ: but our epistle, and 1. Cor. 9. 1. worke secondarily, being instructed by vs 1. Cor. 4. 1. 
                  as the Ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. He Heb. 8. 10. writes in you, but it is through our 1. Cor. 3. 5. ministery, not as the false apostles imperfitly with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing God, whereby you that are his epistle are 
                  Ephes 4 30. 
                  sealed vnto the day of redemption. He writes his grace, not as the law was written in tables of 
                  Exod. 31. 18. 
                  stone: but in fleshly tables of the heart. According to his word vttered of the mouth of Cap. 36. 26. 
                  Ezechiel: I will take away the stony heart out of your bodie, and I will giue you an heart of flesh. That is, (as Anselmu
                        •…
                     
                   vpon this place notes) a good vnderstanding to know, and a ready will to keepe my commandements. Theophilact. As farre then as Gods spirit doth excell inke, and mans heart a stone; so farre the Gospell excels the Law.
               Now lest our Apostle should seeme to commend his ministery too much, he Marlorat. corrects himselfe thus in my text: such trust haue we through Christ to Godward, &c. Anselm. As if he should say, we speake confidently that yee are Christs epistle, and our epistle, not arrogating this excellency to our selues, as if wee were sufficient of our selues: but ascribing all the glory to God, from who
                        •…
                     
                   as the fountaine, through Christ, as the conduit pipe, commeth euery good and perfect gift. If wee be able vnto any thing, the same commeth of God, which hath made vs able to minister the new Testament. And therefore we trust not in the Ephes. 6. 12. princes of darknesse, Psal. 146. 2. nor in any childe of man: but our hope, yea helpe standeth in the name of the Lord, which hath made heauen and earth: Psal. 121. 2. all our trust is in God through Christ.
               The Papists attribute too much vnto the Priests office; carnall Gospellers and worldly politicians ascribe

too little. The Pope forsooth is esteemed of his parasites aSee Tortura Torti. pag. 361. vice god, 2. Cor. 11. 4. Matth. 24. 24. another Christ, assuredly they might say better an Antichrist Nay the Papists hold their vnder ling Masse-priest such an omnipotent creature, that wheras in the sacrament of Order (as they call it) almighty God makes the Priest; in the sacrament of their Altar, horr
                        •…
                     sco referens, the priest (say they) makes almightie God, as it were by magicall arte translating Coelum in coenam, pulling heauen out of heauen, and imprisoning Christs bodie with all his dimensions in a little box.
               Statising wordlings on the contrary thinke that Preachers of the Word are nothing els but as a post, on which Iniunctions of the King, and Mandates of the Court Christian are fixed: Ornaments and ministers of State, not instruments and messengers of God; and soB. of Lin. answere to a name-lesse Cat pag. vlt. 
                  Religion turned into Statisme p
                        •…
                     oues Athoisme. We must therefore go betweene both, Atheists on the left hand, and Papists on the right, medium tenuere beati. We must acknowledge the Gospels ministery to beRom. 1. 16. 
                  the power of God vnto saluation. He could otherwise regenerate men, as being able out of stones to raise vp children vnto himselfe, Matth. 3. 19. but it pleaseth him (as our Apostle teacheth 1. Cor. 1. 21. elsewhere) by the foolishnesse of preachi
                        •…
                     g to saue them that beleeue. God hath reconciled vs vnto himselfe by Iesus Christ, and hath committed vnto his Apostles, and their successors his faithfull Pastors, the Word and ministerie of reconciliation, and they being appointed ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you through them intreate you in Christs stead that you be reconciled to God: 2. Cor. 5. 18. 19. 20.
               If this one lesson onely were well vnderstood and learned in England, namely, that thePsal. 45. 2. tongue of the Preacher is the penne of a ready writer, whereby men are made Christs epistle, written not with inke, but with the spirit of the liuing God, and so sealed vp vnto the day of redemption; wee should not need to giue thankes at our meales, as that odde priest in old time:
               
                  
                  
                     Casparus. Fuckins, Orat. Paneg. 2. pag. 19. Deo gratias,
                  quod nos satias,
                  bonis rusticorum
                  contra voluntatem eorum. Amen.
               
               For all sutes of vnkindnesse against our persons, and all quarrels about tithes and other duties incident to our place, would instantly surcease. Then the Rom. 10. 15. 
                  feete of such as bring glad tidings of peace would be reputed beautifull and all good people in vnfained zeale turne Galat. 4. 15. Galathians, if it were possible, willing to pull out their eyes, and to giue them for their Pastors good.
               
               This also may teach all Clergy men to be faithfull and painfull in their calling, that they likewise may finde such confidence toward God, as Paul had, euen letters testimoniall of their indefatigable diligence written in their owne consciences. It is an easie matter in a corrupt age to be well beneficed, aut errore hominis, aut aere Simonis; as one wittily: but to play the part of a good Pastor, (as Pastoral. part. 1. cap. 2. 
                  Gregory the great said) is ars artium, & scientia scientiarum. A Prelate therefore must not lay a Bishopricke vnder his feete, making one dignity a step vnto another: but he must lay it vpon his shoulders, and remember that as Bishops enioy honour by their place, so they sustaine a burthen in their office.
               
                  Not that wee are sufficient of our selues to thinke any thing as of our selues: but if wee be able to any thing, the same commeth of God.] A pregnant text against the Aquin. Anselm. Rhem. in loc. 
                  Pelagians, 
                  
                     Aug. H
                           •…
                        res. 88. & retract. lib. 1. cap. 9. affirming that our good actions and cogitations proceed onely from free-will, and not from Gods speciall grace. Secondly, this maketh against the Semipelagians, I meane the Papists, 
                     Pelican. apud Marlorat. Dr. Fulk. Kilius in loc.
                   holding that man hath a power of free-will in his owne nature, which being stirred and helped, can and doth of it selfe cooperate with grace. So writes Orthodox. explicat. lib. 4. 
                  Andradius plainly: The motion of free-will, and applying of it selfe to righteousnesses, doth no more depend vpon the graces of God, then the fires burning of the wood doth depend vpon the power of God: intimating that our will adioyneth

it selfe vnto Gods grace, not by grace, but as carried thereunto by the force of nature. Wee teach on the contrary, that freedome of the will to turne to God, and to worke with him, is no power of nature, but the worke of grace. For our selues are not sufficient as of our selues to thinke, 
                  Primisius. much lesse to speake, least of all to doe that which is good. August. de bono perse. c. 13. Indeed we will, but it is God that worketh in vs to will; we worke, but it is God that worketh in vs to worke, according to his good pleasure. Thus it behoueth vs to beleeue, thus also to speake, that God in our humble confession and submission may haue the whole. Idem 
                        •…
                     bisup. cap. 6. For we liue in more safety if wee giue all vnto God, rather then if wee commit our selues partly to our selues, and partly to God. Our selues are not sufficient to thinke any good, A
                        •…
                     densin loc. either in part or in whole. Wee cannot say that it is Chrysost. in 2. Cor. Hom. 6. ours in part, and Gods in part, seeing of him, and through him, and for him are all things: Aug. retract. lib. 1. cap. 9. 
                  Et magna & media & minima. See S. Augustine de bono perseuerant. cap. 13. & contra duas epist. Pelagian. lib. 4. cap. 6. epist. 46. & 47. de gratia & libero arbitrio ad Ualentin. & ad eundem de corrept. & gratia, cap. 1. 2. 3. 8. 14. Caluin. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 3. 4. 5. B. Iewel Defens. Apolog. part. 1. c. 2. diuis. 3. Dr. Mortonappeale. l. 1. c. 2. §. 10. Perkins reformed Cath. tit. Freewill: & Dr. Abbot ibidem pag- 100. 101.
               Thirdly, this may serue to confute the T. 
                        •…
                     . lib. 1. pag. 136. Nouelists inueighing against our Communion booke, for that in the Collect appointed to be red this day we pray thus: Almighty and euerlasting God, which art wont to giue more then wee desire, or deserue: powre downe vpon vs the abundance of thy mercie, forgiuing vs those things whereof our conscience is afraid, and giuing vnto vs that, that our praier dare not presume to aske, through Iesus Christ our Lord. And in another Collect after the Offertory: Those things which for our vnworthinesse we dare not aske, vouchsafe to giue vs for the worthinesse of thy Sonne Iesus Christ our Lord. These passages (as they say, who dare say any

thing) carry with them a note of the Popish seruile feare, and sauour not of that confidence and reuerent familiarity, that the children of God haue through Christ with their heauenly Father. 
                  Dr. Whitgift defen. of his answer to the admonit. pag. 493. Answere is made, that acknowledging of our vnworthinesse is the ground of humility, and that humility is a principall ornament of Praier, and in a sutor such a commendable vertue, 
                     Hooker. ecc
                           •…
                        e polit. l. 5. §. 47. that the testification therof argueth a sound apprehension of his supereminent glory before whom wee stand, and putteth also into his hands a kinde of bond or pledge for security against our vnthankefulnesse: the very naturall roote whereof is alwaies either ignorance, dissimulation, or pride. Ignorance, when wee know not the Author from whom our good comes: dissimulation, when our hands are more open then our eyes vpon that we receiue: pride, when wee thinke our selues worthy of that which vndeserued fauour and meere grace bestoweth. And therefore to abate such vaine imaginations in our prayer with the true conceit of vnworthinesse, is rather to preuent, then commit a fault: and it sauoureth not of any basenesse or seruile feare; but rather of great trust in Gods mercie: for those things which wee for our vnworthinesse dare not aske, wee desire that God for the worthinesse of his Sonne would notwithstanding vouchsafe to grant. The knowledge of our vnworthinesse is not without faith in the merits of Christ; with that true feare caused by the one, there is coupled true boldnesse and encouragement arising from the other. Euen our very silence, which our vnworthinesse putteth vs vnto, doth it selfe make request for vs, and that in great confidence: for albeit looking inward we are stricken dumbe, yet looking vpward we speake and preuaile. So the Luk. 18. 13. Publicane praying in the Temple, would not come nigh, nor lift vp his eyes; and yet you know what Christ pronounced of him, and what a generall rule hee grounded vpon that particular example, to wit, Euery man that exalteth himself shall be brought low, and he that humbleth himselfe shall be exalted.
                  
So theLuk. 15. 21. prodigall child said to his owne father, and that after he was receiued into fauor, euen after his father had embraced and kissed him, I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne. So S. Paul writes here, We are not sufficient of our selues to thinke any thing as of our selues: and yet he saith, our trust is in God through Christ.
               
               
                  For the Letter killeth, but the spirit giueth life.] Origen. peri archon, lib. 4. cap. 2. As a man, so the Scripture consists of a body and a soule. The August. Ser. 70. de temp. superficiall sound of the Letter is the body, but the true sense is the soule. The Letter then of the Bible not vnderstood often killethIdem Ser. 100 de temp. Heretikes, and Iewes, and carnall Gospellers: it is the Spirit onely that giues light and life to such as sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death. It is a notable saying ofExposit. pri
                        •…
                     r. in epist. Gal. cap. 1. 
                  Hierome: Non in verbis est euangelium, sed in sensu; non in superficie, sed in medulla; non in verborum folijs, sed in radice rationis. And therefore we must in reading holy writ apply our selues adsensumrei, more then adsonum vocabuli, saith Lib. contra Prax. cap. 3. 
                  Tertullian. According to this exposition 
                     
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in loc. ignorant Clergie-men are most vnable to minister the new Testament, vnderstanding neither the spirit, nor yet so much as the Letter. As T
                        •…
                     omas 
                        •…
                     
                     rus epigram. one sharply taxed an illiterate Bishop in his age:
               
                  Magne pater cl
                        •…
                     mas, occidit litera; in ore
                  Hoc vnum, occidit litera semper habes.
                  Cauisti bene tu, ne te vlla occidere possit
                  Littera, non vlla est litera nota tibi.
                  Nec Frustra metuis ne occidat litera, scis non
                  Uiuificet qui te spiritus esse tibi.
               
               But 
                     Lib. de Spirit. & 
                           〈◊〉
                        . cap. 5. 6. & sequent.
                   S. Augustine and Ambros. Hieron. Anselm. other Interpretors haue more fitly construed this according to Pauls intent of the Gospell and the Law, shewing that the Law is the Letter as being figured in stones, and written with inke by the ministerie of Moses; and that the Gospell is the spirit, as bei
                     •…
                  g first published vnto the world by the comming down of the holy Ghost, and imprinted in our hearts by the spirit of the liuing God.
               
               
                  There is a spirit in the Law; for Rom. 7. 12. 
                  the commandement is holy, iust, and good: and there is a letter in the Gospell, and that a killing letter, euen the 2. Cor. 2. 16. sauour of death vnto death in all reprobate: but in Caluin. this text we must exactly consider the Law and the Gospell as they stand in opposition each one with other, and so the See Luther loc. com. tit▪ de legis vs
                        •…
                      theologico & spirituali. proper office of the law is to threaten, accuse, terrifie, condemne, kill. As Luther peremptorily, lex non damnans est ficta & picta lex. On the contrary, the proper office of the Gospell, is to preach 
                  
                     Esay. 6
                        •…
                     . 1. 
                  glad tidings vnto the poore, to comfort all that mourne, to bind vp the broken hearted: In a word, to conuert soules, and to giue life. So Saint Cap. 1. vers. 17 
                  Iohn in his Gospell expresly, the law was giuen by Moses, but grace came by Iesus Christ. A
                     •…
                  d thus accurately to distinguish betweene the Law and the Gospel is sapientiarum sapientia, the wisedome of all wisedome, quoth Loc. com. tit. de necessitate discrim. inter Legem & Euangel. 
                  Martine Luther. It is obserued pretily, that the ceremonies of the Law were first in their prime, mortales; after in Christs age, mortuae; last of all in our time, mortiferae. But it may bee said as truely that euery letter of the morall Law, yea iot or title thereof, is able to kill all mankind; for it is, saith our Apostle, the ministration of death, and that in foure respects, as
               
                  1. Aquin. Reuealing our sinne. Rom. 3. 20.
                  2. Caietan. Nitimur in vetitum. Encreasing our sinne▪ Rom. 7. 8.
                  3. Accusing vs of sinne. Ioh. 5. 45.
                  4. Condemning vs for sinne. Rom. 6, 23.
               
               But the Gospell is the ministration of righteousnesse, like Iohn the Baptist, pointing out the Lambe of God who taketh away the sinnes of the world; assuring our conscience that Rom. 8. 1. there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. As De spirit. & li
                        •…
                     . cap. 13. 
                  Augustine most diuinely: Quod lex operum minando imperat, hoc fidei lex credendo impe
                        •…
                     at. 
                  Luther loc. com. tit. de dis
                        •…
                      crim. Iust. legal. & Euangel. When the law calleth vpon thee for thy debt; crying, pay that thou dost owe: the Gospell acquits thy bonds, and saith vnto thy soule, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. For the law of the spirit of life which is in Christ Iesus, hath

freed thee from the law of sinne and death: Rom. 8. 2. See Epistle Sunday following.
               
                  If the ministration of death] As the Gospell is more gratious then the Lawe; so likewise more glorious, and that
               
                  In respect of Countenance: Aquin. For it is more honourable to bee the Minister of Mercie, then an Executioner of Iudgement. A deaths man is accounted base, but the very feete of such as bring glad tidings are beautifull.
                  In respect of Continuance: For Moses glorie is abolished and done away, but the Gospels ministerie remaineth. All Moses glorie was but a Ambros. Anselm. Marlorat. in loc. type of Christs glorie: now the substance being come, the shadowe vanisheth. Ma
                           •…
                        . 11. 13. 
                     All the Prophets and the Lawe prophecied vnto Iohn: but trueth and grace came by Iesus Christ, Iohn 1. 17. Theoderet. apud Occumen. & Primasius in loc. Looke then how farre the Sunne doth obscure the lesser lights; euen so farre the Gospell exceeds in glory the Law. For when that which is perfect is come, that which is imperfect is abolished: 1. Cor. 13. 10.
               
            
            
               The Gospell,
               
                  MARKE 7. 31.
                  Iesus departed from the Coasts of Tyre and Sydon, and came vnto the sea of Galile, through the middest of the ten Cities, and they brought vnto him one that was deafe, &c.
                  
               
               AMong many, there bee Scot
                        •…
                      prolog. 1. sent. two maine demonstrations of Christs diuinitie: the words of his Prophets, and the workes of himselfe. Both are met together

in Vega in lod. this place; for it is shewed here by S. Marke, that he wrought at Ferus ser. 5. in loc. one time, with one word, and that a Verbulo minimo: Coster. in loc. litle word too, great wonders; and that according to the prediction of his Prophet Cap. 35. vers. 5. 
                  Esay, then shall the eyes of the blind be lightned, and the eares of the deafe bee opened. If any then want euidence to proue that Christ is God, let me say to him, as it was once said vnto Peter and Andrew, 
                  Iohn 1. 39. 
                  come and see.
               
               The whole may bee deuided into three principall parts, answerable to three principall parties expressed in the text, namely,
               
                  The partie
                  
                     Cured: One that was deafe, and had an impediment in his speech.
                  
                     Curing: Christ, And when hee had taken him aside, &c.
                  
                     Procuring: Who brought the patient vnto Christ, and prayed to put his hands vpon him.
               
               
                  Iesus departed from the Coasts of Tyre and Sidon, and came vnto the sea of Galile] Christ was not a perpetuall resident in one benefice; but hee 
                  Act. 10. 38. 
                  went about from Coast to Coast, doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the diuell. By which example we may learne to be Kilius in loc. diligent and industrious in our seuerall callings, and that Ardens. we should not expect vntill other vpseeke vs, but that wee should seeke, yea Galat. 5. 13. serue them in loue, doing good vnto all men, especially to them which are of the houshold of faith. Galat. 6. 10.
               
                  And they brought vnto him] In these neighbours of the deafe man, Luther. Heming. Culman. interpreters haue noted a liuely patern both of faith and of loue. First of faith, in that hearing of Christ they beleeued, and in beleeuing they came to him, entreating fauour, not for themselues onely, but for their sicke friend also: being assured that the worlds Sauiour could with a touch easily cure him. Sarcerius. Here then are foure degrees of a iustifying faith, according to that, Rom. 10. 13. Whosoeuer shall call vpon the name of
                  
                  the Lord shalbe saued? but how shall they call on him, in whom they haue not beleeued? And how shall they beleeue in him, of whom they haue not heard? and how shall they heare without a Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they bee sent? The first step is to heare Christs word; the second, so to heare, that wee beleeue; the third, so to beleeue, that wee dare Heb. 4. 16. 
                  goe boldly to the throne of grace; calling on him in whom we beleeue: the fourth is, so to call and aske, that our request may bee granted, and our selues saued. Againe, their action was full of loue; first, in that they brought him vnto Christ. 
                  Ferus serm. 3. in loc. Secondly, for that they deferred not this good worke, but instantly brought him, as soone as Christ was in the midst of their Coast. Thirdly, for that they were not cold sutors in his behalfe, but earnest petitioners vnto Christ, that he would put his hands vpon him. Hereby Zopper. con. 1. in loc. teaching vs how to demeane our selues toward our sicke neighbours, and distressed friends: insinuating that it is not enough to wish well, or speake well, except wee doe well vnto them: and that wee must not onely labour to helpe them our selues, but also when need shall require, to procure other of greater skill and abilitie to giue them further contentment and ease. There bee many motiues vnto this good office; but especially two; namely, Gods precept, and promise. Precept, Luk. 6. 36. 
                  be yee mercifull, as your Father is mercifull. Promise, Psalm. 41. 1. 
                  Blessed is he that considereth the poore and needie, the Lord shall deliuer him in the time of trouble. See Gospell Sund. 4. and Epist. Sund. 2. after Trinitie.
               
                  One that was deafe, and had an impediment in his speech] As dumbe hee could not aske, as dease hee could not heare counsell and comfort for his good. Ardens. Coster. In which respect hee was in a more miserable case then either the blind, or the leper, or the lame: for they made their griefe knowne to Christ in crying, O Iesu the sonne of Dauid haue mercy on mee; and heard also what hee said vnto them; O sonne, be of good cheere, thy sinnes are forgiuen
                  
                  thee. Whether we construe this of spirituall or bodily deafenesse, it was occasioned by Theophylact. Satan, and bred by sinne. The diuell as a murthering theefe, comming to steale from vs our soule, the most pretious iewell in all our house, laboureth especially to stop our eares, lest we should heare that which is for our good, and to close our mouthes, lest we should call for that which is for our good. In which regard Sathan is termed in Luk 11. 14 another text a dumbe and a deafe diuell. Not Ludol. de vit Christ. part. 1. cap. 73. 
                  formaliter (as the Schoole doth speake) for he is a roaring Lion: but Caietan. in Luc. 11. 
                  causaliter, as making other dumbe. See Gospell 3. Sunday in Lent.
               Sathan then is impellens causa, but Adam our first parent Vide Hieron. & Pauigarol. in loc. 
                  contrahens. Hee was deafe when he did not obey Gods expresse commandement; and dumbe, when he did not reprehend his seduced and seducing wife. Deafe, when he did not heare the voice of God, Adam, where arte thou? Dumbe, when he did not vpon that summons ingenuously confesse his sinne. Now the 
                     Rom. 5. 12. & 1. Cor. 15. 22 Scripture telleth vs plainly, that in Adam all men haue sinned, and therefore all of vs are by nature Melanct. & Kilius in loc. borne deafe, and dumbe, not able to heare; much lesse to speake what we should, as we should, vntill Christ open our dull eares, and vnloose our stammering tongue with his Ephata from aboue.
               
                  Pontan. Diez. Some Postillers obserue Saint Markes order and method; first mentioning a lesser euill, one that was deafe: then a greater, and had an impediment in his speech: according to that of the Ecclesiast. 19. 1. Wise-man; he that contemneth small things, shall fall by little and little. The Euseb. E
                        •…
                     is. Hom. in loc. Preachers of the word are they who bring this deafe and dumbe man vnto Christ; he therefore that hath eares to heare, let him heare. For Arboreus in loc. that man is deafe who stops his eares at the Gospell; and mute, who will not open his lips that his mouth may shew forth Gods praise. Concerning their estate which are corporally deafe and dumbe: men ought to iudge charitably, knowing that the Rom. 11. 33. waies

of God are past finding out; who being infinitely rich in mercy doth exact but little where hee giues a little. The 1. Ioh. 2. 27. Apocalyp. 27. spirit of the Lord happily speakes vnto them, and Galat. 4. 6. crieth in them Abba father; Rom. 8. 26. helping their infirmities, and Ibidem. vers. 16. witnessing with their spirit that they be the sons of God. See Hierom. exposit. prior. in Galat. cap. 3. Concil. Carthag. 4. Can. 76. Zepper. con. 3. in loc.
               
               
                  They prayed him] A Kilius in loc. paterne of the precept, Iam. 5. 16. 
                  pray one for another. It is Chrysoft. Hom
                        •…
                     l. 14. ex Mat. ca
                        •…
                     . 6. necessity makes a man pray for himselfe; but it is charity moues a man to pray for another. 
                     Thom. 22. quaest. 82. art. 7 Now that deuotion is most acceptable which is not forged by dissimulation, nor forced by constraint; but ariseth out of pure zeale to God, and meere loue to men. It is our duty therefote to pray, not for our selues onely, but for others also; for 1. Tim 2. 1. all men, euen our Mat. 5. 44. enemies, earnestly beseeching Christ to put his blessed hands vpon them, albeit they desire to lay their violent cursed hands vpon vs.
               
                  To put his hands vpon him] There is a twofold 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , mentioned in holy Scripture; 
                     B. Barl
                           •…
                        w: sermon at Hampton Court: Sept. 21. 1606. in Act. 20. 28. 
                  confirmatoria, & curatoria: the first vsed in ordaining Presbyters, as 1. Tim. 4. 14. and 1. Tim. 5. 22. The second in blessing and healing the people, Mat. 9. 18. and 19. 13. Now the friends of this patient entreated Christ to put his hand vpon him; Maldonat. either knowing that he cured other impositione manuum, as the blind man, Mark. 8. 23▪ 25. and the crooked woman, Luk. 13. 13. or else for that the Prophets and holy men of God vsed in helping and healing the sicke, to lay their hands vpon them. A ceremony not vnknowen vnto the Gentiles, as it is apparent by the speech of 2. King. 5 11. 
                  Naaman the Syrian; I thought with my selfe, the Prophet will surely come out, and stand, and call on the name of the Lord his God, and put his hand on the place, and heale the leprosie.
               
               
                  And when he had taken him aside from the people] Sundrie Diuines haue sundrie deuices in expounding this clause. Literally, 
                  Sarcerius. some thinke that hee caried him aside

from the prease, that he might the better attend the businesse out of the throng. Euthyniu
                        •…
                     . Other, for that among so many, some would bee regardlesse and irreuerent spectators. Caluin. apud Marlorat. Other, that he might pray more deuoutly, while he did the cure. Chrysost. apud Thom. Theophyiact. Ardens. Iansen. Most are of opinion that he did so to shun all ostentation and vaine glory. Hieron. Eu
                        •…
                     h. Emis. Culman. Vega. 
                  Mystically, none are cured by Christ, but such as hee puts apart, drawing them out of Babylon, Apocalyp. 18. 4. out of Sodome, Gen. 19. 6. from out of the broad way, Matth 7. 13. to his little flock, Luk. 12. 32. that they may be men in the world, not of the world, Ioh. 15. 19. & 17. 16.
               
                  He put his fingers into his eares, and did spit, and touched his tongue] Christ could haue cured this man, as he did many, with his bare word; according to that of the Matth. 8 8. Centurion, speake the word only, and my seruant shall be healed: but he did vse feete, finger, spettle, tongue; Theophylact. Euthym. Arboreus. to shew that all the parts of his humane nature being vnited vnto the Diuine, were Salutiferous, euen the true meane whereby men ate holpen in all their sicknesse. He 
                  Esay. 53. 4. 5. 
                  carried all our sorrowes, and cured all our sores. Or happily Christ vsed these things, at this time, Sarcerius. lest wee should tempt God in neglecting ordinarie meanes. Or to Vega. shew that it was the finger of God, as Luke 11. 20. If I by the finger of God cast out diuels. And so this man was healed euen by the same hand that made him Or insinuating that hee wrought this cure by his Panigarol. power and wisedome: the first signified by his finger, the second by spettle. Mystically, the finger of God is the spirit of God: for whereas S. Cap. 11. 10. 
                  Luke saith, If I by the finger of God cast out diuels, S. Cap. 12. 28. 
                  Matthew hath, If I cast out diuels by the spirit of God. Our blessed Sauiour therefore did put his fingers into the deafe mans eare, to 
                     Ferus ser. 4. Zepper. ser. 1. in loc.
                   signifie that the preaching of the word to mens outward eares only, without the secret operation of the spirit speaking inwardly to their hearts, is not auailable to saluation. Albeit Paul plant, and Apollos water, only God giueth encrease, 1. Cor. 3. 6. Here some Friers are so conceited,

as to tell all the fingers on Christs hand, and euery ioynt of the same: but I cannot finger this lesson, I referre you therefore to Iacob de Vorag. ser. 1. in loc. Pontan. Bibliothec. Concion. tom. 4. fol. 199.
               
                  And looked vp to heauen] Euseb Emis. & Vega, in loc. To shew that he was our mediatour and aduocate with God our Father in Heauen. Or Beda. Iansen. Pontan. intimating that euery good and perfect gift is from aboue, comming downe from the Father of lights: and therefore we must in all our sicknesse expect health and ease from heauen, saying with Dauid, 
                  Psal. 121. 1. 
                  I will lift vp mine eyes vnto the hils, from whence commeth my helpe: my helpe commeth euen from the Lord, which hath made heauen and earth. Or hee looked vp to heauen; Ludolphus. Iacob. de Vorag. hereby teaching vs to set our affections on things which are aboue, Coloss. 3. 2. In this Psal. 84. 6. vale of misery we are subiect to deafnes, and dumbnes, and infinite other infirmities of minde and body: but in Hierusalem aboue, there Apocal. 21. 4 is no more dying, nor crying, but all teares shall be wiped away from our eyes, and sorrow from our hearts. And therefore let our conuersation be in heauen, as hauing in it our best friend, or best treasure, best helpe, best home.
               Happily some will obiect, that lifting vp of the eyes, and sighing, are gestures of one that prayeth, and makes a sute: but Christ could haue wrought this myracle without praier, or helpe from other. It is true Christ could, and often did cure without praier: yet in some cases, and at some times he did vse to pray for two reasons especially. First, that all the world might know that he was sent from God, euen from the bosome of his Father in heauen. And this reason is rendered by himselfe, Ioh. 11. 41. 42. Iesus lift vp his eyes, and said, Father, I thanke thee, because thou hast heard me. I know that thou hearest me alwaies; but because of the people that stand by, I said it, that they may beleeue that thou hast sent mee. Secondly, for our Beda. Theophylact. in loc. Idem Greg. Hom. 10 in Ez
                        •…
                     chiel. example, teaching vs how we should desire God to loose our stammering tongues, and open our dull eares: Euthym. in l
                        •…
                     c. instructing Physitions also to pray

while patients are vnder their cure, that the God of heauen would blesse their handy worke.
               
                  And sighed] He did not this as doubting of his cure, but to shew first, that hee was very Beda: Quasi Deus curauit: quasi homo ingemuit. man, subiect to weeping and passion as we are, yet without sin: Hebr. 4. vers. 15. Secondly, to manifest his Ferus, ser. 4. in loc. Idem Beza. compassion and pitie towards distressed men; hee that said, Matth. 5. 7. 
                  Blessed are the pitifull, is such an high Priest Heb. 4. 15. 
                  as is touched with the feeling of our infirmities. And by this example teaching Ludolphus. Iansen. vs also to weepe for the weaknesse and wickednesse of our brethren. Thirdly, to demonstrate the Iacob de Vorag. serm. 1. greatnesse and grieuousnesse of sinne, which is not cured but by the sighing and suffering of the sonne of God. In more particular, Vega. some note that Christ did not sigh vntill hee touched the patients tongue, which is an vnruly euill, an 
                  Psal. 14. 5. 
                  open sepulchre, 
                  Iames 3. 8. 6. 
                  full of deadly poison, a world of wickednesse.
               
               
                  And said vnto him Ephata, that is to say, be opened] He did sigh as a man, but Postil. cum Glossis & figuris. Idem Beda, Ferus, & alij. command as God: vsing neither the subiunctiue, nor optatiue, but Z
                        •…
                     inglius. Iansen. Maldonat. imperatiue moode: Bee opened. The word Ephata was vulgar in that countrey; Bullinger. apud Marlorrt. by which it doth appeare that hee did not vse it as a charme, placing extraordinarie power or confidence therein: but that it was his owne will, and proper vertue that wrought the miracle. This (as Com. in loc. 
                  Maldonate the Iesuite censureth) is a mad glosse. Yet his old friend Concord. euangel cap. 62. 
                  Iansenius is so well in his wits as to receiue it, and so would hee too, but that it maketh against their superstitious vsing of the word Ephata in their popish exorcisme before Baptisme. The Papists, as being masters of ceremonies, or rather indeed slaues, obserue 22. ceremonies in their administration of holy Baptisme: namely, twelue going before Baptisme, siue in the action, and other siue following after, as Bellarmine doth marshall them in his booke De Baptismo, cap. 25. 26. 27. Now the ninth ceremonie before Baptisme is applying of spettle to the nostrels and eares of the Infant, and saying Ephata
                  
                  be opened. And for the lawfulnes of this ceremonie B
                        •…
                     llarm. de baptismo, cap. 25. & Rhem. in loc. they cite Christs example, and S. Ambroses authoritie. To the first our men answere, that it is an apish tricke, rather inscorne, then imitation of Christ. And therefore the noble mother of our gratious Soueraigne K. Iames enioyned the popish Archbishop at his baptisme to forbeare this idle ceremonie; saying, that 
                  Thus his Maiestie reports: premon
                        •…
                     tion, p. 33. 
                  shee would not haue a pockie Priest to spit in her childs mouth. Our blessed Sauiour here did not administer the sacrament of baptisme; why then I pray, should they not annoint the eyes of the baptised infant with clay, so well as his nostrels with spettle? for Christ in the Ioh. 9. Gospell opened the eyes of a blind man with clay; the which is so significant, and happily more sweete then vnsauorie slauer of an vnwholesome shaueling. Againe, suppose this action of Christ were sacramentall, (a thing which neither they can aske modestly, nor wee grant iudiciously) yet herein Epise. E
                        •…
                     i. respon. ad Card. Bellarm. Apolog. pag. 154. they doe not imitate Christ; for hee did apply spettle to the mouth of this patient, but they doe this vnto the nostrels of the child to bee baptised. As for S. Ambroses authoritie, there bee two places in his workes vrged in this argument. The first is cited by Lib. de Baptismo, cap. 25. 
                  Bellarmine, and that is in Tom. 4. Ambros. lib. De ijs qui mysterijs initiantur, cap. 1. Where by way of preface onely the learned Father Exhortatio auditorum: vt aures aperia
                        •…
                     t. vt est in argu ment. ejusde
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . exhorteth his auditors that they would open their eares vnto his speech, as the deafe man had his eares opened in the Gospell. The second is quoted by the Rhemists in their Annotations vpon this text, and that is lib. 1. de sacramentis, cap. 1. Where S. Ambrose mentioneth indeed a needlesse ceremonie vsed in his age, namely, that the Priest touched the nostrels and eares of him that was baptised; and the truth is D•. Fulke in Marke 7. 34. euen at that time, there were many superfluous and burthenous rites in the Church; of which Augustine complained in his 118. and 119. epistle to Ianuarius. But S. Ambrose speakes not in that chapter of exorcismes vsed in the ministration of Baptime, nor of spettle, nor of the word Ephata: which as

                  
                     Caluin. Ins
                           •…
                        it. lib. 4. cap. 15. §. 19. one speakes, are nugae palam in baptismi probrum effraeni licentia inuectae.
               
               
                  And straight-way his eares were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spake plaine] Maldonat. in loc. Two things illustrate Christs omnipotent power in acting this myracle: Celerity, for that hee did it so suddenly: Perfection, for that hee did it so soundly. For the first, it is said in the Text, Straight-way. Otherwise it might haue beene thought that his disease went away of it selfe, or that it was cured by some other. And for demonstration of the second, his thicke eares were opened, and the strings of his stammering tongue loosed in such sort, that hee did not onely speake, but speake plainly, that is, rightly and readily. For he that said in the beginning: Let there be lights in the Firmament, and it was so: let the waters bee gathered together, and it was so: Let the Earth bud▪ and it was so: said heere, Be opened, and immediatly the deafe did heare, and the dumbe speake. 
                  Heming. Mystically, men are loosed from the shackels of Sathan and sinne by the commandement of Christ, and preaching of his word And therefore Christ in healing this patient, first opened his eares and then vntied the string of his tongue: Pontan. because we must heare well, before we can speake well. He that will open his lips that his mouth may shew forth Gods praise, must be swift to heare, slow to speake: Iam. 1. 19.
               
                  And hee commanded them that they should tell no man] Heereby shewing the difference betweene the giuer of a benefit, and the receiuer. Hee that doth a good turne must instantly forget it: hee that receiueth, alway remember it. According to that of De ben. lib. 2. cap. 11. 
                  Seneca: Beneficium qui dedit taceat, narret qui accepit. 
                  E
                        •…
                     sdem lib. cap. 10. 
                  Haec scilicet inter duos beneficij lex est, alter statim obliuis
                        •…
                     id▪ bet dati, alter accepti nunquam. Againe, there is a time for all things, a time wherein Christ would haue his myracles knowen, and a time wherein hee would haue them vnknowen.
               
                  
                  But the more he forbad them, so much the more a great deale they published.] The particular publishing of this myracle, contrary to Christs expresse commandement, was rather immoderate Calnin. Heming. Zepper. zeale, then an imitable vertue. See Gospell, 3. Sunday after Epipha. But their generall praising of God, in saying he hath done all things wel, is very commendable. For
               
                  God is good
                  In himselfe: Matth. 19. 17. None good but God.
                  
                  Toward other, in his Pontan. workes of

                        Creation.
                        Preseruation.
                        Redemption.
                        Glorification.
                     
                  
               
               In his Creation all well, making of nothing all things, and those good, yea 
                     Gen 1. 
                        •…
                     1. very good. In consideration wherof Contra Faust. Man. li. 21. c. 5. 
                  Augustine said sweetly: Cum opera dei considero, moueor ineffabiliter la
                        •…
                     de creatoris illorum, qui prorsus ita magnus est in operibus magnis, vt minor non 
                        •…
                     it in minimis. In his preseruation all well, 
                  Wisdome 8. 1. ordering all things comely, disposing not onely that which is good, but also that which is euill, yea the very diuell, vnto good ends. August. ad Simplic. lib. 2. quaest. 1. 
                  Etiam spiritibus malis benevtitur Dominus, ad vindictam malorum, vel ad bonorum probationem. In his redemption all things well, & far better then in his Creation. Granat. in euangel. Dom. 1. Aduent. 
                  Illic sua nobis dedit, hic vere seipsumcontulit, non tam in dominum quàm in pretium & sacrificium. All things well, yea best of all in his glorification, giuing vs a Matt. 5. 12. great reward, yea so great as 1. Cor. 2. 9. mans eye neuer saw, neither eare heard, neither heart conceiued.
               The Gospell and Epistle well agree: The spirit giueth life, saith Paul: the deafe man had his eares opened by the finger of Christ, saith Luke. By the Gospels ministery men are made Gods Epistle, saith Paul: by the word of Christ the deafe did heare, and the dumbe speake, saith Luk. If we be able vnto any thing, the same commeth of God, saith Paul. He hath done all things well, saith Luke. Let vs therefore pray with the Church:
               
                  Almighty and euerlasting God, which art alwaies more ready to heare, then wee to pray, and art wont to giue more then either wee desire or deserue; powre downe vpon vs the abundance of thy mercy, forgiuing vs those things whereof our conscience is afraid, and giuing vnto vs that, that our praier dare not presume to aske through Iesus Christ our Lord:
               Amen.
            
            
               The Epistle,
               
                  GALAT. 3. 16.
                  To Abraham and his seede were the promises made, &c.
                  
               
               THis Epistle consistes of three parts: a
               
                  Proposition, To Abraham and his seed were made the promises, &c.
                  Exposition, This I say, &c.
                  Opposition, Wherefore then serueth the Law, &c.
               
               The maine drift of all this Epistle to the Galathians, is, to shew Cap. 2. v. 16. 
                  that a man is not iustified by the workes of the law; but by faith in Iesus Christ. Which our Apostle prooues accurately: 1. by reasons of Ibid. ver. 20. experience: 2. from Cap. 3 6. 
                  Abrahams example: 3. by manifest text of Ibid. vers. 11. 12. holy writ: lastly, by manifold apt similitudes and testimonies humane; Fers. 15. 
                  Brethren I speake as men doe. The first wherof is the comparison of a mans will; and his argument is from the Sarcerius. Caluin. Aretius. lesser vnto the greater, (as Logicians speake.) The testament of a man after it is confirmed, may not be broken or abrogated; Ergo much lesse the testament of God. Hee doth argue therefore thus:
               
                  The Testament of God confirmed, cannot be disanulled:
                  The promises made to Abraham and his seed, which is Christ, are his Testament confirmed: Ergo, they cannot be disanulled.
               
               
                  
                  Luther & Perkinsin loc. Hencewe may learne, that it is lawfull to speake in Sermons as men doe, citing testimonies of humanity for illustration of points in Diuinity, reasoning from things earthly to things heauenly. So Christ in the Mat. 7. 11. Gospell, If ye which are euill can giue to your children good gifts, how much more shall your father which is in heauen giue good things to them that aske him? So Peter, Acts 5. 29. wee must obey men; Ergo much more God. So the Prophet Cap. 35. 
                  Ieremy speaking in the Lords name, the Recabites obeyed their father; how much more ought yee to haue obeyed me? 
                  Tertulli. in aduersus Hermogen. Philosophers are the patriarkes of heretickes, enemies of the Gospell, as 1. Cor. 2. 14. not vnderstanding the things of the spirit of God: and therefore to conuince their conscience by naturall reason, is to cut off Goliahs head with his owne sword, saith Saint Epist. ad Magnumorat. Roman. 
                  Hierome. 
                  
                     Deut. 21. ver. 11. 12. &c.
                   
                  When thou shalt goe to warre against thine enemies, and the 
                        •…
                     ord thy God shall deliuer them into thine hands, and thou shalt take them captiues, and shalt see among the captiues a beautifull woman, and hast a desire to take her for thy wife, then shalt thou bring her home to thine house, and shee shall shaue her head, and pare her nailes. Humane learning is the Grecians Helena, full of admirable beauty; Aeneas Siluius Epist. Sigismund. Duc. Austriae. 
                  Cuius facies si videri possit, pulchrior est quam lucifer aut hesperus. And therefore wee may not admit her into the Diuinity schooles Hieron. vbi sup. & Aquin. lect. 6. in Gal. 3. vntill her haire be shaued, and her nailes pared; vntill her superfluous idle conceits, and vnprofitable trickes of ornament are taken away. Hieron. consolat ad Pam tom. 1. fol. 165. But when of a Moabite thou hast made her an Israelite, accompany with her and say; Cant. 2. 6. 
                  her left hand is vnder my head, and her right hand doth imbrace mee. Let vs ascribe to Philosophy, summa, sed sua. For the wisedome of man, to speake the best of it, is but a learned kinde of ignorance, which yet being bridled and guided by the spirit of God, may be wrought (as D. Edes ser. duty of a king. one well obserued) to speake like Balaams Asse to good purpose. To quote then in the Pulpit authorities of Poets, and Philosophers; or as heere Saint Paul, the positions of Lawyers and politicians, is not so

common as commendable, when it is done reuerently without ostentation, and iudiciously for the better vnderstanding of the text, and Mr. Deering lect. 20. Heb. more cleere declaration of the truth.
               
                  To Abraham and his seed] Wee read of Illyric. Cl
                        •…
                     u. script. verb. testament. three testaments in holy Bible; to wit, Abrahamicall, Genes. 12. Mosaicall, Exod. 24. and the new Testament, Ier. 31. Heb. 8. Now the first and last howsoeuer they differ in Ten poris distantia, patefactionis perspicuitate, promissi benedicti s
                        •…
                     minis exhibitione. Illyric. vbi sup. circumstance, yet they bee the same for substance. So Zacharias in his hymne, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for hee hath visited and redeemed his people, as hee spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets euer since the world began; to performe the mercy promised to our forefathers, and to remember his holy couenant, to performe the oath which hee sware to our forefather Abraham, &c. And the blessed Virgin in her magnificat; Hee remembring his mercy hath holpen his seruant Israel, as hee promised to our forefathers, Abraham, and his seed for euer. Christ is the Paschall Lambe, 1. Cor. 5. 7. slaine from the beginning of the world, Apocalip. 13. 8. And so the Patriarkes and old Fathers were saued by faith, Kilius in loc. 
                  in Christum promissum: as we now by faith in Christum missum.
               
               
                  Were the promises made.] Saint Paul speakes plurally, Perkins in loc. because they were made sometime to Abraham, & sometime to his seed, and sometime to both: or because they wereu repeated often to Abraham, as Gen. 12. 4. Gen 15. 5. Gen. 22. 18. And therefore called promises in the plurall, although in substance they were but one promise.
               
                  Hee saith not in his seeds, as many; but in thy seed, as of one, which is Christ.] The Iewes except against this interpretation of Paul, and say, that the singular number is heere put for the plurall, one for many. So Saint Exposit. pri
                        •…
                     r. in Epist. ad Gal. cap. 3. 
                  Hierome doth auow, that hee could neuer finde this word in the plurall number; and therefore Panl in this argument may seeme to speake more subtilly then soundly. Yea, that which is worse, the Iesuite Notat. in loc. 
                  Em. Sa. thinks him (as hee speakes of himselfe, 2. Cor. 11. 6.)

                  rude in speaking. 
                  Luther in loc. Answere is made, that our Apostle wrote Apostolically, construing the Scripture by the Caietan. in loc. same spirit by which it was originally penned. And whereas it is obiected that the word seed is a noune collectiue, signifying all Abrahams posterity; Illyric. vbi su
                        •…
                     . in verb. semen. Diuines answere, that it is vsed often onely for one, so well as for all, or many. For Eue said of Seth, God hath giuen me another seed, Gen. 4. 25. that is another sonne. Secondly, the Gen. 21. 10. & Gala
                        •…
                     . 4. 30. Scripture reports expresly, that Ismael, Abrahams son, was cast out, and not made heire with the blessed seed. See Galatin. de arcan. cat. verit. lib. 5. cap. 13. & Marlorat in loc. Or as Aretius in loc. other acutely, there is semen redimendum, and that is collect
                        •…
                     uum; and semen redimens, and that is vnicum.
               
               Wee receiue therefore this exposition of Paul, acknowledging Christ to bee this one particular seed and sonne of Abraham, in whom, and by whom the nations of the world are blessed: eternall inheritance being first granted vnto him, and so conueied vnto such as Ol
                        •…
                     uian. de substantia 
                        •…
                     oei. part. 1. art. 1. E
                        •…
                     asm. paraphra. in loc. Seminis enim nomine non Christus per se. sed cum suo corpore coniunctus est intelligendus. Beza. beleeue in him. As our Apostle concludes in this Vers. 9. & 29. Epistle; If yee be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed, and heires by promise. See Benedictus.
               
               
                  This I say] Paul in the former verses hath laid downe two propositions; one, that testaments of men confirmed may not bee broken: another, that the promises were made to Abraham and his seed, which is Christ. Now what of all this, may some say? Hee doth expound himselfe therefore, this I say; that is, the drift and intent of all my speech is to shew that the couenant or testament ratified by God can not bee frustrated. And secondly, though it might so bee, yet that the Law could not abrogate the same: Which he proues by two reasons especially.
               First, from the circumstance of time: the law which began foure hundred and thirty yeeres after doth not disanull, &c.
               
               Secondly, from the nature of a testament, donation or legacie: for if inheritance come of the Law, it commeth
                  
                  not of promise; but God gaue it to Abraham by promise.
               
               
                  The Law which began afterward] The Iewes obiect and say, that God mistrusting his owne promises as insufficient to iustifie, further added a better thing; that is to say, the law, whereby men might be made righteous. Our Apostle doth answere by demonstration. Abraham obtained not righteousnesse before God through the Law, because there was no Law when hee liued; and if no Law, then assuredly no merit. What then? Nothing else but the meere promise, which Abraham 
                  Galat. 3. 6. beleeued, and it was imputed to him for righteousnesse. Luther in loc. If a rich man not constrained therevnto, but of his owne good will, should adopt one to bee his sonne, whom hee knoweth not, and to whom hee doth owe nothing, and should appoint him heire of all his lands and goods; and then after certaine yeeres should lay vpon him a law to doe this or that; hee cannot now say that hee deserued this benefit through his owne workes, seeing hee receiued it of meere fauour many yeeres asore: so God could not respect our deserts going before righteousnesse, for as much as the promise was made 430 yeeres afore the Law. Wherefore, saith Vbi sup. 
                  Luther, if thou wilt rightly diuide the word of truth, accustome thy selfe to separate the promises and the law so sarre asunder as heauen and earth, as the beginning of the world and the latter end; that when the Law commeth and accuseth thy conscience, thou maiest answere; Lady law, thou commest not in season, for thou commest too soone; tar
                        •…
                     e yet vntill 430 yeeres bee full expired, and when they are past, then come and spare not. But if thou come then, it wilbe too late, for then hath the promise preuented thee 430▪ 
                  yeeres; to which I assent, and sweetely repose my selfe in the same. Therfore I haue nothing to doe with thee, for I liue now with the beleeuing Abraham; or rather fince Christ his seede is reuealed and giuen vnto me, I 
                  Galat. 2. 20. 
                  liue in him, who is my 
                  1. Cor. 1. 30. 
                  righteousnesse, sanctification and redemption.
                  
Inheritance commeth on Gods part by promise, not on our part by performance.
               It is obiected against this accurate computation of time, Gen. 15. 13. Know for a suertie that thy seed shall bee a stranger in a la
                        •…
                     d that is not theirs foure hundred yeeres, and shall serue them. Answere is made by S. Deciuit. Dei lib. 16. cap. 24. 
                  Augustine, and Oecumen. Aquin. Ca. etan. in loc. other, that Moses in that text speakes of the time that was from the beginning of Abrahams seed, or birth of Isaac, to the beginning of the Law: but Paul in this text, of all the time that was betweene the giuing of the promise, and the giuing of the law. Now the promise was made to Abraham when hee was seuentie and fiue yeeres old, Gen. 12. 4. And Isaac was borne when Abraham was a hundred yeeres old, Gen. 21. 5. that is, 25 yeeres after the first promise. And from the birth of Isaac, vntill the children of Israel were deliuered out of Aegypt, at which time the Law was giuen (as Oecumenius, Aquinas, Aretius exactly reckon according to Gods owne records) were 405. yeeres, in all 430. as Moses, Exod. 12. 40.
               
                  For if the inheritance come of the law, it commeth not now of promise, but God gaue it, &c.] This argument is plaine: for naturall reason, although it be neuer so blind, compelleth vs to confesse, that it is one thing to promise, and another thing to require; one thing to giue, and another thing to take. The Luther. law requireth and exacteth of vs our workes; on the contrarie, the promise doth offer vnto vs the spirituall and euerlasting benefits of God, offert & adfert, and that freely for Christs sake. Therefore wee cannot obtaine inheritance by the law, Galat. 3. 10 
                  for as many as are of the workes of the law, are vnder the curse: but by the promise; for it saith, Gen. 22. 18. 
                  in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth bee blessed. 
                  Rom. 4. 14. If they which are of the law bee heires, our faith is made vaine, and the promise voide, and God a liar. Eternall life is the 
                  Rom. 6. 23. 
                  gift of God, conveied by testament as a Perkins. legacie, which is not an exaction, but a donation. Heires looke not for

lawes or any burthens to be laid vpon them by their fa thers wil, but for an inheritance confirmed thereby. Now that we may receiue this legacy, we must bring vnto God nothing but hunger and thirst after it, making suit for 
                     •…
                  t by asking, seeking, knocking. For albeit in our selues all of vs are most vnworthy: yet shall it suffice for the hauing of this blessing, if our names bee found in the testament of God.
               
                  God gaue it to Abraham by promise.] That is, as afore, to Abraham and his seede. For this gift is not priuate, but a publike donation, and Abraham heere must be considered as a publike person, and that which was giuen vnto him, was in him giuen to all that should beleeue as he did. If then thou beest endued with faith Luke 17. 6. as much as is a graine of Mustard seede, thou art Galat. 3. 9. 
                  blessed with faithfull Abraham. Inheritance of eternall happinesse is as surely thine, as it was his when he beleeued: and if thou continue faithfull vnto the end, thou shalt Matth. 8. 11 
                  sit downe with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob in the Kingdome of heauen, and after this life rest in the 
                  Luk. 16. 22. 
                  bosome of Abraham euermore. For whatsoeuer was done to him as the Rom. 4. 11. 12 
                  Father of the faithfull, is done to them also that walke in the steps of his faith.
               
               
                  Wherefore then serueth the Law?] You haue heard of the proposition, and exposition of our Apostle. Now there followeth an Aquin. Aretius. Kilius. opposition against his doctrine, containing a twofold obiection. The first in the 19. verse: Wherefore then serueth the Law: The second, verse 21. Is the Law then against the promise of God? To the first, answer is made, that the Law was added because of transgressions. 
                  Primasius in loc. Not for iustification, but for transgression, namely to suppresse, and expresse sinne. The ciuill vse of the Law is to punish transgression, and to restraine villany. Good-men are a 
                  Rom. 2. 14. 
                  Law to themselues, and so the Law is not giuen vnto the 
                  1. Tim. 1. 9. 
                  righteous man. But almighty God hath ordained Magistrates, Parents, Ministers, Lawes, bonds, to bridle the wicked, at the least to bind Sathan

that hee rage not in his bond slaues after his owne lust. And therfore Polititians and States-men haue much esteemed and honoured the very senselesse instruments of iustice. Baldwin the great Lawyer called the Gibbet, lignum benedictum; and the good Emperour Max. 1. Sa
                        •…
                     ue sancta Iustitia. 
                  Maximilian when-so-euer hee passed by the Gallowes, vsually putting off his hat saluted it thus: All haile holy Iustice.
               
               The spirituall vse of the Law is to reueale sinne, that a man as in a glasse may behold his ignorance, misery, blindnesse, infirmity, iudgement, death, hell: As a Tyndal. prol. in Exod. corosie laid vnto an old sore, not to heale it, but to stirre it vp, and make the disease aliue, that a man may feele in what perill hee stands, and how nigh to deathes doore. Kilius. For our natures are so corrupt, that wee could not know them to be corrupt without the Law. Rom. 7. 7. I knew not sinne (saith our Apostle) but by the Law; for I had not knowne lust, except the Law had said, thou shalt not lust. 
                  Iere. 23. 29. Is not my word euen as fire, saith the Lord? and like an hammer breaking stones? It is that 1. King. 19. ver. 11. 12. 13. mighty strong winde, and that terrible earth-quake, renting the Mountaines, and cleaning the Rockes asunder, that is, the proud and obstinate hypocrites. Eliah as being not able to abide these terrors of the Law, which by these things are signified, couered his face with a mantle. Thus as you see, the Law was added because of transgressions, that is, to restraine them ciuilly, Luther. but especially to reueale them spiritually, that men might vnderstand the greatnesse of their sinnes, and the iust wrath of God for the same.
               
                  Untill the seede came to whom the promise was made] If the daies of the Law should not bee shortned, no man should be saued: and therefore certaine bounds are limited to this Tyrant, beyond the which hee cannot raigne, namely, the Law was added because of transgressions, vntill the seede came. 
                  Oecumen. Aquin. Ardens. That is, vntill the time of grace, till Christ in the fulnesse of time was borne. This

may be construed literally: for albeit the law serues to reueale sinne till the worlds end; Perkins. yet in respect of the Mosaicall manner of reuealing transgressions, it is added but vntill Christ. For the law before Christ did conuince men of sinne not onely by precepts and threatnings, but also by Rites and Ceremonies as by washings and sacrifices; all which assuredly were reall confessions of sinne, and as Coless. 2. 14. 
                  Paul speakes, an hand-writing against vs, vntill Christ tooke them away, and fastned them vpon his Crosse. 
                  Matt. 11. 12 The Prophets and the Law did endure till Iohn, and from the time of Iohn the Baptist vntill this day the kingdome of heauen suffereth violence, and the violent take it by force. Spiritually the blessed seede is Kil us. come when once Christ Ephes. 3. 17. dwelleth in our hearts by faith. Heere we must begin to say, Luther. Now leaue off Law, thou hast terrified and tormented our consciences enough: 
                     Psal. 42. 9. & 69. 2. 
                  All thy waues and stormes are gone ouer vs. Lord turne not away thy face from thy seruant. 
                  Psal. 6. 1. 
                  Rebuke mee not I beseech thee in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy displeasure. When these terrors and troubles come, let the law then be packing out of the conscience, which indeed is added to discouer and encrease sinne, yet no longer but vntill the seede come to which the promise was made. Now must hee deliuer vp his kingdome to another, euen to Christ, whose lippes are gratious, speaking of farre better things then doth the Law, 
                     Esa. 61. 1. 2. 4. 
                  bringing glad tidings of saluation vnto the Poore, binding vp the broken hearted, preaching libertie to the Captiue, comforting all that mourne, giuing beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladnesse for the spirit of heauinesse.
               
               
                  Is the Law then against the promise of God?] If the Law conuince men of sinne, then it serues not to giue life, but to kill: and so by consequent is against the promise giuing life. To this obiection our Apostle doth answer negatiuely,
               With
               
                  
                     Detestation, God forbid.
                  
                     Attestation, producing out of Gods owne
                     
                     booke sufficient witnesse against these cauillers. If there had beene a Law giuen which could haue giuen life, then no doubt righteousnesse should haue come by the Law: but the Scripture concludeth all vnder sinne, &c.
                  
               
               
                  God forbid] In that Paul auoides an heriticall and blasphemous obiection with an absit, (which is 
                     Aretius in R
                           •…
                        m 6▪ 2. 
                  abominantis oratio) we may learne to Perkins. reiect things said or done to the dishonour of God, with loathing and detestation. Matt. 26 65. 
                  Caiphas supposing that Christ had blasphemed, rent his garments: and Iob suspecting his children had done the like fault, sanctified them, Iob. 1. 5. Magdeburg. epist. praefix. cent. 7. What reason is it to spare great ones, iniuring Christ the greatest one? For as wise men wee must discouer, and as learned men leaue, but as good men abhor such as are hereticall. And therefore we must hate the Luther. detestable dreames of Iewes, affirming that the Messias is not yet come, because our sinnes hinder his comming. As if God should become vnrighteous, because of our vnrighteousnesse; or made a liar, because men are liars. It is said heere that God is one, 
                  Marlorat. that is, euer the same, being alway iust and true. God forbid then a man should thinke that the Law should be against his promise; for he doth not slacke his promise because of our sinnes, or hasten the same for our righteousnesse and merits, he regardeth in it neither the one nor the other.
               
                  For if there had beene a Law giuen which could haue giuen life, then no doubt righteousnesse should haue come by the Law.] Aretius. If the Law were contrary to the promise, then it should execute the promises office: but that it cannot do▪ for it is the promises office to giue life, but the lawes office to kill. And therefore the Law is not against the promise, but rather a Caietan. preparation to receiue the promise. This argument is an hammer to beat downe Popish opinion of merit: That which doth giue righteousnesse, doth first giue life; the workes of the Law cannot giue life: Ergo, they cannot giue righteousnesse or iustifie. See Luther & Perkins in loc.
               
               
                  
                  But the Scripture concludeth all things vnder sinne, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ should bee giuen to them that beleeue] Things subordinate, whereof one serues for another, are not one against another: but the Law is subordinate to the promise, concluding all vnder sinne, that wee might haue recourse to Christ the Ioh. 2. 2. propitiation for our sinnes. Leo serm. 11. de quadrage sima. 
                  Ideo enim datur praeceptum vt praecipientis quaeratur auxilium. It humbleth a man, and in humbling him it maketh him to sigh, and to seeke the helping hand of the Mediatour, 
                     Psal. 109. 20. Sweet is thy mercy. sweetning his mercies, and making his grace gratious and inestimable. The prouerbe is true, that hunger is the best cooke. 
                  Luther. Like then as the dry ground doth couet raine: euen so the Law makes troubled and afflicted soules to thirst after Christ, and in this respect it is our schoolemaster to bring vs to Christ. Aretius in Galat. 3. 24. A schoolemaster hath two speciall offices; one to correct, another to direct. It correcteth in shutting vs vp in the prison of sinne; and it Photius apud Oecumen. in loc. directeth also, for that it occasioneth vs hereby to hunger and thirst after the righteousnesse of Christ.
               
                  The Scripture] 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . That Scripture, Perkins. namely the Scripture mentioned afore, meaning C
                        •…
                     luin. apud Marlorat. in loc. especially the written law of Moses, including all vnder sinne: Deut. 27. 26. Cursed is euery man that continueth not in all things which are written in the booke of the Law to doe them. Euery man is bound to keepe the whole Law: Caietan. 
                  Claudit ergo sub peccato subditos sibi, praecipiendo siquidem, & non adiuuando. But this may bee construed of Luther. Euangelicall Scripture so well as of the law; for if all men had not bin subiect vnto the curse by sinne, for what end should the blessing by Christ haue beene promised, because Matth. 9. 12. 
                  the whole neede not a Physitian? And so both Gospell and Law shut vp all vnder sinne, Rom. 11. 32. 
                  that God might haue mercie on all.
               
               
                  Concludeth] Ergo, the Scripture must be Iudge for the determining of controversies in religion For (as Lib. 5. contra Parmeman. 
                  Optatus and Iu Psal. 21. exposit. 2. 
                  Augustine note) God hath dealt with vs as

an earthly father is wont with his children, who fearing lest they should fall out after his decease, doth set downe his will in writing vnder witnesses; and if there arise debate among the brethren, instantly they goe to the testament. All of vs are brethren, and Gen. 13. 8. therefore we should not contend: but if any question bee made concerning our Fathers inheritance, wee must examine the words of his testament, and Esay 8. 20. testimonie, for that as a Iudge concludeth all things.
               
               
                  All things] Marlorat. As if he should say, not all men only, but all things also, which all men can doe toward their saluation, euen Rom. 3. 19. 
                  all the world culpable before God vnder sinne.
               
               
                  That the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ should bee giuen to them that beleeue] There is Beza in loc. neuer a word in this clause but is a sufficient argument against our merit: promise, faith, Iesus Christ, giuen, beleeue. Sauing faith is called heere the faith of Iesus Christ, because Christ is both author and obiect thereof. Perkins. Euery man therefore shall not be saued in his owne faith and religion, but only such as are of the faith of Christ.
               Almightie and mercifull God, of whose onely gift it commeth that thy faithfull people doe vnto thee true and laudable seruice: grant we beseech thee, that wee may so runne to thy heauenly promises, that wee faile not finally to attaine the same through Iesus Christ our Lord:
               Amen.
            
            
               
               The Gospell.
               
                  LVKE 10. 23.
                  Happie are the eies which see the things that yee see, &c.
                  
               
               THis Text hath two parts:
               
                  One concerning the Gospell: containing a

                        Proposition: Happie are the eies, &c.
                        Reason: For I tell you, &c.
                     
                  
                  Another touching the Law: wherein foure points are remarkable:

                        1. A supplication: Master what shall I do? &c.
                        2. A replication: What is written in the law? how readest thou? &c.
                        3. An explication: A certaine man descended, &c.
                        4. An application: Goe and do thou likewise.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Happy are the eyes which see the things that yee see] Christ in the words immediatly going afore deliuered this doctrine: No man knoweth who the Sonne is, but the Father: neither who the Father is, saue the Sonne, and he to whom the Sonne will reueale him. And then turning about to his Disciples he said secretly, Blessed are the eies which see the things, 
                  Theophylact. Idem Cyril. a apud Veg. in loc. that is, these things hidden from the wise and learned, but opened vnto you: for this is Ioh. 17. 3. eternall life, to know God, and whom he hath sent Iesus Christ. Ardens. Granaten. Zepper. Some did see Christ onely with corporall eies of the flesh, as Iudas and the Iewes who persecuted him. Other

onely with spirituall eyes of faith, as the Patriarkes in old time: Iohn 8. 56. Abraham reioyced to see my day▪
                   &c. and all true beleeuers in our time, faith being an euidence of things not seene, Heb. 11. 1. But the Disciples heere saw Christ with both, and therefore blessed were their eies, &c. Such as beheld Christ onely with their carnall eye, were 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . not happy therefore, but the worse: for, saith our Sauiour in the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 15. 22. Gospell, If I had not come and spoken vnto them, they should not haue had sinne, but now haue they no cloake for their sinne, Such as see Christ onely with the spirituall eye be more happy; for Iohn 20 29. 
                  Blessed are they that haue not scene, and yet haue beleeued. Such as looked vpon Christ spiritually and corporally too were most happie. The first sort saw Christ, but they did not beleeue: Aretius in loc. they considered him as a meere man, but they did not conceiue that hee was the onely begotten sonne of God Iohn 1. 14. they reputed Christ on the Crosse to bee Ambro. ser. 45 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  us, not Deus, a sinner, not a Sauiour. The second sort beleeue, but not see: they beleeue that which was from the beginning, but they cannot say with Saint 1▪ 
                     Epist. 1. 1. 
                  Iohn which wee haue heard, which wee haue seene with our eies, which wee haue looked vpon, and our hands haue handled of the word of life. The third sort did see more then the first, and beleeued so much at the least as the second: and therefore Christ might say well, Happy are the eyes, &c.
               
                  For I tell you, that many Prophets and Kings haue desired to see those things which yee see] That ought to bee respected highly, which great men and good men affect: but I tell you, that many Princes and Prophets haue desired to see those things which yee see, and haue not seene them, and to heare those things which yee heare, and haue not heard them. For the Messias is called in holy Scripture, The 
                  
                     Vide R
                           •…
                        ber. in Hag. 2. num. 29 Gal. de arcanis lib. 
                     
                        •…
                     . cap. 9. L
                           •…
                        rin i
                           •…
                        
                      1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. 
                  desire of all Nations: Haggai 2. 8. Of whom the Prophets inquired, searching when or what time the spirit which was in them should declare the sufferings that should come to Christ, and the glorie that should
                  
                  follow: 1. Pet. 1. 10. 11. When Balaam had prophecied of Christ, Numb 24. 17. 
                  There shall come a Starre of Iacob, and a Scepter shall rise of Israel, &c. hee brake forth into this passion; Alas, who shall liue when God doth this? As if hee should haue said; Happy men are they, who shall see that glorious Starre and Sunne of righteousnesse, comming out of his chamber as a Bridegroome, giuing light to such as sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death. Oh that thou wouldest breake the heauens and come downe, said the Prophet Cap. 64. 1. 
                  Esay. Good old L
                        •…
                     ke 2. 25. 
                  Simeon waited for the consolation of Israel. Pontan. in euang. Dom. 13. p
                        •…
                     st Trin. 
                  Augustine wished hee might haue seene three things especially, Rome in her glory, Paul in the pulpit, and Christ in the flesh. If the 1. King. 10. 8. Queene of Sheba reputed the seruants of Salomon happy, for that attending about his throne they heard his wisedome, discoursing of trees 1. King. 4. 33. from the Cedar that is in Lebanon, euen vnto the Hyssop that springeth out of the wal: how blessed and happy were the disciples in hearing a 
                  Matth. 12. 42. 
                  greater then Salomon, and in seeing him who was Psal. 45. 3. 
                  fairer then the sonnes of men, in whom are hid all treasures of wisedome and knowledge? Coloss. 2. 3.
               Heere the Gospell and Epistle meete: Happie are the eies which see those things which yee see; for Christ is the promised seed of Abraham, in whom all the nations of the world are blessed. And for application it fits our text, and time, to say, Blessed are our eies, and blessed our eares, in this great light of the Gospell. For wee now 
                     Vide Chrysost. Homil. 24. in 1. Cor.
                   see Christ in his Sacraments, and heare Christ in his word. Hee liueth at this houre, Coster in loc. 
                  non solum inter nos, sed etiam intra nos: not among vs onely, but in vs also, dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephes. 3. 17. Galat. 2. 20. The Scriptures are as a prospectiue glasse, wherein hee that hath eyes of beleefe is able to behold Christ crying in his cradle, dying on his crosse, buried in his graue, raised from the dead, transfigured on the mount, ascended farre aboue all heauens, and there sitting as our Aduocate with God the Father. O that men would therefore

declare the goodnesse of God, in Psal. 67. 1. shewing vs the light of his countenance, reuealing the 1. Tim. 3. 16. great mysteries of godlinesse, which in Ephes. 35. other ages was not opened vnto the sonnes of men after such a manner as it is now. For I tell you many good Clerkes, and great Kings of England haue desired in old time to see those things which yee see, and haue not seene them: and to heare those things which yee heare, and haue not heard them. And at this day there bee many learned men among the Iewes, and mightie men among the Turkes, and gooly men among the barbarous and superstitious nations of the world, which vnderstand not as yet those things which appertaine to their peace.
               
                  And behold a certaine Lawyer stood vp and tempted him saying: Master what shall I doe to inherite eternall life?] A P. Fagius capitul. pat. pag. 81. wittie Rabbine was wont to say, that he learned much of his master, more of his fellowes, but most of his schollers. And so surely this ambitious Doctor might haue got somewhat by questioning, albeit hee tooke Christ happily for his inferiour. But his intent was not to bee taught, but to tempt, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Aretius. vsing all possible meanes, and all plausible cunning to snare Christ in his conference. For as Math. 2. 4. 7. 
                  Herod the fox asked the Priests, and inquired of the Magi diligently when and where Christ was borne; not to worship, but to worrie that innocent lambe: so many men heare the word, and in reading the Bible mooue many doubts vpon the text, not to consult, but insult. As Pontá
                        •…
                     . one notes vpon this place, non vt sciant, sed vt▪ sciantur. The Lawyers preamble was courteous, Master, and his quaere not idle, like the contentions of many Lawyers in our time, De lana caprina, touching the tithing of mint and rue: but concerning our eternall inheritance, what shall I doe to inherite euerlasting life? but his spirit was proud, and his heart false, standing vp to tempt, hauing Master in his mouth, hatching mischiefe in his minde. I will therefore turne that old ryme vpon him:
               
                  
                  M
                        •…
                     lin ore, verbalactis.
                  Felin corde, fra
                        •…
                     s in factis.
               
               
                  What is written in the Law? how readest thou?]Con▪ in Euangel. Dom. 12. post Pentecost. 
                  Didacus de la Uega, who was a Spanish Frier of Toledo, notes heere that the Bible teacheth all things exactly, which are necessary to saluation, in his owne Text. Sacrapagina docet nos perfectissimè quae sunt ad salutem necessaria. The I
                     •…
                  
                  suit Costerus in his sermon preached vpon this Gospell, affoords also the Scripture this praise, that it is speculum & regula vitae. Christ therefore sent the Lawyer vnto the Law for the resolution of his doubt; What is written? how readest thou? So Luke 16. 29. They haue Moses and the Prophets, let them heare them. And Esay 8. 20. To the Law, to the testimony. De rebus fidei persuadere debemus ex literis fidei, saith Lib de praescript. aduers. haeret. 
                  Tertullian. It is an old prouerbe, that the letters of Princes are to be read thrice, but the Scripture (which is Gregor. epist. lib. 4. Epist. 84. 
                  Gods Epistle) must be read Luther. loc. com. tit. de sa
                        •…
                     . script. seuen times thrice, yea seuenty times seuen times. Infinities, as Luther speakes in the words of a Horat. Poet, Nocturna versate man
                        •…
                     , versate diurna. That delighting in the Law of the Lord, we may meditate thereon day and night, Psal. 1. 2. For it is not sufficient to read cursorily, Coster in loc. 
                  sine delectn, & intilectu: we must Acts 17. 11. examine the Text, and Iohn 5. 39. search the Scriptures. And therefore Christ heere said not only, what is written in the law? but, how readest thou? That is, how doest thou vnderstand and construe Gods holy word?
               
                  Loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soule, and with all thy strength, and with all thy minde] This commandement is the Matt. 22. 38. first and the greatest of all the Law: wherein
               
                  Two points are regardable:
               
                  The cause why God is to be loued, and that is Heming. because

                        
                           Dominus Deus, the Lord.
                        
                           T
                                 •…
                              us, thy Lord.
                     
                  
                  The manner how, with all thy
                     
                        Heart.
                        Soule.
                        Strength.
                        Minde.
                     
                  
               
               The saying of Tract. d
                        •…
                      diligendo de
                        •…
                     m prin, 
                  Bernard is true: Causa diligendi deum deus est: as being most louing, and louely. Louing, in that he loued 
                  1. I
                           •…
                        h. 4 19. 
                  vs first, euen in our election and creation, when wee could not; in our redemption, when we would not, loue him. Bernard vbi sup a. 
                  Ipse dilexit nos & tantus & tautùm, & gratis tantillos & tales. Louely, being indeed the Vega. center of all our loue; for wee must loue nothing but good, and euery good is from oboue, comming downe from the Father oflights. As then 1. Kin. 18. 21. 
                  Eliah said, If the Lord be God, follow him: in like manner if the Lord bee God, loue him. Againe, thou must loue the Lord, because thy God: for euery man loueth his owne; his owne children, his owne friendes, his owne goods, his owne conceit. Non quia vera, (quoth Confess l. 12. cap. 25. 
                  Augustine) sed qui
                        •…
                      sua. Now nothing is so properly thine owne as God, being Psal. 73. 25. 
                  thy portion for euer. It is obserued by 
                     V
                           •…
                         Diez. con. 2. Dom 12. post. Pentecost.
                   
                  Picus Mirandula subtilly, that in the creation of the World, God gaue the Water vnto the Fish, Earth vnto the Beasts, Ayre vnto the Fowles, Heauen vnto the glorious Angels: and then after all these goodly seates were bestowed, almighty God made man according to his owne likenesse and Image, that hee might say with the Prophet, Psalme 73 24. Whom haue I in Heauen but thee? and there is none vpon Earth that I desire in comparison of thee. Thou Lord art my lot, and inheritance, the strength of my heart, and saluation of my soule. August tract. 13. in Ioan. 
                  Si 
                        •…
                     suris, panis tibi est; si sitieris, aqua tibi est; si in tenebris es, lumen tibi est, &c.
               The manner how to loue God, is, with all thy heart,
                  
                  with all thy soule, with all thy minde. That is, as 
                     De doctrina Christ. lib. 
                     
                        •…
                     . cap. 22. & de spirit. & anima cap. 35. Idem 
                           •…
                        ombard. 3. sent. dist. 27. 
                  Augustine, with all thy vnderstanding, Michael, di Hang. F
                        •…
                     r. 9. neuer speaking or thinking of him erroneously: with all thy will, neuer contradicting him obstinately: with all thy memorie, neuer forgetting him obliuiously: louing him Heming. perfectly, purely, perpetually. Or as Ser. de diligendo deo. Idem Ludol. de 
                        •…
                     ita Christi, part. 2. cap. 36. 
                  Bernard, with all 
                     •…
                  hy heart wisely, resisting the subtile suggestions of the diuell: with all thy soule sweetly, mortifying all carnall lusts of the flesh: with all thy minde constantly, ouercomming all crosses and troubles of the world. Or as Lib. de hominis op
                        •…
                     f. cap. 8. 
                  Gregorie Nyssen, with all the faculties of thy soule, vegetatiue, sensitiue, ratiocinatiue, for in him wee liue, and mooue, and haue our being, Acts 17. 28. Hee gaue all, and therefore good reason hee should haue all. Or as Psal. 103. 1. 
                  Dauid ioyntly, with all that is within thee. 
                  Theophylact. Gregor. Are
                        •…
                     ius. For the multiplying of so many termes, heart, soule, strength, minde, is onely to shew that wee must perfectly loue God aboue all, euen with all the Bernardinus de bustis Rosar. part. 2. serm. 5. strength of all our heart, soule minde. Modo sine modo, saith B
                        •…
                     rnard, tract▪ de di
                        •…
                     igendo Deo.
               
               Happily some will obiect, if wee must loue God with all our heart, soule, minde, mig
                     •…
                  t, it is not lawfull to loue any thing else beside him. Answere is made, that we may loue something, praeter Deum, sed omnia propter Deum: 
                  
                     Luther. post maior in loc. Idem Thom. 22 q aest 44. art. 4 & 
                           •…
                        
                        ra in 3. sent. dist 27. Other things beside God, if we loue them in God and for God. As the words following intimate, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe.
               
               In which obserue Heming. the
               
                  Causes, of our loue toward our neighbour.
                  Measure, of our loue toward our neighbour.
                  Order, of our loue toward our neighbour.
               
               The causes are two:
               
                  Commandement in Scripture: Ioh. 13. 34. and 15. 12. This is my commandement, that you loue one another.
                  
                  Bond of nature, because man is neighbour to man, in respect of creation and conuersation. Angels fight not against Angels, but against the fell Apoc. 12. 7. Dragon. Birds of a feather flie together. One beast is

not cruell vnto another of the same kinde. For Cocks (as many coniecture) fight not out of malice, but magnanimitie▪, rather out of iealousie then antipathie. Most vnnaturall then is it for one man to wrong another of his owne kinde, yea kinne. For whereas almighty God made not all Angels of one Angell, nor all beasts of the great Elephant, nor all fish of the huge Whale, nor all birds of the maiesticall Eagle; hee made all mankind of one Adam, 
                     
                        Aug. de bono Coniuga
                              •…
                            
                           
                              •…
                           p 1. & 
                              •…
                           ombard. 2. sent. dist. 18. hereby teaching vs to loue as brethren, and to bee all as one, because wee did proceed all from one.
               
               For the measure of thy loue the text saith heere, thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Now the 
                     Thom. ab A
                           •…
                        
                        gentin. & R
                           •…
                        . de m
                           •…
                        dia 
                           〈◊〉
                         in 3. sent. dist. 29. Idem Thom. 22. quaest. 6. art. 4. schoole Diuines obserue, that as is a note of similitude, not equalitie. The Law doth require that thou loue thy neighbour as thy selfe for the manner of thy loue: Ia
                        •…
                     sen. con. cap 81. but not as much as thy selfe, for the measure of thy loue: because charitie begins with it selfe, making a man to loue first himselfe, then his neighbour as himselfe, that is, 
                     Iacob. de Vorag. serm. 2. in loc. Idem Lombard. 3. sent. dist. 27. 
                  in quo seipsum & ad quod seipsum, in that, and for that hee loues himselfe, namely louing him in God, and wishing him all good. Other Caluin. ap
                        •…
                     d Marlorat. in Matth 22. 39. Interpreters haue gone further, affirming, that according to the rigour of law thou must loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, not onely with the same loue, but also with the same degrees of loue. Now then how thou louest thy selfe, thou doest know best thy selfe. But howsoeuer some learned Authors haue denied degrees of intention, all acknowledge that there bee degrees of extention in our charitie. For, as God is the God of loue; so likewise the God of order: And therefore whereas all men in the world can not bee partakers of our temporall goods and spirituall graces alike, Aug. de doc. Christ. lib. 1. cap. 28. 
                  such as are neerest ought to bee dearest vnto vs. I say neerest, in Heming. spirituall or carnall alliance: For the first, it is said expresly, Galat. 10. 6. 
                  doe good to all, especially to those which are of the houshold of faith, of Gods owne family the Caictan. Church, among whom the Ministers of the word are

the 
                     
                        •…
                     t chiefest. According to this rule Christ in the Gospell honoured his spirituall allies afore his naturall brethren and kindred; for when one told him, behold thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speake with thee, Christ stretched forth his hand towards his Disciples and said, 
                     Mat. 
                     
                        •…
                     2. 49. 
                  behold my mother and my brethren: for whosoeuer shall doe my fathers will which in heauen, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. 
                  Lombard. 3. sent. dist. 29. 
                  Est enim sanctior copula cordium, quàm corporum.
               
               Yet Altissiodor. aur. sum. s
                        •…
                     l. 141. ex Amb. (all other things being alike) wee must affect and respect our owne wife before our owne children, our children before kinsmen, our kinsmen before such neighbours as are not of our blood, our neighbours before strangers, and strangers of our owne countrey before forreiners of another nation. Of this order in our loue wee find a precept in 1. Tim. 5. 8. 
                  Paul, Hee that prouideth not for his owne, namely for them of his houshold, is worse then an Infidell: An example in Ioseph, who preferred Beniamin his owne brother by father and mother too, before the rest of his vnkind brethren: in his seast, Beniamins messe was 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •…
                     3 34. 
                  fiue times so much as any of theirs: at his farewell, other had change of rayment and money, but vnto Beniamin 
                  Gen. 45. 22. 
                  hee gaue three hundred peeces of siluer and fiue suites of apparell. Our blessed Sauiour himselfe being the true Ioseph, euen the truth and the way, loued his owne disciples more then other men, and S. Iohn more then other of his disciples, termed in the 
                     Ioh. 19 16. 20 2 21. 7. 20. Gospels historie, the disciple whom Iesus loued. I conclude in the words of Vbi s
                        •…
                     p. 
                  Lombard, Omnes homines diligendi sunt pari affectu, sed non pari effectu. See Thom. 2. 2
                        •…
                     , quaest. 26. art. 6. 7. 8. Caietan. & Dominic. Ban. ibidem. Altissiodor. Thom. ab Argentina. Ric. de media villa, reliquosque sententiarios in 3. sent, dist. 29.
               
                  Thou hast answered right, doe this and thou shalt liue] For the better vnderstanding of this clause [doe this and thou shalt liue] consider I pray, to what, and to whom Christ made this reply. First, to what. D
                        •…
                     . Fulke, & Sarcer. in loc. It is not demanded

here by what meanes a man might obtaine life euerlasting, but by what doing, or by what kind of works; and therefore Christ answered accordingly; what is written in the Law? doe this, and thou shalt liue. Secondly, to whom, hee did now deale with a Doctor of the Law, with a Pharisee, with one who was willing to iustifie himselfe: he did therefore send him vnto the Law, not vnto the promise. Heming. But speaking of eternall life to penitent sinners, hee saith, Iohn 14. 6. 
                  I am the way: promising in generall, Mat. 11. 28. 
                  Come to mee all yee that are wearie and laden, and I will ease you: performing his word in particular; O woman, thy faith hath saued thee, Luke 7. 50. Christ then in saying, Doe this and thou shalt liue, shewes the Lawyers Melanct. Sarceriu
                        •…
                     , Zepper. hypocrisie, who thought hee could doe this: and not a possibilitie to doe this: Luther. as if hee should say, thou diddest neuer in all thy life fulfill the whole law, nor yet one letter thereof as thou shouldest perfectly: thou must therefore thinke of Aretius. another way to the kingdome of Heauen. Heere the Gospell and Epistle meete againe. The Law cannot giue life (saith Paul.) the Leuit and Priest of the Law, did not helpe the wounded man halfe dead (saith Christ.) The Scripture concludeth all things vnder sinne, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christ, should bee giden to them that beleeue, saith our Epistle. Christ sends a Iustitiarie to the law, that seeing his owne wretchednesse and wickednesse in it, hee might come to Christ the louing Samaritane, to binde vp his wounds and to powre wine and oyle into them, as it is in our Gospell. If Papists in olde time were not impotent in conioyning these two Scriptures as parallel, assuredly the Rhem. & Po
                        •…
                     tan. in loc. Non quid credendo, sed quid faciend
                        •…
                     . Papists in our time are somewhat impudent in making the doctrines of these two so contrarie: that which God and the Church haue coupled together, let no man put asunder.
               
                  A certaine man] The Doctors of the law construed the Commaundement, loue thy neighbour, thus: Mat. 5. 43. 
                  loue thy friend, and hate thine enemie. Christ therefore shews

by this parable that euery man is our neighbour, of what condition or country soeuer, euen our greatest enemy For the 
                     Iob. 4. 9 vide Ioseph antiquit. lib: 1
                        •…
                     . cap 7. & 8. Iew did hate the Samaritane, accounting him as a dogge, and yet the Samaritan performed all neighbourly duties vnto the Iew, for that hee did not commit any worke of cruelty, nor omit any worke of mercy toward him.
               In an Ambros. Euthym. Luther. Melanct. Aretius & alij. allegory, this man is euery man, who sinning in Adam, descended from Ierusalem to Iericho: that is, from Gods Citie to the dominions of Sathan. And fell among theeues: into manifold tentations and noysome lusts. Which robbed him of his rayment: of his Ephes. 4. 24. righteousnesse and holinesse, wherewith Almighty God in his creation adorned him. And they wounded him and departed. For sinne wounding the conscience leaues a man in a desperate case. The Priest and the Leuite looking one him passed by. For the Law being the ministration of 2. Cor. 3. 7. death, is rather a corasie then an healing medicine, procuring rather sorrow then solace to the distressed soule. But a certaine Samaritan tooke compassion, &c. Christ Heb. 4. 15. touched with the feeling of our infi
                     •…
                  mities, out of his pity 
                     Esay 61. 1. Ezech. 34. 16. 
                  bound vp his wounds, and powred in Oyle and Wine: preaching repentance, which as wine doth search; and grace, which as Oyle doth supple our soares. Hee set him on his owne beast: 
                  Philip. 2. 7. hee tooke on him our owne nature, 1. Pe
                           •…
                        . 2. 24. bearing our owne sinnes, in his body, suffering for vs in the flesh. And brought him to a common Inne. That is, the Church, as a common Inne receiuing all sorts of men, being trauellers and 1. Pet. 2. 11. Pilgrims on earth, albeit their Philip. 3. 20. Burgeship be in heauen. And made prouision for him. As long as hee liued among vs, hee did good, and Act. 10. 38. healed all that were oppressed of the d
                     •…
                  uell. On the morrow when he departed: leauing the world and ascending vp on high, hee committed the wounded man vnto the Host; namely, to the Preachers of his word, Ephes. 4. 11. appointing Apostles, Prophets, and Euangelists, and Pastors and Teachers. Vnto which hee gaue two pence, that is, the two testaments,

as In loc. Idem Ambros. Th
                        •…
                     ophylact. Emis. 
                  Euthymuis; or as Aretius. other, the two Sacraments: or as August. ap
                        •…
                     d Th
                        •…
                     m in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . other, the two great Commandements: or as Pangarol. h
                        •…
                     m. in Euang. d
                        •…
                     m. 12. post Pen. part. 2. other, wholesome doctrine and holy conuersation: or Iaem ibid. iurisdiction and order: Idem ibid. or the word and the Sacraments: all which are Gods ordinary meanes vnto saluation. And said, take care of him. He doth not inioyne the Minister to cure, but only to take care for the wounded man. As Lib. 4. de considerat. 
                  Bernard excellently, Petitur a te cura, non curatio. For if the wounded man, as Ier. 51. 9. Babylon, will not be cured, Ez
                        •…
                     ch. 33. 9. he shall die for his iniquity, but thou hast deliuered thy soule. Thou hast done thy part, and thou shalt assuredly receiue thy reward. As Christ himselfe promiseth here, When I come againe I will recompence thee; Then he will say to the good Steward, Mat. 25. 23. It is well done trusty seruant, thou hast beene faithfull in little, I will make the Ruler ouer much, enter into thy masters ioy.
               
                  Goe and doe likewise] For if thou know this, and doe not this accordingly, Euthym. thou dost not loue thy neighbour as thy selfe, and he that loues not his neighbour as himselfe, cannot loue God with all his heart, with all his soule, &c. Let vs therefore be followers of Christ Ephes. 5. 1. as deere children, louing his as he loued vs: opening our bowels of compassion toward all such as mourne in Sion, binding vp the wounds of his distressed members vnder the crosse, 1. Cor. 10. 24. seeking not our owne, but one anothers good, that when hee comes to iudgement we may heare and haue that happy doome: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdome prepared for you. For I was an hungred, and ye gaue me meate; I thirsted, and ye gaue mee drinke; I was a stranger, and ye lodged mee; I was naked, and ye clothed me, &c. For in as much as ye haue done it vnto one of the least of these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto me.
               
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  GALAT. 5. 16.
                  I say, walke in the spirit, and fulfill not the lusts of the flesh, &c.
                  
               
               THis Epistle may be diuided into two parts: a
               
                  Generall exhortation, to walke in the spirit; & that in respect of a double benefit: namely, because the spirit deliuereth vs from the

                        Lusts of the flesh, vers. 16. Walke in the spirit, and yee shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. And ver. 24. They that are Christs, haue crucrucified the flesh, &c.
                        Lists of the Law, vers. 18. If yee be led of the spirit, then are yee not vnder the law.
                        
                     
                  
                  Particular enumeration of the workes of the flesh, and fruits of the spirit.
                  
               
               
                  
                  In the be droll of vices obserue their

                        Condition: The deeds of the flesh are manifest.
                        
                        Kinds: as being against

                              Faith,

                                    Idolatrie.
                                    Witchcraft.
                                    Hercsie.
                                 
                              
                              good manners, especially

                                    Chastitie.

                                          Adulterie.
                                          Fornication.
                                          Uncleannesse,
                                          Wantonnesse, as the daughters of luxurie.
                                          Gluttonie, Drunkennes, as the mother.
                                       
                                    
                                    Charitie.

                                          Hatred.
                                          Uariance.
                                          Zeale: or wicked emulation.
                                          Wrath.
                                          Strife.
                                          Seditions.
                                          Enuying.
                                          Murder.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Punishment: They which commit such things, shall not be inheritors of the kingdome of God.
                        
                     
                  
                  In the catalogue of vertues obserue likewise their

                        Propertie: Fruits of the spirit.
                        
                        Kindes: quantum ad
                           
                              
                                 intra: for the

                                    doing of good: loue, ioy, peace.
                                    
                                    induring of euill: long suffering, gentlenes.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 extra: respecting

                                    God, faith.
                                    
                                    our neighbors, goodnesse.
                                    
                                    our selues, temperance.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Benefit: Against such there is no Law.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Concerning our Apostles exhortation: I haue shewed Epist. Sund. 8. 
                        〈◊〉
                      T
                        •…
                     n else▪where what it is to fulfill the lusts of the flesh, as also what it is to walke in the spirit: and Epist. Sund. af
                        •…
                     er Christmas and Epist. 4. 
                        •…
                     un. 
                        〈◊〉
                      L
                        •…
                     t that all such as are led of the spirit, are not vnder the Law. Pardon 
                     •…
                  ee then in passing sicco calamo, from the first vnto the second part.
               
                  Th
                        •…
                      d
                        •…
                     edes of the flesh are manifest] As being knowen to God: vnto whom all things are 
                  H
                        •…
                     b. c. 13. 
                  naked, euen the secrets of our 
                  
                     
                        •…
                     al. 7. 10. 
                  hearts a
                        •…
                     d rei
                        •…
                     es. And notorious in the sight of men: hatred appearing in open court; gluttony sitting in open Hall; drunkennesse reeling in open streete; murther swaggering open high-wey; seduions in open fi
                     •…
                  lde; 
                     
                        •…
                     mulation in open Schoole; worshiping of Images in open Temple; sects in open Pulpit. Adultery, fornication and other secret sinnes of the Chamber, albeit the night be neuer so darke, the curtaine neuer so close, the doore neuer so fast, are notwithstanding vsually brought to light also. Whereupon the Poets in old time painted Uenus the mother of wantonnesse, naked; 
                  Fulgentius 
                        〈◊〉
                     . l. 2. in f
                        •…
                     bula Veneris. insinuating that this iniquity cannot be long couered. And manifest, 
                  Aretius in l
                        •…
                     c. as being committed against conscience: for as an Tit. 3. 11. hereticke; so the drunkard, witch, adulterer is damned of his owne self
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                   Yea the very Gentiles hauing not the Law, were notwithstanding in this respect a Rom. 2. 14. 
                  Law to themselues. 
                  Perkins in loc. Hence wee may learne not to conceale, but freely to confesse our sinnes before God, and before men also when neede shall require. Whether a man acknowledge them or no, they be manifest, and the ingenuous vncouering of them is the way to couer them. Agnosce 
                        〈◊〉
                     , saith Ser. 88. de Temp. 
                  Augustine, & Deus ignoscit. I said I will confesse my wickednesse vnto the Lord, and so thou forgauest the punishment of my sinne: Psalme 32. 6.
               
                  Adultery, fornication, vncleannesse, wantonnesse] These sinnes are named first, Marlorat. because the fl
                     •…
                  sh is most p
                     •…
                  one to commit them. Old A binuiqu
                        •…
                     st. in G
                        •…
                     n. 
                  Lot did burne with 
                     〈◊〉
                   of lust, whom all the fire that consumed Sodome could not once touch. Apolog. Da
                     
                        •…
                     id. cap. 4. 
                  Ambrose said of Sampson: Qui 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                  etiam suis manibus strangulauit, amorem suum suffocare non potuit, &c. And a O win Epigram. moderne Poet of Hercules:
               
               
                  Lenam non potuit, potuit superare leaenam:
                  Quem fera non valuit vincere, vicit hera.
               
               
                  Adulterie, when both or one of the parties delinquent are married, as the notation of the word intimates, 
                     Isiodor. Etym. lib. 5. cap. 26. Idem A
                           •…
                        teinstaig. & alij
                   
                  adulterium, quasi ad alterius torum. Fornication, is betweene such as are single, so called à 
                  Isiodor. Etym. lib. 10. & Ans
                        •…
                     lm. in loe. 
                  fornicibus, of the place wherein common harlots vsed to prostitute their bodies. Uncleannesse, is incontinency against Aquin. Ca
                        •…
                     etan. nature: Perkins. where these sinnes were knowen, there they were named particularly by Paul: as among the Romans, Rom. 1. 37. and to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. 9. but in Galatia where they were not known, they be mentioned in generall only, lest by naming of them he should after a sort teach them. Wontonnesse in Aretius. lasciuious attire, vnchast talke, petulant behauiour, is an Caluin. instrument, and as it were the bellowes to blow the coles of lust in all.
               
                  Idolatry, witchcraft 
                  Luther. It is plaine that Paul calleth here flesh whatsoeuer is in all the powers of an vnregenerate mans soule. The workes of the will that lusteth, are adultery, fornication, vncleannesse, and such like: the workes of the will inclined to wrath, are hatred, variance, seditions, enuying, &c. The workes of vnderstanding or reason, are Idolatry, witchcraft, heresie. The which are distinguished Aduanc. of learning, lib. 2. pag. pen
                        •…
                     lt. thus: Heresie, when we serue the true God with a false worship. Idolatry, when we worship false gods, supposing them to be true. Witchcraft, when we adore false gods, knowing them to be wicked and false. For the ground of that black art is either an open or secret 
                     Aug. de doct. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 20. V
                           •…
                        de Altenstag. ex. verb. ar
                           •…
                         magica.
                   league with Sathan the prince of darknesse, and so witchcraft (as our iudicious Luther. Soueraigne well obserued) is the height of Idolatry.
               Adultery, fornication, vncleannesse, gluttony, drunkennesse are manifestly knowen to be workes of the flesh, Hieron. in loc. euen to such as commit them: but Idolatry doth appeare

so spirituall, D
                        •…
                     monalog. lib. 3. c. 6. as that it is manifest vnto the faithfull onely to bee a deed of the flesh. A Turke beleeues nothing lesse then that his Alcaron, his washings and other ceremonies are workes of the flesh. A popish Monke when hee leads a single life, saith Masse, prayeth on his beades, is so farre from holding himselfe an Idolater, or that hee fulfilleth any worke of the flesh; as hee that calles himselfe a spirituall man, and is assuredly perswaded that these things are spirituall meanes of his saluation. Hee talketh of the spirit, and thinketh hee walketh in the spirit. Nay the sinne of Idolatrie, though it bee more reprehended in Gods word, and more punished in his workes, then other vices: yet it cleaueth so fast vnto flesh, See Arrow against Idolatrie, chap. 2. as that the best men in the world easily fall into it, and hauing once delighted therein, are most hardly drawen from it. Idols are called by the Prophet Chap. 44. 9 
                  Esay, 
                  Quae maxin. è aman
                        •…
                      Idololatr
                        •…
                     . Vatabius ibid. 
                  del
                        •…
                     ctable things. Ezechiel in the 23. chapter of his Prophecie compareth Idolaters vnto a woman i
                     •…
                  flamed with loue toward some goodly yoong man, on whom shee hath cast her eyes, and fixt her affection, and forgetting all mod
                     •…
                  stie, sendeth messengers for him, and bringeth him into the bed of loue. Saint Iohn in his Chap. 17. Apocalypse accurately describes the superstitious and Idolatrous Church of Antichrist by a whore, whose doctrines, as the wine of her fornication, hath intoxicated the Kings and inhabitants of the earth; her cup is of gold, her selfe is araied with purple and scarlet, and guilded with gold, and pretious stones and pearles. Hereby counterfeiting the glorious ornaments of Christs owne spouse, the true Church: whose Reuelat. 21. 11. 13. 
                  shining is like to gold, and stones most cleere and pretious, her lips like 
                  C
                        •…
                     nt. 3. 10. 
                  skarlet, and her loue much better then wine.
               
               Let vs then aboue all other works of carnalitie, take heed of Idolatrie, which is so secret a vice, that it is discouered of none but such as haue crucified the flesh, and are led of the spirit. And for this cause let vs haue the

commandement alwaies in our eye, thou shalt haue none oth
                        •…
                     r gods but me. Forbidding foure things especially: first, the hauing of strange gods, and not the true: as had the 
                     Acts 14. 11. 12. 15. Gentiles. Secondly, the hauing of strange gods with the true: as the 2. King. 17. 
                        •…
                     3 Samaritans had. Thirdly, the hauing of no gods at all, as the Psal. 14. 1. foolish Atheists. Fourthly, the not hauing of the true God aright, according to his owne word and will, as the congregations of Heretikes and Antichrists.
               
                  Hatred, variance] In this enumeration of sins against charitie, the first is, hatred, and the last, murther. 
                  Aquin. 
                  Quia ab hoc pervenitur ad illud. If we stop not hatred in the beginning, it will breake forth into contentious words, and brawling speeches, happily misled by distempered zeale, will grow to seditious and schismaticall actions, and these breed enuying, and enuie begets murther, according to that of Ser. de liuore & zelo. 
                  Cyprian: Inuidia fons cladium, after 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   there follow 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . For this one fault is Holcot. 
                  toxicum charitatis, & ostium iniquitatis. As it were the death of amitie, and doore of enimitie, the very Materia cul
                     
                        •…
                     arum vti Cyp. vbi sup. matter of all mischiefe, and A
                        •…
                     amts. hell of the soule. Concerning gluttonie, see before Epist. 1. Sund. in Aduent: and of drunkennesse hereafter Epist. 20. Sund. after Trinitie.
               
                  And such like] Paul added this clause, Caieta
                        •…
                     . lest any should imagine that there bee no more deeds of the flesh: as if hee should say, by Primasius. these yee may conceiue what the rest are, for it is Luther. vnpossible to reckon vp all. If Paul numbring the sinnes of his time, was constrained to breake off his catalogue with an & caetera, how shall the Preachers at this day deliuer vp a true inuentorie? For, as now and then all humors of the whole bodie fall downe into the legges, and there make an issue: so the corruption of all ages past, haue slid downe into the present, to the choaking and annoyance of all that is good. The worlds end doth affoord the same faults and the like to them in the beginning, yea doubtlesse many monsters of sinne, which our forefathers

of old could neuer parallel.
               
                  Of the which I tell you before, as I haue told you in times past] Cal
                        •…
                     in. Hence Ministers are taught often to fore warne the people of the future iudgements of God for their sinnes: Pelican apud Marlorat. if present, by word: if absent, by writing: Esay 58. 1. Mich. 3. 8. When a man otherwise cannot hit the marke, hee must draw the bow to the eare and shoote home: little chiding and once rebuking will doe no good with such as haue stony hearts and brasen faces, it is our dutie therefore to threaten, yea thunder againe and againe, saying with Paul, as I told you before, so still I forewarne you Anselme. while ye may take heed, repent and returne from your wicked course, That they which commit such things, shall not be inheritors of the Kingdome of God. Not all they which haue such impure motions arising in their minde: but they which commit such actions in their life, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , such as doe. Not all such as haue done those things once, twice, thrice: for Iames 3. 2. in many things we sinne all, and euery age euen in the Luther. faithfull hath his peculiar fault and folly. Lust assaults a man most in his youth, ambition in his middle age, and couetousnesse in his old age. Bullinger. Such then as haue done these things and after haue heartily repented, are not excluded from the Kingdome of God: but onely such as doe, 
                  Perkins. noting a present and a continued act of doing amisse. The Marlorat. godly man often falles into the workes of the flesh, and being admonished thereof recouers himselfe, hee doth not 
                  Psal. 1. 1. 
                  stand in the way of sinners, although he sometimes enter into it. On the contrary, sinners irrepentant and obstinate when they fall, lie still in the filthinesse of the flesh hating reformation, and heaping to themselues wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. All they which doe this, and die thus without a liuely faith and vnfained repentance, shall not be inheritors of the kingdome of God.
               
               
                  The fruit of the spirit is] O
                        •…
                     cumen. Anselme. Aquin. Aretius. Interpretors obserue generally Pauls altering of his phrase; for whereas he called

acts of sinne workes of the flesh, he termes vertue the fruit of the spirit. He speakes of the one plurally, The workes of the flesh are: but of the other singularly, The fruit of the spirit is. 
                  Caietan. 
                  Ad significandum quod malum contingit ex singularibus defectibus, bonum autem ex integra causa. To signifie that good is the effect of an entire cause, whereas euill comes of defects in many particulars. Or happily to shew that our vices exceede in number our vertues.
               Christian vertues are fruits, 
                  Luther. Ardens. as bringing with them excellent commodities, enriching such as haue them, and alluring other also by their example to receiue the Gospell and faith of Christ. And fruites of the spirit, as begun, continued, ended according to the motions and admonitions of the spirit: begun in faith, acted in obedience, ending in Gods honour. A good man is 
                  Psal. 1. 3. 
                  like a Tree planted by the water side, that will bring forth his fruit in due time. The Church is the Cantic. 4. 12. Garden of God▪ Preachers are the planters, 1. Cor. 3. 6. 9 beleeuers are 
                     Esay 61▪ 3. Trees of righteousnesse, the spirit of God is the sap and Galat. 2. 20. life of them, and good workes are the fruites which they beare. From Perkins. hence wee may learne to distinguish aptly betweene Christian vertues in professors of the Gospell, and ciuill vertues in heathen men. Ioseph is chast, and so was Xenocrates. In Ioseph it was an especiall fruite of the regenerating spirit, but in Xenocrates i
                     •…
                   was a worke proceeding onely from Gods generall prouidence. For there is a gift of regeneration able to mortifie corruption, and a gift of restraint which serues onely to keepe in corruption.
               
                  Loue, ioy, peace, &c.] It had beene sufficient to haue named onely loue and no more: for as it is shewed, Epist. quinquages. Sund. charity doth extend it selfe vnto all the fruites of the spirit, Luther. notwithstanding our Apostle sets it heere by it selfe among other vertues, and in the first place, to signifie that it is the very Ardens. Anselm. Aretius. fountaine from which all the rest are deriued. And therefore that Christians

ought before other things affectionatly tender the good of their brethren, Rom. 12. 10. 
                  Giuing honour one to another, euerie man esteeming better of another then of himselfe, and so 
                  Galat. 5. 13. 
                  seruing one another in loue. The world in this age wants exceedingly this one vertue: for among the roring Gentlemen it is but a word and a wound; among ciuill men, it is but a word and a writ. Yea that which is worst of all, among such as seeme saints of the greatest purity, there be so many sects and schismes euen about matters of Gods holy seruice; that if our Apostle were now liuing, he would censure them as he did the Corinthians in his time, 1. Cor. 3. 4. 
                  when one saith I am Pauls: and another, I am Apollos, are ye not carnall?
               
               
                  Against such there is no law] Against such vertues, and against persons indued with such vertues, there is no law: that is, no law to Rom. 8. 1. condemne, no law to 1. Tim. 1. 9. V
                           •…
                        i Melanct. ibid.
                   compell them. As if hee should say, Such as are led by the spirit are a free people, seruing the Lord without constraint. If there were no punishment in this life, nor hell in the next for adultery, drunkennesse, murther, gluttony, yet they would abstaine from these works of the flesh out of meere loue to God and goodnesse. For they that are Christs, haue crucified the flesh. In this crucifying foure points are to be considered:
               
                  1. Attachment.
                  2. Arraignement.
                  3. Iudgement.
                  4. Execution.
               
               First, wee must attach and bring our selues into Gods presence, saying with the Luke 15. 18. prodigall sonne, I will goe to my father. Secondly, wee must indite our selues of our sinnes at the barre of Gods iudgement: I haue sinned against heauen, and before thee. Thirdly, wee must 1. Cor. 11. 31. iudge our selues, that wee be not iudged of the Lod: I am no more worthy to be called thy sonne. Fourthly, we proceed to the lawfull execution of the flesh, vsing the meanes for the crucifying of it, and they be principally Perkins. three:

The first is applying of Christ crucified, and that is to beleeue not onely that Christ was crucified for vs: but that we likewise were crucified with him.
               The second is to beat downe the flesh by the sword of the spirit, propounding in our daily repentance the seuerall Commandements and threatnings of God against our seuerall affections and lusts. As it were slaying murther with commandement, Thou shalt not kill: and robbing the theefe with another arrow taken out of Gods quiuer, Thou shalt not steale.
               
               The third is to cut off the first beginnings of euill, and to flie the present occasions of euery sin. With these spirituall nailes (as In lot. 
                  Luther speakes) a Christian may fasten all carnall desires vnto the Crosse; so that although the flesh be yet aliue, yet can it not performe that which it would doe, for as much as it is bound hand and foote, and made subiect to the spirit.
               Almighty and euerlasting God, giue vnto vs increase of faith, hope, and charity: and that wee may obtaine that which thou doest promise, make vs to loue that which thou doest command, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  LVKE 17. 11.
                  And it chanced as Iesus went to Hierusalem, that he passed thorow Samaria and Galile: and as he entred into a certaine towne, there met him ten men that were lepers, &c.
                  
               
               COncerning Christs diligence, going about to doe good: obedience, sending the lepers vnto the Priests of the Law: power and pity curing such an incurable disease. Concerning also the faith and fact of the lepers in confessing and adoring Christ, I haue spoken

enough in mine exposition of the Gospell, allotted for the third Sunday after Epiphanie. There remaineth in all this historie, but one point only to be further examined, and that is the gratitude, rather ingratitude of these lepers, in which obserue
               
                  The Number of the thanksgiuers: one among ten, and that one not a Iew, but a Samaritane.
                  The Nature of the thanksgiuing: adorned with many cōmendable vertues, as

                        Obedience.
                        Desire to be with Christ.
                        Praising of God.
                        Humilitie.
                        Loue.
                        Faith.
                     
                  
               
               
                  One of them when hee saw that he was cleansed] Culman. Sarcerius. Aretius. Hence wee may learne that the number of true beleeuers is but a Luke 12 32. small flocke, and that among much Matth. 13. stonie, more thornie, there is but a little good ground. Many men in the world Diez. Co
                        •…
                     er. resemble Dan. 2. 
                  Nabuchadnezzars Image, whose head was of fine gold, his breast and his armes of siluer, his thighes of brasse, his legges of iron, and his feet part of iron, and part of clay: the beginning of all these lepers was golden, and their proceedings as purified siluer; all beleeued, all prayed, all obeyed Christ: but their end was dirtie, forsaking the word, and embracing the world. Hypocrites are like the Plaice, which hath a blacke side so well as the white: when once their turnes are serued by the white, they can and will instantly shew the blacke. While these men had their grieuous disease, they came to Christ, and cry to Christ, Iesus Master, haue mercy on vs. But feeling themselues healed, they forget him, and that which is worse, they side with the Priests against him. Among ten one man only was thankfull, and continued faithfull vnto the end. And this one was a stranger and a Samaritane. Wherein our Euangelist doth taxe their ingratitude, by Caluin. Ia
                        •…
                     sen. comparing one with nine, and a Samaritane with a Iew. Theophylact. Teaching vs also not to boast of our progenie though neuer so godly, nor to despaire

though neuer so wicked. In the businesse of our saluation oft it comes to passe Luke 13. 30. 
                  that the first are the last, and the last are the first. In Galat. 3. 28 Christ there is neither Iew nor Grecian, but in Acts 10. 35 euery nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousnesse is accepted with him.
               The thankfulnesse of the Samaritane is accompanied with many notable vertues, as first obedience; for although he knew that he was, as hee went cleansed of his leprosie: yet according to Christs expresse commandement hee shewed himselfe to the Priests. And when he was with them, he was not seduced of them as the rest of his companie. For whereas the Priests (as Lyra. Culman. Aretius. it is thought) had corrupted and perswaded those other nine that they were cured by the Lawes obseruation, and not by Christs either might or mercy: the Samaritane beleeued vnfainedly that Christ was a Priest for euer after the order of 
                  Heb. 7. 17. 
                  Melchisedec, euen an high Priest which is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, Hebr. 4. 15. and therefore leauing the legall Priests, hee was desirous to bee with Iesus his Sauiour. Euery man goeth astray, but the good man is Bertrandu
                        •…
                      in loc. regredient, returning againe to Christ, which is the way. Being now come to Christ, hee performes his dutie to God, and man. To God, in praising him with a loud voyce, which argueth his Ludolph. deuotion, and in falling on his face at Christs feet, which argueth his Panigarol. humilitie. To man, for whereas Christ said vnto him, Are there not ten cleansed? but where are those nine? hee made no reply, but held his peace; Iansen. C
                        •…
                     ster. Pon
                        •…
                     an. signifying hereby that hee came backe againe to remember his owne thankes, and not to tell tales of others ingratitude. These good things arising from a liuely faith, are well▪pleasing to God: and therefore Christ dismissed him accordingly, Goe thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole.
               
               Let vs imitate the Samaritane in his Melancthon. perseuerance, being neuer 
                  Galat. 6. 9. 
                  wearie of well doing. The which one poynt (as Ser. de orat. Dom. 
                  Cyprian and De b
                        •…
                     no perseu
                        •…
                     rantiae, cap. 2. 
                  Augustine haue noted) is almost all the contents of our Lords prayer. For in saying, hallowed be thy
                  
                  name, thy kingdome come, thy will be done, &c. what doe we desire, but that Gods name may bee sanctified of vs alwaies, his kingdome propagated alwaies, his will fulfilled alwaies. If at any time we fall into sinne, we must returne againe by faith and repentance to Christ, humbling our selues at his feet, and seruing him in holinesse and righteousnesse all the daies of our life.
               The Gospell and Epistle parallel, for sinne is a spirituall
                     u 
                     See postil. cum gl
                           •…
                        ssis: & 
                           •…
                        erus ser. 5. Dom. 15. post Pen
                           •…
                        ecost.
                   leprosie, the spots whereof are adulterie, fornication, vncleannesse, Idolatrie, &c. Christ is the Physitian of our soule, who came into the world to saue sinners, 1. Tim. 1. 15. I, euen I (saith the Lord) am he that putteth away thine iniquities, Esa. 42. 25. The Preachers of his word are his mouth, as it were, to Zepper. con. 1. in loc. pronounce, that all such as truly repent and vnfainedly beleeue his holy Gospell, are cured of their leprosie: but himselfe alone 1. Iohn 1. 7. 
                  cleanseth vs from all sinne. Giuing vs his sanctified spirit also whereby we put off the old man, and walke in newnesse of life. For as leprous 2. King 5. 14. 
                  Naaman after he washed in Iorden, had new cleane flesh in stead of his old rotten flesh; euen so such as are Christs, and are led of his spirit, in the places of their ancient vices hatred, variance, sedition, enuying, murther, &c. haue contrarie vertues, as loue, ioy, peace, long suffering, gentlenesse, &c. If Iob blessed God for a wound giuen; what thankes owe wee to God for our wounds healed, and our sinne forgiuen? August. medit. cap. 7. 
                  O ineffabilis mysterij dispositio, peccat iniquus & punitur iustus, delinquit reus, & vapulat innocens, offendit impius & damnatur pius, quod meretur malus patitur bonus, quod committit homo sustinet Deus.
               
               
                  Pro seruis Dominus moritur, pro sontibus insons. Proaegrotomedicus, pro grege pastor obit.
                  Pro populo rex mactatur, pro milite ductor; Pro opere ipse opifex, pro homine ipse Deus.
                  Quid seruus, sons, aegrotus, quid grex populùs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , Quid miles, quid opus, quid homo soluet? amet.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  GALAT. 6. 11.
                  Yee see how large a letter I haue written vnto you with mine owne hand, &c.
                  
               
               THis epistle to the Galathians hath three principall parts: a
               
                  Preface; setting downe the

                        
                           Saluters: Paul and the brethren, &c.
                        
                           Saluted: The Churches of Galatia.
                        
                           Salutation: Grace be with you, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  Treatise: concerning

                        Doctrines of holy faith: from vers. 6. of the first chapter, vnto vers. 13. of the fifth chapter.
                        Rules of good life: from ver. 13. of the fifth chapter, vnto vers. 11. of the sixt.
                     
                  
                  Conclusion: in the textread, wherein three poynts are to bee considered: a

                        
                           Insinuation: You see how large a letter I haue written, &c.
                        
                        
                           Recapitulation: As many as desire, &c.
                        
                        
                           Validiction: The grace of our Lord, &c.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Yee see how large] Saint Paul insinuates himselfe into the mindes of the Galathians by a twofold argument. First, from the largenesse of his Epistle. Secondly, for that

he wrot it with his owne hand. Interpreters haue construed the word large diuersly; Apud Hier
                        •…
                     n. exposit. prior. in loc. some referring it to the greatnesse of the character. Hyperius to the depth of his matter. In Psal. 118. 
                  Hilarie to the loftinesse of his stile. In loc. Idem. O
                        •…
                     cumen. 
                  Theophylact to the badnesse of his hand. Bene. formatis literis 
                  Anselmus on the contrary to the fairenesse of his writing. But the word signifieth Erasmus, An. in loc. quantity so well as quality: Hebrewes 7. 4. Iames. 3. 5. Whereupon Beza translates heere, videtis quàm longis literis: and Uatablus, Quanta vobis epistola scripserim. Our English Bibles accordingly so large, that is, as Erasmus in his paraphrase, so prolix. The plaine meaning then is, that he neuer wrot so Luther in loc. long an Epistle with his owne hand vnto any Church as vnto them. Hee writ indeed to Philemon with his Philemon. vers. 19. owne hand, but that Epistle was exceeding short in comparison of this: and hee writ larger Epistles vnto the Churches of Corinth and Rome; but by his Scribes, and not with his owne hand. Wherfore seeing this letter is the most long and large that euer himselfe penned, it ought to be more regarded and better accepted; Caluin. as his paines were greater in writing, our diligence should be greater in reading and obseruing the same.
               
                  With mine owne hand] Haimo saith it is the Doctours opinion that Paul wrot not all this Epistle with his owne hand, but onely from hence to the end; which assertion is contrary to the Text, and truth. It is euidently confuted in the Text, for that our Apostle speakes of the whole letter in the time past, I haue written. Or if of any part more then of another, it is of the former part rather then of the latter. Againe, the most ancient Doctours affirme that himselfe penned it from the very beginning to the end with his owne hand. Saint In loc. 
                  Ambrose saith, Ubi holographa manus est, &c: Where the whole writing is his owne hand there can be no falsehood. In loc. 
                  Primasius vseth the word pers
                        •…
                     ripsi. 
                  In loc. 
                  Theophylact brings in Paul speaking thus; I am enforced euen with mine owne hand to write this Epistle to you. 
                  In loc. 
                  O
                        •…
                     cumenius
                  
calles it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , In loc. 
                  Anselme, non notaris manu sed mea. This then is Theophylact. Anselm. Aretius. a testification of his exceeding great loue and care toward them, and it is a president for Pastors how they should bee diligent in their ministery both absent and present; if resident vpon their charge, they must bee faithfull in winning Gods people to the Gospell: if non-resident vpon lawfull occasions (as Paul heere) fearefull lest their mindes should be caried from the truth vnto contrary doctrine, that being absent in body, yet they may be 1. Cor. 5. 3. present in spirit, and present by letters, hauing a greater care of the flocke then of the fleece.
               
                  As many as desire with outward appearance] Heere begins the recapitulation, in which our Apostle like a good Orator artificially repeates all those things hee would haue especially remembred in the whole discourse; now the maine proposition of all this large letter vnto the Galathians is, Cap. 2. v. 16. 
                  that a man is not iustified by circumcision, or any workes of the Law: but by the faith of Iesus Christ. The which is all one with his assertion here, that Christ crucified is the sole meanes of our saluation, and onely ground of our spirituall reioycing. Neither Circumcision, nor vncircumcision auaileth any thing at all, but a creature renued, that is, endued with Cap. 5. 6. 
                  faith working through loue. Hee doth accuse therefore such as obtruded Cap. 1. 6. another Gospell, an opposite doctrine, but blesse Gods Israel, euen as many as walke according vnto this rule.
               
               The false teachers are described by See supplement of Mr. Perkins Co
                           •…
                        . Galat. in loc.
                   fiue properties, as first, They desire with outward appearance to please carnally. Secondly, they constraine men to the strict obseruing of their owne deuised religion. Thirdly, the marke they shoot at is to shun stormes and persecution for the Crosse of Christ. Fourthly, they compell men to keepe that law which they will not obserue themselues. Fifthly, they pretend Gods honour but intend only their owne vaine glory, that they might reioyce in your flesh. 
                  Aretius in loc. Other reduce

these fiue to foure: Flattery, Cowardise, Dissimulation, Boasting. Luther in loc. Other to three: first, shunning of the crosse: secondly, seeking of their owne glory: thirdly, teaching of that themselues vnderstand not. All happily may be referred vnto their hypocrisie; for notwithstanding their faire shewes and outward appearance they seeke not herein their brethrens good, and Gods glory; but their owne honour and ease, that they might haue Cum dignitate otium, a Lordly liuing and a lasie life. Sike Church-men are like the Church pinnacle pointing vpward, poysing downeward.
               In this description of false Doctours, if thy sight bee quicke, thou maiest apprehend the liuely picture both of a Schismaticke and hereticke, who though outwardly they seeme neuer so great, yet are they the least in the Church of God. According to that of Christ, Mat. 5. 19. 
                  Whosoeuer shall breake one of the least Commandements and teach men so, shall be called the least in the kingdome of heauen. As Contra. lib. Petil. lib. 2. cap. 61. 
                  Augustine paraphrastically, Qui soluerit & doeuerit, id est, docuerit verbis quod soluerit factis minimus erit.
               
               If any shall demand how the false brethren in vrging Circumcision had the world at will, and were made free from persecution? Hieron. Primalius, Aquin. in loc. Answer is made, that the Roman Emperours, Caius, Octauian, Tyberius, had giuen libertie to the Iewes to liue according to their owne law, without molestation or disturbance thorowout all the Roman Empire. So that if a Iew turned Christian, hee had the priuiledges of a Iew so long as hee kept the ceremoniall rites of Moses: whereas they who taught that ceremonies were abrogated, and that men were iustified onely by faith in Christ, wanted those priuiledges and so were persecuted of the Iewes, and of the Gentiles too, 1. Cor. 1. 23. 
                  Christ crucified being a stumbling blocke vnto the Iewes, and vnto the Grecians foolishnesse. Now the Ansel. in loc. pseudo-Apostle here, lest they should suffer affliction for the crosse of Christ, inuented a new gospell, and made an hotch-potch of religion. For as the Christians in the countries of Mat. Dressorus, vti Io. Pory descript. of Africa. pag. 400. 
                  Prester Iohn,
                  
and in Augustines age the Augustin. contra Cres. lib. 1. cap 31. 
                  Symmachiani receiued both Circumcision and Baptisme: so they conioyned in the matter of saluation Messias and Moses, iustification by faith, and iustification by workes, hereby seeking carnally to please both the Christian and the Iew: the Christian in preaching Christs crosse: the Iew by pressing circumcision of the Law. Desiring to serue two contrary masters at one time, God and Mammon, as it is in the Gospell appointed to bee read this day. The Papist then in being a 
                     
                        •…
                     . Latimer. 
                  mingle mangler, is branded with this infallible character of a corrupt teacher, and so is the mungrill in religion according fire and water, Antichristians and Christians in the chiefe Oracles and Articles of holy faith, and so are carnall Gospellers who desire to haue Christ, but they will none of his Crosse: They would bee with him vpon Mount Tabor, but not vpon Mount Caluarie.
               
               
                  God forbid that I should reioyce but in the Crosse of our Lord Iesus Christ] The sufferings of the faithfull for Christ, are tearmed often the sufferings of Christ: 2. Cor. 1. 5. as the sufferings of Christ abound in vs, &c. And Colossians 1. 24. I fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his bodies sake, which is the Church. And so Christ himselfe witnesseth in saying Act. 9. 4. 
                  Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou mee? Saul did no violence to Christ, it was all done to his Church: but he that toucheth it, toucheth the 
                  Zach. 2. 8. 
                  apple of his eye. There is a more liuely feeling in the head then in other members of the bodie; for the little toe being hurt, instantly the head sheweth it selfe by the countenance to grieue thereat: so Christ our head is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, euer suffering, while wee suffer which are his body. Luther. Ar
                        •…
                     tius. Some Diuines therefore by the Crosse of Christ, vnderstand Pauls affliction for preaching Christ crucified. As if hee should say, let other boast as they list in auoiding persecution for the Gospell, heerein I will reioyce, that I am esteemed Act. 5. 41. woorthy to suffer rebuke for the name of

Christ, 2. Cor. 12. 10. 
                  I take delight in reproches, in necessities, in tribulations, in anguish for Christs sake. But because the words (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) are both exceptiue, making the sense thus, I will glorie in nothing but in the crosse of Christ: and exclusiue, only in the crosse of Christ, and in nothing else: I subscribe to Tract, 43. in Ioan. 
                  Augustine, 
                  In loc. 
                  Chrysostome▪
                   
                  Com. posterior. in loc. 
                  Hierome, and See B. Bilson tract vpon this text in the beginning of his conclusion to the reader. other who construe this of Christs all-sufficient sacrifice for our sinnes on the crosse, whereby the world is crucified in vs, and wee to the world, Christ himselfe being our 
                  1. Cor. 3. 31. 
                  redemption, wisedome, righteousnesse: that, as it is Ieremy 9. 24. written, he that glorieth should glorie in the Lord, and make boast of him all the day long, as it is Psal. 35. 28.
               As this exposition is most agreeable to the letter, so most answerable to Pauls intent: as if hee should haue written thus, Although other make their reioycing in circumcision, I will reioyce in nothing else but in the crosse of Christ, which Theophylact. in loc. abrogates circumcision. And well might hee speake so, for that in Christ crucified are hid not onely the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. but of fulnesse and grace, Iohn 1. 16. and of euery spirituall blessing, Eph. 1. 3. In a word, all Aquin. in loc. things of which vsually men boast, are in Christs crosse. Doth any man glory in wisedome? 1. Cor. 2. 2. 
                  Paul desired to know nothing but Christ crucified, as being assured, that this knowledge is eternall life, Ioh. 17. 3. Doth any boast of riches and honour? by Christ all true beleeuers are made Kings and Priests, Apocal. 1. 6. Doth any reioyce in libertie? by Christ wee are deliuered from the bonds and hands of our enemies: Luke 1. 74. Doth any delight in the Princes fauour? behold the King of Kings Ephes. 1. 6. accepteth of vs in Christ. All men desire comfort and content, and therefore let vs (as Paul here) reioyce in Christ crucified, in whom only wee are Coloss. 2. 10. 
                  complet, and by whom also wee haue right to those things which eye hath not seene, eare hath not heard, neither can the heart of man conceiue.
               
                  Gods Israel walking according to this rule, though they
                  
                  beare the markes of affliction in their bodie: yet haue they peace of conscience in their soule. For being new creatures in Christ, the world cannot crucifie them any way more then they crucifie the world. As the world accounts them the 
                  1. Cor. 4. 13. 
                  filth and of-scouring of all things: euen so they repute all things of the world as 
                  Philip. 3. 8. 
                  dung, to win Christ, and to glorie in his crosse.
               
               
                  Brethren, the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with your spirit] In this adieu our Apostle concludes his epistle with a great Emphasis, euery word being a strong reason to confound his aduersaries, opposing first our Lord Iesus Christ the master of the house, to Moses who was but a Heb. 3. 5. seruant in the house. Secondly, the grace of Christ to the merit of inherent righteousnesse, Theophylact. Anselm. Caietan. infinuating that we are saued by grace, freeing vs from circumcision and other workes of the Law. Thirdly, the 
                  Primasius. 
                  spirit, which is the obiect of grace, to the flesh, in which the enemies of Christs crosse gloried so much. And lastly, noting in the word brethren, his lowly, but their lordly cariage toward the Churches of Galatia. The briefe of all is, Luther. I haue taught you Christ purely, deliuering vnto you wholsome doctrine touching faith and good manners, I haue entreated you, chidden you, threatned you, letting passe nothing which I thought profitable for you. I can say no more, but that I heartily pray, that our Lord Iesus Christ would blesse my labours, and gouerne you with his holy Spirit for euer. See the peace of God in the Liturgie.
               
            
            
               
               The Epistle,
               
                  MATTH. 6. 24.
                  No man can serue two masters.
               
               THis Gospell is Euthym. & R
                        •…
                     rt. in loc. Idem Iansen. con. cap. 42. parted into a
               
                  
                     Generall rule: No man can serue two masters.
                  
                     Particular instance: Yee cannot serue God and mammon. Wherevpon is inferred that wee may not bee carefull what wee shall eate or drinke, but that wee should rather seeke first the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse thereof, and then all these things shall be ministred vnto vs.
               
               
                  No man can serue two masters] There is no rule so generall but hath exceptions, and so this common prouerbe is confined within his lists and limits, as Interpreters obserue. For one man may serue two well agreeing masters inioyning the same thing, as the men of Tyrus 1 Kings 5. & 2. Chron. 2. hewing Cedar trees out of Lebanon for the Temple, serued both Hiram and Salomon. Againe, this axiome must bee construed Pontan. in loc. 
                  in sens
                        •…
                      composito, not diuiso: for otherwise wee may serue diuers masters at diuers times, as Luke 19. 
                  Zaccheus at the first serued the world, yet afterward hee followed Christ. The meaning of this adage then is, that no man at one time, can serue two masters inioyning Theophylact. Euthym. Anselm. contrarie duties. As for example, God and the flesh are two such masters, I see (saith Rom. 7. 23. 
                  Paul) another law in my members rebelling against the law of my minde: for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these two are contrary one to the other: Galat. 5. 17. Wee cannot serue these two, but we must loue the one and hate the other, or else leane to the one and despise the other: wee must bee seruants vnto God, and not vassals vnto lust.
               Concupiscence is like to a fire, and our bodie like to a seething pot. Now the pot is cooled foure waies especially:

first, by taking away some of the fuell vnder the pot: euen so the lesse wee drinke or eat, the lesser is the heate of our lust. It is fasting spettle that kils this serpent, Cassianus. Collat. 5. 
                  incrementum gastrimargiae initium luxuriae: howsoeuer 
                     See Th
                           •…
                        m. 22 quaest. 153. art. 4 & C
                           •…
                        tan. ibid.
                   
                  delectatio venereorum bee the end, yet gulling is the matter and beginning of incontinence. The Poets faigned venerem natam ex exectis Saturni virilibus, to 
                     •…
                  signifie that saturitie is the father of wantonnesse, and vncleannesseP Fulgent. Mytholog. lib. 2. 
                        •…
                     ab. de venere. the Greg. Moral. lib. 31. cap. 31. daughter of surfetting. Terent. in Eunucho. 
                  Sine Cerere & Baccho friget Uenus: Lady Uenus dwels at the signe of the Iuie bush; where there is cleannesse of teeth, vsually there is no filthinesse of bodie: but if wee stuffe our corps like cloake-bags, making our mouthes as tunnels, our throates as wine-pipes, our bellies as barrels; if we fill them full of strong drinke and new wine, there must follow some vent, according to that of Epist. Amando, tom. 3. fol. 135. 
                  Hierome: Uentrem distentum cibo & vini potionibus irrigatum voluptas genitalium sequitur, nam pro ordine membrorum ordo vitiorum.
               
               Secondly, the pot is cooled by stirring of it; so the furious heate of lust is much abated by the stirring of our bodies, and exercising of our mindes. Vnchast follie for the most part is begot of an idle braine, hatched in a lasie bodie.
               
                  Ouid. 
                  Quaeritur Aegistus qua re sit factus adulter? In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat.
               
               The Crab-fish when as the Oyster doth open, flings into her a little stone, so that she cannot shut her selfe againe, and so the Crab deuoureth the Oyster: Hierome. Our aduersarie the Diuell is like the Crab, and wee like the Oyster, if hee finde vs idle and gaping, he takes his opportunitie to confound vs. Otia puluinar Satanae, Cupid shootes in a slugge, and hits none but the sluggish. Albeit Rome was so well occupied as to make Idlenesse a diuine soueraigntie: yet there was neuer a Temple within the Citie dedicated quieti & otio, sed extra collinam portam illi ignauo numini templum dedicârunt. To

signifie this much (as our reuerend Dr. Humfred. in vita. Iu
                        •…
                     lli. pag. 47. 
                  Iewel obserues) that no man borne in Rome, or Gentleman well brought vp, should vouchsafe Idlenesse any honour. Bez
                        •…
                      in vita. Caluini. 
                  Caluin was wont to say, that a lasie life was of all other most tedious vnto him. And euery generous spirit resolues as Reusner. in symbolis. 
                  Maximinus: Quo maior sum, eo magis laboro, & quo magis laboro, eo maior sum. In holy Gen. 27. Bible we reade that Iacob vnder the name of Esau, which signifieth Ambros de Ca
                        •…
                      & Abel, lib. 1. cap. 4. working, obtained his fathers blessing, and that none shall receiue reward at the last day, but such as haue beene labourers in the Lords Vineyard: Matth. 20. 8.
               Thirdly, we may coole the Pot by casting cold water into it: in like manner abundance of teares is a good meanes to quench outragious flames of this vnruly fire. The Amalekites, as we finde in 1. Sam. 30. sacred History, burned Ziklag, and tooke their wiues and children prisoners: then Dauid and the people lift vp their voices, and wept vntill they could weepe no more. After that Dauid asked counsell of God, and followed after them, and smote them (as it is in the Text) euen from the twilight vnto the euening of the next morrow, so there escaped not a man of them saue foure hundred yoong men which rode vpon camels and fled. Lust is an Amalekite, it burnes our Ziklag, and sets on fire this little City, captiuating our senses, and making them prisoners vnto it: but if we with Dauid shall weepe, so that we can weepe no more; if wee cast cold water into the Pot, if our eyes be a fountaine of teares, if we lament day and night the slaine of the daughter: assuredly wee shall persue the brutish Amalekits, and ouercome our vntamed affections, wee shall smite them from the twilight of our youth, vntill the euening of our old age. Some yoong men may escape, that is, some vaine words and vncleane thoughts as yet may remaine in vs: but as for the old Amelekits, I meane grosse faults and foule transgressions, God will grant vs power and grace to kill all them, and so we shall recouer all that the Amelekits had taken, we shall rescue

our wiues and daughters, our affections most deare to vs heretofore captiuated vnto lust, shall now doe good seruice to God, acknowledging this infallible rule that no man can serue two masters. God and the lust of the flesh.
               Fourthly, the Pot is cooled by taking it altogether from the fire; so we may the sooner coole this hot lust which so boyleth in vs, if we shunne opportunities and occasions of sinne. Saint Paul willeth vs to resist and fight against other vices, 
                     Io sares. policrat. l. 8. c. 6. Idem Aqain. A
                           •…
                        selm. Caietan. in 1. Cor. 6. but as for fornication he saith, flee fornication, 1. Corinth. 6. 18. Cupid is a boy, therefore his shoot cannot be good; and blinde, therefore his aime must needes be bad: he can hit none but such as stand right afore him, and make themselues a Butt for his arrowes. It is a strange, yet a true rule:
               Tu fugiendo fuga, nam fuga sola fuga est.
               And as good Councell,
               Ne sedeas, sedeas: ne pereas, pereas.
               
                  Luther. tom. 4. in Gen. It was as great a myracle that Ioseph in his Mistrisse armes should not burne with lust, as it was for the three children to walke in the Firie-fornace without any scorching. Yong men of a little flame make a great fire; whereas the fault is not so much in our yeares as in our selues. For Daniel a yoong man reproued the lasciuious Elders; Ioseph a yoong man resisted the temptations of his owne Mistrisse; Iohn the blessed Euangelist a yoong man, Hieron. aduers. Iouin. l. 1. 
                  admodum adolescens & poene puer, and yet as the 
                     Iohn 19. 26. 20. 2. Scripture witnesseth, hee was the best beloued Disciciple. But yoong men in our time runne and ride to the Wood for fuell to make the fire greater, vsing strange cates and delicates, meates and medicines, rather poysons to encrease the flames of concupiscence, bragging of much villany done, yea boasting of more then was done. Such a Gallant See coufes. lib. 2. cap. 3. 
                  Augustine was in his vnruly youth, vntill almighty God effectually called him home by a voice from heauen, crying Confess. lib. 8. cap. 12. 
                  Tolle & lege, tolle & lege: Take the booke and read: and taking vp the

Bible, the first Text he lighted on was that of Paul, Rom. 13. 13. Walke honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkennesse, neither in chambering and wantonnesse: but put ye on the Lord Iesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh to fulfill the lust of it. After this Augustine was no more seruile to sinne, but a true seruant vnto Christ; he now well vnderstood my text that he could not serue two masters, God, and the lust of his flesh.
               I know S. Augustine had afterward his infirmities, as himselfe confesseth ingenuously: but he was not Ephe. 4. 19. giuen ouer vnto wantonnesse, to worke all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse. It is true, that concupiscence so long as wee are clothed and clogged with flesh, is not extinguished throughly. Iosua 15. 63 The children of Iuda could not cast out the Iebusites, but they dwelled at Hierusalem vntill this day: lust is a very Iebusite, it will dwell with vs so long as we dwell in houses of Clay. The best man liuing may confesse with Rom 7. 19. 
                  Paul, I do not the good things, which I would, but the euill which I would not, that doe I. Which I would not I doe, because, 1. Ioh. 3. 9. 
                  whosoeuer is borne of God sinneth not, absolutely with plenary consent: his will in sinning is not voluntas, but velleitas, as the 
                     Thom. part. 3. quaest. 21. ar
                           •…
                        . 4. Schoole distinguisheth. A mariner in a tempest doth cast his goods into the water; a true man assaulted on the high-way giues his purse to the theefe, yet not with full consent: euen so the children of God in the sinne of incontinence transgresse wittingly, yet with reluctation afore and repentance after: whereas other men in a reprobate sense, both approue their filthinesse afore, and boast of it after. Lucrecia the faire Lady of Rome was assaulted violently by Tarquinius: 
                  De ciuit. Dei, lib. cap. 19. 1. 
                  Augustine writing of this rape saith excellently, Duo fuerunt, & vnus adulterium admisit. There were two actors, but one adulterer, there was a coniunction of bodies, but a distraction of mindes. A regenerate mans cause is like to that of Lucrece, sinne is rather done de illo quàm ab illo.
               
               I speake not this to encourage any in their vncleannesse,

God forbid. Let euery man in the feare of God vse the meanes afore prescribed for the cooling of intemperate lust boyling in his flesh, and then if hee cannot expell, this Iebusite, if hee cannot cast out this diuellby fasting and prayer, if hee cannot extinguish this outragious fire with watry teares; let this be his comfort, that God requires onely that lust be not our Master, that it reigne not in our mortall bodies, Rom. 6. 12. The Theodoret apud Oecumen. Theophy
                        •…
                     act. & alij. Greeke Fathers obserue well vpon that place, that Paul said not, let not sinne tyrannize, but let not sinne raigne. Be not sins voluntarie soldiers, in Rom. 6. 13. 
                  giuing your members as weapons of vnrighteousnesse vnto sinne: but if ye be sinnes prest souldiers against your will, it is not you that offend, Rom. 7. 20 
                  but the sinne that dwelleth in you. Lust may command as a tyrant, and yet we may performe good seruice to God: but if wee submit our selues vnto it as our king, if wee suffer it to reigne, making our members seruants to vncleannesse and iniquity, then assuredly lust is our Lord and loue: for my Text must be true, No man can serue two masters.
               
               As God and the flesh, August. l. 2. de ser. Dom. in m
                        •…
                     nt. Idem Anse
                        •…
                     m. Vega. Culman. in loc. so God and the diuell are two contrary masters: for the one is truth it selfe, I am the way, and the truth, Ioh. 14. 6. the other is a liar, and the father thereof, Ioh. 8. 44. so that all such as speake the truth from their heart dwell in Gods tabernacle, Psal. 15. but such as delight in lying, are fit for the diuels seruice. Now there is 
                     Thom. 22. quaest. 110. art. 1. 
                  materiale mendacium and formale: the which distinction is more plainly deliuered by the grammarians, who make a difference betweene the reporting of an vntruth, and the forging of a lie. For, as Nigidius in Noct At. l. 11. cap. 11. 
                  A. Gellius, hee that doth lie deceiueth other; hee that reports an vntruth is deceiued himselfe: and as Sent. lib. 3. dist. 38. 
                  Lombard, a man may be true that relates a thing vntrue: for as Philosophers and Diuines haue determined mentiri est contra mentemire, 
                  August. encherid. ca. 22. to speake that with our mouth which wee thinke not in our minde. Enunciatio falsa cum 
                  August. contra mendat. ad Consen. cap. 12. 
                  intentione fallendi. The seruant of God often

vtters that which is false, and yet he is verax, for that hee thought it had beene true; and the diuels seruant sometime speakes the truth, and yet hee is mendax, for that hee thought it to bee false, as Augustine and Lombard haue well obserued.
               Thou maist easily discerne by this cognizance, to what master the seruant of seruants and his retinue belong, namely to Don Beel-zebub, the mint-master of equiuocation and forgerie. Not to meddle with their old Legend, and new Kalender of Saints, in which are more lies than leaues. To passe by their Pasquils and inuectiue libels, as their Per. Ric Verstegan. Antuerp 
                  Theatrum erudelitatum, the relations of Caietan annexed to Genebrards Chronologie, Stapletons tres Thomae, Mer. gallo bel. mundus furiosus, Gifforas Caluino-turcismus, together with the seditious pamphlets of Allen, Sanders, Campian, Bristo, Rob. Parsons; all which are not onely hyperbolici, but as 
                     Dr. Sutlif.
                   one wittily, hyperdiabolici. Not to mention here their vnsufferable correcting, yea corrupting of all authors, onely giue mee leaue to remember how the Iesuits impudently deliuered in pulpit and Viuarius epist. print that old Beza was dead, and that forsooth hee died a Romane Catholike. Marianus Scotus, lib. 3. Chron. adan. 854. Chron. ad anno 854. 
                  Sigesbertus gemblacensis, 
                  Supp
                        •…
                     tat ad anno 855. 
                  Martianus polonus, the penner of the Chronicle called Fasciculus temporum in fol. 66. Uolateran, Com. 
                  Col. 657. Lugdun. 
                  lib. 22. Iacobus Bergomensis de Claris mulieribus, cap. 143, En. 9. lib. 1. 
                  Sabellicus, Ioannes lucidus de emendatione temporum, lib. 8. Polychron. lib. 5. cap. 32. 
                  Ranulphus, 
                  Lib. de Claris. foens. 
                  Boccace, 
                  In vita Ioan. 8 
                  Platina, Nauclerus, and 
                     See Dr. Morton. apolog. cat. lib. 1. cap. 19. & Alex. Cooke: Po
                           •…
                        e Ioane, p. 3 other arrant Romanists affirme directly, that there was a Pope Ioane: who being an Nam papa pa ter patri
                        •…
                      peperit paruulum puerulum. harlot, well became the seate of the Babylonian whore. Yet Auentius annal. Boior. lib. 4. Onuphrius annot. in Platin. Genebrard. in Chron. adan. 854. Bellarm. de Rom pont. lib. 3. cap. 24. and all our moderne Iesuited Papists obstinately contradict this historie, seeking against their owne knowledge, to perswade the world, that it is a meere fable. By which it is apparant that they gaine more by this one illiterall

arte of lying, then they do by the seuen liberall Sciences.
               As God and the flesh, and God and the Diuell, so to giue Christs instance, God and the world are two Iam. 4. 4. contrarie masters. And therefore whereas Ardens in 
                        •…
                     oc. some desire to serue God onely, some the world onely, some both: in their deuotion as it were Psal. 207. 26. 
                  carried vp to the heauen, in their auarice downe againe to the deepe: our blessed Sauiour saith peremptorily, Ye cannot serue God and mammon. 
                  Chrysost. H
                        •…
                     ron. Aret. in loc. He doth not say, yee cannot haue God and mammon; for Mary and Martha may dwell together, righteousnesse and riches may stand together: but yee cannot serue God and mammon; for he that is the seruant of God must bee the master of his money.
               The children of Israel, as it is recorded Exod. 14. walked vpon dry ground through the red sea, because, saith the text, the waters were diuided: but the cruell Aegyptians pursuing after Gods people were drowned because the sea returned againe to his course. Anton. de Rampen. in fig. Eiblieu. 
                  Mystically, such as diuide their worldly substance, distributing to the poore, lending to the needie, passe through the maine streame of the worlds current safely, their riches and honour being vnto them as the waters vnto the children of Israel, a wall on the right hand, and a wall on the left: but hold-fast Aegyptians, auarous oppressors being more cunning in substraction then in diuision, are drowned in the puddle. When S. Peter casteth his net ouer them, alas they runne themselues so deepe into the mud, as that it cannot get vnder them to dragge them out.
               
                  Mammon is a Lord in opinion onely, Iuuenal. 
                  Nos facimus
                  
                     • 
                     Lib. 2. cap. 7. 
                  te fortunadeam, &c. and as Plinie speakes, Omnibus locis, omnibus horis, omnium vocibus fortuna solainvocatur, &c. Aret. in loc. But almightie God is by right and indeed a Lord of all things, of all men especially. For (as Tertul. cont. Hermogen. Idem Vega. in loc. Diuines obserue) God is not called Lord in the Scripture till he created man. In the beginning God created the heauen and the earth, and God said, Let there bee light, &c. Againe God
                  
                  said, Let there be a firmament, &c. but after man once was made, the Gen. 2. text often calleth him Lord: The Lord God made the man of the dust of the ground, and the Lord God planted a garden east-ward, and the Lord tooke the man and put him in the garden of Eden, commanding him, and saying, Thou shalt eat freely, &c. We must therefore serue none but this Ephes. 4. 5. 
                  one Lord, first seeking his kingdome, making him our master, & Mammon our seruant: for if we serue God most, and seek his kingdome first, 
                  August. de ser D
                        •…
                     m in monte lib. 2. Idem Euthym. Anselm. Marlorat. in loc. respecting his glory and honor afore all other things, aboue all other things: then all other things, as Christ promiseth here, which are necessarie for vs, shall bee ministred vnto vs. See Epist. 3. Sund▪ after Trinitie.
               Thus I haue shewed how no man can serue two masters, as two, but Caietan. in loc▪
                   as one. For Gloss. & Iansen. con. cap. 42. euery man is either a willing or vnwilling seruant: if willing, hee shall hate the one, and loue the other: if vnwilling, hee will 
                  Pati
                        •…
                     tur, 
                        〈◊〉
                      August. sustine. bit: vti vulgar. 
                  endure the one, and despise the other▪
                   And yet, as I said in the beginning, one man may serue diuers masters at diuers times, albeit they require diuers, yea contrarie seruice. Matthew sometimes an instrument of Satan, afterward Christs Apostle. Salomon sometime seruing God, sometime seruing his lusts. The blessed theefe seruant to the world in his life, was the child of God at his death. All sinne is Augustine. either a thought, a word, or a deed against the diuine law. Who did euer offend in thought more then Paul? 
                  Acts 9. 1. 
                  breathing out threatnings against the Disciples of the Lord. Who did euer offend in word more than Peter? 
                  Mat. 26 72. 74. forswearing his owne master. Who did euer offend more in deed than Dauid? who bound two great sinnes together, adulterie and murther: And yet the God of
                     i 2. Sam. 11. compassion and father of mercie retained all these sinners againe in his seruice. The which examples are recorded in holy Bible, partly for instruction of such as stand, and partly for the consolation of such as haue fallen. Ambrose de Abraham, lib. 1 cap. 6. 
                  Instruunt patriarchae non solum docentes sed etiam errantes. If N
                        •…
                     e was drowned himselfe with wine, who

foretold the drowning of the world with water; if Sampson the strongest was ouercome by the weaker vessell; if Salomon the most wise committed folly, 1. Cor. 10. 12. 
                  let him that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall. Againe, these things are registred in Scripture for the comfort of such as haue fallen already. Did God forgiue Lots incest, Pauls butchering of the Saints, Aarons idolatrie? then a weake conscience from these premises, & vpon Gods gratious promises may conclude, my sinnes are no greater, and Gods mercy can be no lesse.
               When Theodosius excused a foule fact, because Dauid hath done the like: Saint Ambrose made this answere: Qui secutus es errantem, sequere poenitentem. Hath thy mouth blasphemed with Peter? let thine eyes then weepe with Peter. 
                  Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 21. cap. 24. Either thou must be a Sodomite, or a Nineuite; a Sodomite suffering for sinne, or a Nineuite repenting for sinne. Yet fortie daies and Nineue shall bee destroyed, Ionas 3. 4. Nineue was ouerthrowen, and yet not ouerthrowen, as Saint Epist▪ ad Damasum. tom. 2. fol. 132. 
                  Hierome sweetly, Quae peccatis perit, fletibus stetit. It was ouerthrowen by sinne, but builded vp againe by repentance. Euersa est Niniue quae mala erat, & aedificata bo
                        •…
                     a quae non erat, saith Vbi sup. 
                  Augustine. Let vs not looke to Sodome, but set our eyes on Niniue; for if wee will resist our spirituall enemie, wee must arme our selues with sackcloth, and put on headpeeces of ashes: if wee meane to serue but one master onely, let vs, renouncing all other seruices, instantly with all haste and with all our heart turne to the Lord our God. 1. Pet. 4. 3. 
                  It is sufficient that we haue spent the time past after the lust of the Gentiles, in wantonnesse, gluttonie, drunkennesse, &c. let vs now spend as much time as remaineth in the flesh, after the will of God. It is a monstrous absurditie, that seruing but two masters all our life, wee should sacrifice the best of our daies vnto the worst, and then offer vp the worst of our daies vnto the best. Againe, let vs, I beseech you, repent with all our heart throughly, Lament. 2. 19. 
                  powre out thy soule like water before the face of the Lord▪
                  
                  
If thou powre out milke, the colour remaineth in the panne: if Wine, the sent remaineth in the vessell: if Honey, some taste remaineth in the Pot. He therefore that will not Saluian. lib. 5. de gubernat. De
                        •…
                     . 
                  ipsius poenitentiae poenitere, 
                  Ronauent. Diaet. cap. 11. must not powre out his heart like milke, lest he be knowne still by his colour: nor like wine, lest he smell of wicked imaginations: nor like honey, lest he keepe a smacke of his old trickes: but like cleane water, that no taste, or smell, or colour may remaine. If Mammon be thy master, obserue him; if God be thy Lord, follow him: 1. Kin. 18. 21 halt not betweene two opinions, sit not vpon two stooles, lie not downe betweene 
                     Gen. 
                     
                        •…
                     9. 14. two burthens, serue not two masters, either you must hate the one, and loue the other, or else leane to the one, and despise the other.
               
               Preached at Pauls Crosse, Febr. 8. ann. 1600. the very same houre that Robert Earle of Essex entring the City with his vnfortunate troupe, found by wofull experience the words of my Text to be true, that no man can serue two masters.
               
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  EPHES. 3. 13.
                  I desire that yee faint not, because of my tribulations, &c.
                  
               
               THis Epistle containeth a double request of Paul:
               
               
                  
                     One to men: I desire that yee faint not, because of my tribulations. And that
                  
                  Inrespect of the

                        
                           Cause: for that I suffer for your sakes.
                        
                           Consequent: for that it is your praise.
                     
                  
                  
                     Another to God: For this cause, &c. consisting of A
                     
                        
                           Petition: I bow my knees vnto the Father, &c.
                        
                        
                           Thanksgiuing: Vnto him that is able, &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  I desire] The Vide Zanchium in 
                        •…
                     oc. Syriac hath it thus: I desire that my spirit faint not in my tribulations. And the bare words of the Greeke in Exposit. prior. in loc. 
                  Hieromes opinion, affoord the same sense. But if we shall examine the precedent part of this Chapter, I Paulam the prisoner of Iesus Christ for you Gentiles, &c. and the subsequent, I bow my knees vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, &c. That yee may be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man; it will appeare most euidently, that this Text ought to be construed as our English translation heere readeth, I desire you that ye faint not; it being one, yea the onely Aretius in loc. Idem Aquin. & Marlorat. argument. hu
                        •…
                     us. epist. maine point of all this Epistle, which is nothing else but an exhortation vnto perseuerance.
               
                  That I suffer for your sakes] An argument from the causes of his affliction: as if hee should say, Yee men and brethren of Ephesus are Zanchius. both efficient and finall
                  
cause that I suffer, and therefore no reason that ye should faint because of my tribulations. Efficient, being a prisoner in Rome for the Caietan. Gospell, euen for that doctrine which I taught you. Finall, enduring this imprisonment for your Aquin. Kilius. good, and Anselm. Sarcerius. example, that yee likewise may continue constant in the sincere profession of Christianity. Paul then suffered not for his owne fault, nor yet for their faction: it was onely for defending the truth, euen for preaching 1 Cor. 1. 23. 
                  Christ crucified, vnto the Iewes a stumbling blocke, and vnto the Grecians foolishnesse. And therefore such as subscribe to the Confession of our Church, acknowledging all our articles of religion orthodoxall and pure; cannot in suffering a little crosse for certaine questions about matters of indifferency, gaine to themselues or their followers any true glory. For they know that Master Fox in the martyrdome of Bishop Ridley and Latymer.
                   B. Ridley went to the stake cheerefully, wearing a Tippet of Veluet, and a corner cap: and yet as that good old man Father Latymer prophecied, at his burning there was such a candle lighted in England, as shall neuer be put out. Iohn Philpot was an Archdeacon, and Doctor Master Fox in the Martyrdome of Doctor Rowland Taylor of Hadley. 
                  Rowland Taylor vsed the Seruice booke to his comfort all the time of his imprisonment, and commended it at his death as the last token of his loue to his deare wife: Yet these men (let enuy be iudge) were the Diamonds of the Churches ring in that age. Whereas if the daily martyred B. Farrar, or that vigilant Pastor B. Hooper had sacrificed their liues in the quarrell against Clericall habits, and other comely Ceremonies, inioyned by their religious Soueraigne King Edward the sixt: Iudicious Fox would neuer haue numbred them among the glorious Martyrs of Christ. I say then vnto such as boast of their persecution in this kind, not for the body, but only for the swadling cloutes of holy religion: as 1. Cor. 5 6. 
                  Paul once to the Corinthians in another case, your reioycing is not good. See Epist. 2. Sund: after Easter.
               
                  Which is your praise] This clause may be referred (as Caietan. Zanchius. Interpretors obserue) both to Pauls affliction, and their

perseuerance. To Pauls affliction, it is your glory that ye haue such a Pastor as is the 
                  Ephes. 3. 1. 
                  prisoner of Iesus Christ, in bonds not for any scandalous crime, but for 1. Pet. 2. 19. conscience toward God, euen for preaching among the Gentiles the vnsearchable riches of Christ, as it is vers. 8. of this present Chapter. If yee rightly consider my tribulation, it is to make you Sarcerius. glorious, and it cannot dismay Aretius. but rather encourage you, knowing that God will Primasius. reward our light affliction which is but for a moment, with a farre most excellent and eternall weight of glory: 2. Cor. 4. 17. And if my trouble for the truth occasion vnto you such praise; Theophylact. how much more glory shall your owne constancy procure before God and men, If yee faint not vnder the Crosse, but continue faithfull vnto the end. The church is like Abrahams Ramme tied in a bush of thornes, Gen. 22. 13. Tribulation for the Gospell are the 
                  Galat. 6. 17. 
                  markes of the Lord Iesus, in which 2. Cor. 12. 10 our Apostle tooke great pleasure, being more proud of his iron fetters, then a bragging Courtier of his golden chaine. If they bee blessed who die in the Lord, how blessed are they who die for the Lord? Their deathes are not mortes, but 
                     Clerus Rom. apud Cyp. epist. 2
                        •…
                     . 
                  immortalitates, as Ammian. Mar
                        •…
                     el. hist. lib 20. 
                  Iulian honoured all those who were slaine in his warre: so Christ and his Church honour such as are martyred in the Lords battell, Celebri potius laude quàm luctu: right deare in the sight of the Lord is the Psal. 116. 13. death of his Saints, vndergoing in Christs cause Christs Crosse.
               
                  For this cause I bow my knees vnto the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ] As if hee should say, Anselm. Sarcer. Because you cannot doe this of your selues, I pray for it, and that not coldly but Theophylact. earnestly, bowing my knees of the body with Acts 7. 60. 
                  Stephen, and of the heart with In his praier 
                  Manasses, not vnto any Saints in heauen, much lesse to their senselesse Images on earth, Psal. 115. 5. 
                  hauing mouthes and speake not, eies and see not, eares and heare not: but vnto him onely that is able to doe exceeding abundantly aboue all that wee can aske or thinke, to the Father of 2. Cor. 1. 3. mercies, and God of 1. Pet. 5 10. all grace, from

whom commeth Iam. 1. 17. euery good and perfit gift. Royard. in l
                        •…
                     c. 
                  Infirmitatis nostrae est deficere, sed Deireficere: To God then I bow my knees, and yet not to God simply, Zanchius. but to God, as the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, 
                  Matth. 3. 17. in whom he is well pleased. To him I make my request, able, because God, willing, because the Father of Christ, to heare mee and helpe you.
               
                  Which is father of all that is called father in heauen and in earth] According to the present text of our Communion booke, the meaning of Paul is, that God is the Father of all fathers in earth. As of the Prince which is our ciuill Father, because Prou. 8. 15. 
                  by him Kings reigne: of the Pastor which is our Ecclesiasticall 1. Cor. 4. 15. Father, because Preachers and Teachers are his Ephes. 4. 11. ordinance: of the Parent which is our naturall Father, because Psal. 127. 4. children are the gift of the Lord. And father of all our Zanchius. fathers and progenitours in heauen, Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, &c. and father of the glorious Angels also, which are fathers, as is Sedulius. Aquin. supposed one to another, and all of them vnto Anselm. Royard. v
                     •…
                   in respect of ther tuition and illumination, as being the ministers of God for our bodily Psal. 91. 11. preseruation and spirituall Galat. 3. 19. erudition. And so God being 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , may be termed, and that not vnfitly, the father of all that is called father in heauen and in earth, Theophylact. Primasius. Sarcerius. 
                  hac ratione est omnium pater, & ab eo patres caeteri nominantur. Our translation here then is not so senselesse, as Defens. for not sub scrib. part. 1 cap. 18. they who did except against it.
               Our latter English Bibles I confesse read better, of whom is named the whole familie that is in heauen and in earth. And of whom (as Marlorat. Zanchius. Interpreters obserue) may bee referred vnto God the Father, and vnto Christ his Sonne. To the Father, Beza. who did adopt the whole familie, that is, all the Church in Christ. To Christ Iesus our Lord: 
                  Caluin. for the Catholike Church as well triumphant in heauen, as militant on earth, consisting of all nations, peoples, tribes, hath her name from him. Caietan. As all of Caesars family were called Caesarians, and all of the tribe of Israel, Israelites: euen so such as are of Gods house professing Christ, are

named Christians. In Christ all men and Angels are contributes of one kindred, Galat. 3. 28. 
                  there is neither Iew nor Grecian, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for yee are all one in Christ Iesus. 
                  Aretius. Heere then is an other argument enforcing our Apostles exhortation. If all of vs haue receiued this honorable stile to be called Christians of Christ, in that wee professe Christianitie; let vs not be faint but feruent, not wauering but constantin our faith vnto the end, and in the end. For if wee professe Christ in words, and Tit. 1. 16. denie him in our workes, assuredly we shall haue nothing but a name, nomeninane crimen immane: but if any turne Turke or Iew, 
                  1 Cor. 12. 3. defying Iesus, hee shall not haue so much as a name.
               
                  That he would grant you according to the riches of his glorie] The Theophylact. Occumen. Greeke fathers conioyne this and the subsequent verse, making both one request: I desire the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glorie, that yee may be so strenghned with might by his spirit in the inner man, as that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. 
                  Zanchius. Other haue distinguished these petitions, in the first whereof obserue these fiue circumstances especially:
               
                  1. Who doth giue? The father of our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  2. What? That yee may be strengthned with might.
                  3. Out of what coffer? Out of the riches of his glory.
                  4. By what instrument? By his spirit.
                  5. In what part? In the inner man.
               
               The word grant or giue doth exclude Marlorat. humane merit, and shew that our perseuerance proceeds onely from the riches of Gods glorie, which our Apostle calleth in the second chapter of this Epistle, verse 7, exceeding riches of his grace. But hee termeth it heere glorie 
                  Sarcerius. Aretius. because the constant resolution of the faithfull is Gods glorie, for as much as his power is made perfect through their weaknesse, 2. Cor. 12. 9. Or it may be Royard. in loc. thus expounded according to the precise letter; It is not for a great man of an

opulent fortune to giue sparingly, wherefore God out of the riches of his glory giueth vnto all men Iam. 1. 5. liberally, Rom 8. 32. for if he spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all to death, how shall he not with him giue vs all things also? The King of glory cannot Bez a maior annot. inloc. 
                  ex opulentia gloriosa giue but exceeding abundantly, aboue all that we aske or thinke. Pauls addition is very remarkable, the riches of his glory: For as hee sheweth else where, the goodnesse of God toward vs, it is not a bare, but a Ephes. 2. 4. 
                  rich mercy: not a little, but a Ibid. 
                  great loue: not a naked or a single, but a 2. Cor. 12 9. 
                  sufficient, yea Rom. 5 20. 
                  superabundant grace. So long then as God is rich in mercy, saith Serm. 61. in Cant. 
                  Bernard, I cannot bee poore in merit.
               
                  That ye may be strengthened] Caluin. Marlorat. Heere wee may learne that the Church of God militant on earth is not in her full strength, it is alway growing and 1. Thess. 4. 1. increasing more and more, wee may profit▪ but wee cannot be perfect till this corruption hath put on incorruption, the most resolute Souldier in the spirituall warre hath euery day neede to be strengthened, and that with might; because wee fight not against weaklings but against powers and spirituall potentates in high places, Ephes. 6. 12. Our aduersaries are so mighty that wee cannot ouercome them, except the spirit of God which is Esay 11. 2. 
                  the spirit of fortitude, strengthen vs in the inner man, that is, in the 
                     Anselm. Caluin. 
                     
                        •…
                      
                     Zanchius.
                   soule, 2. Cor. 4. 16. that albeit our body which is our outward man, perish: yet our spirit which is the inward man may be renewed daily. He doth not pray for the wealth of the world, or health of the body which affoord comfort outwardly: Caietan. but hee desireth vpon his bowed knees the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that his Ephesians may haue sound inner parts, as it is in the Psalm. 45. 14 Psalme, all glorious within, it is then an idle conceite to thinke that a Pastor benefits his people more by a little skill in Physicke and Law, then by a great deale of Diuinity: for hauing charge of their soules, and not of their bodies or goods, he must especially labour that the inner man may bee strengthened

with might against our adersarie the Diuell.
               
                  That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, that yee being rooted and grounded in loue] These three Metaphors of our Apostle dwell, rooted, grounded: are most emphaticall, and pertinent to his purpose; the faithfull are Gods house, Christ therefore doth not onely Apocalip. 3. 20. sup with
                     b 
                     Heb. 3. 6. them as a gest: but Iohn 14. 23. dwell with them as head of the familie, Beza maior annot. in loc. & in Matth. 2. 23. not onely 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Caietan. 
                  non hospitarimodò sed habitare.
               
               An Matth. 7. 24. house surely founded is able to withstand the windes blowing, and waues bellowing. A Tree deeply rooted is not ouerthrowne with a tempest: euen so, such as are grounded in faith, and rooted in loue, continue steadfast in their profession in the middest of all afflictions and persecutions for the word; but such as haue Matth. 13 21 no root, beleeue but for a season, and so Christ is in their hearts onely for a season. If for the Gospell any stormes arise, they be suddenly cast downe, yea carried away, with euery blast of contrary doctrine. The Gal. 3. 3. Galathians had begun in the spirit, and yet afterward they were betwitched and Gal. 1. 6. remooued away to another Gospell. In Deering. lect 4. Hebr. 
                  Salomon the spirit was quenched, and iniquity for a time got the vpper hand: and Bishop Serm▪ 7. before King Ed. 
                  Latymer is bold to tearme such new spirits, who say that we cannot loose the spirit: and therefore let vs vpon bowed knees humbly beseech almighty God, out of the riches of his mercy, so strengthen our inner man by his spirit. Christ dwelleth in our heart by faith, Bernard. ser. 2. de resur. dom. as long then as faith is aliue, Christ Gal. 2. 20. liueth in vs, and we in him: if our faith once be dead, then Christ which is our Collos. 3. 4. life departs out of our heart. Now faith without good workes is Iam. 2. 17. dead, it must therefore Gal. 5. 6. worke thorough loue, wee must bee grounded and rooted in charity.
               
                  Might be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, lenth, depth, and height] Apud primas & Hieron. 
                        •…
                     x posit. post. in Some by bredth, vnderstand the broad way, Matth. 7. 13. by length, eternall life: by depth hell: and by height heauen: as if he should

haue said, if yee bee grounded in faith, and rooted in charitie, then yee may soone know which of these to loue or leaue. But it is better expounded Zanchius. either of our loue toward other, or of Gods loue in Christ towards vs. Of our loue, Aquin. Royard. which hath a breadth, in louing all men, euen our enemies. A length, in that loue neuer falls away, 1. Cor. 13. 8. An height, in louing our superiours. A depth, in louing our inferiours: or an height in louing God aboue all, and a depth in reuerencing the deepnesle of his riches, Rom. 11. 33. The loue of God toward vs Caietan. Aquin. hath a length, in respect of his eternitie, Psalm. 102. 12. A breadth, in respect of his infinite goodnesse shewed vpon all his workes, Ecclesiasticus 1. 10. An height, in respect of his excellent nature, being high aboue all people, Psalm. 99. 2. A depth, in respect of his vnsearchable wisedome which is a profound deepenesse, Ecclesiastes 7. 26. herein alluding as it may seeme to that of Iob. 11. 7. 8. 
                  Iob. Canst thou by searching finde out God? Canst thou finde out the Almightie to his perfection? The heauens are high, what canst thou doe? It is deeper then hell: how canst thou knowe it? Or as Photius apud Oecum. & Hieron rom. prior in loc. other, Christs loue toward vs hath a length, in that his mercie doth endure for euer and euer, euen from euerlasting predestination, vntill euerlasting glorification. A breadth, in that hee would 1. Tim. 24. all men should bee saued. Iewes, Gentiles, Grecians, Barbarians, afore the law, vnder the law, after the law, from the beginning vnto the worlds end. A depth, in that he descended into hell, openly triumphing ouer Satan in his owne kingdome. An height, in that he did ascend Ephes. 4. 10. farre aboue all heauens, and there sitteth at the right hand of God as our Mediator and Aduocate. Anselm. Aquin. Other haue discoursed of the foure woods, and dimensions in the materiall Crosse of Christ more subtilely then soundly. For the plaine meaning of these words is, that our redemption is a 1. Tim. 2. 16. 
                  great mysterie. To know Christ crucified is Marlorat. the bredth, length, height, depth of all our knowledge, in comparison whereof all other things are to bee reputed as Philip. 3. 8. dung

and drosse. Some trouble themselues and other about round and square, long and short, blacke and white, spending the strength of their wits in examining the lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnesse of certaine ceremonies vsed in the Church of England: whereas if they were grounded in faith and rooted in loue, they would endeuour rather to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, length, depth, heighth of Christs loue toward vs, and in fine to bee fulfilled with all fulnesse which commeth of God.
               
                  Aretius. Some thinke that the Church is this fulnesse, encreasing daily till the number of Gods elect is accomplished. Apud Theophilact. in loc. Other, construe this of the blessed Trinitie: but because Coloss. 2. 9. 10. 
                  the fulnesse of the Godhead dwels in Christ, and the Saints are complete in him: I take the clause (that ye may be fulfilled with all fulnesse of God) to bee nothing else but an Caluin. explanation of the former words, as if he should say, this I meane by breadth, length, depth and heighth; that he which hath Christ, hath all things absolutely complete to perfection: I pray therefore Anselm. not that ye may bee fully God, but that ye may be full of God, full of his Eng. Gloss. Hieron. Sarcer.
                   grace with all the liuing Saints in Aquin. this world, and full of his glory with all the Saints departed in the world to come, that ye may so faithfully serue God heere, as that ye may fully see God hereafter, euen face to face.
               
                  Unto him that is able] In this thanksgiuing of our Apostle three points are considerable, namely,
               The
               
                  
                     Aretius. Motiue: Gods abundant liberalitie, being able and willing to giue moe things, and more plentifully then either we doe aske or thinke.
                  
                  
                     Aquin. Matter: Be praise, or glory: mans bodie within the elements is closed, the blood within the bodie, the spirits within the blood, the soule with in the spirits, the mind within the soule, & God resteth in the mind: so that this world was made for man, man for the soule, soule for the mind, & the mind for God: that as of him & through

him and for him are all things: euen so to him might be praise for euermore.
                  Manner in respect of

                        Place: In the congregation,
                           Sarcerius. as being Gods Tabernacle dedicated to prayer and praise, Zanchius. knowing and participating Gods vnsearchable riches in Christ. Other assemblies haue their beginning and end, but the Church is the1. Tim. 3. 15. pillar of truth, against whichMatth. 16. 18 hell gates are not able to preuaile. Theophylact. The Church then enduring for euer and euer, onely can and will honour God euer and euer.
                        Person: by whom our thankes are conueyed vnto God, by Iesus Christ, as being the Mediator between God and man, by whom alone the graces of God descend downe to vs, and our prayers ascend vp vnto God.
                        Time: Throughout all generations, &c.
                     
                  
               
               For as the mercies of God toward vs are for euer and euer: in like manner our praises to him ought to be for euer and euer: Primasius. 
                  Immensa beneficia laudibus immensis celebranda, see the conclusion of the Pater Noster in the Liturgie.
               
            
            
               
               The Gospell.
               
                  LVKE 7. 11.
                  And it fortuned that Iesus went into a Citie called Naim, &c.
                  
               
               THis Gospell is an Emblem of the
               
                  
                     Heming. Miseries of man: In this afflicted woman accompanying hir child, and that a son, and that hir only son to his graue, dying in
                  The

                        Spring of his youth, euen at that age when hee was most able to comfort hir.
                        Winter of hir widowhood, when she did most want him.
                     
                  
                  
                     Melanct. Culman. Mercies of God: In Christ who did pitie the distressed
                  In

                        
                           Iansen. Concor. cap. 46. In

                              
                                 Thought, 
                                 
                                    〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                                 , He had compassion on hir.
                              
                                 Word, Weepe not.
                              
                                 Deed, He raised the dead, and deliuered him to his mother.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               The
                     See Ferus ser. 3. in Euangel. Dom. 17. past. Pent.
                   mourning troupe in Naim is a liuely representation of our estate by nature; subiect to sicknesse, infirmity, death, damnation, horror, hell: our whole life being as it were nothing else but widow weeping, and a sonne dying. 
                  Iob 3. 3. One doth crie, Let the day perish wherein I was borne, and the night when it was said, there is a man child conceiued; why died I not in the birth? and why did I sucke the breasts? for so should I now haue lien and beene quiet, I should haue slept then and beene at rest. 
                  Psal. 110. 4. Another doth crie, Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell with Mes
                        •…
                     ch, and to haue mine habitation among the tents of Kedar. 
                  Rom. 7. 24. A third crieth, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer mee from the body of this death. All, as it were with one voice crie,Iob. 14. 1. 
                  Man that is borne of a woman is of short continua
                        •…
                      and full of trouble. But Christ and his followers on the contrary resemble

our estate by grace, wherein is ioy, peace, life, health, happinesse, heauen. In this troupe1. Cor. 15. 55. one saith, O death where is thy sting? O graue where is thy victorie? the sting of death is siane, and the strength of sinne is the Law, but thanks be vnto God which hath giuen vs victorie through our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  1. Pet. 1. 
                        •…
                     . Another doth say, Blessed be God, euen the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercie hath begotten vs againe to a liuely hope by the resurrection of Iesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance immort all and vndefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserued in heauen. A1. Iohn 3. 14. third doth say, Wee know that we are translated from death vnto life. All sing and say with Zacharie, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his people.
               
               
                  Behold there was a dead man carried out] The wordVega in loc. 
                  behold in the Scriptures is like an hand in the margent of a booke, pointing out alway some remarkeable thing, and it is heere like that handDan. 5. 
                  Balthasar saw writing vpon the walles of his Palace, for as that forewarned him of his vtter ruine; so this admonisheth vs of our last end: Behold a dead man caried out. This dead man was a yong man, as it is expressed in the text, I say to thee yong man arise, and a rich or honorable man asMaldonat. Coster. some gather out of the text, in that much people were with his mother. And it is worth our obseruing, that Christ in the Gospell is said to raise none from the dead, but only such as were rich and yong, as the daughter ofLuke 8. 41. 
                  Iairus a Ruler of the Synagogue, being about twelue yeeres of age:Iohn 11. 
                  Lazarus a man honored in his nation, and asHaeres. 66. cap. Cat. Manichaei Dogmat. 
                  Epiphanius reports about the yeeres of 30. and in my text, a yong sonne of a widow well affected in the place where she dwelt. Hereby teaching vs, that such often die who least expect death, and are most embraced of the world. Poore men and old men haue their pasport, as they begin to leaue the world, so the world is content to part with them. At their carrying out to bee buried vsually there is lesse weeping, because their friends are comforted, in that departing in peace

they be now deliuered from the burden of the flesh, and infinite miserie▪ of this life. But death is the 
                  Iosua 22. 14. 
                  way of all flesh, and Esay 40. 6. all flesh is grasse, and all the grace thereof as the flower of the field. Per natiuitatem viret in carne, 
                  Greg. in Psal. 5. poenitent. 
                  per iuuentutem candescit in flore, per mortem aret in puluere. By birth a man is greene in his flesh, by youth he is white in his blossome, by death hee is withered in the dust. For death as a fisherman encloseth all kinde of fish in his net, great, small, good, bad, old, young: which the Poets insinuate in the fable of Death and Cupid, who lodging at a time both in one Inne, interchanged each others arrowes: and so from that day to this, it comes to passe that sometimes olde men doate, and young men dye:
               
                  Ioachim Belleiu
                        •…
                     
                   
                  Sic moritur Iuuenis, sic moribundus amat.
               
               
                  Which was the onely sonne of his mother, and she was a widow] Children are walking Images of their parents, euen flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone, the wealth of the poore man, and honour of the rich. It was then one step vnto weeping Crosse, that this woman had lost a childe, for nature by grace is not abolished but perfected, not murthered but manured, her impressions are not quite razed, but suted to the colours of faith and vertue. Dauid a man according to Gods owne heart did weepe for his 2. Sam. 12. sicke childe, cry out for his dead sonne, 2. Sam. 18. 33. 
                  O Absolon, my sonne, my sonne Absolon: would to God I had died for thee, O Absolon, my sonne, my sonne. S. 
                  Lib. de Nabuth cap. 5. 
                  Ambrose reports a tragicall accident, how that in his time there was a poore man in extreame necessitie constrained to sell one of his sonnes into perpetuall bondage, that hee might hereby saue the rest from a present famine. Who calling all his deare children vnto him, and beholding them as oliue branches round about his table, could not resolue which hee might best spare. His eldest sonne was the strength of his youth, euen hee that called him first father, and therefore not willing to part with him. His yongest boy was the nest chicke, the dearely beloued of

his mother, and therefore not willing to part with him. A third most resembled his progenitors, hauing his fathers bill, and his mothers eye, therefore not willing to part with him. One was more louing, another more diligent then the rest, and so the good father in conclusion among so many could not affoord to part with any.
               It was another step vnto griefe in this widow, that her dead childe was Pontan. in loc. 
                  a sonne. For daughters in respect of their sex being weaker vessels, are not so fit for businesse and imployment: whereas a good sonne, albeit in obedience a childe, yet in counsell often proues a father, and is in stead of an husband to his widow mother. But it was an higher step vnto griefe that this one sonne, was her onely sonne 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , first begotten, and Iansen. onely begotten▪ and her selfe not a yong wife: but an old widow without hope of issue. Now what kinde of sorrow this was is expressed in holy Scripture: Ieremy 6. 26. 
                  Make lament atton and bitter mourning as for thine onely sonne. And Zachar. 12. 10. They shall lament for him as one mourneth for his onely sonne, and be sorrie for him as one is sorry for his first borne. Syrophanes hauing buried his only sonne, caused his statua to be set in his house, Fulgent. mytholog. lib. 1. 
                  Seddum tristitiae remedium quaerit, seminarium potiùs doloris invenit.
               
               This in briefe was the widowes miserie, now yee shall heare of Christs mercy. When she was haplesse & hopelesse, hee had compassion on her, and did exceeding abundantly aboue all that she did aske or could thinke, as it is in the select Epistle for this Sunday. Esay 65. 24. Before she did call, he did answere, granting her desire before she mooued hir sute. Culman. Teaching vs hereby that euery good gift is from aboue, not pulled downe of merit: but powred downe by preuenting grace.
               God is a father of the fatherlesse, and defendeth the causes of 
                     Psal. 68. 5. & 146. 9. widowes: Eliah in a great famine by Gods appointment relieued the widow of 1. Kings 17. Zarephath, and Elizeus euen by the same diuine goodnesse, increased

another distressed widowes oyle, 2. Kings 4. Peter, Acts 9. comforted a whole congregation of weeping widowes, in raising Dorcas againe from the dead: and Christ here tooke pitie on the deepe sighing of a widow. Ferus serm. 1. in loc. By which all men may learne, Magistrates especially, to 
                  Esay 1. 17. 
                  iudge the fatherlesse, and defend the widow; not onely when the widow doth importunately call and cry, Doe me iustice, Luke 18. 3. but euen while she doth hold her peace, Maldonat. in loc. 
                  magis enim petit qui petere non audet, & plus dat qui dat non rogatus.
               
               
                  Weepe not] Gen. 23. 2. 
                  Abraham the father of the faithfull bewailed his dead wife Sara, 
                  Gen. 50. 
                  Ioseph an holy man of God mourned many daies for his father Iacob, all the people for Deut. 34. 8. 
                  Moses, and Christ himselfe for Iohn 11. 35. 
                  Lazarus. His ne ste to then, is not a prohibition forbidding at funerals all weeping: but an inhibition onely forbidding too much weeping, that she should not bee sorry for the dead, 
                  1. Thess. 4. 13. 
                  as they which haue no hope. As if hee should haue said vnto her, as he did in the like case to Martha, Iohn 11. 25. I am the resurrection and the life, whosoeuer beleeueth in mee though hee were dead, yet shall he liue. 
                  Deut. 32. 39. 
                  I wound and make whole, 
                  1. Sam. 2. 6. 
                  bring downe to the graue and raise vp againe. And his workes are correspondent to his words, hee came nigh, and touched the coffin, and said, Yong man, I say vnto thee, arise, and he that was dead sate vp, and began to speake, and hee deliuered him vnto his mother. In which hee shewed himselfe to bee very God and man, in walking with his Disciples, in talking with this widow, comming nigh to the gate of the citie, touching the coffin, a very man: in raising the dead, and making him to sit vp, and speake, Eu
                        •…
                     hym. Brentius. Caietan. (not as the Prophets and Apostles in anothers name, but by his owne power in a commanding fashion, I say to thee yong man 
                  El
                        •…
                     ctulo mortis, in qu, mollius ille dormit, qui durius in vita se gesserit▪ Ambr. serm. 28. 
                  arise) to be God, euen the Lord of life, Acts 3. 15.
               About the fall of the leafe men ordinarily bee more subiect to sicknesse and mortalitie then at other times of the yeere, wherefore the Zepper. Con. 2. in loc. Church hath allotted fitly

this Scripture for this season, as a sicke mans salue to comfort vs against diseases and death. Intimating that Christ is the onely health of all the liuing, and euerlasting life of all such as die in him.
               
                  And there came feare on them all, and they gaue the glorie to God] Our Euangelist heere describes a Hem̄ing. double fruit of the myracle: the one befalling such as were present, the other extended vnto many men absent, in that the rumour of it went foorth throughout all Iury, and throughout all the regions which lie round about. The myracle wrought in the present beholders a two-fold effect, Intus timor,
                  
                     z 
                     Caietan.
                   
                  foris glorificatio: Reuerence within, and glorifying of God without, for they conceiued heereby faith in the Messias, and so feared God, glorifying him with true worship, and acknowledging his mercies in visiting his people. Heere the Gospell and Epistle meete againe, Paul would haue him ascribe praise to God in the congregation from time to time: these spectators accordingly, beholding the riches of Christs grace who did exceeding abundantly aboue all that the poore Widow did aske or thinke, gaue the glorie to God, saying, A great Prophets is risen vp among vs, and God hath visited his people.
               
               Hitherto concerning the letter of this History: Now let vs (as the 
                     August. tract. 49. in Ioan. & de verbis dom. serm. 44. Ambros. Beda in loc.
                   Fathers and Luther. Arboreus. Heming. other Interpretors) examine the mystical exposition or allegory, considering these fiue points in order:
               
                  1. Who is dead, and carried out to be buried.
                  2. What is the Coffin and Tombe wherein hee is enclosed.
                  3. What they be that carrie him to the graue.
                  4. What is that gate out of which he was carried.
                  5. What is that widow lamenting his death.
               
               He that is dead and carried out to be buried is an obstinate sinner, for the Rom. 6. 23. wages of sinne is death, and euery man irrepentant without faith and feeling of his sinnes is dead (as the 1. Tim. 5. 6. Scripture) descended into Hell (as
               
                  
                  De bono mortu, cap. 12. 
                  Ambrose speakes) euen while he liueth. In See Iacob. d
                        •…
                      Vorag. se
                        •…
                     m 1. in loc. three things especially resembling a Corse being
               
                  Cold,
                  Heauie,
                  Stinking.
               
               
                  Cold, as being infected with the venome of the Apocal. 12. 9. Serpent, and wanting the powerfull heat of Gods holy Spirit which is 1. Thess. 5. 19 quenched in them. Heauy, because sinne is a burthensome load, Mat. 11. 28. pressing downe, Heb. 12. 1. hindering our ascending and seeking the things aboue, Coloss. 3. 1. For howsoeuer it be true, that if all the mountaines in the world should fall together vpon one iust man hee would notwithstanding be stedfast and keepe his ground: according to that of the i Poet,Horat. Car. lib. 3. ad. 3.
               
               
                  Si fractus illibatur orbis,
                  Impauiaum ferient ruinae.
               
               Yet sinne is so heauy, that it cast downe Dathan from earth, and Lucifer out of heauen into the bottomlesse pit of hell. Stinking, because the slanderer hath an vnsauory breath, his 
                  Psalme 14. 5. 
                  throate being an open sepulcher. The wickednesse of adulterers is 
                     Ephe 5. 4. & Galat. 5. 19. filthinesse. The goods of the couetous hoorded vp, and not laid out, are a very Bonauent. diet. salut. c. 6. dung-hill, and euery sinne is an 1. Thess 4. 7. 
                  vncleannesse, stinking in the nostrels of the Lord.
               Now for the Coffin and Tombe wherein this cold, heauie, stinking Corse lieth: as there be three kinds of death, one of the body, which is the naturall death, another of soule, which is spirituall death, a third both of body and soule, which is eternall death: euen so there be three kindes of Tombes accordingly: the Tombe of the bodie is the Graue, the Tombe of the soule is the body, Theophylact. in loc. Idem Plato in Crat. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  qua
                        •…
                     i 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or as In locum. 
                  Ambrose, tumulus iste mores mali, the Tombe both of body and soule dying in sin is Hell, Luk. 16. 22. The rich man died and was buried in Hell. And the sinner is borne to Hell by Heming. foure Porters especially, detaining him in irrepentance, namely,
               
                  1 Hope of longer life.
                  2 Looking vpon the faults of other men.
                  
                     3. Presumption vpon Gods mercy.
                  4. Flatterie of leaud companie.
               
               These foure carie the sinner out of the gate toward hell, as for example, when hee doth lust with his eye, the dead man is carried out by the r gate of his sight, per oculorum
                  
                     t 
                     August. ser. 31. ad fratres in eremo.
                   
                  beneficium infert animae veneficium. If he delight in backbiting and slandering, the dead man is carried out by the gate of his mouth. If he take pleasure in hearing tales and ill reports of his neighbour, the dead man is carried out by the gate of his eares. And the widow lamenting his death (as Theophylact thinkes) is the soule, but as Ambros. Beda▪ Panigarol. other
                     s 
                     In locum.
                   generally the Church of God, for as there is ioy in heauen for one sinner that conuerteth: euen so griefe to such as haue their conuersation in heauen, when a sinner will not returne from his wicked way, but is giuen ouer in a reprobate sense, to worke all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse, Ephes. 4. 19. The three sorts of dead raised by Christ aptly resemble, saith Ser. 44. de verbis Dom. 
                  Augustine, three sorts of sinners. A sinner is dead in the house like Iairus daughter, when he doth imagine mischiefe in his mind: carried out of the gate like this yoong man heere, when hee 
                  Psal. 7. 15. 
                  brings forth vngodlinesse in word or deed: stinking in the graue like Lazarus, if he sinne habitually without any remorse, Esay 5. 18. 
                  drawing iniquitie with cords of vanitie, speaking good of euill and euill of good, 
                  Rom. 2. 5. 
                  heaping vp wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of the iust iudgement of God. Now then as there was weeping for the dead Damosell in the house, more weeping for this man carried out of the gate, but most weeping at Lazarus graue, Martha wept, & Mary wept, & the Iewes wept, & Christ himself wept and groaned in the Spirit: so we must be sory for the beginnings of sin, more sorie for the proceedings & encrease, most sorie when a man Psal 1. 1. 
                  stands in the wayes of the wicked and sits in the se
                        •…
                     t of the scornefull. It may be well applied vnto Christs Academie, which Guenara epist. 
                  Demosthenes once said of Athens, in our Diuinitie schoole wee weepe more for the leaud liues of the bad, then for the deaths of the good.
               
                  As the Church of God hath three kindes of Planctus ouer the dead: so the diuell and his companie three kindes of Iacob. de V
                        •…
                     
                     rag. serm. 1. in loc. 
                  Plausus. Our aduersarie reioyceth a little when we sinne in the house, conceiuing an euill thought: but more glad if that a man bee carried out of the house, breaking out into scandalous actions: and yet most merrie when a sinner continueth in his filthinesse, as Lazare stinking in his graue. Let vs then Ephes. 5. 14. awake from sleepe, and stand vp from the dead; Christ in his word, in his Sacraments, in his iudgements, in his Preachers instantly calls vnto you daily, Yong man arise, Damosell arise, Lazarus arise. Wherefore let vs I beseech you sit vp, & speake: that we may comfort the Church our afflicted mother on earth, and bee well accepted of God our father in heauen.
               Amen.
            
            
               The Epistle,
               
                  EPHES. 4. 1.
                  I (which am a prisoner of the Lord) exhort you, that yee walke worthie of the vocation wherewith yee are called, &c.
               
               AFter sundry dogmaticall conclusions touching matters of holy faith in the three former chapters: our Apostle comes now to patheticall Sar
                        •…
                     er. Caietan. Aret. exhortations concerning good manners in this present, beseeching his Ephesians in generall to walke worthy of the vocation wherevnto they were called, in more particular to support one another through loue, keeping the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of peace. Pressing this one point with seuen arguments in our text:
               
                  1. There is but one bodie.
                  
                  2. But one spirit.
                  
                  3. But one hope.
                  
                  4. But one Lord.
                  
                  5. But one faith.
                  
                  
                     6. But one baptisme.
                  
                  7. But one God, and father of all which is aboue all, and through all, and in you all. As if hee should argue thus: If the Church your mother bee but one, God your father but one, Christ your Lord but one, the holy Spirit your Comforter but one, if your hope but one, faith one, Baptisme one: I see no cause why you should not liue together and loue to gether all as one, endeuouring to keepe the vnity of the spirit through the bond of peace.
               
               First, there is but one body, that is, one Church: for albeit there be threescore Queenes, and fourescore Concubines, and the number of Damosels be without number, yet as Cant. 6. 8. 
                  Salomon speakes in the person of Christ, my loue, my doue is alone. As then in the naturall body there is a perpetuall sympathy betweene all the parts: 1. Cor. 12. 26. 
                  If one member suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in honour, all reioyce with it: euen so in Christs mysticall bodie, The eye must not say to the hand, I haue no neede of thee: nor the head againe to the feete, I haue no neede of you: for if the Magistrates should bend themselues against the Ministes, and the Ministers against the Magistrates, and the Commons against both: assuredly God would bee against all. And therefore wee must alway remember our Apostles saying, 1. Cor. 12. 20. that there is but one body. though there be many members. One not as tied vnto any one place, much lesse to any one person. The Donatists in the daies of Epist. 48. 
                  Augustine would haue tied the Church to Cartenna in Africa. The Papists in our time tie the Church to Rome in Italy. Contradicting heerein the Creede, in which the Church is stiled Catholique: that is, vniuersall, extended (as Chrysostome notes vpon my Text) to all places, and all times, and as Ca
                        •…
                     c. cap. 3. in exposit. Credo eccles. Cat. 
                  Bellarmine more fully, to all faithfull persons not onely those which are now liuing, but also those which haue beene from the beginning and shall be to the worlds end. And so the Popish antichristian 
                     •…
                  rue which haue nothing so much in their mouthes as the Church, the Church, infringe the liberties

of the Church exceedingly. For all of them haue made the Catholique Church to bee nothing else but the Roman church, and some of them haue made the Romane church to be nothing else but the Pope. Papa virtualiter est tota ecclesia, saithDe potest papae cap. 2
                        •…
                     . 
                  Haruaeus. As Anabaptists imagined a church like the Spider, orNat. hist. lib. 7. cap. 2. 
                  Plinies acephali, all body and no head: so Papists haue framed a Church like the Toad-stoole, all head and no body. To borrow a phrase from Charmides inTrinum. act. 
                        •…
                     . scen. 2. 
                  Plautus: Hic quidem fungino genere est, capitesetotum tegit. I
                     •…
                   Cardinals and Iesuits be reputed monsters, as being men ofVignier answer to Baron. all professions, order, degrees, offices, benefices; then what a monster of monsters is the Pope, which is all of these, and none of these, both head and bodie too.
               
                  One spirit] S. Paul saith, 1. Cor. 12. that there are diuersities of gifts, but one spirit: to one is giuen by the spirit the word of Wisdome: to another the word of knowledge by the same spirit: to another is giuen faith by the same spirit: to another the gift of healing by the same spirit: to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to anointerpretations of tongues: all these worketh one and the same spirit, diuiding to euery man as he will seuerally. Now the spirit which is the Iohn 15. 26. Comforter of the Church in her widdow-hood euer since Christs ascension, and as it were tutor to leade her into Iohn 16. 13. all truth, on Whitsunday descended in visible shapes vpon the blessed Apostles assembled, as the Acts 2. 1. Text speakes 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   altogether in one place with one accord. Where there is vnity of spirit, there doth rest the spirit of vnity: but where there is babling, there followeth instantly Babel, vpon Diuision alway Confusion.
               
                  One hope] As the Decalogue teacheth how to loue, and the Creede how to beleeue: so the Pater Noster how to pray. Shewing vs exactly what we must hope and desire: namely, first Gods glory, then our owne good. Gods glorie, for that is Alpha and Omega, the first thing wee must aske, Hallowed be thy name: and the last thing wee

must performe, for thine is the kingdome, the power, and the glorie. Now concerning our owne good: wee desire and hope for especially the kingdome of heauen, Thy kingdome come. On which all other petitions depend, for wee pray thy will be done, for this end onely, that wee may bee subiects in his kingdome of grace, and saints in his kingdome of glory. And his will is done by depending on his might and mercie for things temporall and spirituall; in regard of the one, wee pray, giue vs this day our daily bread; and for the other, for giue vs our trespasses, lead vs not into tentation, deliuer vs from euill. And by consequence Gods kingdome is the center of all our wishes, and totall summe of all our hopes. And because the wise man euer begins at the end, our great Doctor hath inioyned in things concerning our selues to begge the first of all, which is indeed the end of all. Seeing then all of vs walke in one way, all of vs haue one guide in the way, all of vs when wee come to our iourneyes end expect one and the same reward: it is very meete all of vs should endeuour to keepe the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of peace.
               
                  One Lord] It is reported by In vita Caligul
                        •…
                     . 
                  Suetonius that the Emperour Caligula tooke off the head of his great god Iupiter, and set on another of his owne. The Papists in their interpretations and glosses haue smitten off Christ Iesus the onely head of the Church, and haue set on the Pope. Suppose (for thought is free, and impossibilities may bee supposed) I say suppose, S. Peter was Pope, and the other eleuen Apostles his Cardinals, as Sum. lib. 1. cap. 80. 
                  Iohannes de Turre Cremata doth a
                     •…
                  ow. Suppose hee was at Rome, suppose hee was bishop of Rome, suppose the Pope succeeds him more lawfully then the Patriarch of Antioch, (all which a Protestant will not graunt, and they cannot proue) yet I would faine learne of a schoole-Papist, who was this one Lord, and one head of the Church after the death of S. Peter immediately. Whether Linus, or Cletus, or Anacletus, or Clemens: these are foure good men

and true, let them chuse whom they will.
               
                  Clemens Romanus an old new Father, whom the learned conceiue to bee the Popes owne child, writes in his Lib. 7. cap 47. Apostolicall constitutions euidently, that Linus was the first Bishop of Rome made by Saint Paul, and that Clemens after the death of Linus was the second, ordained by Peter, if this relation bee true, the Pope sits not in the chaire of Peter, but in the seate of Paul, for hee created the first Pope. Franciscus Turrianus in his 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . an 1578. apologeticall annotations vpon the text of Clemens, answereth that Linus was not bishop of Rome, but only Lord Suffragan or Vicar-generall, executing Episcopall iurisdiction in Saint Peters non-residence. The like is recorded of Cletus by Ex epist. D
                        •…
                     
                     cretal. Leon. 2. 
                  Marianus Scotus in the life of Peter. But by their good leaue, the Romane Martyrologie makes both Linus and Cletus Bishops of Rome: and Cardinall Baronius in his annotations vpon their seuerall martyrdomes, and in his Ecclesiasticall Annals, 
                     A
                           •…
                        an. 6
                        •…
                      
                     I
                           •…
                        a numerat Optatus. In lib. 2. contra Parmen
                           •…
                        an. Linus Cle mens, Anacletus.
                   tome 1. maintaines against all commers, that Linus was the first, Cletus the second, and Clemens the third Bishop of Rome after Saint Peter. Caesar Baronius in the same place thinkes that Cletus and Anacletus were all one: but Cardinall De R
                        •…
                     m. pont. lib. 2. cap. 5. 
                  Bellarmine contradicts him, and shewes by diuers reasons accurately, that they were two. And indeed the Romane Kalender allotteth Anacletus a festiuall vpon the 13. of Iuly, and Cletus another vpon the 26. of April. Wherevpon In vita Clementis. 
                  Tritenhemius and other Popish Historiographers hold, that Clemens was the fourth Pope after Saint Peter. So then as you see, some write that he was the first, other that he was the second, other that he was the third, other that he was the fourth.
               
                  Bellarmine who shufled the cards last, and is the best gamester at the Popes primero, takes vpon him to compose the difference. But as 
                     Contra lit. petil. lib. 
                     
                        •…
                     . cap. 50 
                  Augustine said of Petilian, vbirespondere conat 
                        •…
                     s est, magis ostendit quod non poterit respondere: in deed saith 
                     Vbi supra §. caterum pet. mort
                           •…
                         & s
                           •…
                        
                        quenti.
                   he, Clemens by right was the first Pope, but hee suffered out of his humilitie Linus and

                  Cletus, to execute his office so long as they liued. But 
                     Apud Bellar. ibidem §. neque multum me monet.
                   
                  Damasus and Sophronius, and Simeon Metaphrastes affirme that Linus died before Peter. Heere Bellarmine answeres not a word, but contemnes these writers which he magnifieth elsewhere, placing them among learned and Catholike Authors in his 2. In Cat alog. Theolog. anne
                        •…
                     . t
                        •…
                     m. 2. Contr
                        •…
                     . Tome, but for auoiding of tediousnesse, let it be granted that Clemens being an honester man then Popelings in our time, poisoned not his predecessors, but suffered them to liue and die in peace. Yet if there were three Popes aliue at once, who was this one head, and one Lord? then there were three Lords, not one Lord, the Lord Cletus, the Lord Linus, the Lord Clemens, and happily this may be one reason why the Pope hath three crownes, one for Cletus, one for Linus, and the third for Clemens.
               
               Thus (as Mr. Philp
                           •…
                        t vti Fox in his Martyr. one said) the Papists in the points of their religion are vntrussed, and lie open to the whip. They boast of their succession of Bishops, and yet they cannot agree among themselues and tell their owne tale who was the first, second, third, or fourth Pope of Rome. Heere the words of the Lord are verified, Esay 19. 2. Concurrere faciam Aegyptios aduersus Aegyptios, I will set Epgyptians against Egyptians, euery one shall fight against his neighbour, city against city, and kingdome against kingdome, popish Councels against Councels, Vniuersities against Vniuersities, Schoolemen against Schoolemen, the Iesuits against the Priests, and the Priests against the Iesuit, Baronius against Bellarmine, and Bellarmine against Baro
                        •…
                     ius, one against another, God and the truth against all.
               It is wittily noted by S. Tract. 13. in Ioan. 
                  Augustine, Petrus erat oculus in corpore, Peter was not head of the church, but an eie in the head. God grant the Pope so much grace as to become an eye, or to stand in stead of an hand, yea of a finger, to further the building of Gods house. Head he is not, head he was not so much as in opinion for the space of fiue hundred yeere after Christ, head he cannot be, for there is but one Lord, one head, one sheepfold, one shepheard, Ioh. 10. 16.
               
                  Let vs examine therefore what this one Lord is, our Apostle saith 1. Cor. 8. 5. else-where that there be many Gods and many Lords. Many gods in title, many gods in opinion, in title, either authoritatiuè or vsurpatiuè, by right, and so Kings are stiled gods in the 82 2. Psalme. By vsurpation, and so the Pope is called god, Extrauagant. grat. Ioh. 22. 
                  Dominus Deus noster Papa, as the Canonists impiously blaspheme. Many gods in opinion, and so the Scripture tels vs, that gold is the Coloss. 3. 5. couetous mans god, and the Philip. 3. 19. belly the gluttons god, and so there be many gods in heauen, and in earth, and in hell too. For it is written that the people of Calicute worship the diuell. The Gentiles were so vaine in their Rom. 1. 21. imaginations, De ciuit. Dei. lib. 1. cap. 32. 
                  amentes mentes, hauing their vnderstanding so blinded, that as Lib. 1. Aduer. Sym. 
                  Prudentius writes vnto Symachus, euery thing that was good was esteemed a god: in so much that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , they had so many gods; as that indeede they had no God. Thus you see there be many gods, and many lords, yet vnto vs but one Lord. Vnto vs who know the truth (as it is heere said) there is but onely one Lord in truth. Other lords are dominititulares: our Lord is Dominus tutelaris, a Lord protector indeed. Other by men are made gods: but our Lord is the God who made all men, an absolute Lord of himself, and in himselfe 1. Tim. 6. 15. 
                  Dominus dominantium, the Lord of all other lords, and God of all other gods. And in this acceptation Lord is vsed in the holy Bible sometimes essentially, signifying the whole Deity: as in the first Commandement, I am the Lord thy God, and Psalm. 50. 1. The Lord euen the most mighty God: and sometime personally, for Christ the second person in the blessed Trinity, Luk. 17. 5. The Apostles said to the Lord: and 2. Cor. 13. 13. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ: and so I take it to be taken heere, there is one Lord, that is, one Christ, Master of vs all, and head of his whole Church.
               Now Christ is one in himselfe, and one to vs: in himselfe one, for albeit he be God and man: yet he is not two but one Christ. 
                     
                        •…
                     sen. hom. 2. de 
                        •…
                     at. Dom. 
                  Non alter ex patre, alter ex matre: sed
                  
                  aliter ex patre, aliter ex matre. One (as orthodoxall Athanasius in his Creed) not by conuersion of the God head into flesh: but by taking of the manhood into God: one not by confusion of substance, but by vnitie of person: for as the reasonable soule and flesh is one man, so God and man one Christ. Againe, Christ is one to vs, as being Hebr. 13. 8. 
                  yesterday and to day, and the same for euer.
               
               
                  Idem,
                  Obiectiuè,
                  Subiectiuè,
                  Effectiuè,
               
               
                  Obiectiuè, the same in his word, for hee that yesterday was shadowed in the Law, is to day shewed in the Gospell: as Super Exod. quaest. 73. 
                  Augustine said, the new Testament is clasped in the old, and the old is opened in the new. One Christ crucified being the center of all the Bibles circumference. Idem subiectiuè, the same in his attributes, in his power, in his authoritie, being alway the Lord of his people, the shepheard of his flocke, the head of his Church. Idem effectiuè, the same in his goodnesse and grace, for he who was yesterday the God of Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, is to day and shall bee for euer Iesus, 
                  Matth. 1. 21. that is a Sauiour of his people: he is as well now the light of the Gentiles, as hee was before the glorie of his people Israel: hee that was present and president among the blessed Apostles, hath promised also to come vnto vs, to comfort vs, to be in the middest of vs, as ouer all, and through all: so likewise in vs all, as it followeth in the text.
               If then this one Lord bee present with vs in his word, present in his Spirit, present in his power, in all the same yesterday and to day, and for euer. I see no cause, why he should need another Lord, deputie Lieutenant, or Vicar generall to execute his office: for Christ may be considered of vs as a Lord See Perkins Reformed Catholike tit. supre
                        •…
                     asie. two wayes:
               
                  1 As God.
                  2 As God and man.
               
               As God, by right of creation, hee is an absolute Lord ouer all men, and all things in heauen and earth. As

God and man, or as the redeemer of man hee is soueraigne Lord of the whole Church in more speciall manner.
               Now then, as Christ is God with the Father and holy Ghost, hee hath his Deputies on earth to gouerne the world: namely, Kings and Princes, therfore called Gods. But as he is a Mediatour and Lord of his redeemed ones, he hath neither fellow, nor deputy. No fellow, for then he should haue beene an imperfect Mediatour: no Deputy, because no creature is capable of this office: the performance whereof ariseth of the effects of two natures concurring in one action, namely the God head and the Man-hood. And therefore howsoeuer Preachers are his actiue instruments, his messengers, his Ministers, (if you will) his vnder Vshers to teach his schollers in this great Vniuersity: yet none can properly be called his Vicars, or Deputies to doe that in his stead which personally belongs to him. In this sense there is but one Lord, and this one Lord is the Lord, euen the Lord of Lords, Christ Iesus God and man.
               Wherefore seeing all of vs march vnder the colours of one Captaine, all follow one Master, all serue one Lord, whose title is 1. Iohn 4. 8. loue, whose Iohn 13. 35. liuery is loue, whose chiefe commandement is loue, whose doctrine is the doctrine of Ephes. 2. 17. peace, whose Ministers are the Rom. 10. 15. messengers of peace, whose followers are the L
                        •…
                     e 10. 6. children of peace: it behoueth vs (if it be possible) to haue peace with all men, endeuouring to keepe the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace.
               
                  One faith] The Turke hath his faith, the Iew his faith, the Gentile his faith, Heretikes haue their faith, and Sc
                     •…
                  ismatikes their faith. In some countries (as it is reported) there are almost as many Creedes as heads, at the least as many sects as Cities. It is Relation of religion in the West parts of the World, sect. 43. written of Poland, that if any man haue lost his religion he shall be sure to finde it there, or else he may giue it gone for euer. How then is it true that there is but one faith?
               
                  Answer is made, that to speake properly these are not faiths, but factions; all of them being either vnbeliefes, or misbeliefes. And therefore when the Disciples asked the Lord to Luke 17. 5. 
                  increase their faith, it must be construed of increase in measure, that we may grow from vertue to vertue, from knowledge to knowledge, from faith to saith, vntill we be full of growth in Christ Iesus: not of increase in number, for in regard of the manifold rents and diuisions in the Church, it is our dutie contrariwise to pray the Lord, that he will decrease, not increase our faith in number, which is and must be but one.
               For the further handling whereof, obserue with Auguistine and S
                        •…
                     nt. lib 3. dist. 23. 
                  Lombard, that among manifold acceptions of faith in holy Scriptures, it is taken especially vel pro eo quod 
                        •…
                     reditur, vel pro eo quo creditur: either for the doctrine of faith, or else for the grace whereby we beleeue this doctrine. For the doctrine of faith, as Tit. 1. 13. Rebuke them sharply that they may be sound in the faith, And Galat. 1. 22. He that persecuted in time past, now preacheth the faith, that is the Gospel. And in this sense there is but one onely true Catholique and Apostolique faith: if any man on earth, or Angell from heauen shall goe about to deliuer another Gospell, let him bee accursed, Galathians 1. 8.
               Secondly, faith signifieth the gift and grace whereby we beleeue and apply this doctrine, fi
                     •…
                  ly termed by Diuines glossa euangelij. For as loue is the best exposition of the Law: so faith is the best interpretor of the Gospell: not glossa ordinaria, but as it were catena aurea, containing all that must and may be beleeued. In which respect it is truly called sauing and iustifying faith. And this (as the Thom. 22 
                        •…
                     . qu
                        •…
                     st. 4. art. 6. Schoole distinguisheth) is diuersa, ratione subiecti: sed vna, ratione obiecti. Faith is, and must be diuers in regard of diuers beleeuers, for euery man must liue by his Habac
                        •…
                     . 2. 4. owne faith. Paul cannot be saued by the faith of Peter, nor Peter iustified by the faith of Iohn. As euery one must haue Matth. 25. 9. Oyle of his owne in his owne lampe: so euery one

must haue faith of his owne in his owne heart. Yet faith in regard of hir obiect is but one, for there is but one only diuine truth, which is the general obiect of faith, and but one only Christ Iesus crucified, who is the speciall obiect of iustifying and sauing faith. One only faith, because one only Lord, hir owne only obiect. Albeit faith be diuers in diuers men, and hath diuers degrees in one man: yet it is but of one kinde in all. And heere wee may learne how faith is said to iustifie, non vt mediator, sed vt medium; not as a meritorious or efficient cause, for that were to make our faith our Christ: but as an instrumentall or spirituall hand apprehending Christ who doth iustifie. For as our 2. part. homof saluation. Church aptly, faith is like Iohn the Baptist, it points out Christ and saith vnto vs, Behold the Lambe of God that taketh away the sinnes of the world. Nay faith is like S Thomas, first handling, and then applying the wounds of Christ in particular, Thou art my Lord, and my God. This in number is but one vertue, yet in a Christians account vpon the point, it is the only vertue: for lose faith and lose all, hold faith and hold Christ who is all in all.
               The Papists haue martyred the text in magnifying the wooden Crucifix; but a man by faith may behold Christ crucified almost in all the workes of God, either in vs or vpon vs. Doest thou read the Bible? there is a Crucifix, and as it were a speaking picture of Christ. So himselfe said in the Iohn 5. 39. Gospell, Search the Scriptures, for they witnesse of me. Doest thou behold a brother in distresse? there is another Crucifix, in him Christ is naked, hungry, sicke, harbourlesse. Doest thou come to the Lords table? there is another Crucifix, the consecrated bread and wine are dumbe sermons of Christs passion. Art thou tempted and afflicted? then thou maist behold Christ crucified as thy partner and thy paterne. Thy partner, who pitieth thy cause, and hath Heb. 4. 15. compassion on thee. As thy paterne, 1. Pet. 2. 21. Christ suffered for vs, leauing vs an example, that we should follow his steps, who when he was reuiled, reuiled not
                  
                  againe: when he suffered, threatned not: but committed the vengeance to him that iudgeth righteously. So that it may be said of faith as well as of originall sinne, vna est essentia, sed multiplex efficientia▪
                   In essence but one, but in effi cience, loue, patience, hope, and many vertues: euen 1. Iohn 5. 
                        •…
                     . 
                  the victorie that ouercommeth the world, the shield wherby wee may quench all the fierie darts of the diuell, Ephes. 6. 16. the very speare which killeth our last enemie, for a true beleeuer in his deaths-bed is ready to sing with old Simeon, Lord now lettest thou thy seruant depart inpeac, for mine eyes haue seene thy saluation: and to say with 1. Cor. 15. 55. 
                  Paul, O death where is thy sting? O h
                        •…
                     ll where is thy victorie? the sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law, but thankes be giuen to God, which hath giuen vs victorie through Iesus Christ our Lord.
               
               
                  1. Kings. 3. 9. 
                  Salomon because hee was a King, desired wisedome aboue all things; Psal. 27. 4. 
                  Dauid being a litle restrained from the temple, desired aboue all things to behold the beautie of the Lords house; Mydas aboue all things desired gold; Alexander aboue all things desired honour; Epicurus aboue all things desired pleasure: but if wee will make but one wish vnto God, let vs begge and pray for a liuely faith, O Lord increase our faith. Hee that hath this one gift is learned enough, religious enough, rich enough, honourable enough, eased enough, pleased enough, against which no euill on earth, no diuell in hell shall finally preuaile.
               For as Thu
                        •…
                     ydides. one called Athens Greece of Greece: so faith is the grace of all grace. Without which (as our Apostle teacheth) euen our good workes are sinnes: Rom. 14. 23. Whatsoeuer is not of faith is sinne.
               
               Wherefore to conclude this point, seeing a liuely faith is the key of heauen, and as it were the spirituall hand to take out of the coffers of God all his rich treasure; without which one vertue all other are no vertues; without the which the Gospell is no Gospell, God is no God, Christ is no Christ vnto vs: it behoueth euery man aboue all things

in this life, to labour for encrease of this one gift, without which all other are rather curses then blessings vnto vs. And because there is but one doctrine of faith, and one kinde of iustifying faith, it is the duty of all such as professe the one, and haue comfort by the other, to keepe the vnity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
               
               
                  One Baptisme] Heere with accurat In Epitaphi
                        •…
                     . Nepotian. 
                  Hierom praysing Nepotian, I must entreat you to behold in a little Mappe, that world of matter which might haue beene shewed at large.
               Baptisme then is either
               
                  Proper: as bare clensing and washing. Heb. 9. 10.
                  Figuratiue:

                        
                           Metaphorical, as affliction, Mat. 20. 22.
                        
                           Allegoricall, as repentant teares, Luk. 7. 38.
                        
                           Synecdochical, and so it is put for the whole doctrine of Iohn, Matth. 21. 25.
                        
                           Catexochen, and so it is taken for that we call vsually Christening, and this as the 
                              Tom. par. 3. quaest. 66. art. 9. Schoole teacheth is of three sorts:

                              Baptisma
                              Flaminis.
                              Fluminis.
                              Sanguinis.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               But of all these there is but one only Sacrament of Baptisme, the which is one in three regards;
               
                  Unum quia
                  Ad vnum.
                  In vnum.
                  Per vnum.
               
               First, vnum advnum, one in one man, once truly receiued, neuer to be Aquin. Caietan. reiterated; as we teach against the Hieron. exposit. prior in loc. 
                  Ualentinians in old time, and Anabaptists in our age. Heere might I shew that Bishopping is not a new Baptisme, but as the word imports, a confirmation onely: wherein a Christian in his owne person doth performe

that which heretofore by other he did promise.
               Secondly, vnum in vnum, one Baptisme, Marlorat. in Aquin. for that all of vs are baptised into one faith of one Lord, for Iohns and Christs Baptisme differ not in substance, but in circumstance: Iohn baptised 
                     Melancthon. in Matth. 3. Idem Caluin. Chemnitius, & caeteri protestant. apud Bellarm. de sac. bap. lib. 1. c. 20. 
                  in Christum passurum, Christs Apostles in Christum passum.
               
               Thirdly, vnum quia per vnum, one a in regard of the water and words wherewith we baptise, wee may not vse any other element but water, nor any other words, but I baptise thee in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghost: 
                  b one matter, one forme essentiall in holy Baptisme.Vide Lombard. sent. 4. dist. 3.
               
               
                  One God, and Father of all, which is aboue all and through all, and in you all] The map whereof in briefe is, God asDionysiu
                        •…
                      Carthus. Caietan. Father of Iohn 3. 16 Christ by nature, of Christians by Rom. 8. 15. adoption, of all men and all things by Deut. 32. 6. creation; Ouer all, and through all, and in you all, may bee Gerran. in loc. construed either with appropriation to the seuerall Persons in the blessed Trinitie: and so God the Father is the Person ouer all, God the Sonne the Person through all, God the holy Ghost the Person in vs all. Or else of the whole Deitie without appropriation, and so God is ouer all excellentiae dignitatis, through all praesentia maiestatis, in all gratia inhabitationis.
               
               For finall conclusion of this and all the rest: seeing all of vs haue been borne and now liue in one and the same Church, all of vs haue been comforted often by one and the same Spirit, all of vs expect one and the same crowne, all of vs acknowledge one and the same Lord, all of vs hold one and the same faith, all of vs are sanctified with one and the same baptisme, all of vs adore one and the same God, who is the Father of all, ouer all, through all, in vs all. I beseech you men, brethren and fathers, let me speake to you in the words of g 
                  Paul, Marke them diligently
                  Rom. 16. 17. 
                  which cause diuision and offences, contrarie to the doctrine which yee haue learned, and auoid them. For they that are such, serue not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne bellies,
                  
                  and with 
                        •…
                     aire speech and flattering deceiue the hearts of the simple.
               
               As Christ, so the Tertullian. Church is crucified betweene two male factors: on the right hand Schismatikes, on the left Papists: the one doe 
                     Aug
                           •…
                        st. a
                           •…
                        ud Caluin. Inst
                           •…
                        . lib. 4. cap. 2. §. 5. 
                  disrumpere charitatis vincula, vntie the bonds of peace, the other doe corrumpere fidei dogmata, vndoe the vnitie of the Spirit. The first are different in things indifferent, the second almost indifferent in matters different, concerning the publike exercises of our religion, and yet each of them spurne at the poore Church as at a common foot-ball, being herein Oxford An. to the Puritans Petition. like Iudges 15. 4 
                  Sampsons foxes, seuered in their head, but tied together by the taile with fire-brands betweene them, able to set the whole land in combustion and vproare. The Schismatikes vnderstand that the bonds of peace are not one policie, one discipline, one ceremonie: but as it is heere said, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme. Wherefore seeing both of vs agree in the maine matters, it is a very fruitlesse contention to quarell about by points.
               Againe, the Papists acknowledged heeretofore that our Bible and booke of diuine seruice doe containe doctrine sufficiently necessarie to saluation, and so much (as I haue Iudge C
                           •…
                        oke charg at N
                        •…
                     rwich, 
                        
                           •…
                        n. 1606 read) Pope P
                        •…
                     us quintus (who could not erre) signified in a letter to our late Soueraigne of famous memorie Queene Elizabeth. Vpon what credit I speake this I suppose most know. If any mistrust that great reporter, I can easily shew him a parallel in Bristoes 
                  Mot. 34. 
                        •…
                     ag. 144. motiues. The Protestants are apes of the Papists, the very Communion booke is made altogether out of the Masse booke, and so are other Church-bookes also taken out of ours, as it is well known to all who know both. If this be true, then his Collection is not false, who censured their not communicating with vs, to be a point not of deuotion: but of state, namely, to maintaine the Popes supremacie. To speake plainely, which I thinke sincerely, the people of the Puritans, and the priests of the Papists, are the true let why both endeauour not to keepe the vnitie of the spirit in the bond

of peace. For the first, schismatickes are like the vaine Philosophers in old time, Hierom. epi. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Popularis aurae mancipia vaen
                        •…
                     
                     lia, certaine creatures bred of the peoples breath; hoc ipso placere cupiunt quod placere contemnunt, they reake not top Hierom. epist. ad Eustoc.
                   be condemned of the learned for ignorant: so they may be commended of the ignorant for learned. And therefore when Plato saw the people pitying Diogenes for ducking himselfe in cold water on a frostie morning, he said vnto them, if yee depart to your lodgings and leaue gazing on him, he will I warrant you presently come out of the Riuer and keepe himselfe warme. Yea, but shall we carry away the people from looking on Diogenes? as Piutarch in vita Alcibiadis. 
                  Socrates did Alcibiades, make them pitchers and so carry them away by the eares, instruct them in season, out of season. Because some of their pastors haue put out their owne light, I beseech you let vs that are conformable, supply their silence by our diligence. For albeit some of that humour be malitious, and incorrigible, yet other (as De guber. Dei lib. 5. 
                  Saluian
                        •…
                     s writes) errant, sed bono animo errant: impij sunt, sed hoc putant veram esse pietatem. And as In Luc. 14. 
                  Euthymius, quidam Pharisaei semimali. So that if we cast our Net on the right side of the ship dexterously, we may peraduencatch them, and draw them to fruitfull knowledge and dutifull obedience.
               It was an excellent speech of our late Archbishop Whitgift. diocesan (whose memory I assure my selfe is so sweet as Eccles. 49. 1. Hony in your mouthes, and musicke in your eares) hee is not worthie to hold two Benefices, who doth not preach one sermon at the least euery Sunday. As there be many wholesome iniunctions touching Cap and Cope: so likewise many good orders for the reuerent administring of the Sacraments, and diligent preaching of the word. God forbid, the one should be Canons, and the other made Pot-guns onely. I confesse that Diuines which are Counsellours or Prelats, or attendants in Court, or Students in Vniuersities, or necessary residentiaries in Cathedrall Churches, or imployed in writing, or ambassages, may profitably spend

their time otherwise: but the Country Pastors occupation is to feed his flocke, by preaching to Christs sheep and catechising his limbes▪ If it be said of him who will, but can not preach, that he is a dumbe dog: I thinke it may bee said of him who can and will not, that he is a dumbe diuel. It is a beastiall rudenesse 
                     •…
                  aith reuerend 
                     Eccles. polit. §. 81. pag. 262. 
                  Hooker alluding to the first of Iob, ver. 14. that Oxen only should labour, and Asses feede: that good schollers should preach, and dunses be preferred. But it is a greater inconuenience for the Church, that Oxen should onely feede, and Asses take all the paine: who though happily they be resident at their Cure, yet for the most part non-resident from their Text, or if they come neere it (as Luther was wont to say) they make a martyr of it.
               Will you haue the factious Nouelists cut off with little griefe to the Prelats, and no hurt to the people? then let vs that are conformable liue in our studies, and die in the Pulpit: that when our great Lord shall come to reckon with vs for our stewardship, he may not take vs (as 
                     Melanct. in Rom. 12. Tom. 3. fol. 1025. 
                  Aristophanes said of Cleon) with one foot in the Court, another in the City, none in our Cure: but (as those two great Diuines Iewel and Caluine were wont to wish) hee may finde vs in his owne house doing his owne businesse.
               Concerning the Papists: I hold the Priests among them most inexcusable. The people are like the sea, and the Priests are like the winde, the sea of it selfe would be calme, if the winde did not set it in agitation: but so long as Priests and Arch-priests, Iesuits and Seminaries raigne ouer this our goodly Forrest, seeking for their pray: well may the Courtiers haue their goods, and the Country their Persons, but I feare the Pope will haue their hearts, and the diuell in conclusion their soules. It is great pitie that many piercing wits of England can see nothing but thorow the spectacles of Statising Iesuits, and so hauing but two paire of eies, one of their Confessors which is nequam: and another of their owne, which is ne quicquam:
                  
the wilfull blind leading the wofull blind, they fall both into the ditch. If they could put on eyes either of religion or reason, they should easily see that their Priests doctrine is preiudiciall to Christ, and their liues hatefull to all Christendome. For this saying is ingros
                     •…
                  ed in their owne bookes, Relat of religion in the West parts of the world. § 36. 
                  That of all Christians, Italians are the worst: of all Italians, the Romans: of all Romans, the Priests: of all Priests, the Cardinals: and commonly the most leaud Cardinall is elected Pope. Nay some maintaine this opinion, The sparing Discourse. pag. 41. 
                  Hominem non Christianum posse esse Romanum pontificem, That a man which is not a member of Christ, may notwithstanding be head of the Church. As for our home-bred, but farre taught Gun-powder men, aske the Secular Priests what the Iesuits are, and they will, and that in Ibid. pag. 7. print, tell you, that they be Statists, 
                  Important con. pag. 3. 
                  Machiuellians, 
                  Quod libet 3. art. 3. 
                  Atheists, 
                  Iesuit. Cat. lib. 1. cap 1. 
                  so many Iesuits, so many Iudasses. Aske the Iesuits what the Secular Priests are, and they will tell you, that they are Drunkards, Dunses, Fooles, the very 
                  Quod libet 1. art. 2. 
                  refuse of the Church. If these things bee true, then they bee both monsters of men: if false, most malicious diuels.
               God of his infinite goodnesse grant, that wee and they and all may seriously labour for a perfect vnion, not onely of law, but of loue, for an vnitie of the spirit, knit with the bond of peace: that all of vs following the truth, in loue, wee may maintaine one and the same faith, and hereafter attaine one and the same kingdome of glory.
               Preached at Ashford in Kent, at the Lord Archbishops Metropoliticall visitation, Anno 1607 September 11.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               The Gospell.
               
                  LVKE 14. 1.
                  It chanced that Iesus went into the house of one of the chiefe Pharisees, &c.
                  
               
               IN this Gospell obserue the
               
                  Mercie of Christ, to ward the

                        
                           Master of the feast in comming to his house, for his good, albeit a Pharisie, yea a chiefe Pharisie.
                        Guests,

                              
                                 Impotent, in healing a man which had the dropsie.
                              
                                 Impudēt, instructing such as contended for place, vers. 7. 8. &c.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Malice of the Pharisies, infolded in one word, They watched him, against all rules of entertainment and hospitalitie, making their table a snare to catch him.
               
               
                  It chanced] Saint 
                     Apud Cal Instit. lib. 1. cap. 16. § 8. 
                  Basil is of opinion, that chance and fortune are words of Heathens, and not of Christians. Ignoratio causarum nomen fortunae confinxit. Ignorance made Fortune a Goddesse. The Gentiles as Ephes. 4. 18. blinded in their vnderstanding admit and admire this vncertaine Ladie, Plin. hist. lib. 2. cap. 7. 
                  Huic omnia expensa, huic omnia feruntur accepta, & in tota ratione mortalium sola vtram
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      paginam facit: but such as are taught in Christs vniuersitie, know, that all things come to passe by diuine prouidence, without our heauenly Father a sparrow doth not fall from an house, nor an haire from our head, Matth. 10 29. and therefore Saint Augustine was exceedingly displeased with himselfe for often vsing in his writings the word fortuna, and happily some will except against our translating, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  it chanced, and in the Gospell appointed for the last Sunday, Luke 7. 11. It fortuned, as also cauill at those words

in the Collect, among all the changes and chances of this mortall life. For answer then vnto this obiection, and for clearing of our text; you must vnderstand, that albeit nothing be casuall in respect of Gods knowledge: 
                     Caluin. vbi sup. §. 9. yet many things are casuall in respect of our ignorance. Which 
                     Part. 1. quaest. 116. art. 1. 
                  Aquine doth exemplifie thus: A master sendeth about one errand two seruants, one being ignorant of the others iourney: this concourse of the two seruants in respect of themselues is casuall, and the one may wonder to see the other imployed about his businesse in the same place: but yet in regard of the master who did preordaine this, it is not casuall. Almightie God seeth and foreseeth all things vno actu, yea vno ictu semel & simul: and therefore to him as being all eye, nothing is old, nothing is new: but vnto men it may be said truly, that there be so many chances as there be changes inuoluntary. Herein wee doe not ascribe any thing vnto blind Fortune, but all vnto Gods all-seeing prouidence; yet so, that the diuine prouidence take not away freewill and contingence, for this good act of Christ as it happened not by fortune; so likewise it came not to passe by fate, not, I say, by Si quis Dei voluntatem appellat nomine fati, sententiam teneat linguam corrigat. Aug. de Ciuit. lib. 5. cap. 1. fatall destiny, for God according to the common axiome of the Schoole, non necessitat sed facilitat, he doth induce the good to doe good with alacrity, not inforce them against their will. Prudent. in Hamartig
                        •…
                     ma. 
                  Quoniam probitate coacta gloria nulla venit. As then in regard of God, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is well translated, it came to passe: so in regard of vs, as well, it chanced. As it was prouidence in God, it came to passe, as contingence in Christ being man, it chanced. For hee might haue visited a Publican so well as a Pharisie, but it fell out so, that Iesus went into the house of one of the chiefe Pharisies.
               
               Christ conuersed with men of all sorts, and all sex, sometime blessing Mark. 10. 16 little children, sometime conferring with sillie Iohn 4. women, sometimes eating with the 
                     Matt. 9. 10. Luke 19. 9. Publicans esteemed the greatest sinners, and heere dining with the Pharisies accounted the greatest saints, hee despised

none who came to saue all. He Pr
                        •…
                     . 1. 21. cried in the streets among the prease, powring out his minde and saying, Matt. 11. 28. 
                  Come to mee all yee that are weary and laden and I will ease you. And at his death his hands on the Crosse were stretched out, his head bowed downe, his breast open, as ready to redeeme and receiue such as would beleeue in him. Fulgent. serm. de duplici na
                        •…
                     . Christ. 
                  Homo Deum contemnens à Deo discessit, Deus hominem diligens ad homines venit, dilexit impium vt faceret iustum, dilexit infirmum vt faceret sanum, dilexit mor
                        •…
                     uum vt faceret viuum.
               
               
                  One of the chiefe Pharisies] It is apparent in the Gospels history, that the Pharisies were the greatest enemies vnto Christ, and therfore this being a chiefe Pharisie, was happily one of Christs chiefe enemies. And Cyril apud Aquin in loc. yet Christ being inuited, as it should seeme, to his house formally, comes friendly, without any further examination of his intent, and being come, benefits him and his in vttering a parable and acting a myracle, seeking to Marlorat. win them all vnto the truth. Ardens. Hereby teaching to blesse such as hate vs, embracing all occasions of loue whereby we may be reconciled vnto our mortall enemies. In malice there is nothing else but misery, whereas a common vnion begets a communion of all good things. Augustine hom. 15. 
                  Habet proximus aliquam gratiam? ama illum & tua est: habestu aliam? amet
                        •…
                     te & su
                        •…
                      est. Hath thy neighbour any rare grace? loue him and it is thine: hast thou any notable gift? if hee loue thee, then it is his. And therefore Christ, albeit he did hate the pride, yet louing the person of this Pharisie, said and did also good to him and all his company.
               Againe, in that this Pharisie was a Chiefe, we note that there was among them, as in euery setled society distinction of offices and orders. In the great booke of Nature wee finde that the Bees haue their Master, Cranes their Captaine, Sheepe their Belweather. In holy writ also wee reade of 
                     Luke 19▪ 2. chiefe Publicanes, chiefe Iohn 12. 42. Rulers, chiefe Matth. 2. 4. Priests. Hell it selfe though it be the kingdome of confusion admits of some degrees and order, otherwise

Belzebub could not be Iohn 12. 31. prince of the wicked, and Matth. 12. 24 chiefe of the Diuels. And therefore tumultuous Anabaptists, and all such as would haue no differences and degrees among men in Church and common-weale, seeme to haue lesse reason then beasts, and lesse religion then either the most wicked men, or the most wretched Diuels. Order is the beautie of nature, ornament of Art, harmonie of the world. Now, shall euery thing bee in order, and the Church of God onely without order? It is a 
                  Cant. 4. 12. 
                  garden inclosed, and a garden must be kept in order. It is an 
                  Cant. 6. 9. 
                  armie with banners, and an armie must be marshalled in order. It is the 
                  1. Tim. 3. 15. 
                  house of God, and Gods house must be gouerned in order. A popular equalitie was so burthensome to the seditious Anabaptists in their rebellion, as that contrarie to their owne doctrine they did admit Lanquet. ad a
                        •…
                     . 1534. 
                  Iohn Matthew for their Captaine, and Iohn Aleyd for their King. And so there was a kind of order in their hurly-burly disorder, as there were some chiefe Pharisies: euen so some chiefe Anabaptists.
               
                  To eat bread] Ludolphus de vita Christ. part. 1. cap. 37. Three sorts of bread are mentioned in the Bible. Sacramentall, 1. Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine himselfe, and so let him eat of this bread, &c. Doctrinall, Ioh. 6. 
                     Vers. 26. 27. 32. 34. Labour not, saith our Sauiour, for the loaues and for the meat which perish, but for the meat and bread that endure to life euerlasting. Corporall, Mat. 4. 4. Man shall not liue by bread only, but by euery word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. Now the bread here spoken of, is neither mentall nor sacramentall, but corporall. And this kind in a strict acception is the loafe made of wheate, or some like graine, Gen. 14. 18. Melchisedek King of Salem brought foorth bread and wine: but in a more generall and large signification, it is vsed in holy Scripture Cyril. apud Pa
                        •…
                     ig. in loc. 
                  pro omni comestibili, for all kind of food. As Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat 
                  Nomine panis intelligit
                        •…
                     r omne necessarium ad alimentum Aquin. & Carthusian. ibid. 
                  bread: and in the Lords prayer, Giue vs this day our daily bread: where panis is pan, euery thing necessarie for this our life. See 1. Sam. 14. 24. 2. Sam. 9. 10. Prou. 31. 14.

Ierem. 11. 19. It is then a weake conceit of Ardens, and the counterfeit Eusebius Emisenus, to note from hence the moderate diet of Christ on the Sabbath day, whereas Cal
                        •…
                     in. Are
                        •…
                     . Vega. eating of bread is as much as feasting or dining with the Pharisie. For if there had been nothing but dry bread on the boord, happily there would haue beene lesse contending for place.
               
                  On the Sabbath day] The Pharisies inviting and our Sauiours comming on this day, to this dinner, euidently demonstrate that it is not vnlawfull to feast on the Lords day. For if the Iewes might entertaine neighbours and friends on their Sabbath: how much more Christians on our Sunday, being assured, that God is worshipped euen on this day Culman. in lot. rather with workes of hospitalitie and charitie, then by fond macerating of our bodies. I write not this against godly fasting, nor yet for vngodly feasting. Moderation is the best dish at the table, for immoderate fasts exceedingly dull vs: and on the contrarie, sanctified feasts in good companie, make vs more fit for deuotion and other duties of the Sabbath, especially when Christ is in presence, when a good man is moderator at the boord, whose speech is Coloss. 4. 6. 
                  powdred with salt 
                  Ephes. 4. 29. 
                  that it may minister grace to the bearers, edifying his host and all his house. Christ heerein shewed himselfe thankefull and faithfull, hee did not bite his host in present, nor backbite him absent, but in requitall of his good cheere gaue good words, and better aduice. Christ was faithfull also, for wheras it is the fashion of parasites and trencher-Chaplaines to flatter, or at the least, humour great men at their table: he did not deuoure the faults of the chiefe Pharisie with his fowles, and his sinne with his sauce, but correct him and his, Ians
                        •…
                     n. in lot. instructing their soules while they feed his bodie. This ought to bee the center of all our conuersation and conference, to make those which are bad, good; and those which are good, better. So did Noe converse with them of the old world; so Lot with them of Sodome; so Iob with them of the land of Vz,

and so 1. Cor. 9. 22. 
                  Paul with all men, vsing all meanes to saue some.
               The Pharisies had Pontan. two faults especially, misconstruing of the Scriptures, and pride. Christ here doth rectifie their error in both, in healing a sicke man on the Sabbath, he doth instruct them in the true meaning of the fourth Commandement according to the present occasion offered, and in his parable to the guests, hee deliuereth an excellent document concerning their ambition. Hee could haue cured this man, as he did many, with his bare word only; Ardent. Iansen. but to shew that all handy workes, as these of charitie, and other of necessitie, as to pull a beast out of a ditch, are not vnlawfull on the Sabbath, he touched him, and by touching healed him.
               Two circumstances amplifie Christs exceeding rich mercies in acting this miracle: first, for that he did it vnasked freely: secondly, for that hee did it with hazard of his credit stoutly. He did helpe the Luke 7. Centurions seruant, but vpon entreatie: the Matth. 15. womans daughter of Cana, but after a long and earnest sute: the blind Mark. 10. 
                  Bartimeus, but after much crying, O sonne of Dauid haue mercie on mee: the Matth. 17. lunatike, but his father vpon bowed knees asked this boone, Master haue pitie on my sonne: whereas this man is cured instantly, without any request of his friends, or prayer of himselfe. Againe, Christ vndertooke this cure with hazard of his honour, wheras other miracles vsually wrought his glory. When hee raised from dead the widowes sonne in Naim, all that were present praised God and said, Luke 7. 16. 
                  A great Prophet is risen vp among vs, and God hath visited his people: when hee cured two blind men, Matth. 9. They spread abroad his fame throughout all that land: when hee fed about fiue thousand with fiue barley loaues and two fishes, all that saw the miracle, said, Iohn 6. 14. 
                  This of a truth is the same Prophet that should come into the world: when he made the deafe to heare, and the dumbe to speake, such as were spectators euen with open mouth as it were cried, Mark. 7. 37. 
                  He hath done all things well; but in helping

this man after this manner on the Sabbath, he knew that the Pharisies on the contrarie would obiect that hee had done ill: and yet he first acted the miracle, then makes an apologie for it, answering their secret malice, which of you shall haue an oxe or an asse, &c. Heming. Teaching vs hereby that we should not cease to proceed in well doing, though an infinite number of potent enemies on euery side combine themselues against vs.
               
                  Panigarol. part. 1. hom. in locum. Some for the further amplifying of Christs abundant goodnesse, imagine that the sicke man heere was a parasite to the Pharisies, and that hee came to this feast of his owne accord as a baite to catch Christ, and not with an intent to be cured of his Sauiour. Maldonat. Other hold this improbable, conceiuing that he made no suite but held his peace, rather out of Cyril. feare then out of loue to the Pharisies: he did happily beleeue in heart, but lest the Pharisies should excommunicate him, he durst not openly confesse with his mouth that Iesus is the Lord. As Psalm. 39. 3. 
                  Dauid in another case, I held my tongue, and spake nothing, I kept silence, yea euen from good words, but it was paine and griefe to me. Howsoeuer it was, heere we may behold the riches of our Sauiours exceeding great loue, curing the dropsiemans bodie Beda. Gregor. together with the Pharisies soule. Heming. Doubtlesse the diseased of the dropsie fell into it by disordered surfetting and drunkennesse. Hence then obserue, that Christ despiseth not those which haue cast themselues into sicknesse through their owne fault, if they follow this mans example: to wit, if they come where Christ is, and suffer themselues to be touched and healed of him, if they come to Church, heare the Word, fall to repentance, confessing their sinnes, and hartily crauing pardon for the same.
               The second chiefe part of this Gospell is the Pharisies malice, consisting of three degrees. It was in the Pharisie great iniustice to returne euill for good, but greater to doe this vnder the pretence of loue, yet greatest of all vnder colour of loue at a feast. For 
                     Perkins Gouernment of the tongue. chap. 7. the time of mirth is at

meales, at the table men haue licence to talke Odi memorem compotorem: & 
                        •…
                     itat & probat Marloras in loc. freely, not onely by the rules of humanity, because Gellius l. 13. cap. 11. 
                  b
                        •…
                     llaria maximè mellita quae non sunt mellita: but also by the grounds of Diuinity; for Iudges 14. 12 
                  Sampson at his marriage feast propounded a riddle to his friends, and the faithfull at Hierusalem did eat their meat together with gladnesse, Act. 2. 46. Such then as obserue the merry gestures, and catch at the pleasant words of their guests at table, make their wine like 
                  Deut. 32. 33. 
                  the poyson of Dragons and the cruell gall of Aspes, heating their neighbours and making them drunken 
                  
                     
                        •…
                     abac. 2. 15. 
                  that they may see their priuities.
               
            
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  1. COR. 1. 4.
                  I thanke my God alwaies on your behalfe, &c.
                  
               
               THis Text is a cunning Aretius, Martyr. Piscat. & alij. insinuation of our Apostle, for intending to chide the Corinthians, he begins his Epistle with a commemoration of their vertues, that afterward he might more freely without any suspition of malice reprehend their vices: it consists
               
                  Aquin. In
               
                  Commending them for the present:

                        
                           Caluin. 
                           Generally, For the grace of God which is giuen you, &c.
                        
                        
                           Particularly, rich in all vtterance and in all knowledge.
                     
                  
                  Comforting them against the time to come, which also shall strengthen you to the end, &c.
               
               An example worthy to be Gualter. followed of euery Preacher, lest by concealing the commendable gifts of his auditors, and inculcating only their faults and follies, he breed hate to himselfe and despaire to them.
               
                  I thanke] By this all men, in more particular all Saercerius. Ministers are taught not to repine, but to reioyce for the good things in other, especially for the successe of the Heming. Gospell, out of a fellow feeling not only to weepe with

such as weepe, but also to be Rom. 12. 15. glad with such as are glad. The Sectaries of our daies heerein are very defectiue, for whereas our 2. Cor. 11. 29. Apostle said, Who is weake and I am not weak? They like busie Flies are buzzing alwaies on the soares and gaulds of the Church, and as for the manifold gifts of God by which our Pastors are made rich in al vtterance and in all knowledge: what doe their inuectiue Libels against our Clergy, but vnworthily disgrace these graces, in stead of giuing thanks vnto God alwaies in our behalfe. For as some Hostus lib. 3. contra Brent. prologomen. Papists affirme that Scripture cited by vs is no Scripture: so some Schismatikes haue giuen out, that our preaching is no preaching, that our learning is not sanctified, and that our vtterance doth not edifie.
               
                  My God] Hereby Musculus, Heming. not denying that hee was God to them and all other, for Rom. 10. 12. 
                  he that is Lord ouer all, is rich vnto all that call on him: 
                  Theophylact. Martyr. but out of a singular faith in God, and vnfained loue to them, esteeming that his owne good which hapned well vnto the Church: I thanke my God on your behalfe: as the God of all is my God, so the good of all is my good; and I thanke the giuer of all grace for it, and that not coldly, but with such an earnest deuotion Aretius in loc. as if he were my God only; nor seldome, but alwaies. A little loue will be mindfull at sometime, but mine affection is so great vnto you, that I thanke God alwaies on your behalfe. Paul surely did somewhat else then praise God for his Corinthians: alwaies therefore must not be construed Idem. Ibidem. absolutly, but restrained and referred vnto the present occasion of his speech, as if he should haue said, as often as I thinke of you, I thanke God for you, alwaies in all my praiers, as it is Philip. 1. 4.
               
                  For the grace of God which is giuen you] Caluin. Gualter. Lest he might heere seeme to flatter them in his commendation of their gifts, he puts them in minde who gaue them, and for what end. God is the giuer of euery grace; Oecumen Pomeran. Aret why then doe you boast of your gifts, as if you receiued them not? 1. Cor. 4. 7. And he gaue them vnto you, not to make 1. Cor. 1. 10. dissention in the Church and Schisme, that some may 1. Cor. 3. 4. side with

                  Paul and other with Apollos: but for Piscator. this end, that the testimonie of Iesus Christ may be confirmed in you.
               
               
                  By Iesus Christ] Or as other translate according to the Greeke, in Iesu Christ: hereby signifying Sarcerius. that the graces of God are giuen in Christ, and for Christ only, such as are Christs are made rich by him in all things, according to that of our Apostle, 1. Cor. 3. 22. All are yours, and ye Christs, and Christ Gods. 
                  Caluin. Marlorat. Aret. Interpreters obserue that Paul speaking heere metonimically, doth vnderstand by this one word grace, not only the gifts of vtterance and knowledge mentioned in this Scripture, but all the benefits of Christ reuealed in the whole Gospell. And therefore Saint Com. in loc. 
                  Ambrose and E
                        •…
                     arrat. in loc. 
                  Anselme excellently glosse the Text, Hoc constitutum est à Deo, vt qui credit in Christum, saluus sit sine opere, sola fide gratis accipiens remissionem peccatorum: It is ordained by God himselfe, that whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, should be saued not by any worke, but by faith alone, receiuing freely pardon of all his sinnes.
               
                  In all vtterance, and in all knowledge] Sarcerius. That is, in all doctrine, and in all vnderstanding, whereby men are able to discerne betweene sound and false doctrine, Aretius. the one concerning teachers, and the other hearers. Or by speech is meant the gift of Aquin. tongues, or the gift of Beza. elocution, or the gift of preaching in Anselme. euery kind, giuing Hebr▪ 5. milke to babes, and strong meat to them of age; and by knowledge, a right exposition of the Scripture. Now these two must goe Aquin. together, in as much as neither vtterance without knowledge, nor knowledge without vtterance can edifie: for hee that aboundeth in his study with vnderstanding but wants a 
                     Coloss. 4▪ 3. doore of vtterance to vent it, is like the man that had the rheume and could not spet: on the contrary, he that hath a world of words void of matter (as Lib. 1. de Orat. 
                  Tully speaks, Nulla subiecta sententia & scientia) is like the child who bloweth in a little shell a great buble, which is so vain that it is marde as soone as made.
               These gifts of speech and vnderstanding are named only, Martyr. because the Corinthians abused them in their dissentions

especially, prophaning the graces of God giuen (as our Apostle speakes 1. Cor. 12. 7. elsewhere) to edifie withall, vnto the destruction and vtter vndoing of the Church. If any shall obiect that all the faithfull in Corinth had not these gifts? Marlorat. Answer is made that there was among them, as among vs, and euer shall be such a communion of saints; as that the praise which is indeed proper to some particular men and members, is ascribed to the whole body of the Church in generall. And therefore Com. in loc. 
                  Caietane notes accurately, that as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   may be construed adiectiuely, yee are made rich in all things: so likewise substantiuely, ye are made rich in all. Applying Gods grace rather to the whole congregation in grosse, then to singular persons in seuerall.
               
                  By the which things the testimonie of Iesus Christ was confirmed in you] Piscator. The witnesse of Christ is nothing else but the witnes of the blessed Apostles concerning Christ Act. 1. 8. euen the Musculus. Calutn. Gualter. preaching of the Gospell, the summe whereof is to reueale Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. So that the meaning of Paul is plaine, by these manifold graces as Martyr. effects and fruites of the spirit, you may know that you haue receiued the true Gospell: or by these two gifts, vtterance and knowledge, as instrumentall causes the testimony of Christ is confirmed in you. Learne from hence to reuerence those men which are indued with these meanes of thy saluation, euermore thanke thy God in the behalfe of Schooles and Vniuersities, as the common nurseries of all vtterance and knowleege. 
                  Dr. Couel pref. before des. of M. Hooker It is said of reuerend Hooker, truely, that hee was borne for the good of many; but few borne for the good of him. In this vnthankfull age some rich in the graces of God are neglected, and other rich in the gifts of the world are preferred. But Psal. 37. 1. fret not thy selfe because of the vngodly, for learned men forgotten in States and not liuing in eminent places, are Aduancement of learning, lib. 1. pag. 13. like the Images of Cassius and Brutus in the Funerall of Iunia: of which not being

represented as other were, Tacitus saith, eo ipso praefulgebant quòd non visebantur. If thou well employ Gods talent of vtterance and knowledg, that the testimonie of Christ may be confirmed in other, assuredly (noble yoke-fellow) thy credit is honour enough, and thy worke it selfe a sufficient reward vnto thy selfe. Remember that the profitable seruant said not in the Matth. 25. Gospell, Ecce mihi lucrifeci: sed ecce tibi lucrifeci domine.
               
               
                  So that ye are behind in no gift] Caluin. Heming. Gualter. That is, in no necessarie gift whereby yee might attaine sauing knowledge, wanting no grace competent vnto such as Ardens. are in via, 
                  1. Pet. 2. 11. strangers and pilgrimes on earth. Or as Paul expoundeth himselfe, behind in no gift incident to such as waite for the appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ. It is true that now we know but in 1. Cor. 13. 9. part, and prophecie but in part: our greatest perfections haue their imperfections, our gifts are giuen by measure, though happily Luke 6. 38. shaken together and pressed downe, yet not running ouer as long as wee waite for Christ: but when he shall appeare, when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall bee abolished.
               
                  Appearing of our Lord Iesus Christ] The second comming of Christ is called a reuelation, or an appearing in respect of vs, and inrespect of himselfe. In respect of vs, for at his comming 1. Cor. 4. 5. 
                  hee will lighten things that are hid in darknesse, and make the counsels of our hearts manifest. At that time it shall bee knowen who bee Gods ele
                     •…
                  t, and who reprobrate; then our Lord shall vnfold the 
                     Dan. 7. 10. Apoc. 20. 12. Cuncta
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cunctorum cunctis arcana patebun
                           •…
                        .
                   bookes of conscience, which all the time of this life were shut vp closely, that all the world may read what is written in the consciences of all men, and according to the contents of these records iudgement shall bee made. Many puissant Princes and sage Philosophers haue their honourable memorie magnified in this world, whose soules in hell are terribly tortured, in which respect one said of Aristotle; Woe to thee Aristotle that art praised where thou art not, and art tormented where thou art. On the

contrarie, blessed art thou Queene Elizabeth, O thrice happy, for albeit treacherous Papists, enemies of Gods grace, dishonour thee where thou art not, assuredly thou art comforted where thou art. 1 Iohn. 3. 2. 
                  Now are we the sons of God, but yet it doth not appeare what we shall be: for 
                  Coloss. 3. 4. 
                  whensoeuer Christ (which is our life) shall shew himselfe, we shall appeare with him in glory.
               
               Secondly, the comming of Christ is a reuelation in respect of himselfe: for whereas he came first in humilitie, being 
                  Iohn 1. 10. 
                  in the world, but not knowen of the world, hee shall now come with cloudes in such a maiestie, Apoc. 1. 7. 
                  that euery eye shall see him. 
                  Matth. 24. 27. 
                  As the lightning commeth out of the East, and shineth into the West: so shall also the comming of the sonne of man be, that he may not onely discouer himselfe in heauen to the good; but also that on earth where his ignominie was most apparent hee may manifest himselfe to the wicked. And for this cause the place of iudgement (as Vide Riber. in Ioel, cap. 3. Num. 2. Lorin. in Act. 1. 11. Lombar. 4. sent. distinct. 48. Aquin. & Altissiodor. ibid. some coniecture) shall be the valley of Iosaphat, neere to Ierusalem and the Mount of Oliues, that in the very same place where he was iudged, condemned, crucified; all may see him with great honour to bee the Iudge both of the quicke and of the dead, Acts 10. 42. and that hee who did ascend to heauen in the sight of a few Disciples, shall descend (as it is foretold by the glorious Acts 1. 11. Angels) in the sight of the whole world to iudge them all in righteousnesse. All which is exceeding necessarie for the credit of his gouernment in this life, that all may see that he was both wise and holy in all whatsoeuer he permitted or ordained, and that neither the Psalme 83. Ieremy 32. 1. good may complaine any more that vertue was oppressed, nor the Habac. 1. 6. wicked glory that vice was exalted. Hee shall in that day separate the 
                     Matth. 3. 12. & 13. 30. wheate from the cockle, the graine from the chaffe, the Matth 13. 48 good fish from the bad, and the Matth. 25. 32 sheepe from the goates: and the good hee shall place at the right hand, taken vp (as 1. Thess. 4. 17. 
                  Paul saith) into the aire that all the world may know them, and honour them as Saints: and the wicked hee shall place at his left hand,

leauing them vpon the earth that all may behold and despise them as sinners.
               
                  Which also shall strengthen you to the end] Heming. We are not so perfect, but that we may be more perfect vntill Christ appeare. Yee must aske therefore this confirmation of God, that ye may bee strengthned euery day more and more to the end. Philip 1. 6. 
                  Hee that hath begun this good worke in you, will performe it vntill the day of Iesus Christ. 
                  1 Th
                           •…
                        ss 5 23 
                  He will sanctifie you throughout in soule and bodie, 
                  
                     Phi
                           •…
                        ip 2. 1
                        •…
                     . 
                  working in you both the will and the deed, euen of his owne good pleasure. 
                  1. Cor 1. 9. God is faithfull, euer dealing with his seruants according to his word. As then hee Matth. 28. 20 promised, euen so will hee be with vs vntill the worlds end, that wee may be blamelesse at the day of his comming, not absolutely without sinne: for 1. Iohn 1. 8. 
                  if wee say wee haue no sinne, wee deceiue our selues, and truth is not in vs. But he shall so preuent vs in all our doings with his holy grace, that we may li
                     •…
                   
                  Anselm. 
                  sine criminali crimine, 
                  Ardens. that we fall not into such hainous sinnes as may shu
                     •…
                   vs out of his fauour; Caietan. or if at any time we fall into those sinnes, hee shall so Ephes. 3. 16. 
                  strengthen vs with power by his spirit in the inner man, as that we shall againe recouer our selues, and so be blamelesse at the day of his comming: or Eng. Gloss. Martyr. Marlorat. 
                  blamelesse, because there is no condemnation vnto such as are in Christ, Rom. 8. 1. He is our righteousnesse, and sanctification, 
                     •…
                  . Cor. 1. 
                     •…
                  0. euen the propiti
                     •…
                  
                  tion for our sinnes, 1. Iohn 2. 2. couering our iniquities and forgiuing our vnrighteousnesse, Psal. 32. 1. and therefore wee shall be blamelesse in the day of the Lord, because nothing shall bee laid vnto the charge of Gods elect, Rom. 8. 33. In that houre we shall heare this happy doome deliuered by Christ our Sauiour, C
                        •…
                     me yee blessed of my father, &c. He saith not, Come ye blessed of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob; nor ye blessed of Moses, or of the Patriarchs and Prophets, or yee blessed of God: but yee blessed of my father. Insinuating that all these blessings proceeded onely from the fatherly loue that God beareth vs in respect of his sonne. Come yee blessed therefore,

possesse you the kingdome prepared for you from the foundation of the world: as for the wicked, earth shall open vnder their feet, and the diuell laying hold on them they shall all together goe downe Psal. 55. 16. quicke into 
                     •…
                  ell, and there being couered with huge mountaines of earth, shall be bolted vp with eternall bolts, and bound hand and foot with chaines of perpetuall damnation. O Father of mercy, which hast placed vs in this world as in the middle between heauen and hell, Bernard. ser. 31. ex paruu. euen as Nouices are in a house of probation: assist and strengthen vs with thy Spirit to the end, that we may be found blamelesse in the end. Lord make vs heere thy subiects in the kingdome of grace, that hereafter we may be thy Saints in the kingdom of glory.
               Amen.
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATH 22. 34.
                  When the Pharisies had heard that Iesus had put the Sadduces to silence, &c.
                  
               
               THis text is an H
                        •…
                     ing. Ferus. Ponta
                        •…
                     . in locu
                        •…
                     . abridgement of the whole Scripture, to wit, of all the doctrine contained in the Gospell and in the Law: for the pi
                     •…
                  h of all the Gospell is to beleeue that Christ is God and man, as it is said heere, the Lord of Dauid, and the sonne of Dauid: and the 1. Tim. 1. 5. end of al the Law is to loue God with all thine heart, and thy neighbour as thy selfe: for on these two Commandements (as our text telleth) hung all the Law and the Prophets, 
                  Piscator. Interpreters of the Law.
               
                  When the Pharisies had heard that Iesus had put the Sadduces to silence] The Sadduces, Herodians and Pharisies were sectaries of diuers and Ioseph. antiquit. lib. 18. cap. 2. aduerse factions, all differing one from other, and yet (as we read in this present Chapter) all these ioyne together in confuting Christ: yea Luke 23. 12. 
                  Pilat and Herod mortall enemies are made friends, and agree together in confounding Christ: according to

that of the Prophet in the second Psalme, The Kings of the Earth stand vp, and the Rulers take counsell together against the Lord and against his anointed. And therefore when as we shal see Turke against Iew, Iew against Turke, Pope against both, and all of them against Gods Israel: or when we behold the Seminary Priest against the Iesuit, and the Iesuit against the Seminary Priest, and both against the Protestant: or when as happily wee feele the brethren of diuision against the brethren of separation, and the brethren of separation against the brethren of diuision, and both against Englands conformable Clergie: let vs remember our Sauiours lot heere, and lesson Matt. 10. 24. elsewhere, The Disciple is not aboue his Master, nor the seruant aboue his Lord. It is enough for the Disciple to be as his Master is, and the seruant as his Lord is. If they haue called the master of the house Beelzebub, how much more them of the houshold? And let all true Christians Ephes. 4. 3. 
                  endeuour to keepe the vnitie of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Tha
                     •…
                   as there is a combination of Pharisies, a society of Iesuits, a congregation of Separists, a brother-hood of Schismatikes; euen so to confront all these, let there be a communion of Saints and a perpetuall holy league in truth of orthodoxall Catholikes.
               
                  They came together] It is a true saying, B. Latimer. 
                  bonum est Concilium, sed bonorum, a Councell is good, if it consist of such men as are good: otherwise the councell of the wicked Psal. 22. 16. lay siege against the godly, when Pharisies are met in a conuocation they Psal. 7. 15. trauell with mischiefe, and bring forth vngodlinesse. Truth, and many good men for the truth hath beene condemned in Councels, as See Doctor Fulke in Tit. 3. 
                  Chrysostom, in a Councell holden at Chalcedon, Athanasius in a Councell holden at Antioche, Iohn Husse in a Councell holden at Constance. The Councels of Ariminium and Nicomedia decreed for the Arrians against Christs Diuinity: the second Councell of Ephesus for Eutyches and Dioscorus against the truth of Christs humanity: the Councell of Trent against many sound doctrines of Gods holy word,

in so much as the Papists of France protested against it in the daies of Francis the first, openly deliuering in print, Iesuits Cat. lib. 2. cap. 1. that it is to be refused touching discipline as well Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill.
               
                  And one of them] Caluin. Elected of the rest as the mouth of the company, being of a more ready wit and accurate iudgement, asked him a question, tempting him: 
                  Ardens. not as God tempted Abraham for his triall, or as a Schoolemaster doth his scholler for instruction, but as Sathan a Christian to delude him. Our blessed Sauiour therefore being Wisdome it selfe, doth answer the Doctor of the Law out of the Deut. 6. 5. bookes and bowels of the Law, Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, &c. As if hee should say, though other gods are contented with Pontan. outward and eye-seruice; the Lord thy God is a Ioh. 4. 24. Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit: 
                     Pr
                           •…
                        . 23. 2
                        •…
                     . 
                  sonne giue me thine heart: not a piece nor a part, but all thine heart, all thy soule, all thy minde. See the further exposition of this and that other Commandement touching loue toward our neighbours, Gospell on the 13. Sunday after Trinity.
               
                  This is the first, and the greatest Commandement] Anse
                        •…
                     me. Ardens. Aretius. 
                  First in order, and greatest in honour. First in respect of the Granat. Con 1. in loc. Law giuers intention, who wrote all Scriptures and made all creatures especially for this end, that he might be loued aboue all things. And first in the Law-writers pen, as being Heming. first set downe: and first in it owne nature, for asmuch as the true feare and loue of God is the 
                     Psal. 111. 10 Ecclesiasticus 25. 13. beginning of all wisdome, without which it is impossible to loue what wee should, as we should, for we cannot loue our neighbours as our selues, except first we loue God more then our selues. And the first as Marlorat. Idem Rabanus apud Aquin. in loc. comprehending in it all the Commandements of the first table, virtualiter continens reliqua, for he that loues God with all his heart, soule, minde: will neither commit idolatry, nor blaspheme his name, nor
                     d 
                     Caietan.
                   prophane his Sabbath.
               And this Commandement is greatest, as hauing the

greatest Heming. Obiect: for Ecclesiastes 5. 7. 
                  God is higher then the highest, a great King 
                  Psalm. 95. 3. 
                  aboue all gods: and greatest, as requiring the greatest Aretius. perfection of loue, to wit, all our heart, all our soule, all our minde: and greatest, in that Granat. all other great Commandements are subordinate to it: and greatest, as Coster. endurig the greatest time, for though that prophecying be abolished, or knowledge vanish, or the tongues cease, 
                  1. Cor. 13. 8. 
                  yet loue neuer falleth away. To conclude with Aretius in one line, Maximum est obiecto, Iure, dignitate, difficultate, perpetuitate, fine. From hence we may know which are our greatest iniquities, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Heresie, prophaning of the Sabbath, outragious swearing, in a word, euery trespasse against the first Table, being committed in the same measure of malice, is a greater sinne then any transgression of the second Table: because to loue God with all our heart, soule, minde, is the first and greatest Commandement, and so by consequent, optimi corruptio pessima, the breach of the greatest ordinance is the greatest offence.
               
                  And the second is like vnto it] Heming. Not like in obiect, but in subiect, Iansen. Con. cap. 118. as being both precepts of loue: or like in respect of their Coster. bond, as tying all alike: or like 
                  Euthym. because these two mutually depend each on other, for hee that loues God with all his heart, will also loue his neighbour as himselfe; and whosoeuer loueth his neighbour as himselfe, loueth him assuredly for Gods sake, August. Confess. lib. 4. c. 9. 
                  amicum in Domino, inimicum propter Dominum. Or like, 
                  Aretius. Heming. because we must loue both God and our neighbour vnfainedly, 1 Iohn 3. 18. 
                  not in word and in tongue only, but in truth and in deed. Ordinarily men vse their louers as Diez. Con. 2. in loc. ladders, only to climbe by, the ladder is laid on our shoulders, and embraced with both hands in our bosome so long as wee stand in any neede of it, but afterward it is cast into some corner, or hanged vp by the walles: euen so when neighbours haue serued once the turnes of ambitious and couetous wretches either for their profit or preferment, instantly they be forgotten: for it is an infallible position (as See Cominaeus hist. l. 3. c. 12. 
                  Cominaeus
                  
obserueth) among states-men in eminent place, to loue those least vnto whom heretofore they were bound most. Or like, 
                  Marlorat. for that as the first is the fountaine of all duty required in the first Table: so this second Commandement of all offices enioyned in the second Table; for he that loueth another hath fulfilled the Law, Rom. 13. 8.
               
                  On these two Commandements hang all the Law and the Prophets] As being their principall argument and a
                     •…
                  me, Euthym. in Matth. 7. Iansen Pontan. Coster. in loc. for whatsoeuer is recorded in Moses, or in the Prophets, or in the Psalmes, or in any Scripture else, may be reduced vnto them: and is written especially for this end, that wee may loue God aboue all things, and our neighbours as our selues. And therefore let not poore men obiect that they cannot purchase Gods booke, nor ignorant people complaine that they cannot vnderstand and remember the contents of holy Scripture: for behold, Christ hath heere prouided a little Bible for thee, which thou mayest easily get, and euer keepe in memory; Loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and thy neighbour as thy selfe.
               
               
                  While the Pharisies were gathered together, Iesus asked them] One Pharisie did assault Christ, that if he were conquered, his shame might seeme the lesse; if conqueror, his victory might appeare the greater: but Christ opposeth a whole Councell of Pharisies, and so confoundeth them all in asking one question onely, that no man afterward durst aske him any moe questions. Why this question was asked, and how it may be well answered: see Galatin: de Arcanis lib: 8. cap: 24. Iansen: con: cap: 119. Maldonat, Caluin, Genebrard in Psalm. dixit Dominus domino. Marlorat. Aretius, Panigarol, in loc. I conclude with I
                        •…
                      Psa. 109. 
                  Augustines glosse, Quomod
                        •…
                      nos diceremus, nisi à te disceremus? nunc ergo quia didicimus, dicimus. In principio eras verbum, & verbum eras apud Deum, & Deus eras verbum, omnia per te facta sunt, ecce Dominus Dauid, sed nos propter infirmitatem nostram, quia caro desperata iacebamus, verbum caro factus es, vt habitares in nobis, ecce filius
                  
Dauid. Certê tu in forma Dei cùm esses, non rapinam arbitratus es esse aequalis Deo: Ideo Dominus Dauid. Sed teipsum exinanîsti formam serui accipiens, inde filius Dauid. Deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & in ipsa interrogatione tua dicens, quomodo filius eius est, non te filium eius negâsti, sed modum in quo id fieret inquisisti.
               
            
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  EPHES. 4. 17.
                  This I say, and testifie through the Lord, that yee hencefoorth walke not as other Gentiles walke, &c.
                  
               
               THis text consists of a
               
                  Soule, giuing not onely light, but also Habet vim ob
                           •…
                        estationis & asseuerationis magnae. Aretius in loc. life to the present exhortation of Paul: I say this, and testifie through the Lord, 
                     Primasius. Lombard. Anse me. that is, I doe not only desire, but (as he speaks elsewhere) 2. Tim. 4. 1 
                     I charge you before God, and before the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall iudge the quicke & the dead. I call God to Oecumen. witnesse that I haue taught you the truth, I testifie this as Christs 2. Cor. 5. 20. Ambassadour, Marlorat. it is not my word, but his will. And therefore Heb. 13. 22. suffer the words of exhortation, because whosoeuer heareth his, heareth him, Luk. 10. 16. and he that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God: 1. Thes. 4. 8.
                  Bodie, that we should walke

                        Not as Gētiles in their

                              Vnderstanding, blind and ignorant.
                              
                              Will, obstinate and alienated farre from a godly life, 
                                 Aquin. Sinning
                           
                           
                              Wilfully, giuing themselues ouer vnto wantonnes.
                              
                              Actually, to worke all maner of vncleannesse.
                              
                              Insatiably, with greedinesse.
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           But as Christians in

                              
                                 Putting off their old man, that is, their old conuersation in time past as being corrupt.
                                 
                                    Thought, vnaduised anger, with all bitternesse of spirit. 
                                       Ardens. In Word, lying and filthy communication.
                                    
                                    Deed, vniust deling & stealing.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Putting on the new man according to Gods image, renued 
                                 Caietan. Aquin. in all the powers of the Mind

                                    Rationall, in putting away lying & speaking the truth.
                                    
                                    Irascible, in being angrie without sin.
                                    
                                    Cōcupiscible, in stealing no more, but labouring &c.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  That yee henceforth walke not as other Gentiles walke] The most obseruable point in all this exhortation is Pauls Antithesis or checker-worke, as it were the blacke of the Gentiles, and white of the Christians. The Gentiles are blinded in their vnderstanding and ignorant: but Christians haue learned him in whom are all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge, Coloss. 2. 3. hearing him in his Aretius word, and taught of him also by his Lombard. Auselm. Marlorat. spirit, leading them into all truth, Iohn 16. 13. The Gentiles by the
                  
                  meanes of their blindnesse and ignorance walke in vanitie of their mind, farre from a godly life, committing sinne, not out of passion and infirmitie, but out of election and iniquitie, giuing themselues ouer vnto wantonnesse, and that not in thought onely, but in act also, working and that all manner of vncleannsse, and that euen with greedinesse insatiably, Philip. 3. 19. glorying in their shame, and, as Caluin. Aretius. some Diuines aptly construe the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , contending for the victorie in villanie. But Christians hauing learned Christ, whose doctrine
                     Tit. 
                     
                        •…
                     . 12. forbids all vngodlinesse, ought to put on the new man, that is, new manners, all the daies of their life seruing God in righteousnesse and true holinesse. The Gentiles vnregenerate are giuen to lying and forgerie: but euery Christian regenerate will speake the truth vnto his neighbour, as being members one of another. Vnregenerate men in their anger offend God, and giue place to the diuell: but men regenerate, will not let the sunne goe downe vpon their wrath: in a Ardens. Caietane. Marlorat. literall exposition, Horat. 
                  ira furor breuis est, all their vnaduised anger is not a day long: or in a mysticall sense, they bee so moderate as that neither Hierome. Aquin. reason the 
                  Ecclesiast. 12 2 
                  light of the minde, nor Lombard. Anselme. Christ the sunne of righteousnesse shall at any time forsake them in their furie. Men vnregenerate make 1. Tim 6. 5. gaine their godlinesse, robbing openly, stealing secretly: but a regenerate man is content to labour with his hands the thing that is good, that hee may giue to him that needeth. Hee laboureth, as knowing that the end of lasinesse is the beginning of leaudnesse, Laurent. Pisanus euangei
                        •…
                     e. paradox. 
                  finis otij resurgere ad prauum negotium. And hee laboureth Occumen. not as a theefe to doe mischiefe, but the thing which is good; 
                  Ardens. Aretius. Marlorat. exercising himselfe in some vocation or trade that is good, and that for good, that hee may rather giue then take from other; acknowledging that axiome to bee true, Laurent. Pisan. vbi s
                        •…
                     pra. 
                  Magis delinquit diues non largiendo superflua, quàm pauper rapiendo n
                        •…
                     cessaria. Vnregenerate men haue filthy communication and vnsauourie: but the speech of a regenerat
                     •…
                   man is so Colos. 4. 6. powdred with salt, that as oft as need is it may 
                        〈◊〉
                      grace to the hearers.
                  
In a word, vnregenerate men are full of bitternesse, and fiercenesse, and wrath, and roring, and cursed speaking, and all maliciousnesse: but regenerate men are courteous one to another, mercifull, forgiuing one another, euen as God for Christs sake forgaue them.
               
               These particulars haue bin discussed often elsewhere, but in the whole you may note Sarcerius & Piscator in loc. two maine parts of repentance, namely contrition or mortification in putting off the old man: renouation or viuification in putting on the new man. And this newnesse of life must be both outward, and inward: outward, in righteousnesse toward men, and holinesse toward God, opening our lips to speake that which is good, and labouring with our hands to doe that which is good. If idolatrous Gentiles and superstitious Papists in old time did more then they knew: what a shame lieth vpon vs if wee know more then wee doe? This renouation also must be spirituall and inward, as it is in the text, renued in the spirit of your mind, 
                  Anselme. that is, in the spirit which is the minde, Hierome. Ardens. or in the spirit and minde. In the Caluin. Caietan. supreme part of the minde, as well as in the will and affections: or in the minde made Lombard. Aquin. spirituall after God in righteousnesse and true holinesse. He who first made this Image restoreth it againe being lost, ipse qui fecit reficit: 
                  Ardens. albeit this newnesse be found in vs, it is not of vs, it proceeds onely from the Lord who saith, Apoc. 21. 5. 
                  Ecce noua facio omnia; Behold I make all things new. Wee are his workmanship created in Christ Iesus vnto good workes, Ephes. 2. 10. and therefore wee must pray with Dauid, O God renew a right spirit within me, Psal. 51. 10. and embrace the Gospell of Christ as the 
                  Rom. 1. 16. 
                  power of God vnto saluation, instructing vs how to liue soberly, righteously, and holily Tit. 2. 12.
               Whosoeuer is a scorner and a despiser of this soulesauing grace, grieues the spirit of God, and giues place to the diuell. It is true that the Spirit cannot properly 
                     Thom. part. 1 quaest. 21. 
                        
                           •…
                        rt. 3. 
                  grieue, because the mercies of God are not passiue but actiue, succouring not suffering in our miserie. Primafius. Lombard. Yet a man that

is giuen ouer vnto wickednesse, doth occasion other in whom the Spirit dwels, exceedingly to lament and grieue for his faults and follies: or he may be said to grieue the Spirit, Anse
                        •…
                     me. because filthy communication is displeasing to the Spirit: or for that as Augustin. epist. 23. much as in him is, he doth extinguish the Spirit, and driue him out of his mansion, and so giues place to Sathan, entring in at two doores especially saith 
                     In Psal. 14
                        •…
                      
                     idem Lombard. in loc.
                   
                  Augustine, Per ostium cupiditatis & timoris, aut cupis aliquid terrenum & kâc intrat, aut times aliquid terrenum & hâc intrat.
               
               On the contrary, whosoeuer is renued in the spirit of his minde, openeth a doore to Christ, Apocal. 3. 20. and Christ dwelleth in him, Eph. 3. 17. and he liueth in Christ Galath. 2. 20. nay the good man Rom. 13. 14. 
                  puts on Christ, and is as it were a walking 
                  Casaubon. not. in epist. Nys. ad Eustat. 
                  picture of Christ, so the text expressely, Galath. 4. 19. my little children, of whom I trauell in birth; againe, vntill Christ be formed in you: which Com. post. in Galath. 
                  Hierome glosseth aptly thus, In illo verê Christus formatur, qui virtutem fid
                        •…
                     i eius intelligit, & in quo omnis conuersatio eius exprimitur at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      depingitur. 
                  Dr. Fulke in loc. In this life this renouation is only begun, and not perfect vntill this mortal put on immortality. S. Lib. de Nat. & Grat. cap. vlt. 
                  Augustine notably to this purpose, Charity begun, is righteousnesse begun: charity encreased is righteousnesse encreased: great charity is great righteousnesse: perfect charity, perfect righteousnesse. Idem epi. 29. 
                  Charitas in alijs maior, in alijs minor, in alijs nulla: There be many degrees of charity, some haue lesse, other haue more: sed plenissima, quae iam non possit augeri, quā diu homohic viuit, est in nemine: but ful and perfect charity cannot be found in any man so long as he liueth heere. To conclude this argument in three words onely, iustifying righteousnesse is perfect, but not inherent: sanctifying righteousnesse is inherent, but not perfect: glorifying righteousnesse is both inherent and perfect.
            
            
               
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATTH. 9. 1.
                  Iesus entered into a ship, and passed ouer, and came into his owne Citie, &c.
                  
               
               THis History cō
                  mends vnto your cō
                  sideration
               
                  Actors,

                        Agent,

                              Porters of the Palsie-man as Procters helping: Behold they brought, &c.
                              Christ, as the chiefe Doctor healing: infirmities of

                                    
                                       Soule, Thy sins be forgiuē thee.
                                    
                                       Body, Arise, take vp thy bed &c.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Patient: a man, a sicke-man, a man sicke of the palsie, so sicke that he could neither goe, nor stand, nor sit, but lie in his bed.
                     
                  
                  Auditors,

                        The Scribes, murmuring at the matter and blaspheming Christ, vers. 3.
                        The people, maruelli
                                 •…
                              g at the miracle and glorifying God, ver. 8.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Iesus entred into a ship and passed ouer] It is written of Erasmus in eius ritapraefix. tom. 1. Hieron. 
                  Hierome that hee spent foure yeares in a Desert of Syria so studiously, that he did allow himselfe but a little time for sleepe, lesse for meat, none for idlenesse. But our blessed Sauiour neither immured in a wall, nor Cloystered in an Abbey, nor hidden in a Wildernesse, Act. 10. 38. 
                  went about doing good from Coast to Coast, and from Country to Country, from the Gadarens vnto Galil
                        •…
                     : whose Heming. diligence you must according to your seuerall occupations and occasions imitate so fast as you can, and so farre as you may; knowing that it is impossible not to finde ill in idle:
                  
                  Lament. Pisanus Euangel. paradox. 
                  Hominem ot iosum non esse malum impossibile, quia nihil agendo dis
                        •…
                     u male agere. From hence likewise we may note Christs vnspeakable goodnesse, who came to the Gergese
                     •…
                  s
                     • 
                     F
                           •…
                        rus c
                           •…
                        . 1. in loc.
                   afore they desired him, and stayed in their countrie till they reiected him as being prior in amore, posterior in odi
                        •…
                     : loning vs 1. Iohn 4. 19. first afore we loued him, and ne
                     •…
                  er forsaking vs vntill we forsake him: as he speaks by the mouth of his holy Hosea 13. 9. Prophet, O Israel hurt is from thy selfe; but helpe is in mee.
               
               
                  Into his owne citis] The man sicke of the palsie was cured in Capernaum, as Saint Marke reports in his second Chapter at the first verse: but Christ as wee find in the Gospell of Saint Matthew was borne at Matth. 2. 1. 
                  Bethlehem, and brought vp at Matth. 2 23. 
                  Nazaret: how then accord you these places? 
                     De consensu Euangel l. 2. cap. 25 Idem Anselm. in loc.
                   
                  Augustine doth answere, that Capernaum was the chiefe, and as it were Metropolitane Citie of all the Galileans, and therefore in what place soeuer of Galile Christ was, hee might be said to be in Capernaum, as the whole Roman Empire spread farre and wide was termed Rome, and all the parts of Huntingdonshire, Cambridgeshire, Bedfordshire, take their denomination from Huntingdon, Cambridge, Bedford, the principall head townes of those countries. And this exposition is receiued by theIn loc. Penner of the Ordinarie Glosse, Beda, Hugo, Strabus and other, apud Maldonat. in loc. But Idem Theophi. lact. Euthym. Beza in loc. 
                  Chrysostome giues a more probable satisfaction vnto the present obiection, affirming that Christ was borne in Bethlehem, and bred in Nazaret; but afterward dwelt in Capernaum especially, shewing his greatest miracles (as Matt. 11. 23. himselfe witnesseth) in that Citie; Thou Capernaum, which art lifted vp vnto heauen, shall bee brought downe to hell: for if the great workes, which haue been done in thee, had been done among them of Sodom, they had remained to this day. So that Capernaum is called heere Christs owne Citie, because Matth. 4. 13. leauing Nazareth, hee went and dwelt in Capernaum. Kilius in l
                        •…
                     . Hence wee may learne that euery towne which is adorned with the Gospell is Christs owne Citie, there 
                     •…
                  esus is

present in his Sermons, in his Sacraments, in his gifts, in his grace. Diez Con. 1. in loc. So long as the children of Israel obeyed God, and walked in his waies according to his word, so long they were called his people. Come saith the Exod. 3. 10. Lord to Moses, I will send the to Pharaoh, that thou may est bring my people the children of Israel out of Egypt: but when once they werePsal. 106. 38. stained with their owne workes, and went a whoring with their owne inuentions, in so much as they Ibid. ver. 20. turned their glory into the similitude of a Calfe that eateth hay: the Lord speaking vnto Moses his seruant, cals them not as afore my people, butExod. 33. 1. 
                  the people, or according to the vulgar, Thy people. So Hierusalem once Psal. 87. 2. Gods citie, was afterward by Matth. 23. 37. killing the Prophets, and reiecting the Lord of the Prophets, a den of theeues, Matth. 21. 13. So Rome was in Pauls age the Rom. 1. 7. beloued Church of Christ, but since her erroneous doctrine, as the wine of hir fornication, hath intoxicated the Kings and inhabitants of the earth, Apocal. 17. 2. what is shee but the Apocal. 17. 5. 
                  mother of abomiuations, a synagogue of Sa
                        •…
                     han, a seat of Antichrist.
               
               It may be further obiected heere, that the 
                  Matth. 8. 20. 
                  Son of man had not so much as an hole wherein to rest his head, and therefore no Citie of his owne. To which, answer may be, Musculus in loc. that the holy Ghost (in these two contrary texts as they seeme) doth insinuate that lesson secretly, which Paul else-where deliuereth openly, to wit, that wee should 
                  1. Cor. 7. 31. 
                  vse the world as if we vsed it not, 
                  2. Cor. 6. 10. 
                  as hauing nothing, and yet possessing all things.
               
               
                  They brought to him a man sicke of the palsie lying in a bed] In these Porters and Procters obserue with Postil. in loc. 
                  Hemingius and Soarez Culman. other, vnfained loue to their friend, and a liuely faith in Christ: in being Iob 29. 15. feet to the lame, great loue. But in bringing him vnto Christ, and that after such a strange manner as Saint Cap. 2. 4. 
                  Marke reports it, vncouering the roofe of the house where Christ was, and letting downe their sicke neighbour in a bed, and when he was so brought vnto Christ holding it sufficient to present Deauxamis in loc. 
                  miserum ante
                  
                  misericordem, an obiect of miserie to the father of mercy, greater faith. Other happily would haue powred out a long prayer vnto Christ in word, or haue giuen vp a large petition in the behalfe of their friend in writing: but they were well assured, as Paraph. in 5. Luke. 
                  Erasmus elegantly, that the distressed in his couch, eò magis loquebatur misericordi medico, quia loqui non poterat. And therefore the text saith in the next clause, that Iesus saw the faith of them. 
                  Zepper. con. 1. in loc. As God, he saw their faith, as he saw the thoughts of the Scribes: and as man, he saw their faith by their workes. Hee saw the faith of the porters in bringing, and of the palsie man in suffering himselfe to be brought in such a manner: and therefore Christ, the Luke 2. 25. consolation of Israel, affoords him instantly comfort both in word, and deed. In word, Sonne bee of good cheare, whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, Iohn 1. 12. 
                  hath power to be the sonne of God: and if thou bee Gods sonne, thou maist bee very well of good cheare; for your Matth. 6. 8. 33. father in heauen knoweth your wants, and prouideth all things necessarie for you. Indeed, healing first his sinnes, and then his sores.
               
                  Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee] Where first obserue, that Christ is so good as his word, yea better then his promise: for whereas he saith, Matth. 7. 7. 
                  aske and yee shall haue, hee granted heere to the palsie man afore hee did aske, and more then he did aske. Musculus in loc. Wee read not that the patient himselfe, or his agents exhibited any petition vnto Christ in his behalfe, yet the Lord heard the Psal. 10. 19. desire of the poore, yea the very groanes of his seruants 1. Sam. 1. 13. not expressed, Hilarius apud Lilium in loc. So God vnto Moses, Exodus 14. 15. 
                  oratio licet tacens est Deo clamor. His palsie was prayer enough, and his faith a sufficient friend for his way to the God of all comfort. Againe, this patient came to Christ especially, if not onely, to bee cured of his corporall infirmitie: but behold his spirituall iniquities are healed also. Sonne bee of good cheare, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee. 
                  1. Kings 3. King Salomon desired of God onely, that hee would giue him an vnderstanding heart to iudge his people: but the Lord granted him

not onely wisedome in such a plentifull manner, as that none were like him in vnderstanding either afore or after his time: but also bestowed on him other blessings of riches, honour, and prosperitie which he did not aske.1. Sam. 9. 
                  Saul seeking for Asses onely, found a kingdome. Augustin. Confess. lib. 9. cap. 10. 
                  Monica begged of God that her sonne Augustine might one day turne Christian and Catholike: but hee proued also the most illuminate Doctor of all the Fathers. As when Iudges 5. 
                  Sisera asked water, Iael gaue him milke: and as when Gehezi begged of Naaman one talent, he presently said vnto him,2 Kings 5. 23. 
                  Yea take two talents, and hee compelled him, and bound two talents of siluer in two bags: euen so God dealeth exceeding abundantly with vs aboue all that wee aske or thinke, Ephes. 3. 30.
               Secondly, in that Christ heere said to the patient, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, before hee said, Arise, take vp thy bed, and walke; 
                  Fe
                        •…
                     us & Mald
                        •…
                     nat. in loc. hee doth insinuate that first hee should haue craued pardon for his sinnes, and then afterward haue desired helpe for his sicknesse; that Matth. 6. 33. first hee should haue sought the kingdome of God, and then all other things should haue been cast vpon him. Ordinarily men are too carefull for their bodies, and too negligent in doing right to their soules; in so much as Sir William Co. newallis essay. 12. one said, Our bodies are made gentlemen, but our mindes are vsed as slaues. Euery man in his right wits affects a good seruant, a good sonne, a good friend, a good sield. Nay euery man is desirous his house, his horse, his hose should bee good, he will haue euery thing good about him, only not caring if his soule be bad in him. O wretched wight, saith Serm. 145. de tempore. 
                  Augustine, quid de te tu ipse malè meruisti? inter bonarua non vis esse malum nisi teipsum: How didst thou deserue so much ill of thy selfe, as that among all thy goods only thy selfe art bad.
               I obserue that Christ like a good Physician did first purge his patient, and take away the Hierom
                        •…
                     . The
                        •…
                     hylact. Euthym. matter of 
                     〈◊〉
                   disease, that hee might the better worke his cure. 1. Cor. 11. 30. Iohn 5. 14. Sinne is the cause of all diseases, and therefore Christ who was

without sinne, was also without sicknesse, he tooke vpon him (as the 
                     Thom. 3. part. quaest. 14. art. 4. Suarez in 3. Thom. disputat. 32. & Senten. in 3. sent. distinct. 15. schoolemen in this very well) infirmitates speciei, sed non indiuidui. Common infirmities vnto the whole nature of mankind, as to be weary, to thirst, hunger, mourne: but not the particular infirmities of euery singular person, as the blindnesse of Bartimeus, the feuer of the Rulers sonne, the palsie of this patient lying in his bed. Indeed it is said, Esay 53. 4. that hee tooke our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. But S. 1. Epist. 2. 24. 
                  Peter interprets it of our Sauiours passion, (his owne selfe bare our sinnes in his bodie on the tree. Saint Chap. 8. 17. 
                  Matthew construeth it of his healing all kind of diseases. See 
                        •…
                     . Bilson serm. of Christs suffring, pag. 261. Other expound it thus, he tooke vpon him our paine, that is, whatsoeuer infirmitie was in him, it was onely for our sake, not for his owne sinne: for so the Prophet explanes himselfe in the words immediatly following, hee was wounded for our transgressions, and broken for our iniquities, and with his stripes wee are healed. If any then be sicke, let them humbly confesse their sinnes, and heartily craue forgiuenesse of the same,Perkius treat. of dying well: & Coster. con. in euang. Dom. 18. post Pentecost. first consulting with a Physition for the soule, then entertaining a Physition for the bodie.
               4. Hence learne Heming. that Christ hath not an eye so much to the greatnesse of our sinnes, as to our faith. If hee see thy faith, hee will winke at thy fault. When the blessed theefe had confessed hïm on the crosse, Luk 23. 42. 33 
                  O Lord remember mee when thou comest into thy kingdome: Christ instantly forgetting all his former sinnes, especially respects his present confession, answering him exceeding gratiously, to day shalt thou bee with me in paradise. When Mark. 10. 52. 
                  Bartimeus had cried, Iesus thou sonne of Dauid haue mercie on me; Christ answered forthwith vnto the comfort of his soule, Goe thy way, thy faith hath saued thee. This palsie-man had sinnes in the plurall number: originall, as being vniuersall: and actuall, as being the speciall causes of his disease; which not vnlikely was occasioned either by some disquiet of minde, or else by some disdier of bodie: yet (as you see) so soone as Christ perceiued

the faith of himselfe and his friends, he said (as not respecting their Culman. other vertues, or his other vices) O sonne be of good cheare thy sinnes are forgiuen thee.
               
               5. In that Christ said heere, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, notwithstanding hee knew the Scribes would murmure and mutter against his speech: Heming. hee teacheth vs to bee faithfull in our calling, and diligent in doing our dutie, mauger the beard of all captious and cauilling aduersaries. As S
                        •…
                     m. 3. in natal. Dom. 
                  Bernard said of another text, Luke 2. 8. Haec mea sunt, mihi apponuntur, mihi proponuntur imitanda. This was spoken by Christ, and written by Matthew for our instruction. Hath then almightie God giuen such power vnto men, as to pronounce the pardon of sinne to the sicke man in his bed? Is the doctrine of confession and absolution agreeable to the Scriptures, and practise of the Church as well present as primitiue? then albeit some scribling Scribe, pen an invectiue pamphlet against a discreet Pastour executing this office, or some selfe-conceited Pharisie tell the people, this man blasphemeth: hee may notwithstanding (vpon good information of
                     Caluin. Inflit. lib. 3. cap. 4. § 21. 22. faith and repentance, as Christ in this place) say to the sicke sinner in his bed, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, and by Christs authoritie committed vnto him, I absolue thee. That absolution as well priuate as publike belongs principally, yea properly tanquam ex officio to the Minister, as Christs ambassadour in his ecclesiasticall function: I referre you to the Postils of Melancthon, Culman, Zepperus vpon this place: to Martin Bucer in 
                  Inter scripta A
                        •…
                     glicana, pag. 688. 
                  articulis concordiae: Melancthon in Matth. 18. vers. 18: & in Iohan. 20. vers. 23: & in tract. de poenitentiatit. Confessio, tom. 2. fol. 191. Oleuian de substantia foederis, part. 2. pag. 278. 279. & sequent. Luther. Musculus, Cruciger apud Melancthon in 
                  Pag. 256. 
                  Concilijs Theologicis: Doctor Field, lib. 3. of the Church, chap. 25. Master White, way to the true Church, pag. 230. 231. For mine owne part, I wish vnfaignedly that all popish abuses of Confession and absolution vtterly abolished, they might one day bee more fully restored in our Protetestant

Churches vnto their primitiue sinceritie.
               6. Christ in saying, thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, doth Heming. instruct vs more fully concerning his owne person and office, for which he was sent into the world: namely, Luk. 19. 10. 
                  to seeke and saue that which was lost. Vnlinke the phrase, and you shall finde a Gospell in euery word. Sonne, If wee be sonnes, how can our father in heauen deny vs any good thing? Matth. 7. 11. Be of good cheere. 
                  Rom. 8. 31. If God be with vs, who can be against vs? if he will haue vs merrie, what shall make vs sorry? Thy in particular, sinnes in the plurall, many sinnes, all sinnes, are forgiuen freely, yet fully, through my grace, not vpon thy merit. For hee saith not (as Musculus. Heming. Interpretors obserue) thou shalt satisfie for thy sinne: but ecce remittuntur tibi, behold they be forgiuen. Againe, it is very remarkable that Christ saw their faith: but said thy sinnes. I grant with Euthymius and Chrysostom. Theophylact in loc. other ancient fathers, that vndoubtedly this sicke man had some faith, otherwise hee would neuer haue sought after Christ so greedily, neither would Christ haue receiued him into fauour so gratiously: yet Saint Matthew, Marke, chap. 2. vers. 5. Luke chapter 5. verse 10. attribute most vnto the faith of the porters, all of them relating the story thus: And when Iesus saw, not his: but their faith. And so many Doctors vnderstand this Text, asCom. in Luc. 5 
                  Ambrose, 
                  Catechil. 5. 
                  Cyrillus Hierosolimitanus, 
                  Com in loc. 
                  Hierome andAnselm. Heming. other. If Christ then be so willing to grant our requests vpon the prayer and inuocation of other; Th
                        •…
                     m. in loc. how ready will hee be to heare when our selues out of our owne faith are sutors for our selues? Vndoubtedly this saying, thy sinnes are forgiuen, is a B. Lat. serm. Gosp 20. Sun. after Trinitie. standing sentence, spoken not onely to the palsie man heere: but as a generall proclamation vnto euery one that beleeueth.
               
                  And behold certaine of the Scribes said within themselues, this maen blasphemeth] A man may blasphem 
                     Ludolph. de vita Christ. part. 1. c 47. Bonauent. in Luc. 5. Beauxamis. Panigaro
                           •…
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         loc.
                   three waies especially: first, ascribing to God that which is vnbefitting his excellent maiesty: secondly, by denying to God his proper attributes: thirdly, by giuing that vnto

himselfe which is only due to God. And in this third kind the Scribes imagined Christ to blaspheme, because none can forgiue sinnes except God. Esay 43. 25. I am he that putteth away thine iniquities for mine owne sake. Christ therfore prooues himselfe to be God, first by knowing their thoughts, and secondly by doing this myracle. Iesus saw their thoughts; ergo, God. For1. Kings 8. 39. God onely knowes the hearts of all the children of men, according to that ofIustin. Mart. de monarch. dei. Totus oculus est & qui minime fallitur quia minimè clauditur. Bernard. lib. 5. de consid. 
                  Philemon an old Poet:
               
                  Qualis Deus mihi dicite, censendus est,
                  Qui cuncta cernit, ipse sed non cernitur.
               
               
                  Whether is it easier to say thy sinnes be forgiuen thee? or to say arise and walke] Rupert. in loc. With God it is all one to say and to doe; but with men it is more easie to say this, then to shew this. And therefore that yee may know that the sonne of man hath power to forgiue sinnes on earth: 
                  Theophylact. I will by curing the palsie mans body, prooue that I can also saue his soule. Carnall men beleeue their sense more then their Sauiour, Hierome. 
                  fit ergo carnale signum vt probetur spirituale, 
                  Chrysostom. 
                  facit minus quod est manifestius, vt demonstret maius & non manifestum. And it is worth obseruing that Christ neuer openly forgaue the sinnes of any, Non hoc ante dicoret quam factis comprobaret. Rupert. in loc. till by working of myracles hee shewed euidently that hee had power to grant pardons. Ambassadours are not beleeued in another Nation, vntill they deliuer their letters of credence. Christ therefore shewed his Commission, andMusculus. letters testimoniall, or rather a plaine Patent: That ye may know that the Sonne of man hath authority to forgiue sinnes on earth, I say to the sicke of the palsie, arise, take vp thy bed, &c.
               
               
                  Arise, take vp thy bed, and goe to thy house] So many words are set downe for the greater Maldonat ex Chrysoct. manifestation of the myracle, as if hee should say, Thou that couldest not sit, now stand: thou that couldest not goe, now walke: thou that wert carried in thy bed, Hieron. epist. ad Rustic. now carrie thy bed: and Chrysost. Theophylact. Euthy
                        •…
                     . so demonstrate that thy former agilitie, strength, and health, is truly restored againe. Goe to thine
                  
                  house, that thy friends and acquaintance who knew thee to be sicke, may confesse my power in making the whole. If Christ would haue had this palsie man to follow him, he would not haue said, take vp thy bed: butMatt. 16. 24. 
                  take vp thy crosse. For to be Christs follower is not opus puluinaris, sed pulueris, a featherbed is vnfit for our swift race in theMatth. 7. 14. narrow way, where Matt. 10. 10. two coates are troublesome.
               
                  Kilius in loc. 
                  Mystically, this palsie man is euery man vnregenerate lying sicke in the bed of his sinne, not able to stirre hand or foote of himselfe for the good of himselfe. Hee must therefore be renued in the spirit of his minde after God in righteousnesse and true holinesse. Now the power to forgiue sinnes and to worke this cure is giuen to Christ onely. So Psal. 51. 2. 7. 
                  Dauid, Wash mee througly from my wickednesse, and I shall be whiter then the snow. So Chap. 31. 18. 
                  Ieremy, Conuert me Lord, and I shall be conuerted. And it is, as our Church speakes, a great maruell, nay, saith Apud Veg. in loc. 
                  Augustine, it is a more strange miracle to conuert a sinner and to make him a new man, then it was in the beginning to make the old world. For there was nothing to hinder God in creating the great world; but in renuing this our little world, besides our owne naturall corruption, all euils on earth, all diuels in hell are ready to withstand him. In more particular, he that will not worke for his liuing hath the palsie in his Rupert. in loc. hands, hee must therefore so learne Christ, as that hee steale no more, but rather labour with his hands the thing which is good. And so the Gospell and Epistle meete together in their argument and aime, both insinuating that Iesus Christ is the Sauiour of soule and body. Wherefore let vs as the beholders of this miracle, glorifie God, and pray with our Church:
               O God, for as much as without thee we are not able to please thee: grant that the working of thy mercy may in all things direct and rule our hearts through Iesus Christ our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  EPHES. 5. 15.
                  Take heede therefore how yewalke circumspectly, not as vnwise, but as wise men, &c.
                  
               
               IT is an axiome that will abide the touch-stone, whosoeuer is a good man is a wise man, and on the countrary, whosoeuer is an irrepentant sinner is a foole. Salomon affirmes it in his 
                     Chap. 1. 7. 22. & 8. 5. Prouerbes, and Christ a greater then Salomon confirmes it in his Gospell, expressing the dangerous estate of improuident sinners by the parable of the Matth. 25. 
                  foolish Uirgins, and terming the prodigall childs repentance Luk. 15. 17. 
                  comming vnto himselfe, as if he had beene out of his wits vntill his amendment, as the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   doth import, and the Latine resipiscentia, quasi 
                  Tert
                        •…
                     llian lib. 2. con ra Marcion, vel vt alij resipiscere q
                        •…
                     si res
                        •…
                     pere. 
                  receptio mentis adse. So Paul aduiseth vs in my text to walke circumspectly-, not as vnwise: but as wise men. And to be wise men according to the doctrine of Paul is to be new menEphes. 4. 22. 
                  to cast off our old conuersation, and to be renued in the spirit of our minde, to speake more particularly, the learned Atheist is a foole, Psalme 14. 1. The foole hath said in his heart, there is no God. The witty harlot is a foole, Prou. 9. 13. a foolish woman is troublesome, &c. The couetous (albeit the world repute him only wise, Varrol. 4. de ling. Lat. 
                  Diues quasi Diuus, as being a petite god on earth) is notwithstanding in the Scriptures estimate but a foole, Luk. 12. 20. O foole this night will they fetch away thy soule from thee. But because the drunkard is a most apparent grosse fot, our Apostle willeth vs heere principally to take heede of drunkennesse, be not drunken withwine, &c.
               That we may walke circumspectly, Ardentin loc. three points are to be considered especially,
               
                  Quò.
                  Quo modo.
                  Qua via.
               
               The Ecclesiastes 2. 14. wise mans eies are in his head, he therefore Heb. 12. 2. looketh

vnto Christ, Coloss. 3. 1. seeking the things aboue, where Christ our head sitteth at the right hand of God: and he walketh vnto the Citie which is Heb. 13. 14. to come, in the right way with a right eye. The way to heauen is to know God and his Christ, Iohn 17. 3. a liuely faith working by loue, Galat. 5. 6. and to walke in this right way vprightly, is to shun the mountaines of presumption and the pits of despaire, to turne neither to the right hand nor to the left, to run our race neither hastily nor slowly, but as Paul heere, circumspectly. Now the drunkard (as it is in the Prouerbe) is 
                  Esay 28. 7. 
                  out of the way, to speake the best of him in charitie, reeling in the way, for tipling heads haue topling heeles. It is a popish axiome, cautè, si non castè; but the truth is, no man walkes charily, but he who walkes chastly. Our Apostles cautè, is as much as Aqui
                        •…
                     . in loc. 
                  cauete, take heed of euery thing which is an hindrance to your walking in the waies of the Lord, but especially take heed that ye bee not drunken with wine wherein is excesse.
               
               Concerning this one sinne schoole Authors haue mooued many questions, as first, whether a man being sicke may be drunken medicinally for his health?
               2. Whether a man taking an inebriatiue potion, not knowing the force thereof, hereby committeth any sinne?
               3. Whether a man ouercharging his stomacke at a publike feast, not in any carnall delectation intemperatly carrowsing, but vpon complement onely pledging ordinarie cups of kindnesse, may iustly bee condemned of excesse?
               4. Whether the courteous invitor vrging his guest in loue, may bee said to make the riot, and if either bee thought author of misrule, whether occasionaliter, or causaliter?
               
               5. Whether any subiect in answering his Soueraignes health, may wittingly and willingly transgresse in this kind?
               6. Whether any for feare of stabbing, or any such like imminent perill, should endanger his soule to saue

his bodie; and if any of these kindes are to bee excused, whether à toto, or à tanto?
               
               For the resolution whereof, I refer you to 22. quast. 150. art. 1. 2. & sequent.
                   
                  Thomas, 
                  In Aurea summa, fol 157 
                  Altissiodorensis, 
                  In Thomam vbi supra. 
                  Caietan; holding it sufficient at this time to treat of voluntarie, wicked, inordinate drunkennesse implied in our text. First, voluntarie, bee not: insinuating that it is in our owne power. Secondly, wicked, drunken with wine. For, as Ardens in loc. ebrietas sancta.
                   Diuines are bold to speake, there is an holy drunkennesse, as that of the blessed Apostles on Whitsunday; and that of Martyrs and Saints in euery age, who taking the cup of saluation into their hands are so filled with the spirit, that they are euen sicke with loue, Cant. 2. 5. and inebriated as it were with the Psal. 3. 68. plenteousnesse of Gods house. Thirdly, inordinate, wherein is excesse, making men absolute Luther. Beza. Piscator. dissolute, ready to commit all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse. All these being put together, make drunkennesse a grandame in Babylon, and a very monopolie of mischiefe, transgressing euery precept of the whole Law.
               The first Commandement is, Thou shalt haue none other Gods but me. The meaning whereof Christ expounds it, Matth. 22. 37. is, thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thine heart, with all thy soule, with all thy minde. Hee saith not (as Chrysostome notes vpon the place) feare the Lord: for the most impudent Atheists haue trembled, often in whom there is no perfect loue, 1. Iohn 4. 18. which expelleth feare. Neither saith hee, know the Lord: for heathen men haue some knowledge of God by nature: Psal. 19. 1. The heauens declare the glorie of God, and the firmament sheweth his handie worke. Neither saith hee, beleeue the Lord thy God: for the Iames 2. 19. diuels also beleeue; but hee saith expressely that which is the Rom. 13. 10. fulfilling of the Law, loue the Lord thy God. As then our Rom. 6. 16. Apostle said, he is our master to whom we submit our selues as seruants to obey: so that is our God assuredly which wee like best and loue most. And therefore for as much as the glutton and drunkard is totus venter (as Erasmus said of a Frier) all belly, and

all for the belly: without all doubt his belly is his Philip. 3 19 God, and his glory his shame.
               The second Commandement is, Thou shalt not make to thy selfe any grauen image, &c. thou shalt not bow downe to them, and worship them. Albeit drunkards cannot endure to kneele one halfe quarter of an houre in the temple: yet they can bee content to kneele, and that on both knees, and those bare, pressing and answering healths in the tauernes either to their good Captaine, who many times is but a swaggerer; or else to their faire Mistrisse, who sometimes is little better then a strumpet; or else forsooth vnto their Soueraigne, vsing the diuels logicke, hee that will not be drunken for Caesar, is no friend to Caesar. 
                  Hieron. com. in Tit. 
                  Accusationis occasio est, adiuratum per Caesarem frequentius non bibisse. This vngodly Vide Ambros. lib. de Elia, c. 17 deuotion and idolatrous adoration of he-saints and she-saints, as they protest vnfainedly from the bottome of their heart vnto the bottome of the cup, is so full of scandall and scorne, that there can bee but a little difference between a drunkard in vpholding his wine-worship, and a Papist in obseruing his willworship.
               As for the third Commandement: a drunkard alway blasphemeth God in his workes, ofter in his words. It is an old prouerbe, Shew me a liar, and I will shew thee a theefe: so shew me a swaggerer, and I will instantly shew thee a swearer. For when once hee begins to seeme to himselfe valde disertus, a very fine man, faecundi calices cumiam fecêre disertum: hee will talke of God most, although hee thinke of him least. It is recorded in the Matth. 8. 31. Gospels historie that the dispossessed diuels entreated Christ that hee would suffer them to goe into swine; because the chiefe place of the diuels residence is the soule of the swilling drunkard. Matth. 12. 43 
                  In dry places he findes no rest, 
                  Bonauent. diet. sal
                        •…
                     t. c. 29. that is, in a sober minde hee gets no footing: hee dwels in low countries and in wet ground, in such as are filled with wine. Now when the spirit of God is gone which should direct their speech and guide their thoughts, and

Satan is entred in and taken possession of their ho
                     •…
                  se; then vndoubtedly the doore of their lips is shut vp from Gods praise, but open as hell mouth alway to sweare vainly, to forsweare villanously.
               Touching the sanctifying of the Sabbath enioyned in the fourth Commandement; an Alehouse in a Parish is ordinarily the diuels chappell; while Gods congregation is chaunting in the Church, boone companions are chatting in the tauerne, hauing their letanie, gospels and epistles in derision of our common praiers, and the welsh sermon in scorne of our preaching: Church hom. concerning the time and place of prayer. so that they more dishonour God, and serue better the diuell on Sunday, then in all the daies of the weeke beside.
               The fifth Commandement requires honour to fathers
               
                  Oeconomicall,

                        Parents.
                        Husbands.
                        Masters.
                     
                  
                  Politicall,

                        Betters in office.
                        Elders in yeeres.
                     
                  
                  Ecclesiasticall,

                        Tutors.
                        Pastors.
                        Prelates.
                     
                  
               
               Now the drunkard in this habit of sinne dishonoureth all at once, disobeying the counsell of his Parent, commandement of his Master, statutes of his Prince, direction of his Elder, lesson of his Tutor, exhortation of his Preacher, discipline of his Prelate. Scandalizing also by these leaud courses his mother the Colledge, his mother the Vniuersitie, his mother the Church.
               Against the sixth Commandement a drunkard offends more principally two waies: first, in Vide Ambros. lib. ae Elia, c. 16 
                  
                     •…
                  uinating the state of his owne bodie by disorder and intemperance.
               
                  
                     Owin Epigram: vt Venus eneruat vires, sic copia 
                           •…
                        acchi. Virgil. Una salus sanis nullam potare salutem,
                  Non est in pota vera salute salus.
               
               Secondly, being apt in this humour to stab other, according to that of Uirgil: Bacchus ad armavocat. And as another ancient Horat. Poet, in praelia trudit inermem. 
                  Church 
                        •…
                     om. against drunkennesse. 
                  Alexander the great being drunken killed his deare friend

                  Clitus, for whose life when he was sober hee would haue giuen halfe his Empire. The records of our Courts afford innumerable presidents in this kinde, in so much as the common epithete to quarrelling is drunken, as a drunken fight, or a drunken fray, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim faceret haec sobrius vnquam, for no man in his right wits admitteth of any such desperate courses.
               The drunkard is occasioned to breake the seuenth Commandement by his large commons, and leaud companions. For the first, Rom. 13. 13. after drunkennesse ensueth chambering, after chambering wantonnesse, Hieron. epist. Amando. 
                  pro membrorum ordine or do vitiorum est: and as Loc. com. tit. de libidinibus. 
                  Luther excellently, gula soror est, immo irritamentum & procus, & minister luxuriae, For temetum, 
                  Perottus in Cornucop. some conceit, is so called, eo quod tentet, and Isidor. etym. lib. 20. c. 32. 
                  vinum ab implendo venas: examples heereof in Scriptures are the Sodomites, Herod, Lot, Dauid, and in our Polydor. Anglican. hist. lib. 3. pag. 56. Chronicle Uortigerius.
               
               Secondly, the drunkard is inticed to the sinne of incontinence by leaud company: for although an Inne was called in old time Isidor. etym. lib. 15. cap. 2. 
                  propina, and of late corruptly popina of the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifying hunger, because Tauernehouses were first erected onely for the necessary refection of trauellers and strangers, and not for idle meetings of neighbours: yet afterward they became places of notorious riot and excesse, in so much that the Ecclesiasticus 26. 30. Wiseman said expresly, Two things are hard and perilous, a Merchant cannot lightly keepe him from wrong, and a Uictualler is not without sinne. And it is well obserued out of the second chapter of Iosua, verse 1. that the word in Hebrew vsed for an hostesse signifieth an harlot also, the messengers of Iosua went into an harlots house, that is, saith our English glosse, into a Tauerne-house, and in Latine stabulum is an Inne, and prostibulum a whore. Now the filthy communication and vncomely gestures vsuall in such places and among such persons are so great motiues vnto sinne, that as Martin Luther was won
                     •…
                   to say, It is as strange a miracle for a man to conuerse with such and

not to burne with lust, as it was for the three children to be in the fiery furnace and not to be 
                     •…
                  corched. Pro. 6. 27. 28 For can a man take fire in his bosome and his clothes not be burnt? or can a man goe vpon coales and his feete not hurt? Ambros. de poe
                        •…
                     it. li. 1. c. 14. 
                  Pascitur libido conuiuijs, nutritur delicijs, vino accenditur, ebrietate flammatur. In these two respects I may pronounce with Com. in Tit. 1. 
                  Hierome, Nunquam ego ebrium putabo castum. Adulterers and drunkards are of such affinity, Heliodor. Aethio
                        •…
                     . hist. lib. 13. that in ebrietatem amans, & in amorem eb
                        •…
                     ius procliuis admodum, a wanton will easily turne drunkard, and a drunkard as soone become wanton.
               As for the eighth Commandement: he that is drunken with wine first is a theefe to himselfe in his excessiue riot, and then being in neede is occasioned to steale from others also. Drunkennesse is Bonauent. diet. salut c. 8. 
                  regius morbus, a costly sin, for he that draweth his patrimony through his Church h
                        •…
                     m. against drunkennesse. throate, eating and drinking more in an houre then hee is able to earne in a whole weeke, must in fine come to beggery: Prouer. 23. 21. the drunkard and the glutton shall be poore, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags. He doth cast his house so long out of the window, that as Luscinius in salibus & iocis. 
                  Diogenes said, at the last his house doth cast him out of the doore, hauing left nothing rich except a rich nose. The prodigall child wastfull in the beginning of his iourney, was in the end so needy, that he was desirous to be fellow commonor with Luke 15. 16. swine. Diogenes derided a yong riotous gallant, who spent so much at dinner that hee had nothing but a Radish roote for his supper. In a word, the most ordinary progresse of a meane man giuen ouer to tipling is nothing else but this, from luxury to 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     quia perditus & nihil si
                           •…
                        i & suis seruans. Zanch. in loc.
                   beggery, from beggery to theeuery, from Holborne to Tyburne, from the alehouse to the gallowes.
               As for the ninth Commandement: Lib. de men. da
                        •…
                     . ad consent. cap. 14. 
                  Augustine makes eight kindes of lies, which 
                     Lombard. sent. l 3. dist. 38. & gloss
                           •…
                         Psal. 5. other haue reduced vnto three, mendacium officiosum, iocosum, malitiosum. And these may be contracted into two, to wit, a merrie verie lie.

All which a drunkard hath at his fingers ends: for the merry lie, cogging and iesting are the chiefe props of his tottering estate. And as for malicious lies, if he be on his Ale-bench, and sit downe in the seat of the scornfull, he will, as Luke 2. 1. 
                  Augustus Caesar once, tax the whole world, pratling of Priest and Clerke, yea Prince and people, censuring all hee knoweth, often more then he knoweth. Hee will not spare his other selfe, his best selfe, his owne selfe. Bacchus is painted by the Poets vsually naked: 
                     
                        •…
                     ulgentius mytholog. l. 2. 
                        •…
                     ab de Dionysio. heereby signifying that a drunkard reueales all the secrets of his heart, Plutarch. l. de garrulitate. 
                  quicquid est in corde sobrij, est in lingua ebrij. The which is a most odious fault in ciuility: for who will familiarly conuerse with such a dolt as can neither keepe his owne, nor his friends counsell? In vino veritas helpes him not a whit; for seeing all truthes are not to bee told at all times, he may beare false witnesse when he makes a true report, because the meaning of the commandement is, that we should not mooue any tales either false or true, whereby the credit of our neighbour is lost or lessened: but that on the contrary wee should endeuour by all meanes possible to maintaine his honest reputation among vs. And therefore the gabling drunkard in mouing many false prattles, and so making many foule quarrels, offendeth against the ninth Commandement especially.
               The naming of the last Commandement is enough, he that is guilty of the fact, of necessity must be accessary to the motion. And therefore to conclude this euidence, euen as a Generall that besiegeth a City, laboureth especially to gaine the Tower or the Castle, knowing that if hee possesse it, he shall instantly command the whole Towne: so likewise the diuell who daily doth assault our little citie, plots how he may be possessed of our Capitoll and Sconce, being assured that if our head be tipling, our eyes will bee wanton, our tongue blasphemous, our throate an open scpulchre, our hands ready to stab, our feete swift to shed blood: in briefe, all our members at

his seruice to become Rom. 6. 13. weapons of vnrighteousnesse, to commit all manner of sinne euen with greedinesse. And so the drunkard is like mare mortuum, as no fish can liue in the one, so no vertue in the other, Augustin. 
                  abominatur à Deo, despicitur ab angelis, deridetur ab hominibus, destituitur virtutibus, confunditur à daemonibus, conculcatur ab omnibus.
               
               But the foulenesse of this vnhappy sinne will appeare yet to be greater, if wee consider it according to our seuerall estates, as we are
               
                  Men.
                  Ciuill men.
                  Christian men.
                  Collegiate men.
                  Clergie men.
               
               If we consider our selues as men, we shall easily see that drunkennesse maketh vs no men. Virgil. epigramide venere & vino. 
                  Demens ebrietas, it is a voluntary madnesse, whereby men depriued of their vse of reason are like horse and mule without vnderstanding. Hanc qui habet, seipsum non habet, he that hath this sinne hath lost himselfe, and is become Chrysost. in Act. hom. 27. rather a beast then a man, nay Dadraeus lo
                        •…
                     . com. tit. 
                        •…
                     brie. tas. worse then a beast, for we can not enforce a beast to drinke more then he neede: Chrysost. ad pop. Antioch hom. 1. 
                  est voluntarius daemon, a drunkard, as it is in our English prouerbe, will play the diuell.
               
                  
                     Bez
                           •…
                        epigram. Quaeris quis sit homo ebriosus? atque
                  Nullus est homo Maeuole ebriosus.
               
               Secondly, if we consider our selues as ciuill men, this one sinne ouerthroweth all the foure cardinall and chiefe vertues. As Iustice, for how shall any man doe right vnto other, who cannot doe reason vnto himselfe? Prudence, which is often drowned in this sincke, and especially maintained by moderate diet, as the Aristot. ethic. lib. 6. Philosopher intimates in the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   to be quasi 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Temperance, for foulnesse of body followeth ordinarily Ezech. 16 49. fulnesse of bread. Fortitude, for as S. Lib. de Elia cap. 13. 
                  Ambrose notably, Quos mane insignes armis spectaueras, vultu minaces, eosdem vesperi cernas etiam à puerulis rideri, sine ferro vulneràtos, sine pugna interfectos, sine host
                        •…
                      turbat
                        •…
                     s, sine senectute tremulos, 
                  Iudith 13. 2. 8. 
                  Holofernes hauing lost his wit in wine,

lost his head also by the hand of a silly woman. And that of a moderne Poet is memorable, de duce Dipontino.
               
               
                  Pons superauit aquas, superarunt pocula pont
                        •…
                     m,
                  Febre tremens peri
                        •…
                     t, qui tremor or bis erat.
               
               Thirdly, if wee consider our seiues as Christian men, 1. Tim. 5 6. 
                  he that liueth in pleasure is dead while he liueth: ergo, saith Epist. Oceano tom. 2. fol. 324. 
                  Hierome, a drunkard is not onely dead, but buried in his sinne also. There be many 
                     Esay 5. 11. Ioel 1. 5. Prou. 23. 29. woes denounced against him in this, and moe woes executed on him in the next life. For I tell you (saith our Apostle) that they who doe such things shall not inherit the kingdome of God, Galath. 5. 21. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Phauorinus apud Zanch. in loc. 
                  quòd non possit 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  seruari.
               
               Fourthly, if we consider our selues as schollers, our honourable founders in great wisedome foreseeing the manifold inconueniences of tipling in Students, ordained that we should haue but a spare diet in the Colledge, and forbad all excessiue riot and inordinate commessation in the towne. A Gentleman hearing that his sonne at Vniuersitie was giuen to dicing, answered, that want of money would occasion him happily to leaue that fault. Afterward vnderstanding that hee was giuen to whoring, said, that either mariage or old age would one day cure that folly. But when he was informed of his Morall vpon Ariost. Or ando surioso, lib. 35. wine bibbing, out vpon the villaine (said the father) I will surely disinherit him, for that fault will encrease with his yeeres. A gamester will continue so long as his purse lasts, an adulterer so long as his loynes last, but a drunkard so long as his lungs and life last.
               Fifthly, if wee consider ourselues as Clergiemen, he that is giuen to 1. Tim. 3. 3. wine should not be made Bishop, and if any Prelate or Priest after consecration become a winebibber, ebrietatibus vacans, aut cesset aut deponatur, as it is in the 42. Canon of the Apostles, according to the computation of Theodorus Balsamon. And by the seuenth Iniunction of Queene Elizabeth, Ecclesiasticall persons are forbidden haunting of Alehouses and Tauernes. I know Paul may meet his acquaintance at the market of
                  
                  Appius, and at the three Tauernes, Acts 28. 15. but this ought to bee for his honest necessities, as the former Iniunction intimates, and not to keepe ranke riot at vnlawfull houres. Hee that is irregular in this kinde, after admonition and warning, is worthy to be suspended
                     Vide Balsam. in Apost can. 42. & Photium. Tit. 9. cap. 27. & 35. 
                  ab officio & beneficio. A great gallant hauing prouided a great feast for his neighbours, desired the parish Priest to wash first and to sit downe last: hereby signifying (saith mine Mensa philosophica fab. de milite. author) that Clergie-men ought to be primo mundi, sed postremo ebrij. Thus as you see, by surfetting and excesse Ambros. de Elia, cap. 14. 
                  vina are made venena, that is, in the words of holy Deut. 32. 33. Scripture, the wine of drunkards is so bitter as the poyson of Dragons, and the cruell gall of Aspes. In some respect worse, saith Vbi supra. 
                  Ambrose, then any venome; for the most deadly poyson hath holpen many, whereas the drunkards potion heales none, but hurts all, a root of much euill, a rot of euery vertue.
               Preached at S. Maries in Cambridge on Whitsunday anno 1602. The remnant of this text concerning Psalmes, and Hymmes, and spirituall songs, is expounded Epist. Sund. 5. after Epiphanie.
            
            
               
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATTH. 22. 1.
                  Iesus said vnto his Disciples, the kingdome of heauen is like vnto a man that was a King, which made a great mariage for his sonne, &c.
                  
               
               THis Gospellin Marlorat. Panigarol. in loc. effect is all one with that appointed to be read on the second Sunday after Trinitie, B. Latymer serm. vpon this Gospell. both teach one point, and tend to one purpose. Wherefore, lest I seeme double diligent, I refer you to my large notes vpon that other text, and intreat you to bee content with a short paraphrase for the present.
               
                  The kingdome of heauen] The Church militant on earth, is this kingdome of heauen, I say militant, and that for Iacob de Vorag. serm. 1. in l
                        •…
                     . two reasons especially: first, because this mariage feast is called a dinner, vers. 4. and after dinner there followeth another banquet, namely the Supper of the Lamb, Apocal. 19. 9. This dinner then is a feast of grace, that supper a feast of glorie. Secondly, because none can bee thrust out of the Church in heauen triumphant, many croud vnto Gods dinner in the militant without any wedding garment or bridelace: but at the last day when hee shall▪come to view his guests, hee will cast them out of the wedding chamber into vtter darknesse, as it is in the 13. verse. The Church vnder the crosse then is this kingdome, gathered together by the preaching of the Gospell, 1. Pet. 2. 9. 
                  a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people. Not kingdomes in the plurall, but in the singular a kingdome, as being gouerned by one and the same Lord, vnder one and the same law. And it is a kingdome of heauen, as being the way to the kingdome of heauen, because, saithSerm. 136. de temp. 
                  Augustine, per portam ecclesiae intramus in portam paradisi. And a kingdome of heauen, for that herPhilip. 3. 20. conuersation is in heauen, and herColoss. 3. 2. affections set on things aboue. The synagogues of Satan

are a kingdome of darknesse, but the Church a kingdome of light. Iacob de Vorag. vbi supra. For as in heauen some bodies giue light and receiue none, as the Sunne: other receiue light and giue none, as the firmament: other both receiue and giue, as the Starres and Moone: so Christ in the Church, is the 
                  Iames 1. 17. 
                  father of lights, and the sunne of righteousnesse. Malac. 4. 2. giuing light vnto Iohn 1. 9. all, and receiuing light from none. The lay people resemble the firmament, called to receiue light in the publike preaching of the Word, and not to giue light, except it be candle-light in their owne priuate families. Indeed there be many blazing Starres and prodigious Comets in this our heauen, but such are not properly lights, but fiers: as the Philosopher, ignes fatui. The Preachers of the Word are starres in the firmament, first receiuing light from Christ, and then communicating it to other, as the words of their Patent import, Mat. 5. 14. Ye are the light of the world.
               
               
                  This King is God the E
                        •…
                     hym. Anselme. Father, a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, able to doePsal. 135. 6. whatsoeuer hee will in heauen, in earth, and in hell. As one doth glosse my text, Regens in coelo per gloriam, in mundo per gratiam, in inferno per iustitiam. His Sonne the Bridegroome isEphes. 5. 32. Christ, and his Bride the Church, and God made this mariage by Christs Greg. hom. 38 incarnation. Arden
                        •…
                     . For as the best way to reconcile two disagreeing families or enemie-kingdomes, is to make some mariage betweene them: euen so the word became 
                  Iohn 1. 14. 
                  flesh and dwelt among vs in the world, that hee might heereby make ourEphes. 3. 14. 16. peace, reconciling God to man, and man to God. At this great mariage dinner the
                     D. Latymer.
                   Bridegrome himselfe is the best dish, euen the bodie and bloud of Christ preached in his word, and presented in his Sacraments. And albeit this feast especially concerne the Iew, Melancthen. yet appertaineth it vnto all, as begun in the
                     Gen. 3. 15. The seed of the woman, &c.
                   beginning of the world, and enduring to the end of the same. The Patriarkes and Prophets in old time, the Preachers and Pastors in our time, call and invite men euery day to this mariage. The latter course at this feast, or

the B. Latymer. sweet meats, are remission of sinnes, euerlasting life, such ioy as no tongue can expresse, or heart conceiue. The time when the King commeth in to see his guests, is either the particular houre of our Panigarol. death, or else the generall day of Hieron. Musculu
                        •…
                     . iudgement, when he shall seperate the reprobate from his elect, Matth. 13. 40. and 25. 32. God is euery where, seeing all things alway; Thomas in Gen 18. Idem Panigarol. & Coster. in loc. yet that heereby Iudges may learne not to condemne any but vpon good information, almighty God said of Sodome, I will goe downe now, and see whether they haue done altogether according to that crie which is come vnto mee, Gen. 18. 21. and of Babel, Come, let vs goe downe, Gen. 11. 17. and heere the King is said to come in among his guests, and to spie the man which had not on a wedding garment, afore he commanded him to be bound hand and foote, and to be cast into vtter darknesse.
               The wedding garment, asOrigin. some thinke, is Christ: or asEuseb. Emiss. other, the new man: or as other, Hieron. obseruing of the Commandements of Christ: or as other, aEuthym. pure conuersation: or as other, an vpright heart, comming to the mariage Aretius. rather out of duty, then for a dinner: or as other,Ardens. charity: or as other, Gregor. grace: or as other, Kilius. faith: or as other, Melanct. regeneration, consisting in faith and repentance. All which vpon the point are the very Panigarol. same: so that, (asCaluin. Fulk. Zepper. our Diuines obserue) the question is idle whether faith or godly life bee this garment, because good workes alway proceed from faith, and faith alway sheweth it selfe by good workes. Hypocrites are they who want the wedding garment, Tit. 1. 16. 
                  professing that they know God but in their workes denying him.
               
               But it is a more darke Problem, how the King when he came to see the guests found but one without a wedding garment, and how that one may be called his friend. 
                  See Panigarol part. 1. hom. in loc. Answer may be, that all reprobate sinners are called one, because they be all of one kinde, namely faithlesse: or one, because the roote of all sinne did proceed from Rom. 5. 19. one: or one, because Iames 2. 10. hee that faileth in one point is guilty of

all: or one, to shew the quicke sight of God, who can, if there be but one hypocrite among many, soone spie him: or one, 
                  Coster. in loc. because many such hypocrites are lesse esteemed then one righteous man: Ecclesiasticus 16. 3. One that is iust is better then a thousand vngodly children: or one, to shew that at Christs owne Table there was one Iudas among the blessed Apostles, as Theophilus. Alexan. apud Panigarol. vbi supra. some construe it. And this one whosoeuer hee be, may be called a friend, 
                  Euthym. for that he did seeme by profession a friend: or a friend, ex parte dei, calling him vnto the marriage, 1. Tim. 2. 4. willing that all men should be saued, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Hee was Hieron. vsed by the King as a friend, but in comming without a wedding garment hee was Coster. foe to himselfe: or friend in derision; as if he should say, You are a kind friend indeed to come in hither without your wedding apparell, and bride-lace: for the Scriptures admit of Ironies, as Gen. 3. 9. Adam where art thou? or a friend, for that hee was Panigarol. once a friend, as Simon is tearmed the 
                  Matth. 26. 6. 
                  Leper, for that hee was a leper: and Matthew the 
                  Matth. 10. 3. 
                  Publican, for that he was a Publican: and Hierusalem a sincke of sinne, the holy citty, for that it was once holy, Mat. 27. 35. In reporting these different opinions I will imitate the sage Iudges of our Law, who somtime determine to heare, not heare to determine.
            
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  EPHES. 6. 10.
                  My brethren be strong through the Lord, &c.
                  
               
               THe life of man is a I
                        •…
                     b 7. 1. warfare on earth, and euery Christian is a professed souldier, hauing 2. Cor. 7. 5. 
                  fightings without, and terrors within. He must therefore learne two things especially: first, how to chuse his armes: and secondly how to vse them. Our Apostle doth instruct him heere concerning both. As for the choice, the Zanchius. defensiue weapons are the girdle of veritie, breast-plate of righteousnesse, s
                        •…
                     ooes of preparation, shield of faith, helmet of saluation.
                  
Offensiue, the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. As for their vse, Paul aduiseth vs also to put them on, and to put them all on, and so to put on the whole armour, as that we may stand in all good, and withstand all euill. All which is implied in the 11. verse, containing a proclamation ad arma, put on all the armour of God. And a reason, that ye may stand, &c.
               In the proclamation foure points are remarkable:
               
                  1. Euery Christian is charged with armour.
                  
                  2. This armour must be Gods armour.
                  
                  3. Panoplia, complet armour, all the armour of God.
                  
                  4. This complet armour must not onely be shewed abroad, or hung vp at home: but vsed and imployed daily, put on.
                  
               
               The reason hereof is manifest and manifold: first, that we may be able to For so long as a man standeth in battell he is well, if he fall downe then in ieopardie.. 
                  stand in battell. Secondly, that wee may so stand, as that we may withstand. Thirdly, that we may so withstand, as that we may foile our enemies assaulting as well as retiring. Fourthly, that we may repell not only some few, but all assaults. Fiftly, all assaults not only of the flesh and the world, but of the diuell also, which is the prince of darknesse, and generall commander of all forces against vs in these spirituall skirmishes. Iudith 15. 1. 
                  Olofernes being slaine, his souldiers instantly fled. Lombard. in loc. If we conquer the rulers and gouernours of the darknesse of this world, wee shall easily discomfit their followers and instruments. If we cast the Anselm. rider, his horse will instantly be taken and tamed. Euery Christian ought to put on the resolution of Captaine Pareneticall treatise to the Princes of Europe, pag. 26. 
                  Ferras, alway bearing armes against the greatest Emperour of the world, wrestling not against blood and flesh onely, but against principalities, against powers, against spirituall craftinesse in heauenly things.
               
               For the first point: armour is necessarie, whether wee consider our owne weaknesse, or our enemies strength. Our weaknesse, as being vnapt and vnable by nature to

                  2. Cor. 3. 5. thinke so much as a good thought, and therefore we must be strong through the Lord, 
                  Lombard. who giueth his souldiers power and might, 
                  Psal. 144. 1. teaching our hands to warre, and our fingers to fight. It is reported of Xiphlin in vita Traiani. 
                  Traian that he would cut in peeces his owne garments, rather then his souldiers should want a ragge to binde vp their wounds: but our Captaine Christ hath giuen vnto such as march vnder his banner his owne flesh and his owne selfe, willing vs not to put on his armour, but also to Rom. 13. 14. 
                  put on himselfe, that we may be strong through the power of his might, who can doe whatsoeuer he will, and will doe whatsoeuer is best for all his followers. Againe, we need armes in respect of our enemies, as being many, mightie, cunning in plotting, cruell in executing.
               1. Many, Kilius. for these gouernours and princes haue many souldiers and subiects vnder them, Aretius. 
                  improbos spiritus, & homines pessimos, an Ecclesiastes 1. 15. infinite number, against a little flocke and an handfull of people.
               2. Mightie, for we wrastle not against flesh and blood, 
                  Z
                        •…
                     chius. that is, not simply with flesh and blood; or Lombard. Aquin. onely, for then Marlorat. one sword should be so long as another, and one man so strong as another: but we fight men against diuels, euen weaklings against powers and principalities, as it were sillie lambes against roring lions.
               3. Cunning in plotting, as being spirituall and invisible, fighting so craftily, 
                  Anselme. that we know not on which side they will assault. Satan in the beginning was a Gen. 3. 1. Serpent for his subtiltie, but now being indued with almost six thousand yeeres experience, become a Dragon and an old Serpent, Apocal. 20. 2. Cui nomina mille, mille nocendi artes, quoth Ad Heli
                        •…
                     dor. de vita 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Hierome. Such a 2. Cor. 2. 11. circumuenting enemie, that being a prince of darknes, he can 2. Cor. 11. 14. transforme himselfe into an angell of light. Auarice is a worke of darknesse, peeuishnesse a worke of darknesse, inordinate drinking a worke of darknes. But he doth couer and cloak these with armour of light, insinuating, that couetousnesse is commendable thrift, obstinacie noble resolution, and

drunkennesse a point of good fellowship. Grosse wickednesse is easily seene, and preuented soone: but our chiefe aduersaries abound with spirituall wickednesse and inuisible craftinesses, and their ordinary souldiers are in their generation Luke 16. 8. wiser then the children of light.
               4. Cruell in executing and prosecuting; Sathan is an Apoc. 12. 10. accuser of his brethren, and a Iohn 8. 44. murtherer from the beginning, called in holy Scripture a Lyon for his might, and a roring Lyon for his malice, seeking daily whom he may deuoure, 1. Peter 5. 8. Now these descriptions are set downe not that we should faint, Caluin. Bullinger. Kilius. but rather encouraging vs to fight. For seeing our enemies are Augustin de Ciuit. l. 8. c. 22. 
                  superbia tumids, inuidentia liuids, fallacia callidi, à iustitia penitus alieni, so many, so mighty, so malitious, so crafty, so willing and able to hurt vs, it behoueth euery man to be well appointed and armed, that he may be able to resist in the euill day.
               
               The second point obserued in the Proclamation, is, that our armour must be Gods armour, not armour of the flesh, for 
                  Ierem. 17. 5. 
                  cursed is the man that maketh flesh his arme. Not armour of the world, for our enemies are worldly gouernours, and the chiefe of them is Iohn 12. 31 
                  the Prince of the world. 
                  Psal. 20. 7. Some put their trust in Chariots, and other in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. Not armour of the diuell, for then we shall haue nothing but his leauings. His armour is Popish exorcisme, superstitious crossing, holy water and the like: which he little feareth as being framed in his owne shop, and giuen vs at his appointment. The weapons of our warfare are not 
                  2. Cor. 10. 4. 
                  carnall, but mighty through God to cast downe holds. Against spirituall harmes we must vse Primasius. spirituall armes; against the workes of darknesse we must Rom. 13. 12. 
                  put on armour of light, 
                  Aquin. that is, vertues against vices, as being vestimenta put on, munimenta armour, ornamenta of light. Let vs then if the diuell at any time tempt to cruelty, pride, impatience; put on 
                  Coloss. 3. 12. 
                  tender mercy, kindnes, humblenes of minde, meeknesse, long suffering, &c. as it is in the present Epistle, wee must

arme our selues with the breast-plate of righteousnes against iniquity, with the girdle of truth against heresie, with the helmet of saluation against dispaire, with the shield of faith against infidelity. The diuell is mysticallie that huge Leuiathan esteeming 
                  Iob. 41. 
                  iron as straw, and brasse as rottenwood, when the sword doth touch him he will not rise vp and he laugheth at the shaking of the speare, in the earth there is none like him, he feares not our fleshly weapons, or worldly weapons, and therefore that we may stand against his force, we must put on the armour of God, and dwell vnder the Psal. 91. 1. defence of the most high.
               The third thing considered in the proclamation, is, that we put on Sarcerius. B. Latymer. Mariorat. 
                  all Gods armour, or the whole armour of God, as it is verse 13. If we should arme our head onely, the diuell happily would strike at the foote: if the foote only, then he might hurt our head: if both, and leaue our breast vnarmed, he might wound vs at the heart. Wherefore that we may repell all assaults of the diuell, we must Aretius. 
                  tanquam milites cataphracti, put on all the armour of God. I cannot examine euery particular weapon in this Armourie, learne onely three points of warre in the whole.
               First, that Paul heere makes no mention of a backe Curete for the Christian souldier. There is an helmet for the head, a corselet for the breast; in a word, a shield for all the fore-parts, onely no guard, no regard of the hinder. It is a compleat armour, and yet without any defence for the backe: signifying hereby that euery Christian ought to keepe his Zanchius. station in Gods armie, neuer forsaking the banner of Christ, vntill death his 1. Cor. 15 26. last enemy be destroied. It is G
                        •…
                     euara. written of Bias falling into the hands of his enemies, and his souldiers crying, what shall we doe? that he did answer, Report yee to the liuing that I die fighting, and I will report to the dead that yee did escape flying. When Restitution of decaied intelligence, pag. 176. 
                  William the Conquerour had landed at Pemsey neere to Hastings in Sussex, he caused all his ships to be sunck, that all hope of flying backe might be taken away.

The Numantine would rather die then flie; so the Christian warriour must continue Apocal. 2. 10 faithfull vnto the end, like Iudg
                        •…
                     s 16. 30 
                  Sampson killing enemies at his death as well as in his life.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in symbolis. Mars dubius, victor
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cadit, victus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      resurgit.
                  Qui fugit, huic merito
                        •…
                     ulla corona datur.
               
               The second remarkable point of warre is, that we must aboue all other weapons of defence take the shield of faith. And the reason heereof is plaine, because the helmet couers only the head, the corselet the breast, and the sandall the foote: but a Zanchius. shield couers all the body. Let vs then aboue all, or as Vulgar Latin. other read in all, vse faith. In Anselm. all tentations and combats, Royard, hom. 2. in loc. or in putting on all the weapons aforesaid, haue a liuely faith and assured confidence, without which all the rest haue no force. The sword of the Spirit without faith is no scripture to thee, the girdle of verity without faith is no truth vnto thee, all thy righteousnesse without faith is vnrighteousnesse. Seeing then it is impossible without faith either to please God, or resist the diuell, in all, and aboue all vse the shield of faith, wherewith yee may Caietan. not onely reiect or auoid: but also quench all the tentations of the wicked, albeit they bee Caluin. 
                  darts in respect of their sharpnesse, and fiery for their destroying, one sinne Lombard. Zanchius. kindling another, as drunkennesse kindleth adultery, and adultery murther. All the world, saith Saint 1. Epist. 5. 19. 
                  Iohn, lieth in wickednesse, positus in maligno, 
                  Royard. vbi supra. that is in malo igne, set on fire by the diuell, heere called the wicked, 
                  Sarcerius. as being author of all euill, and master of all the fiery workes in the world, Matth. 6. 13. and 13. 38. But bee of good cheare, faith ouer commeth the world, 1. Iohn 5. 4. One shield of faith is able to beare, yea to beat off all the fierie darts of the wicked world, flesh, and diuell.
               The third point of warre is, that the Christian souldier is armed with a sword so well as with a buckler: and this sword is the word of God, being Heb. 4. 12. powerfull in operartion and sharper then any two edged sword. Viues in August. lib. 14. de Ciuit. cap. 12. Sharpe in a literall,

and sharpe in a mysticall exposition: or sharpe in discoursing of thingAns
                        •…
                     lm. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Heb. 4. temporall, and sharpe in teaching things eternall: or Aquin. lect. 2. in Heb. 4. acute in moouing vs to vertue, and acute in remoouing vs from vice. Doth the flesh intice thee to wantonnesse? strike with the sword of the Spirit, Thou shalt not commit adultery. Doth the world tempt thee to vanity? strike with the sword of the Spirit, 1. Ioh. 2. 15. 
                  loue not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man loue the world, the loue of the father is not in him. Doth Sathan assault thy faith, and tempt thee to superstition and idolatry? strike with the sword of the Spirit, Matth. 4. 10. 
                  Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onely shalt thou serue. Doth Death in the last houre of thy spirituall combat affright thee? strike with the sword of the Spirit, 1. Cor. 15. 54. 
                  Death is swallowed vp in victory, the sting of death is sinne, and the strength of sinne is the law: but thankes be vnto God which hath giuen vs victory through our Lord Iesus Christ. 
                  Caluin. By the buckler of faith a Christian souldier is able to defend himselfe, by the sword of the Spirit able to confound his enemie. So that our aduersary going about daily seeking whom he may deuoure, reioyceth exceedingly when either B. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . serm. vpon this Epistle. Papists hinder the reading, or, Atheists hurt the preaching of the word. As the 1. Sam. 13. 19 Philistians would not suffer a Smith in Israel, lest the Hebrwes should make them swords or speares: 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      in euangel. dom. 1. qu
                        •…
                     ra. Co
                        •…
                      5. so the diuell cannot endure that we should heare sermons, and read holy Scripture, lest out of this shop wee get armour to repell his assaults in the euill day.
               The last obseruable thing in the proclamation is, that a Christian ought not onely to know Gods armour, but also Zanchius. 
                  put it on. For as it is not enough for the seruice of our Common-weale that wee keepe good weapons at home, or that we shew them at musters abroad, except we haue skill and will (as occasions of the State require) personally to serue with them: euen so, to haue the sword of the Spirit rust at home, or sometime to flo
                     •…
                  ish a little with it abroad, is not sufficient for the souldier of Christ,

except he can and will vse Gods armour, and stand in battell against all assaults of the diuell. As in Physicke the best prescript can doe no good except it be taken: so the most complet armour is no defence when as it is not worne. We must in aduersitie put on patience, in prosperitie put on humblenesse of minde, at all times Coloss. 3. 14. aboue all these put on loue, giuing euery man his owne. If we will ouercome the princes of darknesse, wee must put on the armour of light.
               But obserue heere that wee must vse the weapons of God in the warres of God, against enemies of God onely, that wee may stand against all assaults, and quench all the fierie darts of the diuell. Many men hit the souldiers of Christ, and hurt the friends of God with armour of God. As Heretikes fraudulently cite scriptures against scriptures, and Fathers against Fathers, and so make God as it were fight against himselfe. Velleiu
                        •…
                      hist. lib. 1. 
                  Silla said, ante frangendus hostis quàm vlciscendus ciuis, our force must not bee spent in priuate grudges against our brethren, but in the publike quarrell of the Gospell against the common enemie. The Scorpions in Apollonius in hist. mirabilib
                        •…
                     . 
                  Caria when they sting, kill homebred people: but hurt not any stranger. On the contrarie, there bee certaine little Snakes in Babylon which onely bite forreiners, and not inhabitants. It is a fooles fray to strike him that is neerest; Mc. Greenham in a ser
                     
                        •…
                      at S. Maries in Camb. vpon the comming out of Martin marprelate. vndiscreet Schismatikes vsing lies and libels the weapons of the diuell in good causes, offend the Church as much as open heretikes imploying Gods armour in bad causes.
               In this our spirituall warfare wee haue many great incouragements to fight valiantly: first, our weapons are good, a complet armour: secondly, our Captaine is good, euen the Lord of hosts, hauing all power and might: thirdly, our cause good. Now
               
                  
                     Iucan. 
                     Causa iubet melior superos sperare secundos.
                  
                  
                     Propertius. 
                     Frangit & attollit vires in milite causa.
                  
               
               Againe, the continuance of our fight is little, but our reward great. In Rome the militarie age was from

                  Auius Gell
                        •…
                     us lib. 10. c. 28. seuenteene to fortie and six, or in dangerous times vntill fiftie. Psal. 90. 10. The daies of our age are threescore yeeres and ten, and in all this time there is no time for peace; we are legionum filij, borne in the field, and sworne souldiers in our swadling clouts, alway bearing armes against the common enemie from our holy baptisme to buriall. All which is called in the 13. verse the euill day: in regard of the sharpnes Aquin. Anselm. Zanchius. 
                  euill, in regard of the shortnes Oecumen. 
                  a day. Now the souldiers resolution is aut sors, aut mors, either victorie the beginning of ioy, or else death the end of miserie. So the Christian in this holy warre may comfort himselfe:
               
                  Horat. 
                  Aut cito mors veniet, aut victoria laeta.
               
               Either God will end our danger, or our daies: and then wee shall be no longer souldiers in armour, but gowne men in Apocal. 7. 9. long white robes, hauing palmes in our hands, and Apocal. 4. 4. Crownes on our heads as conquerors, according to that of 2. Tim. 4. 7. 
                  Paul; I haue fought a good fight, and haue finished my course, from henceforth is laid vp for me the crowne of righteousnesse, which the Lord the righteous Iudge shall giue me at that day, and not me onely, but vnto all them also that loue his appearing.
               
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  IOHN 4. 46.
                  There was a certaine ruler, whose sonne was sicke at Capernaum, &c.
                  
               
               THis Gospell Heming. teacheth vs, whether we should flee for succour in all the troubles of this life: namely to the fountaine of all welfare Iesus Christ. According to that of Chap. 12 3. 
                  Esay; Ye shall draw water out of the welles of the Sauiour. To this well a Christian ought to come not with feete, but with faith, and then Ioel 2. 32. 
                  euery one that calleth vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued.
               
               
                  In the whole storie you may behold 4. principall persons:
               
                  1. A louing father.
                  2. A sicke sonne.
                  3. A pitifull Sauiour.
                  4. Dutifull seruants.
               
               In the father obserue two things: his
               
                  Great fortune, being regulus, a little king, a ruler.
                  Great faith, hauing three Beda. Ludolphus. Panigarol. degrees, a

                        Beginning, in desiring Christ to come downe and heale his sonne.
                        
                        Encrease, in beleeuing the word that Iesus had spoken.
                        
                        Full growth, in that him selfe simply beleeued and all his household.
                        
                     
                  
               
               As for the greatnesse of his honour. Apud Thom. in loc. 
                  Origen thinks he was of Caesars familie. In Esaiae cap. 65. circa prin. 
                  Hierome, that he was a Palatine, happily controller of Herods house. De vita Christi part. 1. cap. 63. 
                  Ludolphus and Lyra, that he was Deputie Lieutenant of Galile, for Galile belonged vnto the iurisdiction of Herod, Luke 23. 7. See Musculus & Maldonat in loc. Other, that he was a ruler in Capernaum, where his son was sicke. What he was it is vncertaine now, for one generation passeth, and another generation succeedeth, Ecclesiastes 1. 4. and the fashion of this world goeth away, 1. Cor. 7. 31. But it is certaine that he whilome was Theophylact. Euthym. Erasmus. either noble by descent, or degree; fauoured in the Court, honoured in the Country, a man of worth and qualitie. Which our Euangelist insinuates in his stile, calling him aruler, as also Origen apud Thom. in loc. for that he was attended well, his seruants met him, vers. 51. Aretius. Marlorat. Zepperus. Where note by the way, that it is not impossible for a great man to be a good man, or for Caesars fauourite to be Christs follower. Almightie God hath elect children among all sorts of people, Magdalen among harlots, Zaccheus among oppressors, Matthew among Publicanes, and heere this ruler in Herods Court. Indeed De Consid. lib. 4. 
                  Bernard was wont to complaine that the Court is wont to receiue such as are good, but to make them

bad. Bonos facilius recipere quàm facere, nam plures in aula defecisse bonos quàm profecisse malos probauimus. And Lib. 5. de asse. 
                  Budaeus saith all Courtiers must be like Cameleons, accommodating themselues vnto all companies, vt assentioni & assentationi sci
                        •…
                     è asseruiatur, resembling an herbe called Tripolium, which (as In mirabilibus narrat. 
                  Antigonus reports) euery day changeth colour thrice, being sometime white, sometime violet, sometime carnation. Apparent parasites, Magdehur. epist 
                        •…
                     refix. C
                        •…
                     nt. 7. 
                  vno ore calislum & frigidum pro suis commodis efflare periti: creeping vp to honor through a S
                        •…
                     neca. Per mi
                        •…
                     e indignita
                        •…
                     es in consummationem dignitatis. thousand dishonors.
               
                  
                     Hippolitus à Collibus in Aulico politico. In aula Regis non est multum legis,
                  Si qui sunt boni coguntur esse onos,
                  Si qui sunt mali sunt in gratia regali.
               
               And S
                        •…
                     resbur. in policrat. another to the same purpose: Quò quis corruptior moribus, & corrumpentior muneribus eò beatior. The Court is all for money, making Ioh 1. 14. 
                  oxen to labour, and asses to seed. A mint of fashions, an exchange of complements, a shame to shamefastnesse, Bez 
                        •…
                      in epitaph. Secret. Reg. Gall. 
                  omnis sceleris mater nutrix
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nefandi. Yet notwithstanding Ioseph was a good man in the Court of Pharao, Daniel a good man in the Court of Darius, Mordecai a good man in the Court of Ahasuerus, and this ruler a good man in the Court of Herod.
               
               The faith of this 
                     •…
                  uler in the beginning was very weake: first, in Chrysost. hom. 34. in Ioan. Idem Hugo Cara. & alij. that he did not seeke vnto Christ vntill he was almost at his owne doores, as the context euidently, Iesus came againe into Cana a towne of Galile, where hee had made of water wine, and there was a certaine ruler, &c. Secondly, Musculus. Pon
                        •…
                     an. for that hee did not entreat Christ to cure the sinne so well as the sicknesse of his sonne. Thirdly, for that he came not to Christ in the Panigar
                        •…
                     
                   beginning of his sonnes infirmitie, but as wee may gather at such a time when all other Physitians had forsaken him, euen at the point of death. Fourthly, all Interpretors obserue, that he was Brentius apud Marlorat in loc. 
                  rudissimae fidei & infantis, in beseeching Christ to come downe and heale his sonne, as if Christ being God could not as well haue holpen him absent as present. Againe,

when he beleeued Christs saying, Goe thy way, thy sonne liueth: his faith as yet was 
                     See Panigar. part. 
                     
                        •…
                     . hom. in loc.
                   infirme and full of wauering. Augustin. tr
                        •…
                     ct. 16. in Ioan. 
                        •…
                     dem Leontius apud Maldonat. in loc. Otherwise hee would neuer haue made such a doubt, and asked such a question of his attendants, at what houre began he to amend? But when he knew certainly that his son was healed miraculously by Christ, and not by casuall or any naturall meanes, himselfe and his whole family beleeued absolutely. When he first heard of Christ his faith was a very sparke, when he beleeued Christ, it did kindle, but when hee beleeued in Christ it was a great flame giuing light to his houshold. So that our blessed Sauiour in vttering one word, healed Cyrillus. two, namely the fathers soule and the sonnes body. Thus I haue shewed vnto you the faith of this old father, and the fruites thereof: first, in being so carefull for his child. Secondly, 
                     See Zepper. Con. 1. & Ferus Con. 2. in loc.
                   for that in his affliction he went not for helpe to witches, as Saul, 1. Sam. 28, 8. nor to diuels, as Ahazia, 2. King. 1. 2 nor onely to Physitians, as King Asa, 2. Chron. 16. 12. but to Christ, and that in his owne person, although a ruler and a man of eminent quality. Thirdly, in that he was such an earnest sutor againe and againe, desiring Christ to visit his sicke sonne. Fourthly, in that he cast off his doubting and infidelity. Lastly, yet chiefly, for that all his house was instructed in the faith of Christ, and feare of God. So Iosua 24. 15. 
                  Iosua, so Acts 16. 15. 
                  Lydia, so Crispus the chiefe ruler of the Synagogue Acts 18. 8. and so must Melanct. Musculus. Bullinger. euery master of a family bring vp his houshold in instruction and information of the Lord. Euery man is a King and a Prophet in his owne priuat house, so that hee can want no meanes, except hee want a minde to performe this holy businesse.
               In the sicke son you may note
               
                  1. His sicknesse expressed in the text, sicke of a feuer.
                  
                  2. The causes of his sicknesse, surfetting and riot, implied (as may be suspected) Pontan in loc. that he was the sonne of a ruler, and in 
                     Ludolphus de vita Christ. part. 1. cap. 63. 
                     Capernaum a dissolute City.
               
               
                  Prou. 31. 30. Fauour is deceitfull, and Ecclesiastes. 11. 10. youth is vanity, riches

auaile not in the day of wrath Prou. 11. 4. nay the scepter cannot keepe vs from the sepulchre. Yong men as well as old men, and Gentlemen as well as Poore men are sicke and weake and die. The children of rulers ordinarily be most vnruly, giuen ouer to chambering and wantonnesse, and so by consequent they be Zepper. Con. 1. in. loc. more subiect to sicknesse then other, in being more subiect to sinne then other. A drowsinesse of spirit is their quartan, incontinence their tertian, pride and gluttony their quotidian ague. How sinne resembleth a feuer in condition, kind and cure: see Ludolphus vbi sup. in margin. Iacob. de Uorag. serm. 2. Ferus serm. 4. in loc. Bonauentura diet. salut. cap. 1. Pontan. Bibliothec. Con. Tom. 4. fol. 313.
               In Christ, the third, yet the most obseruable person in all this history, 2. things are to be considered especiallie:
               
                  1. His rebuking the ruler.
                  2. His relieuing the ruler.
               
               The Ruler was at the first in fide tepidus aut frigidus, as Tract. 16. in Ioan. 
                  Augustine notes, and therefore Christ chides him, except yee see signes and wonders ye will not beleeue. Uerba rogantis audimus, cor diffidentis non videmus: sed ille pronunciauit, qui & verba audiuit, & cor inspexit. This reprehension is not Iudge-like, but Heming. father-like, concerning the Marlorat. whole Nation of the Iewes in generall, as much as this Ruler in particular. In token whereof (as Musculus Aretius. Interpretors obserue) Christ vseth not the singular, except thou: but the plurall number, except ye. 
                  Maldonat in loc. As if he should haue said, I must in regard of your incredulity shew signes and wonders, otherwise yee will not beleeue. I will heale thy sonne therefore not so much vpon thy petition, as for the confirmation of others faith. I will not goe downe to thine house, yet I will worke such a wonder in thine house, that not onely thy selfe but all thine shall beleeue. Goe thy way, thy sonne liueth.
               
               The petition of the Ruler consists of Ardens. two branches: one, that Iesus would come downe; another, that hee would heale his sonne. Now Christ reiected the first as being vnfit, but hee granted the second wherein he prayed well,

helping his childe not by going downe, but by speaking one word, Thy sonne liueth.
               
               In the seruants heere mentioned two vertues are commendable: first, Zepper. loue to their master in obeying his commands and reioycing at his good. Secondly, Aretius. faith in Christ: The ruler did beleeue the word of Iesus, and they the report of the ruler, and so both hereby became happy. Let euery master in like sort teach his houshold, and euery seruant heare the good instruction of his master, Heming. that there may be so many Churches as there be families, and so many Chappels as there be chambers in euery house: that being armed with the complet harnesse of God, we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked, and withstand all his assaults in the euill day.
               Grant we beseech thee mercifull Lord, to thy faithfull people, pardon and peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sinnes, and serue thee with a quiet minde, through Iesus Christ our Lord.
               Amen.
            
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  PHILIP. 1. 3.
                  I thanke my God with all remembrance of you alwaies in all my prayers, &c.
                  
               
               THis Epistle to the Philippians hath three parts: a
               
                  Subscription, Paul and Timotheus. Paul 
                     Zanchius. as author inditing, Timotheus as approuer or happily penner, writing this Epistle: both the seruants of Iesus Christ, and dearly beloued of the Philippians.
                  Inscription, to all the Saints in Christ Iesu which are at Philippi: that is, all such as are Lombard. Anselm. Aquin. baptized, and haue giuen vp their names vnto Christ in 
                        
                           •…
                        retius. Zanchius. professing the Gospell, all in Philippi, but vnbeleeuing Primasius. Pagans.
                  Description of their perfeuerance, together

with an exhortation vnto the same, Beza. which is the maine scope of all this excellent letter. Part whereof is our present text, Containing

                        Praise to God, and in it obserue

                              Matter

                                    
                                       Past, a good beginning: Because yee are come into the fellowship of the Gospell.
                                    
                                       Present, an happy proceeding: From the first day vntill now.
                                    
                                       Future, a blessed end: Surely certified that hee which hath begun a good worke in you, will performe it &c.
                                    
                                 
                              
                              Manner in respect of

                                    
                                       Extension of
                                       
                                          
                                             Time, alway in all my praiers.
                                          
                                             Persons, for you all.
                                       
                                    
                                    
                                       Intension, hauing you in my remembrance, and praying for you with gladnesse, as louing you from the verie heart roote in Iesus Christ.
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                        Prayer to God, that their loue may encrease more and more in knowledge and iudgement, being so filled with the fruit of righteousnesse, vnto the glory of God, as that they may be pure 
                           Oecumen. Marlorat. before God in their Lombard. Anse
                                 •…
                              m. conscience, and without offence before men in their credit.
                     
                  
               
               The Sarcer. Zanc
                        •…
                     ius. Kilius. summe of all is in briefe, that the Pastour ought to blesse God alway for the present graces of the Church, as also most heartilie to pray for the further and future good of the same. And the people likewise must on their part bring foorth in their life such excellent fruit of righteousnesse, as that they may be both a 
                  2. Cor. 1. 14. 
                  reioycing and a
                  
                  Philip. 4. 1. 
                  crowne to their Pastour. As the legall high Priest had the names of the children of Israel grauen in his Exod. 28. 29. breastplate: so the Preacher of the Gospell ought to haue his Cure stamped in his breast, alwaies in all his prayers hauing them in perfect memorie. Queene Mary said, Calice was imprinted in her heart: so Paul here to the Philippians, I haue you in my heart. And to the Corinthians 2. Cor. 3. 2. elsewhere, Ye are our epistle written in our hearts. See Epist. Dom. 12. & 18. post Trinitie.
               
                  Because ye are come into the fellowship of the Gospell] The chiefe subiect of his thankes and gladnes is Brentius apud Marlorat. in loc. not the goodnesse of their soile, nor yet the greatnesse of their Citie (though it were the 
                     Acts 1
                        •…
                     . 12. chiefe in the parts of Macedonia) but their fellowship of the Gospell 
                  Lombard. Aq
                        •…
                     in. Anselme. in word and deed, beleeuing the word preached, and relieuing their Pastor persecuted: being companions of Paul in bonds, as they were partners of Paul in grace: Aretius. Commonors in respect of the Epist. Iude vers. 3. common faith, and commonors as 
                     Philip. 4. 
                        •…
                     4. 
                  communicating to his affliction. Hence we may learne, that although euery subiect ought in dutie to thanke God for crowning our nation with a world of outward blessings, as honour, plenty, peace: yet aboue all, in all our deuotions alway to praise God for the fellowship of the Gospell. And therefore the 17. of Nouember, in which it was happily 
                     •…
                  estored, and the 5. of Nouember in which it was miraculously preserued, ought to be had in a perpetuall remembrance.
               
                  From the first day vntill now] The first day of their conuersion is mentioned Acts 16. and this now was his Zanchius. first imprisonment at Rome, recorded Acts 28. or as other, his second apprehension at Rome, by computation about Rhem. Argument epist. Philip. ten yeeres after the first. All which time the Philippians continued constant in the sincere profession of Christianitie; Caietan. neither reduced to their old Gentilisme, nor seduced by false teachers vnto new heresie. Vngratefull Schismatikes 
                     Brightman Apocalyp. Apocalyp. pag. 105. 106. &c.
                   affirme that the Church of England is like the Church of Laodicea, neither hot nor cold; proud, but

yet poore, blind, naked, miserable: but it is our dutie to thanke God alwaies in all our praiers, for that our Church hath against a world of popish and peeuish oppositions in the midst of a crooked generation, euen from the first of Queene Elizabeth, vnto the eleuenth of King Iames, vncessantly continued in the fellowship of the Gospell. And it becommeh vs to iudge that hee which hath begun a good worke in this kingdome, will performe it vntill the day of Iesus Christ.
               
                  He that hath begun a good worke in you will performe it] Royard. in loc. Three things are requisite in an absolute agen
                     •…
                  , power, skill, and will. Power is attributed especially to God the Father, wisedome to God the Sonne, willingnesse and loue to God the holy Ghost. He therefore that begins a good worke, can and will accomplish it vnto his glory. This sentence confutes abundantly the Aquin. Zanchius. 
                  Pelagians, holding that the beginning of euery good worke is onely from Gods grace, but the consummation of the same from our owne vertue. Whereas our Apostle giueth Oecumen. all to God, Ardens. the first and second and third grace. The first is, operans gratia, whereby God beginneth a good worke in vs, without vs, in giuing a Philip. 2. 13. will to doe well. The second is, cooperans gratia, whereby God performeth it, giuing to our will abilitie, working in vs and with vs, according to that of 1. Cor. 15. 10. 
                  Paul; I laboured more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. So the most accurate August. ser. 15. de verbis apost. Doctor excellently, Qui fecit te sine te, non iustificabit te sine te. The third is, saluans gratia, wherby God crowneth our will and worke in the day of Iesus Christ, 
                  Tit. 3. 5. not by the merits of righteousness which wee haue done, but according to his mercy sauing vs. In the words of Apud Ardens in loc. 
                  Gregorie: Primò Deus agit in nobis sine nobis, vt postea nobiscum agat: & per immensam misericordiam remuneret in nobis illud, ac si solum processisset ex nobis. And so this saying of our Apostle maketh against the Papists also, which are 
                     Dr. Fulke answere to Rhem preface § 52▪
                   cater-cousins to the Pelagians in the question of freewill and humane merit. For seeing God is 1. Cor. 15. 28. 
                  all in
                  
                  all, and 1. Cor. 12. 6. 
                  worketh all in all, end, middle, beginning; it must assuredly proceed from grace, that any man works with grace. God in euery good worke makes a beginning, 2. Cor. 3. 5. helpeth in the middle, 1. Cor. 15. 10. confirmeth vnto the end, 1. Cor. 1. 8. And therefore Radulphus Ardens, a Perkins treat. Christ the true gaine. very learned man in his age, Vt habetur in eius vita praefix. hom. edit. Colo
                        •…
                     . florishing from the yeere 1040. to 1100. (saith in an homilie preached vpon the Epistle Sunday 18. after Trinitie) seeing by one grace we come to another grace they be called merits improperly, for all our owne workes are losse that Christ might be the true gaine and aduantage. Philip. 3. 8.
               
                  And this I pray that your loue may encrease yet more and more] Matth. 24. 12 Christ had foretold that the loue of many should bee cold in the latter ages of the world, Paul therefore begs of God earnestly that the Church of Philippi might abound with the gift of charitie: not only that they might haue loue, Zanchius. but that it might encrease, yea that it might encrease yet, and that more and more. The word (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) doth import that our loue must not bee contained within the lists of our priuate persons, or particular acquaintance: but that it should ouerflow like a fountaine to the benefit of the whole Church: and that not for a time, but vntill the day of Christ: that is, vntill either he call vs to him in Primasius. Lombard. Anseim. our particular deaths, or hee come to vs in Caietan. Marl
                        •…
                     rat. his generall Iudgement. This our loue must haue two Aretius. companions especially, Knowledge and vnderstanding. Seeing loue 1. Cor. 13. 7. beleeueth all things, it is exceeding necessaire that our loue should abound in knowledge, 
                  Theophylact. Oecumen. whereby wee may discerne between good and bad, between Heretike and Catholike, and in vnderstanding, which is a spirituall experience gained by much exercise, 1. Thess. 5. 21 
                  trying all things, and then accepting the most excellent. (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) is Zanchius. Theoricall, and consists in generall notions of the Bible, whereas (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) is practicall in Christian experiments, and particular actions. A true iudgement whereby men are able not onely to marke and make difference betweene good and bad, Anselm. but also betweene

good and better, and so in fine chuse the best. Our aduersaries as well the popish as the peeuish abound (as they pretend) with a very great loue to God and his people. But because their zeale is not ioyned with all vnderstanding and knowledge, the fruit thereof is not the fruit of righteousnesse, a pure life before God, and without offence before men: but the bitter roote of all schisme in our Church, and sedition in our Common-weale. So that whereas Psal. 69. 9. 
                  Dauid said, The zeale of thine house hath euen eaten me: we may contrariwise say, Their zeale hath euen eaten vp thine house. The 
                     See dangerous positi
                           •…
                        ns of reform. lib. 2. cap. 4. 9. 11. 12. 13. Puritane zeale calleth it in word, the 
                     Casaubonepist. ad Front. pag. 81. 82. & sequent.
                   Romish zeale endeuours to make it in deed, a den of theeues, a fear of Antichrist, a shamelesse Babylon, a mother of abomination and desolation.
               Tantum religio potuit suadere malorum.
               
                  Filled with the fruit of righteousnesse] If we construe this of Iustification, it is apparent that good works are not the cause: but the Aretius. Sarcerius. Beza. consequent of our righteousnesse, as the fruit makes not the tree to be good, but onely shewes it to be good. If we take righteousnesse here for sanctification, obserue with In loc. 
                  Zanchie the foure causes of good workes:
               
                  1. Efficient,

                        Primarie, Christ: Which commeth by Iesus Christ, working in vs the will and the deed, Philip. 2. 13.
                        Secundarie, our selues: As being Esay 61. 3. trees of righteousnes planted by the Lord, and so by Christs especiall grace the iust man Psal. 1. 3. brings foorth his fruit in due season, and continuing in well doing is filled with the fruit of righteousnesse.
                        
                     
                  
                  2. Materiall, fruit. Internall in thought, externall in word and deed. For a good tree beares fruit on euery bough and on euery branch.
                  3. Formall, righteousnesse. A conformitie to the diuine law, Christs imputatiue righteousnesse is perfect, our inherent righteousnesse is imperfect.
                  
                     4. Finall

                        Benefit of our brethren, for trees beare fruit for the good of other.
                        
                           Glory and praise of God, and Theophylact. Aretius. heere wee may learne the difference betweene the good workes of Christians and other. A Gentile doth a good worke, but not in Christ: an hypocrite doth a good worke, not vnto Gods glory: but for Matth. 6. 2. mens praise. Whereas the true Christian is filled with the fruit of righteousnesse, especially for this end, that Luke 15. 10. Angels in heauen may Caietan enim & Zanchius r
                                 •…
                              ferunt gloriam ad angel
                                 •…
                              s in coelo, laudem ad homines in terra. 
                           glorifie God, and men on earth also praise God in his Saints. And as the iust man is a Lombard. in loc. 
                           glorie and praise to God: so God one day will praise the iust, in saying, Come ye blessed, &c. and glorifie him also both in body and soule by Iesus Christ in the kingdom of glory.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATTH. 18. 21.
                  Peter said vnto Iesus, Lord, how oft shall I forgiue my brother if he sinne against mee, &c.
                  
               
               THis Gospell is a large Zepper. con. 2. in loc. Comment vpon the fifth petition of the Pater Noster, and it may be parted
               Into
               
                  Peters question: How oft shall I for giue my brother if he sinne against mee, till seuen times?
                  
                     Christs answer: deliuered
                     
                        
                           First simply by way of proposition: I say not vnto thee vntill seuen times: but seuentie times seuen times.
                        
                           Then amply by way of 
                           Hieron. Ludolphus. Caietan. 
                           exposition in the parable following, therefore is the kingdome of Heauen likened, &c.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Peter said vnto Iesus] In this question of Peter obserue first his reuerence, then his diligence. Reuerence toward Christ his Teacher, in calling him Lord, or Master, or Sir.

An 1. Tim. 5. 17. Elder that rules well and laboureth in the word is worthy of double honour: 1. Thess. 5. 20 despise not prophecying, but Heb. 13. 17. obey such as haue the ouersight of you. Giue thy learned and discreet Pastor the 
                     
                        •…
                     ir. and not the sirra. Secondly, we may note Peters, 
                  Euthym. diligence questioning and arguing with his Master Caietan. about that hee taught a little before, vers. 15. And it is a Aretius. commendable practise, for as reading maketh a full man, so conference a ready man. A duty much omitted in our time, because some men haue too bad a conceit of themselues and dare not, other too good an opinion of themselues and will not aske their Teachers any question. See Gosp. on Sexages Sunday.
               
                  Iesus said vnto him] In this answer two points are remarkable: what he said, and to whom. I say not vntill seuen times, but seuenty times seuen times: that is, 490 times, and then (as Apud Erasmum annot. in loc. 
                  Origens interpretor is of opinion) a man is not bound to forgiue his brother any more. But most expositors affirme that Christ heere names a certaine number for an vncertaine, a definite for an Euthym. Pontan. Iansen. infinite. An vsuall trope euen in our common speech, I haue heard it a thousand times. I would not doe this, or suffer that for an hundred pounds. Almighty God the father of mercy forgiueth vs more then seuenty times seuen times, for Pro. 24. 16. 
                  the iust man falleth seuentimes a day; so that if wee liue but seuenty daies, our sinne will stand in need of pardon seuenty times seuen times. But if we continue long, and become the sons of many yeeres, assuredly we shall be the fathers of many sinnes, and neede forgiuenesse seuenty thousand times seuen times. O Lord Psal. 19. 12. 
                  who can tell how oft he offendeth? O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. Now we must be mercifull Luk. 6. 36. as our father in heauen is mercifull, extending our compassion toward our brother offending vs not only seuen times, as Peter said, or seuenty times seuen times, as Christ in the bare letter of the text: but according to the true meaning of the same, Maldonat in loc. 
                  vicibus innumer abiliter innumerabilibus, 
                  Toties quoties August. serm. 15. de verbis Domini. euen so many seuen times as he trespasseth against vs.
               
                  The next point to be considered is the partie to whom our blessed Sauiour spake this, and that is Peter. Iesus said vnto him, I say to thee, &c. Petrus hic gerit personam ecclesiae. Anselm. in loc. To Peter as to a publike Preacher, and to Peter as to a priuate person. In the words a little before Christ spake of ecclesiasticall censures, If thy brother heare thee not, tell it to the Church, vers. 17. and in the 18. I say vnto you, whatsoeuer yee binde on earth, shall bee bound in heauen: and Melanct. postil. & Com. in loc. so this text (as the coherence sheweth) ought to bee construed of the Ministers absolution as well as of other mens forgiuenesse. Here then all Pastours are taught not to discomfort and despise the poore penitent soule: but rather to pronounce Gods pardon and absolution as often as hee truly repents and vnfainedly beleeues his holy Gospell. It was an heresie defended by Hieron. lib. 2. adversus Iouin. 
                  Montanus, 
                  Alphonsus de Castro Tit. paeniten. haeres. 3. 
                  Nouatus, and 
                     August. haeres. 48. & Epiphan haeres. 6
                        •…
                     . 
                  Meletius, that such as after baptisme and solemne repentance fell into relapse, and committed any grieuous crime, as adulterie, sacrilege, murther and the like, ought not to be receiued againe into the bosome of the Church. But Apud Melanct. Com. in loc. 
                  Peter Bishop of Alexandria, and Anselme Bishop of Canterbury confute them out of this text, Thou shalt forgiue thy brother seuentie times seuen times. If thy brother will not heare thee, tell the Church: if he will not heare the Church, hold him as an heathen or a publican:
                     s 
                     Enarrat. in loc.
                   but if he repent and heare thee, thou hast wonne thy brother vnto God, and thou Confess. Anglican. art. 16. must againe receiue him into the Church.
               And this may be construed of the Churches absolution, so most expound it of mutuall forgiuenesse in priuate between brother & brother. A lesson oft vrged by Christ as exceeding necessarie, whether we consider God, our neighbours, or our selues. In not forgiuing we wrong God, to whom Heb. 10. 30. vengeance belongeth: our neighbours, in that our priuate Philip. 2. 3. quarrels often hinder the publike peace of the Church: our selues, hereby neglecting other businesse of importance, yea the greatest of all our owne soules eternall estate, for Matth. 6. 14. except we forgiue other,

God will not forgiue vs, as Christ sheweth in the conclusion of his ensuing parable.
               Yea but is it vnlawfull to defend our selues against the violent hands and virulent tongues of such as iniurie vs in our goods and good name? No. When a brother offendeth in this kind, Corripiamus verbis & si opus est verberibus, quoth Serm. 15. de verbis Domini. 
                  Augustine. As euery Christian must bee tender of his conscience in regard of himselfe, so Melanct. postil. in loc. iealous of his credit in regard of other. We may therefore sue the slanderer euen for the Gospels glorie, lest good men be scandalized, and God himselfe blasphemed vpon any false report spread abroad of vs. Indeed the seditious Anabaptists, and Iulian that scoffing Apostata say, that this and other like places of holy scripture disanull the Magistrates authoritie. For if wee must all alway forgiue, none may punish the faults of his brother. Here we must aptly distinguish between priuate reuenge, and publike iustice. A priuate person ought onely to admonish his brother, a publike magistrate being Gods Lieutenant, to whom vengeance belongs, may punish him also. For 1. Pet. 2. 14. 
                  Gouernours are sent of God for the punishment of euill doers, and for the praise of them that doe well. If then a Minister of estate forgiue the bad, hee doth iniurie the good. It is a true saying of Serm. 22. de verbis apost. 
                  Augustine: Sic vigilet tolerantia vt non dormiat disciplina. Christ in this present chapter intimates Ludolphus d
                        •…
                      vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 8. three sorts of correction. The first is of loue, If thy brother trespasse against thee, goe and tell him his fault between thee and him alone: if hee heare thee not, take yet with thee one or two, &c. The second is of feare, If hee will not vouchsafe to heare them and thee, tell it to the Church. The third is of shame, If hee refuse to heare the Church also, let him be vnto thee as an heathen man and a publicane. So likewise the temporall Magistrate Rom. 13. 4. 
                  beareth a sword not in vaine, for hee is the minister of God to take vengeance on him that doth euill. And if hee strike with the sword of Iustice, it is not August. cont. literas Pe
                        •…
                     ilian. lib. 3. cap. 4. 
                  ferrum inimici vulner antis, sed medici secantis. According to the tenor of this doctrine, Gen. 14. 
                  Abraham
                  
deliuered his nephew Lot from the hand of his enemies. And so 1. King. 22. 
                  Michaiah the Prophet defended himselfe against the wrongs of Zidkiiah. And so Acts 25. 11. 
                  Paul appealed vnto Caesar: and Christ accurately confuted all the forged imputations of his aduersaries, Iohn 8. 49. See Epist. 3. Sund. after Epiphan. August. de verbis Dom. serm. 15. postil. Melanct. & Zepper. in loc.
               
               In the parable following note the
               
                  Matter or narration, The kingdome of heauen is likened vnto a certaine man, &c. and in it these fiue Circumstances:

                        1. Who is the Creditor.
                        2. Who is the debtor.
                        3. What is the debt.
                        4. The time when our Creditor, cals for a reckoning.
                        5. What is to be done when our account is called vpon.
                     
                  
                  Morall o
                        •…
                      application, so likewise shall my heauenly father, &c.
               
               The Creditor is God, as Christ expoundeth himselfe, verse 35. who lendeth vs euery good and perfect gift, See Pontan. in loc. as well naturall as supernaturall. He created vs according to his owne image, redeemed vs with his owne blood, and sanctifieth vs with his owne spirit: making vs Psal. 8. 6. Lords of the World, Pro
                        •…
                     er. 1. 8. sons of the Church, 
                     Heb. 1. 14. Matt. 25. 34. heires of Heauen. The riches of his mercy toward vs are so pretious for their nature, so great for their number, as that they far exceede ten thousand talents. See Epist. 4. Sunday after Easter.
               As for the second circumstance, Apud Hieron. in loc. some thinke the diuell is this debtor. Apud Vegā in loc. 
                  Origen and Thomas vnderstand this of Clergie-men. Rabanus apud Thom. & Anselm. in loc. Other expound it of the Iewes onely. But Augustine, Ardens and other ordinarily construe this of all men, as being seruants and debtors vnto the heauenly King. Granat. in loc. 
                  Seruants, not as other creatures in respect

of their creation onely, but in respect of our redemption also. Debtors, 
                  Iames 3. 2. for in many things we 
                     •…
                  inne all. And sins are debts, as Christ teacheth in his prayer, forgiue vs our debts. And our manifold sinnes arise to the summe of ten thousand talents, euen Melanct. three tunne of gold, an Culman. infinite masse of money.
               Our debt is great in magnitude and multitude. Wee sin against God in 
                     Dan. 5. 2
                        •…
                     . whose hand our breath is, Acts 17. 28. in whom we liue, and moue, and haue our being; against such a God as Wisdome 11. 17. 19. ordereth all things in measure, number and weight, before whom all the world is as a drop of the morning dew, that falleth downe vpon the earth; against such a God at whose looke the Psa. 104. 32 earth trembles, and the pillars of Iob 26. 11. heauen quake; against such a God as hath the Ap
                        •…
                     al. 1. 18. keyes of death and hell, Luke 12. 5. able to kill the body and to destroy the soule. And as our sinnes are infinite in respect of their infinite obiect: euen so infinit in respect of their infinite number, as being Psal. 40. 15. 
                  moe then the haires of our head. Almighty God created Adam according to his owne likenesse, and bestowed many notable gifts vpon him belonging to his posterity, the which being lost in his fall, God f exacteth them of vs in our account. This debt isHeming. old which of our selues wee can no way discharge, and beside this originall debt, wee runne in arrerages euery day. The particulars of thy debt will amount quickly to the summe of ten thousand talents, if thou shalt examine thy seuerall transgressions of the seuerall Commandements in the Decalogue. Tell me, beloued, or for that it is impossible to tell, I pray thinke, how often hast thou blasphemed the name of God, how often prophaned his Sabbath, how often dishonoured thy father and mother, how often committed adultery, how often abused thy neighbour in false witnesse, how often coueted his house, wife, seruant, &c. and thou shalt in conclusion finde that thou doest owe to God for the breach of euery one of the Commandements, aboue ten thousand talents. Or if thou wilt a little consider onely but how much time thou

spendest vnprofitablely, Seneca. 
                  vel nihil agendo, vel aliud agendo, vel male agendo: thou wilt easily feele thy debt to bee so great, as that thou canst not make satisfaction for it, although thou sell euen thy selfe, thy wife, thy children, and all that thou hast. 
                  Apo
                        •…
                     a. 22. 11. He that is vniust, let him be vniust still: and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still. O 
                     Ecclesiastes 11. 9▪
                   yong man, reioyce in thy youth and walke in the waies of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know, that God for all these things will bring thee to iudgement. As it is in the Text heere, the King taketh account of his seruants.
               
               He takes account of 
                     Ludolphus de vita Christi, part. 2. cap. 9. Idem Pontanin loc.
                   foure things especially: De bonis commissis, as he sheweth in the parable of the Steward, Luke 16. De bonis omissis, as in the parable of the Talents, Matthew 25. De malis admissis, as in the parable of the two debtors, Luke 7. De malis seu peccatis dimissis, as in this present. This one mentioned in the text is euery one, for Gods all-seeing eye beholds all our thoughts and words and deedes, as if all men in the world were but one. He sends forth his summons in this life by the preaching of the Zepper. law, by the clamour of the Anselm. conscience, by Heming. crosses and losses, or other signes of Gods wrath in heauen and in earth, as it were citing vs to his vniuersall audite. Granaten. Vega. But in the particular death of euery man, and in the generall iudgement of all men he finisheth his account. Heb. 9. 29. 
                  For it is appointed vnto men that they shall once die, and after that commeth the iudgement: in which euery man shall haue his doome, 
                  2. Cor. 5. 10. 
                  according to that he hath done, whether it be good or euill. In that day there shall be iudgement Iames 2. 13. mercilesse to him that sheweth no mercy, the cruell and vngratious seruant who tooke no compassion on his fellow, shall be deliuered to the Iaylors, and kept in prison vntill he pay the 
                  Matth 5. 26. 
                  vtmost farthing. For, as I
                        •…
                      loc. 
                  Ardens acutely, Quorum vita mortua est in culpa, eorum mors viuet in poena: Their death is euer liuing in sorrow, whose life was euer dead in sinne.
               What then is to be done that our debt may be forgiuen?

according to the tenor of this scripture, Culman. Heming. we must humbly fall downe before God our Creditor, ingeniouslie confessing our inability to make payment, and hartily crauing releasement for the merits and satisfaction of his 
                     •…
                  onne Christ Iesu, who Rom. 4. 25. dyed for our sinnes, and is risen againe for our iustification, and now sitteth at the right hand of God as our mediator and aduocate, promising in his Matt. 11. 28 holy word to refresh all such as groane vnder the burthen of their debt. And because faith is working by Galat. 5. 6. loue, we must in our conuersation bring forth the fruite of righteousnesse, Ephes. 4. 32. forgiuing one another euen as God for Christs sake forgiueth vs. Here the Gospell and Epistle meete, Paul saith, I pray that your loue may increase yet more and more, &c. And Christ saith in his application (which is the very Bullinger apud Marlorat. key that openeth all the secrets of the whole Parable) so likewise shall my heauenly Father doe also vnto you, if yee from your heart forgiue not euerie one his brother their trespasses. This one point is pressed here by sundry reasons: as first from Christs owne commandement, I say forgiue thy brother offending thee seuenty times seuen times: Secondly, from Gods example: Thirdly, from the proportion of our debt, our heauenly king forgiueth vs ten thousand talents, and therefore let vs not striue with our fellow for an hundred pence: Fourthly, from the dangerous euent, because the pitilesse man is cast into prison of hell. As then wee desire to doe the will of Christ, and to be followers of God as deare Children, and to flie from the vengeance to come: let vs be courteous one to another, and tender hearted, forgiuing our brethren seuenty times seuen times: and that Hieron. Culman. Iansen. not onely from the teeth outward; but as Christ in the text expresly from our hearts, in truth and in deede. Augustin. 15 de verbis Domini. 
                  Si dicis dimitto, dimitte: melius est cum clamas ore, & dimittis in corde, quam blandus ore, crudelis in corde. Whosoeuer takes this course with his creditor shall be loosed of his bonds, and released of his debt: the which one word Heming. 
                  release doth ouerthrow the Monkish doctrine of satisfaction,

and quench also the fire of purgatorie: for releasement and payment, forgiuenesse and punishment are quite contrarie. The debt is forgiuen: ergo, not satisfied: the debtor is forgiuen, ergo, not imprisoned in Purgatorie. Shall not the gates of Matth. 16. 18. hell preuaile against vs? and shall the muddie walles of Purgatorie hedge vs in? Hath our Sauiours soule gone downe to the Ephes. 4. 9. nethermost hell, and yet made no passage thorow the suburbs of hell, as they reckon it? Hath he bound the Matth. 12. 29 strong man that he should not hurt vs, and will he now torment vs himselfe, or set other wee know not whom to doe it? Coloss. 2. 8. Beware lest any spoyle you by vaine reason and Philosophie, whereas the Bible doth admit of no Purgatorie but Christ and the crosse, Iohn Frith epistle to the Reader before his answere to Raftels Dialog. the word of faith, Acts. 15. 9. Iohn 15. 2. and the rod of affliction, Hebr. 12. 6. See Gospell 5. Sunday after Epiphanie.
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  PHILIP. 3. 17.
                  Brethren, be followers together of me, and looke on them which walke, euen so as yee haue vs for an ensample, &c.
               
               SAint Paul in this text exhorts the Church of Philippi to
               
                  Follow him, and other Apostles of the like cariage, because their conuersation is in heauen.
                  
                  Flee false teachers, & such as walke wickedly, because their

                        
                           Courses are dā
                              nable, being
                           
                              
                                 Erronious in doctrine, enemies of the crosse of Christ.
                              
                                 Corupt in maners, whose belly is their god.
                           
                        
                        End is damnation, and glorie their shame.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Be followers of me] This argueth his Ardens in loc. confidence, not B. Latymer. serm. in loc. arrogance. For hauing instructed his Philippians euery way that is commendable, Royard. by word, by writing, by working: and knowing 1. Cor. 4. 4. nothing by himselfe wherein hee was wanting in his Apostleship: hee speakes thus as their watchman, and not as his owne trumpetor, out of vnfained zeale sincerely to keepe them from error, not out of selfeloue vainly to sound his owne praise. Sarcerius. Piseator. Kilius. Hence Pastors are taught to be 1. Pet 5. 3. 
                  paternes vnto their flocke 
                  1. Tim. 4. 12. 
                  in word, in conuersation, inloue, in spirit, in faith, in purenesse; that it may be said of euery Prelate truly, which a Poet of a Pope flatteringly,
               
                  Hic viuens lux vrbis erat, defunctus eclipsis,
                  Urbs stetit Urbano stante, ruente ruit.
               
               
                  And looke on them] He ioyneth other with himselfe to Aretius. decline enuie. There bee many false Teachers among you, but I would not haue you to follow them. Other

there be, though a few that walke as I do. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Marke them Lombard. Zanel
                        •…
                     ius. accurately, for we may not imitate euery one, but onely such as Paul; and Paul not in euery thing, but (as himselfe 1. Cor. 1. 11. elsewhere doth expound himselfe) Be yee followers of mee, euen as I am of Christ. 
                  B. Latymer. If these words, as I am of Christ, be brought hither vnto the clause, be followers of mee, then all is well: otherwise Christians (as B. Latymer heere notes) are not bound in conscience to be Saints apes. Imitate Dauid in that wherein he was a man according to Acts 13. 22. Gods owne heart, but abhor his murther and adultery. Follow Iudas Maccabeus in his hearty deuotion and hardy valour in the Lords war, but imitate him 2. Mac. 12. 43 not in bestowing money to make a sacrifice for the dead. Imitate Peter in his Matt. 16. 16. confessing, but not in his Matt. 26. 72. denying Christ. So Paul and his followers are to be followed, but with a Aretius. 
                  quatenus, in Anselm. that they were perfect, proceeding by one rule, and minding one thing, as the words afore: and Caietan. Zanchiue. for that their conuersation was in heauen, as the words after intimate.
               
                  Many walke] Not after the spirit, Erasmus. as I, but after the flesh, all for the belly. Which Aretius obserues out of the two Greeke words [
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ] in this, and [
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ] in the verse going afore. Good Pastours and good people walke in their vocation orderly, but the wicked are dissolute in their courses and march out of ranke. B. Latymer. If many such walkers in Pauls age, there must of necessity be more now. For Sathan bound in the Primatiue times, is in this latter end of the world Apocal. 20. 7. 
                  loosed againe out of his prison, and his 
                  Apoc. 12. 12. 
                  wrath is great, knowing that he hath but a short time. There is now such horrible rebellion, inhumane cruelty, monstrous heresie, barbarous drunkennesse, euen among such as professe the Gospel, that a man would think the whole world were turned diuel: and therefore seeing the wicked walkers are not a few, but many; 
                  Aretius. Zanchius. the moe, the more heed ought to be taken of them. As Paul in this present chapter at the second verse, Beware of dogs, beware of euill workers, beware of the concision.
               
               
                  
                  Of whom I haue told you often, and now tell you weeping] That he warned them often argueth his Sarcerius. diligence, that he did it now weeping his Caluin. zeale and piety. Weeping for that the Lombard. Anselm. simple seduced were damnified, and the subtill seducing (if they did not repent) hereby damned. So Samuel mourned for Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 35. and so Paul bewailed his 2. Epist. 12. 21. Corinthians, and the Prophet Cap. 9. 1. 
                  Ieremy; Oh that mine head were full of water, and mine eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night for the Qaine of the daughter of my people. There be many learned and industrious Preachers in England which often admonish you of such as walke wickedly, but I feare we want weeping Pastors and weeping Prelates, earnest men in Gods cause. For if they weepe ouer their spirituall children, as Monica did ouer Augustine her naturall sonne: I may boldly tell them, as that reuerend Bishop did her, August. Confess. l. 3. c. 12 
                  Fieri non potest vt filius istarum lachrymarum per eat.
               
               
                  Enemies of the Crosse of Christ] Al such as derogate from the merit of Christs passion, are enemies to Christs Crosse. As the 1. Cor. 1. 23. Iewes vnto whom Christ crucified is a stumbling blocke, and the Gentiles vnto whom his crosse seemed foolishnesse, and the B. Latymer. Papists as they be merit-mongers and masse-mongers, it is a great contempt of Christs crosse to thinke that any can merit heauen for himselfe, but it is a greater scorne to sell his good workes for a little siluer, and so bring other to heauen by deedes of supererogation. Againe, the Papists are enemies of the Crosse of Christ in their Masse, making it a daily sacrifice for the quicke and the dead; whereas Christ was Heb. 9. 28. once, not often, offered to take away the sinnes of the world. See Epist. 4. Sunday in Lent.
               In a word, all such are enemies of Christs Crosse Ardens. Mirlorat. Zanchius. 
                  qui crucem Christi, vel non credunt vel non portant, which either beleeue not, or beare not his Crosse. As the false Apostles in Pauls age, who taught that a man is iustified by circumcision and workes of the Law, which is so derogatory to the sufferings of Christ, as that it is said

expresly, Galat. 2. 21. If righteousnesse be by the law, then Christ died in vaine. And in maintaining this assertion, they did 
                  Galat. 6. 12. 
                  seeke carnally to please, left they should suffer persecution for the crosse of Christ, as hath at large been shewed Epist. 15. Sunday after Trinitie.
               
                  Whose end is damnation] Lombard. Aquin. Anselm. That is, eternall destruction in hell: and therefore take heed how yee follow them in the labyrinth of error, lest the blind leading the blind Matth. 15. 14. both fall into the ditch. Here Sarcerius. Aretius. Diuines obserue Pauls antithesis between the good and the bad Apostles. The good are the Iohn 15. 14. friends of Christ, but the bad enemies of his crosse. The good haue their conuersation in heauen, but the bad, mind earthly things. The good shall haue their vils bodi fashioned like to Christs glorious body, so that their shame shall be turned into glory: but the wicked on the contrary shall haue their glory turned into shame. They flourish happily for a time, but their end is damnation.
               
               
                  Whose belly is their God] Photius. Ardens. Lombard. That is our God which we like best and loue most. And therefore the false Doctors in Pauls age, who to serue their owne turne ioyned together Circumcision and Christ in the businesse of our saluation. And such in our daies as thrust themselues into the Clergie that they may B. Latymer. buckle the Gospell and the world together, and set God and the diuell at one table, preaching pleasant things in the Princes eare, that they may get riches and goe gay: what I pray doe they but make their belly their God? And, as Lib. de Ieiunio aduersus psychicos sub fin. 
                  Tertullian addes, their lungs his temple, their paunch his altar, the Cooke the Priest, the fattie fume of their meat their holy Ghost: their sawces their spirituall gifts, their belching their prophecie: their loue boyleth in their kettle, their faith warmeth in their kitchin, their hope lieth in their meate; he that feasteth most and of delicate fare is prouided best, is holiest among them.
               
               
                  And glory their shame] That is, they boast Primasius Anselm. Zanchius. 
                  in circumcisione membri pudendi. Or as Oecumen. other, they glory in sinne, whereof they should be ashamed. B. Latymer. Or their short glorie

shall be turned into long shame, their earthly pompe to confusion eternall, at the last day.
               
                  Our conuersation is in heauen] First in respect of our Coluin. vnion with Christ, in whom heauen and earth are met: Pomeran. apud Marlorat. in so much as all Gods elect are called often in holy scripture the kingdome of heauen. For albeit they be 1. Pet. 2. 11. pilgrimes on earth, and dwell in houses of Iob. 4. 19. clay: yet they liue not according to the Rom. 12. 2. fashions of the world, but after the lawes of that citie which is Galat. 4. 26. aboue, praying alway that the kingdome of God may come, and that his will may bee done. See Epist. Easter day.
               Secondly, the conuersation of godly men is in heauen, in respect of their Aquin. affections, as minding Coloss. 3. 2. heauenly things, and not earthly things. Perkins exposit. Cred. art. ascens. In the world if a man make purchase of a Lordship, his heart is alway there, there he puls downe, and builds againe, there hee makes himselfe orchards and gardens; there hee meanes to liue, there hee meanes to dye. Christ Iesus hath bought the kingdome of heauen for vs (the most blessed purchase that euer was) and hath paied for it the dearest price that euer was paied, euen his owne pretious blood: and in this citie he hath prepared a Iohn 14. 2. mansion for vs, and made vs free Denizens of it: all our ioy therefore should bee there, Anselme. 
                  Corpore ambulantes in terra, sedcorde habi
                        •…
                      antes in coelo. From whence wee looke for the Lord Iesus Christ, Zanchius. vnto the wicked a Iudge, but vnto such as loue his comming a Sauiour, who shall change our vile bodie, &c. Where foure points are considerable.
               
                  1. Who? Iesus Christ, as being the resurrection and the life: Ioh. 11. 2. and 5. 25.
                  2. What? our vile bodie, for as he reneweth our minde by grace, making it conformable to his minde: so likewise will he change our vile bodie, that it may be like his glorious bodie.
                  3. By what meanes? accerding to the working whereby he is able to subdue all things vnto himselfe.
                  
                  4. After what manner? hee shall change, not the substance

nor the lineaments of our body: but the Transformabat quoad qualitatem non quoad quantitatem. Theo 
                           •…
                        oret. quality, making this 1. Cor. 15. 53. corruptible to put on incorruption, and this mortall, immortality, changing our vile body that it may be fashioned like vnto his glorious body.
                  
               
               
                  
                     P
                           •…
                        udentius apoth. de resurrect. carnis humanae. Nosco meum in Christo corpus consurgere, quid me
                  Desperare iubes? veniam quibus ille reuenit
                  Calcata de morte vijs, quod credimus hoc est.
                  Et totus veniam, nec enim minor, aut alius quàm
                  Nunc sum, restituar: vultus, vigor & color idem
                  Qui modo viuit, erit: nec me vel dente vel vngue
                  Fraudatum reuomet patefactifossa sepulchri.
               
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATTH. 22. 15.
                  Then the Pharisies went out, and tooke counsell how they might entangle him in his words, &c.
                  
               
               CHrist in this Gospell answereth a captious question of his aduersaries after such a sort, that he Iob. 5. 13. 
                  caught the wise in their craftinesse, and as the Psal. 9. 15. Psalmist, in the same net which they hid priuily, themselues are taken.
               
               In the question these Aretius. six circumstances are to be discussed especially, the
               
                  
                     Time when. So soone as Christ had deliuered his Parable concerning the mariage dinner of the Kings sonne, then the Pharisies went out.
                  
                     End why: to tangle him in his words.
                  
                     Manner how: tooke counsell how.
                  
                     Questionists,
                     
                        Pharisies, as chiefe authors.
                        
                        Their disciples with Herods seruants, as actors or subordinate instruments.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Proeme: Master, wee know that thou art true, &c.
                  
                  
                     Probleme: Is it lawfull that tribute be giuen to Caesar, or no?
               
               
                  In Christs answer two points are remarkable, to wit, his
               
                  
                     Conflict in
                     
                        
                           Confounding his aduersaries, Iesus perceiuing their wickednesse.
                        
                           Confuting, shew mee the tribute money.
                        
                           Concluding, giue therefore to Caesar, &c.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Conquest, When they heard these words, they maruelled, and left him, and went their way.
               
               
                  Then the Pharisies] Kilius. Euen at that time when Christ in his doctrine sought their eternall saluation, they conspire to worke his vtter destruction. At that instant Chrysost. when they should haue beleeued in him (Ierem. 5. 3. 
                  hauing faces harder then a stone) they went out from him. And I pray whither? into the 
                  Psal. 1. 1. 
                  counsell of the vngodly, 
                  Heming. for counsell is the foundation to worke vpon. Wherefore? to entangle him. And for that heretofore they could not intrap him in his Ardens. morals, or in his miracles: here they take counsell how to catch him in his words. A fit and (as they thought) a fecible plot. It was exceeding fit, in that Christ had often intangled them in their words, and therefore seeing they could not at any time finde an hole in his coat, they went about to discouer a botch in his doctrine, that, as it is in the by-word, they might Pontan. crie quit. Againe, they conceiued it to be very fecible, for that the tongue is glib, according to that of Saint Cap. 3. 
                        •…
                     . 2. 
                  Iames, if any man offend not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the body.
               
               
                  Their disciples with Herods seruants] Executing their malice by deputies, as being Caluin. Lud
                        •…
                     lphus ex Chrysost. 
                  
                     •…
                  sse knowen, and so lesse suspected of trechery. But these disciples as apt schollers, were Anselm. peeres in mischiefe, though vnder-lings in age to their masters. And with these were ioyned the Herodians also, that is (as In loc. 
                  Theophylact and In Matt. 12. 
                  Euthymius) such as thought Herod to be Christ. Hicron. & Chrysost. Other affirme that they were souldiers of Herod, or as our translation heere, seruants of Herod, 
                  Iansen. Con. cord. ca. 1. 6 not of Herod the Tetrarch, but of Herod
                  
the King. Maldonat. in loc. Factors in his Court for the Romane tribute; for Herod fauoured the taxes of Caesar, and they flattered Herod. A sect altogether opposite to the Pharisies in the question about Ioseph. antiquit. 
                        •…
                     ib. 18. c. 2. tribute: for whereas the Pharisies alway pretended the good of Gods Temple, the Herodians on the contrarie contended for the benefit of Caesars exchequer; and yet both agreed and tooke counsell together against the Lord and against his annoynted, Psal. 2. 2. See Gospell Sunday 18. after Trinitie.
               
                  Master, we know that thou art true] Thom. & Pontan in loc. That a man may speake freely the truth, hee must haue knowledge, zeale, boldnesse. All which our Sauious aduersaries ascribe to him here. Knowledge of the truth, in that hee was a master and taught the way of God. Zeale and loue to the truth, in that he was true, teaching truly. Boldnesse, in that he respected not the person of any. Where by the way Ardens. Caluin. Vega. Diuines obserue the commendable parts of a good Pastour: First, he must be for his learning a master, able to teach, 1. Tim. 3. 2. apt to teach, a Rom. 2. 19. guide to the blinde, a light to them that are in darknesse. Secondly, he must be true, which Ardens applieth to purenesse of life: but In loc. 
                  Marlorat is of opinion that the words, and teachest truly the way of God, expound the clause, thou art true. Thirdly, Kilius. he must not vtter his owne dreames, or the Iere. 23. 16. vision of his owne heart, but teach the way of God. 
                  1. Pet. 4. 11. If any man speake, let him talke as the words of God. Fourthly, he must haue Heming. certaintie of doctrine, teaching the truth aright, or truly. For so saith the Lord, He that hath my word, let him speake my word faithfully, Ierem. 23. 28. And Rom. 12. 6. If any man haue the gift of prophecie, let him haue it according to the proportion of faith. Fifthly, he must be stout in deliuering Gods ambassage, not caring for any man, &c. Ezech. 2. 6. Sonne of man, feare them not, 
                  Esay 58. 1. 
                  cry aloud, spare not, lift vp thy voyce like a trumpet, and shew my people their transgression, and to the house of Iacob their sinnes.
               
               Now the Pharisies vttered all this proem out of Euthym. impudent flatterie: Psal. 55. 22. Their words were softer then butter,

hauing warre in their hearts, and smoother then oyle, yet were they very swords; calling Christ master, and yet scorning to bee his schollers: Ioh. 9. 28. Be thou his disciple (say they to the blind) wee bee Moses disciples. Affirming here that he was true: but Iohn 7. 12. elsewhere that he deceiueth the people; saying vpon this occasion that hee taught the way of God: but at another time quite contrarie, Iohn 9. 16. 
                  this man is not of God. Highly commending his vndanted spirit, that they might heereby prouoke him either to speake treasonable words against Caesar, or insupportable words against the people.
               
                  Is it lawfull that tribute be giuen to Caesar, or no?] God ordained in his 
                     Exod. 30 13 14. &c.
                   law that euery man of twentie yeeres old and aboue should yeerely giue halfe a shekell, as an offering to the Lord, toward the reparation of his house and other pious vses. And this collection, as Commen, in Matth. 22. 
                  Melancthon coniecturally, did amount euery yeere to three tunne of gold. Now when the Romanes had conquered the Iewes, and made them, as we read Luke 2. tributarie; this money giuen vnto the Temple, was paied into Melanct. vbi sup. & Zepper. con. 1. in loc. 
                  Caesars Exchequer. Herevpon there did arise first a great disputation among the chiefe Priests and Pharisies, whether it was lawfull to pay this tribute vnto Caesar, or no. Then after ward insued open rebellion among the people, Iudas of Galile being their Captaine, as S. Luke mentiotioneth, Acts 5. 37. For this 
                     Ioseph. Antiquit. lib 18. c. 1. 
                  Iudas Galileus conspiring with one Sadducus a Pharisie, drew away much people with him openly maintaining against the faction of Herod, that this exaction of the Romane Emperour was intolerable, contrarie to the lawes of God and immunities of the Iewes his free people. By which it doth appeare that the quaere concerning Caesars tribute was exceeding captious, and a meere Dilemma. 
                  Ardens. For if Christ had answered, it is lawfull, the Pharisies had accused him vnto the chiefe Priests, as being all for the Temple: but if hee should haue said, it is vnlawfull, the seruants of Herod would haue Luke 20. 20. deliuered him vnto the secular power of

the Gouernour, as a seditious fellow peruerting the people, and forbidding to pay tribute to Caesar, Luke 23. 2. Luther. Heming. If he should haue disputed against the tribute, he had offended Caesar: if for the tribute, displeased the people, who did beare this burthen against their wils. And so the Pharisies might haue had a gap opened to destroy him if the people did abandon him. In both appeared imminent danger, if not death. Hitherto concerning the Pharisies question, hearken now to Christs answer.
               
                  But Iesus perceiuing their wickednesse] Or as S. Cap. 12. 15. 
                  Marke, their hypocrisie: or as S. Cap. 20. 23. 
                  Luke, their craftinesse. For Prou. 21. 30. 
                  there is no wisedome neither vnderstanding nor counsell against the Lord. Wherefore Christ Aretius. as God seeing their hypocriticall humour, and vnderstanding their trecherous intent, accommodates his answer, Iacob. de Vorag. 
                  non ad eorum verba blanda, sed ad eorum corda praua, to the foule malice of their minde, and not to the faire words of their mouth. Obiecting against them Pontan. foure faults especially: first, folly, noted in the word why? For if I am (as you say) true, then I am God, because Rom. 3. 4. euery man is a liar, and only God ture, yea truth it selfe, Iohn 14. 6. and if I be the sonne of God, I can easily make your wisedome Iob 5. 13. foolishnesse. Secondly, trechery, why tempt ye? Thirdly, ingratitude, why tempt yee me, who teach vnto you the way of God truely, 
                  Matt. 23 37. desiring often to gather your children together, euen as the Hen gathereth hir Chickens vnder hir wings, and yee would not. Fourthly, Dissimulation, yee hypocrites. Hauing thus in a trice confounded them, hee proceedes in the next clause to confute them, euen by their Musculus. Aretius. owne words and deeds, as the souldiers of 2. Mac. 12. 22. 
                  Tymotheus were wounded with the points of their owne swords. For, saith he, shew me the tribute money: and they tooke him a penny, and he said vnto them, whese is this image and superscription? They said vnto him, Caesars. Then hee said vnto them, Giue therefore to Caesar, &c. Luther. Culman. Caluin. As if hee should say, your selues haue let in the Romanes, acknowledging Ioh. 19. 15. 
                  no King but Caesar. And in token of your homage,

you say that the currant coyne among you beares his image and superscription: and therefore seeing Caesar by conquest hath made himself Lord ouer you, giue to Caesar the th
                        •…
                     ngs which are Caesars, and vnto God the things which are Gods.
               
               In which one sentence we may note many profitable lessons, as first, Musculus. that it is our duty to giue euery one his owne: Rom. 13. 7. tribute, to whom tribute: custome, to whom custome: feare, to whom feare: honour, to whom honour. Ardens. 
                  Deo religionem, sibimunditiam, parentibus honorem, familtaribus prouidentiam, fi
                        •…
                     ijs correctionem, fratribus amorem, dominis subiectionem, subiectis benignitatem, omnibus aequitatem. Vnto God the things of God, vnto men the things appertayning to men, and vnto the Euthym, in loc. diuell himselfe that which is his due, charging him with all our sinne and iniquity. Secondly, from hence we learne that the spirituall kingdome of the Church, and the ciuill kingdome of Caesar are Heming. Culman. distinct and separate, (that albeit they be both of God) Barelatus de authoritate Papae cap. 2. each of them being included in his bonds, may not enter vpon the borders of the other. A Anglican. Confess. art. 37. explained in the conclusion of Queene Eliz. Iniunctions. I lem D•. Fulke in loc. Prince may not minister the Sacrament, nor a Priest manage the scepter. Thirdly, 
                     Zepper. Aretius. Aquin. 22. quaest. 10. 4. art. 6. this scripture sheweth euidently that the kingdome of Christ abrogates not the kingdome of Caesar, but that the Gospell is a good friende vnto Common-weales, in teaching Princes how to gouerne, and the people how to be subiect vnto the higher powers. It is not Christ and his word, but Antichrist and the Pope, who deny to Caesar the things which are Caesars, absoluing the subiect from his allegiance to the Soueraigne, Elienfis ad apolog. B
                        •…
                     llar, respon. cap. 2. pag. 71. 
                  Caesari sublata nonreddit, & (quod caput est inturiae) defendit non reddenda, tollere ea potuissese, posse etiam iam, cum volet, quoties volet, atque apudse detinere, ad se enim non ad Caesarem pertinere. This intrusion vpon the things of Caesar is thought vniust and vncouth, euen by the Sorbon and Parliament of Paris in France, by the Common-wealth of Uenice, by the Seminarie Priests in England; in a word, distasted of all Pope-lings in the

world, except the serpentine brood hatched of the Spanish egge Ignatius Loiala. Read the bookes of Watson, especially Quodlibet 8. art. 7. 8. Barclai of the authoritie of the Pope: Roge. Widdrington apolog. pro iure principum: Sheldons generall reasons proouing the lawfulnesse of the Oath of Alleigance. The ready pens of our accurately learned Caesar and his judicious Diuines haue so foyled in this argument the Popes bul-begger Cardinall Bellarmine, that it may be said of him aptly, which once Catalog. glor. mundi, part. 5 considerat. 28 
                  Cassanaeus of the whole Romane Empire, nihil in principio fortius, nihil in fine debilius.
               
               
                  Giue therefore to Caesar the things which are Caesars] Euthym. Iansen. He saith not date: but reddite, because tribute is due debt vnto Caesar. And if we must pay tribute to Caesar a Panim Emperour: Buflinger, Beza. much more to Christian Kings and Queenes Esay 49. 23. which are nursing fathers, and nursing mothers vnto the Church. If we denie this dutie we are no better (if father Serm at Stamf
                        •…
                     rd. 
                  Latymer be iudge) then theeues. Alway prouided that we reserue to God such things as are Gods, and giue to Caesar onely such things as are Caesars: for Ferus serm 2. in loc. it is not said here, reddite Caesariquae petit: sed quae sunt illius. Now the things of Caesar are principally Melanct. Com. in loc. Idem Zepper. & Culrian. three: Honor, obedience, tribute. We must honour them as the Rom. 13. 4. Ministers and 2 Sam. 14. 17 angels of God, as the N
                        •…
                     mb. 27 17 sheepheards and Psal. 47. 9. shields of his people, vnder whose Ezech. 31. 3. 6 shadowing boughes our nests are built, and our yong brought forth. And in this respect also we must obey Caesar in such things as are Caesars: but if Caesar intrude vpon the things of God, and coyne a new Creed, or broch another Gospell, it is better to obey God then man, Act. 4. 19. The lawes Melanct. Com. in loc. Idem Erasmus in para. order requiring that first we giue to God the things which are Gods and then vnto men the things of men. See Epistle 4. Sunday after Epiphanie.
               As for the tributes of Caesar, if they be iust and reasonable wee must pay them as his wages: if vniust and vnreasonable, we must Luther. Zepper. Melanct. postil in loc. be are them as our punishment. We may refell his arguments in parliament, and repell his

oppression according to courses of law: but we may not in any case rebel with the sword. And yet (as Melancthon and other vpon this text) Caesar himselfe is bound to keep the commandement, Thou shalt not steale, remembring alway that almighty God hath made him a sheapheard, and not a wolfe; a nursing father, and not a cursing tyrant; a 2. King. 13. 5. deliuerer, and not a de
                     •…
                  ourer of his people. 
                     August. de ciuit. l. 4. c. 4. 
                  Remota iustitia quid sunt regna nisi magna latrocinia? quoniam & ipsalatrocinia quid sunt nisi paruaregna? Saint Serm. 4. 
                  Ambrose notably to the same purpose, Quod Caesar praecipit ferundum est, quod imperator indicit tolerandum est: sed fit intolerabile dum illud praeda exactionis accumulat. The gratious Apothegme of Basil. Dor. li. 2. pag. 99. our noble Soueraigne to his dearest son Henry the Prince is worthy to be written in letters of gold, Inrich not your selfe with exactions vpon your subiects: but thinke the riches of your people your best treasure.
               
               
                  Unto God those things which are Gods] Melanct. Zepper. As if he should say: Ye Pharisies are careful for the money of the Temple, but in the meane while yee neglect the diuine worship and word of God▪ 
                  Erasmus annot. in loc. Ye giue to Caesar the penny that hath his inscription and image: why then, I pray, confecrate ye not to God your soule, wherein is imprinted Gods image and superscription? How Christians are Gods penie, hauing his image by creation, and inscription in holy baptisme, whereby Christ Apoca. 22. 4. 
                  writeth his name in their foreheads, and so markes them as it were for the children of God and inheritours of the kingdome of heauen: See Ludolphus de vita Christipart. 2. cap. 35. Ardens, Musculus, Pontan, Ferus in loc.
               
               If we now conforme our selues according to Christs image, hee shall hereafter (as it is in this daies Epistle) transforme our vile body, that it may be like his glorious body, 
                  1. Cor. 15. 49. for as wee haue borne the image of the earthly, so shall wee beare the image of the heauenly. Take heede therefore that Sathan imprint not his stampe in you, because Christ at the Ludolphus. last day will say to thy soule, as hee did to the Pharisies here: whose is this image and inscription?
                  
If thou be branded with the Apocal. 23. markes of Sathan and Antichrist, hell is thy portion; if Ephes. 4. 30. sealed by the holy spirit of God vnto the day of redemption, heauen is thine inheritance. Giue then vnto Caesar the things which are Caesars, Ambros. in Luc. cap. 20. leaue to the world the things of the world, that thou maiest the better giue to God the things of God. Origen apud Thom. in loc. Or giue to thy body such things as are necessary tribute, and to thy soule such things as are conuenient and profitable for thy soule. Or giue to thy Pastor such things as are the Pastors, and vnto the Prince such things as appertaine to thy Prince, 1. Tim. 2. 2. that thou maiest leade a quiet and a peaceable life in all godlines and honesty. Remember the prouerbe, He that eates the Kings Goose, shall haue the feathers sticke in his throat seuen yeeres after: and obserue the Commandement, Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy daies may be long in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee.
               
               
                  When they heard these words, they marueiled, and left him, and went their way] This happy conquest of Christ is full of Luther. Zepper. consolation, in that his spirit Rom. 8. 9. dwelleth in vs, and Matt. 10. 20. speaketh in vs, helping our infirmities, and inabling vs in our disputations afore Kings and Councels to plead the Gospels cause so powerfully, that he Psal. 2. 4. 
                  who dwelleth in heauen shall laugh his enemies to scorne, yea the Lord shall haue them in derision. When the Acts 6. 9. 10. 
                  Libertines and Cyrenians disputed with Saint Stephen, they were not able to resist the wisedome and the spirit by which he spake. So the godly learned, and truely stout Martyr of Iesus Christ Master Iohn Philpot, at a Examination 11. as Mr. Fox in his martyrdome. conference holden in Bishop Boners house, told Doctour Morgane plainely, Thou art not able to answer that spirit of truth which speakes in mee, for the defence of Christs true religion. I am able by the might thereof to driue thee round about this Gallery before mee. So silly women and yoong boyes endued and strengthened by the spirit, in the quarrell of Christ argued so peremptorily, so profoundly, that Boner as being too wicked to dismisse them, and too weake to conuince them, ordinarily

for saking all his Logick and Rhetoricke, Mr. Fox in the martyrdome of Ioane Hornes. 
                  knocke them downe with the butcherly axe of his sentence. So we read in 
                     Hist. lib. 10. cap. 3. cited in part 1. Church hom. for Whitsunday.
                   
                  Eusebius, of a subtile Philosopher, who being an extreame aduersarie to Christ and his doctrine, could by no kind of learning bee converted vnto the faith: but was able to withstand all arguments that could be brought against him, euen with little or no labour. At length there started vp a poore simple man of smal wit, and lesse knowledge, one that was reputed among the learned as an idiot: and hee on Gods name would needs take in hand to dispute with this proud Philosopher. The Bishops and other Diuines standing by, were much abashed at the matter, as fearing that they should bee brought to shame by his doings, he notwithstanding goeth on, and beginning in the name of the Lord Iesus, brought the Philosopher to such a point in the end, that he could not chuse but acknowledge the power of God in his words, and to giue place to the truth.
            
            
               
               The Epistle.
               
                  COLOSS. 1. 3.
                  We giue thankes to God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, &c.
                  
               
               THis proem of Pauls Epistle to the Colossians is in effect Sarcerius. Aretius. all one with that to the Corinthians, expounded Sunday 18. after Trinity: and to the Philippians expounded Sund. 22. after Trinity. Wherefore lest I seeme tedious in tautologies, I will onely part it, and so depart hence to the Gospell ensuing.
               It consists of Melanct. Zanchius. two parts, a
               
                  Congratulation for their gifts in present possession, and in it

                        Who: ver. 1. Paul an Apostle, not of Galat. 1. 1. men, but of Iesus Christ. Not thorow his owne Sarcerius. intrusion, or for his owne Primasius. merit: but by the wil of God. And Timotheus his brother: in respect of their Zanchius. common faith on earth, and common father in heauen.
                        When: Alwaies praying: or as our translation, alwaies in our praiers. As Caietan. Aretius. Marlorat. often in our deuotion as wee thinke of you, wee thank God for you since the day we first heard of yourfaith, v. 4. 9.
                        To whom: Vnto God & the father of our Lord, &c. that is, as we read, to God euen the father. Or to God Caluin. Beza▪
                            as the father of our Lords Iesus Christ, in Matth. 3. 17. whom only God is well pleased. As if he should say, seeing euery Iames 1. 17. gift is from God & bestowed on vs for Christ: it is our bounden duty to thanke God the father of

our Lord Iesus Christ alwaies in all our prayers; Combard. able to heare, because God, for that is a stile of Bullinger apud Marlorat. maiesty; willing to helpe, because the father of Iesu, for that is a stile of mercy.
                        For whom: For you, because 1. Cor. 13. 4. loue doth not enuy, but reioyce for others good. For you Saints at Colosse, verse 2. that is, Saints by 1. Cor. 1. 2. calling, all such as are consecrated to God in holy Theophylact. baptisme, Aretius. sanctified by the sanctifying spirit. In a word, Piseator. all the faithfull in Colosse.
                        For what. As Aretius for the 3. principall vertues of a Christian:

                              Faith, and that a true faith, hauing Christ Iesus for the Caluin. proper obiect, and wholly relying vpon his Bullinger. merits.
                              Loue, and that according to Philip. 1. 9. knowledge, louing especially the Saints, and those not a few, but without Primasius. exception of person, in respect of Caietan. blood, affinity, fashion, or faction, all.
                              
                              Hope. & that an assured hope, expecting an inheritance that is Here in alluding to carefull parents hoording vp treasure for their babes: v
                                          •…
                                        Zanchius in loc.
                                  
                                 laid vp in store; and that in a sure Lombard. Anselm. & secure place

(where Matth. 6. 20 neither the moth nor canker corrupteth, and where theeues neither dig thorough nor steale) in heauen. As S. 1. Pet. 1. 4. 
                                 Peter interprets Paul, an inheritance immortall & vndefiled, & that fadeth not away, reserued in heauen. All which is conueied vnto them by the preaching of the Gospell, here commended à 
                                 Aquin. 
                                 veritate, dilatatione, profectu. That is in two words in respect of it

                                    
                                       Contents, as being the word of truth, vers. 5.
                                    
                                    
                                       Extents, as being come to all the world, and fruitfull in all good workes, vers. 6.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Comprecatiō for their further increase & future proficience Zanchius. in

                        Plentifull wisedome and spirituall vnderstanding, whereby to know the wil of God, vers. 9.
                        Fruitfull obedience, whereby to doe the will of God, walking worthie of the Lord, vers. 10. that is, as becommeth his Philip. 1. 27. Gospell, and his Lombard. Anselm. glorie, pleasing him in all things, &c.
                        Cheerefull patience, whereby to suffer according to the will of God and that with ioyfulnesse, vers. 11.
                     
                  
               
               The difference between patience and long suffering may bee, that the first is Aretius. 
                  circa grauiora pericula; the second, circa leuiora. 
                  Theophylact. The one teacheth vs to forbeare when wee can reuenge; the other, to beare when we cannot

reuenge. Or patience 
                  Case▪ an. leuelleth as it were the minde in our present affliction, which is but for a moment; long suffering exalteth it in expectation of our future 2. Cor. 4. 17. far most excellent and eternall weight of glorie, when as wee shall be made partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light, vers. 12. Spirituall vnderstanding is most vsefull in our contemplatiue life, obedience in our actiue, patience needfull in both. And therefore let vs pray with Paul here to the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, that we may be strengthned with all might, through his glorious power, vnto all patience and long suffering with ioyfulnesse, &c.
            
            
               The Gospell.
               
                  MATTH. 9. 18.
                  While Iesus spake vnto the people, behold, there came a certaine ruler, and worshipped him, saying, my daughter is euen now decased, &c.
                  
               
               TWo points are to be considered in this Gospell especially, the
               
                  Goodnesse of Christ, in relieuing all sexes and all sorts of men, hearing a ruler who was rich and a Iew, healing a woman who was poore and a Gentile. Comforting a distressed father, recouering a diseased woman, raising a deceased damosell.
                  Leaudnesse of the people, vers. 24. laughing Christ to scorne.
                  
               
               In the first miracle wrought vpon the woman which had an issue of blood, note circumstance of
               
                  
                     Time: vers. 22. the woman was made whole euen the same time.
                  
                     Place: vers. 19. 20. in the way to Iairus house.
                  
                     Person,
                     
                        To whom.
                        Before whom.
                        By whom this worke was done.
                     
                  
               
               
                  In the second miracle three persons are remarkable: the
               
                  
                     Physitian, Christ.
                  
                     Patient, a deceased Domosell.
                  
                     Mediatour betweene both, a certaine Ruler.
               
               In that Christ healed the sicke woman instantly so soone as she beleeued in him, and he saw hir: he teacheth vs Ferus. D
                        •…
                     zinloc. hereby not to deferre any worke of charity, but to doe good turnes in a good time. Prou. 3. 28. 
                  Say not vnto thy neighbour, goe and come againe, and to morrow will I giue thee, if thou haue it now, for hope that is deferred is the fainting of the heart: but when the desire commeth it is a Tree of life, Prouerbe
                     •…
                   13. 12. And in that our blessed Sauiour cured this woman in the way to Iairus house: hee giueth vs an Ludol
                        •…
                     hus ex Chrysost. example to spend all our houres profitably, B. Latymer. serm. vpon this Gospell. neuer intermitting any fit oportunity to doe good, redeeming the time because the daies are 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Ephes. 5. 16.
               In the party to whom, obserue first hir griefe, then hir grace. She was a Luke 8. 47. fearfull and a silly woman, vexed with an vocleane and vncomfortable disease twelue yeeres, in such sort (that as Saint Marke reports in his fifth chapter, verse 26.) she suffered many things of many Physitians: some torturing hir with one medicine, some with another, and yet none did hir any good, but rather much hurt. For as 
                     Marke 5. 26. L
                           •…
                        ke 8. 43. other Euangelists haue recorded this History more fully, she spent all that she had, and it auailed hir nothing, but she became much worse. Whereby she was made bis misera (saith Paraph. in loc. 
                  Erasmus) or as Postil in loc. 
                  Hemingius, many waies vnhappy. For hir sicknesse brought hir to weaknesse, hir weaknesse to physicke, physicke to beggery, beggery to contempt. And happily remorse of conscience made these wordly grieuances more bitter: for whereas the 
                     Eccle. 
                     
                        •…
                     8. 15. wise▪ man affirmes, Hee that sinnetb before his maker, shall fall into the hands of the Physitian: shee might per aduenture conceiue that God had cast hir away. This (as you see) was hir hard case, vexed in minde, troubled in body, beggered in hir estate, despised in hir place.
               From hence we may note first against 
                     Lib. de Solem
                           •…
                        ne cap. 5. la
                           •…
                        m alij sc
                           •…
                        
                        tivant apud 
                           •…
                        udolphum de vita Christi, part 1. c. p. 
                     
                        •…
                     9. 
                  Ambrose that

this afflicted woman was not Martha the sister of Mary, 
                  Beauxamis Har. Tom. 1. fol. 160. because Martha was rich, as we finde in the Ioh. cap. 11. & 12. Gospels history, whereas this Haemorrhousa had wasted all hir wealth vpon Physitians.
               Secondly, by this example you see, K
                        •…
                     llius in loc. what an inestimable ie well health is, in that this Haemorrhousa willingly became a begger in hir estate to be better at ease. Uitanon est viuere, sed valere; it is more comfortable to die quickely, then to liuesickly. In loc. 
                  Theophylact, 
                  H
                        •…
                     st. l. 7. c. 14. 
                  Eusebius and Zozomen & 
                        〈◊〉
                      apud Vegam, & Zepperum in loc. other report, that this woman healed of hir bloody flux, and returned home to Caesarea Philippi, did erect against hir own doores a brasen image of Christ, in perpetuall remembrance of this great benefit. It is our duty likwise to blesse God alway for his blessings in this kinde.
               Thirdly, in that our father in heauen, after long sickenesse sendeth at the last happy deliuerance to his children: it may teach vs in all our distresse, neuer to distrust his mercy, but to say with Iob 13. 15. 
                  Iob, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. And with Gen. 32. 26. 
                  Iacob, I will not let thee goe, except thou blesse mee. 
                  Tobit 
                        •…
                     . 14. 2. 
                  Toby was blinde eight yeeres, and then the Lord restored his sight againe. Saint Luke reports in his Luk. 13. 11. 12. Gospell, how a crooked woman after she was bowed together eighteene yeeres in such sort, that she could not lift vp hir selfe in any wise, was made straight and loosed from hir infirmity. Kilius in his explication of this text, saith he was acquainted with a man, who lay twenty yeeres bedred, and of those twenty, fourteene vpon one side, who notwithstanding afterward married, and begat children, and liued in perfect health a long time. Saint Cap. 5 v. 59 
                  Iobn mentioneth a certaine man made whole, which had beene diseased eight and thirty yeeres. And Acts 3. we read of a Creeple from his mothers wombe, whose fecte and ancle-bones receiued strength in so great measure, that hee could stand, and walke, and leape. Here this woman had a bloody flux twelue yeeres, and yet Christ assoone as shee touched his vesture, said, Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole, &c.
               
                  Hitherto concerning hir grieuances: I come now to hir graces, and they be principally three: Faith, Inuocation, Humility. Which Caten. Aurea in l
                        •…
                     . 
                  Aquin notes out of three words in the text, Credidit, dixit, tetigit: quia his tribus, fide, verbo, & opere omnis salus acquiritur. Hir faith was so great, that shee certainely perswaded hir selfe, if shee might but touch onely the hemme of Christs garment, shee should attaine hir former health. Our blessed Sauiour cried often in the Prou. 1. 21. streetes among the people, Matt. 11. 28. 
                  Come to me all that are laden, and I will ease you. Now Heming. surely this woman heard this gratious promise, beleeuing it to be true in generall, and applying it to hir selfe in particular. He calleth all men, and promiseth he will refresh all such as are combred; I am one of that all, one of those which are heauie laden, I therefore verily beleeue that he will heare mee and heale mee. Let vs in like sort stirre vp our faith in all aduersity, when any trouble without, or terror within assaulteth vs, and it alone shall Ephes. 6. 16. quench all the fiery darts of the wicked. Happily some will obiect, This woman had Christ in hir eye, present at hir fingers end, but I poore soule, may complaine with Ioh. 20. 2. 
                  Mary Magdalene, They haue taken away the Lord, and he is now gone farre from vs. Against this tentation of the flesh, oppose the word of Christ vnto Iob. 20. 29. 
                  Thomas his Apostle, Blessed are they which haue not seene and haue beleeued, and his promise to all his followers, Matt. 28. 20. 
                  I am with you alway vntill the end of the world, with vs in his Sacraments, in his word, by his power and spirit and grace: being a Psal. 46. 1. very present help in all affliction vnto such as call vpon him, I say such as call vpon him faithfully. Wherefore Iames 4. 8. draw neere to him, and he will draw neere to thee; come to him, and call vpon him (as this woman here) with a stedfast hope, no way doubting of his might and mercies, and his spirit shall Rom. 8. 16. assure thy spirit, that thou art his childe, and that thy faith hath made thee safe.
               The second vertue noted in this woman, is hir invocation or manner of praying. The Ruler in my text worshipped

Christ, and said, my daughter is euen now deceased, &c. The Matt. 15. 2 Cananite called after him, Haue mercy vpon me, O Lord the sonne of Dauid. And blind Mark. 10. 48 
                  Bartimaeus also cried vnto him, O sonne of Dauid, and being rebuked, he cried much more, Sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me. But this a B. Latymer. shame
                     •…
                  ast woman, Eut
                        •…
                     ym. in 8 L
                        •…
                     c. & Theophylact. in l
                        •…
                     c. as blushing to publish hir vncleannesse afore the whole multitude, and fearing happily that shee should haue beene thrust out of the company for impurity, speakes not a word to Christ openly, but prayeth onely to hir selfe in secret: If I may but touch euen his garment I shall be whole. Wishes are hir words, and sobs hir sacrifices, and yet Christ heares hir groanes and grants hir hearts desire, saying, Daughter be of good comfort, &c. Insinuating Heming. heereby that the prayer which pearceth the clouds is not a wagging of the lippes, nor a babling of the tongue: but rather an humble Psalm. 25. 1. lifting vp of thy soule to God, Offer then vnto Christ a I
                        •…
                     l 2 15. rent and a Psal. 51. 17. broken heart, in seeking thy Sauiour heartily, praying heartily, repenting heartily; that hee may turne to thee, and turne his iudgements away from thee, saying to thy soule, Psal. 35. 3. 
                  I am thy saluation.
               
               The third vertue commended in this woman is hir discreet Calman. Ludolphus. Aretius. humility, who knowing hir owne vnworthinesse, and considering hir lothsome sicknesse, did not presume to come before, but behind Christ, as it were B. Latymer. stealing hir health. And this hir relike is worth our obserueuing also: for as pride is the first stop; so lowlinesse the first step vnto blessednesse. It is an eminent grace for a man speaking with the tongues of Angels to transport his audience with the winde of words, and flouds of eloquence whither he list: and yet if learning be not seasoned with humility, it rather 1. Cor 8. 1. bloweth vp then buildeth vp, and as the Aristotle. Philosopher said, is no better then a sword in a mad-mans hand. Prophecying is an excellent gift, but if any preach themselues, and goe before Christ Ierem. 23. 16. auouching the vision of their owne hearts, and not following after Christ in deliuering out of his mouth his

errand faithfully: what are they but as a 1. Cor. 13. 1. sounding brasse or as a tinkling cymball? In running after delight, riches, honour: come behind Christ, euermore treading in his waies, and touching the hemme of his vesture.
               
               The persons afore whom, are the Ruler, verse 18. the Disciples, verse 19. and a great multitude, Marke 5. 24. Christ acted this myracle before Iairus, 
                  Theophylact. in loc. & Euthym. in Luc. 8. for the strengthning of his weake faith; encouraging him heereby to belceue, that he could recouer his daughter, as well as cure this woman. Afore the Disciples and the multitude, for the confirmation of his doctrine, shewing Ludolphus heereby that he knew the secrets of all hearts, as also Chrysost. Theophylact. E
                        •…
                     thym. that the liuely faith of this Haemorrhousa might not be concealed, but openly commended as an example for all men. And therfore Iesus inquired immediatly, 
                     Marke 5 30. Luk 8. 45. 
                  who hath touched my clothes? and he looked round about, to see hir, and when the woman saw that shee was not hid, shee came trembling, and fell downe before him, and told him afore all the people, for what cause she had touched him, and how shee was healed instantly. The briefe whereof is recorded here by S. Matthew, When he saw hir, he said, Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith hath made thee whole. Propounding hir as a B. Latymer. Schoole-mistresse to all the world, to learne by hir how to trust in God, and to come to Christ in all manner of afflictions.
               The person by whom, is Christ, and in him obseruo what he said, and what he did. His words 
                     Zepper. Con. 1. in▪ 
                     loc.
                   containe consolation, Daughter be of good comfert: and commendation, thy faith hath made thee safe. The word Daughter, is Iacob. de Vorag. ser. 2. in ioc. 
                  magnae familiaritatis: be of good comfort, magnae securitatis: Thy faith hath made thee safe, magnae iocunditatis. Heere then are set downe three notable effects of a liuely faith: it maketh vs the children of God, Daughter: it brings comfort, be of good cheere: it procures saluation of body and soule, thy faith hath made thee whole.
               
               Christ said in the Ioh. 20. 17. Gospell, Iaescend to my father, and vnto your father. Vnto my father by Theophylact. Euthym. C
                        •…
                     ietan. in Ioan. 20. nature, but vnto

your father by grace: August▪ tract. 121. in Ioan. 
                  non ait, ascendo ad patrem nostrum: aliter ergo meum, aliter vestrum: naturâ meum, gratiâ vestrum And this adoption of the Father electing, of the Son redeeming, of the holy Ghost assuring vs that we are the children of the most high: is on our part, by faith only. For Iohn 1. 12. vnto such as receiued him, he gaue power to be the sons of God▪ euen to such as beleeue in his name. Ideo f
                        •…
                     a, quta fides tua te saluum fecit, as S. Hierome vpon my text. This woman is Christs daughter in that her faith made her whole. Here then obserue that a Christiā is most honorable, being son to a King, Heb. 2. 11. brother to a King, R
                        •…
                     m. 8. 17. heire to a King, yea to the King of Psal. 24. 7. glory, to the King of all Kings Ecclesiast. 5 7 higher then the highest. He were a foolish poore man that were ashamed of the kinred which the King did challenge of him: Deering. lect. 10. Heb. hee is more foolish though he were a King himselfe, that is ashamed of the sonne of God, when he doth offer himselfe vnto him. For Christ is the Luke. 2. 25. consolation of Israel, as it followeth in the next clause to be considered, he brings comfort to his children, Daughter be of good cheere. The reprobate account the children of God vnhappie wretches, euen Wisd. 5. 4. mad men, hauing them in derision as the 1. Cor. 4. 13. filth of the world. But as Lib. 1. de guber. dei. 
                  Saluianus truely, nemo miser alieno sensu, sed suo. Men are not miserable for that other think so, vnles themselues feele it so. The children of God then hauing the 1. Tim. 4. 8. promises of this life and that which is to come, cheered in conscience while they liue, filled with eternal ioy when they be dead, haue both hereafter and here such comfort as Philip. 4. passeth all vnderstanding.
               The last effect of a liuely faith is saluation of bodie and soule, Thy faith hath made thee safe. For whereas it is said here, The woman was made whole euen the same time: wee must expound it (as Enarrat. in loc. 
                  Anselme and Zapper con. 1. loc. other intimate) not that she was healed at that houre when Iesus turned about to her, and spake, but in the same moment of time, wherein she touched his vesture. Hi
                        •…
                     ron. in loc. 
                  Non enim dixit fides tua te saluam factura est, sed saluam te fecit: in eo enim quod credidisti, iam salua facta es. It was then her trust and

not hir touch, hir faith and not hir finger, which haled vnto hir this health and helpe. For the multitude thrust Christ, and trode on him (as S. Luke reports) and yet only this woman is said to touch him. And 
                     Ferus Con. 3. Granat. Con. 2. & Zepper. Con. 1. in loc.
                   so when we come to diuine seruice, sermon, or sacrament without liuely faith, hearty deuotion, holy reuerence; wee touch his outward element, but take not his inward grace to the comfort of our soule. We doe tangere panem domini touch his hemme, but not contingere panem dominum touch him. And the reason hereof is plaine, for that our faith and our fingers goe not together. And therefore when any tread in the courts of the Lord, hearing his word, and receiuing his sacraments: I say when any come to the Church, and yet feele no vertue to come from Christ: it is assuredly for that Esay 29. 13. 
                  their lips are neere him, as it were, pressing among the multitude: but their heart farre from him, not attending, much lesse attayning his sauing grace.
               From Latymer. Fulk. Zepper. in loc. hence we may learne (against Arboreus, Maldonate, Beauxamis, and other Popish authors in their Commentaries vpon this place) not to put any trust in the reliques of Saints, or impute any saving vertue to the vestments of our Sauiour. For the vertue which healed hir went not out of the coate, but out of Christ immediatly: hee said not there is vertue proceeded from my vesture, but I perceiue that vertue is gone out of me, Luke 8. 46. There was no great or extraordinary vertue in his garments after his death, when the souldiers had parted them among them: nor in his life when he wore them, for the people that thronged him, receiued no benefit by them, but onely she and they that touched him by faith. And therefore Ferus serm. in loc. some by Christs garment vnderstand the scriptures, in which our Sauiour is wrapped: but if a man vnfold them, he shal behold the best Crucifix that euer he saw: for Christ crucified is the end of all the Law, scope of all the Prophets, and as it were hemme of all the Bible. Apud Thom. in loc 
                  Rabans and Ansel. in loc. other affirme, that this garment was

Christs humane nature, for he Philip. 2. 7. tooke on him the shape of a seruant, and put on our ragges that he might clothe vs with his robes. Now the hemme of his humane nature was his passion, and his passion was a Heb. 9. 14. sacrifice for our sinne: so that to touch the hemme of his garment, is nothing else, but to beleeue with 1. Tim. 1. 15 
                  Paul, that Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners, of whom I am chiefe. Yea but happily some will obiect, it was neither the womans finger nor faith that made hir whole? but Christs owne vertue, Luke 6. 19. The whole multitude sought to touch him, for there went vertue out of him, and healed them all. He might haue said then it was my vertue, not thy faith? It is true, that Christs owne vertue and grace doth onely cure the sinnes of our soule, and sores of our body: but his vertue is not apprehended but by the finger of faith. And therefore Christ (as we read in Saint 
                     Cap. 6. 
                        
                           •…
                        . 5. 6. 
                  Marke) could doe no great workes in his owne country, because of their vnbeliefe, because they wanted an hand to touch his vesture. Cyprian, apud Granat. Con. 1. in loc. 
                  Quantum enim vas fidei capacis afferimus, tantum gratie inundantis haurimus. Hence you may know both how Gods grace, and our faith is said to iustifie. Yee are saued by grace through faith, Ephesians 2. 8. by grace effectiue, by faith apprehensiue: See Epistle 17. Sunday after Trinity.
               Now faith in respect of it obiect, is called in Galat. 3. 22. scripture the faith of Iesus Christ: but in respect of the subiect in which it is Aretius in loc. inherent, my faith and thy faith. As our text here, thy faith hath made thee whole. By this which Christ said, is shewed also what he did, he spake the word and it was done, hee commanded and it was effected, euen the same time the woman was made whole. In generall, to confirme his Gospell; in particular, intimating that all physicke is in vaine, B. Latymer. Kilius. Zepper. except the great Physitian of the world (who visiteth and redeemeth his people) blesse it. So much of the parts and persons of the first miracle. Let vs now come to the second, and in it (according to the texts order) inquire first of Iairus.
               
               
                  In whom obserue,
               
                  First, his fashion, in that he was a

                        
                           Ruler, as our Euangelist.
                        Ruler of a Synagogue, as Marke and Luke.
                        
                        Ruler of a Synagogue in Capernaum, as may bee collected out of them all.
                     
                  
                  Then his faith, and the fruits thereof.

                        1. His fatherly loue toward his daughter, in desiring helpe for her at Christs hand.
                        2. Inuocation, and worshipped him.
                        
                        3. Hope, Come, and lay thine hand vpon hir, and she shall liue.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Acertaine ruler] I haue shewed 
                     Gospel 3. Sun. after Epiphan. Trinit. Sund. & 21. after Trinit
                   often, how many great men haue beene good men, and that the Pharisies obiection is false, Iohn 7. 48. 
                  Doth any of the rulers beleeue in Christ? For he that keepeth Israel, hath in euery See Beauxamis. Har. tom. 1. sol. 160. age stirred vp as well Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill gouernours to fauour his children, and further the businesse of the Gospell. I will vpon this occasion adde one thing only to the perpetuall honour of England, namely, that Constantine the Great our countriman was the first Christian Emperour, Lucius our countriman the first Christened King, Henry 8. our countriman the first Catholike Prince that vtterly shaked of the Popes vnlimited iurisdiction in his dominions, and our King Iames of blessed memory the first of his ranke who did oppose that Antichrist of Rome with his owne pen in the quarrell of religion.
               This Iairus was a ruler of a Synagogue. Now that yee may the better vnderstand what office this was, I must informe you, that there was in all Iewry but one Temple, Deut. 16. where the people were commanded to celebrate their

solemne feasts, and offer vp their sacrifices vnto God. And there was only but one, for the preseruation of Melanct. postil. in loc. Idem Hospinian. de origine templorum, cap. 4. vnitie in piety, that there might bee but one only religion, of one only God, in one only Temple. Where by the way note, that vniformity in discipline is an hedge to vnitie and doctrine. Where Canons and Iniunctions of order are despised, and euery man left vnto himselfe: There many times are so many sects as Cities, and almost as many Gospels as gossips. On the contrary, when all things in the Church are done 1. Cor. 14. 40. orderly, when the Christian Magistrate enioies in outward ceremonies one kinde of discipline for the publike worship of God: there for the most part, an vnion in law breeds an vnion in loue, a conformity in fashion an vniformity in faith, Ephes. 4. 3. 15. endeuouring to keepe the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace, following the truth in loue. This I take to bee the true reason, why Gods Israel had but one Tabernacle and one Temple.
               But there were Synagogues in 
                     Vide Sigon. de repub. Heb lib. 2 cap. 8. & Hospinian vbi sup.
                   euery towne, where diuine praiers and Gods holy word was read and expounded euery Sabbath, as Saint Luke recordeth, Acts 15. 21. And for this purpose there was a Melanct post in loc. Couent, or Colledge of students, and sonnes of the Prophets, among which our Iairus heere was a ruler: as Ser. vpon this Gospell. Bishop Latymer imagineth a Church-warden: or as other, Ma
                        •…
                     donat. in loc. expounder of the Law and the Prophets, as it were publike Professour in Diuinity, the 
                     b 
                     Melanct.
                   
                  Diez con. 1. in loc. Prior of the place, the Kilius. Rector of the Schooles. Heere then obserue both antiquity and vtility of Colledges and Vniuersities, as being in Vide Hospinian. de origine scholarum, cap. 4. 5. all ages the Nurseries of Gods vine-yard, out of which Impes of hope haue beene translated into the Church and Common-weale. So then if thou wish well vnto thy Countrey, speake well and (as occasion is offered) doe well vnto the schooles of the Prophets, in that they bee Seminaries of learning and fountaines of holy religion. If thy sonne bee fit, and thy selfe be fitted also for meanes and money, send him vnto

                  Iairus the ruler of the Synagogue. If hee bee fit, I say, for when a man is out of his proper calling in any society, it is as much as if a ioint were dislocated in the body. To make thy sonne a trades-man, if hee bee most apt for learning; or to send him to the Court, when hee is fitter for the Cart: is as much as if a man should applie his toes to feeling and not his fingers, and to walke on his hands and not on his feet. It was a memorable fact of that famous Bishop▪ of Lincolne, Robert Grosthead, 
                  Sir George Paul in the life of Archbishop Whitgift. p. 85. who being vpon a time solicited to preferre his poore kinsman, and thereupon enquiring what condition of life hee followed, and vnderstanding that he was an husbandman: Why then (answered he) if his plough be broken, I will repaire it, or rather then faile bestow a new vpon him, whereby hee may go on in his course: but so to dignifie him, as to make him forsake his calling and trade wherein he was brought vp, I meane not to doe.
               
               Now that a father may the better accommodate his child with a fit calling: hee See Perkins treatise of Callings. must obserue both his inclination and naturall gifts. Euery childe euen in his infancy, doth affect some one particular occupation or condition of life more than another: and therefore the iudicious Nazian. epist. ad Eudoxum. 
                  Athenians afore they placed their children in any calling, vsed to bring them into a publike place where tooles and instruments of all sorts were laid: and then accurately to mark with what kind of instrument they took delight, applying them afterward to the like Art with good successe. And it is not amisse for Christians to follow Heathens in this, or any like commendable practise.
               Secondly, parents must obserue the naturall endowments of their children, applying such as excell in eminent gifts of the minde vnto courses of learning: and other which excell in gifts of the body to trades and mechanicall occupations. Magdeburg. Cent. 3. col. 250 
                  Origen that great Clerke when he was a child, vsed to question with his father Leonides about the sense of the Scripture, whereupon he was made a

scholler. Athanasius also was first put to learning (as Apud Magde. cent. 4. col. 1027 
                  Ruffinus and Zozomene report) for that hee was found by the sea side doing the part of a Bishop among a company of little children like himself, examining and baptizing them according to the solemne order vsed in the congregation. Archbishop Whitgift the Camden. Britan▪ in Comit. Lincoln. peerelesse Prelate in our age for learning and pietie, Idem Camd. in comit. Cant. consecrating his whole life to God, and his painefull labours vnto the Churches happie peace, was applied first vnto the Schoole, for Sir George Paul vbi supra pag. 2. that his Vnkle Robert Whitgift Abbot of the Monastery of Wellow, found an extraordinary towardlinesse in him. And because many parents are ignorant, and most parents exceeding partiall in iudging of their owne childrens inclination and ingenuity: the best way for them is to be directed heerin by some iudicious friends, and then out of mature iudgement, to giue vnto Caesar, the things appertaining to Caesar, accommodating such vnto secular courses as are most apt for the Common-wealth: and vnto God the things which belong to God, committing them vnto Iairus, and consecrating them vnto the sacred function of the Ministerie.
               That Iairus was a ruler of the Synagogue in Capernaum, is insinuated Luke 8. 41. and in the first verse of this present chapter of our Euangelist, as I haue copiously prooued in the beginning of mine Exposition, Gospell Sunday 19. after Trinity. Capernaum then had a good Melanct. 
                        •…
                     m. in loc. Pastour, and as we read, Matth. 8. 5. a good Captaine, and Christ the best of all often resided in that Citie: yet notwithstanding (as truth it selfe Matth. 11. 23 witnesseth) it was a very wicked and dissolute place, deseruing greater damnation in the day of iudgement than the land of Sodome and Gomorrah. Let not then any vigilant Minister, or diligent Magistrate bee discouraged in his place, for that his people bring not foorth any fruits of righteousnesse answerable to the meanes of their instruction: for Ezech. 3. 19. 
                  if thou warne the wicked, and he turne not from his wickednesse, nor from his wicked way, hee shall die in his iniquity: but
                  
                  thou hast deliuered thy soule.
               
               Hauing thus examined the fashion of the ruler, it remaines I should treat of his faith, and fruit thereof also. But for as much as I haue spoken of these vertues in the woman afflicted with the bloody flux, and other like petitioners vnto Christ often elsewhere: I thinke that I haue a Supersedeas out of the Chancery to meddle no more with him at this time, and a Capias corpus as it were, for his deceased daughter. Concerning whom I note with Com. in loc. 
                  Aretius the pregnant circumstances of hir death, and the true demonstrations of hir rising againe from the dead. Saint Cap. 5. v. 23. 
                  Marke reports indeede the petition of the Ruler otherwise, My little daughter lieth at the point of death, &c. and Saint Cap. 8. v. 42. 
                  Luke, shee lay a dying: not as our Euangelist here, my daughter is euen now deceased. And yet all agree, for Iairus happily said his daughter was dead coniecturally, Theophylact. Euthym. Beauxamis. because hee left hir at home so desperatly sicke. And Augustin. de consensu. Euangelist l. 2. c. 28. so Marke and Luke set downe what Iairus said, but Matthew what Iairus thought. Or as Enarrat in loc. 
                  Anselm, it may be that the Ruler said both, and made two requests: one that he would lay his hands on hir, and heale hir malady, for that shee was a dying: another, (being informed certainely that shee was euen now deceased) that he would come, and lay his hand vpon hir, and restore hir to life. So that the first euidence to proue hir dead, is hir fathers owne confession. A second is Christs assent, instantly following Iairus. A third, the relation of certaine comming from the Rulers house, meeting Christ and him vpon the way, Marke 5. 35. Thy daughter is dead, why diseasest thou thy master any further? A fourth argument is the derision of the tumult in Iairus house, when Iesus said, the damosell is not dead, &c. They laughed him to scorne, knowing that shee was dead. A fifth inuincible proofe was the preparation for hir funerall, as the multitude weeping, and the minstrels playing ouer the dead; a fashion in Ambros. in Luc. 8. old time crept in among Gods people from the Gentiles, according to that of the Ouid. 4. fast. Poet,
               
                  Cantabat maestis tibia funeribus.
               The demonstrations of hir rising againe from the dead, are Surg
                        •…
                     t, Ambulat, Edit. The damosell arose, saith our Matthew, and walked, as Saint Marke reports, and eat, as Saint Luke. The witnesses hereof are Peter, and Iames, and Iohn, and the father and the mother of the maide. For Iesus thrust out of the doores (at Musculus. least out of the chamber where the damosell lay) the minstrels and all the rude company making a noise, 
                  Hieron. Chrysost. Hilarius. because they were not worthy to see mysterium resurgentis qui resuscitantem indignis contumelijs deridebant. Or happily to Aretius. shunne vaine ostentation and popular applause. Or for Maldonat. that he would not as yet haue this great my racle knowne, as Marke and Luke intimate.
               In the Physitian Iesu, note first his facility, who would instantly come, verse 19. then his faculty, who could instantly cure the deceased Damosell, according to the request of hir owne father, verse 25. For whereas Iairus said, Come, and lay thine hand vpon hir, and shee shall liue: Christ arose, followed him, and tooke the Damosell by the hand, and raised hir againe from the dead. Mystically, 
                  Ludolphus. 
                  Christus venit per gratiam praeuenientem, manum imponit per gratiam concomitantem, & tunc anima viuit per gratiam cooperantem.
               
               
                  And they laughed him to scorne] Musculus. Heming. The world is blinde, and cannot iudge aright of Christs doctrine and doing, the wisedome of the flesh is at enimity with God. And therefore lest vnhappily wee turne scorners with the world, let vs beleeue the Gospell, especially that article (which is our chiefe comfort) the resurrection of the dead. And by B. Latymer. Christs example we may learne to be content when we be despised in this world, that wee may be glorified with him in yonder world, as also to Ludolphus. proceed in doing any good office, notwithstanding the scoffes of malitious and ignorant people. Nam 
                  Lipsius reiect
                        •…
                     ncula Sannionis cujusdam ad finem. l. de Di
                        •…
                      Sichemiensi. 
                  vt ignis paleam exurit, aurum nitidius reddit: sic istae calumniae vanum aut vacuum aliquem absumant, verâ virtute granem illustrant. On the

contrarie, to be praised of naughtie folkes, is almost as great a shame as to be praised for naughtinesse. Remember the sweet aduice of De ser. Dom. in monte, lib. 2. in prin. 
                  Augustine: Si homines inter quos viuis, te rectè viuentem non laudauerint, illi sunt in errore: si autem laudauerint, tu in pe
                        •…
                     ieulo.
               
               So much of the literall exposition of these two miracles. In a mysticall, Iacob. de Vorag. ser. 1. in loc. euery sinner is like the woman infected with an issue of blood. Osea. 4▪ 2. By swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring they breake out, and blood toucheth blood. Where 
                     Rupert, & Caluin. in Hos
                           •…
                        ae cap. 4. Idem Greg mag, in multis locis v
                           •…
                        i Ribera num. 3. in Hoseae 4. Diuines vnderstand by blood, sinne. Hieron. in loc. Hoseae. As if he should say, the wicked heape sinne vpon sinne, adding new sinnes vnto their old. For when a man runnes from one foule fault vnto another, blood toucheth blood. As when a wicked thought issueth into some wicked act, and act to custome, custome to necessitie, necessitie to desperation. And then as a man desperate in sicknesse, cares not what meat he doth eat: so the man rechlesse in sinning, Ephes. 4. 19. giuen ouer to commit all vncleannesse euen with greedinesse, careth not what villanies he deuoureth, vntill Christ the Physitian of his soule stop his bloody flux, directing him with his word which is holy, and sanctifying him also with his spirit which is holy. Nay the deuout people liuing in blind poperie, Luther. post. maior in loc. could neuer haue their conscience truly quieted (although they spent almost all their wealth vpon Monkish Doctors, healing by the doctrine of satisfaction and merit) till they did vnderstand that iustification is onely by faith, and that it alone maketh a man whole. Postil. in loc. 
                  Melancthon deliuereth another allegorie: This woman (saith he) doth aptly resemble the Iewish Synagogue, vexed a long time with many mischieses and miseries, especially tortured with vnconscionable Princes, and vnskilfull Priests or Physitians of the soule, the Pharisies and Sadduces, on whom she wasted all her strength and goods, and yet she was not a whit the better, but rather much worse, till the blessed Lord of Israel, her Sauiour in his owne person came to visit and redeeme her. And so Iairus is a

                  Beauxamis ex Emisseno. type of all the Patriarkes and holy Prophets 1▪ 
                     Pet. 1. 10. 11. expecting Christ, and earnestly desiring that he would Esay 64. 1. breake the heauens and come downe, and lay his hand vpon the Synagogue being at the point of death, and heale hir. Saint In Luc. 8. 
                  Ambrose, 
                  Com. in loc. 
                  Hierome, 
                  In loc. 
                  Rupert, Anselm, and 
                     F
                           •…
                        rus ser. 3. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 25. post Pent.
                   other affirme, that this woman and this wench are plaine figures of the Gentiles and Iewes. The woman a Gentile
                     b 
                     In loc.
                   had hir disease twelue yeeres, and the rulers daughter a 
                     •…
                  ew raised heere was twelue yeere old. The woman fell sicke when the wench was borne: so the Gentiles went their owne waies into superstition and idolatry, when the Iewes in Abraham beleeued. Againe, as Christ heere went to raise the wench, and by the way the woman was first healed, and then the wench reuiued so Christ came to the Iewes, as being sent to the Matt. 15. 24. lost sheepe of Israel especially, but the Gentiles beleeued first, and were saued, and in the end the Iewes also shall beleeue.
               Christ Melanct. in Matth. 9. in the three yeeres of his preaching raised three sorts of dead. The first yeere the Widowes sonne in Naim, Luke 7. the second yeere Iairus daughter, mentioned in this scripture: the third yeere Lazarus, Iohn 11. Now Soarez tract. 3. in Matth. 9. 
                  Iairus daughter raised in hir fathers house resembleth the Iewes; the Widowes sonne carried out of the Towne gate resembleth the Gentiles, Ephes. 2. 12. 
                  altanss from the common-wealth of Israel, and strangers from the couenants of promise vntill Christs comming, as it were shut out of the Citie of God. Lazarus who laid in his graue foure daies, is a figure of the Iewish remnant, which asore the worlds end shall be raised out of the pit of ignorance and incredulity, wherein they haue lien dead many hundred yeeres, and at the length acknowledge Christ Iesus (whom their fathers crucified) to be their Messias and Sauiour. Esay 10. 21. The remnant shall returne, euen the remnant of Iacob vnto the mighty God. For though thy people, O Israel, be as the sand of the sea, yet shall the remnant of them returne. And Saint Rom. 11. 25. 
                  Paul saith, I would not that
                  
                  yee should be ignorant of this secret (lest ye should be arrogant in your selues) that partly obstinacy is come to Israel, vntill the fulnesse of the Gentiles become in, and then all Israel shall be saued, as it is written, the deliuerer shall come out of Sion, and shal turne away the vngodlinesse from Iacob. When the woman is fully cured which was diseased, the damosel shall be raised which was deceased. When the fulnesse of the Gentiles is past, almighty God remembring his old mercie shall graft the Iewes in againe, and conuert them vnto the Christian faith.
               It is well Relation of religion vsed in the West parts of the world. sect. 53. obserued, that beside the Iewes naturall and inrooted obstinacy, there be three great impediments which hinder their conuersion: First, the scandals of vs Christians, as the most vnbrotherly dissentions among Protestants, and most abominable superstition and grosse worshiping of Images among the Papists. Secondly, want of meanes to teach and instruct them, because the Papists among whom they liue, will not suffer the new Testament in the vulgar tongue. Thirdly, losse, which the Papists by their conuersion shall incurre, and (it should seeme by their toleration of Iudaisme) they had rather haue the crownes, then saue the soules of the Iewes, it was necessary that the sonne of man should suffer, as it is written of him, and yet Matt. 26. 24. woe be to that man by whom the sonne of man is betraied: it had beene good for that man if hee had neuer beene borne. So it is necessary that the Iewes should persist in their vnbeliefe for a time; but woe be to them whose scandals are hindrances to their conuersion. For the houre shal come, when Iairus daughter shall be raised againe, she is not dead, but sleepeth. Albeit the Iewes are in a dead sleepe, the Lord in his due time will rouse, yea raise them vp againe from their incredulity.
               For conclusion of the whole, by the goodnesse of Christ in restoring the sicke woman vnto health in the way, raising the dead wench vnto life in hir fathers house; wee may learne Ferus Con. 1. in loc. Sanitas in via, vita in patria. what to looke for at his hand:

namely grace, while we be pilgrimes in this our short, yet troublesome race; but glory, when as we shall rest in heauen, our euerlasting home. According to that of Dauid, 
                  Psal. 84. 12. 
                  The Lord will giue grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from such as walke vprightly.
               
            
            
               The Epistle.
               
                  IEREMY 23. 5.
                  Behold, the time commeth, saith the Lord, that I will raise vp the righteous branch of Dauid, &c.
                  
               
               THe Church ends, as she began, with hir onely Lord and Sauiour: which Petrus Machado ord. ff. praedicat. prouinc
                        •…
                     al. occasioned one to call his postil annulus Christianus, as it were the Christians round, or ring. Sarcerius in epist. Dom. 22. post. Trinit. For all the Gospels are fraught with excellent doctrines of holy faith in Christ, and ordinarily the Epistles are nothing else but earnest exhortations vnto the fruite of faith, a godly life; that we may Co
                        •…
                     oss. 1. 10. 
                  walke worthy of the Lord and please him in all things. As then on the first Sunday, the Gospell intimating that Christ is come [behold thy King commeth, &c.] and the Epistle teaching that wee must imitate our King being come, [put on the Lord Iesus, &c.] are in stead of a Preface: so this Epistle and Gospell on the last Sunday (the one prophecying that the Lord our righteousnesse shall shortly come, Behold, the time commeth, &c. and the other preaching that he is already come, this of a truth is the same Prophet that should come into the world) may serue for a 
                     Ferus ser. 3. in euangel. Dom. 26. post. Pentecost.
                   conclusion or epilogue to all the rest of the whole yeere.
               The Gospell is expounded Sunday 7. after Trinity. The Epistle containeth an abridgement of all the chiefe doctrine deliuered in the Church, euen from the first in Aduent vnto this present day; shewing that Christ is God, and man, and so participating of both natures in one person, is the sole Mediatour betweene God and man. Our Hiero. trooem. in lib. 1. Com. Ierem. euangelicall Prophet as another Matthew
                  
proues here Christ to be man, in that he was a branch of Dauid. And yet not a meere man, in that the righteous, in whom is Esay 53. 9. no guile: whereas the scripture witnesseth of other men that they were 
                     Psal. 5
                        •…
                     . 5. 
                  conceiued in sinne, and borne in iniquitie, that 
                  Psal. 14. 4. 
                  all are gone out of the waies of the Lord, and that none doth good, no not one. Christs high stile, the Lord our righteousnesse, is an euident demonstration of his Godhead, as Interpretors haue noted against Arians and Iewes out of this place. Uide Caluin. Instit. lib. 1. cap. 13. §. 9. Galatin. de arcanis, lib. 8. cap. 3. Melanct. proposit. de eccles. propos. 25. Tom. 2. fol. 320. Bellarm. de Christo lib. 1. cap. 7. Indeed there be 1. Cor. 8. 5. many Lords, and yet but Ephes. 4. 5. one Lord, which is the Lord: and many righteous comparatiuely, but none Aug. ep. 54. simply good, or righteousnesse it selfe, but only Mark. 10. 18. God the most holy.
               Now Christ as God-man, or Man-god, is the King of his redeemed ones, in whom obserue three royall vertues especially,
               
                  
                     Wisedome, verse 5.
                  
                     Iustice, verse 5.
                  Mercie, sauing Iuda, verse 6. and deliuering Israel, verse 7. 8. Hieron. in loc. Not as by Moses out of Egypt onely: but out of the hands of Luke 1. 74. all their enemies, and calling them out of all countries and corners of the world, to Matt. 8. 11. sit downe with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen, being our righteousnesse 
                        Theophylact. Aquin. Piscator in 1. Cor. 1. 30. Idem Bellarm. de Iustificat. lib. 2. cap. 10. 
                     efficienter, as author of euery good and perfect gift in vs: and sufficienter, in giuing himselfe a ransome for all men, 1. Tim. 2. 6. and obtayning eternall redemption for vs, Heb. 9. 12. a Iesus immediatly sauing vs himselfe, not by giuing vs power to become our owne Sauiours. And so the righteousnesse whereby we are saued, is not the righteousnesse which we by him act for ourselues, but that which he in his owne person hath wrought for vs; an imputatiue, not an inherent iustice, August. de Ciuit. Dei, li. 19. c p. 27. consisting not in the perfection of vertue, but in the free pardoning of our sinnes. According to that of Psal. 32. 1. 
                     Dauid, Blessed is hee, whose vnrighteousnesse is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered.
                  
               
               
                  The words of this text, as Hierome notes are well interpreted by Paul, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Christ is made to vs wisedome, and righteousnesse, and sanctification, and redemption, that according as it is written, he that reioyceth, let him reioyce in the Lord. As if he should haue said, Dr. Fulke in loc. ad Cor. ex Chrysest. Oecumen. Beda. If these graces are our owne, we may vaunt in our owne. But for as much as Christ is made to vs from God, not onely the beginning of holinesse, wisedome, righteousnesse, &c. but the perfection of all these: let not flesh boast it selfe in his presence, but he that doth glory, let him glory in the Lord. As Christ was made 2. Cor. 5. 21 sinne for vs, euen so are we made the righteousnesse of God in Christ. He was sinne through imputation onely, 1. Pet. 2. 22. for hee did no sinne, neither was there guile found in his mouth. And so we are made righteousnesse, in that our vnrighteousnesse is not imputed vnto vs, Rom. 4. 8. As Loc. Com. tit. de Iustitia Christiana & remissione peccatorum. 
                  Martin Luther is bold to speake, Christiana sanctitas non est actiua, sed passiua sanctitas, extra nos est iustitia, non in nobis. It is a righteousnesse in God, whereby we stand righteous afore God. It is true that we worke righteousnesse according to the proportion of grace bestowed vpon vs in this life: but for as much as wee Matt. 5. 6. thirst after the full righteousnesse in another world, and haue receiued onely the Rom. 8. 23. first fruites of the spirit heere; to say that wee are now throughly cleane Ephes. 5. 27. 
                  without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing, is to iustle Christ out of his iustice, and to take from him his due title of honour, which is giuen him in our text, the Lord our righteousnesse. See Gregor. apud Magdeburg. Cent. 6. col. 681. Luther. vbi supra in margine. Melancton in Cat. & loc. Com. & exam. tit. de Iustificatione & bonis operibus. Caluin. Instit. lib. 3. cap. 11. §. 11. Dr. Morton Apolog. lib. 1. cap. 2. §. 11. & 1. 7. 2. & lib. 2. cap. 11. Dr. Abbots answer to Bishops Epistle to the King, pag. 138. 139. &c.
               Wherefore learne to sing with Psal. 4. 1. 
                  Dauid: O God which art my righteousnesse: and to say with Vbi sup. 
                  Luther, Tues Domine Iesu, iustitiamea, ego autem sum peccatum tuum: tu
                  
                  assumpsistimeum, & dedisti mihi tuum: assumpsisti quod non eras, & dedisti mihi quod non eram, &c. I conclude with a meditation of Serm. 61. in Cant. 
                  Bernard: Thy righteousnesse, O my deare Sauiour, is not a short cloake that cannot couer two, but being a 
                  Apocal. 7. 9. 
                  long robe, and a large righteousnesse, it will wholly couer thee and mee: a multitude of sinnes in mee, but in thee what shall it couer, O Lord, but the treasures of thy goodnesse? To thee, (sweet Iesu) the beginning and ending, which hast out of the riches of thy superabundant grace blessed my studies hitherto, guiding, as I hope, my penne with thy finger, euen from the first lesson vnto this last line: be giuen all honour, power and praise, now and for euer.
               Glorie be to God on high, and peace to men in earth.
               Amen▪
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   