
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A booke called the Treaſure for traueilers, deuided into fiue Bookes or partes, contaynyng very neceſſary matters, for all ſortes of Trauailers, eyther by Sea or by Lande, written by William Bourne.
                  ¶Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paules Churchyarde, at the ſygne of the blacke Beare. 1578.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        VIRTVS IN ACTA
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶To the Right worſhipfull ſyr William Winter Knight, Maiſter of the Queenes Maieſties Ordinaunce by Sea, Suruaior of her highneſſe marine cauſes. &c. William Bourne wiſheth increaſe of woorſhip vnto the ſtate of honour and true felicitie.
                  WHat great commoditie and profit Right worthy & worſhipfull Knight, hath alwaies redownded vnto the common weale, and gouern ours of the ſame, which in martial affaires and warlike diſcipline, haue chiefely delighted and taken great paines and care in the ſame, and vnto what excellent fame and renowme it hath alwayes brought and exalted vnto high dignitie, thoſe that haue taken vpon them, for their Prince and Countries proſperitie great exploytes, rather putting them ſelues in daunger of their liues, then their Prince and Country ſhoulde bee diſhonoured. Then I may ſay without any obiection or doubt, that your woorſhip is one: For I my ſelfe can witneſſe, and of my owne knowledge, know, that no perſon in this Land hath ſuch great iudgement and knowledge in martial affaires by Sea, both touching the ſhipping, for that purpoſe, and alſo the prouiſion for the ſame, as your woorſhip hath: and as for your courage, valiantneſſe, and wiſdome, which is not vnknowne vnto the worlde, whereas I being moſt ſymple haue written this baſe and rude volume, whiche I doo call a Treaſure for Trauaylers,

am ſo bolde to dedicate it vnto your worſhip, not for that the Booke is worthy to be preferred vnto ſo worthy a perſon, but for my bounden duetyes ſake, to acknowledge my good wyll towardes your worſhip, for that I haue moſt largelye taſted of your beneuolence towards mee, being as a poore Gunner, ſeruing vnder your worthineſſe, hoping that your woorſhip will take this ſimple woorke in good part: the which woorke is deuided into fiue Bookes, the fyrſt is Geometrie perſpectiue, the ſecond Booke is appertainyng vnto Coſmographie, the thirde Booke is Geometrie general, the fourth Booke is Statick, and the fyfth and laſt Booke is appertayning vnto natural Philoſophie, as the contentes of the matter doo appeare in the Tables of the Bookes, hoping that your worſhip wil take this ſimple thing, as a true token of my good will towardes you, although the thing it ſelfe be but rude & ſimple. And thus, I ceaſſe to trouble your worſhip any longer, at this time, beſeeching the liuing God to proſper you in al your affayres, in perfect health, with all your children and familie, Amen.
                  
                     
                        By your worſhips at commaundement, William Bourne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Preface to the Reader.
                  
                     COnſideryng with my ſelfe, gentle Reader, with howe infinite paynes and labour, dyuers heretofore, men of moſt excellent wittes, and of paſsing knowledge, haue compiled their Bookes, and with what heede and circumſpectneſſe they haue examined and peruſed theyr trauayles, and with what feare and waryneſſe they haue publiſhed the ſame. and not without good cauſe why, for thereby they haue opened them ſelues, theyr name, and fame, to no ſmall daungers and harzardes: namely to the veiwe, iudgement, and report of all menne. For which cauſe, nowe ſeeyng I haue taken vpon me at this time a harde enterpriſe, a burthen too heauy for mee to beare or ſuſtaine, who haue at length ſhewed my ſelfe ſo hardly, as to publiſh this litle Treatiſe, I being altogether vnlearned, and hauing no helpe of any other learned perſons, being of my ſelfe altogether deſtitute both of knowledge and learning.
                  Wherefore I deſyre thee, gentle Reader, to beare with my rudeneſſe, and conſider that it is the good wyll which I beare vnto my natyue Countrey, for to profyte the common wealth, as much as lyeth in me, although that it be not learned lyke, yet I pray thee holde me excuſed, beyng altogeather ignorant, lacking the capac
                        ••
                     e both of knowledge and eperience (who hauyng taken vppon me) to publyſhe this to the ſcannyng and trying of ſo many toucheſtones, and daungerous crimes, that I beyng ſo ſimple, ſhould enterpryſe ſo farre to take vpon me to open any Science.
                  
                     But notwithſtanding, I doo ſee, that it is ſo needful a matter to be knowen vnto a number of perſons, that doo deſyre for to haue inſtructions in thoſe cauſes that are conteyned in this ſymple volume, the which booke I doo call A Treaſure vnto Trauaylers, and is diuided intoo fyue Bookes.
                  
                     The fyrſt booke.And the fyrſt booke conteyneth the particuler concluſions of the Skall Quardrant or Aſtrolobe, and in the like maner the particuler concluſion of the Croſſe ſtaffe &c. Alſo the vſe of the Horizontall or flatte Sphere, whereby to drawe or take the platte of any countrey. &c.
                  
                     The ſeconde booke.The Seconde booke dooth ſhewe vnto you, if that you doo knowe the Longitude and the Latitude of any place truly, then howe to knowe the diſtance in myles from you, or any place aſſygned, and by what poynt of the Compaſſe that it is from you.
                  And becauſe that London is the moſt famous and the moſt principall place here in Englande, I haue haue named certayne principal places here in Europe, and alſo in Africa, and in Aſia, and alſo in America, with ſome of the principalleſt Ilandes in the worlde, both their Longitude and Latitude, and their diſtance from the citye of London, and by what poynt of the Compaſſe that it is from London, and alſo how much that the Moone doth chaunge rather or later, then it doth at the citie of London, and what length their longeſt day is of. &c.
                  
                     The thirde booke.The third booke is as touching the meaſuring of Superficials and ſollid bodies, and howe to augment them, or diminiſh them, vnto what proportion or bignes you liſt, whether that it be the tonnage of any ſhyppe, or the bigneſſe of any kaſke. &c.
                  
                     The fourth booke.The fourth boke is as touching the Art Statical, as to know the waight of any ſhyp ſwimmyng on the water, and ſuch other like. &c.
                  
                     The fyfth booke.The fifth or the laſt boke is as touching the natural cauſes of ſand and rockes in the Sea, and diuers ſuch other like cauſes, as it doth appeare in the table of the contentes, of the

Bookes. &c. The which things, in my opinion, are very neceſſarie for al maner of perſons, and eſpecially vnto ſuch as be Trauaylers: which cauſeth me to geue the booke vnto name, A Treaſure vnto Trauaylers. For what thing can there bee more better vnto a Trauayler, either by Sea or by Lande, (Golde & Siluer onely excepted then to know the diſtances from place to place, and to haue capacity to know the height and the lownes of any thing, & how to make a Plat or Carde for any countrey. &c. which is declared in the firſt booke.
                  And alſo how neceſſary a thing it is for a Trauailer to know vnto what quarter of the worlde any place dooth beare from him, & what the diſtaūce is thither,Geometric perſpectiue. & what length the day is of, whē he is the
                        •
                     e: as I haue knowne a great number of perſons that haue trauayled vnto ſundry places, & whē they haue come home, they haue had no iudgement at all, as touching that place that they haue trauayled vnto, for that they haue not knowne vnto what quarter of the worlde the place is, that they haue beene at: neither in reſpect what the diſtance is thither. And theſe matters are ſhewed in the ſecond booke.
                  And alſo it is not hurtfull,Coſmographia. but neceſſary for a Trauayler to know how to meaſure al manner of Superficalles, as land, pauementes, bourd, and Glaſſe, and ſolid bodies, as Tymber and Stone, and the burthen or tonnage of ſhyps, and the bigneſſe of any thing.
                  And furthermore it is neceſſary for a Trauailer in like maner,Geometric general. to haue a way to get the true waight of any thing that ſwimmerh on the water, & in like maner to know the waight of any thing that ſynketh into the water, & what it waigheth in the water, to be lifted frō the bottome vnto the ſuperficiall part of the water, as it is declared in the fourth boke. And furthermore, it is very neceſſary & conuenient for Trauaylers either by Sea or by land,Staticke. to haue knowledge in the natural cauſes of ſundry things that are to be ſeene in trauayling, as the cauſe of ſands & bankes, as well in riuers as in the ſea,Naturall Philoſophie. and the cauſe of Mariſh ground and meddowes, & the cauſe of cliffes on the ſides of riuers, & on the ſea coaſt, with ſuch other like matters, as is declared in the fifth and laſt Booke.
                  
                     And now it is poſsible, that ſome perſons wyll marueyle, that I being ſo ſimple, and not learned, ſhoulde take vppon me to be a medler in theſe cauſes, for that they be matters that doo appertayne vnto learned men. And it is poſsible, that it wil be diſlyked of a nūber of people, as enuie dwelleth generally in the hartes of moſt men, for that is the propertie of many people, to diſlyke all things that are not doone by them ſelues, vſing to reade Bookes to no other ende, but to fynde faultes in them.
                  
                     Diſcouragement.And yet it is poſsible, that they will do nothing thē ſelues, which were a cauſe of diſcouragyng vnto any perſon that dooth write: yet notwithſtanding it ſhal not diſcourage me, for that I am vtterly vnlearned, and therefore it ſhall not diſlyke me, if any learned man dooth fynde any faulte therein: for I beyng ſimple and vnlearned, it is no diſcredite for me, eyther to be taught, or to haue the faultes ſhewed vnto me. For by that meanes I may refourme the faultes, either by them, or my ſelfe.
                  And furthermore, I doo not intende to make any booke to teach them that are cunning & learned: But the only cauſe of my writing of this booke is, to inſtruct or teach them that are ſimple and vnlearned: And therefore notwithſtandyng, I ſhal the better lyke of it,Bookes are written to the intent to teach the vnlearned. if any learned man ſhould write or ſet out any booke, as touching theſe cauſes, to refourme this. And my opinion is this, if that any Booke be ſet foorth vnto the common people in the world, that then it is to the ende, to teach the ſympleſt ſort of people that are not inſtructed in learned cauſes. But if that it be any high poynt in learned cauſes, then it is not for the common ſort of people, but to be in learned mens Libraries, and therfore as it is not written by a learned man, ſo in lyke manner you muſt not looke for fyne or eloquent ſchole termes, but euen to take the ſubſtance of the matter rudely as it is, and more to regarde the neceſſarineſſe of the matter, whether it may doe any good in the common wealth. &c.
                  
                     And yet notwithſtanding my opinion is this, that no perſon is to be diſliked of, that doth his good wil and endeuour,No perſon is to be diſliked that doth his good wyll to doe good. to doo good in the common wealth, howeſoeuer that it prooueth. But thoſe perſons are vtterly to be dyſlyked of, that doo hurt willyngly in the common wealth, as extortioners and vſurers, and conuayers of Corne and Vitayles, and other neceſſaries and commodityes that his countrey dooth lacke or hath neede of.
                  And al thoſe perſons are not to be thought well of,Perſons that are to be diſlyked. that doo deſyre to lyue eaſily, abuſing the good benefytes that God dooth bleſſe the earth with: as al licentious lyuers, as drunkardes, banketters, whoores, and whooremayſters, and ſuch as doo vſe an exceſſe in apparell, much aboue their degree.
                  And alſo thoſe people are to be abhorred of al men, who doo annoy the earth, that vſe quarrellyng and fyghtyng, robbyng and ſtealyng, caryng not howe they come by it, ſo that they may haue it, with which this our countrey of England floweth at this day, (the more is the pytie) for what wickedneſſe is there that can be deuyſed, but that it is vſed here in England amongſt al degrees, which muſt needes procure the wrath of God to lyght vppon vs. And there is as great abuſe amongeſt the Clergie, which ſhould be as Lanternes to geue vs lyght, to leade vs vnto vertue.Abuſes of Englande. But now in theſe dayes they be as Lanternes to leade vs vnto vice. So that al degrees of people are geuen vnto wickedneſſe, although that we haue the Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt, preached dayly vnto vs, yet wickednes doth abound, for what ſynne or wickedneſſe is there, but that it is ſuffered and vſed, as wichcraft and ſorcery, and magical Inchantment, and coungering, which is the greateſt and moſt abominable diſhonouring of God, that may be.
                  For in theyr magicall Inchantment and coungeryng,Magical Inchauntment is a great diſhonoring of God. doo they not obſerue houres in the making of Carecters, & ſet vp pickturs of the Roode, and Agnus Dei, and the Doome, and a number of ſuch other pickturs, paynted, and gilded vppon

Virgin Parchment, as they cal it. And then in like maner their cirkles muſt be perfumed, & inbalmed with ſweete odours, and they muſt haue a knaue prieſt, made by the Popes lawe, to hallowe a certayne portion, with a number of ſuch vayne Ceremonies. And when that they haue the diuel, whom they doe ſerue, & doo geue him in ſome caſes ſome thing for a ſacrifice, and when that they doo geue the diuel a charge to tel them any queſtion that they would knowe, then are vſed a number of ſuperſtitious wordes, as in the name of the virginitie of the Virgin Mary, and the head of Iohn Baptiſt, and a number of vaine Saintes more, beſides a number of ſuch deteſtable Ceremonies, to the great diſhonouring of God. &c. And who is the cauſe and the procurement of theſe moſt odious and deteſtable matters, but a number of vaine, & wicked people, yea ſome of thē be of no ſmal wealth nor calling, that do procure theſe matters: For if that they haue loſt any thing, thē they muſt repaire vnto a Coniurer, to know where that is againe. And furthermore, there are ſome vaine & fooliſh Gentlemen, which ſeeke to liue pleaſantly and idlely, that muſt liue by gaming and playe, and he muſt haue a familiar in a Ryng,What maner of chriſtian is he that deſyreth to be familiar with the diuell. or ſuch other like place. But what manner of Chriſtian doo you thinke him to be, that deſyreth to be familiar with the diuell? So that a great number of people that are in the world, deſire to lyue idlely and pleaſantly, caring not, ſo that they haue their pleaſure here, although their ſoule goe vnto hel, and there to be tormented in fire & Brimſtone euer world without end. Wherefore God turne the hartes of thoſe that are the cauſe of wickednes, and eſpecially here in our natiue countrey, & Realme of England, for that we haue a moſt gratious and vertuous Queene raigning ouer vs, and ſuch a one as doth alwaies ſtudy for the ſetting foorth of the word of God and ſacred Goſpel of Ieſus Chriſt,The vertuouſneſſe of the Queenes maieſtie is our preſeruation. and dooth alwayes ſtudie for peace & trāquility. And conſidering the great wickednes that is vſed in England, the wrath of God would haue lighted vpon vs long before this time, but only for the grace & vertuouſneſſe of the Queenes miaeſty, that God hath ſpared

vs for her ſake. Therefore let vs al pray vnto God for her long life and proſperity, that ſhe may raigne long ouer vs. For ſurely my opinion is this, except we doo repent and turne frō our wickedneſſe, the wrath of God wil light vpon vs. For in theſe daies euery man is but for him ſelf, the elder ſort of people are geuē generally al vnto exceſsiue & huge couetouſnes, and the yonger ſort of people are geuen generally vnto pride and whooredome, and other vaine toyes,The abuſes of al degrees. as idleneſſe and gamyng, ſo that in reſpect fewe or none haue the feare of God before their eyes. And if any perſons doo frame them ſelues to liue vertuouſly, according vnto the lawe of God, then they ſhalbe but derided both of the elder ſort, & alſo of the younger: for the couetous rich perſons wyl ſay, he is a foole, he can not make ſhift to liue, he hath too preciſe a conſcience: and the youngeſt, vayne glorious proude fooles, will ſay, He is a ſcriptured man, he wil not haue vs to be meery nor go clenly.Couetouſnes is called good husbandrie. So that in theſe dayes, extortiō & couetouſnes is called good husbandrie: and the one of them wil commende the other, ſaying, He is a wiſe felowe, he wil liue, how fraudulētly ſoeuer he come by his goods. So what wickedneſſe ſoeuer that it be,
                        Pride is clenlineſſe, ſwearing luſtineſſe, drunkenneſſe, good fellowſhyppe.
                        Whoredome, friendſhip 
                              〈◊〉
                            a tricke of youth.
                      the ſame ſhalbe commended by them that vſe the like: as pride in theſe daies is called clenlineſſe, and ſwearing luſtines, ſaying, he is a luſtie fellowe, and dronkenneſſe, good fellowſhip, and whooredome a tricke of youth or freindſhip, ſo that the one ſort of people doo heape vp the goods on the earth vnſaciably, and the other ſort of people, ſpende it away moſt vainely and wantonly, ſo that the good giftes or benefytes of God, which are the riches of the world, are abuſed on euery ſide, & not vſed as they ought to be, that is to ſay, to do good vpon the earth with that, for it was created for the vſe of man to a good ende, to take his portion of it, & the reſt to vſe vnto ſome good purpoſes at his diſcretion, for that God doth ſende it hym, vnto that ende, and not to be heaped vp, neyther to throwe it away wickedly, as a number doo: Therefore men do not rightly conſider, wherefore they were borne vppon the face of the earth.
                  
                     
                     The firſt cauſe that man is borne for, is to ſerue God.Fyrſt he is borne to ſerue God, for that he hath created him, and al mankinde, and hath created him a reaſonable creature, and hath created al thing for his vſe: as fyrſt the earth, with al his mynerals, as we doo digge out of the earth, Gold, Syluer, and al other mettals, and ſtones, to make vs neceſſaryes to ſerue mans vſe. And alſo the face of the earth, he hath created to bring foorth Trees to make vs Timber, and Graſſe to feede Cattel, to make vs foode and meate: Corne to make vs breade, with al his other benefytes, which man receyueth from the face of the earth. The Sea with al other Ryuers, bringeth foorth Fiſh of innumerable ſortes, to make vs foode and meate, yea the very Sea is for mans vſe, too paſſe from Countrey vnto Countrey.
                  The ayre in lyke manner, wherein are multitudes of feathered foules, for mans vſe, yea the very Heauens are for mans vſe, as the Sunne, Moone, and Starres, are created for the vſe of man. And alſo he hath redeemed vs from the Originall ſynne of Adam, by his precious bloodde ſheeddyng. Wherefore wee are fyrſte borne too ſerue God.
                  
                     The ſeconde cauſe that man is borne is to ſerue his countrey.And ſecondly, wee are borne to ſerue our Prince, and na
                     
                        •
                     yue Countrey, that is to ſaye, to defende our Territoryes, that no other ferreine Nations doo ſpoyle vs of our labours, or our Prince of her dignitie.
                  
                     Thirdly man is borne to labour to lyueAnd thyrdly, we are borne to prouide for our houſhold, and our familie and to ſee that they be trayned vp, to lyue in the feare of God, and to knowe theyr duetie to their magiſtrates, and to trayne them vp vnto ſome facultie, whereby they may get them a lyuing. &c.
                  Wherfore I would wiſh al thoſe perſons, that it hath pleaſed God to bleſſe vppon the face of the earth, with anye worldly reuenewes, or ſubſtance and liuing, to practiſe ſome thing, whereby they may doo ſome good vppon the face of the earth. And in like manner to trayne vp theyr chyldren in the nurture and feare of God. &c.
                  
                     Eſpecially the noble men and gentlemen, and they themſelues not to deſyre to liue pleaſantly and idely,The cauſes of al degrees. but to practiſe ſome vertuous thing, as martiall affayres, or ſuch other lyke cauſes, as their capacitie wyll ſerue them. For there were two cauſes in the beginning of all degrees of the temporaltie or layetie, wherof al Noble men and Gentlemen had their originall and beginnyng, and they are worthy to be had in honour vnto the worlds ende, for their parentage, and the much the rather, if that they doo folow the rule of their noble and worthy progenitors.
                  The fyrſt cauſe was, for their noble actes and deedes in the defending of their Country againſt their enemies. &c.The fyrſt cauſe. So by that meanes, for their valiantneſſe againſt their enemies, they were extolled and aduanced vnto high dignitie, euerye perſon according vnto his deſertes, and had lyuings to maintayne their ſtate, and they to defend their Territories whileſt the common people dyd manure and tyll the ground.
                  And the ſecond cauſe in degrees of nobilytie and gentlemen,The ſecond cauſe. was to them that made good and wholſome lawes for the good gouernement of their common weales. Therefore I would wiſh al noble mē and gentlemen to folow the noble race of their progenitours: and then they are the highlyer to bee eſteemed. But otherwiſe, what a ſhame and diſcredit, if that they do rightly conſider of it, is it for them to be euil members in the cōmon weale: conſidering howe worthyly their ancientrie dyd attaine & come vnto their callyng.Good members in a cō
                        mon weale. Therfore I would wiſh euery gentleman, to practiſe ſomething, that he may do good, either to defend the common weale, or els to profyt it ſome otherway, and not to be idle and to ſeeke to liue eaſily, whereby the common weale may be the better mayntayned, the Prince the better ſerued, and our Countrye the better furniſhed, with ſuch perſons, as are able to defende the Prince, Crowne, and dignytie, as well in their good counſel, and alſo in their acts and deeds. And alſo in my opinion, they are very neceſſary members in the common weale in diuers

reſpectes, that are Trauaylers into other Countries, and they are able to profyt theyr owne Countrie in diuers reſpectes: for that hee is able to geue iudgement by his owne Countrie of other, whether it bee as touching the gouernement of the common weale, in the executing of their lawes of the manner of traffick, and in the vſage and nature of the people, bothe in their Cities and Townes, and in their Countrie, and what manner of commodities they haue, and of the ſituation of their Townes, and in their fortifycation, and alſo of what ſtrength and force other Princes and ſtates are of, and of the order and manner of vſyng them ſelues in martial affayres in the warres, and what their Artillerie is, and how they are weaponed and armed, and furniſhed in euery reſpect, which is very neceſſarie to bee knowne vnto the nobilitie, for that they may prouide them ſelues, and their Countrie for their better ſafetie, and alſo they ſhall knowe what thing ſhall annoy their enemies moſt.
                  Then it is a playne caſe, that Trauailers into other Countreies doo much profyte the common weale. For ſuppoſe this, that if we, or any Country dyd liue in that order, that we did trauaile into no place or Countrie, neither no nation vnto vs, then in proceſſe of time wee ſhould beecome barbarous and ſauage. Therfore the Trauaylers are much to bee commended in diuers reſpectes. Wherefore I wyll ſhewe you my opinion, what manner of people are meeteſt to bee trauaylers. For a number of people haue trauayled, and when they haue come home, they haue had no iudgement of their trauayle, but haue beene vtterly ignoraunt of ſuche thinges as were moſt meeteſt of a Trauailer to be noted, and partlye ſome of them were not capable in thoſe cauſes,What maner of perſons are the meeteſt to be Trauailers. and ſome of them many times, their heades are occupied with other vaine and fooliſh cauſes. &c. as this fyrſt: thoſe people that are able to benefyt their country by their trauaile, when they are come home, ought not to bee to young: for commonlye a young man his head is occupyed with euery vaine and light cauſe,

as with banketting, and play, and game, & daunſing, and dalying with women, and gazing vpon vaine toyes. &c. So that his head is occupyed with no other thing, but all pleaſaunt matters.
                  Therefore he that is ſent to be a Trauailer,What a Trauailer ſhould conſider of. to the ende to profyt his Country, ought to be a man that hath a ſtayed & a modeſt head, and ſuch a one as is capable, and hath a good witte with him, and learned. And if hee bee ſeene in the Mathematical Science, it is all the better: For then hee ſhall the ſooner conceaue any matter. And alſo he ought not to be either to young nor to olde, but betweene the age of .40. and 56. or 57. yeares. &c. And theſe bee the principalleſt poyntes, that a trauailer ſhould conſider of. Firſt, to conſider what maner of Nation he is entred into, whether they bee politicke or wiſe, or Ciuill people, or whether they be a rude or barbarous nation: and ſo in his trauailing to frame his vſage accordingly as neare as he can, that the people may like well of him▪ for in ſo doing he ſhould vnderſtande the better of the ſtate and commoditie of the Country, Citie, Towne or place: and when that you do come into any Citie or Towne, view of what maner of grounde it ſtandeth vpon, and what it may be or is ſubiect vnto, and in like maner how it is fortifyed and prouided, and how it is maintayned, and whether it ſtandeth vpon any hauen or riuer, that hath vent vnto the Sea, or any water, that hath no vent or paſſage vnto the Sea, but thorow or by ſome other Citie or Towne, before it commeth vnto the Sea. And alſo vnder whom it is, and howe it is gouerned, and what theyr Lawes and Ordinaunces bee: And what notable Monuments of buildyngs there be: and any other rare and notable thing that is not common: And alſo to learne what nation, Country, Citie or Towne that may moſt annoy them, and alſo what Countrye, Citie or Towne dooth moſt pleaſure them, and what trade or Marchaundize they are principalleſt maintayned by, and what commodities are

moſt plentieſt, and what commodities or things neceſſarieſt, are moſt ſcanteſt, and what the nature of the ſoyle or ground is thereabouts, that is to ſay, what the ground is moſt apteſt to bring foorth, or moſt vnapt, as touching Corne, Trees, and ſuch other lyke, whatſoeuer it bee. And al
                        •
                     o what maner of Money and coyne is vſed, both in Siluer and Golde, and other baſe Money in Copper, if they haue any. And alſo what the people hath moſt pleaſure in, and what they do moſt abhorre or hate, and whether the Countrye bee a playne and champion Countrie, or Hils and Mountaynes, or lowe marſh or mariſhe grounde, and whether it be full of Riuers or not, and alſo how the Princes or the other Gouernours doo leuey their Souldiours in the time of their warres, & how they doo arme them, and weapon them, and furniſh them in euery reſpect, and what duties or cuſtomes, or tolles, or ſuche lyke charges are payd, whether it be of them ſelues, or vpon ſtrangers, or any other kinde of goodes or marchandize, and what thing it is they make moſt ſtore of, that they wyll not haue paſſe out of their Countries, with all ſuch other lykenes, that for breuitie I doo omit.
                  And now ſuch perſons as haue noted theſe cauſes at their returne home, are able to profyt much the common weale in diuers reſpects, and are perſons of great valure vnto theyr Countrye, for that they are able to profyt the ſtate, and the common weale of their Countrye in diuers reſpectes. For all thoſe perſons are of great valure and price, and are as ſpecial Iewels vnto their Country,What perſons are of valure in the common weale. and in the common weale, that are politick, cunning, and valyaunt in mar
                        •
                     hall affayres: for thereby their Countrye is defended and preſerued from the forrayne enemies: For looke what Country is riche and welthye, then other Princes are deſyrous therof, for to haue the ſpoyles, and the benifyts of it: wherfore by polycie and manlyneſſe they muſt be defended. Therefore men expert in marſhall affayres are very neceſſary in a common wealth.
                  And furthermore, all thoſe perſons, that are wiſe and ſober,

and diſcreet in the good gouernemēt of the common weale, ſuch as doo maintayne vertue and ſuppreſſe vice, are perſons of great valure to their Countrie, and alſo thoſe perſons are able by their wiſdome and knowledge to benefyt or profyte their Countrie, whether it be in the teaching of good artes and Sciences, or by any other meanes, ſo that the common weale be the better mayntayned, are perſons of great valure, and are as Iewels vnto their country, and their country is beholding vnto them. But contrariwiſe, all thoſe perſons that are not able to profyt the common weale in any reſpect, and alſo deſyre to liue pleaſauntly and wantonly, and haue great liuynges and riches, and doo no good therewith: all thoſe perſons are more beholding vnto their Countrie, then their Countrye is vnto them. But if they haue great ſtore of ryches, and doo couet to heape more, caryng not how they doo come by it, ſo they may haue it: ſuch perſons are the deſtruction, and are as Caterpillers to the common weale of their Countrye, for that they doo annoy and hurt the proſperity and the ſtate of their Country, for that they catch and heape vp into their cuſtodie more then dooth ſuffice themſelues, by great quantities, whereas thowſandes doo lacke to ſerue their turnes, that are better members in the Common weale then they are. And all ſuch perſons, the Common weale hath a good turne when they are deliuered of ſuch a one: For by that meanes is diſpearſed that heape of ſtore vnto a number of perſons handes beſydes that whiche he would haue heaped vp more, if that hee had continued longer. So that ſome of the richeſt ſort of people are not the beſt members in the common weale, but the worſte: and yet it behoueth ſome perſons to bee rich, and by their riches the common weale is the better maintained, as thus.
                  The Prince of any Countrye being godlye and vertuous, the Common Weale dooth the better flouriſhe, and is continually kept the ſafer from the forrayne enemyes:

and the Noble men, and Gentlemen, that are vertuous, and giuen to practiſe the good gouernment, & the preſeruement of them ſelues, and the ſtate of their Country. So then their riches doo good, and alſo if the Marchaunte bee rich, ſo that he doo not hurt his owne Country, but winneth his ryches out of other forraine Countries, or any other good and vertuous Subiect, by his riches he may doo good, if hee doo vſe that hee hath to the furtheraunce of the common weale: So that it is neceſſarye that there ſhould bee rich perſons in the common weale, for a number of cauſes, ſo that thoſe rich perſons be vertuouſly bent, but otherwiſe they may do hurt. And thus gentle Reader, I doo make an ende, deſyring you that you wyll take this ſimple Booke in good part, and if there be any faults committed by me, either by ignoraunce or negligence, I pray you let mee gentlye vnderſtand thereof, for man cannot bee ſo preciſe, but that hee may erre. And thus I betake you vnto almightie God, the Creator of all thinges.
                  
                     
                        By yours, William Bourne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶A briefe note, taken out of M. Dees Mathematical Preface that goeth before Euclides Elementes nowe extant in our Ingliſh tongue, as touching what the Mathematical Sciences are, that is to ſay, all thoſe Artes that order number, meaſure, or wayght, and tyme, without the which, in reſpect, we can doo nothing. For what can bee doone in any reſpect, but we muſt vſe number, which is Arithmeticke? or what can be doone, but we muſt vſe meaſure or wayght, which is Geometrie? or what can there be doone, but that we muſt vſe tyme, which dooth appertayne vnto Aſtronomie? for by number we knowe howe many or fewe there are: and by meaſure we knowe whether it be ynches, feete, yardes, ſcores, myles, leagues, poundes, ounces, galloes, quartes, or tunnes: and by tyme, we knowe whether it be minutes, howres, dayes, weekes, monethes, yeeres. &c. Whereof two are pryncipal, Arithmeticke and Geometrie, wherof al theſe compounded ſcientes are ſprong of theſe two Simples.
                  
                     ☞Thinges done by hand Geometricall.
                     1 Mecometrie. Is the meaſuring of the length anything whatſoeuer.
                     2 Embadometrie. Is the meaſuring the contentes of all flat things, as Land, Boorde, Glaſſe.
                     3 Stereometrie. Is the meaſuring of all ſolid bodies, as Timber, Stone, Kaſke, & ſuch lyke.
                  
                  
                     ☞Thinges meaſured that haue diſtaunce from you.
                     4 Apomecometrie. Is how farre any thing is frō you, whether it be on lande or on water.
                     5 Hipſomettie. Is how high or deepe any thing ſeene, is from the leuell, whether it bee on

Lande or water. &c.
                     6 Platometrie. How broade any thing is. &c.
                     7 Geodeſie. Is the ſuruaying or meaſuring of landes, woods, or water, hauing diſtaunce from you by inſtrument or otherwiſe.
                     8 Geographie. Is the deſcription of Countries, or Kingdomes.
                     9 Cherographie or Typographie. Is the deſcription of a part of a Country or kingdome. &c.
                     10 Hydrographie. Is the diſcription of the Seas, with the Ilandes and rockes, and dangers and lynes, and Courſes. &c.
                     11 Stratarithmetrie. Is the view or meaſuring of a battel of men, to know the number of them not comming neare them. &c.
                     12 Perſpectiue. Demonſtrateth the manner and propertie of all radiations directe, broken, and reflected.
                     13 Aſtronomie. Is the mouing of the lightes and Planets. &c.
                     14 Muſike. Teacheth the diuerſyty of ſounds. &c.
                     15 Coſmographie. Is the deſcriptiō of the whole earth, and the Paralell of the heauens anſwering thereunto &c.
                     16 Aſtrologie. Is to geue iudgment by ye ſignes, lights and planets. &c.
                     17 Statick. Is an art that doth order and deale with heuines and lightneſſe. &c.
                     18 Anthropographie. Is of thinges appertaynyng to the body of man, to ſhew them. &c.
                     19 Trochilike. Doth appertaine vnto the turning of wheels, this art is neceſſary for Clockmakers,

& Crane makers, and Mylles, & al other ſciences, that doo deale with wheeles.
                     20 Helicoſophie. Is an art to drawe hylical or Spheral or winding lines, and is very neceſſary for Skrewe makers, & diuers other things.
                     21 Pneumatithmie. This art is neceſſary for all them that doo make Pumpes or great Bellows, for yt it teacheth al thoſe thinges that goe by wynde and water. &c.
                     22 Menadrie. Is an art, that teacheth the making of al ingenes, as things to pull to, or thruſt fro, or lyfting vp, or preſſing downe. &c.
                     23 Hypogeiodie. Is that arte that dooth appertayne vnto myners in the grounde. &c.
                     24 Hydrogogie. Is that art to bring water vnto any place aſſigned. &c.
                     25 Horometrie, or Horologiographie. Is the making of Dyals of al ſortes. &c.
                     26 Zographie. Is the art of a cunning Painter. &c.
                     27 Althalmaſat. The art of Grauing.
                     28 Archetectur. Is a cunning Maſon or Carpenter. &c.
                     29 Nauigation. Is ſayling on the Sea. &c.
                     30 Thauruaturaike. Is that which dooth make ſtrange workes, as thoſe that made the braſen head ſeeme to ſpeake, the braſen Serpēt to hiſſe, the Doue of wood to flye, the Eagle made by art to flye. &c.
                     31 Archemaſtrie. This art teacheth to bryng to actual experience ſenſible al worthy concluſions, by al the artes Mathematical, &c.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Reader of the firſt booke,
                  
                     ¶The fyrſt booke of the treaſure for trauellers, contayning the particuler concluſion of the Scall for to know the hieght of any Tower, Steeple, or Hill, or Walle, and the dyſtance vnto them, and the particuler concluſions of the Croſſe ſtaffe, and to know the thinges before reherſed after the playneſt order of teachyng, & alſo there is the concluſion of the horizontal or flat Sphere how to take the plat of any countrey, after the playneſt order, with ſuch other lyke, very neceſſary for all ſortes of trauelers eyther by ſea or by Land, written by Willyam Bourne.
                     
                  
                  
                     To the Reader of the first parte.
                     
                        GEntle Reader, there is conteyned in this firſt booke, the particular concluſions of the Skal, as touching the knowing o
                           •
                         heigthes, bothe by right ſhadowe, and contrary ſhadowe: and alſo howe to knowe any diſtance by the Skalle. And although that M. Thomas Dygges hath ſet out a booke called Pantometria, whiche is extant in print, as touching the concluſions of the Skall, whiche is very learnedly done. Yet notwithſtanding I doo not thinke it hurtful to ſhewe it particularly and plainely, whereby they may doo it in moſt cauſes, without Arithmetike. For the Skall being put but into .12. partes, it may be counted by the head, without Arithmetike: but if the Skal be put into many partes, then it muſt of force require the ayde of Arithmetike. And alſo there is the particular

concluſions of the Croſſe ſtaffe, as to take the wideneſſe betweene any two markes, and the length of any wall, and the diſtance vnto any place, with other neceſſarye matters to be donne with the playne Croſſe ſtaffe. &c. And alſo there is the Concluſion of the horizontal or flat Sphere, howe to take the plat of any Countrey, after the playneſt order of teaching, that is to ſaye, by the poynt, and partes of poyntes of the Compaſſe: For it is al one matter, whether that the Inſtrument be diuided into degrees, or partes of poyntes: and that ſame may be done by playne lynes of oppoſition, without any Inſtrumēt or circle, which I doo omyt at this tyme to ſpeake of. And although gentle readers, that it ſeemeth not vnto you, to be learned like done, yet notwithſtanding it is poſsible, that there is ſome thing that is not common in thoſe books that are extant, that maye doo you pleaſure. For the learned ſortes of bookes (it may be) are not moſt neceſſary to be common, and yet it woulde doo well, that the common ſorte of people ſhoulde haue ſome inſtructions.
                     
                        
                        FOr that it is ſufficiently declared in diuers bookes nowe extant in our Engliſhe tongue, wherefore I doo thinke it ſuperfluous for to ſhewe what a Pricke is, or what a lyne is, or what a Plat or Superficial is, or what Angles be, and what a ſholded bodie is, as it is ſufficiently declared in all theſe bookes: as in Euclides Elementes, and in M. Thomas Dygges booke called Pantometay, and alſo in M. Leonarde Dygges booke called Tectonicon. &c.A Circle. A Centre. A Circumference. A Diametre A Circle is that whiche is drawen rounde with a payre of Compaſſes, a Centre is the myddle pricke, Circumference is the compaſſe, Diameter is the breadth of a Circle. &c.
                     And furthermore, for that in this firſt part there is the concluſions of the Scall, and the Croſſe ſtaffe, ſhewyng by them howe for to knowe the diſtance vnto any place aſſigned: Therefore it is very neceſſarie for to knowe the partes of meaſure, as it is not vnknowen vnto all men, what a foote is, and that .12. ynches maketh a foote, ſo .3. foote is a yarde, and .5.A Foote. A Yarde. A paſe Geometrical. foote is a paſe Geometricall: but ſome perſons haue been of that opinion, that .3. foote is a paſe, which is a yarde, but it is but a ſimple ſteppe,A ſimple ſtop of yarde. and fewe men are able to endure to paſe a yarde any long tyme togeather: but any perſon may endure to ſteppe two foote and a halfe, all a day long togeather. Therefore a paſe Geometrical, is two reaſonable ſteppes, and that is fiue foote: and ſo any man may endure all a day together,A raſe is two ſtepp
                              •
                           s.
                        
and twelue paſes maketh a ſcore,12. paſes is a ſcore, that is, 20. yardes. A myle is a 1000. paſes, that is .5000. foote, or 1666. yardes, and 3. A Rod is .16. foote .2. of land meaſure, and 18. foote is a Rod of woode meaſure .6. foote is a fadome, and .833 fadome is a myle. and that is twentye yardes, and that maketh .60. foote: and a myle conteyneth .1000. Geometrical paſes, and that is .5000. foote, and that maketh 1666. yardes .⅔. and that is .2. foote, and that conteyneth 83. ſcore. ⅓. and that is .20. foote. &c. and a Rod is .16. foote and a halfe, of lande meaſure, and .18. foote is a Rod of woode meaſure, according to our Engliſhe account: and .303. Rodde and .1/33. that is halfe a foote, is a myle of lande meaſure, and .277. Rodde, and .7/9. that is .14. foote of woode meaſure, is a myle, and a fadome is .6. foote, and that is .2. yardes: and .10. fadome is a ſcore, and a myle conteyneth .833. fadome, and .⅓. part, that is 2. foote. &c.
                     And thus muche haue I ſaide as touching our Engliſhe account, as concernyng the meaſuryng of the length, or the diſtances vnto any place aſsigned. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                     ¶The firſt Chapter of the firſt booke conteynyng the making of the Quadrant with the Skall, whereby you may knowe the height or loweneſſe of any thynge. &c.
                     
                        NOwe begynneth the firſt part of this booke, called A Treaſure for Trauaylers, ſhewing the concluſions of the Skall, whereby you may knowe the height of any Tower, Steeple, or Wall, or the height of a Hyll, and the diſtances vnto any marke aſſigned by the Concluſions of the Skall. And alſo in this firſt part there is the Concluſions of the Croſſe ſtaffe: ſhewyng howe to knowe the length of the Corten of a wall, and the diſtance thereof, or any Towne more playner then is ſhewed in M. Leonarde Dygges booke called Tectonicon. And alſo there is the making and the vſe of an Inſtrument, that may be called an Horizontal Sphere, to drawe the plat of any Countrey ſet out vpon the face of the whole earth: and howe to knowe howe to place the longitude and the latitude of any Towne, with other neceſſarie thinges. &c. very neceſſarie and profitable for al trauailers and ſeruit
                           •
                        urs, either by ſea, or by lande, as Gonners and Captaines, and leaders of men.
                     And nowe ſhall followe the making of a Quadrant,The ma
                              ••
                           ng of the Quadrant, with the Skal with the Skal diuided but into .xii-partes, although ſome wyl haue it diuided into .60. partes, and ſome into 48. partes, and ſome into moe partes, and ſome into leſſe partes, according vnto the fantaſie of ſundry Authours. But I doo thinke it b
                           •••
                         to be diuided into .12. partes: for that diuers people are deſirous to knowe the vſe of the Skall, that are not ſeene in Arithmetike, and yet the vſe of the Skal is very neceſſary and profitable for them to knowe, and the Skal diuided but into .12. partes, any reaſonable man may haue the vſe thereof. But if it be diuided

into .48. or .60. partes, then it dooth require Arithmetike, which is not in many perſons: Wherfore I doo thinke the Skall that is diuided into .12. partes, to be moſt neceſſary and profitable for al ſortes of people. And although that M. Thomas Dygges in his booke called Pantometria, hath written thereof generally, yet I doo thinke it very neceſſarie, to write of it particularly. &c
                     And nowe for the marking of the Quadrant, doo this: firſt take a peece of wel ſeaſoned wood, that is bard, and fine grayned, as Boxe, or ſuch other like, or els you may make it in metal, as in Braſſe, or Latten. &c. and then being wel playned or poliſhed, and the larger, the better.
                     For in a ſmall Inſtrument you may committe an erroure, ſoner then in a large: then be ſure that one of the corners haue a ſquare or ryght angle, and then there ſet the one of the feete of your compaſes, and with the other foote of the compaſes make a quarter of a circle, for that it is called a Quadrant, it is the .4. parte of a Circle, and no .4. cornered thing. And that beeing done, then deuide the edge thereof into .9. equal parts: and euery one of thoſe partes deuide into .10. equal partes: ſo that then there wyl be in al .90. equal partes: and euery one of thoſe diuiſions or parts, are called a degre. & a degree is no other thing but a whole circle diuided into .360. equall partes, and then at euery .10. or .5. degrees you may make them, as thus .5. and .10. and .15. and .20. or els as this .10.The vſe of the degrees. and .20.30. and ſo forth vnto .90. for that the quadrants is diuided into ·90. equall partes, and the vſe of theſe diuiſions or parts called degrees, is to know the heyght of the ſunne, or any ſtarre aboue the horizon, whereby they may know the altitude or height of the pole of the world aboue the horizon, as I doe more at large declare in my booke that is extant in prynt called The Regiment for the ſea. &c. and alſo the degrees are very neceſſary for gunners, to know what ground that any peece of exdenāce doth caſt or cōuey the ſhot at the mont of euery degre, as I do more at large declare in my booke called the Art of ſhooting in great ordenance. &c. And now furthermore, for the making of the Scal vpon the Quadrant, do thys, at the ryght angle or corner

make a ſquare in ſuch ſort, that the other corner ryght againſt it doth ſtand iuſt vpon .45. degrees, & loke that it be a ryght or ſquare angule in lyke maner, and ſo from that to the two ſides there wyl be .4. ſquare or ryght angule, and then deuide two of thoſe ſydes, that is to ſay, the two ſides that is from the corner where that the Plummet ſhal hang towards the partes of the degrees, diuide eche of them into .12. equal partes, and then marke .12. at .45. degrees, and then make two ſightes vpon one of the ſides of the Quadrant: and thoſe diuiſions, or partes of that, or next vnto the two ſightes, are the partes of right ſhadowe, and then the other diuiſions are the partes of contrary ſhadowe. And here dooth folowe the demonſtration of the Quadrant, with the Seal. &c.
                     
                     The vſe of the Skal is very neceſſary and profitable in diuers reſpectes, as to knowe the height of Hylles and Steeples,The vſe of the Skal. or Townes, or Walles, and by the laying of the Skal flatte, to knowe the diſtance vnto any thing, as vnto Shyppes ridyng at the ancore in the ſea, or in any hauen, or harborow. &c. But in my

opinion, the Seal of the backſide of the Aſtrolobe, is the better: for with the Quadrant you can not ſerue the ſights with your eye, and ſee howe the Plummet dooth hang, and all at once: but you may ſet the Alydeday or Rule with the two ſightes, vpon what part you liſt, and ſo ſtand faſt, vntyl you haue obſerued it. &c.

                           Nowe foloweth the forme of the backeſide of the Aſtrolobe. &c.
                        
                        
But you muſte be ſure that your Aſtrolobe hang vpryght as you may proue it by a perpendiculer or plūme lyne from the turret of your Aſtrolobe .E. downe by the lyne to F. then if your Plumme lyne be iuſt with the lyne. E. and .F. then it hangeth vpryght: if that it doe not agree, then it hangeth not vpryght.
                  
                  
                     ¶The ſecond Chapter is of vpryght ſhadowe, that is to ſay, to know the heyghte of al thyngs taken within the length of the thyng.
                     NOwe followe the concluſions of the Scall, both of the Quadrant, and alſo of the Aſtrolobe, but the Aſtrolobe is the better. And firſt, for line of leuel called of Gonners the poynt blanke, turne the other ſide C. right with the lyne of leuel G. and H. then put your thombe thorow the ridge D. then hold vp your hande that you may looke thorow both the ſight A. and B. thē al things that you ſe thorow is leuel with the ſight of your eye, neyther higher nor lower. Now if that you wyl know, the height of any Towne or vpright wal, doe thus turne the Athelida C. to the corner of the Scall, and ſet it vpon the parte 12.What to obſerue in taking of height with the Skall. then goe forwards or backwards, tyll that you doe ſee the toppe of the wall thorow the two ſightes A. and B. then meaſure how many foote it is from the middle of your foote to the hard wall, ſo many foote the wall is high. and as much as it is from your eye, downe to your feete, and that you muſt adde to in all your heightes, & looke that the grounde be leuell, and be ſure that you ſtand vpright, and winke with the one eye. Now furthermore beinge an vpright wall, ſet the Athelida C. vpon the part one, of vpright ſhadow:Vpright ſhadow at on ſtation. then doing as before is rehearſed, than mete the grounde to the wal .12 times the meaſure ſhalbe the height of the wal, then the Athelida vpon the part 2. then ſixe times the meaſure to the wall, ſhall bee the height of the wall the Athelida vpon the part 3. then 4. tymes the meaſure ſhall be the height of the wall. then vpon the parte 4. then 3. times the height ſhall be the meaſure of the height of the

wal, the Athelida vpō the part 6. thē mete to the wal double, the meſure ſhalbe the height of the wall. Alwayes prouided, that you ad to the meaſure the length of your body, from your eye to your feet, now ſhall you haue a way to get the height of a ſteeple or wall that hath a ditch: but then you muſt haue two ſtandings: and ſtill for vpright ſhadow, ſet your Athelida vpon the part 12. then looking thorow the ſights, holding it vpon your thombe as afore is rehearſed, then with the midle of your foote ſet a mark, then turne the Athelida to the part 6. of vpright ſhadow, and there make an other marke, then mete how many feete it is, betwixte the 2. ſtandings, then double that meaſure ſhal be the height of the ſteeple or wall, the firſt ſtanding vpō the part 12. then turne the Athelida to the part 8. of right ſhadow, then meaſure the grounde 3. times: that diſtaunce ſhall be the height of the ſteeple or wal, the firſt vpon the part 12. and the ſecond vpon the part 9. then 4. times the meaſure ſhall bee the height of the ſteeple, the firſt ſtanding vpon the parte 12. the next on the part 10. then the meaſure betweene the two ſtā
                        dings ſhall be the 6. part of the height, the firſt ſtanding on the part 12. the next on the part 11. the meſure betweene the ſtandings ſhall be the 12. part of the height. yet furthermore for vpright ſhadow, firſt ſet the Athelida vpon the parte 9. of right ſhadowe, then doing as afore is ſayde, ſet a marke with the midle of your feete: then turne the Athelida to the parte 3. of right ſhadow, and there ſet a mark, then meaſure thoſe two ſtandings, and then double that meſure that ſhall be the height of the Steeple or wall, or the firſt ſtanding vpō the part 8. & the next vpō the part 4. thē doyng as before is ſaid, 3. times the meſure ſhalbe the height of the ſteeple or wal, and the firſt ſtanding vpon the part 10. and the next vpon the part 6. of vpright ſhadow, then doyng as afore is ſayde meaſuring the diſtances 3. times, that meaſure ſhalbe the height of the ſteeple or wal. Or the firſt ſtanding vpon the part 7. & the next vpon the part 6. of vpright ſhadow, then doyng as before is rehearſed meſuring the diſtaunce 12. times, that meaſure ſhalbe the height of the wal. Or the firſt ſtāding vpon the part 7. & the next vpon the part 5. thē meaſure the diſtaunce 6. times: that meaſure ſhall be the height of the wall. Thus much haue I ſaide for vpright ſhadow, & vpright

ſhadow is this, all things whoſe height is taken within the compaſſe of the length of any thinge meſured, as for enſample this, by the figure folowing.

By a Towre or Steeple being 65.Enſample. foot high of all thoſe queſtions of vpright ſhadow afore rehearſed the firſt was the Athelida vpon the part 12. and to the wall the meaſure of the grounde was 60. foot, & thē from mine eye to the ground was 5. foot: ſo that 60. foot and 5. foot, make, 65. foote. So I conclude the whole height of the Towre to be 65. foote. The next is the Athelida vpon the part 1. and the ground to the wall 5. foote, ſo 12. times 5. is 60. then the next was vpon the part 2. and the meaſure 10 foote, and ſixe times 10 is 60. the next vpon the part 3. and the meaſure to the wall 15. foote, then 4 times 15. is 60. the next was vpon the part 4. and to the wall 20. foote, and three times 20. is 60. the laſt vpon the part 6. and to the wall 30. foote, and 2. times 30. is 60.
                     
                        
                        Enſamples of two faſhions or ſtandinges.Now all the other haue two ſtations or ſtandinges, therefore you doe not meaſure to the wall, but the meaſure betweene the 2. ſtandyngs, the firſt ſtanding vpon the part 12. the next vpon the parte 6 and the meaſure betweene the 2. ſtandyngs is 30. foote, then 2. times 30. is 60. then betweene the parte 12. and the parte 8. was 20. foote, and 3. times 20. is 60. then betweene the parte 12. and the parte 9. was 15. foote. and 4. times 15. is 60. then between the parte 12. and the parte 10. was 10. foote. and 6. times 10. is 60. then betweene the part 12. and the parte 11. was 5. foote. and 12. times .5. is 60. And now furthermore where you coulde not goe ſo farre back as the part 12. the one ſtanding vpon the part 9. and the other vpon the part 3. the meaſure of grounde was 30. foote. then 2. times 30. is 60. the one ſtanding vpon the parte 8. and the other vpō the part 4. the meaſure was 20. foote. and 3 times 20. is 60, then the one vpon the part 10. and the next vpon the parte 6. the meaſure was 20 foote. and 3. times 20. is 60. then the firſte ſtandyng vpon the part 7. and the next vpon the part 6. the ground betweene the 2. ſtandings was 5. foote. and 12. times 5. is 60. the one ſtanding vpon the part 7. and the other vpon the parte 5. the meaſure betweene the 2. ſtandinges was 10. foote. then 6. times 10. is 60 So you may ſe that euery way the whole height to be 65. foote. adding vnto it as before is ſayde the length of your body being 5. foote, thus much haue I ſayd of vpright ſhadow, and now followeth contrary ſhadow.
                  
                  
                     The 3. Chapter ſheweth howe to knowe the height of any thing with the Scall by contrary ſhadow (that is to ſay) without the length of any thing ſo taken.
                     NOw foloweth contrary ſhadow, & contrary ſhadow is this, that when ſoeuer any height is taken without the height or length of any thing, as foloweth: firſt, doing as before is ſayd, in al points, putting his thumb thorow the ring of the Aſtrolobe, ſet the Athelida vnto the part 12. then with the midle of your foot, make a mark, thē turne the Athelida to the part 6. of cōtrary ſhadow: thē go bakwards til you may ſe the top of the ſteple or towre thorow both

the ſights of your Aſtrolobe, being ſure that it is hanging plūbe vpright. Thē at the middle of your foot there make another mark, then meaſure how many foote there is between your .2. ſtādings, ſo many foote is the height of the Steeple or Towre. Thē in lyke manner at the firſt ſtanding, the Athelida vppon the part .6. then turne the Athelida to the part .4. of cōtrarie ſhadow. Thē meeting the grounde betweene the .2. ſtandings, it ſhalbe the height of the Steeple or Towre. Then in lyke manner the Athelida at the one ſtanding vpon the part .4. and the other vpon the part .3. and then meaſuring the grounde betweene the .2. ſtandinges, ſhalbe the height of the Steeple or Towre, then at the one ſtanding the Athelida at the part .3. and the other ſtanding the Athelida vpon the part .2. then meaſuring the grounde betweene the .2. ſtandings, halfe that meaſure ſhalbe the height of the Towre, Steeple, or Wall.
                     Furthermore the one ſtanding the Athelida on the part .2. & the next ſtanding, the Althelida vpō the part one: then meaſure howe many paſes or foote was between the two ſtādings: the .6. part of that meaſure ſhalbe the height of the ſteple or towre, but you muſt be ſure that the ground be plaine & leuel, or elſe it may erre. Now for your better enſample, by this fygure here vnder made, by a

Steeple that is from the toppe downe to the grounde .120.Enſample o
                              •
                            contrary ſhadow. foote hyth from the foote to the toppe of the ſhafte or ſpeare, and nowe by the height is knowne the diſtaunce, as you ſhall knowe by all the queſtions before rehearſed. Firſt the Athelida at the firſt ſtanding was on the part .12. and at the nexte ſtanding, at the part .6.

and the meaſure betweene the .2. ſtandings was .120. foote. Now I doo conclude that the heyght of the ſayde Steeple is .120. foote from the grounde to the toppe, and the diſtaunce to the ſayde Steeple is .240. foote, that is .48. paſes: & the height of the Steeple .24. paſe. Then frō the part .6. to the part .4. in like maner once the height of the Steeple, and the diſtaunce to the Steeple, is .3. tymes the height, that is .360. foote to the Steeple, that is .72. paſe: then from the part .4. to the part .3. is once the height of the Steeple: and the diſtance to the Steeple is .4. tymes the height, that is .480. foote to the Steeple, that is .96. paſe. Then from the part .3. to the part .2. is twice the height of the Steeple, and the diſtaunce to the Steeple is .720. foote, that is in paſe .144. paſe. Then from the part .2. to the parte .1. the diſtance of grounde is betweene the .2. ſtandings .720. foote, that is .6. tymes the height of the Steeple: and the whole diſtance to the Steeple is .12. times the whole height of the wall, that is .1440. foote. The ſūme of the whole diſtaunce from the part one, to the Steeple, and that ſame in paſe is .288. which maketh .24. ſcore: and at the parte .2. the diſtaunce of ſcores is .12. then at the part .3. it is to the Steeple .8. ſcore, at the part .4. it is to the Steeple .6. ſcore: at the part .6. it is to the Steeple .4. ſcore, then at the part .12. it is the iuſt height of the Steeple, being .120. foote, that is .2. ſcore, adding as before is ſayd, ſo much to the height of the Steeple, as from your eye to your feete, which you ſhall doo in this ſort. And ſpecially if the diſtaunce be farre from the Steeple at euery ſtation, if you wyll worke exactly, when you haue taken the height, 
                           •
                        urne your Aſtrolobe (the Athelida ſtanding as before) not remouing your foote frō that ſtanding, then looking thorowe the ſightes, turning your face directly from the Steeple, then whereas your eye dooth reſt, there ſet a marke: then there is no doubtes but that you ſhall take the true height and diſtaunce, dooyng this at euery ſtandyng, your grounde beyng plaine and leuell.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ The fourth Chapter ſheweth howe for to take the parte of any height as the length of a wyndow or ſuch lyke.
                     NOw furthermore to take the part of a height, you may in like manner, doyng as afore is rehearſed in all poyntes, and alſo you maye with the Scal of the Aſtrolobe take the length of a pinacle or a windowe or windowes, the one aboue the other, you may take the meaſure between them as thus. Set your Athelida to the part .12. then goe backewardes or forwardes, tyll that your ſightes doo agree with that thing that you woulde take meaſure of, letting your Athelida ſtande ſtill at the part .12. Then in lyke maner take the other ende of that thyng whoſe length you doo meane to take, then take your ſight agreeing wyth the other ende of the pinacle, then meaſure the grounde betweene the .2. ſtandings: that ſhalbe the length of the pinacle, windowe, or croſſe, as by this figure it may more plainely appeare, as for enſample this.

                        
Firſt I did ſet the Athelida vppon the part .12. and doyng as before is ſayd: and tooke the vpperſide of the windowe, and at my foote made a marke,Enſ
                              •
                           mple in the taking of the poynt of a height. then I went nearer the Steeple, and tooke the lower ende of the windowe as you may ſee at the letter. A. then I meaſured the ground betweene the .2. ſtandings, and founde it 20. foote, ſo I doo conclude the window to be .20. foote long. Thē in lyke manner I tooke the Pinacle, dooyng as afore is rehearſed, firſt at the toppe, and then at the foote, the Athelida ſtanding ſtill on the part .12. and founde the meaſure betweene the .2. ſtandings .15. foote, the iuſt length of the pinacle, as by the .2. lynes B
                        ▪ it doth appeare, then betweene the .2. croſſes, dooyng as before is ſayde, and founde the diſtaunce betweene the .2. ſtandings .10. foote; the length betweene the .2. ſtandings as by the .2. lynes C, it dooth appeare, and ſo doo by all other ſmall partes.
                  
                  
                     ¶ The fifth Chapter ſh
                           •
                        weth howe to knowe the diſtance of many things that is from you, and alſo whether any other towre be higher or lower then the towre that you be vpon.
                     YEt furthermore by the Scal of the Aſtrolobe, you may know when you be on the toppe of a Towre, or toppe of a Caſtle, howe farre many thinges bee from you, and in lyke manner the height of an other Towre that ſhall ſtand neare vnto you. And alſo howe much that one Towre is higher then another, with diuers profitable thinges more, as this: Firſt if you know not the height of the Towre that you be on, then take a lyne, hanging a Plomet of leade or ſome other ſuche thyng, then let it downe ouer the wall to the ground. Thē by the length of the lyne you ſhal know the height of the Towre or wall that you be vpon, then when you know the true height of the wall or Towre, then take your Aſtrolobe, hanging it vpō your thombe by the ring, as afore is declared, then looking thorowe the ſightes in order, as afore is rehearſed. So ſhall you fynde the diſtaunce, as this: firſt, at the part .12.How to know diſtance by the ſhadowe. looke what the height of the wall is from the ground, ſo farre it is to the marke that you do ſee thorowe the ſightes of the

Athelida, turning your aſtrolobe that the ſightes may goe downewardes, then the Athelida on the parte .6. of contrary ſhadowe, the thing that you ſhall ſee thorowe the ſyghtes ſhalbe .2. times the height of the Towre or wall: then on the part .4. of contrary ſhadowe, that thing that you doe ſee thorowe the ſightes ſhallbe 3. tymes the height of the Towre of Caſtle, then on the part .3. i
                           •
                         ſhalbe .4. tymes the height of the wall to that thing that you ſhall ſee thorow the ſightes. Then on the part .2. that thing that you ſhall ſee thorow the ſightes, ſhalbe .6. tymes the whole height of the Towre or Wall. Then the Athelida on the part one, that thyng that you ſhall ſee thorowe the ſyghtes, the diſtance wyll be 12. tymes the whole height of the Towre or Caſtle, or wall, as for an enſample by this figure following.

By a Towre beyng founde to bee .60. foote hyghe, at the part 12. the ſhadowe to runne downewardes, it is .60. foote of,An enſample. at the parte .6. the ſightes dyd ſhewe you that thyng that was 120. foote of, that is .2. ſcore, at the parte .4, 180. foote of, that is .3. ſcore, at the parte .3. the ſightes ſhewe you .240. foote of, that is 4. ſcore, at the parte .2. all thinges ſeeme from the toppe of the Towre thorowe the ſyghtes, as .360. foote of, that is, 6. ſcore of. Then at the parte one, all thynges ſeene thorowe the

ſightes from the toppe of the Towre ſhall bee .12. tymes ſo farre from the wall, as the wall or Towre is in heyghte, that is .720. foote from the Wall, and that maketh .12. ſcore. Nowe if that there were another Towre or Wall neere vnto you, you maye knowe howe manye foote that it is hygher then that whiche you bee on, as thus. Firſt dooyng as afore is declared, you ſhall know how many foote that the Towre is hygh, thus by this afore rehearſed, you ſhall knowe howe farre that the other is from you. Then ſet your Athelida to the lyne of Leuell, ſo ſhall you ſee whether that the other Towre bee hygher then that whiche you bee on, then to knowe how much that the other Towre is hygher then that you bee on, doo this: Firſt looke howe manye partes that there is from the foote or baſe of that Towre that you woulde knowe howe muche that the one is hygher then the other, to the ryghte lyne called the lyne of Leuell, then turne the Athelida tyll that you doo ſee the toppe agree wyth the .2. ſightes, holdyng the Aſtrolobe by the ryng vppon your thombe, as before is rehearſed, as thys: The foote of the next Towre ſeene thorowe the ſightes at the parte .12.To know how much the one Towre is higher or lower than another. then you ſhall deuyde that height of the Towre that you bee on, into .12. partes. Then looke howe manye feete that there commeth vnto a parte, then turne your Athelida tyll that you maye ſee the toppe of the nexte Towre, and looke howe manye that commeth vnto, adde ſo manye foote of the meaſure of your owne Towre, to the other Towre. Then at the parte .10. if you doo ſee the foote of the nexte Towre, deuide the heyght of the Towre that you bee on, into .10. partes, then looke howe many partes, that the other Towre is hygher then yours, adde ſo manye foote more to the heyght of the other Towre as the partes of feete dooth anſwere of your owne Towre, then in lyke manner, if you ſee the foote of the Towre at the parte .6. deuide the heyght of your owne Towre into .6. equall partes: then looke howe manye partes that the other Towre is hygher then yours that you bee on, adde ſo manye foote to the heyght as thoſe partes

dooth come vnto: and if you doo ſee the foote of the other Towre, at the parte .3. then deuide the heyght of that Towre that you bee on into .3. equall partes. Then looke howe manie partes that the other Towre is hygher then your Towre, adde ſo manye foote as thoſe partes dooth come vnto the other Towre, as thys for an enſample, by a Towre that is 60. foote hyghe. Then I tooke my Aſtrolobe and turned the Athelida to the parte .4. Then I dyd ſee the baſe or foote of the other Towre, then that Towre that I was on, the toppe beyng .60. foote hyghe, I dyd deuide it into .4. equall partes, and that dyd aunſwere to .15. foote a part: for this I am aſſured of, that when I dyd ſet the Athelida to the lyne of Leuell, that it was iuſte the heyght of my Towre, that place whiche I dyd ſee vppon the other Caſtle.

                        
Then I dyd turne the Athelida ſtyll aboute,Enſamples. ſeekyng where I myghte ſee the toppe of the Caſtle: then at the parte one and a halfe, I myghte ſee it iuſtlye with both the ſightes, then dyd I adde .15. foote and a halfe .15. that is .7. and a halfe, and thoſe .2. ſummes make .22. foote and a halfe, and then put .22. foote and a halfe, to .60. foote, maketh .82. foote, and .½. the whole heyght of the other Towre or Caſtle. Yet for more playneneſſe, lye another Towre of .50. foote hygh which I was vppon, I tooke my Aſtrolobe, and dyd as afore is ſayde, and I ſawe the baſe or foote of the other Towre at the parte .10. then I dyd deui
                           •
                        e the heyght of the Towre that I was on, into .10. equall partes, beyng .50. foote hyghe, and euerye one of thoſe partes came to .5. foote. Then I dyd take the Aſtrolobe and turned the Athelida, tyll that I coulde ſee the verie toppe of the other Towre thorowe both the ſightes: and then at the parte .4. I ſawe that it was true. Then I dyd adde .4. of thoſe partes, whiche was, 5. foote, to a parte, and that came to .20. foote. So that the one Towre was hygher then the other by .20. foote: ſo I dyd adde .20. foote to .50. foote, whych maketh .70. foote. So I doo conclude the whole heyght of the hygher Towre to bee .70. foote iuſt. Yet another emſample of .2. Towres: firſt, that Towre that I was on to bee .40. foote hyghe, and I ſawe the baſe or foote of the other Towre at the parte .2. of contrarie ſhadowe. Then I dyd deuide that Towre that I was on, into .2. equall partes, and that dyd aunſwere to .20. foote a parte. Then I turned my Aſtrolobe, and remooued the Athelida to the parte one. Then I ſawe the toppe of the other Towre thorowe the .2. ſyghtes. Then dyd I adde one of theſe partes beyng .20. foote, to the heyght of the other Towre, which maketh in all .60. foote hygh, the true height of the other Towre, as by theſe .2. figures you may perceyue.

                        
Now furthermore in lyke maner, if you be on the higher Towre,To know how much any Tower is lower then that you be on. you may know how much the lower Towre is ſhorter then the other. As this: firſt, knowing the height of your Towre that you bee 
                           •
                        n: then take the foote, or baſe of the ſhorter Towre with your Aſtrolobe (as before is ſayde,) then looke how many partes it commeth vnto, deuide the height of your Towre that you be 
                           •
                        n, as you did before: then turne the Athelida, till that you may ſee the top of the ſhorter Towre, then looke at what part you may ſee the top of the ſhorter Towre: take ſo much away from the height of your owne Towre, as the partes doe come vnto: then that whiche ſhall remayne, ſhall be the height of the ſhorter Towre, as for enſample thus: By a Towre that you were on, being 63. foote hye,Enſampl
                              •
                           
                           ▪
                         and you ſaw the foote of the other Towre, thorow the ſights at the part 9. of contrary ſhadow, then deuide the whole height of your Towre that you be on, into 9. equall partes, and euery one of theſe parts commeth to 7. foote. Then turne the Athelida, tyll you may ſee

the top of the ſhorter Towre agree with both the ſightes, then at the part 2. you did ſee them, the one of thoſe parts being 7. then 2. times 7. maketh 14. So that the lower Tower is 14. foote ſhorter then the other. Then pull 14. out of 63. foote, there remayneth but 49. foote, ſo you may ſee the whole height of the lower Tower to be 49. foote, and thus doe by all other Towers, Caſtles, Steeples, or Walles.
                  
                  
                     The 6. Chapter ſheweth how for to knowe the height of a Hill, and alſo the diſtaunce vnto the toppe of any Hill with the Scall.
                     NOw furthermore, by the Scall of the Aſtrolobe, you may take the height of any Hyll, and alſo of the diſtaunce vnto the toppe of the Hyll, by the Lyne Hypothenaſall, as though there were a Lyne made faſt to the top of the Hill, as heereafter foloweth. Firſt that Hyll that you doe require to know the height of it, or to know the number of the pace, or feete, that is aboue the grounde that you bee on: then ſeeke a plaine grounde neare about the hyll, there where you may ſee the top of the hyll, then doynge thus. Firſt turne your Athelida, tyll that you may ſee the toppe of the hill thorow both the ſights, your Aſtrolobe hanging vpright, the Ring being vpon your thumbe, then looke at what parte that the Athelida ſtandeth on, then accordingly as you dyd ſee before, by the taking of the height of Steeples, Towers, or Wals, meating the ground betweene the 2. ſtandinges, to be the height of the hill, as you may know by this enſample.
                     
                        To knowe the height of a hill.Firſt I ſeeking out my grounde meete for my purpoſe, to bee as playne as I can fynde it, firſt, at the part 6. I ſet the Athelida, and ſo dyd I ſee the top of the hyll, for nearer I coulde not ſee it: then I dyd turne the Athelida too the parte 4. and then where I ſaw it agree with the ſightes of the Aſtrolobe, there I began for to mete how many pace, that it was betweene the parte 6. and the

parte 4. the meaſure of ground was 100. pace: ſo I dyd conclude that the height of the hill was 100 pace hye, that is 500, foote. and then I muſt needes ſay, that from the part 4. to the Center or top of the hyl, if there were a perpendiculer lyne let downe as low thorow the middle of the hyll till that it were leuell with the ſighte of mine eye, then it were to the ende of the perpendiculer Lyne 300. pace iuſt. Then for to know the iuſt diſtaunce to the top of the hyll, by a right Lyne, as though there were a Lyne ſtretched from the top of the hyll to mine eye, which is the Lyne hypothenuſall: Then muſt I bee perfect in the ſeconde parte of Arithmetyke,To know the length of the Hipothenuſall Lyne by the extracting of the roote. (that is to ſay) the extraction of rootes, and there will I doe thus: I muſt multiply the whole diſtance in it ſelfe, which is 300. times 300 pace, and of that multiplycation commeth 90000. Then in lyke maner I multiply the height in it ſelfe, which is 100. tymes 100. and of that multiplication commeth 10000: then I doe adde both thoſe numbers together, & that maketh in number 100000. then this being done, I doe extract the ſquare roote of both theſe numbers added together (that is to ſaye) 100000, and then there will ſtande in the quantytie Lyne .316. and wyll remayne 144. whiche is 18/79. Therefore I doo conclude that the Lyne ſhoulde bee ſtretched from the toppe of the hyll downe tyo the ſightes of mine eye which is the Lyne Hypothenuſal, to bee 316 pace, and one foote and better, the iuſt length of the hypothenuſall Lyne, as by this Enſample it doth more playnely appeare.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     So by this Hyll you may ſee that the height of the Hyll was aboue the grounde, that it was taken vpon 100. pace: that is 500. foote, and that maketh 8. ſcore, and 20. foot: & the diſtaunce to the Center, or perpendiculer, or plumbe Lyne imagined into the Hil to be 300. pace, & that is 1500. foote, which maketh 25 ſcore, and the Hipothenuſall Lyne, from the top of the Hill to the ſtanding, at the part 4. is 316. pace, & neare 2. foote, which is in feete 1582. and in ſcores, 26. and 22. foote, as the figure afore made doth repreſent. And thus doe by all other hilles, whether that it be a part of a Hill or a whole Hill, all is one matter.
                  
                  
                     The 7. Chapter ſheweth you by the Skall of the Aſtrolobe, to know the true wydeneſſe of any water, or how farre that any ſhip is of from you, or to take any great diſtance by laying the Aſtrolobe flat before you with the Scall vpwardes.
                     YEt furthermore, by the Scall of the Aſtrolobe you may know the wideneſſe of Waters, and the diſtaunce from place too place all alonge the water ſyde, and alſo how farre that any Shippe doeth ryde from the ſhoare ſyde, and alſo how farre the Shippe is from you: whereby you may make a perfect ſhot, very profytable for Gonners to haue the vſe of, as heereafter followeth.To knowe the wideneſſe of waters. Fyrſt, take your Aſtrolobe, and ſette the ſame vpō ſome ſteadye thinge, layinge that flatte with the Scall vpwardes: Then turne the Aſtrolobe tyll that the Lyne of leuell doeth ſtande

as the ſhoare ſide, as thoſe that you ſhould ſet the Athelida with the line of Leuel, to looke al alongeſt the waters ſide: then ſhall the plumbe lyne of the Aſtrolobe ſtande directly croſſe the water, then al thinges ſeene right with that line to be right ouer the water: then your Aſtrolobe lying ſtyl, turne the Athelida to the part 12. then looke what marke or banke that you ſee hard to the waters ſide, through the ſight of the Athelida, marke it: then take your Aſtrolobe going directly by the waters ſide, tyll you come directly right againſt the marke taken vpon the other ſide of the water, ſetting your Aſtrolobe as before is rehearſed. Then if the perpendiculer lyne doo directly poynt to the marke afore taken, then the meaſure betweene the two ſtandinges, ſhalbe the true breadth of the water.
                     Furthermore, the Aſtrolobe ſtanding as afore is rehearſed, ſetting the Athelida vpon the part .6. of the right ſhadowe, then double that meaſure betweene the .2. ſtandinges, that ſhalbe the breadth of the water, then the Athelida vpon the part .4. of right ſhadowe, the Aſtrolobe ſet as afore is rehearſed, then the meaſure betweene the .2. ſtandinges, ſhalbe the .3. part of the breadth of the water, and ſo foorth to the part .3. to the marke right ouer the water, ſhalbe the one quarter of the breadth of the water, then .4. tymes the whole meaſure ſhalbe the breadth of the water: for to take the breadth of waters with the Skal of the Aſtrolobe, is no other thing in the dooing of it, but as you doo take the height of Walles or Towres in al poyntes, ſauyng that in the taking of heigthes, you doo hang your Aſtrolobe by the Ryng vpon your Thumbe: and for to take the breadth of waters, you muſt laye your Aſtrolobe ſteedy afore you, and the line of Leuel to ſtande al along the waters ſide, as circumſpectly as you may or can: then you muſt make your meaſure al alongeſt by the waters ſide, as by this enſample folowing, of a water that is meaſured, and is .36. ſcore ouer it.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        An enſample.Firſt I take my Aſtrolobe, and come to the waters ſide, and laye my Aſtrolobe vppon ſome ſteedye thing, and laye the lyne of Leuel all alongeſt by the waters ſide, then the thwart lyne of the Aſtrolobe poynted iuſt thwart or croſſe the waters ſide, neare to the Church ende: then I turned the Athelida to the part .12. ſo I ſawe a polled tree through the ſightes: Then I tooke vp my Aſtrolobe, and beganne to goe, meaſuring the ground by paſe, two ſteppes to a paſe, and that made .5. foote, which is a Geometrical paſe: and .12. of thoſe paſes make a ſcore: And then I came right againſt the tree, prouyng it with my Aſtrolobe, and found that the meaſure was from my firſt ſtanding, tyl I came right againſt it, 432. paſes, and that maketh .36. ſcore. So I dyd conclude the breadth of the water to be .36. ſcore, from banke to banke.
                     
                        Then furthermore I turned the Athelida to the parte .6. and then I ſawe a polled tree at the houſe ende: then I went meaſuring the grounde, and founde that the grounde was .216. paſes, and then I was right againſt the marke, and that was .18. ſcore: then two tymes .18. is .36. Then I turned the Athelida to the part .4. of right ſhadowe, and meaſured the grounde, tyll I came right agaynſte the marke taken through the ſightes of the Athelida, and founde the meaſure betweene the firſt ſtandyng, and the next, one hundred fourtie and foure paſes, that is, twelue ſcore: then three tymes twelue ſcore, is thirtie ſixe ſcore. Then the Athelida ſtanding vpon the parte .3. I meaſured the grounde betweene the two ſtandinges, and founde it to be .80. paſes, that is .9. ſcore, and the fourth part of the breadth of the water, for foure tymes 9. is .36. Then the Athelida vppon the parte .2. Alwayes prouided that you doo as before is rehearſed, meaſuryng the grounde tyll you come directly agaynſte the marke taken, ſhalbe three ſcore and twelue paſes, that is, ſixe ſcore: then ſixe tymes ſixe, is .36. For vppon the parte .2. the grounde betweene both the ſtandinges, is but the ſixt parte of the wydeneſſe of the water. Then at the parte one, the ground betweene the two ſtandinges, ſhalbe but the twelfth parte of the breadth of the water, that is .36. paſes, and that maketh three ſcore: then .12. tymes three, is .36.
                     Nowe furthermore, if you wyll knowe the length of any of the Hypothenuſal or ſlope lynes, then extracting the roote,To knowe the length of the ſlope lyne, by the extract of the Roote. the length of that lyne ſhall appeare: ſo that with the Skal of the Aſtrolobe, you maye knowe any diſtaunce, being ſure that you doo make a ſquare Angle, by laying the Aſtrolobe flatte afore you, euen accordyng vnto the Concluſions, when that you doo hang the Aſtrolobe.
                     And alſo you maye take a greater diſtaunce, and alſo a larger ſtation, whereby you maye woorke more exactly, by laying it, then by hangyng of it. For that there is ſeeldome any ground, but that it is higher or lower in one place, then it is in another, & that maye breede a notable errour, if it be not well conſidered of. But if you doo laye the Skall flat before you, conſidering well

the concluſions, you may commyt no great errour, being ſure, that in your remouyng, you doo make a ſquare Angle, and then meaſure the diſtance of grounde truely, for thence are many folde notable concluſions to be donne with the Skal, as by this you maye knowe howe farre of that any Shyp dooth ryde at an ancore in the Sea, or in any Baye, or Ryuer: you may knowe certainely howe farre ſhee is from you, ſo that ſhee be not moueable: And alſo you being beſieged in a Towne, may knowe howe farre any thing is from you: And alſo if you be without any Towne, you may knowe by the S
                           •
                        al of the Quadrant or Aſtrolobe, howe farre any Towre, Balwarke, or Steeple is of from you. &c.
                  
                  
                     The eight Chapter ſheweth vnto you, if that you doo know the dyſtance, then you may know whether that it be hygher ground or lower ground then the place that you are vpon, and howe much, both By the partes of the Scal, and by the degrees: and alſo you may know whether that one ſhippe be higher then an other &c.
                     And furthermore, you knowing the dyſtance vnto any place aſſygned, then you may know the height of any Hyl or Steple or Towre, or the deepeneſſe of any valley by the parts of the Scal, as thys: The dyſtance being known, if that it be hygher or lower by one of the parts & the Scall to be deuided 12.To know howe much any place is higher or lower then the placeth it you are on, whether that it be on Towre, Steeple, 
                              •
                           l, Clyffe, of valley. &c. partes: then the thinge is higher or lower by the .12. parts of the diſtance, & if it be higher or lower by two of thoſe partes, then the thyng is higher or lower then the place that you doe ſtande vpon by the ſixt part of the diſtance. And if the thyng be higher or lower by .3. of thoſe partes, then the thynge ſo taken, ſhall he hygher or lower by the .4. parte of the dyſtance: and if that it be higher or lower by the .4. part, then the thyng ſhalbe higher or lower by the third part of the diſtance: and if that the thing be higher or lower by the .6. part of the Scal, then the Hyl or valley ſhall be higher or lower by halfe the diſtance. &c. As

for an inſample this: I laying the Skall flat, toke a marke vpon the top of a Hyll, or in the botome of a valley: and ſo workyng as is declared in the Chapter going before, and founde the dyſtance to be .24. ſcore from me, and then I deſire to knowe howe much that the Hyl was hygher groūd, or the valey lower ground, then the place that I ſtoode vpon. And then I tooke the Aſtrolobe and hung it vpon my thombe, and ſo I ſawe that the Hyll was hygher by the one part. Therefore I dyd conclude that it was .2. ſcore higher, that is .120. foot hygher groūd then the place that I ſtode vpon, for that the dyſtance is .24. ſcore: and the .12.An enſample. parte of 24. is .2. Wherfore yf that it were a valley, then it were .120. foote lower then the ground that I ſtoode vpon. &c. And then if that it were hygher or lower by the .2. part of the Skall, then it ſhould be hygher or lower then the place that you ſtoode vpon, by the .6. part of the diſtance, that is .4. ſcore, and that maketh .240. foote. And furthermore, if that it were hygher or lower by .3. of the partes of the ſcall: then the ground ſhould be higher or lower by a quarter of the diſtance, that is .6. ſcore: and that contayneth 360. foote. And furthermore, if that it were higher or lower by .4. of the partes of the Scal, then it ſhould be higher or lower by the third part of the diſtance, that is .8. ſcore: and that contayneth .480. foote, &c. And this I do take to be ſufficient for an enſample. And nowe furthermore, if that the dyſtaunce were very farre, and alſo the Scal deuided but into .12. partes, yet you myght know the height of a Hyll, or the deepneſſe of a valey,
                           To know howe much any place is hygher, or lower by degrees.
                           An enſample of ſhyps on the water.
                         by the degrees of your Aſtrolobe, or Quadrāt, as this: the diſtance being knowen vnto any marke vpon a Hyll, or in any valley, if that it were one degree higher or lower then the place that you do ſtand vpon, then the thing ſhoulde be higher or lower grounde by the .60. part of the diſtance. If .2. degrees, then it ſhould bee higher or lower by the .30. part of the dyſtance: if .3. degres, higher or lower, then the ground ſhoulde be higher or lower by the .20. part of the diſtance: yf .4. degres, then the grounde ſhould be higher or lower by the .15. partes of the dyſtance: if .5. degrees, then the ground ſhould be higher or lower by the .12. part of the diſtance: and thus farre the degrees will ſerue exactly yenough,

but not vnto many moe degrees, for that they be the diuiſor of a circle. But vnto .5. or .6. degrees they wyll ſerue the the turne very wel. And now for your better vnderſtanding, I wil make an enſample vnto .5. degrees according vnto the dyſtance before reherſed,An enſample. that is, at, 24. ſcore from you, the grounde being higher or lower by one degree, the thing is higher or lower by the .60. part of the dyſtance, that is .24. foote, whether that it be any marke vpon a Hyll or valley, or the height of any Towre or Steeple. &c. Yf that it be .2. degrees higher or lower, then the marke ſhall be higher or lower then the grounde that you doo ſtand vpon, by the .30. part of the diſtaunce: and the diſtaunce being .28. ſcore, the Marke ſhall bee higher or lower by .48. foote.
                     And Furthermore, if that the marke bee higher or lower by. 3. degrees, then the thynge ſhall be higher or lower then the grounde that you doe ſtande vpon, by the .20. part of the diſtance: that is .72. foote. And Furthermore, if that the marke be higher or lower by .4. degrees, then the thing ſhall be higher or lower by the .5. part of the dyſtance, that is .96. foote. And further more, if the thinge be higher or lower by .5. degrees, then the thing ſo taken, ſhall bee higher or lower then the grounde that you ſtande vpon by the .12. part of the diſtance: that is .120. foote. &c.
                     And furthermore, by this meanes or order, you may knowe the diſtance vnto any ſhyppe vpon the ſea, or Ryding in any Hauen or Harborowe you knowing the hight of any Towre or Clyffe, or any Hyll vpon the ſea Coſte, howe many foote that is higher then the water: and you may knowe it eyther by the partes of the Skall, or els by the degrees, as for an enſample, the Towre or Hil, or Clyffe to be .60. foote higher then the ſuperficiall of the water, and the .60. foote is one ſcore.
                     
                        An enſample of ſhyps on the water.And if you do ſe the ſhipe at one degree lower then the horizon then it ſhall be .60. ſcore vnto the ſhip: and if at .2. degrees, then

it ſhallbe .30. ſcore vnto the ſhip, if at .3. degrees, then it ſhal be .20. ſcore vnto the ſhip, if at .4 degrees, then it ſhall be .15 ſcore vnto the ſhip: if .5. degrees then it ſhalbe .12. ſcore vnto the ſhippe: if .6. degrees, then it ſhall be .10. ſcore vnto the ſhyppe: but if the ſhyppe be nearer, the degrees wyll ſerue no turne, but wyll be erronious. Wherefore you muſt vſe the partes of the Scall, as .5. degrees and the part one is all of lyke dyſtance: for the hyght of the Towre, Clyffe, or hyll beeing .60. foote in hyght aboue the ſhippe, that is iuſt one ſcore: at .5. degrees, the dyſtance vnto the ſhyppe is .12. ſcore. And alſo at the parte one, the diſtance is .12. ſcore in lyke maner &c. and at the parte .2. the dyſtance vnto the ſhyppe is .6. ſcore: and at the part .3. the dyſtance vnto the ſhyppe ſhalbe .4. ſcore: and at the part .6. but .2. ſcore: and at the part .12. the dyſtance from the foote of the Clyffe or Towre, vnto the ſhyppe, ſhalbe but one ſcore, that is iuſt the heyght of the Towre or Clyffe. &c.
                     Furthermore you may knowe, if that you be on the ſea, whither that one ſhyppe be hygher or lower of borde,To know whether my ſhyp be higher or lower of boord, then another, and whether the one dooth ouertop the other, and howe. then the other ſhyppe, and howe much: and alſo whither the one ſhyppe dooeth ouertoppe the other ſhyppe, you may knowe howe much: ſo that ſhee bee not aboue a myle from you, as thys, by the lyne of the horizon lacke, what place ſo euer that you doo ſee iuſt with the horizon, is equall in height with your eye, neyther higher nor lower, whither that you bee one the Sea, or vpon the lande: and then you being in a ſhippe on the Sea, and you do deſier for too knowe whither that the other ſhyppe be higher or lower of borde then that ſhippe that you are in, then looke Vppon the other ſhpppe, at what place that the horizon quoteth: and if you doo ſee the horizon ouer the other ſhyppe, then your ſhippe is higher of borde then the other ſhip: and if that you woulde knowe howe muche, then goe too a lower place in your owne ſhyppe, vntill ſuche time that you doo ſee the Horizon

iuſt with that part that you doo deſire to knowe the heigth of, and then ſtanding ſtyl, looke what part of your owne ſhip that the Horizon quoateth, that part of the ſhip is iuſt equal with the other ſhyp, neither higher nor lower: then to knowe whether that the other ſhippes top of her Maſt be higher or lower then your ſhips, then goe vp, or ſende one to the top, and if that the other ſhips top be higher then the Horizon, then the other ſhips top is higher by ſo muche as you doo ſee aboue the Horizon: but if that you doo ſee the Horizon ouer the top of the other ſhip, then your ſhip is the higher: and then to knowe howe much, come downe lower, vntyll you doo bring the other ſhips top vnto the Horizon, then at the iuſt heigth of your eye, is the true heigth of the other ſhips top, neither higher nor lower: and then looke howe much it is higher then your eye vnto the top, ſo much your top is higher then the other ſhips top. &c.
                     And alſo you being on the lande, you may knowe whether one ſhip be higher of boorde then the other, and alſo whether the one ſhip dooth ouertop the other ſhip, as this, by the quoting of the Horizon vpon both the ſhips, as this, If you be either in a Towre, or any high houſe, neare the ſea coaſt, or els at the foote of any hyl eyther.
                     Then if that you deſyre for to know which of the ſhyppes be the higher of boord, or els the hygher topped, then aſcende or deſcend, vntil that you doo ſee the horizon iuſt with the hygher part of the ſhip, and then looke vpon the other ſhippe, and then if that the other ſhip be hygher then the Horizon, then that ſhip is ſo much hygher of borde from the quotyng of the Horizon vpwards, and then if that you would know how many foote, then aſcend vpwards vntil that you doo ſee the vpper part of the ſhip iuſte with the horizon, then looke how many foote and ynches that you were hygher then you were before, and ſo many foote the Ship is higher then the other ſhip iuſt.To know howe much one houſe, ſhip, towre, or hyl is higher then the other. And by this order you maye knowe howe muche one ſhip is higher topped then the other.
                     And by thys order you maye knowe whether one Towre is higher then another, or one houſe higher then an other: And alſo whether that one hyl be higher then another. &c.
                     
                        And furthermore, by this meanes you doo knowe whether that one ſhyp dooth ouertop the other: then you may knowe how many foote it is from the top of any ſhip, vnto the water, by the heigth of your owne ſhippes top, and the heigth being knowen, then you may knowe the diſtance vnto any ſhip ſailing on the ſea, ſo that ſhee be not too farre of, by the partes of the Skal, and alſo by the degrees, as before is rehearſed, going ſo lowe as you can in your owne ſhip, and then to conſider howe muche that you are aboue the water, &c. And thus I doo ende the concluſion of the Scal, and nowe dooth folowe the concluſion of the Croſſe ſtaffe.
                  
                  
                     The nienth Chapter ſheweth the making of the Croſſe ſtaffe, that in ſome caſes is better then the Skall of the Aſtrolobe, or Quadrant. &c.
                     NOwe furthermore as concernyng the making of a Croſſe ſtaffe, that ſerueth the Towne in diuers reſpectes, muche better then the Skal of the backeſide of the Aſtrolobe, and ſpecially for to take the length of the Cortane of the wall of a Towne, or the diſtance betweene two Townes, or any two markes ſtanding directly againſt them, very profitable for al ſeruitours, or other, for to haue the vſe of. And nowe foloweth the making of a Croſſe ſtaffe, as much as ſhal ſerue landmens turnes. Firſt take a peece of good, fine, and wel ſeaſoned wood, and let it be wel playned, and very ſtreight, of 
                           ••
                        ue foote long, and then let it be diuided into .60. equal partes or ynches, and then you may graue in it .1.2.3. and .4▪ and ſo tyl you doo come to the ende at .60. And be ſure that you make euery ynche or part note, the one to be bygger or leſſer then the other. Then if you wyl, you may make at the ende of euery .12. ynches, a roundell or circle, and at the ende of euery .6. ynches, halfe a circle:The ma
                              •
                           ing of the Croſſe ſtaffe. then at euery .3. ynches, ſ
                           •
                        me marke or croſſe, and then your long ſtaffe is finiſhed. Thē in like maner you ſhal make an other ſhort ſtaff, called a Tranſuaſtorie, of two foote long, and in the very myddle of it you ſhall make a ſquare hole, ſuche a one as ſhal goe cloſe to the

longer ſtaffe without any ſwaruing, and then ſhall you make .2. wings or plates of braſſe, one for the one end, and the other for the other ende, then ſhall you make a chace or rygall on the one ſide of the Saffe, that the wynges may be rem
                           •
                        ued at your diſcretion: & then at .6. ynches from both the endes you ſhal make a marke: And then there will bee .12. ynches betweene the 2. markes. Then in lyke maner, you ſhall make .2. other markes 9. inches from both the endes, and there will bee .6. inches beetwene the .2. markes.
                     And then in like maner, you ſhal deuide the reſt of the middle of the Tranſuaſtorie into ynches equal partes, and then it is finiſhed, ſauing that in the middle of the Tranſuaſtory you ſhall put a little peece of braſſe into the hole or ſocket that the longer Staffe doth go thorowe, and then you ſhall make a little vice or worme, to the ende that you may make the Tranſuaſtory to ſtand faſt at your deſcretion: as theſe .2. figures doo repreſent both the ſtaffe and the Tranſuaſtorie, and the vppermoſte, the longeſt ſtaffe
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The tenth Chapter ſheweth howe for to vſe the Croſſe ſtaffe, for to knowe the length of any Wall, or the diſtance betwene any two marks, and alſo the distance from you, vnto any Wal or Marke.
                     
                        NOwe when ſo euer you liſt for to take the length of any cortaine of a Wall, or the widenes betwene two marks, or any other thing what ſoeuer it be, then ſhall you take the longer ſtaffe, ſet out with equall partes, and put the Tranſuaſtorie vppon it, through the hole in the myddle of the Tranſuaſtorie: and then if you would know the wydeneſſe betweene anye two Markes, or the length of the cortaine of any Wall,How to vſe the Croſſe ſtaffe to take the widnes and the diſtance of any thing. and the diſtaunce vnto them: then ſhall you doo thus: Firſte, ſet the ende of the longer Staffe, harde vnde
                           •
                         one of your eyes, wynkyng with the other eye.
                     Than your Tranſuaſtorie ſtandyng at .24. ynches from the ende of your long Staffe, whiche is the whole lengthe of your Tranſuaſtorie: Then goe forewardes or backewardes, ſtandyng vpright with your bodye, and heade, and both your feete togeather: then goe forwardes or backewardes, lookyng towarde your Marke, tyll both the endes of your Tranſuaſtorye do agree with your two Markes iuſtly. If it bee a Wall, meaſure the grounde iuſt to the myddle of the Wall, and that ſhalbe the true length of the Wal.
                     But if there bee a Ditche betweene you and the Wal, then remooue your Tranſuaſtorie at the ſeconde ſtandyng, his whole length further forewardes, that is, two foote: and then goe backwardes, tyl that you maye ſee againe, both the endes of the wal agree with the two endes of the Tranſuaſtorie. Then meaſure the grounde betweene the two ſtandinges, and that ſhalbe the iuſt length of the wal. And then the diſtaunce vnto the wal, ſhalbe

twiſe the length of the wal. Then if that the diſtaunce be further then the Tranſitorie wyl take, and the wal too ſhorte: then remoue the Plattes or wynges of the Tranſitorie, to the markes, ſixe ynches from both the endes of the Tranſitorie: and then the two Plattes or ryngs wyl be but twelue ynches aſunder.
                     Then take the wydeneſſe betweene the two markes, or the two endes of any wal iuſtly with the outſydes of the two Plattes or Ringes: then with the myddle of your foote, there make a marke: then remooue your Tranſitorie forewardes or backewardes, the length that the Plattes or Ringes be aſunder, as you haue grounde: and then goe forewardes and backewardes, tyll that your two Plattes or Ringes doo agree againe with both the endes of the wal: and then there make an other marke at your feete. Then meaſuring the gr
                           •
                        unde betweene the two ſtandinges, it ſhalbe the length of the wall.
                     And then for to knowe the diſtaunce vnto the wall, you ſhal doo thus: Looke howe many tymes that the Tranſitorie is from the ende nexte towardes you, and eſpecially the diſtance betweene the two Plattes or ringes: ſo many tymes the length of the wal, ſhalbe the diſtaunce vnto the marke: as for enſample thus, By the wal of a Cortaine of a towne betweene two Turrettes, and my deſire is to knowe the length of the Cortaine of the wal: and then I hauyng the Tranſitorie vpon the long Staffe, I could not come ſo neare the towne as I woulde. Then I remooued the Plates or wynges of the Tranſitorie, to the diuiſion of ſixe ynches from both endes, that was, twelue ynches aſunder: then I goyng forewarde, tyl that I dyd ſee both the Turrettes with the two Plates or wynges of the Tranſitorie: and then at my feete I made a marke, and then in like manner I remooued my Tranſitorie twelue ynches forewarde, and then I went backewardes, tyl 
                           •
                        hat the two endes of the wal dyd agree agayne with the two Plates or wynges of the Tranſitorie, and there is made an other Marke.
                     Then I meaſured the grounde betweene the two ſtandings, and founde it tenne ſcore: then I dyd conclude, that the length of the Cortayne of the wal, was tenne ſcore from the one towre to

the other. And nowe I knowing the length of the wal, I maye eaſily knowe the diſtaunce vnto the wal, as thus: Nowe I doo looke howe many tymes twelue ynches that the Tranſitorie was from the ende nexte vnto me, and it was foure and a halfe: that is, 54. ynches.
                     And nowe, becauſe that the Plates or wynges of the Tranſitorie were twelue ynches aſunder, and .54. maketh foure tymes and a halfe twelue, and the length of the wal, tenne ſcore. Therefore I doo conclude, the diſtaunce vnto the wal, from the place of the laſt ſtandyng, to bee foure tymes and a halfe tenne ſcore: that is, fourtie and fyue ſcore: as by the enſample of the figure folowing it is declared.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     
                        Nowe furthermore, if the diſtaunce be further, then the two Plates or wynges maye bee remooued nyene ynches from the two endes, that is, but ſixe ynches aſunder: Then in like manner if that be too wide, you may remoue the two plates or wynges ten ynches from both the endes, and that is but foure ynches aſunder. Then in like manner, if that the diſtaunce bee verye farre of, and the length of the wall bee ſhorte, then maye you remooue the Plates or winges of the Tranſuaſtorie, eleuen ynches from both the endes: that is, but two ynches aſunder: And then, dooyng as before is rehearſed, to take two ſtandynges, that ſhalbe the mydeneſſe betweene any two markes.
                     Prouided alwayes, that you remooue the Tranſuaſtorie at the ſeconde ſtanding, either forewardes or backewardes, ſo many ynches, as the two Plates or wynges be aſunder, iuſtly, and no more, and then you ſhall knowe the diſtaunce vnto any Marke or wall.
                     When you doe knowe the length of the wall, (and that is knowen, as afore is ſaide, by the meaſure betweene the two ſtandinges) then looke howe many ynches that the Tranſuaſtorie is from the ende of the long Staffe nexte to your eye: then looke howe many ynches that the Plates or wynges of the Tranſuaſtorie are aſunder, ſo many times the length of the wall ſhalbe the diſtance vnto the wal.
                     As for enſample thus: By the Cortaine of the wal afore named, being ten ſcore long, & the Tranſuaſtorie to be ſet at .48.An other enſample. ynches from the ende. Firſt, the two winges ſtoode at the very vtter ende of the Tranſuaſtorie, that is .24. ynches aſunder: then the meaſure vnto the wal, ſhalbe twiſe ten ſcore, and that maketh .20. ſcore, becauſe there is twiſe .24. in .48. Then in like manner the Plates or wings were ſet .12. ynches aſunder, and the Trāſuaſtorie .48. ynches from the ende. Then there is foure tymes .12. in .48. then you may conclude, that that is foure tymes ten ſcore vnto the wal of the towne, that maketh .40. ſcore. Then in like manner the Plates or wynges being ſet but ſixe ynches aſunder, then there is eight tymes ſixe in .48. which maketh eight tymes ten ſcore: that is .80. ſcore. Furthermore, if that the wynges

were but foure ynches aſunder, the Tranſitorie being .48. ynches from the ende, there is .12. tymes foure in .48. So the diſtance vnto the wall is .12. tymes .10. ſcore. that is .120. ſcore. Then furthermore, the winges ſtanding but .2. inches a ſunder, but then it is an hard matter for to take it perfect: then there is .24. tymes .2. in .48. ſo that maketh .24. tymes .10 ſcore: which maketh .240. ſcore. Now furthermore, in lyke maner if that it fa
                           •
                         not right iuſt meaſure, then if that there be but halfe the meaſure betweene the winges, then for that, take halfe the length of the wal, and adde it vnto the reſt of the meaſure: and if that it bee three quarters, then three quarters of the meaſure, and for a quarter, one quarter. &c.
                  
                  
                     The eleuenth Chapter ſheweth you howe for to take the length of a wall, when that you haue not grounde large yenough for your two ſtations or ſtandynges.
                     NOwe furthermore, if that you haue not grounde for to goe forewardes or backewardes, ſo much as that the quantitie of the wydenes of the Cortaine, or the diſtāce between any two markes ſhal come vnto, there is a remedie for that, as this: Looke at what length you haue ſet the diſtance between the two Plates or wyngs: then remoue the Tranceuaſtory of the long ſtaffe, but halfe the length betweene the two Plates or wyngs, at the ſecond ſtanding, and then the grounde betweene the two ſtandings ſhalbe but halfe the length of the wal, or diſtance betweene your two markes: then double the meaſure that ſhalbe the length of the wal: then hauyng not ſo much ground, remoue the Tranſitorie but the thirde part of the meaſure betweene the two wynges of the Tranſitorie, and then the grounde betweene the two ſtandings, ſhalbe but the third part of the length of the wal, and three tymes that meaſure, ſhal bee the whole length of the Cortaine of the wall.
                     
                        Then hauing not ſo much ground, then remoue the Tranſitorye but one quarter of the meaſure of 2. plates or winges, and then the meaſure betweene the 2. ſtandynges ſhall be but one quarter of the length of the Wall: and then 4. times that meaſure ſhall be the whole length. Thē in like maner you may remoue the Tranſatory but the 6. part of the meaſure & there Tranſitory the betweene the 2. ſtandyngs ſhall be but the 6. parte of the length of the Wall: and ſo foorth to the 12. parte or more, as you haue Grounde or roome.
                     But heere is one thinge by the way, neuer take a ſhort ſtation betweene the 2. markes, as longe as you may haue a large: for that a lyttle errour often times multyplyed, becommeth a great and myraculous errour in the ende, yea an vntollerable fault.Enſample. And now for your better Enſample of all thoſe queſtions afore rehearſed of the length of a Brickwall 12. ſcore longe, fyrſte I tooke my croſſe Staffe, and ſought out my grownde ryght againſt the middle of the Wall: and becauſe I coulde not come ſo neare as I woulde, I remoued the 2. plattes or winges 6. ynches from the 2. endes of the tranſatorye that was 12. ynches aſunder, and ſet the tranſatorye 36. ynches from mee: and then there where the 2. Plates or Winges dyd agree with the two endes of the Wall, there at my feete I made a marke: then I had not grounde ynoughe neyther for to goe forwardes nor backwardes: therefore I remoued my Tranſitory but 6. ynches forwardes, that is at 42. ynches, and then I went backwardes tyll that the 2. plattes or winges dyd agree agayne with the ende of the Wall, and there I made another marke. Then I meaſured the grounde betweene the 2. ſtandynges, and founde it but 6. ſcore: then that beinge halfe the length of the Wall, 2. times 6. ſcore maketh 12. ſcore.
                     Then I hauinge not ſo much ground, remoued the Tranſitory the thirde parte but 4. ynches forwarde, that is, at 40. ynches. Then meaſurynge the grounde betweene the 2. Standynges, was 4. ſcore: then three times 4. ſcore maketh 12. ſcore: then hauynge not ſo much grounde, remoue the Tranſitory but one quarter forwards, that is 3. ynches forwardes, that maketh 39. ynches:

and then the grounde betweene your two ſtandynges ſhall bee but three ſcore: and foure times three ſcore maketh twelue ſcore. Then in lyke caſe yf that you haue not ſo much grounde, you may remoue the Tranſuaſtorye but the ſixt parte of the meaſure betweene the two Plates or Winges, that is two ynches forwardes, and that maketh .38. ynches: & then the meaſure beetweene the two ſtandynges is but two ſcore: and ſyxe times two ſcore maketh twelue ſcore, and ſo foorth to the twelfe parte of the meaſure betweene the two Plates or Winges of the Tranſuaſtorye, as by this Example.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The 12. Chapter ſheweth you how to know the diſtaunce vnto any two marks, or to the two endes of any wall by the extracting of the ſquare roote.
                     NOwe furthermore, whenſoeuer you haue taken the wydeneſſe betweene any two markes, then you doe knowe the iuſt wideneſſe, but not the true diſtaunce, except it were a Wall, you doe know the true diſtaunce vnto the middle, but not to the ende.To know the diſtaunce vnto any two marks by the extracting of the ſquare roote.
                     
                     Now therefore whenſoeuer you woulde know the diſtaunce vnto the endes of any Wall, or vnto a Churche, and a Tree, or whatſoeuer that you haue taken the wydeneſſe betweene them, then how farre ſo euer that they bee aſunder, deuide the meaſure into 2. equall partes. Then take the Lyne of the diſtaunce vnto the middle of the marke, and fyrſte multiplye the diſtaunce in it ſelfe: then in lyke manner multyplye the halfe wideneſſe in it ſelfe: then part both the numbers of the multiplycation, and adde them both together: then extract the roote of both the numbers, and it ſhall bee the diſtaunce of both the endes of the Wall, or any other 2. markes, as now for example thus: by a Church and a Bulwarke. And my deſyre is to know the wydeneſſe betweene them, and firſt I take my croſſe Staffe and ſet the Tranceuaſtorye 24. ynches from the ende: and the 2. plats or winges ſtoode at the harde ende: and then I tooke my fyrſt ſtanding, as afore is declared, holdynge the longe Staffe hard vnder the ſide of mine eye, and then I ſeing the Bulwarke & the church agreeing with the 2. ends of the trācevaſtory, there at my firſt ſtanding I made a marke, and then I remoued the Tranceuaſtory 24. ynches forwardes, and that maketh 48. ynches, and there where the two markes dyd agree agayne at the 2. endes of the Tranceuaſtorye goynge backwardes, there I made an other marke, and then I meaſured the grounde beetweene the 2. ſtandyngs, and founde it 24. ſcore.
                     
                        Then I did conclude the wydeneſſe betweene the Church and the bulwarke, was .24. ſcore: then it muſt needes bee ſayd, that the diſtaunce to the myddle waye betweene the Bulwarke and the Churche at the firſt ſtanding to bee .24. ſcore: becauſe that the Tranſitorie was once his whole length from the ende nexte vnto mee, and then at the ſecond ſtanding the diſtaunce muſt needes be 48. ſcore, becauſe that the Tranſitorie was twice hys whole lēgth from the ende nexte vnto mee, beyng .24. ynches. And nowe for to knowe the diſtaunce vnto eyther the Bulwarke or the Churche, then ſhall you doo this: and for the neereſt ſtanding, when that the Tranſitorie was once his whole length from the ende, and the diſtaunce vnto the myddle .24. ſcore, then I dyd multiplye .24. tymes .24. and that maketh .576. And then from the myddle betweene the Bulwarke and the Churche, was .12. ſcore to the bulwarke, and .12. ſcore to the Churche. And then .12. ſcore multiply ſquarely, that is to ſay, 12 tymes .12. and that maketh .144▪ Then adde both your numbers together, that is to ſaye, 576. and .144. and that maketh .720. Then extract the roote of the number, and then there wyll ſtande in the quantitie lyne .26. and .44. wyll remaine ouer. So that you may conclude, that from the neereſt ſtanding, to the Bulwarke or to the Churche, it is .26. ſcore, and 11/13. parte of a ſcore, that is more neere .51. foote: and nowe from the furtheſt ſtanding, and the diſtaunce vnto the myddle .48. ſcore. Nowe multiplie .48. tymes .48. and that maketh .2304. Then multiply .12. tymes .12. for the halfe wydeneſſe, that is .144. and that added vnto .2304. maketh .2448. ſo extracting the roote, there will ſtande in the quantitie lyne .49. and then wyll remaine ouer .4. which maketh .47/98. parte, that is, neere halfe a ſcore, beyng .29. foote. So I doo conclude, that from the further ſtanding to eyther the Churche or Bulwarke, it is .49. ſcore, and neere 29. foote.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The thirtienth Chapter ſheweth howe to knowe the diſtance vnto any marke with the croſſe ſtaffe, without the extracting of the roote, and alſo howe to take the height of any thing with the croſſe ſtaffe.
                     NOwe furthermore for your more eaſe, whenſoeuer that you woulde knowe howe farre it were to any marke or place by

the helpe of two markes,To knowe the diſtance vnto any marke with ye Croſſe ſtaffe without the extracting of the roote. with not knowing the length of the ſlope lyne, then ſhall you doo thus: Firſt, ſtande ryght agaynſt the marke that you doo deſyre to knowe the diſtance vnto, then ſeeke out your marke, and be ſure that the other marke make a ſquare Angle vnto that marke that you deſyre for to knowe the iuſte diſtance vnto: then remoue one of the plates or wyngs of the Tranſuaſtorie to the verye myddle of the Tranſuaſtorye: then when ſoeuer you liſt to knowe the diſtance, firſt at your fyrſt ſtandyng, then make a marke: then for your next ſtandyng, remoue the Tranſuaſtorye, but ſo muche as the dyſtaunce is betweene the .2. plates or wynges, beyng ſure that you take the marke that you doo deſyre the diſtance vnto, with that plate or wyng of the myddle of the Tranſuaſtorye: then (as afore is declared) looke howe many ynches that the .2. plates or wynges be the one from the other, ſo manye tymes the meaſure that the diſtance is betweene the .2. markes, ſhall be the dyſtance vnto that thyng that you haue taken with the middle of the Tranſuaſtorie. And ſo foorth in al poyntes as afore is rehearſed: as for enſample thus, by a towre that I doo requyre the diſtance vnto,An enſample. and then I ſtandyng wyth my face right agaynſt the towre, then I ſought a tree that ſtoode right beſyde the towre, that made a perfecte ſquare Angle to the tower and vnto mee: then becauſe that the dyſtance was ſomewhat farre of, and the tree ſomewhat neare vnto the towre, therfore I ſet one of the plates or winges .6. ynches from the ende, and the other wing right with the middle of the Tranſuaſtorie. Then I ſet the ende of the long ſtaffe harde vnder one of myne eyes, and tooke the meaſure true betweene the tree and the towre, with the plates or wings of the Tranſuaſtorie, the Tranſuaſtorie ſtanding .48. ynches fom the ende. And then I remooued the Tranſuaſtorie .6. ynches forwardes, becauſe that the .2. plates or wynges were but .6. ynches aſunder, and that made .54. ynches: and then I went backwardes and made my ſeconde ſtanding, and then I meaſured the grounde betweene the .2. ſtandings, and founde the grounde .4. ſcore, then I knewe that the tree was .4. ſcore from the towre.
                     
                        And then I looked howe manye ynches that the Tranſitorie was from the ende, and founde it .54: then in lyke manner I looked howe many tymes .6. there was in .54. and founde .9. times .6. Then I muſt needes conclude, the diſtance vnto the Towre to bee .9. tymes .4. ſcore, that is, 36. ſcore: as by enſample of theſe figures following.
                     
                     The whole diſtaunce vnto the Towre is .36. ſcore. Nowe furthermore, you may take the height of any wall, or Towre, or Steeple, or any other thing, ſo that you ſet one of your plates or wings with the very middle of your Tranſitorie,As touching the taking of heightes with the croſſeſtaffe. & with the myddle plate be ſure to take the foote or baſe of the Towre, Steeple, Wall, or tree: or elſe you may commit errour. And by the ſtaffe you may knowe the wydeneſſe of waters, with diuers other moſt neceſſarie thinges, as this: When that you bee in a towne, for to knowe the diſtaunce of any place whoſe length or wydeneſſe that you doo knowe, as by the length of a pyke, or the wydeneſſe or diſtaunce betweene .2. Buſhes or .2. ſtones, or any other thing, beyng ſure that you take your ſight true vppon your markes holding your handes ſteedie tyll you may ſee your .2. markes, ende wyth your 2. plates or .2. endes of your Tranſitorie, ſetting the ende of your long ſtaffe cloſe to the vtter parte of your eye, winking with your other eye, ſtanding vpright with your necke and heade: and thys dooyng, you ſhall not fayle of the truth. For if that you erre, the fault ſhall bee in your ſelfe, for that you haue not taken it truely.

Therefore that is very good to haue a reſt to laie your long ſtaffe on, & for to take a hey 
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        , you mu
                           •
                        t turne the Tranſuaſtorie one ende vpwardes, and the other ende downewardes, and then you muſt holde the ende of the long ſtaffe cloſe to the corner of your eye.
                  
                  
                     ¶The fourteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you, how that you ſhall knowe the di
                           •
                        taunce of any ſhippe from you, and you beyng in another ſhippe, and both the ſhippes vnder ſayle, and goyng by the Croſſe ſtaffe. &c.
                     ANd furthermore, by the Croſſe ſtaffe you maye knowe the diſtaunce vnto any ſhippe ſayling on the Sea, very exactly, you beyng in another ſhippe ſayling after them, or before them, or beſide them: although that diuers men are not of that opinion, for that both the markes are moueable, whereby they cannot get any certaine ſtation or ſtandyng, as this is declared in the eight Chapter goyng before, how to knowe whether that one ſhyppe doth ouer toppe the other, by the ſending of one vp vnto the toppe of the ſhippe, to looke how the Horizon cutteth vpō the toppe of the other ſhippe: and by that he dooth knowe whether that the other ſhippe dooth ouertoppe or vndertoppe the ſhippe that he is in: and then you knowing how many foote that your owne ſhippes toppe is in height from the toppe downe vnto the water, then you may knowe by that howe many foote the other ſhippes toppe is in height in lyke maner from the water very exactly.As touching the knowing the height of any ſhippes toppe. But if that you doo not knowe the iuſt height of your owne ſhippes toppe vnto the water, then you may knowe it thus, by ſend
                           ••
                        g one vp vnto the toppe, with a leade or a Plomet made faſt vnto a lyne, and ſo let downe vnto the ſuperficiall parte of the water: and then meaſuring the lyne, you may ſee the height of the ſhippes toppe that you are in, downe vnto the water: and then by the height of your owne ſhippes toppe, you may iuſtly knowe the true heyght of the other. &c. And now to knowe the diſtaunce vnto the other ſhippe with the Croſſe ſtaffe, you muſt doo this:How to know the d
                              •
                           ſtance vnto any ſhip. take your Croſſe ſtaffe, and remoue the two plates or winges of the Tranſuaſtorie

vnto the myddle of the ſtaffe, and ſet them at a knowne diſtaunce betweene the two winges or plates, as at an ynche or halfe an ynche a ſunder at your diſcretion, and that beyng done, then ſet the long ſtaffe harde vnto the corner of your eye, wynking wyth your other eye, & then remouing the Tranſuaſtorie forwardes or backwardes vnt
                           •
                        ll that you may ſee and ſerue it truely, the toppe of the ſhippe iuſt with the vpper plate, and the lower part 
                           •
                        f the ſhippe harde vnto the water with the edge of the lower winge or plate: and that doone, then looke howe many times the wydeneſſe betweene the two plates that the tranſuaſtorie is from the end next vnto your eye, ſo many times the height of the toppe downe vnto the water as that commeth vnto, ſhall bee the true diſtaunce betweene the two ſhippes: which you ſhall worke in this manner: Firſt, the number of feete that the other ſhippe is from the toppe vnto the water beyng knowne, then looke howe many tymes the diſtaunce of the two wynges or plates bee a ſunder, then looke how many times that quantitie the Tranſuaſtorie is from the ende nexte vnto your eye, then doo thus multiplie the number of feete from the toppe vnto the water, by the number of the diſtance betweene the two plates or wynges from the ende nexte your eye: and then looke what that number commeth vnto, and then deuide that by .60. and ſo many ſcores the two ſhippes bee a ſunder iuſtly.An enſample. As for an enſample thus: by a ſhippe that was founde by the order before rehearſed, to bee .65. foote from the toppe of the toppe Matte vnto the water, and the two winges or plates were ſet iuſt an ynche aſunder. And then in the obſeruyng the Tranſuaſtorie was remouyng forwardes and backwardes vntyl that he dye ſee the toppe of the Maſte, and the lower parte of the ſhippe harde vnto the two plates or winges: and that doone, then he looke
                           •
                         how many ynches the Tranſuaſtorie was from the end nexte vnto his eye, and founde it .54. ynches iuſt. Wherefore he multiplyed .65. by .54. for that .65. foote was the height of the toppe vnto the water, and the plates or winges were iuſte one ynche aſunder, and the Tranſuaſtorie .54. ynches from the e
                           ••
                        e
                           •
                         and of that multiplication there commeth 3510. Wherefore deuide that .3510. by .60. and that will ſhewe vnto you the number

of ſcores, and that .3510. deuided by .60. there will ſtande in the quantiue lyne .58. and .30. remayneth ouer. So that you may conclude, the diſtaunce betweene the two ſhippes to be iuſt 58. ſcore and .½. and by this order you may know the true diſtance betweene any two ſhippes. &c. And yet for your better vnderſtanding, I will giue a ſecond enſample more eaſier to be vnderſtood,Another enſample. by a ſhippe that was iuſt .60. foote from the toppe vnto the water, that being a iuſt ſcore and no more, the two winges or plates being iuſt one ynche a ſunder, and the ſhippe being obſerued and was founde to bee where as the two plates did agree with the toppe and the lower part, that the Tranſuaſtorie was .40. ynches from the ende. Therefore they maye conclude that the diſtaunce betweene the two ſhippes was iuſt .40. ſcore, for that the toppe of the maſte vnto the water was iuſt one ſcore: that is .60. foote, and the two plates or winges iuſt one ynche a ſunder, and the Tranſuaſitorie .40. ynches from the ende. &c. And alſo by this order you may knowe the diſtaunce of any ſhippe from the lande. &c. And thus I doo ende the concluſions of the Croſſe ſtaffe. &c.
                  
                  
                     ¶The fifteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you, howe you ſhal make an inſtrumēt wherby you may deſcribe a Region or Countrey, which you may call an Horizontall Sphere: and alſo howe to take the plat of any ground. &c.
                     NOwe furthermore, I thinke it conuenient to ſhewe vnto you the making of an inſtrument, whereby you may deſcribe a whole Countrey at ſundry ſtations or ſtandings: which is verie meete and neceſſarie for all men that doo ſeruice to theyr Countrey, and principally for Generalles and Captaynes, and eſpecially for all them that take 
                           •
                        harge t
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ee leaders of men. The inſtrument is muche lyke 
                           •
                        o the backſide of an Aſtrolobe, but that it hath no Scal, and yo
                           •
                         ſhall make it in this manner. Firſt, take a peece of well ſeaſoned bordes ende

of a foote ſquare,The making of an inſtrument to deſcribe a Countrey. & thē make it round: or elſe you may make it in metall, the larger the better, making it perf
                           •
                        t rounde. And then deuide the circumference or edge into .360. degrees or equall partes: and then in like manner deuide it into .32. equall partes, & name them as you do the .32. poyntes of a ſea mans Compaſſe, and then make a hole in the center of the inſtrument, and thē make an Athelida with .2. ſightes, ſuch a one as an Aſtrolobe hath in all poyntes, and there make it faſt with a pinne to the middle hole of the inſtrument, and then in one of the ſides eyther to the North or South poynt, place a needle, ſuch a one as a Dyall hath, and this inſtrument is finiſhed. As by this figure following is repreſented.

                        
Now foloweth the vſe of this inſtrument, which is, for to deſcribe a Region or Countrye, and for to knowe the diſtaunces from one place to an other: very meete for Cherography or Topography, to make a Carde or Mappe for any Countrye, or to know the dyſtaunce from one Towne to an other, and alſo to know towardes what part the Towne or Village doth beare from the one to the other, by the help of two ſtations or ſtandings, made vppon ſome high grounde, as ſome Hill or ſome high Towre, where that you may ſee all the coſte of the Countrye rounde about you, as thus: Fyrſt, take the inſtrument and goe vppe vnto ſome high Hill or Towre, where that you may ſee all the Countrye rounde aboute you, and then draw into a peece of paper a Circle with a payre of Compaſſes, and then draw a Meridian Lyne, and then deuide the Circle into 32. equall partes as the inſtrument is, and then laye the inſtrument vpon ſome ſtoole or thing flatte afore you, and then ſet it with the needle due North and South, and ſo let the inſtrument ſtande without any remouinge: then turne the Athelida or Rule with the two ſightes, to ſuch Townes or Villages or hils, or Churches, as are within the Argle of ſight, and looke thorow both the ſightes of the Athelida, and ſee what Towne or marke that you doe ſee.
                     Then reſort to your Paper, and looke vpon the inſtrument at what poynt and degree the Athelida is ſtandyng on, then vpon the point and degree of the Circle wryte the name of the towne, or Village, or Hyll, then turne the Athelida to the next marke: and ſo foorth, tyll you haue taken all the townes and Villages rounde about the Countrye or Coaſtes that be within the Angle of ſight, and write the names of all thoſe townes at the poynte and degree that the Athelida doth ſtande vpon, at the tyme of the takyng of them with the 2. ſights.
                     And furthermore, write in the paper the 4. principall windes, as eaſte, weſte, northe, and ſouthe. Euen as the coaſte of the countrye dothe ſtande: and then drawe righte lynes from the Center of the Circle too the Circumference, to the place where the names of the townes were written, and ſo paſſinge right to the edge of the Paper.
                     
                        And thus doe by euery towne written on the edge of the Circle, and then that ſtation is finiſhed. And then furthermore, looke to what place that you doe meane for to goe vnto for to make your ſeconde ſtation, beinge one of thoſe that you haue obſerued afore. For the fyrſt obſeruation is to no purpoſe: ſo that you muſt of force haue 2. And then vpon that Lyne that the name of the towne or Hyll that you doe meane to goe vnto, ſette one of the feete of the compaſſes, and with the other foote of the compaſſes make an other circle in lyke maner: then draw an other Meridian Lyne, and be ſure that both the Meridian Lynes doe agree the one with the other, and ſo deuide that circle into 32. equall partes, as the other was in all poyntes: and then goe vp vnto ſome high place that was the marke before, and then lay your inſtrument afore you agayne, ſetting it by the needle due South and North, and ſo let the inſtrument ſtande.
                     
                        The ſecond obſeruation.And then turning the Athelida to ſuche townes as were taken before, looking thorow both the ſights were where the Athelida doth ſtand, and write the names of thoſe townes agayne vpon the edge of that circle at the poynt and degree that the Athelida doth ſtand vpon: and doe thus tyll that you haue taken all the townes that were obſerued at the fyrſt ſtandings: and then drawe right lynes from the Center of that Circle, by the edge of the Circle, to the names of thoſe Townes that were written, and ſo the lynes for to runne right to the ſides of the Paper. Then looke where that the lynes doe croſſe, there make a marke: for there ſtandeth the Towne or place that you haue obſerued.
                     And now in lyke maner, yf you lyſt, you may know the diſtaunce from one Towne to an other, as thus: fyrſt, you muſt meaſure the diſtāce betwen any one towne to another: & that groūd being meaſured,To know the diſtaunce vnto any place. you muſt make a Scal or tronke of meſure on the ſide of the paper, and then meaſure the diſtaunce betweene thoſe 2. Townes in the paper: then according to that proportion of meaſure make your myles in the Scall or tronke of the Carde or Mappe: and that beynge doone, you may knowe the diſtaunce with a payre of Compaſſes betweene any one Towne or Townes to the other, by the Scall of the Carde: and then this beyng doone, you may make

that fayre in an other thing without lynes, and bewtyfye that at your pleaſure, as for example thus, by the partes or countrye about Graueſende.
                     Fyrſt, I tooke the Inſtrument, and then in lyke maner I made a Circle in a ſheete of paper: then I drew a Meridian lyne,An Enſample. that is to ſaye, a lyne from the South to the North: and I deuided the Circle into 52. equall partes, and then I wrote the 4. principall windes in the foure ſydes of the paper: that is to ſaye, the Eaſt, Weſt, North, and South: and then I went vp to a Hyll that ſtandeth beſyde Graueſende, called Ruggon Hyll, and there beſyde the Myll I made my fyrſte ſtandinge: and then I obſerued al thoſe Townes and places folowing: Fyrſt Clyffe Church, and that I tooke Northeaſt and by Eaſt, and the ſixt part of a poynte to the Eaſtwarde: the next was Weſt Tilbrye Churche, North, and ¾. of a poynt to the Eaſtwardes, and then I tooke the Bulwarke of Weſt Tilbrye, North, and ¼. of a poynte to the Weſtwardes: and then I tooke Braueſende Churche ſteeple, North and by Weſt, and ⅔. partes of a poynte to the Weſtwarde: and then I tooke little Thurrock, Norweſt and by North, and the 6. parte of a poynt to the Weſtwarde: then I tooke Grayes Thurrock Northweſt, and the 6. part of a poynt to the Weſtwarde: & then I tooke Sainct Clements Churche, Weſt, Northweſt, and ¼. to the Northwardes: then I tooke North fleete Church, Weſt and 
                           •
                        /4;. partes of a poynt to the Northwards: then I tooke Swankam Churche, due Weſt: then in lyke maner I tooke the Vinyard Mill, Weſt, Northweſt, and ¼. parte of a poynt to the Weſtwardes: then I tooke Mappam Church Southweſt, and ⅕. part of a poynt to the Weſtwardes: then I tooke Cobbam Churche, Southea
                           •
                        t, and by South, and ⅕. parte of a poynte to the Southwardes: then I tooke Shorne Myll, Eaſt, and by South, and ⅖. partes of a poynte to the Southwarde: Then I tooke Chaulke Churche, Eaſt, and ⅖. of a poynte to the Southwardes: and ſo I make an ende of that ſtanding.
                     And now I choſe out for my ſecōd ſtāding, Weſt Tillary church, & I dyd draw a Lyne frō the Center of the Circle to the Circumference

of the Circle, to the title of Tilberye Churche beinge North, and ¾. of a poynte to the Eaſtwarde. the Lyne paſſynge ryght to the edge of the paper. And then I tooke a payre of compaſſes, and ſet the one foote of the compaſſes vpon that Line, and with the other foote I made a Circle: and then I made an other Meridian lyne by the other in the other Circle, ſo that the one dyd agree with the other: and then I deuided the Circle into 32. equall partes, and then I went ouer the water to Weſt Tilbery Church, and then I layde my inſtrument before me, and ſet it due North and South, and there I obſerued al the townes and places before named: as Cliffe, Eaſt and 1/
                           •
                        . parte to the North: Shorne Myll, and Chaulk Church, South Eaſt & by South, and ½. parts to the Southward. Cobbam Churche, South and by Eaſt, and ⅙. part to the Southwards.
                     Ruggon Hill, the Mille South, 
                           •
                         ¾. to the Weſtwards. Mepham Church, South and by Weſt, and ½. to the Weſtwarde. Tilberye Bulwark and Graueſend, South, Southweſt, and ½. to the Southwardes. Northe Fleete Churche: Southweſt, and ¼. to the South. Swanſkam Churche, Southweſt, and ¾. to the Weſtwarde. Saint Clements church, weſt, and by South, and ⅛. parte to the Weſt. Grayes thurrock, Weſt, and ⅔. partes to the South. Litle Thurock, Weſt, and ⅖. partes to the Southwarde. The Vineyarde Mill, Weſt, and ⅕. part to the Southwarde. And ſo I make an ende. And then I drew lynes from the Center of the Circle to the Circumference, to the title of the names of the Townes, and ſo I paſſed by the right lynes to the furtheſt partes of the paper, fyrſt vpon the one Circle, then vppon the other, tyll that I had drawne ſo many Lines as that there were Townes in both Circles: and there where that the Lynes dyd croſſe the one the other, I made a marke: For there ſtandeth the Towne, as by this Enſample it doth appeare.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     The .16. chapter ſheweth you how for to make a Trouke or ſkalle of meaſure in a mappe or Carde, whereby you may know the diſtance in myles that it is from one towne to an other.
                     Now this being done, you may know the diſtance from any one towne to an other. For as many townes as you haue obſerued, and if you lyſt you may goe from place to place, tyll that you haue obſerued and taken all the Townes in a whole region or countrie, as thus: firſt meaſure the diſtance in myles frō any one towne to another, then that diſtance being knowne, make a Tronke or Skall of meaſure with a pare of compaſſes, according to the diſtance taken with the compaſſes betwene thoſe .2.How to make a tronck or Skal of meaſure to know the diſtance frō any one towne vnto another. townes in the paper. Then that being truly diuided into myles and halfe myles, and quarters of myles, then you may know the diſtance from one towne to an other thorowe all a whole region or countrye, by the replying it with a payre of compaſſes, as you maye perceaue by the rule or Skall made vppon the other ſide of the paper: and the roundles with the prickes in the middle, be myles: and the prickes meaſured betwene them, is one quarter of a myle: as enſample, for the makyng of a Tronke or Skall. Firſt, I meaſured the diſtaunce between Northfleete Church & Graueſend Church, & found the meaſure vpon the right lyne a myle and halfe a quarter: and then I made a Tronke of Skall in the card, as thus: then I toke a payre of compaſſes, and meaſured the diſtance from the croſſing of the .2. lynes of the .2. circles of the Tytle of Graueſende, and the Tytle of Northefleete: and then I finding the meaſure to be a myle and .⅛. partes of a myle, I did rebate the .8. part of a myle: and then that which did remayne was iuſt a myle: and then according to that proportion of meaſure, I made a Skall or Tronke of meaſure on the ſide of the .2. Circles, and deuided it into .4. equall parts, and euerie one of theſe parts to be one quarter of a myle, as by the demonſtration afore made, it doth appeare. Now whenſoeuer that you do deſire for to know the diſtance from any one

towne to an other,An enſample how to reply a payre of compaſſes to know the diſtance vnto any town aſſygned in any carde or Map. then take your compaſſes, and open the compaſſes to the wideneſſe betwene the .2. townes, that the one foote might ſtande vpon the one Towne and the other vpon the other. Then ſet your compaſſes to the Skall or Tronke of meaſure: there ſhall you ſee the diſtance of myles open with halfe myles and quarters of myles: as for enſample this, by certayne places afore named, which is (Clyffe Church, and the vinyarde mylle,) and the third to be Graueſende. And the vinearde mille, and Clyffe church, the one beareth from the other by a right lyne Eaſt & weſt. Clyffe Church a quarter and halfe a poynt to the Northe of the Eaſt, and the vinyard mille a quarter of a poynt to the South, of the weſt, and the diſtance betwene them by a ryght lyne, ouer the water and the land .8. myles and .⅖. partes of a myle: and Clyffe Churche beares from Graueſende, Eaſt, Northeaſt, and to the North: and the diſtance ouer the water and the lande by a ryght lyne, 4. myles and ⅙. part of a myle. Then the vinyarde mill bare from Graueſende, Weſt and by North, and part of a poynt to the North: and the diſtance to the mill from Graueſend .4. myle and .¾. partes of a myle: as by this enſample it dothe appeare. And now you knowing the diſtance vnto any place aſſygned, you may know the height of any hill, or the deepneſſe of any valley, by the order declared in the Chapter there by the Scall, or els by the degrees. &c.
                     
                        The vinyard myll.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     The .17. Chapter ſheweth vnto you how you may make a carde or mappe for any countrie, placing in it the true Longitude and the true Latitude: And alſo how for to know the true longitude and the true latitude.
                     NOw furthermore, if that you liſte, you may make a carde, & bewtify it at your pleaſure, & make it fairer, & you may drawe the longitude and the latitude of euery place, as thus: firſt, you may take the diſtance of euery Towne and Village, and Hill, or any other notable marke whatſoeuer it be, and then make a marke for the name of ſuch a Towne, according to the obſeruation that you haue obſerued afore: bothe the diſtance, and towards what coſte of the contrey the Towne doth declyne, according to the croſſing of the .2. lynes, placing in it the principal ryuers or waters: and then in the very midle of the mappe or carde make a Meridian lyne, to the intēt for to rule al the reſt of the work. And then in the margent of the card, from the South to the North,How to make a carde or pl
                              ••
                            Tipograph
                              •
                           e and to place the longitude and the latitude in it. vpon both of the edges of the mappe or card, place the latitude of the country, (that is to ſay) at how many degrees that the pole Artick is lyfted aboue your Horizon, as you may know it by your Aſtrolobe, by the altitude of the ſame vpon the Merydian lyne, knowing what declination, the Sun hath vpon that day of the moneth that you take the height of the Sunne.How to take the latitude of any place. And then if that the Sunne hath North declination, you muſt ſubſtract or pull away the Suns declination with degrees and minutes: & if South declination, you muſt adde or putte to the Sunnes declination with degrees and minutes: and then that which ſhal remayne ſhall be the altitude of the Equinoctial. Then pull that ſūme out of .90. degrees, with degrees and minuts: the remaynder ſhalbe the height of the North pole Artick aboue the Horizon.
                     And furthermore, you may know the latitude of any Towne or Countrey by the ſtarres of the South, or ſtarres of the North, knowing there iuſt declination from the Equinoctial, dooing by them as you doe by the Sunnes declination in all poyntes. And then if that they bee Northern Starres, you mu
                           •
                        t knowe the diſtaunce

from the pole, and then if that the ſtarre be aboue the pole then you muſt pull that ſūme away with degrees and minutes. And if the ſtarres at the time of your taking of them, be vnder the North pole, then put to that which is the diſtance of the ſtarre from the pole, vnto the height of the ſtarre: and that in lyke manner ſhall ſhew vnto you the true height of the North pole Artick aboue the Horizon. And then in the margine of the mappe of the Eaſt ſyde and of the weaſt ſide, you may write the latitude directly, in that Eaſt and weſt lyne of that place which you haue obſerued the latitude of the North pole: and then that being truly knowen, you may knowe the true latitude of all the townes in a whole countrie or Region, knowing the diſtance to euery towne or place, as thus. Euery .60. myles going directly South and North, doth anſwere vnto one degree.
                     And then further, if that you would place the longitude, and that you cannot get without a globe, or elſe a Carde Coſmographye, or elſe you muſt followe ſome author who hath written thereof, and bycauſe you cannot get the longitude with no inſtrument, for that the whole frame of the firmament with all the lightes therof be caryed round about in 24. houres, ſo that there remaineth no marke nor lyght that ſtandeth ſtill, but onely the two poles of the worlde: therefore I will ſhew vnto you how that you may get the longitude with a globe or Carde Coſmographye, ſo that it be truely placed in it.
                     
                        How to know the longitude.Firſt you muſt meaſure the longitude from the Meridian of the Canarie Ilands, or other wiſe called the fortunate Ilands, and ſo take the number of degrees from that place vnto any other that hath that ſame Meridian that your Towne or place hath: and that ſhalbe the number of the degrees for your place.
                     And then you hauing one place true, you may finde the iuſt longitude in a whole region or countrye.
                     But there is one ſpeciall thing to be noted, and that is this: The degrees of longitude be not ſo many myles in length as the degrees of latitude. For as thoſe places that be to the ſouth partes of thys ſyde or vnder the Equinoctiall be as longe as the degrees of latitude, ſo that to any of the 2. poles ſhorter & ſhorter,

as I haue declared in the .16. Chapter of my booke called the Regement for the Sea, as by this Enſample it doth appeare, by the Realme of Englande.
                     
                     Nowe whenſoeuer that you doo deſire to knowe the longitude and the latitude of any towne or place in a carde, after that the Mappe or Carde is drawne, then doo this: Firſt, by the enſample afore made, holde a lyne or a ſtring,How to know the longitude & the latitude in a Carde or Mappe. the Map lying flat & playne vpon a table before you. And firſt for the latitude, holde the lyne Eaſt and Weſt ryght ouer the towne and place, then by the enſample afore made, you doo ſee the latitudes be vpon the Eaſt ſide, and vpon the Weſt ſide: then by the lyne you ſhall know how many degrees and partes of degrees, the Pole is rayſed aboue the Horizon. And then in like manner for to knowe the longitude of any towne in a Mappe or Carde, then hold the lyne due South

and North right ouer the towne or place whoſe longitude you doo deſire for to know: and for to hold it due South and North, which is called your Meridian lyne, you muſt doo this: For that the degrees be ſhorter to the North partes, then they be to the Southe ſide or partes of the Mappe or Carde, therefore you muſt ſeeke the number of degrees both at the South ſide and at the Northe ſide all at one time: holding the lyne proportionable right ouer the towne: that is to ſay, halfe degree for halfe degree, and quarter for quarter, and ſo forth to the leaſt part of a degree.
                  
                  
                     The eighteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you how you may place all the principall riuers or waters truely in anye Carde or Mappe.
                     NOw furthermore, as it is ſufficiently declared before, how for to deſcribe or draw a Map or Card, for a whole region or Country, and alſo how to fynde the diſtaunce from one Towne to an other: therfore for that it is one of the ſpeciall matters, in lyke maner to drawe or deſcribe the principall ryuers or waters within a Region or Countrye into a Mappe or Carde: therefore after that you haue obſerued all the notable Townes and places worthy of memory, then yf you canne take a Boate and ſo go all the whole length of the water or riuer in the very midle betweene both the landes, and then with a Maryners Compaſſe you may ſee how that the riuer doeth trent or turne: then you hauyng the obſeruation about you, then you may knowe how long that the water doth trent by that poynt, or winde by the markes of the lande,How to place the riuers or waters in a Carde or Map whiche you haue afore obſerued: and then ſo often as the water doth turne or Compaſſe about, you ſhall ſee by your Sea mans Compaſſe, and howe muche: and ſtill you ſhall know the length by the marke vpon the ſhore.
                     And then you muſt draw a crooked lyne into the Paper that you haue noted thoſe Townes and places, in the Region where that the pryncipall places be, according to the croſſing of the 2. lynes,

in euerye place the crooked Lyne to bee made accordinge to the trentinge of the Riuer or Water, and euery treminge to bee according vnto that poynt or Wynde that the Compaſſe dyd ſhewe to you: and this being done, you may knowe the wydeneſſe of the Water by the obſeruation afore taken, and then you may draw your Plates, and ſo bewtifye it at your pleaſure, takinge the crooked Lyne from the verye middle of the Water.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧A Table of the Contents of the firſt part of this Booke called a treaſure for Trauailers.
                  FIrſt to the Reader of thys firſt part.
                  The firſte Chapter of the firſt parte conteyning the makyng of the Quadrant with the Skall, whereby you may knowe the height or lowneſſe of any thinge.
                  The Seconde Chapter is of vpright ſhadow, that is to ſaye, to knowe the heighte of all thinges taken within the length of the thinge.
                  The Thirde Chapter ſheweth howe for too knowe the heighte of anye thinge with the Skall by contrarye ſhadowe, that is to ſaye, without the length of any thinge ſo taken.
                  The Fourth Chapter ſheweth howe to take the part of any height, as the length of a window or ſuch lyke.
                  The fyfth Chapter ſheweth howe for to knowe the diſtaunce of manye thinges that is from you, and alſo whether any other Towre be higher or lower then the Tower that you be vpon.
                  The Sixte Chapter ſheweth howe for to knowe the height of a Hill, and alſo the diſtaunce vnto the top of any hyll with the Skall.
                  The Seuenthe Chapter ſheweth you by the Skall of the Aſtrolobe to knowe the true wydeneſſe of any Water, or howe farre that anye Shyppe is of from you, or to take anye great diſtaunce by layinge the Aſtrolobe flatte beefore you with the Skall vpwardes.
                  The Eight Chapter ſheweth vnto you if that you doe knowe the diſtaunce, then you maye knowe whether it bee higher grounde or lower then the place that you are

vpon, & how much, both by the partes of the Skall, and by the degrees, and alſo you may know whether that one Ship be hygher then another.
                  The ninth Chapter ſheweth the makinge of a Croſſeſtaffe that in ſome caſes is better then the Skall of the Aſtrolobe or Quadrant.
                  The tenth Chapter ſheweth how for to vſe the croſſeſtaffe, for to knowe the length of any wall or the diſtaunce betweene any 2. markes, and alſo the diſtance from you vnto any wall or marke.
                  The eleuenth Chapter ſheweth you how for to take the length of a wall when that you haue not grounde large yenough for your .2. ſtations or ſtandings.
                  The twelfe Chapter ſheweth you howe for to know the diſtaunce vnto any 2. markes, or to the 2. endes of any wall, by the extracting of the ſquare roote.
                  The thirteenth Chapter ſheweth howe for to knowe the diſtaunce vnto any marke with the Croſſeſtaffe, without the extracting of the roote, and alſo howe for to take the height of any thing with the Croſſeſtaffe.
                  The fourteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you howe that you ſhall know the diſtaunce of any ſhippe from you, and you being in another ſhippe, and both the ſhippes vnder ſayle and goyng, by the croſſe ſtaffe.
                  The fifteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you, how that you ſhall make an inſtrument whereby that you you maye deſcribe a region or countrey whiche you may call a Horizontall, and alſo howe for to take the plat of any ground.
                  The ſixteenth Chapter ſheweth you howe to make a Trounke or Skall of meaſure in a Mappe or Carde, whereby you maye knowe the diſtaunce in myles that it is from one towne to another.
                  The ſeuenteenth Chapter

ſheweth vnto you howe you may make a Carde or mappe for any countrey, placing in it the true longitude, and the true latitude, and alſo howe for to knowe the true longitude, and the true latitude.
                  The eyghteenth Chapter ſheweth vnto you, howe you may place all the principall riuers or waters truely in anye Carde or Mappe.
                  Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     The Argument of the ſeconde Booke, of the Treaſure for Trauailers.
                     The ſecond booke of the Treaſure for Trauaylers, ſhewing howe by the longitude and latitude of any Cytye, Towne or place, for to knowe the diſtance in myles vnto them, and alſo by what poynt or winde of the compaſſe they be from you. And alſo there is ſhewed in this booke, how dyuers notable Cyties, Townes or places, doe beare from the Citie of London, both in Europe, Africa, Aſia and America, with ſundry principall Ilands in the ſea, both by what diſtance they be in myles from London, and what winde or poynt of the compas they are frō Londō, & alſo theyr longeſt day, & the diuerſitie aſpect, that is to ſay, howe much the Moone ſhal chaūge rather or later, then it doth at the Cytie of London: being very neceſſary for all ſortes of traualers eyther by Sea or by Lande: Written by william Bourne.
                     
                  
                  
                     ¶To the courteous Reader.
                     
                        FRiendely Reader, there is conteyned in this ſeconde Booke, how by the longitude and the Latitude, to knowe the diſtance vnto what quarter of the worlde that anye place aſſigned is from you: that is to ſaye how many miles, (according vnto our engliſh accoumpt) and by what poynt of the Compaſſe anye Citie or Towne, or any other notable Place is from you whereſoeuer you bee, vppon the face of the whole Earth.
                     And for that the Citie of LONDON is the moſt notable, & the famouſeſt place heere in ENGLANDE, therfore

I haue thought it good, to aſſigne the Citie of London to be the place appoynted, how farre ſundrye notable Cities and Townes, and other places worthy of memorye are from the citie of Londō, both their diſtance in miles, & vnto what quarter of the world they doe beare from the Citie of London, according to their longitude and latirude, accordingly as ſundrye authors haue ſet downe their longitude and latitude: and alſo there is contayned in this ſecond Booke, the diuerſitie aſpecte, that is to ſaye, how much that the Moone ſhall change rather or later, then it doth at London, according vnto the Longitude of the places that are mentioned in this ſecond Booke: and alſo the length of the longeſt Sommer day at the places named in this ſecōd Booke, according vnto the latitudes of the places ſette downe in this ſeconde Booke. And for that there is no perſon that hath trauailed generally through the face of the whole earth, therefore they muſt needes of force folowe ſuch authours, as haue written therof, whether they be true or not: and therefore you muſt needs take thē as they be, for otherwiſe I know not how it is poſſible for to doe it, but onely to folowe the beſt and moſt Learned authors that haue written in thoſe cauſes. And yet the learned men that haue bene afore time, muſt of force folow thoſe that haue giuen vnto them the notes of the longitude and the Latitudes of any places that they haue not bene at them ſelues, whether they be true or not. And there bee a number of perſons, who if they doe fynde but a ſmall fault in any Booke, then by that meanes they will goe about to diſcredit the whole matter, often repeatinge the matter, yf they doe fynde any errour in it: as who ſhoulde ſaye, what a cunning man he is, although in all the reſt of the whole booke, hee is not able to ſay any thing thereunto. And it may bee poſſible, that hee may haue no iudgement in the reſt of the cauſes how neceſſarie ſo euer the reſt of the ſubſtance of the matter is.
                     Wherefore (gentle Readers) if you doe finde any fault in

this Booke, then gently geue me warning thereof: and if you doe amende the faultes therin contayned, then I ſhall bee the more beholding vnto you &c. For as touching the longitude and the latitude of places, men muſt credit thoſe that haue beene there, for the trueth of the matter: and yet euery man that hath bene at any place, cannot do it, for the .100. perſon that hath trauailed vnto places, is not able to take the true latitude, but much leſſe the longitude of any place. And furthermore, as touching the true diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned, that cannot bee by any one poynt of the Compaſſe, as is declared in this Booke. &c. And thus (gentle Readers) I betake you vnto the almightye God for euermore.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶The ſecond booke of the treaſure for Trauaylers.
                  
                     The firſt Chapter of the Second booke, ſhewing you how for to know the diſtance vnto any Towne vpon the face of the earth, and what is to be conſidered in the doing thereof. &c.
                     NOwe beginneth the ſecond booke, ſhewing by longitude and by latitude the dyſtance vnto any Towne, or Citie, or place vpon the face of the earth, keping one poynt or winde ouer the Sea and LANDE, although that it be not the very neareſt way, for the very neareſt way ouer the Sea and Land can not be by one poynt of the Compaſſe, except it be vpon the Meridian lyne, that is, due South or due North from you: or being vnder the Equinoctial, to be due Eaſt or Weſt. But if it be in any other place from vnder the Equinoctiall, although it be due Eaſt or Weſt,The neareſt way ouer the Sea and Land is not by any one poynt of the compaſſe. both the places to be vnder one Paralell: yet in the going due Eaſt and Weſt, is not the neareſt way ouer the Sea and Land, but the next way ouer the Sea and Lande is, by diuers wyndes or poyntes of the compaſſe: and the further frō the Equinoctial to eyther of the two poles, the greater chaunging of the poyntes of the compaſſe. For the next way ouer the Sea and the Land, vnto any place, is to goe by the great circle which is equall vnto the Equinoctiall or the Meridian circle, which will not be according vnto any one poynt of the compaſſe, but vnto dyuers: as for proofe thereof you ſhall haue this for an enſample thus:An enſample. that in the latitude of .60. degrees that there were two Townes or places in that paralell, the one being oppoſite or right againſt the other, that is .180. degrees, and a degree in that paralel doth containe .30. myles. And nowe

to goe iuſt Eaſt or Weſt in that paralel, to come vnto the place aſſigned, it is .5400 myles: as for proofe therof, multiply .180. tymes .30. but that is not the next way vnto the place aſſygned: but the next way is to goe by the Merydian lyne, that is to ſay, to goe due North, vntill you do come ryght vnder the pole, and then to goe by that Merydian, due South, tyll you haue that latitude agayne: and then it is but .3600. myles, as you may knowe by playne multiplycation, as it is from the latitude of .90. degrees, vnto the pole, to go due North .30. degrees, and from the pole, Southward agayne, other .30. degrees, that is in all .60. degrees: and then to multyply .60. tymes .60. it ſheweth the true dyſtance, which is but .3600. myles. And to goe by the paralell lyne, that is due Eaſt or Weſt, then it is .5400. myles, that is halfe ſo much more, as by playne proofe you may know. But if the two places be both vnderneth one paralel, & be ſhorter thē 180. degrees aſūder, thē it requireth to go by diuers points of the compaſſe, and not by the Meridian,The greateſt compaſſe of the earth, 21600 myles according vnto the paſſing of the great circle, which doth conteine in circumference 21600. myles, which is the greateſt compaſſe of the earth, and not according vnto moe paralels then one, which is the Equinoctial, nether vnto no one poynt of the compaſſe: for any poynt of the Compaſſe will bring you vnto the poles of the worlde, or verye neare, excepte thoſe that be pararel, which is Eaſt or Weſt,Al the points of the compaſſe wil bring you vnto the pole of the world except the Eaſt or Weſt. as all ryght lynes drawe being extended, exceptynge lynes paralell, will Croſſe the other in the ende: ſo all the poyntes of the Compaſſe doe winde vntyl they doe come vnto the poles or very neare the poles of the world, as they be all Hilicall or Spherall lynes.
                     Wherefore there is no one poynt or wynde, that can be preſcribed to be the next way by that poynt vnto any place aſſygned, but onely the Meridyan lyne or lynes: and to goe Eaſt and Weſt, then to be vnder the Equinoctiall, for the nexte way els is by ſundry poyntes of the compaſſe &c.
                     Wherefore I omitte to ſay any more thereof, but onely to ſhew vnto you, how for to know the dyſtance vnto any Towne or place ſituated vpon the lace of the whole earth, by any one aſſygned

poynte of the compaſſe, then for to knowe the true diſtaunce ouer the Sea and the lande. And I doo ſhewe it thys waye,You cannot paſſe the neareſt way for it is thorow the froſen zones. for two cauſes, the firſt is this, for that it is not poſſible to paſſe the next way, by the meanes of the frozen Zone. Wherfore it is ſuppoſed, that it is not nauigable in thoſe Seas, neyther paſſageable by lande in thoſe Countreys: and the ſeconde cauſe is this, as before is declared, in the goyng the next waye, it dooth require to goe by ſundry poyntes of the compaſſe, which woulde be but a confuſed matter, for the moſt part of thoſe perſons that doo deſire to knowe the diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned, neyther ſhall he knowe ſo readily which way it ſtandeth, or beareth from him.
                     
                        A confuſed matter to ſay a place dooth ſtand by diuers poyntes of the compaſſe.And furthermore, in the knowing the diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned, and by what poynt of the compaſſe it beareth, this is to be conſidered, that the Longitude dooth begin at the Meridian of the Cannary Iland, and ſo to follow vnto the Eaſtwardes, and ſo ending at .360. againe at the Cannary Ilandes, as I doo ſhewe in my booke called the Regiment for the Sea.
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſecond Chapter ſheweth vnto you, howe you may knowe the distaunce vnto any Towne ſituate vppon the face of the whole earth, ſo that you do
                           •
                         knowe the true Longitude and the true Latitude of them.
                     NOw furthermore, if that you doo know the Longitude and the Latitude of any towne or townes, ſituate vppon the earth, you may know the diſtaunce vnto them, as before is declared, as thus: If that the towne be iuſt Eaſt or Weſt from you, that is to ſay, that your towne or place is vnder the Paralel that the other towne is,To know the diſtance of any towne from you, if that both the places are in one Paralel. that is to ſay, that the Pole artike of that towne or place is ſo manye degrees aboue the Horizon as your towne is, both in degrees and minutes: then ſhall you ſeeke how many degrees of Longitude, the other towne dooth differ frō yours: then you ſhall ſeeke how many myles that one degree ſhal anſwere vnto it, in that paralel, and then you ſhall multiplie the

one by the other, that is to ſay, the degrees by the myles: and that ſumme which commeth of that multiplication, ſhalbe the diſtance betweene the two townes: as for enſample, thus: by the Citie of London & Anſwerpe in Brabant, which differeth but .4.An enſampl
                              •
                           . minutes in Latitude: for at London, the Pole is raiſed .51. degrees & .32. minutes, and at the Citie of Antwerpe, the Pole is raiſed .51. degrees .28. minutes, therefore we be both vnder one paralel. Now the Longitude of London is from the Cannarie Ilandes .19. degrees, and .54. minutes, and Antwerpes Longitude is .26. degrees & .36. minutes, ſo that Antwerpe ſtandeth Eaſt from London .6. degrees .42. minutes. Now muſt I know how many miles a degree conteineth in that paralel, (and of that I doo make mention in my booke called The Regiment for the Sea, in the .16. Chapter) and that I doo finde to be .37. myles to one degree. Thē I multiplie .6. times .37. becauſe that it is .6. degrees & .37. myles to one degree: and of that multiplication there commeth .222. Then there is .42. minutes more, and that .42. minutes conteineth neare .26. myles: ſo that the whole ſumme of myles from London to Antwerpe, by a right Eaſt line ouer the Sea, and the land, is .248. myles. Now furthermore, if that towne or place haue that Longitude that your towne hath, and hath another Latitude,To know the diſtance if that both the places are in one Merydian. that is to ſaye, that it dooth ſtande due South or North from you, hauing all one Meridian lyne, then muſt you looke howe manye degrees the other towne is Southe or Northe from your towne: and then you knowyng that, you maye knowe the diſtaunce to any Towne or place that ſtandeth vnderneath your Meridian, allowyng .60. myles for euery degree of Latitude, as for enſample thus: by the Citie of London, and Roane in Normandie,An enſample. which hath in manner all one Longitude, as the Citie of London hath .19. degrees .54. minutes of Longitude, as afore is declared: ſo hath the Towne of Roane .20. degrees .3. minutes, which differeth 6. myles to the Eaſtwardes of the Meridian of the Citie of London, and as it is afore rehearſed, that the latitude of London is .51. degrees and .32. minutes, the Latitude of Roane is 49. degrees and .10. minutes: ſo that Roane ſtandeth .2. degrees & .22. minutes to the Southwardes of the Citie of London.
                     
                        And then multiplie .2. tymes .60 which maketh .120. and then there is .22. minutes more, then that commeth to .22. myles, ſo that .120. myles, and .22. myles, maketh in al .142. myles, the diſtance betweene the Citie of London and Roane, 
                           •
                        uer the ſea & land, by a ryght lyne betweene them. Now furthermore, if ſo be that any towne or countrie hath an other longitude and an other latitude, then yours hath, then to knewe the diſtance betweene thē, you muſt woorke thus: Firſt, looke what latitude that your towne hath, and then looke the latitude of the other towne that you woulde knowe the diſtance vnto,Howe to know the diſtance, if that both the places doth differ both in longitude and in latitude, that is to ſay, yt is neither vnder your parallel nor Meridian. then that being knowne, you muſt ſeeke the longitude of the other towne howe muche it doeth differ from yours: then looke howe many myles of the latitude wyl anſweare to one degree: then that number beyng multiplied, the number of degrees by the myles, and that ſheweth howe many myles that it is from the Meridian of your towne to the Meridian of the other towne. Then the other towne hath an other latitude then yours hath, and if the towne bee to the Northwardes of your towne, then the degrees of that paralell, ſhall bee ſhorter then the degrees of your paralell, and if the latitude of the towne bee to the South partes of your towne, then ſhal the degrees of the parallel be longer then the degrees of the parallel of your towne. Then in like manner as you haue multiplied the number of myles by the degrees of your towne, ſo in like manner you ſhall ſeeke howe many myles wyll annſweare vnto one degree in that parallel: Then multiplye the degrees by the myles, and it wyll ſhewe vnto you the diſtaunce of myles from the other towne too the Meridian of your towne: then the diſtance of the Southermoſt towne, from the Meridian, is moe myles then the other towne is.
                     Therefore you ſhal adde or pull both your nūbers together, and then take halfe that for your Eaſt and Weſt line, then ſhall you multyply the number of myles in it ſelfe, and keepe it in memorye: then you knowing the number of myles of Latitude, that the one Towne doth differ from the other, then in lyke maner you ſhall multyply that number in it ſelfe, then the multiplycation of

both the numbers you ſhall adde together, then you ſhall by extraction of Rootes, ſeeke the ſquare Roote 
                           •
                         that being knowne, ſhall be the iuſt diſtaunce by that poynte or right Lyne ouer the Sea and the Lande, from the one Towne to the other: as for enſample thus:
                     By the Citie of London,An Enſample by Hieruſalem and the Citie of London. and the Citie of Hieruſalem nowe being deſtroyed, whiche was ſomtime the moſt famous Citie on earth, and the Latitude of London, as afore is declared, beinge 51. degrees 32. minutes, and euery degree of our paralell is 37. myles: and the Latitude of Hieruſalem is 31. degrees, and 22. minutes, then for euery degree in that paralell, ſhall be 51. myles. Then I knowing the Longtitude of the Citie of London for to bee 19. degrees and 54. minutes, then I doe ſeeke the Langtitude of Hieruſalem, and I finde it for to bee 65. degrees, and 45. mynutes. Then I doo pull away 19 degrees 54. minutes, out of 65. degrees 45. minutes, and then remayneth 45. degrees 51. mynutes, and ſo many degrees and minutes is Hieruſalem Eaſte from the Citie of London. Then firſt I doe multiply the miles in a degree of our paralell, as this: beinge 45. degrees and 37. miles to one degree. Therefore I doe multiply the one by the other, that is 45. times 37. and of that multiplycation commeth 1665. then 51. minutes more, and that commeth neare vnto 32. miles: then put 32. vnto 1665. that maketh 1697. and ſo manye miles it is from the Citie of London vnto the Meridian lyne of Hieruſalem.
                     And now you muſt multiplye the number of degrees into myles for the latitude of Hieruſalem, whiche is 51. myles to one degree in that paralel, and the degrees be in number 45. degrees 51. minutes: Therfore I doe multyplye 45. by 51. and of that multyplycation there commeth 2295. Then there is 51. minutes more, and that commeth neare vnto 44. miles: and put 44. vnto 2295. and that maketh 2339. and ſo manye myles it is betweene Hieruſalem and the Meridian lyne of the Citie of London. Then this being done, I doe adde both the numbers together, that is to ſay, the number of miles in the paralel of London betweene both

the Meridians, the one being .1697. and the other for to be 2339. then addynge both theſe numbers together, maketh 4036. then take halfe that number for your true Eaſt and Weſt lyne, whiche wyll be 2018. myles: then I doe ſeeke the diuerſitie beeweene the 2. paralels as thus.
                     The pole artick of London is rayſed 51. degrees and 32. mynutes, and the pole artick of Hieruſalem is rayſed 31. degrees and 22. minutes. Then I doe ſubſtract 31. degrees 22. mynutes, out of 51. degrees 32. minutes, the remainder is 20. degrees 10. minutes: then I doe multiplye the number of degrees by myles, 60. miles to one degree, becauſe that they bee degrees of Latitude, thus .20. times 60. & of that multiplication commeth .1200. and then there is 10. mynutes more, and thoſe 10. minutes commeth to 10. miles: ſo that the whole ſumme of myles from the paralel of London to the paralel of Hieruſalem, is 1210. myles. And now for to fynde the true diſtance ouer the Sea and the land by a poynt or lyne: you muſt doe thus by the exctactions of rootes. Fyrſt, you muſt multiplye the Longitude and the number of myles in it ſelfe, as it is afore rehearſed: the halfe of the miles of the diſtaunce betweene the 2. Meridians of both the Latitudes added together, that is to ſaye, as afore is rehearſed .2018. times 2018. and of that there commeth 4072324. Then multiplye the diſtaunce betweene the 2. paralels in it ſelfe, that is to ſaye, 1210. times 1210. & of that multyplycation there commeth .1264100. Then I muſt adde or put both theſe nūbers together, and theſe 2. numbers being both together,From Hieruſ
                              •
                           
                           lem vnto London 2352. myles. and 25 26. are 5536424. This beinge done, you muſt extract the ſquare roote of this number, and the ſquare roote of 5536424. maketh 2352. And 4520/4704. parte, and that doeth contayne in myles from Hieruſalem to London by a right lyne ouer the Sea and the Land 2352 miles, and neare 25/26. partes of a myle, the iuſt diſtaunce betweene Hieruſalem and the Citie of London.A ſecond Enſample by Venice and London. So that the longitudes and the latituds be true.
                     Yet furthermore, for your better Enſample, by the Citie of Venice, as the longitude of London is 19. degrees and 54. minutes, the longitude of Venice is 35. degrees 30. minutes. Therefore

ſubſtract or draw 19 degrees 54. minutes out of 35. degrees .30. minutes, the reſidue ſhalbe 15. degrees, 36. minutes. Then Venice is 15. degrees .36. minutes, to the Eaſtwarde of London, then the latitude of London being 51. degrees and 32. minutes, the latitude of Venice is 44. degrees and 45. minutes. Then take 44. degrees 45. minutes out of 51. degrees 32. minutes, the remnaunt ſhall be 6. degrees 47. minutes. So that Venice is 6. degrees 47. minutes to the South part of London. Then you ſhall multiply the number of degrees of longitude into miles, and fyrſt for the paralell of London, as afore is declared .37. myles to one degree: and the degrees of longitude being .15. degrees .36. mynutes, you ſhall multiplye 15. times 37. and that commeth to 555. Then there is 36. minutes more, and that commeth to 22. miles more. Then put .22. vnto .555. and that maketh .577. myles, the diſtaunce betweene London, and the Meridian of Venice. Then you muſt ſeeke how many miles wyll anſwer to one degree in the paralel of Venice, that commeth to 43. miles to a degree. Then multiply the degres of longitude by the number of miles in that paralel, that is 15. times 43. and that commeth to 645 then the 36 minutes more commeth vnto neare 26. miles.
                     Then put .26. vnto .645. and that maketh .671. ſo that it is .671. miles from Venice vnto the Meridian of London. Then put both theſe numbers together, that is to ſay, the diſtaunce betweene the Meridian of London and the Meridian of Venice, in the paralell of London, and the paralell of Venice, the one beinge 577. myles, and the other 671. miles: and thoſe 2. numbers being both together, maketh 1246.
                     Then take halfe that number for your Eaſt and Weſt line, & that commeth vnto 623. And now I doe conclude, that Venice is Eaſt from London 623. miles. Then you muſt multiplye the degrees of latitude into miles 60. myles to one degree, and the Latitude of Venice being 6. degrees to the South parte of London: therfore I multiply .6. times .60. and that commeth vnto .360, then there is 47. minutes more, and that maketh .47. miles: then put 47. vnto 360. then it wyll be 407.
                     
                        This being done, multiplye the myles of longitude in it ſelfe, as 623. times 623. and that commeth vnto 388129. Then multyplye the latitude in it ſelfe, that is to ſay, 407. times 407. and that commeth vnto 165649. then adde or put both theſe numbers together, that is to ſaye, 388129. and 165649. and that maketh 553778. And now you muſt ſeeke the ſquare roote of both theſe nū
                        bers added together by extracting of rootes, & that wil be 744 & 
                           •
                        2/744. part, and that it is neare ⅙. part of a myle. So I doe conclude that the diſtaunce from Venice to London, by a right lyne ouer the Sea and Lande, is 744. myles, and ⅙. part of a myle: ſo that the longitude and the latitude be truly taken.
                     And thus may you doe by all other Townes and places ſituate vpon the face of the whole earth, whether that the diſtaunce bee much or litle: ſo that you may knowe the true longitude and the true latitude, and ſo reſort to the true length of the Paralel as afore is declared.
                  
                  
                     The thirde Chapter ſheweth how for to knowe vnto what quarter of the World any place doth ſtande from you, that is to ſaye, by what poynte of the Compaſſe, you knowinge the true Longitude and the true Latitude &c.
                     
                        ANd furthermore, you knowinge the true longitude and the true latitude of any Towne vpon the face of the whole earth, then you may know vnto what quarter of the worlde it doth beare or ſtand from you: that is to ſay, by what poynt of the Compaſſe, as this: If athat any two places haue both one longitude, that is to ſay, one Meridyan line, & hath an other latitude, that is to ſay, that the North pole is raiſed more degrees then yours is, then it is North from you: if fewe degrees, then that beareth South from you.
                     
                        And alſo if that it hath your longitude, and haue the South pole,North or South. aboue the Horizon, then in lyke manner the place is due South from you &c. And furthermore, if any two places haue all one latitude, and hath another longitude, being both in one paralel, and if that it haue more degrees in longitude, then your towne hath, then that Citie, towne or place, is vnto the Eaſtwardes of you. If fewer degrees in longitude, then your Towne hath,Eaſt or Weſt. then it is Weſt, from your Citie, Towne, or place, as in the Chapter going before is declared. If that it be more degrees in longitude then your Citie, Towne, or place hath, by .180. degrees, then that place is Weſt from you, although both the places haue one latitude, that is to ſay, in one paralell. And then to knowe how many myles, you muſt firſt note the degrees of longitude that it hath from the Meridian of the Canary Ilande:Note. and then rebate that out of .360. and then adde or put vnto that number of the longitude of your owne place: and ſo multiply the number of myles in that paralel, & that ſhall ſhew vnto you the nūber of myles, that the Citie, Towne, or place is vnto the Weſtwarde of your place, and the reaſon thereof is this, for that the circumference of the earth is to goe from the Eaſt vnto the Weſt, is .360. degrees: and halfe that number is .180. degrees. And then if that it be more degrees then it is Weſtwardes from you,360. degrees is the Compaſſe of the earth. and if that it be but iuſte 180. degrees, then it is oppoſyte or ryght againſt your place that is neither Eaſt nor Weſt, nor no poynt of the compaſſe els, if that both the places were vnder the Equinoctiall, or els if that the one haue the North pole, and the other haue the South pole, both of one altitude, or heyght aboue the Horizon. For then the one ſhould be Antipodies the one vnto the other, that is to ſay,What Antipedies are, that goe foote vnto foote▪
                         the one to goe foote vnto the foote of the other, the one of the one ſide of earth, and the other on the other ſide of the whole earth, & to haue the whole thicknes of the earth betweene them. &c. And furthermore for to knowe by what other poynt or wynde of the Compaſſe that any place dooth bears, then that is thus knowne: the two townes or places to differ both in longitude and in latitude, then as in the Chapter going before is declared, it is knowen, by this order following. If that it haue fewer degrees in longitude then

your place hath, and fewer degrees in latitude in lyke manner, then it is according vnto the degrees, and eſpecially vnto the number of myles, as thus: If the place be ſhorte in longitude, and alſo in latitude, and both in lyke quantitie, that is to ſay, in the iuſt number of myles, that it bee no more myles from the Meridyan of the two places then that it is from the paralell of the two places,In the Southweſt quarter. then that place is Southweſt from you iuſt. And furthermore, if that the diſtaunce in myles betweene the two paralelles be .5. times the diſtance between the two Meridians, then that place is South and by Weſt. And furthermore if the diſtance in miles, between the two paralelles of any place aſſigned, be two times & a halfe ſo many myles, that is to ſay, ⅖. part of the diſtāce between the two Meridians, thē that place is Southweſt frō your places. And if that the diſtance between the two Meridians be .3. quarters of the nūbers of myles between the two paralelles, then that place is Southweſt & by South from your place. And if that the diſtance between the two paralels, be but .3. quarters of the nūber of miles between the two Meridiās, thē that place is Southweſt & by Weſt from your place. &c. And furthermore, if that the nūber of miles between the two paralelles be but .⅖. partes of the number of miles between the two Meridians, than that place is Weſt Southweſt frō your place. And furthermore, if the diſtance between the two paralels of any place aſſigned, be but the .5. parte of the nūber of miles between the two Meridians, that is to ſay, that the nūber of miles be .5. times that nūber of miles betweene the two paralelles, thē that place is Weſt & by South from your place. &c.
                     And furthermore, if that any Cities, townes, or places, bee more degrees in longitude thē your Cities townes or place is, & fewer degrees in latitude, thē al thoſe places ſhalbe in the Southeaſt corner, as al the other before reherſed, were in the Southweſt corner,In the Southeaſt quartes. as thus: The degrees multiplied into myles, both the longitude & the latitude, as in the chapter goyng before is rehearſed, then if that the nūber of miles of the diſtance between the two parallels be equal vnto the nūber of miles between the two Meridians, thē that place ſhalbe iuſt Southeaſt frō your place. And furthermore,

if that the diſtāce of miles betwen the two Meridiās, be but the .5. part of the nūber of miles between the two paralelles, then that place is South & by Eaſt frō your citie, towne, or place. &c. And if to .5. partes, that is to ſay, that the nūber of myles between the two paralelles is more then the nūber of miles betwene the two Meridians, by double & halfe ſo much more, thē that place is South, Southeaſt frō your place. &c. And furthermore, if that the nūber of miles between the two Meridians be but .3. quarters of the nūber of miles between the two paralelles, thē that place is Southeaſt & by South frō your place. &c. But if that the nūber of miles between the two paralelles be but .3. quarters of the nūber of miles between the two Meridians, thē that place is Southeaſt & by Eaſt frō your place. &c. And if that the number of miles between the two paralelles be but .⅖. parts of the nūber of myles betwen the two Meridiās, thē that place is eaſt, Southeaſt frō your Citie, towne, or place: &c. If but .⅕. part of the nūber of miles between the two Meridians, then that place is Eaſt and by South from your place. &c. And furthermore, if that any place be more degrees in longitude, & alſo in latitude, then your place is, then thoſe Cities townes or places are in the Northeaſt quarter.In the Northeaſt quarter. And (as before is rehearſed) if that the nūbers of myles, be equall both betweene the two paralelles, & the two Meridians, thē that place is Northeaſt from you. And alſo if that the number of miles between the two Meridians be but the .5. part of the nūber of miles between the two paralelles, then that place is North & by Eaſt: if ⅖. parts, then North Northeaſt: if ¾. then Northeaſt & by North. &c. And if the number of miles betweene the two Meridians bee more then the number of myles between the two paralelles, that is to ſay, the number of myles to be but .⅓. part, then that place is Eaſt and by North: if .⅖. partes, then Eaſt Northeaſt: if .¾. then Northeaſt and by Eaſt from your place. &c. And furthermore, if any place hath more degrees in latitude and fewer degrees in longitude then your place, then thoſe places be in the Northweſt quarter.In the Northweſt quarter, And (as before is rehearſed) if the number of myles bee equall both betweene the Merydians and the parallelles, then that is but Northweſt: and if the number of myles be leſſe

betweene the Meridians, then it is betweene the paralelles, then (as before is ſayde) if it be but .⅕. parte, then it is Northe and by Weſt: if .⅖. partes, North Northweſt. If .
                           •
                        /4. partes, Northweſt and by North. But if it be not ſo many myles betweene the two paralelles, as it is betweene the two Meridians, if .⅕. partes, that place is Weſt and by North: if .⅖. partes, Weſt Northweſt: if ¾.An enſample by Rome and London. then Northweſt and by Weſt frō your place. &c. And for your better inſtruction, you ſhal haue enſample by the Citie of London and Rome: and as before is declared, in the Chapter goyng before, that the latitude of London is .51. degrees .32. minutes, and the longitude .19. degrees .54. minutes, and the latitude of Rome 42 degrees iuſt, and the longitude .36. degrees .40 minutes. And (as in the Chapter goyng before is ſhewed) in the knowing of the diſtaunce is to rebate the leſſe from the more: wherefore 
                           •
                        ebate the longitude of London out to of the longitude of Rome, as thus: Rome being .36. degrees 40 minutes, in longitude: ſo London is .19. degrees .54. minutes. So that there is .16. degrees .46. minutes, betweene the Meridians of Rome and London. &c. And the latitude of London beyng .51. degrees .32. minutes; the latitude of Rome is .42. degrees iuſt. Wherfore rebate .42. degrees iuſt, from .51. degrees .32. minutes: then .9. degrees .32. minutes remaineth: ſo that there is iuſt .9. degrees .32. minutes betweene the two paralelles. And now to knowe by what poynt of the Compaſſe, doo this: Rome is to the Eaſt wardes of London .16. degrees .46. mi. for that it is more degrees in longitude. Wherfore you moſt ſeeke howe many myles that it is, firſt in your paralell, and heere at London .37. myles dooth anſwere vnto one degree: therefore multiply .16. times .37. and that commeth vnto .592. and then there is .46. minutes more, and that commeth vnto .28. miles, and better. Then put .28. vnto .592. and that maketh .620. ſo that you may conclude that it is .620. myles from London vnto the Meridian of Rome in the paralel of London. And nowe the latitude of Rome is .42. degrees, and then .44. myles maketh a degree in that paralel. Wherefore multiply .16. times .44. and that maketh .704. and then there is .46. minutes more, and that maketh .33. myles and better. Wherefore adde .33. vnto .704. & there

it will be .737. ſo that you may conclude that it is from Rome vnto the Meridian of London .737. myles. Wherefore adde or put both theſe two numbers toge
                           •
                        her, that is to ſay, 620. and .737. and that maketh .1357. And nowe take halfe this number, and that will ſhewe vnto you howe many myles that Rome is to the Eaſtwardes of London, and that is .678. myles and a halfe: and nowe there is .9. degrees .32. minutes betweene the two paralelles, and 60 myles make a degree. Therefore multiply .9. times .60. and that maketh .540. and then take .32. myles more for the .32. minutes, & .32▪ put vnto .540. maketh .572. ſo that Rome is .572. miles vnto the Southwardes of London, and nowe for that Rome is more degrees in longitude then London, and fewer degrees in latitude then London, therefore then Rome muſt needes be in the Southeaſt quarter: and to knowe iuſt by what poynt, then looke what both the numbers be, as thus: Rome is vnto the Eaſtwards of London 678. myles and ½. and vnto the Southwardes of London .572 myles, then vewing the two numbers .572. is more then ¾. of 678. Therefore you may conclude, that Rome dooth ſtande from London, Southeaſt and by Eaſt, and ſomewhat declinyng or leaning more vnto the Southwardes: and if that the numbers had been equall, then it had been due Southeaſt. &c. And to knowe howe many myles by that poynt of the Compaſſe, that is ſhewed in the Chapter goyng before, and by this order you ſhall kn
                           •
                        w by what poynt of the Compaſſe that any place dooth beare from you. &c.
                  
                  
                     ¶The fourth Chapter ſheweth the Longitude and the Latitude, and by what poynt of the Compaſſe, that ſundrye places within England and Scotland, and Ireland, and alſo of certayne Ilandes, neere vnto them, dooth beare from the Citie of London, and what diſtaunce of miles that they are from London, by the poynt of the Compaſſe ouer the water and ouer the lande. And alſo there is ſhewed howe muche that the Moone ſhall chaunge, rather or later then it dooth at London, and

alſo it dooth ſhewe the length of the longeſt Sommers day, for as many places as be named.
                     
                        NOwe furthermore, in ſo muche as I haue ſhewed vnto you how by the longitude and by the latitude, you maye knowe by what poynt of the Compaſſe that any place aſſygned beareth from you, and alſo at anye place aſſygned for to knowe the diſtance by that poynt of the compaſſe, that is to ſay, howe many myles that it is from you: ſo in like manner I thinke it good for to ſhewe the longitude and the latitude of ſundry principall places vpon the face of the whole earth, according vnto diuers Authours that haue written thereof, and alſo for that the Citie of London is the principall and moſt famous place here in England,London is the principalleſt and the moſt famous place of England. I will declare or ſhew vnto you, by what poynt of the Compaſſe that any of thoſe places doo beare or declyne vnto, from the Citie of London, and alſo howe many myles by that poynt ouer the Sea and London by that ryght lyne or poynt of the compaſſe. And alſo I doo thinke it good for to ſhewe vnto you the diuerſitie aſpect of all thoſe places by the Citie of London,The diuerſitie aſpect at London. that is to ſay, howe much that the Moone ſhall chaunge rather or later then that it ſhall doo at the Citie of London, whereby maye be knowne the time of any Eclipſe eyther of the Moone or Sunne, and alſo the aſpectes of the Moone with the other planets, you knowing at what houre or tyme that it wyll happen or be at London.
                     And alſo I doo thinke it good for to ſhewe vnto you the length of the longeſt Sommer day in all thoſe places that ſhall be named accordyng vnto the longitude and latitude,The length of the day. and then the length of the ſhorteſt Wynter daye is ſoone knowne: and the daye is ment to bee, from the Sunne ryſing vnto the Sunne ſetting. For the latitude of places dooth alter the length of the daye, and the longitude dooth alter the tymes of the Eclipſes eyther of the

Sunne or of the Moone, wyth all the other aſpectes, that the Moone hath with the Sunne or any other of the Planets. &c.
                     And nowe ſhall followe the longitude and latitude and the other things before rehearſed, of certaine places, and firſt for England, and Scotlande, and Ireland, with ſome Ilandes belonging thereunto.
                     And for that London is the aſſigned place the longitude therof from the Canarie Ilande beyng 19 degrees 54. minutes,London the aſſigned place. and the latitude or eleuation of the Pole beyng 51. degrees 32 minutes:S Michaelmount in Cornwall. and firſt this S. Michaels muount in Cornewall hath longitude .14. degrees .20. minutes, and latitude 30. degrees 40. minutes, and is Weſt and by South from the Citie of London .210. miles, and the Moone ſhal chaunge rather then at London by .25. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .16. houres .20. minutes long. &c.
                     Doner in Kent, the longitude .21. degrees .15. minutes,Doner in Kent. the Latitude .51. degrees .20. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South from the Citie of London .49. myles, and the Moone ſhall chaunge later then at London .5. minutes, and the longeſt day in Sommer is .16. houres .25. minutes. &c.
                     Barwick, the Northermoſt part of England,Barwick. ſtanding vpō the edge of Scotland, the longitude .20. degrees .24. minutes, the latitude .55. degrees .58. minutes, and is North and a little declining vnto the Eaſtwardes .267. miles, and the Moone ſhall chaunge l
                           •
                        t
                           •
                        r then it doth at London .2. minutes: and the longeſt Sommer day is .17. houres .24. minutes long. &c.
                     The Citie of Yorke hath longitude .20. degrees,The citie of Yorke. and latitude 54. degrees .2. minutes, and is in manner due North from the Citie of London .150. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .7/5. part of a minute, and the longeſt Sommer day is neere 17. houres long. &c.
                     Carlell in Cumberland, the longitude .17. degrees .48. minuts,Carlell. the latitude .55. degrees .2. minutes, and is Northe, Northweſt, 224. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then it doth at London .9. minutes, and the longeſt daye in Sommer is .17. houres long. &c.
                     
                        
                        Edenborowe in Scotland.Edenborowe in Scotlande, the longitude is .19. degrees .50. minutes, and the latitude is .57. degrees iuſt, and is due Northe from the Citie of London .328. miles, and the Moone chaungeth neere about that time that it doth at London, and the length of the longeſt Sommer day is .17. houres .40. minutes long.
                     
                        Catnes poynt.Catnes poynt the Northermoſt part of Scotland, the longitude .20. degrees the latitude 62. degrees, and is in manner due Northe from the Citie of London .628. myles, and the Moone chaungeth neere about that time that it dooth at London, and the longeſt Sommer day is 19 houres .25. minutes.
                     
                        The Southweſt part of Ireland.The Southweſt parte of Irelande hath longitude .6. degrees, and latitude 52 degrees, and is Weſt and ſomewhat vnto the Northward from the Citie of London .518. myles, & the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .55. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .16. houres .30. minutes.
                     
                        The Northpart of Irelande.The Northermoſtpart of Ireland hath longitude 13. degrees, and latitude .58. degrees 10. minutes, and is▪ Northweſt and by North, & to the Northwardes 462. miles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .27. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .17. houres .55. minutes.
                     
                        The citie of Deuelinge.The Citie of Deuelyng in Irelande, hath longitude .12. degrees .40. minutes, and latitude 54. degrees .40. minutes, and is Northweſt and by Weſt .296. miles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .29. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .17. houres .15. minutes long.
                     
                        Sainct Patrikes porcatorye.Saint Patrickes Porcatorie hath longitude .8. degrees .42. minutes, and latitude .56. degrees .50 minutes, and is Northweſt and by Weſt .415. myles, and the Moone dooth chaunge rather then at London .45. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is 17. houres and .4. minutes long.
                     
                        The Ile of Man.The Ile of Man hath longitude .15. degrees, and Latitude 56. degrees .4. minutes, and is Northe Northweſt, and ſomewhat declyning vnto the Weſt .358. myles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London by .20. minuts, and the longeſt Sommer day is, 17. houres 30. minutes.
                     
                        The Ilandes called Sylley, hath longitude .12. degrees .24.The Ilandes called Silley. minutes, and the Latitude 50. degrees 54. minutes, and is Weſt and by South from the Citie of London .278. myles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .30. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is 16. howres long 20. minutes. &c.
                  
                  
                     The fifth Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other thinges before rehearſed of certaine of the principalleſt places in Europe, as in Spaine and Portugal, and Fraunce, and Italie and Germanie. &c.
                     
                        ANd now ſhall folow the longitude and the latitude with the other thinges before rehearſed, of Europa, as Portugall, Spayne and France, and Italy, and Germany. &c.
                     And firſt Lyſhborne in Portugal:Lyſhborne in Portugall. and that hath longitude 5. degrees, and latitude 38. degrees 50. minutes, and is South Southweſt 985. myles, and the Moone ſhall chaunge. rather then at the Citie of London neare an howre, and the longeſt Summer day is 14. howres 45. minutes.
                     Cape Saint Vincent in Portugall, the longitude .4. degrees 58.Cape Sainct Vincent. minutes, the latitude 35. degrees 36. minutes, & is South Southweſt .1092. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London, one howre: and the longeſt Sū
                        mer daye is .14. howres .30. minutes. &c.
                     Cape Saint Mary, the longitude is 5. degrees .10. minutes,Cape Sainct Mary. the latitude .36. degrees .45. minutes, and is South Southweſt 1089. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .58. minutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is .14. howres 30. minutes. &c.
                     Cape Fineſter in Galeza, the longitude 4. degrees 50. minuts,Cape Fineſter. the latitude .43. degrees .10. minutes, and is Southweſt and by

South .788. miles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London one howre, and the longeſt Summers day is .15. howres 20. minutes.
                     
                        Bayone.Bayone in Galeza, the longitude is 5. degrees 40. minutes, the Latitude .42. degrees .40. minutes, and is Southweſt and by South 800. myles from the Citie of London, & the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 57. minutes.
                     
                        S. Iames.Sainct Iames of Compoſtella, the longitude 7. degrees, the latitude 42. degrees 15. minutes, and is Southweſt and by South 810. miles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .56. minutes, and the longeſt Summers day is 15. howres 4. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Bylbow.Bylbow in Byſley, the longitude .11. degres .45. minutes, the latitude .43. degrees .35. minutes, and is South Southweſt .578. myles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then it doth at London .33. mynutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is .15. howres .30. minutes long.
                     
                        S. Sebaſtins in Byſkey.S. Sebaſtians in Byſkey, the longitude is 15. degrees, the latitude .43. degrees, 30 minutes, and is South and by Weſt .572. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 18. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is 15. Howres 30. minutes.
                     
                        Tolledo in Caſtell.Tolledo in Caſtell, the longitude 10. degrees .49. minutes, the latitude 37. degrees, and is South and by Weſt 934. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 36. minutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is 14. howres .36. minutes &c.
                     
                        The Citie of Ciuell.The Citie of Ciuell in Andelazia, the longitude 7. degrees, the latitude 38. degrees .5. minutes, and is South & by weſt .950. myles, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 52. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is 14. howres 40 minutes.
                     
                        Gibaraltarre.Gibaraltarre, the longitude .7. degrees .30 minutes, the latitude 36. degrees 4. minutes, and is South and by Weſt 1066. miles from London, and the Moone changeth rather then at London 49. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is 14. howres .25. minutes.
                     
                        Granmaliga, hath longitude 8. degrees .50. minutes,Granmaliga the latitude 37. degrees 30. minutes, and is South and by Weſt 960. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at LONDON .35. mynutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is .14. howres .4. mynutes.
                     The Citie of Granado hath longitude .9. degrees .5. minutes,Granado. and latitude .38. degrees .20. minutes, and is South and by Weſt .911. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 45. minutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is 14. howres 43. minutes.
                     Burdeux in Fraunce, the longitude .17. degrees .54. minutes,Burdeux in Fraunce. the Latitude 45. degrees .45. minutes, and is South and ſomewhat to the Weſt 36. myles from London, and the Moone changeth rather then at London .8. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is .15. howres 25. minutes.
                     Paris in Fraunce, the longitude is 23. degrees .30. minutes,Paris in Fraunce. the latitude is 48. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southeaſt, .215. myles, and the moone chaungeth later then at London .13. minutes, and the longeſt Summer daye is .15. howres .57. mynutes.
                     Roane in Normandye, the longitude 20. degrees 30. minutes,Roane. the latitude .49. degrees .10. minutes, and is South and a litle to the Eaſt 142. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later a lytle then at London, and the longeſt Summer daye is .16. howres 4. mynutes. &c.
                     Calyce in Fraunce, the longitude .22. degrees .15. minutes,Calice. the latitude .51. degrees .15. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 86. myles from the Citie of London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 9. minutes, and the longeſt Summer day is 16. howres 25. minutes.
                     Brydges in Flaunders, hath longitude .24. degrees .30.Bridge
                              •
                            in Flaunders. mynutes, the latitude .51. degrees 20. mynutes, and is Eaſt .162. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later then at LONDON 16. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is .16. howres .16. minutes. &c.
                     
                        
                        Gaunt.Gaunt in Flaunders, the longitude .25. degrees .30. minutes, the latitude 51. degrees 15. minuts, and is Eaſt 209 miles, the moone chaungeth later then at London 20 minutes, and the longeſt day is 16. howres 13. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Midleborow.Midleborow in Walkerlande, one of the Ilandes of Zelande, the longitude 25. degrees 26. minutes, the latitude 51. degrees 48. minutes, and is Eaſt 205. miles, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 20. minutes, and the longeſt day is 16. howres 30 minutes, &c.
                     
                        Antwerpe in Braband.Antwerpe in Braband, the longitude is .26. degrees 36. mynutes, and the latitude 51. degrees 28. minutes, and is Eaſt, and ſomwhat bending vnto the South 248. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 24. minutes, and the longeſt Summers day is 16. howres 28. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Amſterdam in Holland.Amſterdam in Holland, the longitude 27. degrees 5. minutes, the latitude .52. degrees .20. minutes, and is Eaſt and by North 266. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 28. minutes, and the Longeſt day is .16. howres .40. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Lucke.Lucke, the longitude 29. degrees .30 minutes, the latitude 50. degrees, and is Eaſt 333. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 30. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 16. howres &c.
                     
                        Gulder.The citie of Gulder in Gulderlande, the longitude 27. degrees 48. minutes, the latitude 51. degrees .42. minutes, and is Eaſt 296. myles, the Moone chaungeth later then at London .28. minutes, and the longeſt day is 16. howres 30. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Cleue.Cleue in Cleueland, the longitude is .28. degrees .6. minutes, the latitude is 52. degrees, and is Eaſt 303 miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .32. minutes, and the longeſt day is 16. howres 30. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Collyne.Colline hath longitude 29. degrees 45. minutes, the latitude 52. degrees, & is Eaſt and by North 360. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 39. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 16. howres 34. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Citie of Mentz in high Germanye, the longitude .31. degrees 15. minuts, the latitude 50. degrees, and is Eaſt 420. miles,The Citie of Mentz. and the moone chaungeth later then at London .45. minutes, the longeſt day is 16. howres 25. minutes. &c.
                     The Citie of Spiers, the longitude 31. degrees 30. minutes,Spiers. he latitude 49. degrees .15. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 430. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then it doeth at London .46. minutes, and the Longeſt day is .16. howres 2. minutes. &c.
                     The citie of Strawſborow, the longitude 30. degrees 15.Strawſbrow. mynutes, the latitude .48. degrees .45. minutes, and is Eaſt and by ſouth, and to the ſouth .432. myles frō Londō, the Moone changeth later then at London .41. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 16. howres .0. minutes. &c.
                     Franckforde, the longitude .31. degrees .40. minutes,Francford
                              •
                           . the latitude .50. degrees, 10. minutes, and is eaſt & to the ſouth a litle, .448. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 47. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 16. howres 15. mynutes. c&.
                     The Citie of Prage, the longitude .38. degrees 20. minutes,Prage. the latitude .50. degrees, 6. minutes, & is Eaſt and a lytle to the ſouth 700. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 1. howre 14. minutes, and the longeſt day is .16. howres .15. minutes. &c.
                     The Towne of Hambrough, the longitude 34. degrees,Hambrough. the latitude is 54. degrees, 30. minutes, and is Eaſt Northeaſt & to North .538. miles from London, and the Moone ſhall chaunge later then at London .56. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .18. howres iuſte, &c.
                     Elſon More in Denmarke, the longitude .32. degrees .30.Elſon in Denmark. minutes, the Latitude .58. degrees 20 minutes, and is Northeaſt 577. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .50. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 18. howres 0. minutes. &c.
                     The North Cape, whiche is the Northermoſt parte of all Norwaye, hath longitude .39. degrees .30. minutes, and latitude

.71. degrees 20. minutes, and is North Northeaſt 1308. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 1. howre 15. minutes, and the Sunne ſetteth not in the time of .78. dayes and nightes, that is 10. Weekes, when our dayes bee at the longeſt: and in lyke manner the Sunne wyll not riſe in the tyme of .78. dayes and nyghtes in Winter in lyke manner. &c.
                     
                        Iſeland.Iſelande vnder the King of Denmarke, an Iland, the myddle of it hath longitude 7. degrees, the latitude 65. degrees .30. minutes, and is North Northweſt, 930. myles from LONDON, and the Moone Chaungeth rather then at London .52. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 21. howres 44. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Citie of Rome.The Citie of Rome in Italye, the longitude is 36. degrees 40. minutes, the latitude 42. degrees, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt, 887. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .1. howre .7. mynutes, and the longeſt day is .15. howres .4. minutes.
                     
                        Florance.The Citie of Florance, the longitude is 34. degrees 15. minuts, the latitude 24. degrees .45. minutes, and ſtandeth from London Southeaſt a ly
                           •
                        le vnto the Eaſtwardes 802. myles, and the Moone chaungeth later .57. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .15. howres 10. minutes.
                     
                        Piſa.Piſa, the longitude .33 degrees, the latitude is 42. degrees 15 minutes, and is Southeaſt 741. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 53. mynutes & the longeſt daye is 15. howres 6. minutes.
                     
                        
                           
                              ••
                           nice.The Citie of Venice, the longitude is .35. degrees .30. minutes, the Latitude .44. degrees .45. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt and too the Southwardes, 744. myles from LONDON, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 1. howre 3. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 15. howres 20. minutes.
                     
                        Millayne.The Citie of Myllayne, the longitude is .31. degrees .45. minutes, the latitude 44. degrees 15. mynutes, and is Southeaſt

and ſomewhat to the Eaſtwarde 645. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London .48. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. howres 22. minutes.
                     The Citie of Naples, the longitude is 38. degrees,The Citie of Naples. 50. mynutes, the latitude is 39. degrees .55. minutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt 1051. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 1. howre 16. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. howres 50. minutes.
                     The Citie of Philippos in the kyngdome of Macedonia, the longitude 50. degrees 45. minuts, the latitude is .41. degrees,Philippos in the kingdome of Macedonia. 45 minutes, & is Eaſt Southeaſt 1395. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. howres 3. minutes, and the longeſt day is .15. howres .10. minutes. &c.
                     Conſtantinople that is now the Turkes, the longitude is 56. degrees, the latitude is .43. degrees .5. minutes,Conſtantinople that is the ſeate of the Turk
                              •
                           . and is eaſt Southeaſt 1547. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. howres 24. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 15. howres 15. mynutes. &c.
                     Athens, that hath bene ſometime a famous Citie, but now deſtroyed the longitude 52. degrees 43 mynutes, the latitude .37.Athens. degrees, 15. minutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt .1624. myles frō Londō, the Moone changeth later then at London 2. howres 11. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 14. howres .40. minutes. &c.
                     Danſwicke, latelye vnder the Kinge of Polonia, hath longitude .46. degrees, and latitude .54. degrees .55. minutes,Danſwick. and is Eaſt Northeaſt 961. miles from LONDON, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 1. howre .44. mynutes, and the longeſt day is ſeuenteene howres fyue minutes. &c.
                     The kingdome of Swethen,The kingdome of Swethen. the mydle thereof hath longitude 42. degrees, and Latitude .64. degrees, and is Northeaſt from London 1040. myles, and the Moone chanugeth later then at London.
                     
                        .1. howre .28. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .20. howres .30. minutes &c.
                     
                        The Citie of Muſcouia in Roſey.The Citie of Muſcouia in Roſey, hath longitude 69. degrees, the latitude 57. degrees, and is Eaſt and by North 1747. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London, 3. howres .16. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 17. howres .40. minutes. &c.
                     And thus I ende the diſcription of the Cities and Townes of Europe.
                  
                  
                     The Sixt Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other things before rehearſed, of certayne of the principalleſt places of Africa, and of certayne Ilandes nearer thereunto.
                     
                        AND now ſhall folowe the longitude and the latitude, and the thing
                           •
                        s before rehearſed, of ſome of the Cities and Townes, and Ilandes of Afryca.
                     
                        Morocus in Barbary.And fyrſte, the Citie of Morocus in Barbary, the longitude 5. degrees 5. minutes, the latitude 30. degrees 4. minutes, and is South Southweſt and ſomewhat in the Weſtwardes 1449. miles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London .59. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. howres.
                     
                        S. Cruce rode.S. Cruce Rode, the longitude 2. degrees, the latitude .30. degrees, and is South Southweſt and to the Weſtwards 1440 myles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London .1. howre, and the longeſt Summer daye is .14. howres. &c.
                     
                        Feſſe.The Citie of Feſſe, the longitude .10. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees, and is South Southweſt 1365. myles from London, & the moone changeth rather then at London 39. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. howres.
                     
                        Tangie is a holde that the King of Portugall keepeth in Barbarie, and hath longitude 6. degrees 30. minutes,Tangie. and latitude .35. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southweſt .1113. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London .53. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .14. houres .25. minutes.
                     Abilles, a Hill commonly called Cappe Hill,Abilles. ryght againſt Iuberaltare, and is one of Hercules pyllers, the longitude .7. degrees, the latitude .35. degrees 40. minutes, and is South Southweſt .1116. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 52. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres .25. minutes.
                     Argeyll, the longitude .18. degrees, the latitude .37. degrees,Argeyll. and is South .872. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London, and the longeſt day is houres minutes. &c.
                     Alexandria in Egipt, the longitude .60. degrees, 30. minutes,Alexandria in Egipt. the latitude .31. degrees, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt .2169. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .2. houres 42. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres. &c.
                     The mouth of Nilus that emptieth himſelfe in Mari Mediterraneo, the longitude .62. degrees,The mouth of Nilus. the latitude .31. degrees 30.. minutes, Southeaſt and by Eaſt .2200. myles from London, the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 48. minutes, and the longeſt day is, 14. houres 8. minutes. &c.
                     The North ende of the Red Sea next vnto the middle earthe Sea, the longitude 64. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees,The North ende of the Red Sea. and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt .2345. myles from London, & the Moone chaungeth later .2. houres .56. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres .0. minutes. &c.
                     Cape Deuaca in Ginney, the longitude 2. degrees .20.Cape Deua
                              ••
                            in Ginney. minutes, the latitude .14 degrees .50. minutes, and is South Southweſt .2426. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 1. houre 10. minutes, and the longeſt daye is but 12. houres 50. minutes.
                     
                        
                        The Caſtle Demine.The Caſtle Demine, a holde that the King of Portugall doth keep in Ginney, the longitude 24. degrees, the latitude .2. degrees 30. minutes, and is South, a lyttle to the Eaſtwardes 2940. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London, 16. minutes, and the longeſt day is .12. houres 20. minutes.
                     
                        The mouth of the Ryuer of Bynney.The Mouthe of the Ryuer of Bynney, the longitude .32. degrees, the latitude .5. degrees, and is South and by Eaſt, and to the Eaſtwardes 2885. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 48. minutes, and the longeſt day is .12. houres .20. minutes.
                     
                        Cappe boon Sperance.Cappe boon Sperance, the Southermoſt parte of all Ethiopia, hath longitude .52. degrees, & latitude .35. degrees, 10. minutes, & is of the South pole called the pole Antartike beyond the Equinoctiall, and is South and by Eaſt, and to the Eaſtwardes 5382. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .2. houres 8. minutes, and their longeſt Sommer daye is in our Wynter, and is 14. houres long 20. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Goia.Goia, a Citie in Ethiopia, the longitude is .60. degrees, 50. minutes, the latitude hath the South Pole eleuated 19. degrees 50. minutes, and is South Southeaſt .4685. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .2. houres 3. minutes, and the longeſt dayes are in our Wynter, and that is 13. houres 15. minutes.
                     
                        Garma.Garma, another Citie in Ethiopia, and hath longitude .57. degrees, and the South Pole is 24. degrees aboue the Horizon, and is South Southeaſt .4528. myles from London, the Moone chaūgeth later then at London by 2. houres 28. minutes, and their longeſt daye is as before is ſayde, contrarie vnto ours, beyng 13. houres 30. minutes long. &c.
                     
                        The great Ilande of S, Laurence.The great Ilande of Saynt Laurence, on the Eaſt ſide of Ethiopia beyonde Cape boon Sperance, hath longitude 85. degrees 30. minutes, and the South Pole is eleuated 20. degrees in the myddle of the Ilande, and is Southeaſt and

by South 5249. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 4. houres .20. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .13. houres .15. minutes in our Wynter. &c.
                     The Ilande of Saynt Thomas, hath longitude 30.The Iland of S. Thomas. degrees .30. minutes, and no latitude: for that the myddle therof is ryght vnder the Equinoctiall, and is Southe and ſomewhat to the Eaſt wardes .3696. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .42. minutes, and the daye is continually alwayes .12. houres longe, neyther more nor leſſe, what declination ſoeuer that the Sunne hath. &c.
                     The Ilandes of Cape Deuarde, hath Longitude 356.The Ilandes of Cappe Deuade. degrees, the latitude .16. degrees among the myddle of them, and is South Southweſt .2465. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 1. houre .36. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer daye is but 13. houres 0. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilandes called the Canaries,The Canary Ilandes. and the byggeſt Ilande called the Grand Canarie, hath no longitude, for that it is the aſſygned place to begyn the Longitude: the latitude 28. degrees 30. minuts, and is Southe Southweſt .1914. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 1. houre 20. minutes, and the longeſt day is .13. houres 24. minutes, and is derectlye vnder the Tropicke of Cancer. &c.
                     The byggeſt Ilande of the Madera, hath longitude 358.The Madera Ilandes. degrees 40. minutes, for that it is more Weſterly then the Grand Canarie, where that the Longitude begynneth by one degree and 20. minutes, the Latitude is .29. degrees and .30. minutes, and is Southweſt and by South .1625. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London 1. houre 25. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .13. houres .54. minutes. &c.
                     And thus I do end the deſcription of the Cities, Townes, and Ilandes of Africa.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The ſeuenth Chapter ſheweth the Longitude, and the Latitude, and the other things before rehearſed of certaine of the principallest places of Aſia and in the East India. &c.
                     ANd now ſhall followe the longitude and the latitude, and all the other things before rehearſed, of certaine of the Cities and Townes and other places of Aſia as followeth.
                     
                        Claudiopoles.And firſt of Claudiopolis in the countrey of Pontus and Bethania, where S. Luke wrate the Goſpel, and the Actes of the Apoſtles, the longitude .59. degrees .30. minutes, the latitude .42. degrees 45. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 1697. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 38. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. houres 8. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Nicea.Nicea where Nicea Counſell was, the longitude 58. degrees, the latitude 42. degrees 15. minuts, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 1668. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 32. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. houres 6. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Troy.Troy that was deſtroyed, the longitude 55. degrees 50. minutes, the latitude 41. degrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .1605. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 24. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .15. houres .0. minutes. &c,
                     
                        Epheſus.Epheſus where Saint Iohn wrate the Goſpell, the longitude 57. degrees 40. minutes, the latitude 37. degrees 40. minuts, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the South partes 1808. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 30. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 40. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Tralus.Tralus, the longitude is 58. degrees 40. minutes, the latitude 38. degrees .50. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the South partes 1797. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 34. mnutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 44. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Philadelphia.Philadelphia in Bothlydias, the longitude 59. degrees, the latitude 38. degrees 50. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the

Southwardes 1816. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 36. minuts, & the longeſt day is 14. houres 44. minutes. &c.
                     Olimpus a Citie in Lycia, the longitude 61. degrees 30.Olimpus. minutes, the latitude 36. degrees 10. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt a lyttle to the South 1993. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 46. minuts, and the longeſt day is 14 houres 30. minutes. &c.
                     Pompeiopolis a Citie of Galatia, and builded by Pompey,Pompeiopolis. the longitude .62. degrees, the latitude 42. degrees, and is Eaſt, Southeaſt 1814. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 2. houres 48. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. houres 10. minutes. &c.
                     Olbia in Pamphllia, the longitude .62 degrees,Olbia. the latitude 36. degrees .55. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .1989. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 48. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. houres .36. minutes. &c.
                     Pargamus in the Countrey of Doris, the longitude .57.Pargamus degrees .35. minutes, the Latitude .39. degrees .45. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .1709.. myles from London and the Moone chaungeth later .2. houres .30. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres 54. minutes. &c.
                     Ceſaria in Capadocia, the longitude .66. degrees .30.Ceſaria. minutes, the latitude .39. degrees .30. minutes: and is Eaſte Southeaſt .2064. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .3. houres .6. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres .50. minutes. &c.
                     Nicopolis in Armenia the leſſe, the longitude .69.Nicopolis. degrees 20. minutes, the latitude .41. degrees .40. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .2129. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later .3. houres .18. minutes, and the longeſt day is .15. houres .3. minutes. &c.
                     Antiochia in Cilicia, the longitude .64. degrees 40. minutes,Antiochia. the latitude .36. degrees 50. minutes. & is Eaſt Southeaſt .2078.

myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 2. houres 58. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14 houres 33. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Geldia.Geldia in Albania parte of great Tartarie, the longitude 83. degrees, the latitude .46. degrees 30. minutes, and is Eaſt and to the Southwardes 2458. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 4. houres 12. minutes, and the longeſt day is .15. houres 40. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Bola.Bola in Armenia the greater, the longitude 76. degrees 10. minutes, the latitude 44.. degrees, and is Eaſt and by South 2294. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 3. houres 45. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. houres 20. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Alexandria in Siria.Alexandria in Siria, the longitude 69. degrees 30. mynutes, the latitude 36. degrees 10. minutes, & is Eaſt Southeaſt 2277. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 3. houres 18. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 30. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Tripolis in Phenicia.Tripolis in Phenicia, the longitude 67. degrees 30. minutes, the latitude 34. degrees 20. minuts, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the Southwardes 2314. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 3. houres 10. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres, 20. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Barut.Barut, and is the Porte of Damaſcus, the longitude 76. degrees, the latitude 33. degrees 20. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the Southwardes 2321. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 3. houres 8. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 15. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Antiochia.Antiochia the Mount Taurus, the countrie of S. Luke, the longitude 69. degrees, the latitude 35. degrees 30. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 2319. myles frō London, and the Moone chaū
                        geth later then at London 3. houres 16. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 26. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Damaſcus.Damaſcus, 
                           •
                        ere Caine ſleine his brother Abel, the longitude 69. degrees, the latitude 33. degrees, & is Eaſt Southeaſt and to

the Southwardes 2404. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 3. houres 16. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 15. minutes. &c.
                     Porte Iaſſa or Ioppa, the longitude 65. degrees 45. minutes,Port Iaſſa. the latitude .31. degrees 55. minutes, and is Southeaſt, and by Eaſt and to the Eaſtwardes 2338. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 3. houres .2. mynutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres .6. minutes. &c.
                     The deade Seas or lake of Sodome, the longitude 66.The Lake of Sodom. degrees 50. mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees 10. mynutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt and to the Eaſtwardes .2404. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 3. houres 8. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres 4. minutes. &c.
                     Bethſaida in Galilea, the longitude 57. degrees 5.Bethſaida. mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees 15. mynutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt .2039. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 2. houres 29. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 6. mynutes. &c.
                     Nicopolis in Samaria, the longitude 66. degrees 50.Nicopolis. mynutes, the latitude 31. degrees .50. mi. and is Southeaſt, and by Eaſt and to the Eaſtwardes .2382. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 3. houres 8. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is 14. houres 10. minutes. &c.
                     Hieruſalem in Iudea,Hieruſalem ſometyme the famous Citie on the earth, but nowe deſtroyed by Titus, in the tyme of Vaſpatian the Emperour of Rome, the longitude 65. degrees 45. minutes, the latitude 31. degrees 22. mynutes, and is Southeaſt, and by Eaſt, and to the Eaſtwardes 2352. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 3. houres 3. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 8. minutes. &c.
                     Charan in Meſopotamia, where as Abraham dwelled,Charan in Meſopotamia the longitude 73. degrees 45. mynutes, the latitude 36. degrees, 10. mynutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .2466. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 3. houres 36. minutes, and the longeſt day .14. houres 30. minutes.
                     
                        
                        Babilon.Babilon where the Towne of Babel was, the longitude is 79. degrees, the latitude .35. degrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, 2724. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 3. houres .56. mynutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres .25. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Erupa in Arabia.Erupa in Arabia, the longitude .72. degrees 30. mynutes, the latitude 30. degrees 15. mynutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt and to the Southwardes .2641. myles from London, and the Moone changeth later by 3. houres 30. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. houres 56, minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Red Sea.The Red Sea, the place whych Moyſes and the Children of Iſraell went through, the longitude 63. degrees 30. mynutes. the latitude 29, degrees 50. mynutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt 2336. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later 2. houres 54. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. houres 56. mynutes. &c.
                     
                        Mount Synai or Mount Oreb.Mount Synai or mount Oreb, where that Moyſes receyue
                           •
                         the ten Commaundementes, the longitude 64. degrees, the latitude 30. degrees, and is Southeaſt, and by Eaſt 2344. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London, by 2. houres 58. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is 13. houres 58. minutes. &c.
                     
                        Michia.Michia in Arabia, where is the Sepulchre of the falſe Prophet Mahomet, the longitude 72. degrees 15. minutes, the latitude 23. degrees, and is Southeaſt, and by Eaſt, and to the Eaſt wardes 2954. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 3. houres 29. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. houres 25. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Citie of Niniuie.The Citie of Niniuie in Aſſiria where as Ionas the Prophet was ſent, the longitude 78. degrees, the latitude 36. dedegrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .2635. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 3. houres 52. minutes and the longeſt day .14. houre
                           •
                         30. minutes.
                     
                        Aſia.Aſia a Citie in Suſana, the longitude .80. degrees 10.

minutes, the latitude 31. degrees 40. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeſt 2923. myles from London, & the moone chaungeth later by 4. howres 1. minute, and the longeſt daye is 14. howres 8. minutes.
                     Arima in Perſia, the longitude 87. degrees, 45. minutes,Arima. the latitude 33. degrees 50. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .3108. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by .4. howres .31. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 4. howres .15. minutes. &c.
                     Alca in Media, the longitude is 86. degrees 15. minutes, the Latitude .41. degrees, and is Eaſt and South 2791. myles from London, & the Moone chaungeth later by 4 howres 25. minuts, and the longeſt day is 15. howres.
                     The Caſpian Sea, the longitude of the midle thereof is .90.The Caſpian Sea. degrees, the latitude of the midle therof is .45. degrees, 30. minutes, and is Eaſt and to the Southwards .2788. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London by 4. howres 40. minutes, and their longeſt daye is .15. Howres 30. minutes.
                     Arges in Carmania, the longitude .96. degrees .30. minutes,Arges. the latitude .23. degrees .30. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 3917. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by .5. howres 6. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is .13. howres .25. minutes, &c.
                     The Citie of Hecatompilon in Parthia, whiche hath .100.Hecatompilon. gates, the longitude 93. degrees .20. minutes, the latitude 37. degrees, 50. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 3714. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .5. howres .6. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. howres .38. minutes. &c.
                     Harcan in Hircania, the longitude .7. degrees 30 minuts,Harcan. the latitude .40. degrees .30. minutes, and is 
                           •
                        aſt and by South 3332. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London by 5. howres .14. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. howres .50. minutes.
                     Sena in Margiana, the longitude .102. degrees .30. minuts,Sena. the latitude .42. degrees .20. minutes, and is neare Eaſt and

by South .3430. myles from London, & the Moone chaungeth later by 5. howres 30. minutes, and the Longeſt day is .15. howres 8. minutes.
                     
                        Chomara.Chomara in Bactriana, the longitude .106. degrees, the latitude 40. degrees, and is Eaſt and by South 3635. myles from London, & the moone changeth later by 5. howres, 45. mynutes, and the longeſt day is 14. howres .50. minutes.
                     
                        Prepſa.Prepſa in Sogdiana, the longitude 130. degrees, the latitude .45. degrees, and is Eaſt and to the Southwardes, 4389. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 7. howres 20. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .15. howres 30. mynutes &c.
                     
                        Aſpabora.Aſpabora in Scithia within the mount Emaus, the longitude 102. degrees, the latitude 44. degrees, and is Eaſt and by ſouth, 3311 myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 5. howres 28. minutes, and the longeſt day is 15. howres 20. mynutes.
                     
                        Iſſedon.Iſſedon in Seythia, without the mount Emaus in 
                           •
                        hatay, and vnder the Great Chane Emperour of Tartaria, the longitude 150. degrees, the latitude 48. degrees .30. minutes, and is Eaſt and a lytle to the Southwardes 5008. miles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 8. howres 40 minutes, and the longeſt daye is .15. howres 56. minutes.
                     
                        Iſadon.Iſadon in Serica, the longitude 162. degrees, the latitude 45 degrees, and is Eaſt and too the Southwardes 5622. myles from the Citie of London, and in this Countrye of Serica, breed the Sylk Wormes, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London .9. howres 28. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .15. howres 30. minutes &c.
                     
                        Alexandria maria·Alexandria Maria, the longitude 110. degrees, the latitude .36. degrees, and is Eaſt and by South 3937. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 6. howres iuſt, and the longeſt daye is 14 howres 30. minutes.
                     
                        Aſta in Drangiana, the longitude .107. degrees .30. minutes,Aſta. the latitude 30. degrees, 40. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, 4087. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by .5. howres .50. minutes, the longeſt daye is .14. howres iuſte &c.
                     Cuni in Gegroſia, the longitude .110. degrees,Cuni. the latitude 23 degrees 50. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .4461. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 6. howres, the longeſt daye is 13. howres 30. mynutes.
                     Bardaxima in India within the riuer of Ganges,Bardaxima. the longitude .113. degrees, 40. minutes, he latitude .20. degrees 40. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 4735 myles from London, and the moone chaūgeth later by 6. howres 15. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. howres 15. minutes.
                     Calicute the moſt famous Citie of marchandize in all India,Calicute. the longitude .112. degrees, the latitude .5. degrees, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt and to the Eaſtwards .5224. miles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by .6. howres .8. minutes, and the longeſt daye is but .12. howres .20. minutes. &c.
                     Polibotra in Perſia, the longitude 143. degrees,Polibotra. the latitude 27. degrees, and is Eaſt and by South and too the Southwardes 5710, myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by .8. howres 12. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 13. howres .45. mynutes.
                     Pentapolis in India without Ganges, the longitude .150.Pentapolis. degrees, the latitude .18. degrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 6337. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 8. howres .40. minutes, the longeſt daye is .13. howres .10. minutes. &c.
                     
                        
                        Thagora.Thagora in India without Ganges, the longitude 168.. degrees, the latitude 6. degrees, and is Eaſt South Eaſt 7680. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 9. howres 52. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 12. howres .20. mynutes,
                     
                        Ciamfa.Weſt Ciamfa in Chatay, the longitude .188. degrees, the latitude .37. degrees .15. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 7205. myles from London, and the Moone changeth later then at London .11. howres .43. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. howres 36. minutes.
                     
                        Quinſay.Quinſay, the greateſt Citie in the whole World, in Chatay, and vnderneth the Great Chaine Lord of the Eaſt and South Indians, the longitude .192. degrees, the latitude .37. degrees 40. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South .7272. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by 11. howres .28. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. howres .38. minutes &c.
                     
                        G
                              •
                           iten.G
                           •
                        iten in the Eaſt India, in the Prouince of China, the longitude .183. degrees, and is neare vnto the South Sea, the latitude 25. degrees 15. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 7312. myles from London, & the moone chaūgeth 
                           〈◊〉
                         then at Londō by 11. howres 12. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. howres 35. minutes.
                     
                        Ciamfa.Eaſt Ciamfa, the longitude .97. degrees, the latitude .32. degrees 5. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South, 7787. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later then at London by .11. howres 48. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 14. howres 10. mynutes.
                     
                        Tangury.Tangury in Mugi, the longitude .178. degrees, 15. minutes, the latitude 31. degrees, & is Eaſt & to the Southwards, 6980. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by .10. howres .28. minutes, & the longeſt day is 14. howres 5. minutes.
                     
                        Thebet.The Prouince of Thebet, in whiche the great Chaine Lord of the Eaſt and South Indians hath his Courte, and all the Kinges of India are vnder hym, the longitude is 168. degrees,

the latitude .3. degrees .20. minutes, and is Eaſte Southeaſt 7670. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 9. howres 44. minuts, and the longeſt daye is but 12. howres 10. minutes.
                     Cyamba, in this place they vſe Coral in the ſteede of money,Ciamba and haue great plenty of moſt ſortes of Spices, the longitude 199. degrees 10 minuts, the latitude .25. degrees .30. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South 7980. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by .11. howres .48. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. howres .36. minutes.
                     Barnia in the South India, the longitude .202. degrees .40.Barnia. minutes, the latitude .11. degrees .40. minutes, and is Weſt and by South 8824. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather by .11. howres 52. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is 12. howres.
                     Nar in Moaber, the Inhabitants doe worſhip Oxen,Nar. the longitude 196. degrees, the latitude hath the ſouth pole 20. degrees, 10. minutes, and is Southeaſt and a litle to the Eaſtwardes 8512. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 11. howres .44. minutes, and the longeſt daye is in our Winter, and is 13. howres .15. minutes. &c.
                     Malaqua, the longitude is 189. degrees,Malaqua. the Latitude of the South pole is 15. degrees .30. minutes, & is Southeaſt and by Eaſt 8781. myles from London, & the Moone chaungeth rather by 11. howres 16. minuts, and the longeſt daye is 12. howres 56. minutes.
                     In the Kingdome of Lace there is a Citie called Lace,Lace. the longitude is .166. degrees 30. minutes, the latitude is 21. degrees, 40. minutes, and is Eaſt and by South .7047. myles from the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London by 9. howres 44. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .13. howres 24. minutes.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The eyght Chapter ſheweth the Longitude, and the Latitude, and the other things before rehearſed, of certaine of the principallest places of America or the weſt Indies, that hath been founde within theſe 100. yeares, and not knowen vnto the olde writers.
                     ANd now ſhal folow the longitude, & the latitude, & al the other thinges before rehearſed of certayne Cities,The Streighte of Magellenos the ſouthermoſt part of all America. & other notable places of America. And fyrſt the Streightes of Magellenos the Southermoſt parte of all America, the Longitude .305. degrees, the Latitude is the Pole Antartick, or South Pole .25. degrees .30. mynutes, and is South Southweſt, and too the Weſtwardes, and beyonde the Equinoctiall 7224. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London by .5. howres .0. minutes, and the longeſt Summer daye with them is our ſhorteſt Winter daye, for that the pole Antartick or ſouth pole is aboue the Horizon, and is .16. howres .36. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The great Riuer of Platte.The great riuer of Plate, the longitude 327. degrees, the latitude is the South pole 35. degrees, and is South Southweſt 5685. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London by .3. howres 32. minutes, and their longeſt ſummer day is in our winter. & is 14. howres .30. mynuts long.
                     
                        Cappe Cruſos the Eaſtermoſt part of America.Cappe Cruſos the Eaſtermoſt part of all America, & is cōmonly called the coſt of Braſell, the longitude 345. degrees, the latitude 5. degrees of the ſouth pole, and is South Southweſt 3792 myles frō London, & the Moone changeth rather then at Londō 2. houres 20. mi. the lōgeſt day is about .12. houres .30. minuts.
                     
                        Cappe de Planco.Cappe de planco, the longitude .306. degrees, the latitude 5. degrees, & is ſouthweſt and by Weſt 4547. myles from Londō, and the Moone changeth rather 4. howres .56. minutes, and the longeſt daye is about 12. howres 20. minutes &c.
                     
                        Cappe Sainct Marthae.Cappe S. Marthae, the lōgitude .284. degrees, the latitude 12. degrees, and is weſt ſouthweſt & to the ſouthwards 5103. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather by 60. howres 24. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 12 howres 45. minutes.
                     
                        Carthagena, the longitude .282. degrees, the latitude 10.Carthagena degrees .15. minutes, and is Weſt Southweſt and to the South 5316. myles from London, & the moone changeth rather by .6. howres, 32. mynutes, and the longeſt day is 12. howres .38. minutes.
                     Nomber de Deus, the longitude 276. degrees, the latitude 7. degrees, and is Weſt Southweſt 5685. myles from London,Nomber de Deus. and the moone chaungeth rather by 6. howres 56. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .12. howres 25. mynutes &c.
                     The great & famous Citie of Mexico, the principalleſt place in all America, the longitude .238. degrees, the latitude .21.The Citie of Mexico. degrees 30. minutes, and is Weſt and by ſouth, 6844. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London by 9. howres 28. minutes, and the longeſt day is 13. howres 20. mynutes.
                     The riuer of Palme in Floryda, the longitude 260. degrees,The riuer of Palme in Floryda. the latitude 39. degrees .20. minutes, and is Weſt and to the Southwardes 5034. miles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London by 8. howres .0. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 14. howres 45. minutes.
                     The Cape of Cerra Floryda, the longitude .272. degrees,The Cape of terra Florida. the latitude 31. degrees, and is Weſt and by Southe .4935. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather by 7. howres .12. minutes, & the longeſt daye is .14. howres .6 minutes. &c.
                     Perru in America, the longitude .290 degrees,Perru. the latitude hath the South pole 5. degrees, and is Southweſt and by Weſt .5528. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth rather then at London 6. howres 0. minutes, and their longeſt daye is but .12. howres .20. mynutes.
                     Pannama, a Towne or Citie vppon the Sea Coaſte of Mare de Sur or South ſea, the longitude .276. degrees,The porte of Pannama. the latitude .20. degrees 40. minutes, and is Southweſt and by Weſt, and to the Weſtwardes 5794 myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather by 6. howres 56. minutes, and the longeſt day is 12. howres 15. minutes.
                     
                        
                        Tumbes.Tumbes, a Port in the Prouince of Peru, vpon the coſt of the South Sea, the longitude 276. degrees, the latitud 12. degrees of the Antartick pole, and is Southweſt and by Weſt 6045. myles from Londō, and the moone chaūgeth rather by 6 howres 56 minutes, and the longeſt day is but .12. howres 15. minutes in our Winter.
                     
                        Baculaius. or new founde Land.Baculaius is on the Northeaſt ende of America, commonlye called the new founde Lande, the longitude of the midle of them is 320. degrees, the latitude of the midle thereof is .54. degrees, and is Weſt and to the North partes .2200. myles from London, & the moone chaungeth rather by 3. howres .59. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 16. howres 58. minutes.
                     
                        The land of Labrador.The Lande of Labrador, the longitude of the Eaſtermoſt Cape is 320 degrees, the latitude thereof 63. degrees, and the moone chaungeth rather by 3. howres 95. minutes, and is Weſt Northweſt and to the Northwardes .2768. myles from London, and the longeſt day is 20. howres 0. minutes longe.
                     And thus I doe ende the diſcription of the may
                           •
                        e, or firme land of America. &c.
                  
                  
                     The ninth Chapter ſheweth the Longitude and the Latitude, and the other thinges before hearſed of certayne of the moſt principalle Ilands of Europe, within the midle earth Sea, and alſo of the moſte principalle Ilands of Aſia and America.
                     ANd now ſhall folow the longitude and the latitude, and the other thinges before rehearſed, of Certayne of the moſt notableſt Ilands of all Aſia and America, and alſo of Europe: and fyrſt of certayne of the moſt principall Ilands in the midle earth Sea.
                     
                        The Iland of Cicilia.And fyrſt, the Iland of Cicilia, being the principalleſt Iland in all that Seas, the midle therof hath longitude 37. degrees, the latitude 36. degrees, and is Southeaſt and by South 1178. miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 1. howre .8. minutes, and their longeſt daye is 14. howres .30. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Ilande of Corſica, the myddle thereof hath longitude 31.The Iland of Corſica. degrees, the latitude 40. degrees, & is Southeaſt and by South. 829. myles from London, and the moone chaungeth later by .44. minuts, and their longeſt day is 14. houres 50. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilande of Sardinia, the myddle hath longitude 31.The Iland of Sardinia. degrees, the latitude 38. degrees, and is South Southeaſt, and to the Eaſtwardes .932. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 44. minutes, and their longeſt day is .14. houres 40. minutes long. &c.
                     The Ilande of Maiorica, the myddle hath longitude .17.The Iland of Maiorica. degrees, the latitude 38. degrees 30. mynutes, and is South and a little to the Weſtwardes .792. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather by 12. minutes, and the longeſt day is 14. houres 43. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilande of Minorica, the longitude .20 degrees,,The Iland of Minorica. the latitude 39. degrees, and is due South .752. myles from London, & the Moone chaungeth at that tyme that it dooth at London, and the longeſt daye is .14. houres .45. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilande of Candie, the longitude .55. degrees,The Iland of Candy. the latitude 35. degrees .20. minutes, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt, and to the Eaſtwardes 1791.. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London by 2. houres .20. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres .25. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilands of Nigropant, the longitude .54. degrees,The Ilands of Nigropant. the latitude 38. degrees, and is Eaſt South and to the Southwardes 1643. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 2. houres .16. minutes, and the longeſt day is .14. houres .40. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilandes called Ciclades,The Ilāds called Cyclades. the myddle of them hath longitude .56. degrees 10. minutes, the latitude .37. degrees .20. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, and to the Southwardes 1545. miles from London, and the longeſt day is 14. houres .35. minutes, and the Moone chaungeth later 2. houres 24. minutes.. &c.
                     The Ilande of Ciprus, the longitude .65. degrees 30.The Ilande of Ciprus. minutes, the latitude .35. degrees 10. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt. 2190 miles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 3.

houres 2. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. houres 20. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Ilande of Scoyra.The Ilande of Scoyra, the longitude 86. degrees, the latitude 12. degrees, and is Southeaſt and by Eaſt .3958. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 4. houres 24. minuts, and the longeſt day is 12. houres 45. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Ilande of Ormoſa.Ormoſa is an Ilande in the narrowe Perſicke Seas, and hath longitude 99. degrees, the latitude .19. degrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 4070. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 5. houres 4. minutes, and the longeſt day is .13. houres 12. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The great Iland of Tabrobannu.The great Ilande called Tabrobannu lying in the Eaſt Orean, the longitude 151. degrees, the myddle thereof hath no latitude for that it is directly vnder the Equinoctiall, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 7065. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London 8. houres 44. minutes, and the daye is continuall 12. houres in length. &c.
                     
                        The Iland of great Iaua.The Ilande of the greater Iaua, the longitude 179. degrees, the latitude hath the South pole Antarticke 7. degrees 30. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt, & a lyttle to the South .8486. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 10. houres 36. minutes, and the longeſt day is but 12. houres 20. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Iland of the leſſer Iaua.The Ilande of the leſſer Iaua, hath longitude 188. degrees, and no lattitude for that it is vnder the Equinoctiall, and is Eaſt Southeaſt 8715. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later by 11. houres 12. minutes, and the daye is alwayes 12. houres long. &c.
                     
                        The Ilande of Berno.The Ilande of Berno, hath Longitude 178. degrees, the latitude is of the South pole, and is .2. degrees .30. minutes, and is Eaſt Southeaſt .8320. miles from London, & the Moone chaungeth later by 10. houres 32. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 12. houres 8. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Ilands of Molucke.The Ilandes of Molucke that lye in the Southe Sea called Mare de Sur, the longitude 193. degrees, the latitude 9. degrees, and is Eaſt Southeaſt and a little to the Eaſtwards 8688. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London

by 11. houres 32. minutes, and the longeſt day is but 12. houres 35. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilande of Gelilo the greateſt Ilande of al the Maiucke,The Iland of Gelilo. and hath longitude 204. degrees, the myddle thereof hath no latitude for that it is directly vnder the Equinoctiall, and is Weſt, Southweſt 9078. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London, for that it is vnto the weſtwardes, and is becauſe that it is more to the Eaſtwardes of London, then 180 degrees which is more then halfe the Circumference of the two paralelles, that is to ſay, the paralell of London, & the paralell of the Ilande beyng the Equinoctiall,Gelilo is near
                              •
                            Antipode
                              •
                            vnto London. and if that it had the Southe Pole eleuated 51. degrees and a halfe, then it had been neare Antipodes vnto the Citie of London, and the Moone chaungeth rather 11. houres .44. mynutes, and the longeſt day is but 12. houres long. &c.
                     The Ilande of Iapan neare the coaſt of China,The Iland of Iapan. the longitude 198. degrees, the latitude 32. degrees, and is Eaſt and by South 7919. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth later then at London by 11. houres 52. minutes, and the longeſt Sommer day is .14. houres 10. minutes. &c.
                     The Ilande of Stipango, the longitude 200. degrees 30.The Iland of Stipango. mynutes, the latitude 50. degrees, and is Weſt from the Citie of London, for that it is more then .180. degrees vnto the Eaſtwardes, therefore the ſhorteſt waye is vnto the Weſtwardes, and is 6668. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather then at London by 11. houres 58. minutes, and the longeſt day is 16. houres 4. mynutes. &c.
                     Cuba,The Iland of Cuba. one of the byggeſt Ilandes in the Weſt Indies in the great Bay of America, and the myddle thereof hath Longitude .275. degrees, the latitude .23. degree .30. minutes, the verye myddle of the Ilande that is directly vnder the Tropicke of Cancer, and is Weſt Southweſt .5114. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather 5. houres 0. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is .13. houres 26. minutes. &c.
                     
                        
                        The Iland called Hiſpaniola.The great Ilande called Hiſpanyola neare Cuba, the myddle thereof hath longitude 285. degrees, and the latitude is 20. degrees in the myddle thereof, and is Weſt Southweſt, and ſomewhat to the Southe .4805. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather by .6. houres .20. minutes, and the longeſt daye is 13. houres 15. minutes.
                     
                        Saint Iohns Ilande.Saint Iohns Ilande, the Longitude of the myddle thereof is 293. degrees .30. mynutes, the latitude of the myddle is 18. degrees, and is Weſt Southweſt .4536. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather 5. houres .46. mynutes, and the longeſt daye is 13. houres 8. minutes. &c.
                     
                        The Ilande of Iamica.The Ilande of Iamica, the Longitude is 276. degrees, the Latitude .16. degrees, and is Weſt Southweſt .5332. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather 6. houres 56. minutes, and the longeſt day is .13. houres .0. minutes &c.
                     
                        The Ilands of the Surres.The Ilandes called the Surres in our Weſt Occean Sea, the myddle amongeſt them, hath longitude 344. degrees, and the Latitude amongeſt the myddle of them is .39. degrees, and is Southweſt and by Weſt 1674. myles from London, and the Moone chaungeth rather 3. houres 24. minutes, and the longeſt daye is .14. houres .45. minutes. &c.
                     And thus I doo ende the deſcription of the principalleſt Ilandes of Aſia, Europa, and America. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶The tenth Chapter is as touching certaine thinges in the knowing of the diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned by Longitude and by Latitude. &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, inſomuche as the ſhorteſt diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned, cannot be by any one poynt of the Compaſſe, as is before declared in the firſt Chapter of this ſeconde booke, wherefore if that you doo deſire for to knowe the diſtaunce ouer the Sea and Lande, the nexte way, and the ſhorteſt diſtaunce,If that you doo deſire to know the ſhorteſt diſtance vnto any place, then you muſt do it with a Globe. then you muſt prepare a Globe terreſtrial, and that the longitude, and the latitude of the Townes and Cities, and other notable places, to be truely placed on the Globe: and then take a payre of Compaſſes, and then looke thoſe two places in the Globe, that you doo deſire for to knowe the true diſtaunce vnto, and then open your Compaſſes, and ſet the one foote on the one place, and the other on the other place aſſigned, iuſtly: and that doone, then your Compaſſes ſtandyng ſtyffe and not remoued, ſet them vnto the Equinoctiall circle on the Globe, and that doone, then looke howe manye degrees that it is iuſtly betweene the two feete of the Compaſſes,How to know the true diſtance vnto any place by the Globe. and that beyng knowne, then multiply the number of degrees by 60. and that ſhall ſhewe vnto you the true number of myles, betweene any two places aſſigned, and this beyng doone preciſely, taking the true number of degrees, & the partes therof, you ſhal not fayle of the truth, ſo that the Longitude and Latitude of the places be truely ſet vppon the Globe: and then 60. myles dooth aunſwere vnto one degree both vnder the Equinoctiall, and the Meridians.The whole compaſſe of the earth is 28600 myles, no place can be no further diſtance from you th
                              ••
                            10800. myles. And in euery great Circle on the Globe of the Earth, whoſe whole circumference or compaſſe is 21600. myles, ſo that no two places aſſigned, cannot be further diſtaunce aſunder then 10800. myles, and then the one muſt be oppoſit, or ryght againſt the other, being Antipodes, goyng feete vnto the feete of the other, and then as before

is declared, it is neyther Eaſt nor Weſt, nor no poynt of the Compaſſe elſe, for which waye ſoeuer that you doo goe by anye ryght lyne, the diſtaunce is all one, but if that any two places bee not directlye Antipodes the one vnto the other, then that is nearer one waye, then that it is another way: and yet it ſhall not bee by any one poynt of the Compaſſe, but by diuers poyntes of the Compaſſe, as before is rehearſed, except that the two places bee both vnder one Meridian, or elſe vnder the Equinoctiall. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧A Table of the Contentes of the chapters of the ſecond part of this Booke called a treaſure for Trauailers.
                  FIrſt to the Reader of thys ſeconde part.
                  The firſte Chapter of the ſeconde parte ſheweth you how for to know the diſtance vnto any towne vpon the face of the earth, and what is to be conſidered in the dooynge therof.
                  The Seconde Chapter ſheweth vnto you, howe you may know the diſtaunce vnto any Towne ſituate vpon the face of the whole erth, ſo that you doe know the true longitude and the true latitude of them.
                  The Thirde Chapter ſheweth howe too knowe vnto what quarter of the worlde that anye place doth ſtande from you, that is to ſaye, by what poynt of the Compaſſe, you knowing the true longitude and the true latitude.
                  The Fourth Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude, and by what poynt of the compaſſe that ſundry places within England and Scotland and Irelande, and alſo of certayne Ilandes neare, vnto them doth beare from the Citie of London, and what diſtaunce of myles they are from London, by the poynt of the Compaſſe ouer the water and the land: and alſo there is ſhewed how much the moone ſhall chaunge rather or later then it doth at London, and alſo it dooth ſhewe the length of the longeſt Summer daye, for as manye places as are named.
                  The fyfth Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other thinges before rehearſed, of certayne of the principalleſt places in Europe, as in Spayne and Portugall, and Fraunce, and Italy, and Germany.
                  The Sixte Chapter ſheweth

the longitude and the latitude and the other thinges before rehearſed, of certayne of the principalleſt places in Africa, and of certaine Ilands neare therunto.
                  The Seuenthe Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other things before reherſed of certayne of the principalleſt places of Aſia, and in the Eaſt India.
                  The Eight Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other thinges before ſpecifyed, of certayne of the princpalleſt places of America or the Weſt Indies, that hath bene founde within theſe hundred yeares, and not knowne vnto the olde Writers.
                  The ninth Chapter ſheweth the longitude and the latitude and the other thinges be fore rehearſed, of certayne of of the moſte principall Ilandes of Europe, within the midle earth Sea, and alſo the moſt principall Ilandes of Aſia and America.
                  The tenthe Chapter is as touching certaine thinges in the knowyng of the diſtaunce vnto any place aſſigned by longitude and by latitude.
                  Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     The Argument of the thyrde Booke, of the treaſure for Trauailers.
                     ¶The thirde Booke of the Treaſure for Trauailers, conteyning ſome matters for the meaſuring of ſuperfycialles, as Lande, Borde, Pauement, or Glaſſe, and alſo ſome matters as touching Solled bodyes, as Tymber, Stone, or ſuch otherlyke: and alſo howe to alter the Tonnage, burthen, or bygneſſe of ſhippes, and to keepe that moulde and proportion with other neceſſary thinges belonging thereunto. &c. Being very neceſſary for all ſortes of people that trauaile eyther by Sea or Land, written by William Bourne.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Reader of this third Booke.
                     GEntle Reader, although Maiſter Leonard Dygges in hys Booke called Tictonicon, and alſo Maiſter Thomas Dygges his Sonne in another Booke, called Pantometry, hath ſhewed how for to meaſure al Superfycialles, as Land, Borde, Glaſſe, Pauement or any ſuch other lyke, & alſo how to meaſure al maner of Solled bodies, as Timber, Stone, & ſuch other lyke, yet notwithſtandyng I haue written in this third Booke, a lyttle briefe note as touching thoſe cauſes, and alſo how to buylde ſhippes for to make them of what tonnage or burthen that you lyſt, and to keepe any forme in the mould or proportion that you lyſte, whereby that any Mechanicall workemen by following the order in the Booke preſcribed, may make any ſhippe the one lyke the other, and to make them of what bygneſſe or ſmalneſſe he lyſt, and to keepe that forme and faſhion in an poyntes, both in the moulde that is vnder the water, and alſo in the faſhion aloft, aboue the water. And alſo there is conteyned in this third part, howe for to know the bygneſſe of Ropes, whether that it be as byg agayne, or three tymes ſo bygge more or leſſe, at your diſcretion, which in my opinion is very neceſſary to be knowne, both vnto Naupegers or ſhippe Carpenters, and alſo vnto all ſortes of Sea men: and alſo there is other neceſſarie matters conteyned in this third Booke.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  ¶The thyrde Booke of the treaſure for Trauaylers.
                  
                     The firſt Chapter of the thyrde Booke, ſheweth you howe for to caſte the contentes of lande by Arithmeticke, and alſo by the husbands rule which is by the account of money. &c.
                     
                        NOwe begynneth the thirde Booke, for that it is neceſſarye for to knowe how to meaſure all manner of plat formes and bodyes, both their ſuperficiall contentes, and alſo there maſey contentes. Therefore as briefly as I may I wyll ſhewe vnto you: yet there hath famous and wyſe men written thereof in our Engliſhe tongue as M. Leonard Dygges, and M. Thomas Dygges, his ſonne, & other notable men ſeene in the Mathematicall Sciences. Therefore I doo intend to treate the leſſe thereof, and eſpecially of thoſe thinges that thoſe haue written of, I wyll not meddle withall at this tyme, for that they haue ſufficiently declared it, as this: for to know the contentes of Lande, to be meaſured in Triangles, beyng ſure for to make a ſquare angle and ſo forth, as M. Dygges dooth declare in hys Tictonicon, and for to caſt the contentes therof, you ſhall doo this:To know the cōtentes of account of any peece of groūd by Arithmetike. When you haue found a length and a breadth of anye peece of ground, whoſe contentes in Acres you doo deſire for to know, you ſhall do it by Arithmetike, as thus. You ſhal multiply the length with the breadth, then that number that commeth of that multiplication, you ſhall deuide by .160. and that ſhall ſhewe vnto you the true numbers of Acres, then if there bee any halfe roddes or quarters of roodes, if that they be in breadth, you ſhal adde then to the length, and if that they be in length, you ſhall account them in the breadth, and ſo foorth. Nowe I doo knowe that euery man hath not Arithmetike, therefore you ſhall make your account by this meanes, for to knowe the true contentes of the meaſure of

any peece of Lande, when you doo know the length and the bredth thereof, as thus: by the account of money, euery marke for to conteyne one Acre,To know howe many acres there is in any peece of ground by the account of money. as thus, by the account of money, euery noble of money to conteyne halfe an Acre, and euery 3. ſhillinges and 4. pence, to conteyne a roode or a quarter of an Acre, and euerye groate or 4. pence to conteyne a dayes worke, and euery penny to conteyne a pearche, or as ſome terme it a roode, and for to caſt the contentes of Land, doo this, as by enſample of a peece of Land that is 30. pearches long, and 24. pearches broade, the 24. pence is 2. ſhillinges, then beyng .30. roodes long, that is 2. tymes .30. ſhillinges, that maketh in money 3. pounde, and 3. pounde is .4. marke, and a noble, ſo that the peece of Lande that is .30. roodes long, and 24. broade, doth conteyne 4. Acres and a halfe. Yet furthermore for your better vnderſtanding, where there is half pearches and quarter of pearches, both in the length and in the bredth, then you ſhall doo thus, by a peece of Lande that is 53. roodes long, and a halfe, and of bredth 42. and a quarter, then 42. pence maketh 3. ſhillinges and 6. pence: laye downe 3. tymes 53. ſhillinges, and that will be .7. pounde and .19. ſhillinges, and then ther is 6. pence more, in the bredth: and 53. halfe ſhillings maketh 26. ſhillinges and 6. pence, then laye that to the other ſumme, and then it maketh 9. pounde 5. ſhillings and 6. pence, then there is in the length halfe a roode more, therefore you muſt account it in the bredth, and 42. halfe pence maketh 21. pence. Then laye that to the ſūme, then there is in the ſame bredth a quarter of a roode more, and that you muſt recken in the length: and 53. farthinges maketh 13. pence farthing, then laye the ſame to the reſt, and it wyll make in money 9. pounde 8. ſhillinges and 4. pence ob. and that aunſweres to, in meaſure .14. Acres and 5. dares worke, and about halfe a pearche, for that you may knowe that .9. pounde is 13. markes and a noble, and there is 8. ſhillinges, & that is more then a noble by 4. grotes. Then put that noble to the other noble, then that maketh 14. markes, then the 4. grotes, put to the other 4. pence, maketh 5. grotes, and ſo that peece of lande which is 53. roodes long and a halfe, and 42. roodes broade and a quarter, ſhal be in meaſure 14. Acres 5. dayes worke, neere half a pearch. And

by this account of money, you may know the contentes of anye peece of lande, better then you may knowe by any maner of table or tables, and this ſerueth both for the learned, and the vnlearned, and is generally called the huſbandmans rule, for that he may as ſoone learne this or ſooner, then he ſhall vnderſtande the tables of meaſures, and that ſerueth but for a quantitie of meaſure, and thys ſerueth generally for all manner of meaſures, be it neuer ſo bygge or ſmal, being ſure for to caſt the money right.
                  
                  
                     The ſeconde Chapter ſheweth how to meaſure board and Glaſſe, and to caſt the contentes therof, with other neceſary thinges belonging therunto.
                     NOw furthermore in lyke manner, for the meaſuring of boord or Glaſſe or any ſuch other lyke, for that it is ſufficientlye declared in tables, in Maiſter Digges his Tictonicon: yet notwithſtandinge thus you may know the contentes without any tables, as thus.
                     Looke at what length your boorde is, multiplye the number of feete into ynches 12. ynches to the foote, then that beinge doone, multyplye the breadth with the length, that is to ſaye, the number of ynches of the length, with the number of ynches of the bredth, deuide that number by 144. and that ſhall ſhew vnto you the number of feete: then if that there remayne any thinge, euery 72. ynches maketh halfe a foote, and then euery 36. ſhall make ¼. parte of a foote, and for that euery man hath not Arethmetick for to caſt it by, yet this is a ready way that many Carpenters doe vſe, and is exact ynouth, as thus.
                     If that the Borde be more then a foote brode, then they doo looke how many foote long the Borde is: then 
                           •
                        hey account that that there is ſo many foote of Borde as the length of the borde is, and then for the odde ynches and partes, they mete in the bredthe how much it is, and then with the rule, as often times as there is foote long in the Borde they doe meaſure or ſet it downe, and then they do meaſure how many foote longe it commeth vnto, and then they doe ſay that it is ſo many foote of borde more then the length

of the borde is: and that is true without any fayle, as for enſample thus, by a borde of 10. foote longe, and 14. ynches and a halfe broade. Nowe for that the Borde is 10. foote longe, then at twelue ynches broade, there is 10. foote of borde, and then there is two ynches and an halfe more in the breadth, and for that with the ynche rule that is layde downe 10. times, for that the borde is 10. foote longe, and that beinge meaſured howe long it reacheth, it wyll be 25. ynches longe, that is .2. foote and 1. ynche, thē that 2. foote put vnto the 10. foote, it maketh .12. foot, ſo that you may conclude that a borde of 10. foote longe, and .14. ynches and ½. brode, that there is 12. foote and 1.12. parte of a foote of a borde, without any fayle, and thus you may doe, howe brode or narrow ſo euer that any borde or Planck is.
                     
                        A note of meaſure.And furthermore, at one ynche brode, then 12. foote long maketh a foote of borde, at 2. ynches brode, 6. foote long to a foote: at 3. ynches broade 4. foote longe to a foote, at 4. ynches brode 3. foote long to a foote, then at 5. ynches brode 2. foote and 5. ynches long to a foot of borde: at 6. ynches brode 2. foote longe to a foote of borde, at 7. ynches brode 1. foote and 8. ynches and a halfe to 1. foote of borde, at 8. ynches brode, one foote and 6. ynches longe to one foote of borde: at 9. ynches brode 16. ynches long to one foote of borde: at 10. ynches brode 14. ynches longe and ½. to one foote of borde, at 11. ynches brode 13. ynches long and 1.11. parte of an ynche to 1. foote of borde: at 12. ynches brode 12. ynches long to one foote of borde, at 13. inches brode 11. ynches long and 1.13 parte to one foote of borde, at 14. ynches brode 10. ynches and 2/7. partes of an ynche longe to one foote of borde: at 15. ynches brode 9. ynches and 9.15. partes of an ynche long to one foote of borde: at 16. ynches brode 9. ynches long to one foote of borde, at .17. ynches brode 8. ynches and 1.2. long, to one foote of borde, at .18. ynches brode 8. ynches longe to one foote of borde, and for that there is no cōmō bords ſawne aboue 18. ynches brode, therfore I leaue of to proceede any further, & if it chaūce for to be broder thē any of the meaſure afore named: then you ſhall take one of theſe meaſures afore, that is halfe the breadth, and then you ſhall take

halfe the length for the true contents of the meaſure, and ſo foorthe at your diſcretion.
                     And furthermore,You may know by Arithmetick how many ynches in length wyll make a foote of borde whatſoeuer the bredthe is. you may know how many ynches long wyll make one foote of borde whenſoeuer you do know the bredth, as this. Fyrſt looke howe many ynches that the borde is brode, then deuide the bredth out of 144. and that ſhall ſhew vnto you the true contentes of inches, of length in one foote of borde, with partes of ynches adding the remainder vnto the bredth. And furthermore in lyke maner, for to knowe the contentes howe many feete there doth contayne in any great quantytie, as Pauement or Glaſſe, or Chamber floures, then multiplye the length with the breadth,By Arithmetick you may know how many foot there is in any great quantyty. and that ſheweth vnto you the true contentes of the number of feete. Thus much haue I ſayde for the meaſuring of all manner of plate formes, for that the common people fall into ſuch a number of errours for lack of Geometry & Arithmetick, as thus. Some wil holde opinion that if any Square or Circle be as muche in meaſure more, they wyll ſay that it is but as bigge agayne, where that it muſt needes of force be 4. times ſo big, as for enſāple by a Pauement that is but 12. foote ſquare euery waye, and an other Pauement (in lyke maner) 24. foote ſquare euery way, now that Pauement being 12. foote ſquare, contayneth 144. foote, and the other being 24. foote ſquare euery way, contayneth .576. foote, that is 4. times ſo bigge as the other that is but 12. ynches ſquare, as by this Enſample it doth appeare.

                        
the one of theſe ſquares to be 12. foote ſquare, and the other 24. foote ſquare: for yf that you would haue a ſquare the one to bee as bigge agayne as the other, then yf that it bee a ſquare roote as theſe 2. figures afore made: Then looke how many foote it is from corner to corner, right agaynſt it, paſſinge by the Center of the ſquare, the length of that Lyne from corner to corner, ſhall make an other ſquare vpon the foure ſydes as bigge agayne as the other from corner to corner: as for enſample thus.
                     By the ſquare afore made of 12. foote ſquare euery waye, and the ſlope Lyne from corner to corner, is 17. foote, lackinge 1.33. parte of a foote, which is 16. foote and 32.33. parte of a foote. For as the ſquare roote of 12. is 144. ſo the ſquare roote of .17. is 289. ſwhich is more by one foote, then the double of 144. as by the enample afore made it doth appeare. And for your better enſample, beholde this Fygure with

the ſquare roote of .12. is cutte from the one corner to the other corner, and the length of that lyne from the one corner to the other is 17. foote lackynge 1.33. parte of a foote, and yet for the more plainnes, you ſhal haue this enſample by the ſquare afore made of .12. foote euery way, and ſo beinge cutte from corner to corner, it is 17. foote lacking 1.33. parte: and when you haue done, you ſhall put the 2. partes ſo cutte a ſunder, together, laying the ſyde 12. vnto 12. and then it wyll make a Tryangle as bigge as the ſquare: then adding ſo much more vnto it, wyll make a ſquare roote iuſte as bigge agayne, as by this enſample it doth appeare.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     Now furthermore, the ſquare roote of .17. lackynge one 33. part, will bee corner to corner 24. foote, and it is a ſquare roote iuſte as bigge agayne, as that of ſixteene foote and a 23. parte of 33.
                     And now furthermore for Circles or longe ſquares, all is one matter, as for an enſample thus by a Circle of 12. foote broade, and the Compaſſe ſhall be 37. foote and 8. ynches and better, for this is generall for euer looke how many times 7. is in the Diameter, ſo many times 22. ſhall be the circumference. Or now contrarywiſe: Looke howe manye times 22. you haue in the Circumference ſo many times 7. ſhall be the Diameter.
                     Now to the purpoſe:An enſample in Circles. a Circle as much more in breadth or in Compaſſe, ſhal make a Circle foure tymes ſo bigge in meaſure as the other, and for to meaſure a Circle truly, doe thus. Fyrſte, knowing the Circumference and the Diameter, multiply
                           •
                         the one by the other, that is to ſaye, the compaſſe with the breadth, and then take the fourth parte of the meaſure, for the true contentes of the Circle, or els take halfe the Compaſſe, and halfe the breadth: then multiply the one by the other, that being done, it ſheweth the iuſte contentes of the Circle, as for enſample thus.
                     By the Circle of 12. foote broade, and the Compaſſe 37. and 9. ynches, and halfe 12. is 6. and halfe 37. foote and eight ynches

is 18. foote and 10. ynches, and it being multiplyed together, maketh 113. foote, the true contentes of that Circle afore named. And now there is an other Circle that is 24. foote broade, and that commeth vnto in Compaſſe 75. foote and 4. ynches. And then take halfe the Compaſſe which is 37. foote and 8. ynches and halfe the bredth, and that is .12. foote, and then multyplye the halfe Compaſſe with the halfe bredth, and that maketh .452. as by the enſample of theſe 2. Circles it doth appeare.
                     
                     Now furthermore, yf that you woulde haue an other Circle to be iuſt as bigge agayne, or els in lyke manner the other beynge knowne, I woulde haue a Circle halfe ſo bigge, then bring your circle into a ſquare roote, not reckoning the compaſſed parte,

                        
and the length of the ſquare ſhall make the Diameter of a Circle iuſt halfe ſo bigge, and that being doubled, it wyll make a Circle iuſt as bigge agayne as the other Circle, as by this enſample of a Circle of 24. foote broade, and the roundnes beyng cut a way,Enſamples of Circles. it will make a ſquare roote of 17. foote ſquare, lackinge 1.33. parte of a foote: and then you may knowe what a Circle of 17. foote of Diameter lacking 1.33. parte of a foote, wyl make an other Circle halfe ſo bigge as a Circle of .24. foote of bredth, and as big agayne as a Circle of 12. foote broade: and ſo foorth in all poynts whether that they be Circles or ſquares, as by the enſample of a longe ſquare of 12. foote longe and 6. foote broade, and there is an other ſquare of 24. foote longe and 12. foote broade.
                     Now the ſquare of 12. foote longe and 6. foote broade,An enſample of long ſquare
                              •
                           
                         contayneth but 72. foote, and the other of 24. foote long & 12 foote brode, contayneth in feete .288. whiche is foure tymes ſo bigge as the longe ſquare 12. foote longe and 6. foote broade.
                     
                        And for to make an other ſquare as bigge agayne as that of 12. one way and 6. an other way, that longe ſquare ſhall bee 17. foote long, lacking 1.33. partes of a foote, and of bredthe 8. foote and 16.33. parte of a foote: as by theſe 3. figures it doth appeare:

the one 12. foote long and 6. foote brode, and the ſeconde .24. foote long and 12. foote brode, and the thirde 16. foote and 32.33. long, and 8. foote and .16.33. brode. And the length of the ſhippe lynes from corner to corner of that which is 10. foote longe and 6. foote brode, is 13. foote and 11.26. part of a foote: and that of 24. foote longe and 12. foote brode, ſhal be 26. foote and 11.13. parte of a foote, the length of the Hipothenuſal lyne from the one corner to the other corner, and alſo the longe ſquare of ſeuenteene foote long lacketh 1.33. parte and neare 8. ynches and 1.2. broade, the ſlope Lyne from corner to corner, ſhall be nineteene foote longe lackinge 1.36. parte of a foote, which is 18. foote and 35.36. part of a foote: and as it hath bene often declared in this woorke, howe too knowe the lengthe of the ſlope Lynes from the one corner to the other corner, beinge ſure for to make a ſquare Angle.
                     
                        And then by extracting of the roote, as afore is declared, you may knowe the length of the Hipothenuſall or ſlope Lynes, as by this enſample: if that your

ſquare doo leuell, then you muſt bee ſure to make it ſquare to your grounde lyne, as by this enſample is doth appeare, by theſe 2. figures, and the pricked lynes doo make the leuelles a iuſt ſquare Angle, both the ſharpe Angle, and the broade Angle, as you maye ſee by theſe .2. figures afore made. And furthermore, for to knowe the proportiō, how much the one is bygger then the other of any ſuperficial, whether that it be circles or ſquare rootes, if that you doo knowe the contentes of the one, and would knowe howe much that the other is bygger or leſſer, then you knowing the contentes of it alreadie, then multiply them both ſquarely, that doone,How to knowe the quantytie or proportion of any Circle or ſquare what the one is biger then the other. then if that you doo know the contentes of the leſſer, and would ſeeke the contentes of the bygger, then multiplye the bygger number by the contentes of the leſſer, and looke what that commeth vnto, then deuide that ſame by the number of the leſſer, and that wyll ſhewe you iuſtly, what proportion that the bygger is in quantitie more then the leſſer. Nowe contrariwiſe if that you doo knowe the contentes of the bygger: and to knowe the contentes of the leſſer, then multiply the contentes of the bygger, with the number of the leſſer, and then deuide that ſame by the number of the bygger, and that wyll ſhewe vnto you the proportion of the leſſer, and by thys order you maye knowe the proportion of any Triangles or longe ſquare, or what forme ſoeuer that it hath, as it is more plainelye hereafter ſhewed in the 8. Chapter by the proportion of ropes.
                  
                  
                     
                     The thirde Chapter dooth ſhewe howe for to meaſure Tymber, and to bring it to a ſquare, aſwell without Arithmetike as otherwyſe, and alſo howe for to knowe the true contentes of anye peece of Tymber.
                     NOw furthermore, for the meaſuring of all manner of bodyes, as Tymber or ſtone, or any ſuche other lyke, Maiſter Dygges in his Booke named Tectonicon, hath made Tables of the ſquares of it: yet notwithſtanding I will ſhewe vnto you, how that you ſhall knowe how many ynches long wyl make a foote of any portion of meaſure, as thus: firſt knowing the breadth and the thickeneſſe, and you woulde knowe how many ynches longe wyll make a foote, then looke howe manye ynches that the breadth of the Tymber is the broder waye, and then in lyke manner looke howe many ynches that it is in th
                           •
                        cke
                           ••
                        ſſe the narroweſt waye, then multiply the broader ſide, wyth the narrowe ſyde, then that number that commeth of that multiplication,How to knowe 
                              〈◊〉
                            many ynches long in Tymber wyll make a foote what ſquare ſ
                              ••
                           nes that it hath by Arithmetike. you muſt deuide that ſumme out of .1728. then that ſūme that ſtandeth before the quanti
                           •
                        ie lyne, ſhall be the number of ynches in length of one foote of Tymber or ſtone: and then if there remayneth any thing, then if that number which was the deuider if that it be halfe the number, then it is halfe an ynche more: if a quarter of the number, then one quarter of an ynche: and yf .3. quarters of the ſumme, then 3.4. partes, and ſo foorthe to anye parte or partes of the remainder. And then according to that, the proportion ſhall be ſo many partes of an ynche, as the remaynder dooth ſhewe, and thus you maye knowe howe many ynches long wyll make one foote of Tymber or Stone, without anye ſquaring of the Tymber. And as Maiſter Dygges in his Booke called Tectonicon, hath made Tables of the ſquares, that you may doo by extractions of the roote, as afore is declared in thys woorke. And nowe for bycauſe that euerye perſon that deſtreth for to knowe howe for to meaſure Tymber, or any other thyng, haue not all manner of Arithmetyke, therefore you ſhall haue a

Table of the ſquares of Tymber,The length of a foote of Timber according vnto the ſquare. howe manye feete and ynches wyll make one foote longe of Tymber from one ynche ſquare, and ſo from ynche to ynche, tyll that you come to .36 ynches ſquare, as by this enſample it dooth appeare, and the vppermoſt rowe of this table is the number of ynches of the ſquareneſſe.

                           
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                              10
                              11
                              12
                              13
                              14
                              15
                              16
                              17
                              18
                           
                           
                              1
                              4
                              36
                              16
                              9
                              5
                              4
                              2
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              0
                              0
                              0
                              0
                              0
                           
                           
                              0
                              0
                              0
                              0
                              9
                              0
                              11
                              3
                              9
                              5
                              2
                              0
                              10
                              8
                              7
                              6
                              5
                              5
                           
                           
                               
                               
                               
                               
                              18
                               
                              34
                               
                              716
                              14
                              14
                               
                              38
                              1316
                              1116
                              34
                              1516
                              14
                           
                        
The ſeconde, how many foote long will make one foote of Tymber, the thyrd is ynch, the 4. is partes of an ynche, to bee added

                           
                              19
                              20
                              21
                              22
                              23
                              24
                              25
                              26
                              27
                              28
                              29
                              30
                              31
                              32
                              33
                              34
                              35
                              36
                           
                           
                              4
                              4
                              3
                              3
                              3
                              3
                              2
                              2
                              2
                              2
                              2
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                              1
                           
                           
                              34
                              516
                              78
                              916
                              516
                              0
                              34
                              12
                              38
                              316
                              116
                              78
                              34
                              1116
                              916
                              12
                              716
                              516
                           
                        
vnto the number of feete, or ynches, as by theſe 2. Tables it doth appeare. And nowe for the meaſuring of Tymber or Stone, looke what that it commeth vnto in ſquare number, then theſe tables afore made doo ſhewe vnto you, howe manye ynches and partes of ynches wyll make a foote longe of that ſquares: and for bycauſe that euerye peece of Tymber that is to be meaſured, is not equallye ſquare, I wyll ſhewe vnto you howe that you maye ſquare it wythout extracting of the roote, for that I knowe euery perſon hath not that kynde of Arithmetike.
                     And furthermore, for to make Tables thereof, it were but ſuperfluous, for that Maiſter Dygges in hys Tectonicon, hath made Tables exact yenough for that purpoſe.
                     
                        And furthermore this I am aſſured of, that the reaſon how for to ſquare theyr tymber, may be as ſoone beaten into the common peoples heades, and ſooner, then they will by inſtructions learne to vnderſtande the tables of ſquares. And nowe to inſtruct them howe for to ſquare theyr tymber whenſoeuer that the Tymber is broder one way, then that it is another way, then doo thus. Fyrſt looke howe many ynches that the Tymber is the broder way, and then looke howe many ynches that it is the narrowe waye, then when that you haue doone,How to ſquare Tymber wythout 
                              •
                           rithmetike or tables. recken howe many ynches that it is, more then the perfyte ſquare, then take that number of ynches and put it into 2. equall partes: then that beyng doone, you ſhall lacke a certaine quantitie for to fulfyll one of the corners, and that quantitie you ſhall rebate vppon the .2. ſides, concluding thus, that it is thus many ynches ſquare, lacking ſo muche as the quantitie in the corner dyd ſhewe vnto you, vppon the 2. ſides. And for your better inſtructions I wyll giue vnto you certaine enſamples,An enſample. as thus, for the fi
                           •
                        ſt enſample is by a peece of Tymber of 13. ynches one way, and 11. ynches another waye, and nowe you doo ſee that the broder ſide is .2. ynches more then the narrowe ſide: then deuide the .2. ynches into 2. equall partes, and that is one ynche to a part, and then you doo ſee that it is .12. ynches one waye, and .12. ynches the other way, ſauing that it lacketh one ynche at one of the corners, and that one ynche wyl rebate vpon the 2. ſides of 12. which is 24. ynches, a .1.24. part of an

ynche, as by this figure it is declared. And now I do conclude that this peece of tymber 13. ynches one way, and 11. ynches another waye, dooth make in ſquare Tymber 11. ynches and 23.24. parts of an ynche, which is .12. ynches, lacking 1.24.The ſeconde enſample. part of an ynch. And now to the ſeconde enſample by a peece of Tymber, that is 12. ynches one waye, and 20. the other way. Nowe you doo ſee that the broder ſyde is 8. ynches more then the narrowe ſide: therefore I doo deuide the 8. ynches into 2. equall partes, and that is 4. ynches to a part, and

then laye 4. ynches more to 12. ynches,

vpon the 2. ſides, that maketh 16. ynches ſquare, then theyr lacketh .4. ynches ſquare at one of the corners, then multiply 4. tymes 4. and that is 16. and then the peece of Tymber beyng added vnto the 2. ſydes 4. ynches vnto 12. it maketh 16. and 2. tymes 16. and that maketh 32. then that 16. ynches that lacketh in the corner beyng rebated from 32. wyll rebate halfe an ynche, for .16. whole ynches will make .32. halfe ynches. Therefore I doo conclude that the peece of Tymber that is 20. ynches one waye and 12. ynches the other way, wyll make in ſquare Tymber 15. ynches, and ½. the true ſquare thereof.The thyrde enſample. Now furthermore to the thyrde enſample by ſuche a peece of Tymber that is .23. ynches one waye, and but .7. ynches the other waye, then the broader ſquare, is more then the narrower by 1
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        nches: then as afore is declared, deuide 16. into 3. equall par
                           •••
                        , and it wyll be 8. to euery part, and then put 8. ynches in breadth vppon the two ſydes vnto 7. it wyll make 15. ſo

that it woulde make a ſquare 15. ynches euery way, ſauyng that it lacketh a great matche in one of the corners, then multiplying 8. times 8. it maketh 64 then you muſt rebate 64. ynches out of the 2. ſides of 15. ynches, and 2. tunes 15. is 30. ynches, and thē the ſquare is but 14. ynches: then 2 times 24. is 28. and when there is 30 pulled out of 64. then is there but 34. lefte: thē rebate 28. ynches more from the 2. ſides, then the ſquare is but .13. ynches ſquare, and then .30. and .28. beyng taken out of 64. then there reſteth but .6. and then at the .2. corners, as firſt at 30. and then at 28. you ſhal rebate one ynche at eche of the corners, one and 2. tymes one is 2 then put that 2. vnto the 6 and it maketh 8. and then the ſquare Tymber is but 13. ynches, and .2. tymes 13. is but .26. and yet there is .8. ynches

to be rebated of from .26. and it commeth vnto 4.13. parte of one ynche, & ſo muche the timber is leſſe then .13. ynches ſquare: therefore you may conclude that the peece of Tymber .23. ynches one way, and but 7. ynches the other way, ſhal make in ſquare Tymber 12. ynches, and 9.13. parte of one ynche iuſt, and this is true, and thus maye you ſquare any peece of Tymber, whatſoeuer that it be, without any tables or extractyng of the roote. And thus I make an ende of the enſamples, thynking this ſufficiente yenough for inſtructions: and for to meaſure rounde Tymber, or Tymber that hath many ſquare ſydes, Maiſter Digges hath ſufficienly declared in hys Tectonicon, ſauing that for the meaſuring of rounde Tymber, you muſt allowe as I haue declared in this Booke: that is to ſay, euerye Diameter of .7. ynches, hath the circumference 22. ynches: and then to meaſure rounde Tymber, take halfe the circumference, called the compas, and halfe the Diameter, called the breadth, or thyckeneſſe: then ſquaring that, it ſhal ſhewe vnto you the true ſquare of that Tymber, without any fayle.
                  
                  
                     The fourth Chapter ſheweth howe for too meaſure all manner of bodies, as Tymber, or ſtone, cubes, or globes: and to knowe what proportion of meaſure or waight the one hath vnto the other.
                     NOwe furthermore, for the meaſuring of al manner of bodies, that lacketh parte of their forme, and other that be more then their forme, and other that be mixed bodyes, beyng in one place more then theyr forme, and in an other place lacketh parte of theyr forme, in the meaſuryng of them, you ſhal doo thus. And as it is declared afore, in the meaſuring of Tymber or Stone, or anye ſuche other lyke, if ſo be that it be equallie ſquare or partilye ſquare, all is one matter, or rounde, or many ſquares, Mayſter Dygges hath ſufficiently

declared thereof, as touching the meaſuring of it,How to meaſure any thing that lacketh parte of hi
                              •
                            forme. for that it is a body properly of it ſelfe. Thē furthermore, there be bodies that lacke parte of theyr forme, as thus, there is is a peece of Tymber eyther rounde or ſquare, that maye be hollowe in the core or middle, or els it may be hollow like a Trough or with hollowe natches into it, as by theſe enſamples it dooth appeare, and the blacke dooth ſygnifye the hollowe: and for to meaſure them trulye, do thus.
                     
                     Firſt meaſure the Maſſy bodyes contentes, and ſo caſt it in that forme, then meaſure the hollowe or concaue place, as though it were Timber. Then caſt the contentes thereof, and pull that ſu
                           ••
                        e away frō the whole contentes, & that which doth remaine, ſhalbe the true contētes of that peece of timber, or ſtone, & ſo forth.How to meaſure any thyng that is more then his forme. And now for ſuperfluous bodies as Timber or ſtone, or any other thing, which is more thē their proper forme, as by theſe enſāples

                        
it dooth appeare. Then ſhall you firſt meaſure the principall bodye by it ſelfe: that beyng doone, then meaſure the ſuperfluous parte or partes, by themſelues, then adde or put all thoſe numbers together, and that wyll ſhewe vnto you the iuſte contentes of that body.
                     
                        How to meaſure mixed bodyes.And nowe furthermore for the meaſuring of mixed bodyes, as a mixed bodye is that which is hollowe in one place or places, and more then a body in another place or places, as theſe figures doth ſhewe.

And for the meaſuring of theſe bodyes as afore is declared, firſt meaſuring the principall bodye, and then nexte meaſuring the ſuperfluous parte or partes, and put all thoſe together, and then meaſure the hollowe parte or partes, as afore is declared, then caſt the contentes of the hollowe Tymber or mettall by it ſelfe, then pull that ſumme out of the other ſummes, and then that which dooth remayne, ſhall bee the true meaſure of the bodye that you haue meaſured, and ſo foorth.
                     And nowe furthermore, for the meaſuring of all bodyes, as Cubes or Globes, as for enſample thus, for the meaſuring of Globes or Cubes, as a ſhotte or a Bullet beyng a perfyte Globe, that all bodyes as Cubes or Globes, or anye other forme eyther rounde or ſquare,

                        
if that it be as much more in meaſure euery way. As I doe knowe the opinion of ſome people,Erroure in the commō people as by enſample that wyll ſaye that is but as bygge agayne, where it muſt needes of force be 8. tymes ſo bigge, as for Enſample thus.
                     By a peece of Tymber or of Stone, beyng a foote ſquare euery way lyke vnto a Dye. And there is an other cube of Tymber or Stone of two foote ſquare euery way lyke a Dye in forme. Now that cube of one foote ſquare, is but one foote of Tymber or Stone: and the other cube of two foote ſquare euery way lyke vnto a Dye, is eight foote of Tymber or Stone, as theſe two fygures doo repreſent.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     Now you doe ſee this to be true: and yf that the meaſure of any thinge being as much more in length, bredthe and thickneſſe, that it is 8. times ſo bigge, whether that it bee cubes or Globes, longe Tymber or Raſke, or what ſoeuer it be.
                     And furthermore, as it is afore rehearſed, if that you haue a peece of Tymber,Enſample of large Tymber. yf that it be in ſquareneſſe as long more and as thyck or broade more, that it is 8. times as bigge, whether that it bee rounde or ſquare all is one matter, as for enſample thus. By a peece of Tymber of 10. foote longe, and .12. ynches ſquare, that peece of timber ſhal be 10. foote of tymber: & if that you haue an other peece of tymber, that is 24. ynches ſquare and .20. foote longe, that peece of timber ſhalbe 80. foote of tymber, as by theſe 2. figures it is ſhewed.
                     
                        
                        
                     
                     And furthermore, if that you woulde haue an other peece of tymber iuſte as bigge agayne, as that of 10. foote longe, and one foote ſquare, beinge iuſte 10. foote of Tymber, and to be of that proportion in length and in ſquareneſſe, that is declared heereafter in the 7. chapter.
                     And furthermore whether that it be in Cubes or Globes, and if that you doe knowe the contentes of the one, and woulde know how much the one is bigger then the other: then ſhall you do it thus. You muſt tryple the proportiō of the ſydes of the cubes or Globes, and then multiply them together,To know the proportion of Cubes or Globes, the one by the other. as you doe in fractions: then looke what that number commeth vnto. Then if that you do know the contents of the leſſer, and would knowe the conte
                           •
                        tes of the bigger, then multyplye the contentes of the leſſer cube or Globe, with the number of the bigger: and looke what that number commeth vnto: then deuide that ſūme with the number of the leſſer cube or Globe, and that number that ſtandeth in the quantitye Lyne, ſhall bee the contentes of the bigger cube or Globe, as for Enſample thus  
                            _____ 
                         , by a Bullet of Iron of .5. ynches in height, or Diameter, and ſuppoſe it to weigh 16. pound. And you haue an other Globe or Bullet of that ſtuffe of 9. ynches in Diameter, how many pounde ſhall that way? you ſhall knowe it thus.
                     
                        triple the proportion of them both, & ſet thē downe thus .555.999: Then multiply thus .5. times 5. is .25. and then .5. times .25. maketh 125.
                     
                        An enſample of Globes.And now to the bigger Globe, 9. times 9. is 81. and then .9. times 81. maketh 729, and now the leſſer Bullet wayinge .16. pounde therefore multyplye .729. by .16. and that will make .11664. and now deuide this number by 125. and then there wyll ſtande in the quantytie Lyne 93. then there remayneth ouer 39. ſo as you may conclude, that the bigger Bullet doth way 93. pounde, and .39.125. whiche is neare 5. ounces, the true wayght of the bygger Globe. And now contrarywyſe, you knowing the contentes or waight of the bigger cube or Globe: then you muſt multyplye the contentes by the number of the leſſer, and then deuide it agayne by the number of the bigger.
                     And for more playnneſſe, by the Bullet before rehearſed of .5. ynches high,The ſeconde enſample. to way 16. pound. Now I haue a leſſer that is but 4. ynches in his Diameter, what ſhall it way: you ſhall knowe it thus 444.555. fyrſt multyply 4. times 4. and that is 16. and then 4. times 16. is 64. Then multiply 64. by the waight of the bigger Bullet, and that is 16. times 64. and that maketh 1024. and then deuide the number by 125. and then there wyll ſtande in the quantytie Lyne 8. & 24. wyl remayne ouer. So that yee may conclude, that the leſſer Globe or Bullet doth weighe 8 pounde & 3. ounces. And ſo by this order you may know the proportion of all maner of other bodyes, what forme ſo euer that it hath: by multiplyinge the length, bredth and thickneſſe, and then doyng as before is rehearſed, the contentes ſhall appeare.
                  
                  
                     The fyfth Chapter ſheweth how for to meaſure Globes, and to know the contents in ynches or feete.
                     ANd furthermore, for the meaſuring of Globes by proportion, how much that the one is bigger then the other, it is no otherwyſe then the proportion of any other body, as by enſāple of the meaſuring of cubes, as afore it is declared. For this is generall

for euer in the meaſuringe of all ſolled bodyes, as Tymber and Stone, or Raſke, or any other thinge what ſo euer that it be, if that the proportion of meaſure be as 1. vnto 2. the body contentes as 8. vnto one, that is to ſaye, that if a ſhotte or Globe of Iron of .2. ynches heyght doe weigh one pounde, then ſhall a ſhotte or Globe of Iron of 4. ynches height, weigh 8. pound, and ſo forthe as afore is rehearſed. And alſo this is a verye good way to know the contentes of a Bullet or Globe, a cube of .4. ynches, wyl goe very neare to make a Globe of .5. ynches in Diameter: and for Enſample of this matter beefore rehearſed, they doe vſe for to meaſure Globes or Bullets in this ſorte, to know their contentes. Fyrſte thus.The meaſuring of Globes. The Circumference bringe knowne, as 7. vnto 22. the Diameter is founde.
                     Then multyply the halfe Circumference w
                           •
                        th the halfe Diameter, and that being done, looke what number that commeth vnto. Then multyply that by the Diameter agayne, and looke what that number ryſeth vnto: then take ⅔. partes of that number, and that ſhall be the contentes of the Globe or Bullet, Enſample thus.
                     By a Globe of 12. ynches high in the Diameter. Now to knowe the Circumference: then multiplye 12. by 22. and that commeth vnto 264. and then deuide 264. by 7. and that ſhall ſhew vnto you the Circumference: ſo that commeth vnto .37. and .5.7. the true compaſſe of the Circle. Then take the halfe of both the Circumference, and the halfe Diameter, that is to ſay, halfe 37. and .5.7. and that maketh 18. and 6.7. pa
                           •
                        tes and halfe 12. and that is .6. Then multiply 18.6.7. times .6. and that commeth vnto .113. and then multiply that number by the whole Diameter agayne, and that cōmeth vnto 1356. & that is lyke vnto the end of a pyller: Then for that take ⅔. partes of the number, and that wyll be .905. the true contentes of the number of ynches in that Globe, and by this order you may meaſure the contentes of all Globes how big or ſmall ſoeuer they be. But now if you would know the contents of the ſuperficiall, that is to ſay, what number of ynches would couer the Globe or Bullet: then you muſt doe thus: multiply the Circumference with the Diameter, and that number ſhalbe the contentes

of the 
                           ••
                        n
                           •
                        yden
                           •
                         the Globe or Bullet. &c.
                     And furthermore, 
                           •
                        o know the true contentes of a Globe, how many ynches it doth contayne, this is the eaſyeſt maye that maye be deuiſed.
                     Take the true Diameter of the Globe, and multiplye it cubitly, and then multiply thathy 11. and then deuide that by .21. and tha
                           •
                         ſhall ſhew vnto you the true contentes of the number of ynches in that Globe, as for enſample thus: by the Globe before rehearſed of 12. ynches in Diameter or height, and 12. times 12 is .144. and then 12. times 144, maketh 1728. and then that multyplyed by 11.19008 and then it maketh 19991. and then that beinge deuided by .21. and then there wyll ſtande in the quantytye lyne 905. and 3. wyll remayne ouer: So that you maye conclude that the Globe of 12. ynches in height or Diameter, doth containe 905. ynches and 1. of .7. parte of an ynche.
                     
                        To meaſure the playne of a Circle.And furthermore, to knowe the contentes of a playne Circle how many ynches or feete that it doth contayne: then multyplye it by the Diameter ſquarely, and then multiply it agayne by .11. & then deuide that nūber by 14. & that ſhal ſhew vnto you the true: contentes of the platforme of that Circle. Enſample by a playne Circle of 12. foote broade or ouer, and to knowe how many feete that it doth contayne: Then multyplye 12. times 12. and that maketh 144. and then multyply 144. by 11. and that maketh .1584. and then deuide 1584. by 14. and then there will ſtande in the quantytie lyne 113. and 2. wyll remayne ouer: ſo that you maye conclude, that the contentes of that Circle that is 12. foote broad, that the platforme of that Circle doth contayne 113. foote, and 1/7. parte of a foote.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſyxt Chapter ſheweth howe for to builde Shyps by proportion, that is to ſay, if that you haue one Ship for an enſample, if you woulde haue an other as bigge agayne, more or leſſe: this Chapter doth ſhew vnto you howe you may doe it, keepinge that moulde and proportion in all poyntes, that is to ſaye, by extractinge of the cubike roote.
                     
                        AND furthermore, I doe thinke it conuenient, for that I doe know that many that are Naupegers or Ship carpenters, haue not the exact knowledge in theſe cauſes, that is to ſaye, that when they haue builded any Shyppe or Boat, and the tonnage then knowen vnto them,Of the bending of Sh
                              •
                           ps. yf that you woulde haue an other Ship or Boate of that mould and of that proportion in all poyntes, to be double that tonnage or burthen that the other is: I doe know that there is but few Naupegers or Ship carpenters that can do it: for that they d
                           •
                         look for the 
                           ••
                        ſt parte of them the extractions of C
                           •
                        thicke rootes for otherwiſe it is not poſſible for it to be done: for no man may keepe iuſt proportion in all poyntes without the extracting of Cubes, they may well keepe the tonnage or but then, but not the proportion and moulde in all poyntes. For according as it is afore declared, by the meaſuringe of Cubes or Globes or any maſſy bodyes, if that they ſhould double the meaſure, then it were 8. times ſo bigge.
                     Therfore whenſoeuer that you haue builded any ſhip or Boat, or any other crafte, whatſoeuer it be,How to alter the bignes of a ſhip and 
                              •
                           e
                              •
                            to keepe the proportion mould, and faſhion. then if that you would haue an other of that ſelfe ſome moulde in all poyntes, and woulde haue the other as bigge agayne, or twiſe or thriſe ſo bigge agayne, or halfe ſo big agayne, or any other quantity more or leſſe, then ſhall

you doe thus.
                     Firſt for the length of the Reele, you ſhal multiply it cubitely, and then in lyke manner euery beame: the mydſhippe beame and all the reſt of the Beames, to multiply them cubitelye, and alſo the rackinge of the Shyppe both the Stem and the Sterne poſt, to multiply thē cubitely, and alſo the principall tymbers that doth moulde the Shyp, to multiplye them cubitely, and alſo the depth that the Shippe is in holde, to multyplye it cubitely, and ſo conſequentlye euery place or places with the Ship that doth leade any worke, to multyply it cubitely.
                     Then that being done, yf that you woulde haue the other Shyp or Boat as bigge agayne, then double that number that you haue before multiplyed: Then extractinge the Cubite roote thereof, then according vnto the number make your Reele, your timbers, your Beames, and ſo conſequently all the reſt of your thinges, according vnto the Cubite roote ſo extracted, and that beinge done, you ſhall make hir of that moulde and proportion, and of double burthen, without any fayle, otherwyſe it is not to be done.
                     And furthermore, if that you woulde haue one thriſe ſo bigge, then 3. foulde your number, and ſo foorth: then if that you woulde haue her but halfe ſo great, then take halfe the number ſo multyplyed, and the Cubite roote ſo extracted, ſhal make a Shippe or Boat, but halfe the burthen: and thus you may make a Shyppe or Boate of what proportion ſo euer you lyſt
                           •
                        , and alſo to be of that ſelfe ſame moulde that the other was.
                     Prouided alſo, for the ſquareneſſe of your Beames, and your Tymbers, and alſo the thyckeneſſe of the Planke, that you doe obſerue this order before mentioned, or els in otherwyſe doynge, you ma
                           •
                         put more Tymber or leſſe Tymber, then the proportion of the burthen doth come vnto, and ſo by that meanes you may commy
                           •
                        te errour. As for Enſample thus briefely.
                     By a ſhippe that was .44. foote long by the Reele, and .20. foote broade vppon the mydſhippe beame, and dyd racke it wyth the

ſtem forwardes 13. foote, and the Sterne poſte dyd racke 7.An enſample of the altering of the burthen of a ſhip, and to keepe the moulde and proportion. foote offwardes, and the ſhippe was 9. foote deepe in holde. Now this ſhippe was .100. tonnes, my deſire is to haue a ſhippe of that ſelfe ſame moulde, in all poyntes, to be of iuſt double burthen, that is .200. tūnes. Then firſt multiply the lēgth of the keele cubitely, and that is 44. foote: therefore multiplye .44 tymes .44. and that maketh 1936. and then againe by 44. that maketh .85184. ſo it is multiplyed cubietly. Nowe double the number, and that maketh 170368. and nowe extract the cubite roote, and that will bee 55. foote and .3993.9075. parte, which maketh in ynches .5. and .⅗. partes of an ynche, ſo that you maye conclude, that the ſhippe muſt be .55. foote, and .5. ynches, and neere .32. quarters in length by the keele. And nowe for the breadth of the beame, and that is 20. foote, and .20. tymes .20. is .400. and that multiplyed by .20. maketh .8000. and this double is .16000. then extract the cubite roote, and that is .25. and .375.1875. and that maketh in ynches 2. and .⅗. partes of an ynche, ſo that you may conclude that the ſhip muſt be .25. foote and .2. ynches, and neare a halfe ynche vpon the beame, for the bredth of the ſhippe. And nowe for the racking of the Stem, that is .13. times .13. and that commeth to .169. and nowe cubitely, and that maketh 2197. Now this number double, maketh .4394. Nowe extracting the cubite roote it will be .16. and .298.768. and that commeth vnto .4 ynches and 4/7. partes: ſo that you may conclude, that the ſhippe muſt racke forwardes with the Stem .16. foote, & .4. ynches & neare .¾ partes. And now for the ſterne poſte, and that is .7. foote, therefore .7. tymes .7. is .49. and that multiplyed againe by 7. and that maketh .343. then it beyng double .686. then extract the cubite roote, and that is .8. and 174.1.92. and that commeth vnto .10. ynches, and .7.8. parte, ſo that you may conclude that the ſhippe muſt racke wyth the ſterne poſt 8. foote and .10. ynches, and .7.8. partes of an ynche. And now for the depth in the whole, that beyng 9. foote, 9. times .9. is .81. and that multiplyed cubitely, maketh 729. and that beyng doubled, then it is .1458. and then the cubite 
                           •
                        oote beyng extracted, is .11.

foote & 127. of 363. part, & that cōmeth vnto in ynches .4. & 4. of 5. partes, ſo that you may conclude that the ſhyppe muſte bee in deepeneſſe in holde, 11. foote and 4. ynches, and 4. of 5. partes of an ynche iuſte. And nowe the ſhippe of 100. tonnes, dyd drawe 12. foote, when that ſhee was Laden. Wherefore you muſt keepe a proportion, in all the partes of the worke, as is afore declared vnto you: then ſhall the ſhippe of 200. tonnes, drawe or goe into the water by this aforeſayde meanes, 15. foote, and one ynche and a halfe: and by this meanes which is the extracting of the cubicke roote, you may make a ſhippe or boate or any other crafte, of what burthen ſoeuer you 
                           •
                        yſt
                           •
                        
                        ▪ and to keepe that 
                           ••
                        ulde and proportion that the other was made of, in all poyntes. And by this meanes and order, you may know the quantity of any maner of Caſke, and to make it by proportion howe bygge or little ſoeuer you wyl haue it.
                  
                  
                     The ſeuenth Chapter dooth ſhewe in lyke manner the making of ſhippes by proportion, ſauing that the cubike roote is extracted already with an eaſye way howe to make them, of what tonnage or burthen, you liſte, and of that moulde and proportion in al poyntes.
                     ANd nowe for that I doo knowe the moſt parte of men cannot extract the cubike roote, for that kinde of Arithmeticke is very harde, and not eaſye too bee learned, therefore I meane to make a litle eaſye note▪ for that they ſhall not altogeather leeſe theyr tyme, in readyng of this, but that they ſhall haue ſome helpe for the doubling of cubes, although it bee nothing in the reſpect of them that haue the vſe of the ſeconde parte of Arithmeticks, as the extracting of rootes and cubes, and cubike numbers. &c.
                     
                        F
                           •
                        rſt thus: if ſo bee that you haue a cube or globe, and would haue an other as bygge agayne, or but one quarter more,Of Cubes. then put the ſyde of the cube, that you haue for enſample, into 4. equal partes, and if that you woulde haue that one quarter bygger, then make the bigger cube of 4. of thoſe partes and 1. of 3.To make a cube a quarter bigger. parte, and then haue you your deſyre. And if that you woulde haue it halfe ſo bygge more, ſtill putting the ſyde of that Cube that you haue for enſample, into 4. equall partes, then make the ſyde of the other cube of 4. of thoſe partes, and 2. 3. partes more, and that ſhal make an other cube as bygge, and halfe ſo bygge agayne, as the other.
                     And furthermore,To double a Cube or globe. if that you woulde haue a Cube to be two tymes the bigneſſe of the Cube that you haue for enſample, that is double meaſure, then put your Cube into 4. equall partes, and make the other Cube of 5. of thoſe partes, and 1 of 25. partes more, and that ſhal make a Cubbes bigge agayne:To make a Cube 3. times ſo bigge. and to haue a Cube three tymes ſo bygge, then make the Cube of 5. of thoſe partes, and 8. of 9. partes more, and that ſhal make a Cube .3. tymes ſo bigge.
                     And furthermore, for to haue a Cube 4. tymes ſo bygge, then make the Cube of 6. of thoſe partes and 5. of 14. partes. And furthermore, to make a Cube 5. tymes ſo bygge, then make the Cube of 6. of thoſe partes and 6. of 7. partes more:If a Cube or Globe be double meaſure, thē that is 8. times 
                              •
                           o bigge. then to make a cube 6. times ſo bigge, then make the cube of 7. of thoſe parts and 1. of 6. parte more, & if you would haue a cube 7. times ſo bygge, thē make that cube of 7. of thoſe parts, 13. of 18. parts more: thē if you would haue a cube .8. times ſo bigge, then double the meaſure, and that is iuſt 8. times ſo bygge without any fayle, as afore it is declared, the one being 4. and the other being .8. then your meaſure is doubled. Nowe this ſhort note or remembrance, you may accordyng vnto the Chapter going before, you hauing a ſhippe or boate that you woulde haue an other of that moulde and proportion in all poyntes, and woulde haue her as bygge agayne, more or leſſe, you may do
                           •
                         it by this 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        e afore written: as thus: if you would haue her as byg againe,

Then put the length of the Keele of the ſhippe that you woulde haue an other made by, and to keepe that moulde and proportion in all poyntes, into .4. equall partes, and then make the bygger of 5. of thoſe partes, and .1.25. howe large or ſhorte ſoeuer that it be, and doo this alſo by euery beame and euery principall Tymber: and euery other thing that leadeth any worke, and you ſhall not fayle of the truth, for ſo muche as this dooth ſhewe, which is nothing in the compariſon of them that can extract the cubite roote, it maketh not matter howe bygge or ſmall ſoeuer the proportion is. And this note is but till the roote is encreaſed to .8. times hys bygneſſe, and ſo muche as this dooth ſhewe, you ſhall fynde it reaſonable exact ynough.
                     And yet furthermore, this is an eaſier way to builde any ſhippe or boate by proportion.An eaſy way to make ſhips by proportion. And firſt this: if you doe meane to bee one quarter bygger, that is to ſay, if that you woulde haue a ſhippe of 4. ſcore tonnes, and 
                           〈◊〉
                         haue an other .100. tonnes: then for euery 12. foote or ynches, that the ſhippe that you haue for an enſample, is, in length, breadth, and deepeneſſe, and ſo conſequently euery parte that leadeth any worke, make the bygger of 13. foote or ynches, and you ſhal haue your deſire.
                     And f
                           •
                        rther, if that you woulde haue her halfe ſo bigge more, that is to ſay, your ſhippe that you haue for enſample, being .80. tonnes, and to haue the other 120. tonnes, then for euery 6. foote or ynches, make the other of 7. foote or ynches. And furthermore yf that you would haue her full as bygge agayne: then ſhal that be for euery 50. ynches, make the bygger 63. ynches, and then that Shippe ſhalbe of .160. tunnes, that is, double burthen. And then to bee three tymes ſo bygge, then for euery .36. ynches, make the bygger of .53. ynches. And then if that the leſſer ſhippe be .80. tonnes, the bygger ſhalbee 240. tonnes: and if that you woulde be 4. tymes ſo bygge: then for euery 56. ynches, make the bygger of 89. ynches, and then haue you your deſire, the one beyng 80. tonnes, the other ſhalbe 320. tonnes.
                     And further, if that you woulde haue bee 5. tymes ſo bigge, then for euery 7. foote or ynches make the bigger of 12.

foote or ynches, and then the one being 80. tonnes, the other ſhal be 400. tonnes, and if that you woulde haue the bygger to be .6. tymes ſo bygge, then for euery .24. ynches make the bygger of .43. ynches, and then the one being .80. tunnes, the other ſhalbe 480. tunnes, and then to be .7. times ſo bigge, for euery .72. ynches, make the bigger .139. ynches: and then the bigger ſhippe ſhalbe, 7. times ſo bigge: the leſſer beyng .80. tunnes, the bygger ſhalbe .560. tunnes: and then as afore is declared, if that the meaſure be double, then the bigger is .8. tymes ſo bygge: that is .640. tonnes.
                  
                  
                     The eight Chapter ſheweth howe muche that one rope is bigger then an other: and if that you haue a rope of any ſyſe, then you may knowe howe to haue another of what ſyſe you lyſte: and alſo if that you do knowe the waight of one rope: you may knowe the waight of anye rope by proportion.
                     YEt furthermore, I do thinke it conuenient for diuerſe conſiderations, for that I do do knowe that there is but very few Sea men, that hath the vſe of the extracting of the ſquare roote: and without that they cannot knowe howe for to fit a ſhippe with ropes, but that they muſt of force, many times put too bygge or too ſmal a rope in diuerſe places, not meete for that rome,How to a
                              ••
                           e
                              •
                            the bignes of ropes & how to double the ſyſe vntill they doo ſee it by common experience, and afterwardes amende it. Wherefore I wyll make a little briefe note, for the doublyng of ropes by proportion. And fyrſt by a rope of .3. ynches compaſſe: and to haue another as bigge agayne, ſome wil holde an opinion, that it muſt be .6. ynches compas, but then it is 4. tymes ſo bigge: therefore to haue it as bigge agayne, it muſt be in compaſſe .4. ynches, and 1. of 4. partes, and then to haue a rope of .3. times ſo bigge as the rope of .3. ynches compaſſe,

then that rope muſt be of 5. ynches, & .1. of 5. part, in cōpas: then to be 4. times ſo bigge, then that muſt bee double meaſure: that is 6. ynches compaſſe. Then too haue a rope .5. tymes ſo bygge: then that muſt be in compaſſe .6. ynches and .3. of .4. parte of an ynche: then to be 6. tymes ſo bigge, then it muſt be in compaſſe .7. ynches and .5. of 14. parte: and then .7. times ſo bigge to be in compaſſe .8. ynches, lacking 1. of .16. part▪ then to be 8. times ſo bigge, to be in compaſſe .8. ynches .1. of 2. part: then .9. times ſo bigge, to be in compaſſe, iuſt 9. ynches: then being 10. times ſo bigge: then it muſt be in compaſſe .9. ynches, and 9. of 20. parte: then 11. times ſo bygge, to be in copmaſſe .9. ynches, and 9. of 11. partes: and then to be 12. times ſo bigge, to be in compaſſe 10. ynches 2. of 5. partes: then .13. times ſo bigge, to be in compaſſe .10. ynches: and 17. of 20. part: then to be 14. times ſo bigge, as the rope of .3. ynches compas: therefore that muſt be 11. ynches, and 5. of 22. partes in compaſſe: then to be 15. times ſo bigge, then to be in compaſſe 11. ynches, and 7. of 11. partes: then 16. times ſo big, in compas iuſt 12. ynches. And then to be 17. times ſo big, thē to be in compas .12. ynches, & 3. of 8. parts: thē to be 18. times ſo big, then it wil be in compas 12. ynches, 9. of 12. part: & 19. times ſo big, then it wil be in compas 13. ynches, & 1. of 13. Then being .20. times ſo big, thē it wilbe in compas 13. ynches 11. of 26. parte: and then to be .21. times ſo bigge, it muſt be in compas .13. ynches 10. of 13. partes. Then to be 22. times ſo bigge: then it wilbe in compas 14. ynches and .1. of .14. partes: then to be .23. tymes ſo bigge, it wylbe in compas 14. ynches, and 11. of 28. parte: then too bee .24. tymes ſo bygge, it wilbe in compas 14. ynches, and .10. of 14. partes: then 25. tymes ſo bygge, too be in compaſſe iuſt 15. ynches: and then too bee 26. tymes ſo bygge: then it wyl be in compas 15. ynches, & 3. of 10. parts & then to be 27. tymes ſo bygge, it wyl be in compaſſe 15. ynches, 3. of 5. partes: and then too bee 28. tymes ſo bigge, that wylbee in compaſſe 15. ynches, and 9. of 10. partes: then 29. times ſo bygge too bee in compaſſe 16. ynches, and 5. of 32. partes.

Then too bee 30. times ſo bygge to be in compaſſe 16. ynches, and 7. of 16. parte: and then to bee 31. times ſo bygge, to bee in compaſſe 16. ynches, and 23. of 32. parte: then to be 32. times ſo bygge, muſt be in compaſſe 17 ynches, lacking 1. of 34. part: and then to be 33. times ſo bigge, that wilbe in compaſſe 17. ynches, and 4. of 17. part: and then to be 34. times ſo bigge, it wilbe in compaſſe 17. ynches, and 1. of 2. part: and then to be 35 times ſo bigge, that wilbe in compas 17. ynches, and 13. of .17. part: and then to be 36. tymes ſo bygge, it wilbe in compas iuſt. 18. ynches. And then to be 37. times ſo bigge, then too bee in compas 18. ynches, and 1. of 4 part: then 38. times ſo bigge, to be in compas 18. ynches, and 1. of 2. parte, and then to be 39. times ſo bygge, it wylbe in compas 18. ynches, and 3. of 4. parte: then to be 40. times ſo bigge, it wilbe in compas 19. ynches, lacking 1. of 38. part. And nowe by this litle note, you may knowe howe bigge or ſmal that one rope is by another, ſo that the ropes bee all of one kinde of ſtuffe, and alſo of lyke hardenes in the woorekmanſhippe, or laying.
                     And yet furthermore, I do thinke it conuenient, for to cōpare one rope by another, of the bigger ſort:Of doubling of the bigneſſe of of ropes. for that which goeth before, they be all compared but vnto one rope of 3. ynches compas. And fyrſt by a rope of 6. ynches compas: and to haue another as bigge agayne, that muſt be in compas 8. ynches, and 1. of 2. parte: and to haue a rope 3. times ſo bigge as that of .6. ynches compas, that muſt be in compas 10. ynches, & 2. of 5 parts: and then to be 4. times ſo bygge, as afore is declared, that muſt be double meaſure 12. ynches compas. And you haue another, of 7. ynches compas, and would haue another as bygge agayne, it muſt be in compas, 9 ynches, and 17. of 18 partes: and to haue another 3. tymes ſo bygge, muſt be in compas .12. ynches, and 1. of 8. part: and 4 times ſo bygge, is 14. ynches compas: then you hauing a rope or cable of 8. ynches cōpas, & would haue another, as bygge againe, then that muſt be in compas .11. ynches, and 7. of 22. partes: and to be 3. times ſo bigge, that muſt be in compas 13. ynches, and 23. of 26. partes: and 4. times ſo big, double meaſure, that is 16. ynches.
                     
                        And then you hauing a rope or cable of 9. ynches compaſſe, and too haue an other cable as bygge agayne, muſt be in compas 12. ynches, 3. of 4. partes: and then to bee 3. tymes ſo bygge, muſt be in compaſſe .15. ynches, and 3. of 5. partes: and then to be .4. tymes ſo bigge, that is double meaſure .18. ynches. Nowe you hauing a cable of .10. ynches, and woulde haue another, as bygge agayne, that muſt be in compaſſe .14. ynches, and .1. of 7. parte: and to be .3. tymes ſo bygge, muſt be in compaſſe .17. ynches, and .11. of .34. partes: and to be .4. tymes ſo bygge, to bee .20. ynches. Nowe you hauing a cable of .11. ynches, and to haue another as bygge agayne, that muſt be .15. ynches, and .17. of 30. partes: and to be 3. times ſo bigge, muſt be in compaſſe .19. ynches, and 1. of .19. parte. Then to be 4. tymes ſo bygge, to bee double meaſure, that is, 22. ynches. Then you hauing a cable of .12. ynches compas. And to haue another as bygge agayne, that muſt be in compas 17. ynches, lacking .1. of 33. partes: and to be .3. tymes ſo bygge, muſt be .20. ynches, and .4. of 5. partes: and to be .4. tymes ſo bygge double meaſure, that is, 24 ynches in compas, and then furthermore, if that you haue a cable of .13. ynches, and woulde haue another as bygge agayne, then that muſt bee in compaſſe .18. ynches, and 7. of 18. partes, and to bee .3. tymes ſo bigge, muſt be in compaſſe 22. ynches, 23. of .44. partes: and then you hauing a cable of .14. ynches, and would haue another as bygge agayne, then ſhal that be in compaſſe .19. ynches, & 31. of .38. partes. Thē you hauing a cable of .15. ynches compaſſe, and to haue an other, as bigge agayne, then ſhal that cable be in compaſſe .21. ynches, and 3. of 14. partes. Nowe I do thinke this ſufficient yenough, for to knowe the proportion of ropes, the one by the other, and alſo by thys little note they may fitte any ſhyppe wyth a maſte, dooyng, euen as you doo by the proportion of ropes, in all poyntes: for if that you ſhoulde double the meaſure of any maſte, that Maſt ſhalbe .4. tymes the bigneſſe of the other, ſo that by the order of the proportion of ropes or cables, they may knowe the proportion of the maſtes without any fayle.
                     
                        And furthermore, I doe thinke it conuenient to ſhew vnto you, how to double any rope or Maſt: and that you ſhall doe thus:Howe to double any rope or maſt, by extractiō of the ſquare roote. Take the Compaſſe of that rope that you haue for enſample, and that being knowne: then multiplye that number in it ſelfe: then that being doone, looke what quantitye you woulde haue the other bigger: then encreaſe that number vnto that bigneſſe, then extract the ſquare roote therof, and that rope ſhalbe in compaſſe your deſyred purpoſe. As for enſample thus, by a rope of 5 ynches compas, & I would haue an other rope as big againe, & you muſt do that in this manner. Fyrſt multyplye that rope in it ſelfe number, that is to ſay, 5. times 5. and that maketh 25: then double that number, and then that is double 50. and then the ſquare roote of .50. is 7. & 1. of 14. ſo that you may conclude that the rope of 7. ynches compaſſe, and 1. of 14. parte, is as bigge agayne as that rope of .5. ynches compaſſe: and by this order you may double anye rope as often as you lyſt.
                     And now furthermore, in lyke manner,Enſample if that you doe knowe the waight of the fadome of one rope, you may eaſely knowe the wayght of a fadome of an other rope, how bigge or ſmall ſoeuer that it be, as thus: double the proportion of the 2. ropes, and multiply them as you doe in fractions: ſuppoſe it as thus. I haue a cable of 13. ynches compaſſe, and that waigheth 16. pounde euerye fadome: Nowe what ſhal a fadome of that cable, waigh
                           •
                         both of one kynde of that ſtuffe, that is 16. ynches compaſſe? Fyrſte multiplye .10. tymes 10. and that is 100. and then multyplye .16. times 16. and that maketh 256. and then multiplye the number of the bigger rope by the waight of the leſſer, that is to ſay .256. times 16. and that maketh 4096. and now deuide this number by the number of the leſſer rope, and that is 100. and then there will ſtande in the quantytie Lyne 40. and 96. wyll remayne ouer: ſo that you may ſee the cable of 16. ynches compaſſe, that a fadōe therof doth waigh neare 41. poūde, & by this order you may know the waight of any rope or cable, and if that you would know the waight of a leſſer rope; you knowing the waight of his bigger, then multyply as afore is ſayde, and then ſhall you multiplye the waight of the bigger with the number of the leſſer, and then deuid
                           •
                        
                        
that ſūme by the number of the bigger, and ſo ſhal you know how many pounde that a fadome of the leſſer rope waieth. As for Enſample thus, by the cable afore mentioned, of 10. ynches compas, and a fadome dyd weigh .16. pounde, what ſhall a fadome of a rope of 8. ynches in compaſſe waigh: Nowe as before is declared .10. tymes .10. is .100. and .8. times .8. is 64. therefore multiplye 64. by 16. and that maketh 1024. and then deuide that by 100. and then there wyll ſtande in the quantitye Lyne 10. and 24. wyll remayne ouer: ſo that you may conclude that the rope of 8, ynches, that euery fadome doth way 10. pounde and neare a quarter, and this is true without any fayle, and by this order you may know the waight of all manner of ropes. &c.
                  
                  
                     The ninthe Chapter is as touching the mould of Shippes, to haue good qualities.
                     ANd furthermore, in as much as I haue ſhewed how for 
                           •
                        o double or alter the tonnage or the burthen of Shippes too what bigneſſe you lyſt at your diſcretion, and alſo to keepe that moulde and proportion in all poyntes: therfore I doe thinke it neceſſary and conuenient to ſay ſomewhat in this poynt, that is to ſay, what manner of forme or faſhion that the mould of a Ship ſhould be, that ſhoulde goe or fayle wel, and to haue good qualyties in the Sea. And although that it is poſſible that ſome wyll think that I doe meddle with thoſe matters that I haue no ſkyl in for that I am neither Naupager or ſhip carpēter, neither vſuall Sea man: therfore it is poſible tha
                           •
                         I maye be diſlyked, for that I doe meddle in this matter or cauſes. Yet not with ſtanding you that do reade this, vſe not to condemne any thing before that you haue peruſed it well: and ſo wayinge it in a payre of indifferent ballances, that affection doth not leade you, it is poſſible that it is not altogether vntrue, but that there is ſome matter in it that is good to bee conſydered of in the buildinge or the makyng of ſhips: and thoſe matters that you doe knowe by experience to be vntrue, thē you neede not make any account thereof. &c.
                     
                        And fyrſt thus,Of Ships that ſayle well with the wiend. as concerning the making of the moulde of any ſhips, this is to be noted, that thoſe ſhips that are of eaſye draft, that is to ſay, not to goe to deepe in the Sea or water, and wyll beare a good ſayle, and doth ſtere well, that is to ſay, that it wyll feele the Ruther as ſoone as the Helme or Tyller is put to or fro, and thoſe ſhips doe goe or ſayle well beeringe or afore the winde, that is to ſay, the winde to be large or to come right after them, all thoſe ſhips doe ſayle well and cloſe by the winde, that is to ſay, the Bowline to be haled harde or cloſe, and the ſhip to ſtande or come as neare the winde as may be: thoſe Shippes muſt draw a reaſonable draft of water: and alſo to be a reaſonable good length, and theſe ſhips wyll goe well a head the ſea,Of Ships that ſayle wel by the Bowlyne to be harde pulled or alſo to ſayle well a hed the Sea. that is to ſay, the Ship to ſtande cloſe by the winde in ſuch places as the grating of the tyde doth cauſe the ſea to come agaynſt the head or bowes of the Ship. Then thoſe ſhips that haue a reaſonable length and well breſted or bowed, and not the buttockes or ſterne of the ſhip to be to bigge or to full quartered behinde, but to bee reaſonable lancke at the Sterne, thoſe ſhippes do goe or ſayle well a hed the Sea, ſo that they wyll beare a good ſayle,Of ſhips that ryde well or yll at ancor. and not ouer helde, that is to ſay, not to goe to muche on the one ſyde, but if that any ſhip be too fat buttocked or brode behind at the ſterne, & the bowes or breſt of the ſhip before be to ſlender or narrowe, thoſe Ships wyll neuer goe or ſayle well a hedde the ſea, but wyll fall or beate into the ſea, that it wyll let or hynder the way or goyng of the Shippe. And alſo thoſe Shippes wyll ryde very yll at rode or ancor in the Sea, for that the broadneſſe of the buttockes of the Shippe dooth ſo thruſte downe the head of the Shippe into the Sea, and eſpecially if that the bowes of the Ship he to narrow or ſlender, that the Sea ſhall flye into the ſhip or quite ouer her, as well at an ancor or ſayling, or goyng a hedde the ſea: which is a very yll propertie in a ſhip in a number of cauſes. And all thoſe ſhips that doth draw or go a good deepenes into the water; as before is ſaide, doe ſaile wel by the wind, & alſo wil ly a holde wel in the ſea, that is to ſay, the ſhip hauing no ſayle abrode, wyl not ſeele in rolle ſo much, neither in lyke maner it wil not go ſo much vnto lewards, that is to ſay, that the wind nor the

ſea ſhall not driue it ſo faſt back agayne, as it wyll doe a Shyppe that doth draw or go but a litle way into the Water: and alſo thoſe Shippes that doe drawe but a lytle water, bee very yll in two cauſes, if that they doe lye a holde in the ſea, that is to ſaye, to haue no ſayle abrode, for they wyll ſeel or rolle in ſuch ſorte that it wyll put al in daunger, beſydes the driuinge to lewardes with the ſea & winde. Therefore theſe Ships muſt haue alwayes ſayles abroade, if they be looſe at the ſea, and alſo thoſe kynde of Shyps wyl ryde yll at an ancker, at ſuch time as the tyde doth goe vnto the wyndewardes, for lying thwart, it wyll ſeel or rolle ſo much. But the wynde and tyde to bee al one, that the Ships head to bee right vppon the Sea, and as before is ſayde, the Ship wel bowed, and the Sterne not to full quartered, then it wyll ryde very well at an anker at that time. &c.
                     
                        Of Ships that 
                              •
                           ere well and doe heare a good Sayle.And now furthermore, as touching the building or makyng of Shippes for to ſtere well, and alſo to beare a good ſayle, which is two of the beſt qualyties that is or may be in a Ship: and except that it be a very chance thoſe Ships doo alwayes ſayle very wel, if that the moulde of them be any thing well ordered in the forme thereof. &c. And although that the moulde of a Shippe be neuer ſo finely made, and if it doe not ſtere well, then it can neuer ſayle wel. And alſo if the mould of the Ship be neuer ſo well made, and yf it wyll beare no ſaile but ouer heeld, that is to ſay, to lay downe the ſyde in the water, then it can neuer goe well, how fyne ſo euer the moulde is, for it is yll ſhapen to goe, when al the one ſyde is downe in the water, and the other ſyde all out of the water, and then it cannot abide the force of the wynde to driue it: whereas the Ship that is able to beare a good ſayle, muſt needes goe wel, for that the force of the winde muſt needes draw it, for that it is able to beare ſayle, and then the winde muſt needes force it to goe. &c. And fyrſte thus, as touchinge the cauſe that any Ship doth ſtere wel, is this: that the quicke water of the way of the Shippe doth come vnto the Ruther being put eyther the one way or the other way, that muſt needes, cauſe the Ship to caſt or turne accordingly and the faſter that the ſhippe goeth, the nimbler or quicker the ſhip

ſteereth or turne
                           •
                        h.
                     Therefore when ſoeuer that they doe builde or make anye Shyppes, then it is good for to lette them make the moulde of a Shyppe to haue a ſufficient tucke or runne, whiche tucke or runne muſt bee in length the thyrde parte of the length of the Reele, and in height, by the ſtearne poſt, three quarters of that depth that the Shyppe goeth into the Water,A thing to bee noted. and ſo to growe narrower and narrower forwardes: for it is the ſufficientneſſe of the tucke or runne that maketh a Shyppe to ſtere well. For if that bee not well made, then it requireth to haue the broder Ruther, and that is euell in two reſpectes: the one is this: the Helme beynge putte ouer, and yf that the Shyppe wyll not feele the Ruther quicklye, then the Ruther lyeth croſſe the Stearne of the Shyppe: and the Ruther beynge broade, then it muſt needes hynder or lette the goynge or way of the Shyppe verye muche: Whereas a Shyppe that hath but a narrowe Ruther, and yet is yare or quicke of ſterrage, then the Ruther cannot hynder the goynge or way of the Ship: &c.
                     And alſo it is euill in an other reſpecte to haue a broade Ruther, and that is this: for a Shyppe beinge at Sea in foule weather, a broade Ruther the Sea doth beate it one waye and an other way, by the meanes of the labouring of the Shyp to and fro, that it is apte to breake the tyller or the head of the Ruther & Ruther Irons: and beſydes that, it is vneaſye for the Shyppe in lyke manner. &c.
                     And thus I doe omitte the reſt of the proportion of the moulde of the Shippe vnto the diſcretion of the Naupeger or Shyppe Carpenter, as touchinge the fore waye and the flowringe of the Shyppe, and the leadyng of all the reſt of the woorke &c.The cauſe that a Ship doth beare a good ſayle. And furthermore, as touching this poynte to cauſe a Shyppe to haue a ſtiffe ſyde to beare a good ſayle, then this muſt be conſydered in the buildinge or makynge thereof: and fyrſte thus: that commonly thoſe Shippes that haue a ſufficient breadth accordynge vnto their biggneſſe and length, wil beare a reſonable good ſaile, for that the breadth doth beare it vp.
                     
                        But commonly thoſe be not the beſt, and fyneſt Saylers, neyther are they of the beſt qualities, in diuers reſpects. Yet notwithſtanding, in my opinion, this is the principalleſt poynt to obſerue in the building of ſhips, to haue them to beare a good ſayle, and that is this, for to lay the breadth of the Shippe aboue the water, a foote, or a foot and a halfe, more or leſſe, according vnto the bigneſſe of the ſhippe, and to hange wel of, that is to ſay, to be 4. or 6. ynches on a ſyde broder then it is iuſte at the edge of the water, and to be more or leſſe, according vnto the bigneſſe of the Shippe: and then vpwardes the worke may be houſed inwardes, that is too ſaye, narrower and narrower vpwardes, which wyll doo well, both for the eaſe of the Shyppe in the Sea, and leſſe charge of Tymber bathe in wayght, and otherwyſe: and in ſo dooing, the Shyppe wyll beare a good Sayle, what lengthe ſo euer it haue, howe fine ſo euer the mould is, ſo that it haue quarters proportionally vntoo it. &c.
                     And the cauſe thereof is this: the breadth of the Shyppe being aboue the water in ſuch ſorte, as if the Shyppe come vnto heelding, that the ſame broder place dooth come into the water: then the Nadry or Reele of the ſhippe, dooth growe the further of, by the meanes of the hanging ofwardes of the ſyde or worke of the Shyppe.
                     And for that the ballaſt or the lading of the Shippe, the waightieſt part lyeth downewardes towardes the Reele, therfore it maketh the ſhippe the lother to helde a toſyde, for that the ſyde hangeth outwardes, and then the water doth ſupporte it vp, for that the bigger or broder parte is out of the water, as the reaſon thereof more playnelye ſhall appeare in the fourth Booke of the propertie of Water in waight, called Statick, wherein you ſhal ſee the reaſon thereof more manifeſtly &c. Whereas thoſe Shyppes that haue an vpright ſyde, muſt needes helde much the ſooner, for that the Water doth not ſupporte the ſyde, not vntyll it doe helde very much.
                     Wherefore thus much I haue ſayde as touchinge the moulde

of Shippes, as concerning theyr qualyties, as thus:Note a Shippe that hath Tucke or Runne ynough, wyl ſteare well: a Shippe that doth hange well of on the nayle aboue the water, wyll beare a good ſayle: a Shippe that doth draw a reaſonable good drafte of Water, and well wayed forwardes, wyll ſayle well by the winde: and beinge well bowed and not to fatte buttocked, wyll goe well a head the ſea, and alſo ryde well at rode, and alſo wyll hold well at the Sea looſe. and floty Shippes that ſ
                           •
                        eere well and wyll beare a good ſayle, wyll ſayle well, the 
                           •
                        ynde beyng large. &c. And thus I doe ende this thyrde Booke. &c.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ A Table of the Contentes of the Chapters of the thirde booke, called a rteaſure for Trauailers.
                  The firſt Chapter of the thyrde Booke, ſheweth you howe to caſte the contentes of lande by Arithmeticke, and alſo by the husbande mans rule, which is by the accounte of money. &c.
                  The ſeconde Chapter ſheweth how to meaſure board and Glaſſe, and too caſte the contentes thereof, with other neceſſary thinges belonging therunto.
                  The thirde Chapter dooth ſhewe howe for too meaſure Tymber, and to bring it too a ſquare, aſwell without Artihmetike as otherwyſe, and alſo howe for too knowe the true contentes of any peece of Tymber.
                  The fourth Chapter ſheweth howe for to meaſure all manner of bodies, as Tymber, or ſtone, Cubes, or Globes: and too knowe what proportion of meaſure or waight the one hath vnto the other.
                  The fyfthe Chapter ſheweth howe for to meaſure Globes, and to know their contents in ynches or feete.
                  The ſyxt Chapter ſheweth howe for too builde Shyppes by proportion, that is to ſaye, if that you haue one Shippe for an enſample, if you woulde haue an other as bigge agayne, more or leſſe this Chapter doth ſhewe vnto you howe you may doe it, keeping that moulde and proportion in all poyntes, that is too ſaye, by extractynge of the Cubicke roote.
                  The ſeuenth Chapter dooth ſhewe in lyke manner the making of ſhippes by proportion, ſauing that the Cubike roote is extracted already: with an eaſye way howe to make them of what tonnage or burthen you liſte.

and of that moulde and proportion in al poyntes.
                  The eight Chapter ſheweth howe much that one rope is bigger then another: and if that you haue a rope of anye ſyſe, that you may know how for to haue another, of what ſyſe that you liſte, and alſo if that you doo knowe the waight of one rope, you may know the waight of any rope by proportion. &c.
                  The nynth Chapter is, as touching the moulde of Shippes, to haue good qualities.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                     
                        ❧The fourth Booke of the treaſure for trauaylers.
                     Wherein is touched the arte of Staticke or waight, ſhewing vnto you howe you may knowe the waight of any Shyppe that ſwymmeth vppon the water, with al her ladyng, and al the reſt of her furniture. And alſo howe you may know the waight of any mettal that is ſunke in the water, to knowe what it wayeth in the water, and alſo how you may meaſure any ſtrange forme, ſuche as Geometrie cannot geue you any order for the meaſuring thereof, and alſo howe for too lyfte or way any thing ſin
                           ••
                        e into the water, with other neceſſarie matters belonging therunto, very neceſſary for al land men, and ſeam
                           •
                        n. &c.
                     Written by William Bourne.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     To the Reader of this fourth Booke.
                     
                        GEntle Readers, it is poſſible that you wyll maruayle, that I ſhoulde take vppon mee too deale in theſe cauſes, that is to ſay, to teache any newe Art, and Science, that hath not been as hytheretoo, written in any language or tongue, the which Art or Science, called Staticke, dooth ſhewe the heauineſſe or lightneſſe of any thing.
                     Wherefore there is conteyned in this fourth Booke, howe too knowe the waight of any thing ſwymmyng in the water, as the waight of any ſhyppe, with all her lodyng, and all her furniture: as Ordinaunce, Ankers, Cabels, Maſtes, Sailes, with al other Implementes in them, and alſo it doth ſhew the waight of any thing ſunke into the water, what it wayeth, to be lifted from the bottome, tyl the appearing of it aboue the ſuperficies of the water: with dyuers other neceſſarye matters that are conteyned in this fourth Booke, and not before this tyme mentioned by any other, but onely by that famous and learned man Mayſter Iohn Dee, who hath made mention thereof in his Mathematicall preface, wherein I haue hadde my principall inſtructions, as touching that Arte or Science.
                     Wherefore Gentle Reader, beare with my rudeneſſe, that I being vtterly vnlearned, ſhoulde enterpryſe too take vppon mee too bee ſo bolde, too geue the fyrſt attempt, to imploye that Art or Science vnto any purpoſe: for I do knowe the nature of moſt people, is to diſlyke al thinges that are not done by them ſelues, whether it be good or euyll: and as I haue knowen many tymes by experience, that thoſe perſons that haue learned anye thing at any mans hande, when he dooth vnderſtande it, then he wyll not be knowen where

he learned it, but that he knew that before or euer he ſhewed it vnto him, which is a manifeſt robbery of any man, to learn any thing at any mans hande, & then afterwards to deny it, & to ſay, that he knewe it before he tolde it hym: as I do knowe a number of perſons, that when they are ignorant in matters, then they wyl vſe diligence tyl they haue atteyned it, and then when they haue a little inſtructions to ſerue their turnes, then they wil ſeeme too bee verye cunnyng, and that they neuer learned anye thyng at any mannes hande, which is a great poynt of ingratitude, too offer that perſon that he hath learned of, ſuch a greate iniury: but yet notwithſtanding the earth is greatly infected, with ſuch maner of perſons.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The fourth booke, of the treaſure for trauailers.
                  
                     The fyrſt Chapter of the fourth Booke, ſheweth you by the proportion of a Shyp ſwimming in the water, for to knowe the true waight of any Shippe, with all hir tackle, ordinance, and lading. &c.
                     
                        FOR that I haue ſayde ſomewhat heretofore as touchinge the makyng of Ships by proportion and otherwiſe: Therefore I doe thinke it neceſſary and conuenient to treate partly of this, as touching the nature and qualytie of water, for the ſinkinge or ſwimming of thinges in it, and accordyng vnto the ſimple opinion of the common people,Of things that doo ſwymme. who thinke that things in the water do ſwimme or ſyncke, for that it is Woode, Iron, or Stone: but the onely cauſe of thinges that doo ſwimme, is this, that it is lyghter then the proportion in quantitie, then the water is. For this is generall for euer: Looke how much of any Tymber or any other thinge that is hydde, or in lownes euen with the water, as iuſt of waight as of ſo much water, as the true quantity of that parte that is from the edge of the water downewardes into the water neyther heauier nor lighter, and then that parte that is aboue the water doth ſhew iuſtly what diuerſytie of waight is betweene the water and the woode, or any other ſtuffe that is putte into the water. For any thing ſwimming in the water, the halfe being aboue the water, and the other halfe vnderneath the water, that thing that ſwimmeth in that forme, is iuſt halfe the waight of ſo much water: and if in the ſwimming .3. quarters be buryed in the water, that thinge is iuſte 3. quarters of the waight of ſo

much water, and ſo foorth, to any other proportion, and then adding ſo much in wait, to make it of the iuſt waight of the water: then that thinge being in the water, ſhall ſwimme euen with the edge of the water neither hygher nor lower. But if it bee any thing heauier then the proportion of ſo muche water, then it ſinketh vnto the bottome: and then looke how much in waight it is heuier thē the proportiō of ſo much water: ſo much it waieth in the water the lighter,Of things that ſynke. as the waight of the water cōmeth vnto. For if ani thing in the water, be double the waight of the water, proportiō for proportiō, then ſhal that thing waigh iuſt half the quantytie of that waight, til it be lyfted from the bottome vnto the very edge of the water, and then if that the thinge doe waigh but halfe the waight more then the quantitie of ſo much water: then ſhall that thing in the water to be waighed, waigh but one thyrde part of his waight that it would waigh, if that it were out of the water, and ſo foorth to any other waight or waightes, hauing proportion in bigneſſe, according to the quantitie of the water, whether it bee Braſſe, Stone, or Iron, or any other ſtuffe what ſoeuer it be. And alſo things that do ſwimme, as wood, or any other ſtuffe. Wherfore this is to be noted by the way, the perfect waight of any ſhip with all her ladyng, Ordinaunce, Maſtes, Sayles, and Tackle, with all other implementes in her, may be eaſyly knowen by her onely ſwimming, as thus:
                     Looke what quantitie of the Ship is buryed in the water, that is to ſay, from the edge of the water downwards: then if there were a veſſell or great thing made of the proportion of the moulde of a Shyppe, as much as is buried in the water, if that were filled with that water that the ſhip were in, the water ſhoulde be of iuſt equall waight, that the Ship were of, with all her tackle and implements in her. And now this being true, as it is moſt certayne, then the waight of the water being knowne, any veſſel or body is to bee meaſured by Geometrycall meanes. &c.
                     And furthermore, here is one ſpeciall thinge to be noted, and that is this,Al water is not of lyke waight. all waters are not of lyke waight, for the fineſt water is lighteſt: therfore if that any Ship be in the lighteſt water, then dooth ſhee ſwimme the deeper, according vnto the waight of the

Shyp, and the waight of the water, quantitie for quantitie, and in lyke manner any Shyp being in the heauier water, then ſhal not the Shyp ſwimme ſo deepe, for that the water of his owne force, wyll lyft the Ship out of the water, vntill there be that iuſt quantitie and proportion, according vnto the iuſt wayght of the water and waight of the Shippe: for this is ſeene dayly by common experyence, amongſt Sea men and maryners, that if you doo lade any Shippe in a freſh water or ryuer very deepe,Salt water is the heauieſt water. then when ſhee is in the Sea, and ſpecially in the Occient Sea, that the Shippe ſhal be lifted vp hygher by .3. or .4. ynches out of the water wards: And then when the Shippe is come agayne into a freſhe water ryuer, then ſhe ſhal be as low laden as ſhe was before. Wherfore in the buildyng of Ships, the one of the principal poynt
                           •
                        s is this, the flowring and quarteryng of them: for there may .2. ſhips be made both of one length, and of one breadth, and of one deepeneſſe in the water, and yet the one may bee 
                           •
                        eare as bigge agayne as the other, for if that the one bee full quartered, and a broade flat flowre, (as the Hulks bee commonly) it muſt needs be of a greater burthen, then a ſharpe Shippe that hath neyther flowre nor quarters, as commonlye the Spaniſh building is: for the water cannot beare it before it be deepe yenough into the water: therfore theſe kinds of Shyps drawe very much water & bee but of ſmall burthen, for a ſharpe Shippe muſt haue very muche ballaſt, or els ſhee wyll beare no ſayle: and eſpeciallye if they bee verye highe builded or larged aboue the water. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſeconde Chapter ſheweth how for to meaſure the proportion of the mould of any Shyp, wherby is knowne the waight of any Shyppe with all hir ladynge and furniture.
                     
                        FOR to knowe howe to meaſure the proportion of the moulde of a Shippe whereby may be knowne hir waight, with all hir ladinge, it is ſomewhat tedious, and aſketh long woorke, and muſt be preciſely handeled, for that it keepeth no forme long together: therfore it muſt bee meaſured in manye parts.
                     
                        Howe to meaſure the mould of a Shippe.And for to meaſure the moulde of a Shyppe, the Shippe muſt bee brought a grounde, and then beginne at the broadeſt place of the Shippe in this manner: Fyrſte meaſure the breadthe of the Shyppe from outſyde vnto outſyde, at that very place of the vpper edge that the Shippe dooth ſwimme in deepeneſſe into the water: then that beinge knowne, meaſure the true deepeneſſe that the Shippe dooth ſwimme into the water, at that place of the broadeſt parte of the Shyppe: then that beinge knowne, take the true contentes of halfe the breadth of the Shippe, and then with a rodde or pole lay the ende of the rod or pole that is iuſt the length of halfe the breadth of the Shippe, vnto iuſt the halfe Keele in breadth at that place before ſpoken of, and then with an other rod or pole of the iuſt length that the Shppe doth ſwimme in deepeneſſe into the water, laye the ende of that rodde or pole at that place that the vpper edge of the water dooth touche: and then let both the other endes of the two rods or poles touch iuſt together, and ſo wil they make a ſquare Angle: and then meaſuring or trying betweene the Ship and the 2. roddes or poles as you doe in the meaſuringe of ſuperficiall or plat formes, ſo ſhall you knowe the contentes of that parte that is within the inſyde of the Shippe, by ſubtractynge or

takinge away of that meaſure betweene the two roddes or poles with the outſyde of the Shyp, for that you muſt conſyder that it is a ſquare incloſed from the middle of the inſyde of the Shyppe, vnto the deepeneſſe that the Shyp doth ſwimme in the water, and vnto the two roddes or poles, and hath foure ſquare or righte Angles or corners: and then if that you doe multyply it according vnto the breadth of the ſhippe and the deepeneſſe that the Shyp doth goe into the water, as you woulde doe yf that it were a plat forme: then pulling away the contentes of that ſame being doubled that the meaſure is betweene the Shyppe ſyde, and the two roddes or poles, then that which doth remayne ſhall be the true contentes of that parte which is within the inſyde of the Shyp as though it were a plat forme: and then looke how manye foote longe it runneth in that forme and proportion in breadth and roundeneſſe of the ſyde: then accordynge vnto the length multytiply the one by the other, 
                           •
                        hat is to ſay, the contentes of the meaſure before taken of the inſyde of the Shippe, and the length that the moulde doth keepe in one proportion, and then caſt the contēts therof. And that being done, do as before is rehearſed, accordyng vnto the breadth of the Ship in an other place: then accordyng vnto the deepenes that the Ship dooth ſwimme in the water, and then doyng with the two roddes or poles as before is rehearſed, and ſo trying betweene the Shyps ſyde, and the two roddes or poles, and caſtynge the contentes in all poyntes as before is rehearſed: and thus you muſte doe in as many places and as often times as the proportion of the moulde dooth alter: and then addyng them altogether, you muſt ſee howe many foote that the Shypp doth contayne, if it were all one whole peece of Timber, and not hollow within.
                     And now this being done exactly as it may be done with preciſe diligence, you knowing the true contentes howe many foote the ſoaled body of the moulde of the Shyppe doth contayne as much as is buryed into the water, you maye knowe iuſtlye the whole waight of that ſhip that you haue ſo meſured, with al her ladyng, ordinance, tackle, anker, and cables, with al other implementes

in her, as thus: Take of that water that the ſhip ſwimmeth in, and make a cube of mettall or wood of iuſt .12. ynches ſquare, and deepe: for that 12. ynches ſquare euery way, maketh a foote, and then waigh the water iuſtly howe many poundes and parte of a pounde the water dooth contayne in waight, and that ſhal ſhewe you iuſtly how many pounde and partes of a pounde euery foote ſquare of the moulde of the Ship dooth waigh iuſtly, and then if that you doo multiply the contentes of the number of feete, that the moulde is, and the waight that one foote of the water dooth waigh in poundes and partes, then accordyng vnto that number, the Shyp with all her ladyng, dooth waigh iuſtly without any fayle: ſo that you haue meaſured the moulde of the Shyp truely, and alſo waighed iuſtly the contentes of one foote of the water: and then by that number you may ſay iuſtly, it contayneth ſo many Tunnes in waight, as thus: by diuidyng the number of the waight of the Shippe by .2240. for that a Tunne conteyneth 20. hundreth waight, and euery .100. waight, to contayne 112. pounds.
                     And furthermore, you may meaſure the moulde of a Shyp in this maner, with ſuch a thing as the Shyppe Carpenters doo take the moulde of a Ship, and that they doo call a moulde, or lynck ginne, and that is made of many peeces, of a foote long, or there about, and it is clenched togeather with roffe and clenche, that the ioyning wyll be put to and fro at your pleaſure, and wyll ſtande ſtiffe as you doo leaue it.
                     And now with this inſtrument, you may woorke more eaſely then before is rehearſed: for to know the contentes or quantity of the moulde of any Shyp in this maner: Take at euery place the halfe of the true breadth of the ſhyp, and then in lyke manner the true deepeneſſe that the ſhyp dooth goe into the water, at euery place that you doo meaſure the Shyp at, for that all ſhyppes doo draw more water at the Sterne, then they doo at the head: and then you may put three pinnes of wood into the grounde, the one pinne to be at the midle of the ſhip, and the other to be for the outſyde of the ſhip, and the thyrde to be for the middle of the Keele of the Shyp, and to ſet them truely in diſtaunce, accordyng vnto the

halfe breadth of the ſhippe, and the other vnto the true deepneſſe that tht ſhip dooth goe into the water, and ſo ſhall that pinne for the middle of the Shyp, make a ſquare Angle vnto the pinne, for the ſyde and the keele of the ſhyppe, and then with the inſtrument lay that vnto the ſyde of the ſhyp, and put it in and out as the ſhip dooth rounde from the place of the vpper edge of the water vnto the Keele, and then laying that moulde of the Shyppe vnto the two pinnes, that is to ſay, to that pinne for the ſide, and the pinne for the Keele of the Shyp: and then meaſuryng that in cloſer, as you doo a platforme, the trueth of the contents ſhall appeare, and then doublyng that nūber, it wil ſhew you the contēts of the whole breadth of the Shyp, and then to multiply ſo much in length, as dooth keepe one proportion: And thus doyng as often tymes as the proportion of the moulde dooth alter, and then addyng al your numbers together, and caſting the contentes in all poynts, as before is rehearſed, the trueth of the ſolid body of the moulde of the Ship ſhall appeare, and ſo taking the true waight of one foote of that water, as before is expreſſed in all poyntes. And thus I doo make an ende of the meaſuryng of the moulde of Shyppes, for that there wanteth or lacketh nothing, but to ſhew how to meaſure plat formes, and as for thoſe matters, there are diuers bookes extant, ſufficient ynough for that purpoſe, as Maiſter Leonarde Digges in his booke called Tectonicon, and Maiſter Thomas Digges his booke called Pantometria, with other.
                  
                  
                     
                     The thyrde Chapter ſheweth you an eaſyer way then before rehearſed, by the Arte Saticall, to knowe the true waight of any Shyppe, with al hir lading, and all the reſt of hir furniture.
                     AND furthermore, for that it is ſomewhat tedious and aſketh longe woorke, beeſydes diuers other incombraunces that muſt bee vſed to meaſure the true proportion of the moulde of a Shyppe, I wyll ſhewe vnto you a more pleaſaunter and eaſyer waye (by the Arte Scaticall) both very true and exacte, for to know the true wayghte of any Shyp, with all her ladynge, Maſtes, Sayles, Ancors, Cables, and Ordynaunce, with all other implementes in her.
                     And any Noble manne, or Gentleman may doe it at home in hys Chamber, that hath any knowledge in the Mathematicall Sciences, as thus:
                     
                        An eaſyer waye to knowe the waight of a Shippe.Fyrſte cauſe the Carpenter that dooth builde the Shyppe, or otherwyſe, yf that you deſyre to knowe it by any other Shyppe that is builded already, yf that Shyppe haue any occaſion for to come a grounde: then get ſome cunninge Carpenter to take the true moulde of that Shyppe, as though that hee ſhoulde builde an other of that moulde and proportion in all poyntes, as muche as is buried into the water, when the Shippe is loade vnto her lode marke, & that being exactly done, then cauſe hym for to make the true moulde and proportion, then cauſe the Carpenter for to cut out of a peece of Tymber the true proportion of the moulde of the Shyppe in all poyntes, as thus.
                     
                        For euery foote long, make the moulde in Tymber in length, an ynche: and for the breadth in lyke manner, for euery foote make the other an ynche, and alſo for euery foote in deepeneſſe, that the Shyp ſwymmeth into the water, make the moulde in Tymber one ynche, and ſo conſequently euery parte and place bothe of the roune, and way, and floore, with the quarters of the Shyp, to cutte the moulde for euery foote, and part of a foote, an ynch, with thoſe partes, euen as the woorke or moulde of the Shyppe dooth runne, in all poyntes: and that beeing exactly doone, then let there be made in ſome kinde of mettall, as Leade or Tynne, the true proportion of the moulde, hollowe, and thight, that it may holde water, as the moulde in woode will ſhewe or leade them howe to doo it verye truly: and then that beeyng doone, then cauſe an other ſquare veſſel too bee made of mettall in Cubicke wyſe, ſuche a one as you may meaſure the hollowe thereof as eaſilye as you may meaſure a ſquare peece of Tymber, and if that there were lynes or prickes at euery ynche in deepeneſſe, it were all the better.
                     And then this beeing doone, then fyll that veſſell, that is made for the moulde of the Shyppe, with that water that the Shyppe doeth ſwymme in, and that beeyng exactly fylled, then put that water into the other veſſel, and looke that there be none of the water ſhed, then you may knowe iuſtlye howe many ynches ſquare that the water is, by meaſuring the water with an ynche rule: and that beyng knowne, then you doe knowe howe manye foote that the ſolled body of the moulde of the Shyppe doeth conteyne. And then waying inſtlye one foote ſquare euery way of that water, and then you knowing howe manye poundes, and partes of a pounde, that one foote ſquare of water doeth waye, then multiplye the number of feete of the Ship, with that you haue founde before, by powring the water into the ſquare veſſel: and then for euerye ynche, the Shyppe is a foote, and ſo by that number multiplyed by the number of the wayght of the pounds, and partes of poundes, the true wayght of the Shyp ſhal appeare: and if you doe committe any errour, the fault ſhalbee in not waying, and meaſuring of it trulye.
                     
                        
                        The enſample of the knowing the waight of a ſhyppe.And for your better vnderſtanding hereof, you ſhall haue an enſample of that matter before rehearſed, by a ſhip of .100. tonnes, and the length of the moulde of the Shyppe, to be 50. foote long, and the broadeſt place of the moulde to be .20. foote broade, and the deepeneſſe that the Shyppe goeth into the water, to bee .12. foote: and I firſt cauſed the Carpenter to take the true moulde of the Shyppe, and alſo to catte the moulde in woode, according vnto the length, breadth, and deepeneſſe, that is to ſay, for the .50. foote long, to be 50. ynches, and for the 20. foote broade, to bee 20. ynches: and for the 12. foote deepe, to be 12. ynches, with al the other proportion of the moulde of the Shyp, to be one ynch for a foote: And that doone, there was cauſed too bee made a moulde in Lead, agreable in all poyntes, to the moulde of the ſhp, as Lead, wil marke eaſily yenough: and then there was made the other veſſel in Leade of 12. ynches ſquare, and .48. ynches deepe, and then the moulde for the Shyp was fylled with water, and that being iuſtly, and equally fylled, the water was put into the ſquare veſſell, and then the deepnes of the water was exactly meaſured, & was foūd to be 42. ynches in deepnes, & thē for that the veſſel was 12. ynches ſquare, 12. times 12. is 144. & ſo many ynches there is at 1. ynche deepe: and then for that it is .42. ynches in deepeneſſe, multiply .144. by .42. & that maketh .6048. ſo that you may conclude, that the moulde of the Shyp, as much as is vnder the water, if that it were not hollowe within, that it woulde conteyne .6048. foote of Tymber. And nowe ſuppoſe that the water was of our water, here at Graueſende, and that is not of the lighteſt ſort, neyther of the heauieſt ſort, and a foote ſquare of that water wayeth .55. pounde, moſt commonly, although that it may waygh ſometime leſſe, and ſometymes more, it wayeth leſſe, after much rayne, and neape Tydes: it wayeth more in ſpring Tydes at a ful Sea, vpon ſome cauſe of winds, but it altereth no great matter within a pounde vnder or ouer. Wherfore multiply 6048. by .55. and that maketh .332640. ſo then you maye conclude, that the ſhyp waigheth .332640. pounde: And then as is declared in the Chapter going before, for to knowe howe many tonnes that the ſhyp dooth waygh, deuide that by .2240. and then there wil ſtand

in the quantitie line .148. and there wyl remayne ouer .11209. ſo that you may conclude, that the whole ſhyp with all her ladyng, and al other furniture, and implementes in her, dooth waygh .148. tonnes, and a halfe of a tonne. And by this order, you maye knowe the true wayght of any ſhyppe, howe graat or ſmall ſoeuer that it bee, or Boate, or any other thyng that ſwymmeth.
                     And furthermore, you may knowe by thys Arte Statical,Another way to know the waight of a ſhip, with al her furniture. the true waight of any ſhippe, without puttyng of water into the ſquare veſſel, although that you doo not knowe the contentes, howe manye foote ſquare that there is in the Shyppe, as thus: the moulde of the Shyppe beeing taken, as before is declared, and the proportion of the moulde, made in mettal hollowe, as before is rehearſed.
                     And furthermore, you may make the moulde leſſer then before is rehearſed, that is to ſaye, you may make the proportion of the moulde, for euery foote that the Shyppe is in length, breadth, and deepeneſſe, you may make it but halfe an ynche, or but a quarter of an ynche, at your deſcretion: and then fylling that with water, and then wayghyng the water trulye, looke howe many tymes the length of that moulde that is fylled with water, is in the length of the Shyppe, multiply the wayght of the water with that number Cubickely, and that ſhall ſhewe vnto you the true wayght of the Shyppe, with al her ladyng. As for enſample by that ſhyppe, before rehearſed, that was .50. foote long, and, 20. foote broade, and .12. foote in deepeneſſe.
                     And nowe I cauſed the moulde too bee made for euery foote,A enſample. but a quarter of an ynche, ſo that for the .50. foote long, the mould was made .12. ynches, and a halfe: and for .20. foote broade, but 5. ynches: and for .12. foote deepe, but .3. ynches: & that beyng filled with water, the water being wayghed, did conteyne in wayght 3. pounde, & 2. of .73. partes of a pounde, and that is ſcante halfe an ounce, and the true contentes of the wayght of the water: and then for that you doo ſee that the proportion of the length of the moulde, is but twelue ynches, and one of 2. parte: that is, but the .48. parte of the length of the Shyppe:

therfore multiply it in this maner 48. times 48. and that maketh 2304. and then to multiply it by 48. agayne, and then it maketh 110592. wherefore nowe multiply .110592. by the wayght of the water, that is too ſay 110592. tymes 3. and 2. of 73. parts: and that maketh 334620. ſo that you maye conclude, that the Shyp wayeth 334640. poundes.
                     And nowe to knowe howe manye tu
                           •
                        nes that the Shyp doeth way, as before is declared by deuyding that number by 2240. and ſo further, as before is rehearſed. And furthermore, you maye cauſe in the proportion of the mould of Leade or Tynne, to be certaine Parallel lynes, to be made but a quarter of an ynche aſunder, as many as you lyſte, and then you may knowe by thoſe lynes what wayght that the Shyp is of, when that ſhee is not laden. And alſo if that you liſt, you may knowe howe manye tunnes more in waight, wil loade the Shyppe, as often tymes as you doe knowe howe many foote or ynches the Shyppe dooth lacke of her loade marke.
                     And yet furthermore, you may knowe, howe for too knowe the wayght of anye Shyppe with all her loadyng, although that you haue not made the hollowe moulde of the Shyppe, as thus: by that moulde that the Shyp Carpenter hath made,Another enſample howe to knowe the waight of any ſhippe. the woode beyng not ſo heauye as the water, then make certayne holes in the moulde metall, then at thoſe holes, put in Leade, vntyl ſuch tyme as the moulde is heauier then the water, and then ſtop the holes agayne, that no water may goe into them, and cutte of that parte that there is more then the moulde of the Shyppe: and that doone, then in ſome ſmal thyng or veſſell put in water vnto ſome certayne marke, and then put into that water, the moulde for that Shyp whiche you doo deſyre for too knowe the waight of, and bee ſure that the water dooth couer al the moulde: and then take out all that water verye precyſelye, that is fed by that meanes of the moulde for the Shyp, vntyll ſuche tyme that the water bee iuſte in that heyght that it was before, that the moulde was put in: and then waying that water truly, you dooyng as before is rehearſed▪ to multiplye the length of the moulde of the Shyp accordyng as before is declared, Cubickely, and then

the wayght of that water that is hyghed more then it was before that the moulde was put into the water, and the wayght of that water beyng perfectly knowen too bee multiplyed by that Cubicke number, ſhall ſhewe iuſtly the true wayght of the Shyppe, as afore is declared in all poyntes.
                     And by all theſe rules or order, you maye knowe the iuſte wayght of anye thyng that ſooymmeth in the water, ſauing that you muſt haue conſyderation, that any moulde made of woode, when it is drye, dooth receyue or drynke vp water, and when it is wette, it ſwelled the bigger with the water.
                  
                  
                     The fourth Chapter ſheweth by the Arte Statical, the wayght of anye mettall or ſtone, howe much, or what wayght that it dooth wayghe in the water, to be lyfted or waighed from the bottome, vnto the brimme of the water.
                     
                        NOwe for that I haue ſayde ſomewhat for too knowe the wayght of thynges ſooymmyng on the water, I thinke it conuenient too treate partly by the Arte Statical, to knowe the waight of any thing that ſynketh into the water: and to knowe truclye howe muche that it waygheth more then the wayght of the water, proportion for proportion, whereby you may knowe what it waygheth iuſtly, being ſunke into the water: and alſo you maye knowe by this meanes, howe for to meaſure ſuche things, whoſe forme, whether that it be mettall or ſtone, that for the ſtrangeneſſe of the for me is not to be meaſured, as braunches of mettall, or pillers that be inbowed or hollowe

in one place, and boyleth out in another, or any ſuch other ſtraunge forme, which is to de doone by that meanes, that Archimedes founde the deceite of the Kinges crowne of gold. And firſt for to knowe the true wayght of any Mettall that is ſuncke in the water, whether that it be braſſe, iron, or ſtone, you knowing the wayght therof before that it was ſuncke: then make a cube, or any other ſquare, of that kynd of Mettal that you woulde knowe what it waygheth in the water, and waygh that Mettal truely, and that being knowen howe many poundes, and parts that it waygheth, then take of that water, that the Mettall is ſunken into: and then if you doo make a Cube, or any other ſquare hollowe, in forme like vnto the maſſy Cube or ſquare, neither bigger nor leſſer, then that you haue made in Mettall, and waighed. And then fyl that hollow cube with the water, and then waygh the water truely, and that doone, looke what that water waygheth, pull that ſumme truely away from the waight of the maſſie Cube or ſquare, and that which dooth remayne, ſhalbee the true waight that the maſſie Cube dooth waygh in the water: and ſo by that Cube you may knowe the waight of the greater portion that is ſunke, as thus: The wayght of the ſunken mettall beyng knowen, looke howe many tymes the wayght of the ſmal Cube is in the greater quantitie, that is ſunke, ſo many tymes multiplye the waight of the water in the hollowe Cube, and that doone, ſubtract or take away ſo much in wayght from the ſunken Mettal, and that which dooth remayne, ſhalbe the true wayght of the ſunken Mettall in the water to be wayghed, tyll that it dooth begyn to appeare aboue the water: Or otherwyſe, you may doo it in this manner, by the ſmal Cube, before rehearſed, beyng iuſty wayghed, and the wayght knowen vnto you, take of that ſorte of water that the Mettall is ſunke into, and put it into ſome veſſell, fytte for your purpoſe: and that done, then marke the edge of the water iuſtly vppon both the ſydes, then put your maſſie Cube into the water, that it be couered with water, and then take out, as much of the water as is ryſen aboue the marked places, and then waygh that water truly.
                     
                        And now the true waight of the water being knowen vnto you, then as before is rehearſed, ſubtract or take awaye the wayght of the water frō the waight of the cube in mettall, & then that which dooth remayne, ſhalbe the true wayght of the Cube in Mettal, when it is ſunke to the bottome of the water, and then by the ſmall is knowen, the wayght of the greater portion, as before is declared, by knowing howe many tymes, that the greater quantitye is more then the leſſer, and then multiplying the wayght of the water ſo many tymes as the quantitye dooth ſhewe, and then ſubtracting or pullyng awaye that wayght, then that which doth remayne, ſhall be the true wayght of the Mettall in the water, as for enſample thus:
                     By a peece of ordinaunce of braſſe, that is ſunke, that is to be wayged out of the water, and the wayght is knowen to be .7000. waight, for that it is a double Cannon, that is ſunke, and I doo deſyre for to knowe the true wayght, what it dooth waygh in the water.
                     Wherefore I doo take another peece of that ſorte of Mettal, that waygheth .100. wayght, it maketh no matter, what forme that it hath, ſo that it be of that ſorte, or of that kinde of Mettal, for whereas I ſpake of a Cube before, that was to no other ende, but to make the thyng the more playner, as hereafter it ſhall more playnely appeare: and then take of that water, that the peece of ordinance was ſunke into, for that al waters are not of one wayght, and then put that water intoo ſome conuenient veſſel, meete for your purpoſe, and then marke the water very preciſely, rounde about, euen at the very edge of the the water, & then put the peece of mettal into the water, & then hauing ſome conuenient veſſel already wayghed, and then take out, without anye ſheddyng of the water, all that water that is aboue the place marked before, neyther more, nor leſſe, nor hygher, nor lower, and that being doone truly, then take the waight of the water, and by ſuppoſition, it is founde to be .14. pounde iuſt, and the braſſe, that is put into the water, being one hundreth waight, that is .112. pounde.
                     
                        Therefore I do conclude, that the wayght of the water, is but the .8. parte of the wayght of the Braſſe or mettall, ſo that I doo conclude, that the peece of Braſſe or mettal dooth waygh in the water .7. of .8. partes of his owne proper wayght, that is, but .98. pounde.
                     And nowe for to knowe the wayght of the ſunken Rannon, doo thus: Looke howe many hundred wayght that you haue in .7000 wayght, and that is .70. hundred wayght. Wherefore multiply .14. by .70. and that commeth vnto .980. poundes, which maketh 800 wayght, and 3. of .4. part: And this ſumme being pulled away from 7000. waight, which is .7840. poundes, then there remayneth .6860. poundes, and that is .6100. and .28. pounds in waight: and euery .100. waight, to conteine .112. pounde.Al thing in the water, is lighter then his owne proper wa
                              •
                           ght by the quantity of the water in waight that it occupieth, and out of the water, it waigheth his owne proper waight. And nowe by this order you may knowe the true waight of any ſunken mettal, what it waygheth in the water, to be waighed from the grounde, vnto the appearing of any parte thereof aboue the ſuperficiall of the water: and then too bee wayghed aboue, out of the water, then it hath his owne natural wayght, what kinde of mettall ſoeuer it bee, as Syluer, and Gold, Copper, Leade Tinne, Iron, Steele, or Stone, or whatſoeuer it bee that ſynketh into the water, you may knowe the true wayght of it, in the water, by the order before rehearſed, by puttyng into that kynde of water, anye peece or lompe, what forme ſoeuer it hath, it maketh no matter, ſo that it bee of that ſorte of Mettall or ſtone, being truely and exactlye wayghed, and then to take out ſo much of that water, as by the meanes of that mettall or ſtone is hyghed more then it was before the puttyng in of the mettall or ſtone: And that water truly waighed, and the wayght thereof knowen vnto you, then rebate that waight from the wayght of the mettall or ſtone truely, and then that which doth remaine, ſhalbe the true waight of the mettal or ſtone, being ſanke into the water. And by that meanes you may knowe the true wayght of any great quantitye that is ſunke

into the water, by knowing how many times the great quantitye is more then the leſſer, and then to multiply the waight of the water, ſo many times as the waight of the greater is more then the leſſer, & then that which dooth remayne, ſhall be the true waight of the greater quantity of mettall, or ſtone, that is ſonke into the water.
                  
                  
                     The fyfth Chapter ſheweth how to knowe the true meaſure in the ynches or feete, of any ſtraunge forme, ſuch as Geometrie can giue no ordering for the meaſuring therof, as to meaſure a braunche in mettall, or a piller that is enbowed and ful of hollownes in diuers places, and boyles out in diuers places: and alſo how to know the diuerſitie of the waight of mettall, or the diuerſytie betweene the waight of Stone and mettall.
                     
                        AND furthermore, by this meanes you know the true meaſure in ynches or feete, of any ſtraunge forme, what ſhape ſoeuer it hath, ſuch ſhapes that no Arte by any capacitie are not to be meaſured, whether it be in mettall, ſtone, wood, or in waxe, or gommes, or what ſoeuer it bee, or a Crowne, or Crownes, or a branche, or braunches, or a pyller, or pyllers, or thinges that be inbowed in one place, and boyles out in an other, or a Cuppe, or bowle, or a Potte or Pottes that keepe not in thickneſſe one quantitie, but it is thicker in one place then in an other, as there be diuers other formes not beere ſpoken of, that no man by Arte is able to meaſure them, for that they keepe in no place one proportion.
                     Wherefore I doo thinke it conuenient, to treate partly hereof, and to know the true contentes of any forme what ſoeuer it bee, in ynches or feete, then doo thus: Cauſe to bee made ſome hollow Cube or Square, in ſuch forme that you may meaſure it

with an ynche rule with eaſe, and to know the true contents therof, or any part thereof at your pleaſure, within the hollow part, and then you hauing of diuerſe ſortes of theſe hollow cubes or ſquares, ſome that doo conteine more, and ſome that doo conteyne leſſe, as neere as ſhall require: and then take ſome conuenient veſſel mete for your purpoſe, and put water into it, and that done, then take that thing which you doo require too knowe the true contentes of the number of ynches or feete, & thē before you doo put that into the water, marke the ſyde of that thing or veſſell roūde about by the very edge of the water very preciſely, that you doo not committe errour by that meanes: and that being trulye done, thē put that mettal or thing into the water, that it be couered: and that doone, take out as much of the water as is ryſen by the meanes of the thing of mettall put into the water, vntil the water do ſtande iuſt at the marke that it was before: & then put that water into the hollow cube or ſquare, without any of the water ſhedde or ſpylled by, for that may cauſe ſome errour: & then with an ynche rule meaſure the true deepenes of the water in the cube or ſquare, and ſo ſhall you know iuſtly, how many ynches or feete of mettall there is, by the multiplying of the length, breadth, and deepenes of the water: As for enſample thus: by a branche, or cādleſtick (to hang in a houſe) of Latine or Braſſe, my deſyre is to know, how many ynches of mettall there is contayned in it: and then I dyd fyrſt put in water into a tub or veſſell, that I had appoynted for that purpoſe, and then I marked the water in the tubbe or veſſell rounde about at the very edge of the water: and then I put the brauach or candleſticke into the water, and that ſunke vnto the bottome, and then I tooke out all that water that was dyd by the meanes of the braunche or candleſtick of Latine, & then I did put that water into a litle cube of 6. ynches ſquare euery way, like vnto a dee, & dyd it preciſely & ſhed none of the water, neither tooke I out any more or leſſe of the water, but in I vnto the marke vpon the tub or veſſel ſyde, & then I meaſured the true deepenes of the water in the litle cube, & found it to be 5. ynches, & ⅝. partes of an ynche, that is to ſay, that it was 5. ynches & a half & half a quarter & thē I dyd multiply it in this maner, for that cube was 6. ynches

ſquare .6. tymes .6. and that was .36. and then that being multiplyed agayne, by .5. & ⅝. partes: & that maketh .202. and .½. part ſo that I did conclude, that the braunche or candleſticke in lattine or braſſe, was .202. ynches and a halfe in mettall, and ſo by this meanes you may knowe the true contentes of any forme, whatſoeuer it be: It is alſo very good, to trye the partes of a globe, or globes, or you may double any cube what ſoeuer it be, you may doo it very exactly, by this order, hauing this conſideration, that you doo marke the water truely, and ſhed or ſpil none of the water, and that you doo meaſure the water truely, the deepeneſſe, and that muſt be done with ſome fyne ſtyffe wyer, for if that you do put in any bigge rule, then that wyll ſwell, or hygh the water ſomewhat, according vnto the bignes of the rule or thing. Wherfore it is very good for to haue the cube or ſquare to be marked with ynches, and partes of ynches, within the inſyde rounde about with parallel liens at euery ynche ende, and alſo it is not good to haue your ſquare veſſel too broade, for the narower that it is, the more certayne: and alſo you may not ſhifte your water into to many thinges, and eſpecially if it be wood, for that ſame water wyll hang vpon it, and alſo wood wyll receiue, or drynk water. And al theſe may be cauſes that may hinder the exact truth: and alſo this order of meaſuring is very good, to know if any thing be made in golde, for that it is a very heauy mettall, and no other mettall ſo heauy as it is, if there were made any veſſell in golde, and any deceipt in it, then putting that veſſell into water, then marke how high the water dooth ryſe, than take out of that water the veſſell agayne, then take that waight of golde, and put it into the water, and yf the veſſell dyd rayſe the water higher then the golde, then there is deceipt in the veſſel, but if the water be at both the times of one lyke height, then there is no deceipt in it, as this was the very way, that Archimedes found the deceipt of the Crowne of gold, & alſo this art or order of meſuring doth not altogether ſhew the contents of ynches or feete, but alſo you may know the diuerſitie of waight of euery ſeueral ſortes of mettal, how much the 
                           •
                        ne ſort is heauier then the other, as thus: you hauing of 2 ſortes of mettal, the water being fyrſt marked, & then waighing the mettal before you do put it into the water, thē mark the water how hie it

ryſeth, and then marke it there agayne, & then take that mettal out of the water, and then put in of the other mettall ſo much in quantitie, tyll that it rayſe the water, vnto that iuſt height that it was before: and it maketh no matter, although it be of many peeces, ſo that it be al of one ſorte of mettall, and then take out the mettal, and waigh it iuſtly, and ſo ſhal you ſee certaynly how much in waight it dooth differ quantitie for quantitie, or otherwyſe: you may know the diuerſitie of the waight of mettals, by wayghing two ſortes of mettal, and let them be both of one waight iuſt, and then the water being marked, put in the one ſort of mettall fyrſt, and then take out that water, as much as is ryſen by the meanes of the mettall vnto the fyrſt marked place, and put that into the hollow Cube, as before is rehearſed, and then caſt the contentes how many ynches it contayneth iuſtly: and that doone, then take that mettall out of the water, and put in the water that is in the hollow Cube or ſquare, agayne, into the veſſell, that the water may ſtande at the fyrſt appoynted marke iuſtly agayne: and then put in the other ſort of mettall, that is of the iuſt waight the other was before, and then take all that water out, and put it into the Cube, and if that the water in the Cube bee fewer number of ynches then it was before, then that mettall is heauier then the fyrſt mettal, as the proportion of the number of ynches wil ſhew you iuſtly: and if there be more water at the later time then there was at the fyrſt time, then that mettall is lighter then the fyrſt mettall, and the number of ynches wyll ſhew you the true quantitie, by multiplying them, as before is rehearſed.
                     And if the water at both the times bee of one height, or meaſure in the litle cube, then both the mettals are of one waight. And by this meanes, or Art Statical, you may know the diuerſitie betweene the waight of Stone and mettall, or the diuerſitie of waight of one kinde of Stone and an other, for that all ſortes of Stone, is not of one kynde of weight, as all ſortes of mettals are not of one waight. And alſo by this Arte Staticall, you may know the diuerſytie of the waight of woode and ſtone, or any other kynde of mettall, although the one ſorte dooth ſwimme, and the other ſort ſinketh, and that you muſt doo in this manner.
                     
                        All thoſe kynde of woodes that doo ſwimme, and if theyr forme be ſuch, that you may meaſure them, then the matter is of no oportunitie, to know the contents thereof, for that it requireth no other thing, but to meaſure the contents in ynches, & to waigh them how many pound they doo both contayne: and if the forme in woode be ſuch, that you cannot eaſely meaſure it, by ſuch order as afore is declared, you may know the contents of the woode, by putting it downe into the water by ſome ſlight, although it would ſwimme, to ſynke it, you waighing it before it commeth into the water, to know how many pounde it contayneth. And as touching all theſe matters before rehearſed, it is a very eaſye matter to know how many ynches, and partes of an ynche, wyll make a pounde waight of any kynde or ſortes of mettall, or water, or woode, as thus:
                     You knowing how many ynches, that any ſtuffe doth containe, whether it be Golde, Siluer, Copper, Lead, Tinne, Iron, ſtone, wood, or water: the waight being known
                           •
                        , then deuide the contentes of the number of ynches, by the number of poundes, and that wyll ſhew you the true contentes, how many ynches and partes of an ynch, wyll make a pounde waight,
                  
                  
                     The ſyxt Chapter ſheweth by Arte Staticall to know the waight of any Shyppe, that is ſunke into the Sea, or any other riuer, too know how many tunne wyll waigh her vp agayne.
                     AND furthermore, inſomuch as I haue declared heretofore, how to know the true waight of any kinde of mettall, that is ſunke into the Water▪ nowe I thinke it conuenient, too ſhew vnto you, how too geue a neare geſſe, or an eſtimation, yf any Shyppe by any miſfortune ſhould be ſunke, eyther in the Sea, or in a hauen, or ryuer, to know how many tunnes would waigh her vp agayne, that is to ſay, to know

how many tunne in waight ſhe dooth waigh in the water, being ſunke, which is to be done in this maner: fyrſt they muſt knowe what kynde of goodes the Ship is laden withal, that is ſunke, and to ſet downe a remembrance or note of euery ſorte, & how much of euery ſort of the ſayd goods, & alſo to ſet downe a remē
                        brance or note of the contēts of the waight of her ordinance, & ankors: alſo if it be ſuch goods as do require knitlege or ballaſt, you muſt know how many tuns there may be therof, & alſo what kind of ballaſt it is, whether it be ſand, or ſtones, or earth: & al theſe being knowne, then according as the kinde of goodes is, then trye how many tunnes euery ſort of that goods may weigh in the water, as thus: if it be Copper, Lead, Tinne, Iron, Steele, or ſtone, or ſuch other lyke, that doo not penetrate, or doo not drynke, or ſuck in any lyquor, or water: and the waight therof knowne, then for al thoſe matters, by the rules before reherſed, do ſhew vnto you the trueth of the matter. Then if the lading, or part of the lading, be Waxe, Pytche, or Tarre, or Hony, or ſuch lyke, Gummes, or what ſoeuer it be that is heauier then the water, the conſideration of the rule Staticall before rehearſed, wyll ſhewe vnto you the truth of the matter, accordingly as is bfore rehearſed in al points, and if the ladyng or any part thereof be ſuch thinges as doo penetrate, or doo receiue or drynke in lyquor or water, vppon that matter there may grow ſome error. But to take away ſome part of that errour, you ſhal haue this remedye or helpe, and that is thys.
                     If it be Wool, or Woollen cloth, or Cotten, Sylke, Flaxe, Hempe, or Lynnen cloth, or any ſuch other lyke, then ſhall you make your proofe in this manner, as before is rehearſed in the Chapters goyng before, and that is thus: Fyll ſome veſſel with that kinde of water, that the Ship is ſunck into, & then marke the edge of the water, and that being doone, if there bee any great quantitie of that kynde of goodes or marchaundize, then take of that ſorte drye, as the goodes were before it was laden, whether it be Wooll, or woollen Cloth, or Cotten. &c. And then that being drye, waigh it, and then open it looſely, that the water may

drynke into it, and that being ſoked, by imagination as the goods is or may bee, then take out ſo much of the water as is ryſen by that meanes of the wooll or woollen cloth, or what ſoeuer it bee, and then the waight of the water being knowne, pull the waight of the water from the waight of ſuch thinges as you haue made proofe thereof, and that waight which doth remayne, ſhal bee the waight that the ſayde goodes dooth waygh in the Water. And furthermore, yf the ladyng of the Shyppe bee ſuch,Some kynde of goods is of that nature that it wayeth no waight in the water. as dooth requrie kintlege or ballaſt, if it be wines, or oyles, and ſuch other lyke, for that kind of goods is of no waight in the water, for it is rather lighter then the water: then you muſt make account of the Kintledge or Ballaſt, and if it be ſtones, then the order or Art Staticall dooth ſhew you what it may contayne in wayght very wel, by making your proofe as before is rehearſed.Some ſort of goodes muſt haue kintledge or ballaſt. But if the Ballaſt bee earth or Sande, then put the Sande or earth into the water, & then let the earth or ſande ſettle vnto the bottome: & that being done, you ſhal ſee the water wyll be cleare aloft: and then take out of the water, vntil the water be of that height that it was before, & thē waigh the water, & thē pulling the true waight of the water frō the waight of the earth or ſand, then that waight which dooth remayne, ſhal be that waight that ſo much earth or ſād ſhal waigh in the water. And thē doing as before is reherſed, by the waight of a litle, by the proportion of the waight of a greater, is knowne what it doth waigh in the water. And furthermore, there is ſome kynde of goods, although it be heauier then the water, yet in remaining long in the water, it will conſume, & that is ſuger or ſalt. &c. But moſt kynd of goodes, the longer it remaineth in the water, the heuier it is, for that the water ſoketh into it throughly. And alſo any ſhip being long ſunke, there groweth diuers, accidēts to make it the heuier, that is, by the means ther wil ſettle both ſand & owes into her, & alſo the dry timber that is a loft in a ſhip, wyl becō heuier by the ſoking of the water: for this is to be noted, that a ſhip would not ſinke vnto the bottome, but by the meanes of the ballaſt or ſuch other like heauy goodes: & therefore for the very holde of the Shyppe, as much as is Tymber, a verie ſmal allowaunce wyll ſerue for the wayght of it in the water.

For although it beſoked, yet it is but lyttle more then the waight of the water, for the Tackle or ropes wyll waigh more in the water, then the holde of the Shyppe wyll, for they be much the heauier, for the pitch and tarre that is vpon them. Wherefore, you muſt take a note, what number of Cables, and other ropes may be in her, and their waight being known, then make your proofe, as before is rehearſed, by the Arte Staticall. But if that any part of the loding be oyle, or Wine, or Tallow, or ſuch other like, it is not heauier then the water: all ſuch kynde of goods is of no wayght in the water, but wyll rather helpe then hynder. And alſo if any parte of the ladyng be of Timber, as Maſtes, or Sparres, Deales. or Waynſcot, or ſuch other lyke, all ſuch kynde of goods wyll rather helpe it to ſwimme, then hynder any thing. And now this being done, and you knowing what kynde of goodes there is in the Shyp, and how much of euery ſort, and your proofe beyng made by this Arte Staticall, and you knowing the waight of euery particuler thing, what it dooth contayne in the water, as well the waight of the Ordinaunce, Cables, Ankers, Ropes, and the Ballaſt. &c. And then addyng all your numbers together, then ſhall you ſee very neare what all the whole wayght of the Shyp with her ladyng dooth waygh in the water, and that being knowen, then you doo know what number of Tunnes wyll waygh the Shyp vp agayne, and that being knowne, then the matter is the more eaſyer to know how to make prouiſion for to waigh her vp agayne.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſeuenth Chapter ſheweth howe to waygh a Shyppe that is ſunke, where it dooth ebbe and flowe. &c.
                     
                        NOwe you knowyng the wayght of any Shyppe that is ſunke, if you woulde waygh her vp agayne, then when you doo make your prouiſion for to waygh her, take as many Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyghters, as will beare that number of tunnes, that the ſunke Shyppe dooth waigh in the water, and in euery .40. or 50. tunnes, take .10. tunnes more, for that it is better to haue too muche, then any thing too litle: And looke that you haue good Ropes that are able to beare ſo much in wayght, as the ſunken Shyppe dooth waygh in the water, and thē when you haue made your Cables, hawſeres, & ropes faſte vppon the ſunken Shyppe, you muſte take ſuche order in the making faſt of your Cables, or Ropes, that euery Shyp Hoye, or Lyter may waygh or lyft vp the wayght of her proper burthen, for els you may be deceyued, for that I haue ſeene by experience, that the Shyppe which hath beene ſunke in the water, hath not wayghed .40. tunnes, and the Hoyes or Lyters woulde carrye more then .60. tunnes, and yet they were not able to waygh the ſayd Shyp, but were dryuen to let go theyr faſtes or Cables, and ropes agayne, or els they ſhoulde haue ben ſunke, and that was but for lacke of knowledge in that matter, for the Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyters wyll waygh or lifte moſte from the bottome, when they haue no lading, and yet notwithſtanding they wyll waygh or lift the leſſer, if they doo vſe that matter as I haue ſeene, for that they doo make faſt theyr Cables & ropes ſome vnto the ſide of the Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyters, and

ſome vnto the head, and ſo foorth.
                     And nowe the Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyters, are not able to waygh or lyft, not one quarter of theyr proper burthen, and they lift or waigh much the les, for that they haue no lading within: for if they doo make faſt theyr Cables or Ropes vnto the ſyde, then it wil not lyft the .10. part of theyr proper burthen, for that the ſide wyl ſoone goe downe. And if they doo make faſt theyr Cables and Ropes vnto the heade, (for there it wil waygh or lyft moſt) yet it wyll not waygh or lyft one thirde parte of theyr burthen, for hauyng no lodyng, the heade wyll ſoone goe downe into the water. Wherefore whenſoeuer they doo meane for to waygh any Shyp that is ſunke:How to vſe the lighters to make them lift or waygh their owne proper burthen. then they muſt prepare long, ſtrong, and great Timber, or ſtrong Maſtes, and let them be layde croſſe the Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyters, ouer both the ſydes, and to match .2. and .2. togeather of equal burthen, as neare as you can, and let the long Tymber or Maſtes lye croſſe both the Shyps, Hoyes, or Lyghters, and ouer both the ſides, and then bring your Cables or ropes that are faſt vnto the ſunke Ship, ouer the long Timber or maſts, and then make the ropes faſt within the Shyppes, or Lyghters: and this doone, then the ſhippes, Hoyes, or Lyghters wyl waigh or lyft, their owne proper burthen, otherwyſe they wyl not. And then it ſtandeth you in hande to gette ſuch Timber that wil not breake for that burthen, for if the Tymber dooth breake, it wyll put al in haſſard of ſynking agayne. Alſo it is very good to waigh a ſhyppe with kaſke, and euery hogeſhead, pype, or butte, wyll waygh or lyfte as much in waight, as it woulde waygh, if it were ful of that water, excepting the proper wayght of the veſſell or kaſke, ſo that the Kaſke be made thight, that no water may come into it. And then when you doo meane for to waygh or lyfte vp anye Shyppe, that is ſunke, your Ropes, or Cables being faſt vnto the ſunken Shyp, then you hauing al your things in a readineſſe, your Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyghters, and the great Tymber or Maſtes layde croſſe ouer both the ſydes of them, and two and two of them, and alſo your kaſke, then make faſt your ropes and Cables vnto the Shippes or Lighters,

at a lowe water, the flood beyng in hand. Prouided alwayes, that you bring the ropes or cables ouer the Tymber,you muſt make your ropes faſt at a low water, the flood being in hand. that lyeth croſſe the Hoyes or Lyghters, and alſo then to make faſt the Kaſke vnto your ropes or Cables. And then as the flood ryſeth, ſo ſhall the ſunken Shyppe ryſe from the bottome: and then as the water dooth ryſe or hygh, ſo goe towardes the lande, or ſhoare, tyll it be a ful Sea, and then the ſunken Shyp wyll reſt vppon the grounde agayne. And then at the next lowe water: they ſhortenyng or making faſt their cables or ropes agayne, then the next full Sea, they may bring the ſunken Shyppe, nearer vnto the lande or ſhoare. And thus they may bring the ſunken Shyppe vnto the lande or ſhoare, vntyll ſuch tyme as the ſunken Shyppe ſhalbe layde vppon dry grounde at a lowe water. For you may knowe in howe many Tydes that you may waygh her, and lay her vppon drye grounde, at a lowe water, as thus: Sounde,How to knowe in how many Tides you may waigh a ſhyp. or looke howe many fadome, the ſunken Shyppe lyeth in at a lowe water, and then looke how manye fadome the water hygheth, or floweth till it bee a full Sea, and then conſider howe deepe that your Shyps, Hoyes, or Lyghters, wyll goe into the water, before they are able to lifte the ſunken Shyppe from the bottome: and then conſider howe much, or howe manye fadome or feete, the water wyll ryſe afterwardes: and ſo ſhall you ſee in howe many Tydes that you ſhall bring her to bee drye at a lowe water. As for enſample thus: Suppoſe that any Shyppe or Hoye is ſunke at eyght fadome at a lowe water, and the water dooth ryſe or hygh two fadome and a halfe from the lowe water vnto a ful ſea:An enſample of the w
                              ••
                           ght of a Shyppe. and then the Hoyes or Lyters wyll not be able to lyfte or waygh the ſunken Shyppe from the bottome, not vntyl they be laden downe two foote, and better. So that you may conclude, that the water wyll not ryſe or high lytle more then two fadome, after that the ſunken Shyppe is lyfted or wayghed from the bottome: and then goyng vntoo the Lande or Shoare, tyll that it was a ful Sea.
                     
                        And then the ſunken Shyppe dyd reſt vppon the grounde againe at .6. fadome, at a lowe water, and then at the next lowe water the Cables and Ropes were made faſt agayne, and when it was flowed two foote and better, the ſunke Shyp was lyfted from the grounde agayne.
                     And then goyng vnto the lande or ſhoare, tyll it was a full Sea, then the ſunken Shyppe dyd reſt at .4. fadome at a lowe water: & then at the next lowe water, the Cables and ropes being made faſt agayne, when it was flowed .2. foote, and better, the ſunke Shyppe was lifted from the bottome, and ſo going in vnto the lande or ſhoare til it was a full Sea: then the ſunke Shyppe dyd reſt agayne, at .2. fadome at a lowe water: and then the Cables or ropes, being ſhortned, and made faſt agayne, then going vnto the lande or ſhoare, vntyl that it was a ful Sea, and then reſtyng, the ſunke Shyppe ſhalbe drye at a lowe water: ſo that you maye conclude, that the Shyppe that was ſunke at .8. fadome at a lowe water: and the water ryſe or dyd flowe .2. fadome and a halfe, from the lowe water vnto the ful Sea, and the Hoyes and Lyters woulde waygh or lyft the ſunke Shyppe from the bottome, by that tyme they were title more then .2. foote buryed or ſetled into the water, and then in foure Tydes the ſunke Shyppe wylbe layed vpon drye grounde, at a lowe water.
                     And by this order you may knowe in howe many Tydes that any Shyppemaye he wayghed, and layde on drye grounde at a lowe water, you knowing howe deepe that the Shyppe lyeth at a lowe water, and howe much it dooth flowe in anye place where it doth ebbe or flowe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The eyght Chapter ſheweth howe to waygh a Shyppe, where it dooth not ebbe and flowe.
                     
                        ANd furthermore, if that any Shyp or anye other veſſell be ſunke in ſuch places, where that it dooth neyther ebbe, nor flowe, that is too ſaye, where the water dooth not hygh and lowe, there is ſome matter, and aſketh great charges, and labour for to waygh or lyfte anye great wayghte from the bottome: yet this way it is to bee doone, the wayght of the ſunken Shyppe or veſſell being knowne, what that it dooth waygh in the water, as before is rehearſed.
                     Then the number of tunnes beyng knowen,As touching the waighing of ſhyps, whereas it doth not ebbe and flowe. prepare ſo many Shyppes, Hoyes, or Lyghters, as wyll carrye ſyxe or eyght tymes the wayght, that it dooth waygh in the water, and then let them be neare halfe laden euery one of them, wyth ſome handſome ballaſt that is wayghty, and good to be remoued too and fro.
                     And then when you haue made your Ropes, and Cables faſt vnto the ſunken Shyppe or veſſell, then bring your Hoyes, and Lyghters vnto the ſunke Veſſell, and let all that Ballaſt bee throwne into one ende of all the Hoyes and Lyghters, and then make faſt your Ropes and Cables vntoo that ende that hath the ladyng or ballaſt: Then your ropes and Cables being made faſt, throwe or carrye all the ballaſt or ladyng vnto the other ende, and then it will waygh or lyfte the ſunken Shyppe from the bottome.
                     Wherefore you muſte haue double ſo manye as is able too lyfte or waygh it:Not
                              •
                           th
                              •
                            poynt. for when that all the ladyng is throwne vnto

the other ende: then whyleſt that the one hath lyfted or wayghed it, the other Hoyes or Lyghters muſt make faſte theyr Ropes and Cables vnto the laden endes agayne. And thus they muſte doo as often tymes as the lading is throwen vnto the further ende, they muſt haue as manye Lyghters as are able too lyfte or waygh it, whylleſt that the other Lyghters doo hang or turne the laden ende, and to bee made faſt vnto the Ropes, and Cables agayne.
                     And thus in tyme, they ſhall waygh or lyft the ſunken thyp or veſſell, vnto the drymme of the water, and then they maye carrye the ſunken veſſell vnto the lande or ſhoare. And by this order or meanes, they may waygh any Shyppe or veſſell vp vnto the brymme of the water, in ſuch places whereas it dooth neyther ebbe nor flowe.
                  
                  
                     The nyenth Chapter ſheweth how to bring in any ſhyppe ouer a ſhulde or barre, and to make the Shyppe beare Sayle, when al the ballaſt is out: and alſo if neede requyre, how to lyft the Shyppe higher out of the waterwardes, to the intent to bring her in. &c.
                     ANd now, inſomuch that I haue ſhewed how to waygh any Shyppe that is ſunke, as wel in ſuch places wheras it dooth not ebbe and flowe, and alſo ebbe and flowe. In lyke manner, I doo thinke it conuenient too ſhewe vnto you, how for to bryng a Shyppe in ouer a barre or Shulde, whereas there is not ſufficientneſſe of deepth of water to come into any hauen or Ryuer, and if that all the ballaſt is out, and if there is

not ſufficientneſſe of deepth of water: Then howe to lyft her higher out of the waterwards, vntyl the ſhyppe is ſufficiently out of the water, to bring her in ouer the ſhulde or barre. &c.
                     And fyrſt thus, if that any Shyppe bee come intoo anye Hauen or harborowe, and by the meanes of a ſhulde or barre, that ſhe hath not deepth of water yenough, and yet the Shyppe is but in her ballaſt: Then doo thus: Prepare two greate Hoyes or Lyghters, and alſo ſtrong haulſers or Cables, and then bryng the one of the Hoyes or Lyghters, on the one ſide, and the other, on the other ſyde, and that doone, then make faſte the head, and the ſterne of both the Hoyes or Lyghters, with ſtrong Ropes or Haulſers, and make them faſt, as high in the Shyppe, as you can conuenientlye, and then heaue all the ballaſt out of the Shyppe into the two Hoyes, or Lighters: And that doone, the Ropes and Haulſers being faſt vnto the heade and ſterne of the Lyghters or Hoyes, and vnto the Shyppe, the Shyppe cannot ouerthrowe, although al the Takle, and Maſtes are ſtanding: for looke when the ſhyppe would ſhelde, then it cannot doo it, except that it ſhoulde lyft the furdeſt Lyghter or Hoye out of the water, which is not poſſible for to doe, as long as the Ropes, or Cables doo holde: and then if that it doo offer to holde the other way, then that lighter that is on the other ſyde, wyl not ſuffer it, as long as the ropes or faſtes doo holde: Wherfore the ſhyppe may beare ſaile, although al the ballaſt were out, &c.
                     But if that there be not ſufficientneſſe of deepth of water vppon the ſhulde or barre, to bring the Shyppe in ouer it, when al the ballaſt is out: yet notwithſtanding you maye make ſuch prouiſion, that you may lift her hygher vp out of the water, vntyl ſuch tyme as the Shyppe may be able to come in, as thus: you hauyng prouided two ſuch Lyghters, meete for the purpoſe, as before is declared, then prepare long and ſtrong great Timber or Maſtes, that may be of ſuch ſufficient length, that wyll reach the breadth of the Shyp, and the breadth of both the Lyghters all at once.
                     
                        And then the Lyghters being made faſt, as before is rehearſed, and al the ballaſt heued or throwne out of the Shyppe into the two Lyghters, then the Lyghters beyng laden with the ballaſt, then make holles thorowe both the ſydes of the Shyppe in ſundrye places, and then put the long and ſtrong great Tymber thorowe both the ſydes of the Shyppe, that it may bee ouerthwarte croſſe ouer both the ſydes of the Lyghters, and in ſuch ſort, that the Shyppe maye reſt or hang vppon the long and ſtrong great Tymber or Maſtes, and reſt or lye vppon the two ſydes of both the Lyghters. And then hauyng out all the ballaſt out of both the Lyghters, the two Lyghters wyll heaue vp out of the waterwardes, as muche in wayghte as theyr owne proper Tonnage or burthen commeth vntoo, &c. And by thys meanes you may lyft any Shyppe out of the water, vnto what proportion you lyſt: and alſo you knowing the wayght of the Shyppe, as you maye knowe it, as it dooth appeare in the ſeconde and thyrde Chapters going before: Then accordyngly you maye make your prouiſion of the two Lyghters, to lyft ſuch ſufficient quantitye of the Shyppe that ſhalbee able to ſerue your turne, and alſo if that it ſhoulde happen, ſo that the Shyppe ſhoulde be a grounde vppon the ſhuld or barre, and yet the place that the Shyppe is a grounde on, dooth neyther ebbe nor flowe, yet notwithſtanding you haue this remedye to helpe it, then lade both the Lyghters agayne, and let the Shyp reſt vpon the grounde, and then you maye boulſter 
                           •
                        t vp by ſome prouiſion betweene the two Lyghters ſydes, and the long Tymber or Maſtes, vntyll that it be ſufficient to ſerue your turne: and then diſcharging the Lyghters, they ſhall lyft vp the Shyppe hygher agayne: And by this meanes you may bryng in any ſhip, higher againe ouer any ſhuld or barre, ſo that the water be ſufficient deepe, that the Lyghters beyng laden, may paſſe in ouer the barre or ſhuld. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The tenth Chapter dooth ſhew vnto you, how for to come vnto the Keel of any Ship, without the grounding of her, wherby you may collect any ſhippe, and make her thight vnto the Keel, which is called carriyng of them. &c.
                     
                        AND for that our Countrye of Englande, is inuironed rounde about with the Sea, ſo that no other Nation, or Countrye can come vnto vs, neither we vnto them, but only by ſea, Scotlande only excepted: Therfore it ſtandeth vs moſt principally in hande too bee moſte ſkilfull in ſhipping, for that it is our moſt principall force, and for that it is a very neceſſary matter for to know how to cauke a Shyppe, or to ſtop a leake, and to make her thight downe vnto the Keel of the Shippe, in ſuch places whereas it dooth not ebbe and flow water in, for to grounde any ſhyp, then they muſt vſe ſuch means as thoſe doo that are in the leuāt ſea, that is, the ſea called Mare Mediterraneum, as the Genewayes & Vemſians & Rogoſones, with a number of other, that haue ſhipping in that Sea, that I do omyt, & that haue great ſhips, and yet neuer doo grounde them, but only doo bring them ouer on the one ſyde, which is called carriyng of them, and many people that haue hearde therof, haue thought that they haue wound them ouer by force: and ſome haue iudged one way, and ſome an other way, but few or none of them haue iudged the truth of the matter, although that diuers Engliſhmen haue been there, and haue ſeene the thing done: yet as farre as euer I coulde perceaue at their handes, they coulde neuer vnderſtande the trueth of the matter, and the cauſe thereof was, that they were neuer in the

Shippe where ſhe was a karrenyng, and yet for to karren a ſhip, it is a great deale more eaſe for the Ship, then it is to be grounded in diuers reſpectes, and alſo they ſhall haue more time and leaſure both to ſearche the Shyppe, and caulke her, and to marke her thight, then they ſhall haue in the grounding of a Shyppe, and alſo they ſhall the better perceaue where any leake is in the karrenyng of them, then in the grounding of them.
                     And as touching the karrenyng of a Shyppe, this is too bee done, fyrſt thus, Cauke the ſydes of the Shippe thight aboue the water, and eſpecially that ſyde that you doo meane to bryng her ouer on, and alſo caulke the decke and portes, and the ſperkettes thight, and that done, then prepare labourers ynowe, and bryng the Shippe reſonable light, that ſhe may haue litle more ballaſt, then ſhe may beare her ſelfe well. And that done, her ordinaunce, and euery looſe thing taken out of the Shippe, then let the labourers heaue the ballaſt ouer, vnto that ſyde that you doo meane to bring her ouer vpon, and ſo heauing the ballaſt ouer, the Shyppe wyll goe ouer vnto what proportion you lyſt, and by that meanes you may come vnto the Keel of any ſhip, and marke her thight at your pleaſure, But diuers people haue made argument and ſaide, that the ſhip wyll not ryſe vpright agayne, and ſome haue ſayde, that lying a to
                           •
                        e ſyde, it woulde ouerthrow, and other would think that the ballaſt would ſlyp, but the trueth is this: as ſoone as euer the ballaſt is throwne or heaued backwards agayne, the ſhip wyll beginne to ryſe, and ſo in the ende become to bee vpright agayne.
                     Wherfore it is a ſtraunge matter, to ſee the ſtraunge opinion of ſome people in the worlde that ſeemeth to be wyſe, and for that generally the moſt part of men haue thought that in the karrening of Ships, that they haue beene wounde downe with caxſlienes, and gearres, & tackles by great force, and therfore they haue made faſt the ballaſt by ſome prouiſiō, & alſo haue made raftes of maſts, to the ende that they might lay the ſyde of the Shyp vpon them, to help to beare vp the ſhyppe. And ſee the ſimple opinion of them that ſhould bee wyſe, to thinke that the ſame ſhould doo any good,

for Maſtes being maſſy, and not hollow, are but litle lighter then water, ſo that .20. tunnes waight of them, wyll not ſupport vp two tunnes, therfore that can doo no great good at al. And what a vayne folly is it for them to make faſt the ballaſt, that it ſhould not ſlyppe, for .20. tunnes of ballaſt, being made faſt at the bottome of the Shippe, muſt require the force of 20. tuns to wynde it downe ouer: and then the ballaſt, for that it is made faſt, and the Shippe wounde downe by force, the Shyppe is forced downe with more then fortie Tunnes, for that the Ballaſt dooth hang ouer one waye towardes the Keelwardes, and the Shippe is wounde downe the contrarye waye on the one ſyde, whiche muſt of force be in ſuch ſort, as a thing that lyeth in a colepreſſe, and doth charge the Shippe with a double waight or burthen, to preaſſe it into the waterwardes: and then what can the quantitie of the ſupporting of any thing that cannot lift a tunne or two tunne waight therof, doo them any pleaſure, beſydes the great cumber that they ſhall haue in thoſe cauſes, to get ſuch a number of Maſtes, and alſo to make them faſt, or to frappe them together: and alſo in deede the ballaſt woulde ſlyppe, the Shyppe being wounde downe by force, for when that the ſhyppe hath her Ballaſt into the end, to make her to ſwym vpright, and then to bee wounde downe by force, then the ballaſt dooth hang towards the Keele, and the ſhip beyng wounde downe to the ſyde, then it muſt needes ſlyppe, as before is ſayde, except that it bee made faſt, for that the Ballaſt dooth hang ouer one way, and the Shyppe is wounde downe the other waye, and then it is not poſſible to come vnto the keele, ſo well as they ſhall doo, when the Ballaſt is but throwne or heaued ouer vnto the one ſyde, for that it hath then no more then hys owne proper wayght, where as otherwyſe the Shippe is charged with double wayght, for yf ſhee ſhoulde haue but forte tunnes of Ballaſt, the Shyppe is charged with more then eyghtie tunnes in wayght, and alſo it is very hurtfull and vneaſy for the ſhippe. &c.
                     
                        And furthermore, as before is declared in this fourth booke, called Staticke, that no kynde of thyng doth enter no further into the water, then the quantitie or body or any thing that waigheth ſo much in waight, as the proportion in bygneſſe of ſo much water. Therefore any thyng that is in the water, howe lyght ſoeuer it is, can enter no further into the water, then the proportion of ſuche a magnitude of water. For if the thyng be not the .xx. part of the waight of the water, then the one of twenty part of the body dooth enter into the water: and 19. of .20. partes ſhalbe aboue the ſuperficies of the water, &c.
                     And furthermore, for that the water is an Element ponderous or heauye, and yet thynne: therefore it is the nature and qualitie of water, to ſupport or beare vp a thyng that is lighter then it ſelfe: and yet it dooth geue any thyng place or leaue to turne it ſelfe in the water, ſo that it ſhall ſwymme with the heauyeſt part downewarde, as by experience is ſeene of any thyng that is put into the water, as thus: Take a Raſke, as a Pype or Hogſhead, or a Barrel, and put it into the water, the thyng beyng thyght, the tenth part of the bygneſſe or magnitude dooth not goe into the water, for that it is ſo lyght. And yet notwithſtandyng, if any one part of the kaſke be heauyer then the other, that ſame part wil turne downewards. And if you doo turne it vpwardes, as ſoone as euer you doo let it goe, it preſently turneth of it ſelfe downewardes agayne. So that experience dooth ſhewe this to be true, that the heauyeſt part of any thyng that is in the water, dooth alwayes turne, and ſeeketh downewardes. Therfore we may perfectly conclude thus of any ſhyp, if the ballaſt be caſt or heaued ouer vnto the ſyde of any ſhyp, that the ſhyp dooth turne ouer accordyngly, alwayes to haue the heauyeſt part downewardes.
                     Wherfore, contrary vnto the vayne opinions of a number of perſons that ſhoulde be wyſe, that if the ballaſt be throwen ouer vnto the ſyde, that the ſhyp ſhal ſwymme vpon the ſide, and yet the ballaſt ſhal neuer ſlyppe, for that alwayes the ſhyp dooth turne of itſelfe, to bryng it vnto the leuel, except it be let by ſome cauſe, whiche is, eyther by makyng it faſt, or els by ſome other accidental matter, or els it wyl followe accordyngly. &c. And ſome people

haue bene of that opinion, that no Shyp dooth ſwimme vpright, but that there is as much waight or more belowe in the water, as is aboue the water: but that is vntrue, as before it dooth appeare, by the enſample of a Raſke or Barrel. For you doo ſee that it wyll ſwymme, and the hea
                           •
                        yeſt part wyll turne downwards: & if that it be not one quarter of a pound heauier on the one ſyde, then it is on the other, that part wyll turne downewardes: and yet for all that, that part that is in the water, wyll not waygh the .10. part of that which is aboue the water.
                     Therefore you may conclude, that if the ballaſt doo lye all vppon the one ſyde of the Shippe, the Ship ſhal ſwimme vpon that ſyde, and the Keel ſhall come out of the water. And if that the ſhip ſyde be 
                           •
                        hight, there is no more daunger in her ſwimming on the one ſyde, than if ſhe were vpright in the water. And alſo the Ship dooth not ſwim ſo deepe into the water, lying on the one ſyde, as ſhe dooth ſwim when ſhee is vpright, for that the Shippe is more lancker, or ſlenderer, or ſharper: that is to ſaye, not ſo full and rounde, by the means of her Tuck and Runne, and the Foreway, as the ſyde is rounde and full. Therfore it cannot go ſo deepe into the water, for as before is ſayde, that nothing can goe no further into the water then the proportion of ſo much water in waight. Wherfore the ſyde being rounde and full, it is the more boyenter a great deale, &c. And alſo it is very good to bring a Shippe in ouer a barre or ſhulde, for lying vpon the ſyde, it dooth draw much leſſe water, then when it dooth ſwimme vpright &c. But notwithſtandyng it is not ſo good for to Karrene the Queenes maieſties Shippes, as it is the Marchants Shippes, for two ſpeciall caues, and the fyrſt is this: the Queenes highneſſe Shippes haue alwayes as muche ballaſt in them, as they doo vſually goe to the Sea withall, to be faſt to beare a ſayle, which is no ſmall quantitie in her bigger ſorte of Shippes: and then what a charge is it to take the greateſt part of the ballaſt out of them, and too take it in agayne, for they muſt take more then .3. quarters of the Ballaſt out, when they doo Karren them: whereas the Marchauntes Shippes doo delyuer all the ballaſt out when they do lade their ſhips: therfore the Marchants ſhal not occupy the 20. part of the

charges that the Queenes Shippes muſt. And the ſeconde cauſe is this, that in the Queenes Shippes, the ballaſt is alwayes fyrme and harde, by the meanes that it is ſeeldome or neuer ſtyrred, and alſo the Cooke roome is made vp with bricke vppon the ballaſt, and alſo there is ſet vp in the Cooke roome with Brycke worke the furnaſes, to boyle theyr beefe, and other prouiſion, that is made for the dreſſing of mens vittailes, as Quens and hatches &c. which were no ſmal charge to remoue and make vp agayne, whereas in the grounding of them all, theſe two great charges are ſaued, that Marchauntes ſhyps in theyr karrening ſhall not neede to bee at. &c. And thus I ende the fourth Booke.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧A Table of the Contentes of the Chapters of the fourth booke called a Treaſure for Trauailers.
                  The fyrſt Chapter of the fourth Booke, ſheweth you by the proportion of a Shyppe ſwimming in the water, for to knowe the true waight of any Shippe, with al her tackle, ordinaunce, furniture, and lading, &c.
                  The ſeconde Chapter ſheweth how for to meaſure the proportion of the mould of any Shyp, wherby is knowen the waight of any Shyppe, with all her ladynge and furniture.
                  The thyrde Chapter ſheweth you an eaſyer waye, then before rehearſed, by the Arte Statical, to knowe the true waight of any Shyppe, with al her lading, and all the reſte of her furniture.
                  The fourth Chapter ſheweth by the Arte Statical, the wayght of anye mettall or ſtone, howe much, or what wayght that it dooth waygh in the water, to bee lyfted or waighed from the bottome, vnto the brimme of the water.
                  The fyfth Chapter ſheweth howe too knowe the true meaſure in ynches or feete, of any ſtraunge forme, ſuch as Geometrie can giue no order for the meaſuring thereof, as to meaſure a braunche in mettal, or a piller that is enbowed and ful of hollowneſſe in diuers places, and boyles out in ſome places: and alſo how to know the diuerſitie of the waight of mettall, or the diuerſity between the waight of Stone, and mettall.
                  The ſyxt Chapter ſheweth by the Art Statical, to knowe the waight of any ſhip, that is ſunke into the Sea, or anye riuer, too knowe howe many tunne wyll waigh her vp agayne.
                  The ſeuenth Chapter ſheweth how to waigh a Shyp that is ſunke, where it dooth ebbe and flowe, &c.
                  
                     The eyght Chapter ſheweth howe to waigh a Shyppe, where it dooth not ebbe and flowe, &c.
                  The nynth Chapter ſheweth howe to bring in any ſhip ouer a ſhulde or barre, and to make the Shyp beare Saile, when al the ballaſt is out: and alſo if neede ſhoulde requyre, how to lyft the ſhyppe higher out of the waterwards to the intent to bring her in, &c.
                  The tenth Chapter dooth ſhewe vnto you, howe for to come vnto the Keele of anye Shyppe, without the groundyng of her, wherby you may collect any Shyppe, and make her thight vnto the Keele, which is called carenning of them. &c.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧The fyfth Booke of the treaſure for Trauaylers.
                     Wherein is ſhewed the cauſe of dyuers thynges that are to be ſeene on the Sea, and the Sea Coaſtes, and the cauſe of Rockes and ſandes in the Sea, and the cauſe of the ebbyng and flowyng 
of the water, and the cauſe of currantes in the Sea, with ſuch other like matters. &c.
                     Being very neceſſary for al ſortes of Trauaylers, either by Sea, or by lande, to knowe. &c.
                     Wrytten by William Bourne.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                     To the Reader.
                     GEntle Reader, it is poſsible that ſome wyll thinke that I haue taken vpon mee to meddle with thoſe cauſes, that are paſt my capacity, for that this fyfth and laſt boke is as concerning the naturall cauſes of Sands in the Sea and riuers, and the cauſe of mariſh ground, and Cliffes by the ſea Coaſts, and rockes in the Sea, and alſo the cauſe that the ſea dooth ebbe and flow, and the cauſe that the water in the Sea is ſalt, and the cauſe of Earth quakes, with other matters. And for that my opinion dooth differ from ſome of the auncient writers in naturall Phyloſophy, it is poſsible that it may be vtterly diſlyked of and condemned to be no trueth. But yet notwithſtanding they may geue ſuch credit vnto it, as the ſequell of the reaſons ſhall ſupport vnto them, for that they bee but my ſimple opinions: wherfore they may beleeue them as they lift. Therfore gentle Readers, I deſyre you to beare with me, for that I am ſo bolde to ſhew my ſimple opinion vnto the world, for it is poſsible, that ſome people may mallice me, for that I am ſo bolde to deale in theſe cauſes, conſydering what a great number of ſo excellent learned menne there are in Englande, bothe in the Vniuerſyties, and in diuers other places in this Lande.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The fifth Booke of the treaſure for trauailers.
                  
                     The fyrſt Chapter of the fyfth Booke ſheweth the naturall cauſes, how Sandes and Bankes are ingendered or made, both in the Sea and Riuers.
                     
                        NOw beginneth the fifth Booke which is concerning the naturall cauſes of ſundry things that are to bee ſeene in traueilyng vppon the face of the earth. And although there bee nothing that happeneth, but the prouidence of almightye God, dooth bring it to paſſe: yet notwithſtanding it hath a naturall cauſe why it is ſo, although it ſeemeth ſupernaturall or vnpoſſible for that God dooth woorke all thinges by a meanes, and yet doth come to paſſe by ſome naturall cauſe.
                     And fyrſt of the naturall cauſe of Sandes and Bankes in the Sea and ryuers, my opinion is this: that whereas a great number of Sandes and Banks are many times ſeene at the mouthes and entraunce of many great riuers both into the Sea, and alſo vp into the riuer, that it happneth by this meanes, by the ſhalowneſſe of thoſe ſeas, and the great indraft of the Ryuer. And then by the meanes of the ſoyle of the Countrye in the riuers, beyng a good diſtaunce from the ſea, and eſpecially after any great raine, dooth bring downe the ſoyle, for all the lande water dooth alwaies runne downe towardes the ſea, where as it dooth ebbe and flow, and ſometime the water ouerfloweth the banks, and then the ſwiftnes of the running of the water dooth fret away the bankes, and ſometime it happeneth in the winter after a great froſt.

And ſuch other lyke cauſes, ſometyme from ſandye grounde, & ſometime from clay grounde, & ſometime ſtony grounde: & other good moulde dooth fall into the Ryuer, and ſo is myxed and tumbled too and fro with the water, and is alwayes caried towardes the ſea by the violence of the ſtreame, for that alwaies, where it doth not ebbe & flow, the ſtreame runneth towards the ſea: & wheras it doth ebbe & flow, there the ebbe doth runne both ſwifter & longer then the floods doo, & ſo by that meanes, it is alwayes caried towardes the ſea, & alſo any thyng is apter to rolle, or runne down the hyll, rather then agaynſt the hyll. And thus the ſoyle of the countrey beyng tumbled too & fro in the water, is waſhed and ſoked in ſuch ſorte, that the water is made thycke therewith, and the fat or clammye ſubſtance, become owes, but the greety or ſandy, or grauelly ſubſtāce doth alwaies keepe towards the bottome, for that it is more pōderous or heauier then the fatty or clammy ſubſtance, and then this grauelly or ſandye ſubſtance, beyng dryuen downe towardes the ſea, by the violence of the ſtreame, goyng by the bottome, then where it dooth find any place to ſtaye at by the way, there it reſteth, and ſo groweth more and more, and ſo becommeth a ſande, and then the Tyde, by the meanes of ebbing and flowyng, dooth make or ſcoure out a chanel, or paſadge betweene one ſande or bancke, and another. And alwayes thys happeneth, whereas the Sea is but ſhalowe, and the Ryuer or hauen hath a great indraught, that is to ſay, to run a great diſtāce into the lande, whereby there is much ſoyle brought downe by the meanes afore rehearſed. And then the Sea beyng but ſhallowe, it hath no great deſcent to runne downe the hyll. And then by the meanes of the floods, & the bellowes of the Sea, dooth cauſe it to be ſtayed, although that ſometyme it happeneth, that one ſande or bancke doth decreaſe, and weare away, and another dooth increaſe and waxe bigger, and many tymes the chanels doo alter, ſometymes deeper, and ſometymes ſhallower: and ſometymes whereas a chanel was, becommeth a ſande, & ſometyme whereas a ſande was, is become a chanel, as experience hath many tymes ſhewed, which happeneth manye tymes by ſome ſtormes or great wyndes, ſometymes from one quarter of the

world, and ſometyme from another quarter. And by that meanes the greatneſſe of the bellowes of the Sea, dooth beat, or waſhe awaye the ſande from one place, and ſo dooth reſt vppon another place: and then the Tyde or ſtreame doth ſcoure or frette a newe Chanell, betweene one ſande and another. &c. As we maye ſee by experience in dyuers places, as the mould of the Ryuer of Thames, and Humber, and the Ryuer of Roane, and ſuche other lyke places, whiche I doo omitte at this tyme.
                  
                  
                     The ſeconde Chapter ſheweth the natural cauſe of Mariſh ground, and other plaine meadowes or ground by the ſydes of Ryuers. &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touching the naturall cauſe of Maryſhes or Mariſh grounde, and other playne and leuell grounde, that is by the ſydes of great Ryuers. &c. and in ſuch other lyke places: mine opinion is this, as in the Chapter before is expreſſed, by the bringing downe of the ſoyle of the countrey, which is ground or earth, of al kinde of ſorts, whiche is fallen into the water, and brought downe by the ſtreame.
                     And as before is rehearſed, the grauelly or ſandye ſubſtance dooth dryue with the ſtreame,Of the ſoyle of the Countrey. by the bottome, but the fatty or clammy ſubſtance is mingled with the water: for although you ſhoulde take any earth or ſubſtance, and waſhe it and tumble it in water neuer ſo much: yet notwithſtanding it cannot be conſumed all away, but if you doo let it ſtande ſtyll, then it wyl ſettle it ſelfe vnto the bottome, and you ſhall fynde the ſubſtance agayne.

So although the earth is mingled with water, by the meanes of the fretting of the ſtreame and the Tide, and alſo the ſouſſyngs of the bellows in great winds, toſſyng it to & fro in ſtormy weather, yet notwithſtanding in fayre and calme weather, in ſuch places, whersas there dooth not runne a great Tyde or ſtreame, then that earthye ſubſtance doth ſettle it ſelfe agayne on ſuch places as are defended by ſome Naaſe or poynt, and in ſome Bay or place, that the grating of the Tyde or ſtreame dooth not greatly trouble it, & is then called Owes, or as the common people that be not neare dwellers vnto ſuch Ryuers, doo call it Durt, Myre, or Mud. And then in ſuch places where it dooth ebbe or ſtowe, being ſetled, nowe a litle and then a litle, the winde and the Sunne doo ſomethyng harden it, vntyll at the laſt,How Mariſh groude is ingendred. through the ſetling nowe ſome and then ſome, and ſtyll dryed with the wynde and the Sunne, that it is as high as the common foule Seas: and then it will beginne to beare ſome greene thyng, and ſo it wyl become Mariſhe ground in tyme, and ſo is ouerflowed in the ſpring tides, but in the Neape Tydes, it is bare at a full Sea. And then many tymes it happeneth, that thoſe that are the dwellers there aboutes, or els the Lordes of thoſe ſoyles, doo Inne that ſame grounde, and make the walles for the defence thereof. And in proceſſe of tyme, it becommeth maine lande, and by this meanes commeth all your playne and leuelled groundes neare vnto Riuers ſides: And this kinde of grounde muſt needes be verye fertyle and riche, ſo that it be not ouerflowed with ſalt water, for that all the ſtonye and ſandy ſubſtance is waſht out thereof, and it muſt needes bee playne and leuell, for that it is braught to be leuell with the water at a ful Sea. &c.
                     And furthermore, it happeneth diuers times,Mariſh groūd is fertyle, if the ſalt water come not at it, as in the Chapter before is rehearſed, by great wyndes and ſtormes in ſundrie ages of the worlde, that the Channel
                           •
                         doo alter by the waſhyng or fretting away of ſome poynt or firme lande or Naaſe, and then that which hath been many yeeres before, mayne grounde, may be fretted awaye, and be ouerflowen agayne.
                     
                        And the ſubſtance of the grounde maye be landed in ſome other place, as by experience in manye places hath beene ſeene, ſo that, that place that hath beene before meayne grounde, hath become Sea and water,How land hath been ſea, and ſea hath been land. and that place that hath beene before ſea and water, hath become drye lande. And theſe things haue happened in praceſſe of tyme, by the meanes of the chaunging of the chanels, which doo alter the ſetting of the Tydes in Ryuers and Hauens, whoſe principal cauſe hath happened, as before is rehearſed, by frettyng awaye ſome Naaſe or poynt, and then ſome Naaſe or poynt hath turned the Tyde ſome other waye, and ſo worne or fretted a newe chanell: ſo that whereas the Tyde or ſtreame hath runne moſt ſwifteſt, hath become an eady, and ſo in proceſſe of tyme, grounde in lyke manner. &c.
                  
                  
                     The thyrde Chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſes of the hyghe clyffes by the Sea coaſtes. &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touchyng the naturall cauſes of clyffes that are by the Sea coaſtes, as wee maye ſee ſome of harde ſtone, and ſome of Chaulke, and of a monſtrous height, and ſome of Claye, and other of earth. &c.
                     My opinion is thys, as the age of the worlde is of no ſmall tyme, ſo in proceſſe of tyme the often ſufferynges of the bellowes of the Seas haue beaten away the feete of thoſe hilles, that are by the ſea coaſtes.
                     
                        And ſo vndermyning it, although it were of harde ſtone, yet the wayght of that which was vndermined hanging ouer, in rayny wether, or after great froſt, muſt needes fall downe into the Sea.Of Cliffes by Sea Coaſt. And then that ſayle or ſubſtaunce that fell downe, in proceſſe of time was beaten or waſhed away agayne, by the often ſouſſing of the bellowes of the ſea, in the time of great wyndes and ſtormes. And then the ſtuffe ſo fallen down, being waſhed and conſumed away, the ſea doth begin to vndermine it agayne, by litle and lytle, tyll at the length by the meanes before rehearſed, there falleth downe an other portion of the ſayde ſubſtaunce, or ſtuffe from the hyll, ſo that in the ende, they become ſuch monſterous Cliffes, as wee may ſee by experience, are on the ſea coaſtes in a number of places: And thus they do were away by litle and lytle, vntil that an other place is become aforelande, without that lande, that is to ſay, an other Naaſe or head land to ſtande further out into the ſea, then that dooth, and then that Clyffe wyl ſtay without fallyng downe any more, of the ſubſtaunce or ſtuffe of long time, by the meanes of ſome beache, or ſhingle, or ſande, or ſtones that ſhall be brought thither, by the coſſing to and fro of the bellowes of the ſea, and that ſhall lye there, and defende the foote of the ſande cliffe, as by experiēce we may ſee in a nūber of places by the ſea coaſts, and then doth we are away an other Cliffe, in ſome other place of the ſea coaſtes: for it happeneth many times, in ſundrye ages, that at one time, one place dooth were awaye, and an other dooth increaſe agayne: and in an other age agayne, that whiche dyd increaſe, ſhal weare away, and the other ſhal ſtay, or perhaps increaſe agayne, by the meanes there is ſome head land, or Naaſe without that, which dooth breake away the fretting or gratyng of the tyde: For many times it happeneth vpon the ſea Coaſtes, through ſome great and huge ſtorme, that maketh a breache by the monſtrouſneſſe of the great bellowes, that teareth away ſome great quantitie of ground, from ſome one place in ſhort time, and the bellowes of the ſea ſhall dryue or bring it, or lande it in ſome other place, yea euen in a ſhort ſpace, as experyence hath many tymes ſhewed it, and as it many tymes hapneth, that in one age

of the world, that the great huge windes or ſtormed doo happen ſometime in one quarter of the Worlde, and at an other time, in an other quarter.
                     
                        In foure yeres the great ſtormes are in one quarter of the world, and an other yeare in an other quarter.For as we may ſee, that in ſome yeares, the moſt great winds and ſtormes doo blow in the Eaſt quarter of the worlde, and in other yeares, in the Weſt quarter of the world, and in other yeres, in the South quarter of the worlde, and in other yeares, in the North quarter of the worlde. &c. By which meanes it fretteth at one time away the ſubſtaunce or ſtuffe from one place, and then the bellowes of the ſea doo driue or force it to lande in an other place: and ſo it continueth for a certayne time, vntill ſuch tyme that the great windes or ſtormes doo blowe in a contrary quarter of the world: and then the ſtuffe or ſubtaunce is beaten by the bellowes of the Sea, and dryuen and forced from that place, and ſo is landed in an other place: And it is poſſible to bee forced or landed at the place that it fyrſt came from, although it may be 20. or 40. myles diſtance aſunder. And thus thoſe that are neare dwellers vnto the ſea coaſtes, doo ſee the great and mighty workes of God, wrought by his greatneſſe and almighty power, the great or huge bellowes or waues or knots of the ſea, in great winds and ſtormes or tempeſtes, For euen thoſe things that ſhew or ſeeme vnpoſſible, he bringeth to paſſe, as by experience hath beene ſeene at ſundrye times. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The fourth Chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſe, why that the beache, and the great bolder ſtones, on the ſea coaſtes, are become rounde and ſmooth, without any edges or corners.
                     NOw furthermore, as touching the natural cauſes, why that the Beache, and the great bolder ſtones in the ſea, and the other ſmall ſhingle are all ſmooth and rounde, without corners or ſharpe edges, and yet they be of all kindes and luites of ſtones,The ſhingle beach or the bolder ſtone is of the ſubſtance of the nature of the Cliffes nere vnto them as Marble ſtone, and Flynt, and other hard ſtone. &c. For they bee of thoſe ſubſtance & natures, as the Cliffes that are neare vnto thoſe partes, as in the Chapter goyng before is declared, by vnderminyng of the hilles or bankes, with the bellowes of the Sea, the ſubſtaunce falleth downe into the Sea, what ſoeuer manner of ſtuffe it bee, according vnto the mineralles of thoſe groundes or hylles that falleth into the Sea, whether it be hard ſtone, or Marble ſtone, or Flynt, or what ſtuffe els ſoeuer it bee, accordyng vnto the vaines of the mineralles in the grounde, that ſo by that meanes before rehearſed, do fall into the ſea. Then when it is forced or brought to lande vpon any place of the Sea coaſt, it is all ſmooth, without any corners or ſharpe edges. The cauſe therof commeth to paſſe by this meanes, for when it doth fyrſt fall out of the Cliffe into the ſea, then it hath the faſhion and forme as thoſe haue that are digged forth of the grounde:The cauſe or reaſon that the beach and the great bolder ſtone is rounde without any ſharp edges. but after it is fallen into the ſea, & hath had any continuance there, & ſo toſſed to & fro by the waues and bellowes of the ſea, a great number of them together, the one doth ſo fret and rubbe or grinde againſt the other, that it muſt needs rubbe or fret away al the ſharpe edges of thoſe ſtones, how hard ſoeuer the ſtone is, for the ſouſſing of the bellows of the ſea doth neuer forget it ſelf to ſtand ſtyl, neyther is euer wery, nor deſyreth reſt, but is alwayes labouring and toſſing that is in it to and fro, according vnto the bigneſſe of the winde. &c. as by experience vpon the ſea coaſt may be ſeene, the great and mighty force of the bellowes, in the ſouſſings and forcing of the Beach a ſhore in the time of any great windes or ſtormes, amongſt the Beache & ſhingle:The force of the Sea. for you ſhal heare the ſouſſing of the bellowes of the ſea amongeſt the Beache, as though it weee the powring downe of a thouſande Carte loade at once:
                     
                        So that you may heare it two or three miles from the place wher as it is, yea and ſometimes after a Storme, you may ſee Stones that waygh a pounde wayght, throwne from the full ſea marke, into the landewardes two or three rods, by the very meanes of the ſouſſing of the bellowes or waues of the ſea, as thoſe that doo occupy the ſea coaſtes, doo ſee by experience. &c.
                  
                  
                     The fyfth Chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſe of the Rockes in the Sea. &c.
                     
                        AND yet furthermore, as concernyng the naturall cauſes of Rockes and pinacles that doo ſtande in the ſea very ſtrangelye vnto ſuche as doo beholde and ſee the ſame in ſundry places in the ſea, and ſome on the ſea Coaſtes, and ſome in Hauens, & harborows that are adioyning vnto the ſea. And this is generall for euer, that looke whereas there is any great ſtore of rockes, it is a token of a deepe ſea, it is a token of a ſhallow Sea, that hath many ſands. And the cauſe of rocks in the ſea, in mine opinion is this, as it is knowne vnto all perſons, that the age of the world is of no ſmall time: ſo that I am of that opinion, that the Rockes that are now ſtandyng in the ſea, haue beene parcell of the maynelande, or at the leaſt, ſome Ilandes ſtandyng in the ſea of long time agoe, although there bee no mention made of any ſuche Ilandes ſtandyng in the ſeas, in thoſe dayes. The cauſe thereof might be this: for that they that were of long time agoe, made no accoumpt of any ſmall Ilandes, that were towardes our Weſt Occian. For

theſe weſt partes, in thoſe dayes were ſcant peopled, as Ireland, and Englande, and Scotlande, and Brytayne, the weſt part of Fraunce. For it is no long time agoe, that Irelande hath beene throughly well peopled, although it bee a long time agoe, ſince the fyrſt entraunce of Brute, yet it was long ſince the Incarnation of Chriſt, before that this Countrye became throughly peopled, as it dooth appeare both by the Chronicles, and other ancient hyſtories.
                     And alſo in thoſe dayes,Nauigation not much vſed in the Weſt Occian. Nauigation was not ſo much vſed in theſe our Weſt Occian Seas, for the Sea was litle vſed in theſe our partes, except it were by ſmall Botes, to goe a fiſhing, and to tranſport people from place to place, as wee doo ſee by experience. Yet in theſe dayes, thoſe that doo inhabit, and dwell vppon the Coaſt of Afryca, to the Weſt Occian, doo occupye no ſhypping vnto the Sea, except ſmall Cannoſes, to goe on fiſhing, and ſuch other lyke, as al Barbary and Ginny, which were countryes well people before theſe Northweſt parts were peopled as it dooth appeare by Hiſtories.
                     And furthermore, in the olde time, thoſe people that were the dwellers in theſe Northweſt partes, were very ſimple and ignoraunt, as touchyng the drawing of Plats and Cardes, whether they were Cardes Geography, or Hidrographie. &c. Although that Pitholomias made Tables, as touching the deſcription of the Countries, yet hee dyd not manyfeſtly or plainly ſhew the Ilandes in the ſea, not to this weſt Occian, as they bee now well knowne. And furthermore, it is but a very ſhort time agoe ſince that Engliſhe menne did muche occupie the ſea, to trauaile on long voiages, neyther dyd fewe or none know or vnderſtande the vſe of their Sea plats, called Cardes Hydrography, for within theſe three ſcore or foure ſcore yeares, it hath been thought a great long voiage, for to goe into Spayre, and then when they dyd go into Spayne,Now Engliſhmen are as ſuff
                              •
                           tient to trauaile a long voyage, as any other nation. they went al alongſt by the coaſt of France, and ſo to the coaſt of Byſkey. &c.
                     But thankes be vnto God, now in theſe dayes, Engliſhmen are as ſufficient to trauaile in long voiages, as any other nations

be. But now to returne to our former matter, as concerning the cauſes of Rocks in the ſea, and as I haue ſayde before, that the Rocks haue beene parcell of the mayne lande, or els ſome Ilande long agone, & by the often ſouſſing of the bellowes or waues of the Sea, that neuer ſtandeth ſtyll, the other ſubſtaunce or ſtuffe is beaten and conſumed away, through the great deepeneſſe of the ſea: the other ſubſtaunce or ſtuffe is tumbled to the bottome, and is no more ſeene. And as the mynerals in the ground be of diuers kinds of ſubſtaunces, as ſome earth, and ſome ſande, and ſome ſtones: to conclude, of a hundred ſeuerall ſortes, ſo that all thoſe looſe ſubſtaunces, that woulde be mollyſted with the water, are beaten and waſhed away, ſo that there dooth remayne nothing but the harde myne of ſtone: and ſo he dooth ſtande in the ſea, as a pynacle or Rock,The cauſe of Rocks in the Sea. as by experience is ſeene in a number of places to the weſt Occian, as the Weſt part of Englande, and the Weſt part of Brittayne on the Coaſt of Fraunce, and ſuch other lyke places, whereas there be innumerable companyes of Rocks, ſome being of a gret height aboue the water, other ſome do ſhew thēſelues iuſt with the water, and other ſome are ſunken Rockes being rounded with the water, ſome deeper then other ſome, which would not bee knowne, but onely by the breaking of the ſea ouer them. &c.
                     And this is my opinion as concerning Rocks in the ſea, that haue beene of long time agone parcell of the mayne lande, though they be now Rockes in the ſea. Then it may be ſayde, that the lande is much leſſer then it hath beene before time, and ſo it is. And yet it is but a trifle in reſpect of any great quantytie or bignes, as it may be compared vnto the ragged edges of a peece of cloth, and yet the ragged edges thereof being pared away, the thing hath not much chaunged his faſhion or forme, neither in reſpect is become litle the worſe. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The ſyxt Chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſe of the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and the ebbyng and the flowing of the Hauens and Ryuers.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as concerning the ebbing and flowing of the ſea and other riuers, we do ſee by common experience, that the Moone dooth alwayes gouerne the ſame. Wherefore it may bee ſuppoſed, that the waters doo ſeeke and repaire,The waters are drawne by the power of the Moone. or moſt ſpeciallye are drawne by the power of the Moone, that when the Moone is in the midſt of the ſkie, that is to ſay, vpon the Meridian, then the waters are deepeſt or thickeſt, and alſo in lyke manner, in the oppoſite part, or els it would ebbe and flow but once in .24. houres and 4/
                           •
                        . partes, accordyng vnto the dayly motion of the Moone, which we do ſe by experiēce, that it doth ebbe & flow but once in 12. houres & ⅖. part of an houre, and then by this reaſon it ſhoulde flow or be a full ſea in all places at a South Moone, and a North Moone: & ſo as the Moone paſſeth vnto the Weſtwardes to be a ful ſea in thoſe partes, and ſo to goe with the diurnall or dayly motion of the heauens, which we ſee by experience is contrary, for we doo ſee by dayly experyence, that vpon the Coaſt of Spayne, and all thoſe partes that are vpon the Weſt Occian Seas, that the Moone in the Southweſt dooth make a full ſea, which is 3. houres after the Moone is vppon the Meridian: and yet notwithſtanding it woulde bee a full ſea alwayes where as the Moone is vpon their Meridian, and ſo to folow the daily motiō of the moone, as the moone is caried with primū Mobile: ſo that it were not let by this gret accidēce that this

Weſt Occian Sea, is ſhot in betweene the firme lande of Ameryca, on the Weſt part, and the mayne lande of Afryca, and Europe, on the Eaſt ſide, by which meanes the waters cannot folow to bee a full Sea, accordyng vnto the Moones courſe, as ſhe doth goe in her dayly motion, accordyng vnto the Moones commyng vnto the Meridian.
                     Wherefore it is to bee ſuppoſed, that yf there were no ſuche accidence in the Sea, to be let by the lande, that then it would follow orderly, that the waters in the Sea woulde goe rounde, accordyng vnto the Moones courſe in .24. houres, and ſo the ſtreme or currant, to goe from the Eaſt into the Weſt, and ſo rounde about. &c.
                     But nowe wee ſee that the waters, in the ebbing and flowyng, are let by this great impediment: for Ameryca dooth incloſe the Weſt part,The Moone doth gouerne the ebbing and flowing of the water, in two great and notable cauſes. and Europe and Afryca the Eaſt part, and yet we doo ſee by experience, that the Moone dooth gouerne the ebbyng & the flowyng of the waters of the Sea in two great and notable reſpectes. The one is this, as it is daylye ſeene in euery place, wheras it dooth ebbe and flow, that the Moone in one quarter of the Skye dooth make a full ſea for euer, in that place, or hauen, or harborow. And the other great effect of the Moone is this: as it is alwayes ſeene, that at the full of the Moone, and alſo at the chaunge of the Moone, how that the waters are quickened, and doo rayſe or lyft them ſelues muche higher then they doo at any other times, and alſo dooth deſcend much lower, where by it maketh the tyde or ſtreme to runne much the ſwifter, as it is ſeene by dayly experience, in ſuch places whereas it dooth ebbe & flow, at which times it is called in the time of the full Moone, and the chaunge of the Moone, ſpring tydes, or ſpring ſtremes: & in the quarters of the Moone, it is called Nepe tydes, or Nepe ſtremes, for that the waters doo not lyft them ſelues, or flowe ſo high as they doo at any other time, neyther doo they deſcende, or ebbe ſo low, as they doo at any other times of the Moone, and by that meanes the ſtreme doth not runne ſo ſwift as it doth at other times, for as in ſpring tydes it dooth flowe or lift it ſelfe higher, and deſcende or ebbe lower, then of cuſtome.
                     
                        So in neape Tides it doth lift or flow leſſe in height, & alſo ebbe or deſcende leſſe in deepeneſſe, then it dooth of cuſtome, as it is ſeene dayly by common experience. &c.
                     But yet furthermore,The var
                              •
                           etie of being a full ſea in one Ryuer. as touching the ebbyng and flowing of the water, both in the Sea, and alſo in Hauens and Ryuers, and although that it dooth keepe an order or methode in anye one aſſigned place, yet is there great varietye in places harde by: yea in one Ryuer, it ſhalbe a full Sea in one parte of the Ryuer, and in that Ryuer, and at that inſtant, a lowe water, as the proofe thereof maye be manyfeſtly ſeene here in the Ryuer of Thames, as it is not vnknowen, that the Moone in the South dooth make a full Sea on the landes end, at the entraunce of the Ryuer of Thames, and the Moone in the Southweſt, dooth make a full Sea at London, and then it is halfe ebbed on the landes ende: But in Rychmonde aboue London, there the Moone in the Weſt, dooth make a ful Sea, and then on the landes end, there it is a lowe water, as it is manifeſtly to be ſeene. &c.
                     And furthermore, as touching the ebbyng and flowyng vpppon the Coaſt of the Occient Sea, for that it floweth generally a Southweſt Moone, ſo mine opinion is this,A ful ſea and a lowe water act at one inſtant in the Ryuer of Thames. by the meanes of the ſhuttyng or incloſyng of the Sea betweene America, and Europe, and Africa, that it commeth to paſſe thus, for the water cannot followe the courſe of the Moone, for after that the Moone is paſt the Meridian in the Bay of America, commonly called the Bay of Mexico, that then the waters can no longer followe the courſe of the Moone, for that it is letten by the mayne lande. And then when the Moone dooth come rounde about, vnto the Southeaſt, then the powers of the Moone doo tracte or draw the waters vnto the Eaſtwardes, by whiche meanes the waters hauing a great courſe or ſwaye vnto the Eaſtwardes, are drawen ſo vehementlye by the powers of the Moone, vntyll ſuche tyme, as the Moone dooth come vnto the Meridian, that it cannot ſodaynely reuerſe, although the Moone bee paſte the Meridian to the Weſtwarde, as we maye ſee manye tymes by common experience, that any thing forced to moue violentlye, is

not preſently ſtayed, but that it muſt haue a tyme in the ſtaying, as the force of the dryfte dooth decay, which muſt be by litle and litle. &c. And ſo by that meanes the Mone is in the Southweſt before the waters wylbe deſcended: and for proofe thereof, if that you doo put water in any broade or long veſſell, and ſturre the water in ſuch ſort,The cauſe of the ebbing & flowing in Hauens, and Riuers. that it may ſwaye from one ende vnto the other, and after that it hath begunne to ſway from ende vnto end, it wyll be a long tyme before it wyll ſtande ſtyll: for you cannot make it to ſtaye vppon the ſodayne, but it wyll ſway too and fro, vntil that it dooth ſtay it ſelfe by litle and litle. &c.
                     And furthermore, as touching the ebbyng and flowyng in the other inferior Seas, and Hauens, and Ryuers, that happeneth by this meanes, as it is a full Sea in all the places vppon the Weſt parte towardes the Occian Sea, ſo that when it door finde the water of our inferior Sea, lower then that which dooth come out of the Occian Sea, then it runneth in vntil that it commeth to be leuel. For the propertie of water is alwayes to runne vnto the lower partes, and ſo by that meanes, and alſo the ſway that it hath, it runneth and floweth into al Hauens, and Harbours, and Riuers, as long as it fyndeth any place lower or inferior in hight vnto it ſelfe. And then as ſoone as it fyndeth the water behynde it, lower then it is before it, then it ſtayeth, and beginneth to runne backe agayne, for as is ſayde before, the propertie of waters is alwayes to runne to the lower partes: and by this meanes it floweth into al ryuers, Hauens, and Crickes vppon the Sea coaſt, and in ſome place it dooth hygher flowe more water vpryght,The c
                              •••
                            that the water doth riſe and flowe higher in one place then it doth in another and dooth ebbe more water in lyke manner downe right, then that it dooth in ſome other places, and that happeneth by this meanes, and if any place haue a wyde enterance, and then afterwardes is ſhut vp into a narow roume, hauing ſome diſtance to reuerſe backe agayne, then the water dooth ryſe and flowe very hygh, for that th
                           •
                         water commeth in with a great ſway, and will not vppon the ſodayne reuerſe backe agayne, as by enſample it may be ſeen in Seuern, that commeth vp to Briſtow and as before is ſayde by the Ryuer of Thames, that it is not a ful Sea in all

places at one inſtant. For when that it is entred in at the mouth, and hath taken his ſway withal, then it runneth in by the meanes that the water is lower within, then it is with out at the Sea, for that it is a quarter flood, and more at the Sea, before that the flood entreth into the Ryuer, and ſo floweth vpwardes, for it muſt haue a tyme, before that it can hygh ſo much water at the mouth or enterance to be hygher then it is within vp into the Ryuer: for it is three parts flood vpon the landes end, before that it be anye flood at London, for that the diſtance is a great way in, & the Ryuer very crooked and narrow, and many poynts, and Naaſes that doo let and ſtay the Tyde, but afterwardes, when it is in, and hath taken his ſway, then it cannot ſo ſoone reuerſe backe, vntyll that the water is well deſcended or ebbed behynde it too the Seawardes, as it dooth manifeſtly appeare by experience. And by this order it floweth into all Hauens and Ryuers, accordyng vnto the indraught.
                  
                  
                     The ſeuenth Chapter ſheweth the cauſe of Currantes or ſtreames, that runneth in the Sea, in ſuch places, where it dooth not ebbe, and flowe, and of Currantes or ſtreames in the Sea, there are three ſeuerall ſortes, as in the Chapter it dooth appeare. &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touchyng the Currantes, or the ſtreame in many places in the Sea, whereas it dooth not ebbe and flowe, as that is perceyued in manye places, as by experience is ſeene and knowen in the Sea. And to let you vnderſtande what thoſe Currantes or Strames bee, that it is a continuall runnyng of the water in the Sea alwayes

one way, and not reuerſyng or commyng backe wardes to and fro, as it dooth in ſuch places where it doth ebbe and flow, but that the water alwayes in thoſe Seas or partes doth 
                           •
                        unne continually one waye,3. ſortes of Currātes. or els at the leaſt a long tyme, according vnto the naturall cauſe of that currant. And of theſe currantes I doo fynde three ſeuerall ſortes, that doo come of three ſeuerall cauſes, and the cauſe of euery one of them is contrary vnto the nature of the other.
                     And fyrſt concerning the naturall cauſe of the principalleſt Currantes, as by experience of them is ſeene in diuers places, by thoſe that haue trauayled into thoſe partes by the Sea, as thus: The currant rūneth forceably, and continually from the Eaſt vnto the Weſt,The principall and chiefe Currant of the ſea. at the Cappe bone ſperaunce, the Southermoſt Cappe of Africa, or Ethiopia, and ſo reboundeth vpon the Coaſt of America, which is drawen by the powers of the Moone by ber dayly motion, as in the Chapter next before is rehearſed, as it dooth appeare by the enſample of ebbyng and flowing, and ſo rebounding vppon the Coaſt of America, by that impediment, that it cannot get paſſage that way, accordyng vnto the dayly motion, then it is forced to ſeeke other paſſages, ſo that parte thereof dooth ſeeke, and dooth goe thorowe the ſtrayghtes of Magelen
                           •
                        s into the South Sea, and there the currant dooth go continually from the Eaſt, into the Weſt. But that ſtrayght or paſſage beyng vnſufficient, for that it is ſo narrowe, the currant is forced to ſeeke ſome other waye. Wherefore partly it dooth deuide it ſelfe, and ſo dooth runne vp vnto the Coaſte of Braſyll, towardes the Equinoctiall by Cappe Crucis, and Saint D
                           •
                        
                        myngs,The reuerſing backe of the currant. and ſo into the great Bay of Amerrica or Bay of Mexico, and ſo reuerſeth backe agayne, and ſo thorowe the Cannel or Chanell of Bayhaina, between the Cappe of Terra Florriday, & the great Ilande of Coba, goyng from the Weſt into the Eaſt, which is the cauſe that thoſe that doo go into the Weſt Indies, doo fyrſt goe to the Cannaries, and ſo to the Weſtwardes, to the intent to haue the currant to the Weſtwardes, into the Bay of Mexico, and then when they doo returne home, then they doo

go by the North part of the Bay of Mexico through the chanel of Baphamea, for that the currant dooth reuerſe backe from the Weſt into the Eaſt, ſo that they haue the currant or ſtreame to help them backe home agayne. &c. And thē in lyke maner, partlye the currant that commeth about Cape bone ſperance, being beaten by the mayne lande of America, as is ſayde before, part runneth or goeth thorowe the ſtrayght of Magalenus, and partly thorowe the great Golfe or Bay of Mexico, as before is rehearſed, and part dooth reuerſe or goe backe alongeſt the coaſt of the South land that lyeth on the South ſide of the ſtraightes of Magalenus, where the South pole or pole Anterticke is rayſed more thē .50. degrees, and ſo goeth backe from the Weſt into the Eaſt, alongeſt the South Coaſt, vntyl it dooth come into the Eaſt Occian ſea agayne. &c.
                     And this is the principalleſt currant,The ſeconde ſort of currants or ſtreames. as thoſe that doo occupie thoſe partes by ſea, doo knowe, and theſe currantes are wel knowen to runne continually alwayes one way. &c. The ſeconde ſort of currantes or ſtreames, is this, as it is ſeene in dyuers places, that they ſhall haue a currant or ſtreame, where it dooth not ebbe & flow, that alwayes doth goe vnto the windewards. But that neuer happeneth but in the tyme of great wind, and the cauſe thereof is this, that the ſea beyng wrought or troubled with great ſtormes of wynd, dooth rayſe great bellowes or waues, or great knottes in the ſea, and that runneth rollyng with the wynde, and dooth cauſe the water too bee vnleuell or vneuen, as it is the nature of water to ſeeke to the lower partes tyll that it doth come vnto his leuel:The cauſe that it doth not ebbe and flowe in ſome ſeas. ſo by that meanes as the wind beareth the water in the ſea, with great waues or bellowes, ſo the currant in the water dooth goe agaynſt the wynd, to come vnto his leuel againe: as the experience thereof is ſeene in dyuers places, where it dooth not ebbe and flowe, as in the myddle earth ſea, or leuant ſeas, and within the Soūd, that is to ſay, within Elſon Nore that hath narrowe enterances, and yet is great ſeas within, which dooth take away the effect of ebbing and flowing, for that the ſtraight is not ſufficient to let in water ye
                           ••
                        ugh, for to cauſe it too ebbe and

flowe. And this effecte in lyke manner is many tymes ſeene, ſometyme on the coaſt of Barbary, and in ſuch other lyke places, where it dooth not ebbe and flowe. &c.The thirde ſort of ſtreames or currantes. The thirde ſort of currants or ſtreames that runneth in the Sea, where it dooth not ebbe and flowe, as by experience is ſeene in diuers places, is cauſed by the ſailyng into the Sea of ſome great and myghty Ryuer, that the lande water commyng forceably downe the Ryuer, and ſo emptyeth or runneth into the Sea, dooth cauſe a currant to goe in the ſea, agaynſt the mouth of the Ryuer, as it is ſeene in the middle earth Sea, agaynſt the mouth of Nilus, and alſo it is many tymes ſeene in the North partes, at the ſpryng of the yeare, when the Snowe and the Iſe is melted or conſumed into water. And then agaynſt the mouthes of ſuch Ryuers, as doo emptye them into thoſe ſeas, dooth cauſe a great currant to runne a great diſtance from the lande, in ſuch places as this effect happeneth in thoſe ſeas. &c.
                  
                  
                     The eyght Chapter ſheweth the cauſe that the waters of the Sea are ſalt, &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touchyng the naturall cauſe that the water of the Sea is ſalt, whereas the opinion of ſome Authors is, as Ariſtotle, & other, that it is made ſalte by the powers of the Sunne, by the drawing of the fyne ſubſtance of the water, vp into the ayre, the Sea is made ſalt by that meanes. Then if that were the whole cauſe, thē the water of the Sea ſhoulde be moſt ſalteſt vnder, or neare the Equinoctiall. For that the Sunne hath a greater force by the meanes of the direction of the ſhadow of the Sunne, whereby the

Sunne ſhoulde drawe or diſtil it more faſter, then it dooth in any of the other Clymates.
                     Yet notwithſtandyng, it is ſeene by experience, that the water of the Sea is as ſalte in the Latitude of .60. degrees,The ſea is ſalt very farre to ye Fro
                              •
                           th partes. in the Occian Sea, as it is vnder the Equinoctiall. And as ſome haue ſayde, it is as ſalte in Iſelande, and at the North Cappe, which is within the Polle or Cyrcle, neare fyue degrees. And there the Sunne cannot haue any great power, for that the Sunne hath but a very glaunſyng ſhadowe in Iune. And in the Wynter part of the yeare, the Sunne wyll not appeare or ryſe vnto them, in the ſpace of tenne Weekes.
                     And furthermore, if the water of the ſea were made ſalte onely by the powers of the Sunne, then thoſe ſeas muſt needes become freſhe, by another great cauſe, and that is this: For in the Spring of the yeare, in the meltyng of the Snowe and the Iſe, there falleth ſuch abundance of freſhe water, that it would make it freſhe, and yet the water is verye ſalt, inſomuch that in dyuers places in the North parte, they doo make ſalt of the ſea water, although that it is not made by the heate or powers of the Sunne, as it is made in Spayne and in Fraunce, for that they doo make it in Scotlande with the heate of the fyre,Salt is made of the ſea water in Scotland & in Roſey. & ſo as ſome haue ſayde, it is made in Roſey, not farre from Sainct Nicolas. And furthermore, as it may be prooued, the water is not made ſalt by the power of the Sunne, for that the heade of the great Ryuer Nylus that commeth from the Mountaynes of the Moone, & hath Latitude beyond the Equinoctial twelue degrees: And ſo in ſundry places, ſtandeth in ſundry great pooles,Freſh water in ſeas or pooles vnder the Equinoctiall. not farre from the Equinoctial, and ſo paſſeth from vnder the Equinoctiall, vnto the Northwards, and dooth empty it ſelfe in the middle earth ſea: and yet that water is freſh, and not ſalt. So that it is manifeſt that the powers of the Sun, are not altogether the cauſe that the water of the ſea is ſalt. Wherfore in mine opinion, the water of the ſea is become ſalt by the Minerals or ſubſtance of the nature of the ground, which is ſalt properly of it ſelf, and ſo mollified or ſoked, that it turneth vnto water, hauing anye moyſture or lyquor to come vnto it.
                     
                        As for an enſample, that in ſundrie places, it is knowen that there is Salt found and dygged out of the ground, and is perfect Salt, and occupied for Salt, after they haue made it cleane, and beate it ſmal. And as it hath been credybly reported vnto me, there is a hyll or Mountayne in Barbary in Africa,Salt mines. that Salt is digged out thereof, and is a great diſtance from the ſea. And the like is reported to be in the kingdōe of Hungary, here in Europ, that there is ſalt digged out thereof, and is ſolde and bought into dyuers places, as into Polonia, and into ſome places of Germanye.
                     
                        The ſea made ſalt, by the ſubſtance of the grounde.Then it is a playne caſe, that there be ſuch wynes or mineralles in the grounde, which maketh the thyng to be moſt manifeſt, that the Sea is made Salt by the mineralles or ſubſtance of ſalt in the grounde.
                     And yet for further proofe therof, here in England, at the Wyches in Cheſſeſhyre, there is in ſundrye places, a water or Bryne that they doo make Salt of, and is a good diſtance from any Sea. And ſome haue made argument, that it may come from the Sea, thorowe the Vaynes or Coues in the grounde, which is moſte contrarye, by thys meanes: for if that it come from the Sea, thorowe the grounde, then it coulde not be ſalter then the water of the Sea, for that at the Wyches, is much ſalter then the Sea water. For if that it come from the Sea, then it muſt be ſomewhat freſher then the Sea water, by the meanes of the ſcouring it ſelfe thorowe the earth, and by meeting of ſome freſh waters, as the earth is not without freſh water. &c.
                     And furthermore, as concernyng the ſaying of the Philoſopher Plato, in his Dialogues of Tymeus, and Crecia, and alſo is written by Marcellius Ficius, that in the olde time, there was an Ilande in the Sea, ouer agaynſt Africa, bygger then Africa and Aſia, which Ilande was called Atlantyda, and that the Kynges of this Ilande did gouerne a great parte of Africa and Europa, and as Marcellius Ficius, and Plato ſay, by the meanes of a great earthqake, and a great rayne, thys Ilande ſunke, and the people thereof were drowned: and after the ſinkyng of thys

great Ilande, the Sea Atlanticus was ſo full of mudde by the meanes of the ſinckng therof, that the ſea Atlanticus could not be ſayled with ſhippes in a great time after. Now if this be true,Of the great Ilande called Atlantica that ſunke. that there was any ſuch Ilande, that dyd ſo ſincke, & that the Sea was ſo full of mudde, then after that the mudde is ſetled vnto the bottome, as it wyll doo in proceſſe of time, then the ſea muſt needs be a very ſhallow ſea, for ſuch a great maſſe of earthy ſubſtance being ſunck with water, muſt needes make a very ſhallow Sea: and yet it is ſeene and knowen almoſt generallye vnto all mē, that it is a depe ſea, yea no man can tel of what depth, for that they cannot finde any grounde: for that ſea is greatlye occupied with Shippes, and that Ilande lay 
                           •
                        aſt from Spayne and Barbary, which is moſt occupyed with Ships, of any ſea: for all the great trade of ſhipping is now in theſe daies vſed out of Europe. And then what place can be greater occupied, then into our weſt Occian ſea, called in olde time, the ſea Atlanticus, as it is the whole trade from Englande, Fraunce, and the lowe Countrey, and Denmarke, and ſuch lyke places of Europe, into Spayne, and Portugall, and Barbary, and into the myddle earth Sea, and into Ginny, and into the Carnarie Ilandes, the Madera Ilandes, and the Ilandes called the Syrtes, and to the Weſt Indyes: ſo that it is the greateſt occupyed ſea with ſhipping in the whole world: ſo that the ſame ſea is not vnknowne, but that it is a great deepe ſea: therefore it is to bee ſuppoſed, that the fundamentall nature or ſtubſtaunce, or ground therof was of Salt, and ſo ſoked or moyllfied with the water, that the ſuperficies thereof might be ſunck vnder the water, and ſo in proceſſe of time to ſoke the minerall of the Salt, that the ſtony and earthye ſubſtaunce is nowe ſetled downe ſo low, that it ſeemeth vnto the ſimple people, that it hath no bottome: for otherwiſe ſuch a huge maſſe of earthy ſubſtaunce coulde not be ſo loſt, as it dooth appeare by that great Iland called Atlantida, that Maccellius Ficius, Plato, and Proclus, with other Authors, doth make mention of. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The nienth Chapter is as touching the cauſe of Earthquakes.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touchyng Earthquakes, and the ſynking both of the mayne Lande, and alſo of Ilandes in the Sea, and alſo of the drying vp of Waters, as great Pooles & Riuers, and alſo of the caſting vp of Grounde both in the ſea, as well as vppon the mayne Lande, although it bee the prouidence of almyghtye God, to bryng it ſo to paſſe, for the puniſhment of the people,Whē god doth plague the earth, he dooth puniſh both good & bad. that are vppon the face of the Earthe: and as well the godlye doo periſhe, as the wicked, when theſe thinges happen, whiche are the ſcourge of the wrathe of God, for that hee wyll haue his diuine glory knowne: yet hee dooth nothing but that it is done by a meane, & hath a naturall cauſe of the commyng of it ſo to paſſe, although the thing it ſelfe bee ſupernaturall.
                     And furthermore, although I am ſymple and vtterly vnlearned, neyther to the iudgement of the people to haue any great experyence in theſe cauſes, yet notwithſtandyng being as one more bolde then wyſe, to ſhewe myne opynion vnto the Worlde, and alſo it is poſſible that in ſome poyntes my opynion dooth not agree with ſome of the ancient Writers, that haue written of ſundry thinges in their Bookes of naturall Philoſophye. Yet notwithſtandyng I am ſo bolde to ſhewe my opinion, although it be poſſible that it may dyffer from the trueth. Wherefore they may vſe ſuch credit vnto the matter, as the reaſons in theſe matters ſhall ſupport vnto them, for yf that by reaſon my opinyon be not to bee lyked, then they may the leſſe regarde it. &c.
                     
                        And this firſt, as concerning the ſincking of grounde as experience hath ſhewed, that it hath happened in ſundry places, and in ſundrye ages of the worlde, my opinion is this, as in the Chapter before is ſhewed, that in thoſe places that it hath happened, that the ſubſtaunce of the grounde in that place is Salte vnderneath,The cauſe of the ſinking 
                              •
                            the grounde. and ſo beyng ſoked or mollyfyed with water, in proceſſe of tyme, it is turned vnto water, and then the earthy ſubſtance that is a loofe vppon it beyng ponderous and heauie, and not ſupported or borne vp wyth any harde thing, then it muſt needes ſettell it ſelfe downe and ſincke into the water: and ſo by that meanes the water ſtandeth aboue the ſuperfycies thereof, as it is ſhewed in the Chapter goyng before, by the ſincking of the great Iland called Atlantyda, &c.
                     And furthermore, as concerning ſome kinde of earthquakes, that happeneth in ſuch ſort that it renteth and lyfteth and ſhaketh the grounde, and poſſible lyfteth the grounde hygher then that it was before, and ſo remayneth and ſtandeth ſtyll afterwardes, wyth out any ſetling afterwardes. &c.
                     My opinion is this, by the meanes before rehearſed,Of Earthquakes. that there may be ſome vaynes in the grounde that may be of the ſubſtance of ſalt, as before is rehearſed, and yet may be incloſed with other mynes rounde about it, as we may ſee by experience, howe often that the vaines of the ground may alter, and in a ſmal circuite, as in ſome place may be hard ſtone, and in another place chalke, and in another place, claye, or ſande, or the oure of diuers kyndes of mettalles, with a number of ſundry ſortes of ſubſtances that I doo emyt. &c. Now this myne or ſubſtance of ſalt being incloſed round aboute with other ſubſtances or ſtuffe, as before is ſayde,Water cannot d
                              •
                           part from any place, vntil the ayre, or ſome other ſubſtance doth occupy the rounde and the ſpringes of water in the grounde comming vnto it, both ſoke it & molifyeth it, that it is turned vnto water: & then being water it is apt to runne in the vaynes of the ground, & yet it can not depart to go from that place, vntyl that it doth draw ayre thither. And looke as the aire doth fynd 
                           •
                        ent thorow the powers in the ground, & doth repaire vnto that place, ſo the water doth decreaſe & rūneth in the vaines of the groūd vnto other places: & thus in proces of tyme the ſubſtāce of ſalt being turned vnto water, ſhalbe diminiſhed or gon

and the roome thereof fylled full of ayre, and yet the grounde aloft ſhall ſtande fyrme and faſt, for that it is borne vp or ſupported by rocky or ſtony ſubſtaunce. &c.
                     Now it is poſſible, that ſome will make argument, and ſay, how ſhoulde ayre come thither, for that it is ſo low in the ground, and that there is no place open vnto the ayre, wherby it may come thyther? But they doo not conſyder this, that no place can bee vacant, but that it is furniſhed with ſomwhat, either with earthy ſubſtance, or water, or ayre, or Fyre, & euery one of thē is finer in ſubſtaunce then the other, as the earthy ſubſtance is groſſe and harde, ſo the watry ſubſtaunce is thinner, and yet ponderous and heauy: ſo that there can be no place hollow or concaue in the earth, but it is filled with water or ayre. For the water by his ponderouſnes dooth deſcend and ſeeke to the lower parts. And then looke where as the water is not ſufficient to fyll the hollow place, then ayre dooth repayre thyther to fulfyll the reſt, takyng his place next aboue hym, as we may ſee by experyence, that if wee doo dygge in the grounde, wee ſhall meete with Sprynges of water: as by the enſample of the digging of Wels in the grounde, that when they haue dygged ſo low, and haue founde but a ſmall ſpryng, then letting it ſtande a certayne time, thither wyl repayre a great quā
                        titie of Water afterwardes. And then this being true, that the water dooth fynde paſſage through the vaynes in the grounde, then it is a playne caſe, that ayre muſt the rather fynde paſſage, for that it is an Element more thinner and ſubtyller then water, and wyll ſoke through any ſmall thing ſooner. For the nature of ayre is to deſcende very deepe into the earth, if it bee not fylled with other ſubſtaunces. So in lyke manner water, although it be ponderous and heauy, wyll aſcende vpwardes, yf the ayre cannot come thyther by the meanes of the cloſeneſſe or thightneſſe of the thing that the water is incloſed aloft or ouer it, and alſo the water wyll not deſcende or fall downe ſodaynlye, although the ayre be vnder it being incloſed in it, that the water by his 
                           •
                        underouſneſſe or waight, dooth cauſe the ayre to ſeeke through the water, which wyll be a long time, except the water and the ayre bee

be ſtyred by ſome accidentall cauſe.
                     And now to returne to the cauſe of Earthquakes,The cauſe of Earthquakes. my ſimple opinion is this. The ayre being incloſed in the bowels of the earth, which hath happened by the meanes before rehearſed, or by diuers other meanes, which I am not able to rehearſe, that the ayre may bee incloſed in the grounde or earth, and then when it ſhal pleaſe almighty God to bring it ſo to paſſe, for God is the worker of all thinges, either by one meane or another, that the waters may ariſe and encreaſe in the grounde, and eſpecially after any great and continuall rayne, and the water being ponderous and heauy, dooth ſeeke into the earth, expelling or thruſting out the ayre that is neare the ſuperficiall part of the earth, and ſo by his ponderouſneſſe ſetleth it ſelfe lower and lower, and then the great and continuall rayne dooth lode the ſuperficiall face of the earth with water, and dooth cauſe the earth to ſwel and ſhutte it ſelfe cloſe aloft on the vpper part of the earth, and that water in the earth, by ſetlyng it ſelfe lower and lower, and the earth by his cloſeneſſe wyll not ſuffer the ayre to depart out of the earth, ſo that there is no roome in the earth to holde or contayne both the Ayre and the water, but that the ayre in the earth is forced to rent the earth to haue roome ſufficient. And alſo at that time the earth is more apter to ſeperate it ſelfe, then it is at any other time, for that the earth is ſoked and made ſoft by the great moyſture that is in it.
                     And by this meanes, in ſuch places whereas this cauſe dooth happen that the grounde dooth quake and tremble,Of the ſhaking of the earth. and the buildings that are neare thereabout, vntill ſuch time as the ayre doth fynde paſſage to get out of the ground, and if that it cannot fynde paſſage, then it dooth ſplit and rent the grounde, caſting al things that are ouer it, or in the way of the ayre, that breaketh ſo out of the ground ouer it, and poſſible to turne the buildings vnderneath the earth or grounde to the great and maruaylous deſtruction both of the people and buildinges where this happeneth. &c.
                     And by this meanes thoſe places, that haue beene Lande, may become Water, being neare vnto the Sea or any great Ryuer.
                     
                        And in lyke manner whereas there haue bene any Pooles or Ryuers may be dryed vp, as cleane as though there had neuer beene any Poole, or Ryuer, or water there, by this meanes: for after that the ayre in the earth hath rent the earth to ſeeke paſſage out, then this thing happening there or neare vnto the water, may run or deſcende into that place wheras the ayre was before, and alſo in the turning vp or ſplitting of the grounde, there may bee ſome hilles or cliffes ſtandyng vp much higher then the grounde was before. And ſo by this meanes the places that haue bene dry land, may become ſea and water, and in lyke manner that place that hath beene water, may become dry lande. &c.
                     And furthermore, in lyke manner there may by this meanes before rehearſed, be Ilandes caſt vp in the ſea, by the meanes of the ayre breaking out of the earth. &c. for that is the propertie of ayre, to runne and to ſeeke into all places, that is not occupied or furniſhed with ſome of the elementall ſubſtances, ſo that rather then any hollow or concaue place in the earth ſhall bee vacant, ayre wyll ſeeke thither, if it were in the very Center of the earth. For as is ſayde before, if water bee able to ſeeke paſſage through the vaines in the earth, then much rather the ayre ſhall doo it, for that it is much thinner, & ſubtiller then water, although that ayre wyll geue place vnto water, by his ponderouſnes or waight. &c.
                  
                  
                     
                     The tenth Chapter ſheweth the reaſon, howe America, and all the Ilandes and newe found Countries, and Lands, became peopled, and of what poſteritie they be come of. &c.
                     
                        AND furthermore, as touchinge the vaine argumentes and opinions of ſome people, as touching the diſcouering of a number of Landes and Ilandes, that haue not beene founde nor knowne but within litle more then .100. yeares, as all America, and a number of Countries, and great and ſmall Ilandes more, & none of them of any quantitie or bigneſſe, for that they are peopled: and for that they are peopled, I haue harde ſome vayne and fooliſh arguments therof, why there ſhoulde be people there, for that theſe Countries or places were neuer knowen before, except there were any more Adams then one, or any more 
                           •
                        oyes thē one. So we may ſee by experience, how apt a nūber of people are to fal into errours, vſyng moſt vayne and contentious argumentes in thoſe matters that are paſt their capacitie, whiche is a great offence before God, and alſo to the eui
                           •
                        l Enſample vnto the world, vnto ſuch as doo heare of the ſame. For it is no ſmal errour for vs to fal into, for to think that there was an
                           •
                        more Adams in the world then one, for that it is vtterly againſt all the Canonycall Scriptures: and alſo it is as great an errour to ſay that there were ſaued any more people after the deluge or flood, more then N
                           •
                        y and his famyly, that was in the Arke with him, as it is manyfeſtly declared in Geneſis. &c. Wherefore I thinke it not hurtfull to ſhewe my opinion as concerning how all America became peopled, with all the other new founde landes and Ilandes, lying in the ſea, whereſoeuer they be. &c.
                     Fyrſte thus my opinyon is, that America is parte of

the great Ilande called Atlantida, as it is further declared in the eight Chapter goyng before,How all the new founde Countries became peopled, as all America, and all other Ilandes. that the Kinges of the Ilande dyd gouerne a great part of Europe and Africa, and accordyng vnto ſome Authors, that the Kings of that Ilande were the ſonnes of Neptunus, then that dooth ſygnifye that there was a trade or occupying of Shipping betweene theſe knowne partes and that great Ilande, and then when that great Ilande dyd ſynke, as before is declared, the Sea Atlanticus was ſo full of mudde,All the great Iland called Atlant
                              •
                           da, dyd not ſynk, but part remained. that it coulde not bee ſayled in longe time afterwardes. And by the Enſample of America, that all the Ilande dyd not ſynke, but the Weſtermoſt parte dyd remayne ſtill. Although this happened long beefore the commyng of Chriſt, and as before is declared, the great ſtore of mud and fylth that dyd remayne in the Sea, was the onely cauſe that dyd let the Trafficke and paſſage betweene vs in theſe knowne partes, and them that were vnknowne vnto vs in all this long time of this mud remayning in the Sea: ſo long time, that thoſe men that were the Sea men in thoſe dayes, were of long time dead before the Sea was cleare of the mudde. And alſo thoſe ſea men,Olde ſea men being gone, the other did neuer attempt to ſeeke any thing as it is to be gathered, that were in the Ilande, dyd periſhe by the meanes of the ſinking of the Eaſt ſyde of that great Ilande. Wherfore it is to be gathered, that thoſe that were in theſe partes, dyd neuer attempt to ſeeke any Lande that wayes to the Weſtwardes, neither thoſe that were remayning vpon that part of the Ilande that dyd not ſynke, dyd neuer attempt to ſeeke any Lande vnto the Eaſtwardes.
                     And in lyke manner, they could not ſo conueniently doo it, for that they had no Shipping to goe vnto the Sea, but ſmall Boats called Cannouſes, which be occupyed to no other purpoſe or vſe, but onely to goe on fyſhing, or els to tranſport themſelues from Ilande vnto Ilande, neare vnto the mayne. &c. And yet it is poſſible that ſome people might paſſe out of theſe partes by ſhipping although they neuer made any returne agayne, but might tarry there, and inhabite in thoſe parts.
                     And now inſomuch that it is knowen, that they had boates, and dyd tranſport them ſelues from place vnto place, and from Iland

vnto Iland, before the fynding of the mayne land of America. So it is not to be meruayled at, why al the Ilands in the ſea, that are of any quantitie, haue people in them, conſidering that they had in al thoſe partes, the vſe of Boates from the beginning after Noy,The Indians had Boates aſoone as we here in theſe partes. or what time we had Boates. &c. And nowe furthermore, as touching the great & fyrme land that lyeth to the Southe
                           •
                        wards beyond the Equinoctiall about .50. degrees, & is extended vnto the South partes, no man in theſe partes dooth knowe, and it is peopled too, and the people thereof may come out of America, for there is nothing to let them, but a narrowe 
                           ••
                        a, called the ſtraight of Magalenus, and they hauing the vſe of Boates, howe eaſily is it to be paſſed? So that there can be no I
                           •
                        and, lying in the ſea, neare vnto America, that is of any bygneſſe, but that it is peopled, whether it be to the Eaſtwardes towards vs, or to the Weſt partes in the South Sea, or the Eaſt Ocean Sea. &c.
                     And furthermore, as it dooth appeare in the Scriptures, that Noy had three ſonnes, that is to ſay, Sem, Ham, and Iaphet, and that Sem, the eldeſt ſonne of Noye, dyd inhabite the partes of Africa, and Cham or Ham, the ſeconde ſonne of Noy, dyd inhabite the partes of Aſia: and Iaphet the youngeſt ſonne of Noy, dyd inhabite Europe, and the Ilandes in the ſea, as the great. Ilande Atlantida, nowe called America, and that the Kinges of that greate Ilande, were the ſonnes of Neptunus, and the people, the poſteritie of Iaphet, the youngeſt ſonne of Noy. &c.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     ❧A Table of the Contentes of the Chapters of the fyfth and laſt booke called a Treaſure for Trauaylers.
                  To the reader of the fifth and laſt booke.
                  The firſt Chapter of the fifth booke, ſheweth the natural cauſes how ſandes & bankes bee ingendred or made, hoth in the ſe
                        •
                      and riuers. &c.
                  The ſecond Chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſes of Mariſh ground, and other plaine meddows or ground by the ſydes of ryuers, &c.
                  The third Chapter ſheweth the natural cauſe of the high cliffes by the ſea coaſts. &c.
                  The fourth Chapter ſheweth the natural cauſe, why the Beach, & the great bolder ſtones on the ſea coaſts is become roūd & ſmooth, without any edges or corners. &c.
                  The fyfth chapter ſheweth the naturall cauſes of the rockes in the ſea, &c.
                  The ſixth Chapter ſheweth the natural cauſe of the ebbing and flowing of the ſea, and the ebbyng and flowing of hauens and riuers. &c.
                  The ſeuenth chapter ſheweth the cauſe of currantes and ſtreames that runne in the ſea, in ſuch places where it dooth not ebbe and flowe: & of currantes or ſtreames in the ſea, there are three ſeueral ſortes, in the chapter it doth appeare &c.
                  The eight chapter ſheweth the natural cauſe that the water in the Sea is ſalt. &c.
                  The ninth chapter is as touching the cauſe of earthquakes.
                  The tenth chapter ſheweth the reaſon howe America, and all the Ilandes, and newe founde landes and countries, became peopled, and of what poſteriritie that they be come of. &c.
                  FINIS
               
               
                  
                  Faultes eſcaped in printing.
                  
                     
                        The fyrſt Booke
                        
                           fol.
                           pa
                           ly
                                 •
                              e.
                           faultes.
                           Correction.
                        
                        
                           3
                           1
                           20
                           ſet the
                           ſituate
                        
                        
                           3
                           2
                           8
                           marking
                           making
                        
                        
                           3
                           2
                           24
                           make
                           marke
                        
                        
                           4
                           1
                           9
                           of that, or
                           that are
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           11
                           for lyne
                           for the line
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           12
                           other ſide
                           
                              
                                 •
                              thelida.
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           13
                           ridge
                           ring
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           laſt
                           the heigth
                           0
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           laſt
                           meaſure of the
                           that meaſure
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           12
                           and the
                           and at the
                        
                        
                           8
                           2
                           13
                           ſtandinges
                           places
                        
                        
                           9
                           1
                           20
                           as
                           is
                        
                        
                           10
                           2
                           8
                           lye
                           by
                        
                        
                           12
                           1
                           11
                           there
                           then
                        
                        
                           12
                           1
                           20
                           the line ſhould
                           the line ye ſhoulde
                        
                        
                           13
                           1
                           1
                           there
                           though
                        
                        
                           14
                           2
                           3
                           thence
                           there
                        
                        
                           14
                           2
                           23
                           12
                           into 12.
                        
                        
                           15
                           2
                           12
                           28
                           24
                        
                        
                           15
                           2
                           19
                           5
                           15
                        
                        
                           16
                           1
                           23
                           lacke
                           looke
                        
                        
                           17
                           1
                           1
                           doo
                           mayſ
                        
                        
                           17
                           2
                           4
                           ſtaffe
                           tranſuaſtorie
                        
                        
                           18
                           2
                           many
                           tranſytorie
                           tranſuaſtorie
                        
                        
                           18
                           2
                           many
                           ringes
                           wynges
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           many
                           tranſytorie
                           tranſuaſtorie
                        
                        
                           20
                           1
                           32
                           that
                           their
                        
                        
                           22
                           2
                           16
                           part
                           put
                        
                        
                           27
                           2
                           22
                           by
                           too
                        
                        
                           28
                           1
                           7
                           52
                           32
                        
                        
                           29
                           2
                           10
                           and halfe
                           of
                        
                        
                           29
                           2
                           22
                           the chapter
                           the .8. Chapter
                        
                     
                     
                        The ſecond Booke.
                        
                           fo.
                           pa.
                           line.
                           faultes.
                           Correction.
                        
                        
                           1
                           1
                           22
                           vnto
                           and vnto
                        
                        
                           3
                           1
                           8
                           90
                           60
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           13
                           Southweſt
                           South Southweſt
                        
                        
                           9
                           1
                           10
                           32. put
                           put
                        
                        
                           10
                           1
                           11
                           30. degr. 49.
                           50. degrees .12.
                        
                        
                           9
                           2
                           20
                           
                              
                                 •
                              ondon
                           land
                        
                        
                           11
                           1
                           2
                           54
                           16
                        
                        
                           12
                           1
                           13
                           36
                           360
                        
                        
                           13
                           1
                           30
                           Eiſon More
                           
                              
                                 ••
                              on Nore
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           7
                           Cappe hyll
                           Ape hyll
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           13
                           18
                           25
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           15
                           London
                           London .10. mi.
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                            
                           the longeſt day
                           the day .14. hours .35. mi.
                        
                        
                            
                            
                           15
                            
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                            
                           minuts ſoutheaſt
                           minuts, 
                                 •
                              nd is Southeaſt
                        
                        
                            
                            
                           24
                           vnder the tropick of Cancer
                        
                        
                           16
                           1
                           25
                           0
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           11
                           Eaſt and South
                           Eaſt & by ſouth
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           30
                           7
                           98
                        
                        
                           19
                           2
                           30
                           Maria
                           in Aria
                        
                        
                           21
                           2
                           11
                           25
                           52
                        
                        
                           22
                           1
                           33
                           20
                           4
                        
                        
                           22
                           2
                           2
                           12
                           4
                        
                     
                     
                        The thirde Booke
                        
                           fo.
                           pa
                           line
                           faultes
                           Correction.
                        
                        
                           3
                           1
                           28.29
                           that that
                           that
                        
                        
                           3
                           2
                           12
                           of a boord
                           of boord
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           2
                           be corner
                           be from corner
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           3
                           22
                           32
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           4
                           leuel
                           beuel
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           11
                           leuel
                           beuel
                        
                        
                           14
                           2
                           9
                           with the
                           within the
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           12
                           30
                           3. quarters
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           19
                           racking
                           raking
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           32
                           whole
                           holde
                        
                        
                           16
                           2
                           15
                           would haue
                           haue
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           22
                           13. ynches
                           10. ynches
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        The fourth Booke.
                        
                           fol.
                           pa.
                           lin.
                           faultes
                           Correction
                        
                        
                           3
                            
                           24
                           as
                           is
                        
                        
                           4
                           1
                           laſt
                           targed
                           karged
                        
                        
                           5
                           1
                           27
                           ma
                                 •
                              
                           
                           may
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           30
                           with
                           which
                        
                        
                           7
                           1
                           53
                           multiply by
                           multiply that by
                        
                        
                           8
                           2
                           23
                           in the mould of mettall
                           in the mould of wood.
                        
                        
                            
                           2
                           31
                        
                        
                           8
                           2
                           5
                           led
                           rayſed or highed
                        
                        
                           11
                           1
                           1
                           neare as
                           needes
                        
                        
                           12
                           2
                           18
                           30.
                           36.
                        
                        
                           12
                           2
                           32
                           waight the
                           waight that the
                        
                        
                           12
                           1
                           23
                           one kind
                           of one kynde
                        
                        
                           14
                           2
                           6
                           by the proportiō o
                                 •
                               the
                           by proportiō, the
                        
                        
                           17
                           1
                           19
                           hang
                           chaunge
                        
                        
                           18
                           1
                           22
                           h
                                 •
                              e
                                 •
                              
                           
                           hee
                                 •
                              d
                        
                        
                           18
                           1
                           3
                           to hold
                           to heeld
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           18
                           collect
                           calke
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           
                              
                                 •
                              
                           
                           in,
                           yenough
                        
                        
                           19
                           1
                           24
                           carying
                           carenyng
                        
                        
                           19
                           2
                           30
                           cartienes
                           Cap
                                 •
                              tynes
                        
                     
                     
                        The fyfth Booke
                        
                           fol.
                           pa.
                           lin.
                           faultes.
                           Correction
                        
                        
                           5
                           2
                           6
                           mould
                           mouth
                        
                        
                           6
                           1
                           2
                           ſo aſſynges
                           ſuff
                                 •
                              ng
                                 •
                              s
                        
                        
                           8
                           1
                           8
                           ſuites
                           ſortes
                        
                        
                           8
                           2
                           5
                           ſu
                                 •
                              f
                                 ••
                              nges
                           ſuff
                                 •
                              nges
                        
                        
                           8
                           2
                           22
                           ſea, it
                           ſea, as it
                        
                        
                           9
                           1
                           3
                           Ireland
                           England
                        
                        
                           9
                           2
                           4
                           ſou
                                 ••
                              inges
                           ſuffinges
                        
                        
                           9
                           2
                           19
                           rounded
                           couered
                        
                        
                           11
                           1
                           15
                           in
                           at
                        
                        
                           13
                           1
                           6
                           beaten
                           le
                                 •
                              ten
                        
                        
                           15
                           1
                           12
                           waſt
                           Weſt
                        
                        
                           6
                           2
                           3
                           meayne
                           mayne
                        
                        
                           11
                           1
                           30
                           tra
                                 •
                              t
                           attract
                        
                        
                           11
                            
                           26
                           hygher
                           hygh or
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  ¶Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke, dwelling in Paules Churchyarde, at the ſygne of the blacke Beare. 1578.
                  
               
            
         
      
   