
      
         
            
            
            ¶ AN EPITAPH VPon the deceaſe of the worſhipfull Lady Mary Ramſey, late wife vnto Sir Thomas Ramſey Knight, ſometime Lord Maior and Alderman of the Honorable Cittie of London. Wherevnto is annexed certaine ſhort Epigrams, touching the mortalitie of man. Publiſhed by the conſent of the Executors.
            
               Written by N. B.
            
               Beati omnes, qui moriuntur in Domino.
            
            
               Thrice happy they, and of all other bleſt,
               Whoſe dayes well ſpent, the Lord cals vnto reſt.
            
            
               LONDON Printed by R. R. dwelling in Fleet-lane. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            The Author to the Booke.
            
               GOe little Booke, I leaue thee now, vnto the Readers view,
               Since there is nought in thee containd, but what is inſt & true,
               And though thy volume little be, or ſubſtance verie ſmall,
               Deſire that my goodwill may make contentment to them all.
               Firſtwiſh them read, and afterward giue cenſure as they ſhould,
               For why thy Author would haue writ farre better if he could:
               What he hath done, is for to pleaſe, if ſo it may content:
               And to that end amongst them all, the little Booke hath ſent.
               Farewell therefore, ſpeake faire, and ſay, if ought he haue offended,
               He would be glad by warning giuen, to haue the ſame amended.
            
            
               N. B.
            
         
         
            The Bookes aunſwer.
            
               VVHat as of right I ought to do, performed that ſhalbe,
               And therefore gentle Readers all, that me ſhall ouerſee,
               I doe beſeech you earneſtlie, my Maiſter to excuſe,
               And pardon his inuention rude, his meeters and his Muſe:
               For I dare vndertake for him, that thankfull he will reſt,
               If of your kindly courteſie he may be full poſſest.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An Epitaphe vpon the deceaſe of the Worſhipfull Lady MARIE RAMSEY.
            
               
                  COme Gentils all, lend me your liſtning eares,
               Attentiue, to the ſequele of my verſe,
               Which mournfullike vnto the cauſe appeares,
               That at this time I purpoſe to rehearſe.
               The tenor tends vnto her ſweete deceaſe,
               Whom while ſhe liu'd, God bleſſed with increaſe.
            
            
               Whom while ſhe liu'd, (ſee heere a Looking Glaſſe)
               Spending her dayes with credit and with fame:
               Spending her time moſt godly as it was,
               Vnto the praiſe of her continuall name.
               Vnto her praiſe that to the day of doome,
               From age, to age, for euermore ſhall ronne.
            
            
               Dame Ramſey, ſhe it is that I do meane,
               A Lady rare, moſt vertuous, meeke, and milde:
               Whoſe harmeleſſe life, whoſe conſcience pure and cleane,
               Showed forth her fruits both vnto man and childe.
               Whoſe liberall hand was neuer frozen faſt,
               From Alines-deeds, ſo long as breath did laſt.
            
            
               Witneſſes be, the bounties of her minde,
               In Chriſt his Church, and Hoſpitall like caſe:
               
                  
Where her good workes regeſtred you may finde,
               To all mens ſights, that do frequent the place.
               To all mens ſights, which there may take the view▪
               
               Not ſo much rare as altogether true.
            
            
               Firſt for reliefe of childien very poore,
               Orphins, and ſuch as deepely be diſtreſt:
               She hath ripte vp the bountie of her ſtore,
               By whoſe good meanes thoſe infants they be bleſt,
               Succorde, and well defended as they ought,
               Thus much for them ſweet Ramſey ſhe hath wrough▪
               
            
            
               Sufficiently for Schollers twelue like caſe,
               In Oxford ſix, in Cambridgeſix likewiſe:
               She hath ſet downe to euery one their place,
               As they proceede in ſtudy to ariſe.
               Not for a month, a yeere, but ſtill for aye,
               For to indure vntill the latter day.
            
            
               Maintenance great for Preachers next to this,
               Gods holy word to ſtabliſh and increaſe:
               She ordered hath, as right well knowne it is,
               Vntill the worlde and age of man ſhall ceaſe:
               That truth thereby might England ouer-ſpred,
               And at no time in blindneſſe to be led.
            
            
               Fiftly, her care and prouidence hath beene,
               A Writing Schoole erected for to ſee:
               And there vnto hath plentious larges giuen,
               That Schollers might therein well nurtered be▪
               
               And for to learne Gods word and perfect ground,
               That they in time true ſubjects may be found.
            
            
               
               People diſtreſt and Souldiers wounded ſore,
               To them ſhe hath applyed her watchfull eye:
               That they might be well heald for euermore,
               And not for want of ſuccor for to dye:
               A gratious deede, a deede deſeruing fame,
               A deede that winnes deepe credit for the ſame.
            
            
               For maintenaunce of poore other Souldiers tenne,
               Likewiſe ſhe hath her contribution made▪
               
               And onely for a comfort vnto them,
               Vnable for to liue by any trade:
               Pittie in her had tane ſuch ſetled roote,
               That no good deede was left trodvnderfoote.
            
            
               And this beſide ſee for tenne widowes poore,
               How ſhe hath made prouiſion in like caſe:
               Allowing them henceforth for euermore.
               Meate drincke and cloth with the abyding place,
               So that no want might nip them in the colde,
               Nor winters force on them take any hold.
            
            
               Poore maidens rights and marriages to mend,
               Her liberall hand hath beene ſupporting ſtill▪
               
               In bountious ſort their dowries to extend,
               A ſigne of her vnfained great goodwill.
               Wiſhing to them and others all before,
               Partly alike the ſweetneſſe of her ſtore.
            
            
               To Briſtow eke one thouſand poundes ſhe gaue,
               Vnto the poore there dwelling in that place:
               For maintenaunce and cloathing they ſhould haue,
               A louing gift to heale their wofull caſe;
               
                  
To helpe their deepe and poueriſhed diſtreſſe,
               Which helpe and gift makes not her praiſe the leſſe.
            
            
               To Th'oſpitall of Chriſts Church thus much more,
               Two thouſand poundes in ready coyne ſhe gaue:
               To priſoners eke diſtreſt, feeble, and poore,
               Fiue hundred poundes ſhe wilde that they ſhould haue;
               To companies of London eke beſide,
               One thouſand poundes to them ſhe hath relyde.
            
            
               To pariſhes in Eſſex countie there,
               One hundred poundes ſhe rendered for their neede▪
               
               Wherein her loue and bountie did appeare,
               To ſatisfie and to content their neede.
               Becauſe that they each one in their degree,
               Should not amiſſe but well conſidered be.
            
            
               Vnto her kinne as ſhe thought good therefore,
               Two hundred pounds to ſome ſhe ſeemd to yeeld▪
               
               To other ſome one hundered and no more,
               To others eke fifty as ſhe them wilde:
               To others leſſe according to that rate,
               As ſhe thought good to meaſure their eſtate.
            
            
               What elſe of goods, of moueables, or lands,
               That vnbequeath'd remainderlike remaine:
               Vnto the poore by her excecutors hands,
               She wiſht and wilde ſhould be beſtowed againe:
               Let all therefore that heare what ſhe hath done,
               Thinke fewe or none ſuch like there are to come.
            
            
               Other good deedes a number to recite,
               
                  
Which tedious were, I pretermit therefore:
               Whereby ſhe hath lent to the world a light,
               To looke into the bleſſing of their ſtore:
               And to doe good before their latter dayes.
               Which works with hers ſhall bring them endles praiſe
            
            
               But now note here, how that her life was ſpent,
               Firſt voted to ſerue God both day and houre:
               Holding herſelfe moſt happily content,
               With all good gifts proceeding from his power:
               And at the laſt extinct of vitall breath,
               With patient minde to conquer fearefull death.
            
            
               Wherefore no doubt her portion is inlarg'd,
               Her talent well redoubled ore againe.
               Her dutie done, her conſcience well diſcharg'd,
               Her death a life which euer ſhall remaine:
               Her mortall ſtate immortall to be ſeene,
               Her Glorious ioyes moſt floriſhing freſh and greene.
            
            
               
                  Oſſa iacent tumulo, mentis monumenta ſuperſunt,
               
               
                  Optima pars ſupereſt: Noniacet haec tumulo.
               
               
                  Vita per acta pie, mortem eſt ſortita beatam,
               
               
                  Exijt ad certum men s reditura diem.
               
               
                  O foelix nimium quae ſic ſua ſaecla peregit,
               
               
                  Ter foelix cui dij dant ita poſſe mori.
               
            
         
         
            
            A ſufficient defence and reaſonable excuſe concerning the miſchaunce that hapned at Leaden Hall after the funerall of the worſhipfull Lady Mary Ramſey ſo ſolemnized.
            
               VVHo can withſtand miſhaps, that daylie ſeeme to fall?
               Or be againſt that God doth ſend? Not any man at all.
               Things inexpected chaunce, and chaunces they haue change:
               And ſudden miſeuents doe grow, like wonders very ſtrange.
               But whatſoeuer haps, Thereto I doe reply:
               It falleth out but for our ſinnes, A ſcourge from God on hye.
               Then let vs not impute, or conſter things amiſſe:
               But thinke (I ſay) and deeme no more, but iuſtlie as it is.
               The goodwill of the dead, that gaue this bounteous doale.
               Bequeathed it vnto the helpe of manie a Chriſtians Soule,
               Bequeathed it for good, of widowes in diſtreſſe,
               The halte, the blinde, the ſicklie man, the poore and fatherleſſe.
               The executers eke, performed but the will:
               Of that ſweete Lady dead and gone, and for no further ill,
               And as for thoſe that were, in that caſe put in truſt,
               To deale the doale it was their minde, to deale it well and iuſt:
               If then 
                     ••
                  ſrulie folke, would not well gouernd be,
               The fault was theirs and no mans elſe, that could not this foreſee,
               Let vs not cenſure then, to talke that is not true:
               But iudge and ſay in euery poynt, as I haue ſaid to you,
               And let the fault reſt there, by whome the fault befell,
               And iudging ſo you iudge but right, and cenſure very well:
               For they that headlong runne, and will not be fore warnd,
               Their headleſſe care was that default, which made them to beharmd,
               Examples there haue beene, like vnto this before,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   let miſchaunce excuſe miſhap: what can be ſpoken more.
            
         
         
            
            In obitum Dominae Mariae Ramſei Ni▪ Boormanni Longaeuum et vltimum vale.
            
            
               
                  SWeete Ramſey, now
               my laſt farewel I take,
               Though ſimple be my verſe:
               or mournefull rime,
               For what I writ before,
               was for thy ſake.
               So farforth as I reſpit had by time,
               And more then that, the minde I bare to thee,
               Was that thou ſhouldſt not cleane forgotten be.
            
            
               But had I writ or ſpoake few words or none,
               Deſerued deedes would haue obtain'd their hire:
               And therefore though thy earthly corps be gone,
               I truſt thy ſoule doth to the heauens aſpire,
               Where reſting thou ſhalt euermore remaine,
               Amongſt Gods flocke in Glory for to raigne.
            
            
               Where earthly change ſhall reape eternall blis,
               Where downefall of thy mortall ſtate or ſtay:
               Shall ioy enioy that neuer vading is,
               Where thou ſhalt liue for euer and for aye.
               Vnto which place although thy dayes be done,
               I pray that all thy good friends they may come.
            
            
               
               And thus in briefe I giue thee leaue to ſleepe,
               While I take leaue for writing as before:
               Yet for thy ſake reſerued thoughts Ile keepe,
               Within my hart to reſt for euermote.
               That when by chaunce I heare ſome ſpeake of thee,
               Though I ſpeake leaſt thou maiſt remembred be.
            
            
               Naſcimur è terra, adterr amque reuertimur omnes,
               Terra ſumus, nobis maxima terra parens,
               Terra tegit quam terra tulit, ſuamembr a repoſcit,
               Quae dederat tellus, non aliena petit.
               Chara vale, lux clara vale, tuaſunera fleui,
               Prae lachrymis nequeo ſcribere plura, vale.
            
         
         
            
            Short Epigrams touching the mortallitie of man.
            
            
               EArth of the earth, muſt to the earth,
               from whence at firſt it came,
               Such is the earthly naturall ſtate,
               of euery earthly man.
            
            
               Another.
               ADams earthly fall incurde,
               diſpleaſure to damnation:
               But Chriſt his death ſubdued ſinne,
               to bring vs to ſaluation.
               Dye then from Adam for to liue,
               with God thy onely maker;
               So ſhalt thou in the booke of life,
               with him be full pertaker.
            
            
               Another.
               MAns earthly ſtate is but a pompe,
               which ſpeedy time deuours
               Compared to a winters blaſt,
               which nips the faireſt flowers.
            
            
               Another.
               NOthing at all can be ſo ſwift,
               as ſwiftneſſe of the time,
               To day aliue, to morrow dead,
               and couered in thy ſhrine.
               Thinke then on earthly time that fleetes,
               which no man once can ſtay▪
               
               For I, and thou, thou, I, and he,
               haue euery man his day.
            
            
               
               Another.
               TYdes haue their ſpaciat time, to ebbe,
               to riſe, and for to flow,
               Yet neuer a ſwelling flood ſo hye,
               but hath his fall as low.
               Young ſprings reſemble youthfulneſſe,
               the floriſhing time of man:
               Which with the ebbe ſhall haue his fall,
               let him do what he can.
            
            
               Another.
               THe ſturdieſt Oake of any Oake,
               hath but his time to grow,
               And yet at laſt in tract of time,
               receiues his ouerthrow.
               So, be a man, ſtrong, tall, or ſtout,
               his hold is moſt vnſure:
               And cannot longer then his time,
               By tract of time indure.
            
            
               Another.
               THe clockes do ſtrike the houres tunne on,
               the Sunne eclipſed ſtands:
               Yet all, let vs be ſure of this,
               reſts in our makers han des.
               Conclude we then, our certaintie,
               is brickell and vnſure▪
               
               And by it ſelfe hath neither ſpace,
               nor warrant to indure.
               And ſay we thus, to day a man,
               and not a man to morrow,
               For longer life then God doth lend,
               neither King nor Lord can borrow.
            
         
         
            
            The Lenuoy.
            
               THe higheſt tree is ſeldome times moſt ſure,
               The ſwelling floods yeeld ebbes that drench ful low,
               Nothing ſo firme that alwaies can indure,
               The tydes through time weare out their times we know,
               The Sunne eclipſ'd the Moone bereſt of light,
               The day ſurpriſ'd, the night abandond quight.
            
            
               Houres, dayes, and yeeres, runne out their courſe at laſt,
               The candell bright hath his extinct in time▪
               
               None can recall, ſwift time when time is paſt,
               What bootes it then for worldly pompe to clime.
               The watch forwarnes when as the clocke will ſtrike,
               The cock and clocke are watches both alike.
            
            
               The faireſt day aſſures his glowning houre,
               The Sunſhine bright is couered oft with ſhade
               Mans harueſt is compared to a flower,
               That vnawares dothperiſh, waſte, and vade,
               And whoſe pride paſt beares but a withered hew,
               And bendes and biddes the Gardner then adew.
            
            
               Our life a lampe, that for a time burnes bright,
               Our life a ſpanne when it is at the beſt:
               Our life aſſur'd of neither day nor night,
               our life a ſmoake and vnaſſured reſt.
               
                  
Our life, our ſtate, our ſtay, and vitallbreath,
               Subiect vnto the ſudden call of death.
            
            
               The youngeſt lambe goes with the eldeſt ſheepe,
               Which vnawares, the ſlaughterer takes from foalde:
               Neither young, nor old, their dayes of reconing keepe,
               How long to feede, or how ſoone to be ſould.
               Their haps do chaunce as do the gamſters play,
               And ſo is ours that once muſt haue a day.
            
            
               Who therefore reades this preamble ſet downe,
               Let him bethinke what as the meaning is:
               And make ſuppoſe that if the fates doe frowne,
               Man is recalde ſoone from his earthly blis.
               For health, and wealth, his glorie and his eaſe,
               Are at commaund when as the Lord doth pleaſe.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   