
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A frutefull treatiſe and ful of heauenly conſolation againſt the feare of death. Wherunto are annexed certeine ſweet meditateons of the kingdom of Chriſt, of life euerlaſting, and of the bleſſed ſtate & felicitie of the ſame. Gathered by that holy marter of God, Iohn Bradford.
            ¶ Peruſed corrected & augmented according to the originall, & Imprinted in Fleteſtrete neere to ſaint Dunſtons Churche by William Powell.
         
         
            
            
               Eccleſiaſti, 5.
MAke no taryinge to turne vnto the lord, and put not of from day to day: For ſuddenly ſhal his wrathe come, and in the day of vengeance he ſhall deſtroy thee. Stande faſt in the way of the lord: bee ſtedfaſt in thine vnderſtandinge, and followe the word of peace and righteouſnes.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ A treatiſe agaynſt the feare of death.
            
            
               
                  BEING mynded, through the helpe of God, for myne own comfort and encouraging of others, to ſpeake ſomething of Deathe (at whoſe doores thoughe I haue ſtande a great while, yet neuer ſo nere, to mans iudgement, as I do now) I think it moſt requiſite to cal & cry for thy helpe, Oh bleſſed ſaut our Ieſus Chryſte, whiche haſt deſtroyed death by thy deathe, & brought in place thereof, life and immortalitie, as by the goſpell it appereth: graunt to mee true & liuely fayth, wherethrough men paſſe from deathe to eternal lyfe,

that of practyſe and not of naked ſpeculation, I may ſomethynge wryte cōcernyng death (whiche is dredful out of thee & in it ſelfe) to the glory of thy holy name, to myne owne comfort in thee, and to the edifying of al them, to whō this writing ſhall come, to be red or hearde. Amen.
            ¶ There be .iiii. kindes of death, iiij. kindes of death. one whiche is naturall, an other which is ſpiritual, a third which is temporall, and a fourth which is eternal. Concerning the firſt and the laſt what they be, I nede not to declare, but the ſecond and the third, perchaunce, of the ſimple (for whoſe ſake eſpecially I Spiritual death what it is wryte) are not ſo ſoone eſpied.
            By a ſpirituall deathe therfore, I mean ſuch a death as the body lyuing the ſoule is dead. Wherof

the Apoſtle maketh menciō in 2. Tim. 5 ſpeaking of widdowes which linyng daintely, being a liue in body, are dead in ſoule. Thus you ſee what I meane by the ſpirituall death. Nowe by a temporall Temporal death. death I mean ſuch a death, wher throught the body and affections therof are mortified, that the ſpirite may lyue. Of which kynde of deathe the Apoſtle ſpeaketh in Cols. 3. exhorting vs to kyl our mēbers. And thus muche of the kindes of death: wherin the iudgement of the worlde is not to it approued, for it careth leſſe for ſpiritual dea the, then for naturall deathe: it eſtemeth leſſe eternall death then temporal death, orels wold men leaue ſyn, which procureth both Sinne is the cauſe of death. thone and the other (I mean ſpiritual & eternal death) and choſe

temporally to dye, that by naturall death they myght enter into the full fruition of eternall lyfe: whiche none can enioy nor enter into, that here wil not temporally dye, that is, mortifie their affections, and crucifie their luſtes and concupicences: For by obeying them at the firſt came death, as we may reade Geneſis the. 3. If Eue had not obeyed her deſire in eatinge the forbydden fruite, By what meanes death came into the world. wherby ſhe died ſpiritually, none of theſe kyndes of death had euer come vnto man, nor ben knowen of vs. Therfore (as I ſaid) we muſt nedes here temporally dye: that is, mortifie our affectiōs, to eſcape the ſpiritual death, and by naturall death, not onely eſcape eternal death of ſoule & body, but alſo by it, as by a dore, enter into

eternall life, which Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour hath procured and purchaſed to and for al that be in him, tranſlatinge eternall deathe into a ſleepe or rather into a delyueraunce of ſoule & body, from all kinde of myſery & ſynne. By reaſon wherof we may ſe that to thoſe that be in Chriſte: that is, to ſuch as do beleue (which beleuers I meane, are diſcerned frō others, by not walking after the Roma. 8. fleſh, but after the ſprite) to thoſe I ſay, death is no dāmage, but a vantage: no dreadfull thing, but rather deſierable, & of all meſſengers moſt mery, whiles he is loked vpon with the eyes of faith in the goſpell. But more of this hereafter.
            Thus haue I briefely ſhewed thee the kyndes of deathe, what

they be, whence they come, and what remedy for thē. But now̄, for as muche as I am purpoſed hereafter to entreate onely of the firſt kynd of death, that is, of natural death, ſomthing to comfort Naturall death. my ſelf & others againſt ye dreade and paynes of the ſame: I wyll ſpeake of it as God ſhal inſtructe mee, and as I accuſtome with my ſelf to muſe on it now̄ & then, the better to be prepared againſt the houre of temptation.
            I haue ſhewed howe that this naturall death came by ſpiritual death yt is, by obeying our affectiōs in ye trāſgreſſiō of gods preceptes: but through the benefite of Chriſt, to ſuch as be in him, & Death what it is to chriſtians. die temporally, that is, to ſuche beleeuers as labour to mortyfie their affections, it is no deſtruction,

but a plaine diſſolution both of ſoule and body, from all kynde of perils, daungers, & miſeries, and therefore to ſuch is not to be dread, but to be deſired: as wee ſe in the Apoſtle, whiche deſired Philip. 1. Luke. 2. to be diſſolued: And in Simeon which deſired to be loſed, ſaying: diſmiſſe or loſe mee, O lorde, By whiche wordes, he ſemeth plainly to teache, that this life is a bō
               dage, and nothinge to be deſired, as now I wyll ſomthing ſhewe.
            Firſt conſyder the pleaſures of This liffe is not to be loued in reſpect of the pleaſures ther of, beinge nothynge elſe but vanitie. this life, what they be, how long they laſt, how painefull we come by them, what they leaue behind them: and thou ſhalt euen in thē
               ſe nothing but vauitie. As for example: how long laſteth the pleaſure that man hath in the acte of generatiō? How painfully do mē
               
behaue theym ſelues before they attayne it? how doth it leaue behind it a certaine lothſomnes and fulnes? I wyl ſpeake nothing of the ſting of cōſcience, if it be come by vnlawefully. Who wel ſeinge this, and forecaſting it aforehād, woulde not forgoe the pleaſures willingly, as farre as neede wyl permyt & ſuffer? If then in this one, wherunto nature is moſte prone, and hath moſt pleaſure in, it be thus: alas how can we but thincke ſo of other pleaſures?
            Put the caſe that the pleaſures of this life were permanente during this life: yet in that this life What this lyfe is, marke here, and learne. it ſelfe is nothing in comparyſon, and therfore is ful wel compared to a candell light, whiche is ſone blowne out, to a flower, whiche fadeth away, to a ſmoke, to a ſhdowe,

to a ſleepe, to a runnynge water, to a day, to an houre, to a momente, and to vanitie it ſelfe: who wold eſteme theſe pleſures and commodities, which laſte ſo lyttle a while? Before they be begonne, they are gone and paſt awaye. Howe muche of our tyme ſpende wee in ſlepyng, in eating, in drinking, and in talking? Intancie is not perceiued: youth is ſhortly ouerblowen: middle age is nothyng: olde age is not long: and therfore (as I ſaid) this lif, through the conſideratiōs of the pleaſures and commodities of it, ſhoulde little moue vs to loue it, but rather to lothe it. God open our eies to ſee theſe thinges, and to wey them accordingly.
            Secondly, cōſider the miſeries of this life, that if ſo be the pleaſures

and cōmodities in it ſhuld moue vs to loue it: yet yt miſeries This life is more to be loched for the myſeries, thē loued for the pleaſures ther of. The myſeries of this life concernīg the body. might counteruaile and make vs to take it as we ſhoulde doe: I meane, rather to deſier to be loſed and diſ
                  ••
               ſſed hence, then otherwiſe. Loke vpon your bodies, & ſe in howe many perils and daū
               gers you are. Your eyes are in daunger of blindnes and blerednes: your eares in danger of deaf nes: your mouthe and tongue of cankers, tothache and dumnes: your head in danger of rewmes & megrims: your throte in danger of horſenes: your handes in daunger of goutes & palſeys. &c. But who is able to expreſſe the nūber of diſſeaſes, wherto mans body is in daunger, ſeynge that ſomme haue written yt more then ¶ ¶ ¶. diſeaſes may happen vnto

man? I ſpeake nothing of the hurte that maye come to our bodies by priſons, venemous beaſtes, water, fier, horſes, men. &c. The miſeries of this life concernīg the ſoule. Bylokīg on our olde falts & tēptatiōs, and other mès falts we maye ſee what daunger we are al wais ready to fall into.
            
            A gayne, loke vpon your ſoule: ſe howe many vyces you are in daunger of, as hereſie, hypocriidolatrye, courtouines, idlenes, ſecuritie, enuie, ābition, pride. &c. Howe many temptations maye you fall into? But this ſhal you better ſe by lokinge on your olde falles, foily, and temptatiōs, and by loking on other mens faules: for no mā hath done any thinge ſo euil, but you may do the ſame. Moreouer, loke vpō your name, and ſe howe it is in daunger to ſciaunders & falſe reportes. Loke vpon your g
                  •
               o
                  •
               es, ſe what danger they are in for theues, for 
                  〈◊〉
               . &c. Loke vopon your wyſe,

children, parents, bretherne, ſyſters, kinſfolkes, ſeruantes, frendes, and neighbours: and behold howe they alſo are in daunger, both ſoule, body, name, & goodes Great & weighty cauſes for vs to be ſadde and heauy, & lyttle to ioy in the pleaſures of this lyfe. as you are. Loke vpon the common weale and contrey, loke vppon the churche, vpon the myniſters and maieſtrates, & ſe what great dangers they are in: ſo that if you loue them, you can not but for the euyll whiche may come to them, be heauy and ſadde. You knowe it is not in your power nor in the power of any man, to hinder all euyll that maye come. Howe many perils is infancie in danger of? what danger is youth ſubiect vnto? mans ſtate is ful of cares: age is full of diſeaſes and ſores. If thou be ryche, thy care is the greatter: if thou be in honour,

thy perilles are the more: if thou be pore, thou art the more in daunger to oppreſſion. But alas, what tongue is abie to expreſſe the myſerablenes of this lyfe? the which conſidered, ſhuld make vs little to loue it.
            I can compare our lyfe to nothing An apte cōpariſon betwene a ſhip on the ſea, & the lif of man: for what daungers are ſo great? what ſo like? ſo fytly, as to a ſhyp in the middes of the ſea. In what danger is the ſhippe and they that be in it? Here are they in daūger of tempeſt, there of quicke ſandes, on this ſyde of pyrates, on that ſide of rockes, now may it leake, now may the maſt breake, nowe maye the maſter fall ſicke, nowe may diſeaſes come amongſte the maryners, nowe maye there diſſenſion fall amongſt them ſelues. I ſpeke nothing of want of freſh water, meate, drinke, and ſuche

other neceſſaries: Euen ſuch an other thinge is this life. Here is the diuyll, there is the world, on Beholde the greate miſeries & miſchiefs that this life is in danger of, on euerye ſyde. this ſide is the ſleſhe, on that ſyde is ſynne, which. thurowly cleaueth vnto our rybbes, and wyll do ſo long as we be in this fleſh, and natural life: ſo that none but blind men can ſe this life to be ſo muche & ſo greatly to be deſired: but rather, as the men that ſayle, are moſt glad when they approch to the hauen, euen ſo ſhould wee be moſt glad when we aproch to the hauen, that is death, whiche ſetteth vs a land: whoſe commodities 1. Cor. 2. no eye hath ſeene, no toung can tell, no harte can conceiue in any poynt, as it ſhoulde. Happy, oh happy were wee, if wee ſawe theſe thinges accordingely: God open our eies to ſe them. Amenſ
            
               
If any man would deſire teſtimonies of theſe things, although experience, a ſufficient miſtres, is to be credyted: yet wyll I here marke certaine places, wher vnto the reader may reſorte, & finde no leſſe then I ſaye, but rather much more, if that with diligēce he reade & wey the places. Iob the .v. calleth this life a warfare. Iob. 5. Iob, 8. In the .vii. chapter he paynteth it out ſomething liuely, vnder diuerſe ſimilitudes. Saint Iames Iaco. 4. compareth it to a vapour. Al the booke of Eccleſiaſtes teacheth it to be but vanitie. Sainct Iohn Iohn. 8. Pſal. 91. ſaith, it is altogether put in euill. Daniell ſayth, the beſt thynge in this lif is but vanitie, labour and ſorow. But what go I her about How ſhort tranſitory and miſera ſeinge that almeſte euery leafe in the ſcripture is ful of the breuitie

and miſerie of this lyfe? So that The life of man is, the ſcriptures doe euerie where declare. I think as ſainct Auguſtine doth write, that ther is no man yt hath liued ſoo happely in this worlde, that wold be content when death commeth, to goo backe againe by the ſame ſteppes, wherby he hath come into the worlde and lyued, except the ſame be in diſpaire, and looke for nothinge after this lyfe but confuſion.
            Thus I truſt you ſe, yt though the commodities of this life were The breuitie, vanitie, and miſerie of this life, ſhoulde cauſe vs little to regarde it. ſuche as could cauſe vs to loue it: yet the breuitie, vanitie, and miſerie of it is ſuch, as ſhould make vs little to regarde it, which beleeue and knowe death to be the ende of all myſeries to them that are in Chriſt, as we all ought to take our ſelues to be, being baptiſed in his name (for our baptiſme

requireth this faith vnder peyne of damnation) although we haue not obſerued our profeſſion as we ſhould haue done, if ſo be we nowe repente, and come to amendment. To ſuche I ſay as are in Chriſt, death is to be deſired, euen in reſpect of this, that it deliuereth vs from ſo miſerable a lyfe, & ſo daungerous a ſtate as we now be in. Do that I maye well ſay, they are ſenſeles, without wyrte, voyde of loue to god, voide of al hatted & ſenſe of ſinne 1. Pet. 7 Apoc. 7. (wherwith this life floweth) that rather deſire not to departe henſe out of al theſe miſeries, thē here ſtill to remaine to their continuall greefe.
            But if theſe thynges wyll not moue vs, I would yet wee beheld: the commodities whervnto

death bryngeth vs. If we be not moued to leaue this lif in reſpect of the miſeries, wherof it is full: yet we ſhould be moued to leaue The commodities wherto death bringeth vs, ſhoulde make vs wylling to forſake this lyfe. it in reſpecte of the infinite goodnes which the other lyfe, wherto death bryngeth vs, hath moſte plentifully, Men, though they loue thinges, yet for things whiche are better, can be contente to forgoe them: euen ſo we now, for the good things in the lif to come (If we conſider them) ſhall and wil be content to forgoe the moſt commodious thinges in this preſent life. Here we haue great pleaſure in the bewtie of the worlde, and of the pleaſures, honours, & dignities of the ſame: alſo in the company of our friendes, parentes, wyfe, children, ſubiectes: alſo in pientie of ryches, cattel. &c.

and yet we knowe that neuer a one of theſe is without his dyſcommoditie, The commodities of this lyfe mixed with diſcommodities, leſt we ſhould loue them to muche. which god ſendeth, leſt we ſhuld loue them to much: as if you wyl weye thinges, you ſhal eaſly perceiue. The Sunne, though it be fayre & cherefull, yet it burneth ſometimes to whot. The ayre, though it be light and pleaſant, yet ſomtimes it is dark and troublous: and ſo of other thinges. But be it ſo, that there were no diſcommodities mingled with the commodities: yet (as before I haue ſaide) the breuitie and ſhorte time that wee haue to vſe them, ſhoulde aſſwage their dulcetnes.
            But if this were not alſo, but that the pleaſures of this lif were without diſcommoditie, permanent, and without peril (wherof

they be ful) yet are they nothing at all to be compared to the commodities of the lyfe to come. What is this earth, heauen, and The pleaſures of this life what they are, in cō
                  pariſon of the pleaſure of the life to cōe. ſhape of the worlde, wherin beaſtes haue place, and wicked men Goddes ennemies haue abyding and lybertie, in compariſon of the newe heauen and earth, wherin righteouſnes ſhal dwell? in compariſon of that place where Angels and archangels, and al gods people, yea God hym ſelfe hath his abiding and dwelling? What is the company of wife, children, &c. in compariſon to the company of Abraham, Iſaack, & Iacob, tſte Patriarkes, Prophetes, Apoſtles, martyrs, confeſſors, virgins and all the ſainctes of God? what is the companye of any in this world, in compariſon to the

company of the Angels, Archangels, Cherubins, Zeraphins, powers, thrones, dominations: yea of god the father, god the ſonne, and god the holyghoſt? What are the ryches and pleaſures of this lyfe, in compariſon of the felicitie of euerlaſting lif, which is without all diſcommodities, perpetuall without all peryll and ieoperdie, without all griefe and moleſtation? Oh the myrth and melody: Oh the honour, and glory: The bleſſed ſtate of the life to come. Oh the ryches and bewtye: Oh the power and maieſtie: Oh the ſwetenes and dignitie of the lyfe to come. The eie hath not ſeene, the care hath not hearde, nor the 1. Co. 2. harte of man is not able to conceiue in any thynge, any parte of the eternall felycitie, and happy ſtate of heauen. Therefore the

Sainctes of God haue deſired ſo earneſtly & ſo hartely to be there. Oh how amiable are thy tabernacles ſayth Dauid? My ſoule Pſal. 84. hath a deſire to enter into yt courtes of the Lord: my hart and my The vehement deſire and lōging of Goodes ſainctes to be diſſolued and to be with god. ſoule reioyce in the lyuinge god. Bleſſed are thoſe yt dwell in thy houſe, that they may aiwayes be prayſing thee: for one day in thy courtes is better then a thouſand els where. I had rather be a dore keper in the houſe of my GOD, then to dwel in the tentes of vngodlines: For the lorde god is a light and defence. And againe, as the Hart deſireth the water brokes, ſo lōgeth my ſoule after thee Pſal. 24. oh god. My ſoule is a thyrſt for god, yea euen for the lyuing god. when ſhall I come to appere before the preſence of god? And my

ſoule thirſteth for thee: my fleſhe Pſal. 63. alſo lōgeth after thee in a barren and drye lande, where no water is. They (gods peple I meane) deſier the daye of their redemption, & they ſtill crye, let thy kingdome Roma. 8. come: they crie, come lord Apoc. 22. Ieſus, come: they lyft vp theyr heades, loking for his appearing whiche wyll make their vile bodies like to his own glorious and immortall body: For when hee Philip. 1. ſhal appeare they ſhalbe like vnto hym. The angels wyl gather Math. 24. 1. Theſ. 4. them together, & they ſhall mete hym in the clowdes, and be alwayes with hym. They ſhall Math. 2
                     •
                  
                heare this ioyfull voyce, come ye bleſſed of my father, poſſeſſe the kyngdome prepared for you from the begynning. Then ſhall they be lyke vnto his Aungels: then

ſhall they ſhyne lyke the Sunne in the kyngdome: then ſhall they Apoc. 7. haue crounes of glory, and be endued with whyte garmentes of The glory and felicitie of Gods children in the kingdom
                     •
                   of God. Death ye Hauen of eternall life. innocencie and righteouſenes, & palines of victorye in their handes. Oh happy, happy is he that may with them, ſe that imusrial and incorruptible inherytaunce, which thē we ſhal enioy for euer.
            Thus you ſe (I hope) ſufficiently, that in reſpect of heauen & eternall blyſſe (wherunto by the hauen of death we land) this lif, though there were no euyll in it, is not to be loued: but rather we that he pilgrimes in it, ſhould deſier with Paule and Simton, to The miſeries and dangers we paſſe, and the be loſed and diſſolued, that wee might be with god. Here our bodies (as before is ſpoken) are in daunger of innumerable euilles

but there our bodies ſhall be, not onely without al daunger, vutalſo be like the glorious & immortal Phil. 3. Mat. 13. Dan. 12. Mat. 17. body of the lord Ieſus chriſt. Nowe our bodies be darke: then ſhall they be moſt cleere & lyght, as we ſe Chriſtes face dyd ſhyne in his tranſfiguration like to the ſuane. Now our bodies be vile, miſerable, mortall and corruptible, but then ſhall they be gloryous, happy, immortal and incorruptible. Cor. 15. Io. 3. wee ſhall be lyke vnto Chriſt our ſauiour: euen as he is, ſo ſhal we be. As we haue borne the image of the earthly, ſo ſhall 1. Cor. 15 we beare the image of the heauē
               ly. Here our ſoules are in greate Now foliſh & ſenſles are thei which in reſpecte pect of ſo glorious a ſtate will not gladly forſake ſo miſerable a lyfe? dearknes and daungers of many euyls: but there they ſhall be in great light, ſafe ſecuritie, and ſecure felicitie: we ſhall ſe god face

face, where nowe wee ſe him but as in a glaſſe, thorowe a darke ſpeaking. There ſhal we behold him euen as he is, and be ſatiſfied without lothſomnes of his preſenſe: yea we ſhalbe endued with moſt perfecte knowledge. where now we know but partly, there ſhal we know as we be knowen. Here our commodities are meaſurable, ſhorte, vncertaine, and mingled with many incommodyties: but there is myrth without meaſure, all lybertie, al light, all ioye, reioyſing, pleaſure, healthe, wealthe, ryches, glorye, power, treaſure, honour, triumphe, comforte, ſolace, loue, vnitie, peace, concorde, wiſdome, vertue, melody, mekenes, felicitie, beatitude, and all that euer can be wyſſhed or deſired, and that in moſt ſecuritie

and perpetuitie that may be conceiued or thoughte, not onely of men, but alſo of aungelles, as wytneſſeth hee that ſawe it, (I meane Paule) who was caryed 1. Cor. 2. vp into the thirde heauen: The eye hath not ſeene (ſaith hee) the tare hath not heard, neither hath entred into the harte of man, the felicitie that God hath prepared for them that loue hym. There the archangels, angels, powers, thrones, dominions, cherubins, Seraphins, Patriarkes, Prophetes, apoſtles, martyrs, Virgins, confeſſors, and ryghteous ſpirites ceaſe not to ſinge nyghte Apo. 44. and day, Holy, Holy, Holy, lord God of hoſtes: honor, maieſtie, glory, impery, and dominion be vnto thee, oh lord God the creator: Oh Lord Ieſu the redemer:
            
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
               
O holy ſpirit the comforter. For the light of the moone ſhalbe as the The claritie and brightnes of Gods children in his kingedome, aboue the ſeuen told brightnes of the ſū
                  
                     •
                  . lyght of the ſunne: and the lyght of the ſunne ſhalbe ſeuen folde, euen as the lyght of ſeuen daies in his bleſſed kyngdome, where and when he wyll vinde vp the woū
               des of his people, and heale theyr plagues. Oh that we might haue ſome liuely ſight hereof, that we might reioyce ouer the vndefyled & unmortall inheritaunce, whervnto God hath called vs, & whiche he doth kepe for vs in heauē: that wee might heare the ſweete ſonge of his ſaued people, crying ſaluatiō be vnto him that ſitteth on the throne of our God, & vnto the lamb: that we might▪ with ye elders and Angels, ſing and ſay: praiſe and glory, and wyſedome, and thankeſgeuing, and honour,

and power, and might, be to thee our god for euermore: that wee mighte be couered with a whyte ſtole, & haue a palme in our handes, to ſtand befort Gods throne night and day, to ſerue him in his temple, and to haue him dwel in vs: that we might heare ye greate voice ſaying from heauen: behold Apoc. 22. the tabernacle of the lord is with men, and he wil dwel with them and they ſhall be his people, and God hym ſelfe wil be with them, their god. Oh happy were they that nowe myghte haue a little ſhe we of that holy citie, new Ieruſalem, deſcending from heauen, Apoc. 21. prepared of god as a bride decked for her huſband, which he ſhewed to his ſeruaunt ſaincte Iohn. Trewely this ſhould we ſe if we were with him in the ſpirite: but

this can not be, ſo longe as wee are in the fleſhe. Alas then and well away, that we loue this life Lacke of fayth is ye cauſe whi we do ſo lyttle deſire to be out of this ſynfull lyfe. as we do. It is a ſigne we haue lyttle faith, for els how could we but night and day deſire the meſſenger of the lord (death I mean) to delyuer vs out of all miſeries, that we might enter into the fruition of eternall felicitie?
            But here wyll ſome man ſaye: Oh Sir, If I were cerrayn that I ſhould depart from this miſerable An obiection procedinge of the ſenſe of ſynne & reaſon, whiche is an aduerſary to fayth. life, into that ſo great felycitie, then coulde I be right glad and reioyce as you will mee, and byd death welcome: but I am a ſynner, I haue greuouſly tranſgreſſed and broken Gods wyll, and therfore I am afraide I ſhal be ſent into eternall woe, perdition, and myſery. Here my brother

thou doeſt wel that thou doeſt acknowledge thy ſelf a ſinner, & to haue deſerued eternal death: for doubtles, if wee ſay, we haue no ſinne, wee are lyars, and the 1. Iohn. 1 trueth is not in vs. A chylde of a nightes birth, is not pure in goddes ſyghte. In ſinne were wee Iob. 25. borne, and by birth or na
                  ••
               re we are the chyldren of wrath, and her brandes of hell. Therfore confeſſe our ſelues to be ſinners, wee needes muſt. For if the lord wyl obſerue any mannes iniquiries, none ſhall be able to abide it, yea we muſt nedes all cry: enter not into iudgement, O Lorde, for in Pſal. 
                     •••
                   Pſal. 141 thy ſyghte no fleſhe, nor man lyuing can be ſaued. In this point therefore thou haſt done well to confeſſe that thou art a ſynner.
            But now, where thou ſtanteſt

in doubte of pardon of thy ſinnes Thre thinges wher by the afflicted conſciēce may be aſſured of pardon & forgeuenes. and thereby arte afrayde of damnatiō, my deere brother, I wold haue thee anſwere mee one queſtion: that is, whether thou deſireſt pardon or no: whether thou doeſt repent or no: whether thou doeſt vnfainedly purpoſe, if thou ſholdeſt liue, to amende thy life or no. If thou doeſt euen before god ſo purpoſe, & deſireſt his mercy, then harken (my good brother) what the lord ſaith vnto thee: I am hee, I am hee, that for my Eſay. 43. owne ſake wyll doe away thyne offences. If thy ſinnes bee as Eſay. 1. redde as ſcarlet, they ſhalbe made as whyte as ſhow, for I haue no pleaſure in the death of a ſinner. As ſurely as I lyue, I wyll not Ezech. 33 thy death, but rather yt thou ſholdeſt liue and be cōuerted. I haue

ſo loued the worlde that I wold not ſpare my dearelye beloued Sonne, the Image of my ſubſtaūce, Iohn. 3. and brightnes of my glorye, by whome all thinges were geuen: but gaue hym for thee, not onely to be man, but alſo to take thy nature, and to purge it from mortalitie, ſinne, and al corruption, and to adorne and endewe it with immortalitie & eternal glory, not onely in his owne perſon, but alſo in thee, and for the: wher of nowe by faith I woulde haue thee certein, as in very dede, thou ſhalte at length feele and fully enioye for euer. This my ſonne I Philip. 2. haue geuen to the death, & that a muſte ſhameful death euen of the croſſe for thee, to deſtroye death, to ſatiſfie my iuſtice for thy ſins: therefore beleue, and accordinge

to thy faith ſo be it vnto the. Harken what my ſonne himſelfe ſayeth vnto thee: Come vnto mee al Math. 11 ye that laboure, and are laden, & I will refreſhe you. I came not into the worlde to damme the Iohn. 3. world, but to ſaue it. I came not to call the righteous, but ſinners Luke. 5. to repentance. I praie not (ſayth he) for theſe mine Apoſtles only, but alſo for al them that by theyr Iohn. 15. preachīg, ſhal beleue in me. Now what prayed hee for ſuche? Father (ſaith he) I will that where I am, they may alſo be, that they maye ſee and enioye the glorye I haue and alwaies had with thee. Father ſaue them and kepe them in thy truth. Father (ſaith hee) I ſanctifie my ſelfe, and offer vp my ſelfe for them.
            Loe, thus thou heareſt how my

ſonne prayeth for thee. Marke nowe what my Apoſtle Paule ſayeth: we know (ſaieth he) that Heb. 5. oure Sauiour Chriſtes prayers were hearde. Alſo this is a true ſaying that Ieſus Chriſt came 1. Tim. 1. into the worlde to ſaue ſinners. Harkē what he ſaieth to ye Iaylor: beleue in the Lorde Ieſus & Act. 16. Heb. 9. thou ſhalte be ſaued: For hee by his owne ſelf, hath made purgaciō for our ſinnes. To him (ſaith Act. 8. Peter) beareth all the prophetes witnes, that whoſoeuer beleueth in his name ſhal receiue remiſſiō of their ſins. Beleue man, pray, Lorde helpe mine vnbelefe, lorde Mark. 6. Luke. 17. increaſe my fayth, aſke and thon ſhalt haue. Harken what ſ. Iohn ſaith. If we confeſſe our ſinnes, 1. Iohn. 1 God is righteous to forgeue vs al our iniquities, and the blood of

our lord Ieſus Chriſt ſhal waſh vs frō our ſinnes. For if we ſin, we haue an aduocate (ſayeth he) with the father, Ieſus chriſt the 1. Iohn. 2 righteous, and he is the propiciation for our ſins, Harken what Chriſte is called: Call his name Ieſus, ſaith the Angel, for he ſhal Luke. 1. ſaue his people from their ſinnes: So that where abundance of ſin Rom. 5 is, there is abundaunce of grace. Say therefore, who ſhal lay any thinge to my charge? It is god yt abſolueth me, who then ſhal condempne Rom. 8. me? It is Chriſt which is dead for my ſinnes, yea which is riſen for my righteouſeneſſe, & ſitteth on the righte hande of the father & prayeth for me. Be certayne therfore and ſure of pardon of thy ſinnes: be certain and ſure of euerlaſting life. Do not nowe

ſay in thy hart, who ſhall deſcend into the depe? that is, dobute not of pardon of thy ſinns, for that is to fetch vp Chriſt againe: neither Rom. 10. ſay thou, who ſhal aſcende vp in to heuen? that is, doubt not of eternall bliſſe, for that is to putte Chriſt out of heauen. But mark what the lord ſaith vnto thee: the worde is nighe thee, euen in thy mouth and in thy hart, and thys is the worde of faith which wee preach: If thou confeſſe with thy mouth that Ieſus Chriſt is the lord, & beleue with thy hart that God rayſed him vp from ye dead, thou ſhalt be ſafe. If thou beleue that Ieſus Chriſte died and roſe againe, euen ſo ſhalt thou be aſſured (ſaith the lord god) that dieng with chriſt, I wil bringe thee agayne with him. 1. Theſ. 4.
            
            
               
Thus deare brother, I thought good to wryte to thee in ye name of the Lorde, that thou fearinge death for nothing els but becauſe of thy ſinnes, mighteſt be aſſured of pardon of them, & ſo embrace death as a deare friend, & inſulte againſt his terrour, ſtinge, & power, ſayinge: death where is thy ſtinge? hel where is thy victory? 1. Cor. 15. The greateſt diſhonor to god is, to dout of his mercy. Nothinge in all the worlde ſo diſpleaſeth the lorde as to doubte of his mercie. In the mouth of two or thre witneſſes, we ſhoulde be content. Therefore in that thou haſte hearde ſo many witneſſes, howe that in dede, deſiring mercye with the Lorde, thou art not ſente empty a waye: geue credite thereto, and ſaye wyth the good Virgin Marye, beholde thy ſeruaunt (Oh Lorde) be it vnto me Luke. 1. in ye word only, wee beholde gods loue & fauoure towardes vs, & therfore wee ſhold geue credit to it againſt al our ſenſe, reaſō, and iudgmēt.
               
according to thy word. Vpon the which word, ſee thou ſet thine eie only and wholy: For otherwiſe, here thou ſeeſt not god thy father but ī his worde, which is ye glaſſe wherin now we behold his grace and fatherly loue towards vs in Chriſte, & therfore herewith we ſhould be content, and geue more credit to it then to all our lenſes, & to al the world beſides. Iohn. 12 The worde (ſaith our Sauiour) ſhall iudge. According to it therfore, & not according to any exteriour or interiour ſhew, iudge both of thy ſelfe & of al other things els. Concerning thy ſelfe: if thou deſire in dede Gods mercy, and lamenteſt that thou haſt offended, loe it pronounceth yt there is mercye with the lord for thee, & plenteous redemption. Pſal. 130 It telleth thee which

                  
wouldeſt haue mercy at ye lordes hand, that the Lorde willeth the ſame, and therfore thou art happy for he woulde not thy death. It telleth thee that if thou acknowledge thy faultes vnto the lorde, he will couer them in his mercye. Againe, concerning death, it Deathe what it is by ye word of god. telleth thee that it is but a ſleepe: that it is but a paſſinge vnto thy father: that it is but a deliuer āce out of miſery: that it is but a putting of of mortality & corruption: that it is s putting on of immortalitie & incorruption: that it is a putting a way of an earthy tabertabernacle, 2. Cor. 5 that thou mayeſt receiue an heauēly houſe or māſiō: that this is but a callinge of the home from the watching & ſtanding in the warfare of this miſerable life. According to this (
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
worde I meane) do thou iudge of death, & thou ſhalt not be afraide of it, but deſire it as a moſte holſome medecine and a frendly meſſenger of the lordes iuſtice & mercy. Embrace him therfore: make hym good chere, for of al enemies he is the leaſte. In ennemy quod I? nay rather of all frendes he is the beſte, for he bringeth thee out of all daunger of ennemies, into ye moſt ſure & ſafe place of thy vnfained frende for euer.
            
            Let theſe things be oftē thought whi death oughte to be premeditate and thoughte often vpō
                vpon. Let death be premeditated, not only becauſe he commeth vncerteinly (I meane for the time, for els he is moſt certeyne) but al ſo becauſe he helpeth much to the contempt of this worlde: out of ye which, as nothinge wil go with thee, ſo nothinge canſte thou take

with thee: becauſe it helpeth to ye mortifying of the fleſhe, whyche when thou fedeſte, thou doeſt nothinge els but feede wormes: becauſe it helpeth to the well diſpoſing & due ordering of the things thou haſte in this lyfe: becauſe it helpeth to repentaunce: to bringe thee vnto the knoweledge of thy ſelfe, that thou arte but earth and aſhes, and to bring thee the more better to knowe God. But who is able to tel the cōmodities that come by the often and true conſideration of death? whoſe time is therefore lefte vnto vs vncertein and vnknowen (although to god Iob. 14. it be certein, and the bounds ther of not only knowne, but appointed of the Lorde, ouer the whych none can paſſe) becauſe we ſhould

                  
not prolonge and put of from day to day ye amendement of our life, as dyd the riche man, vnder hope Luke. 12. of longe life. And ſeinge it is the ordinance of god, & commeth not but by the will of god, euen vnto a ſparrow, much more then vnto vs, which are incōparably much more deare thē many ſparowes: and in that this wil of god is not only iuſte but alſo good (for he is our Father) let vs, if there were nothing els but this, ſubmit our ſelues, our ſenſes, & iudgements vnto the pleaſure of him, beynge content to come out of the roume of our ſoulderſhip, whenſoeuer he ſhal ſend for vs by his purſeuant death. Let vs render vnto him, that whiche he hathe lente vs ſo longe (I meane life) leaſte we be 
                  •
               ounted vnthankful. And in that

death commeth not but by ſinne, in that wee haue ſinned ſo often and yet the Lorde hathe ceaſſed from exacting this tribute & puniſhment of vs vntil this preſēt: let vs with thankefulnes prayſe hys pacience, and pay our det, not doubting but that he being our father & our almighty father, can & will, if deathe were euil vnto vs (as god knowech it is a chiefe benefite vnto vs by Chryſt) cōuert & turne it into good. But deathe being (as before I haue ſhewed) not to be dred, but to bee deſired: let vs lift vp our heades in thinking Luke. 11. on it, and know that our redemption draweth nigh. Let our The .iiij. laſt Artycles of the fayth oftē to be meditate and thoughte vpon. mindes be occupied in the conſyderation, or often coutemplation of the four laſt articles of our beliefe: yt is the cōmuniō of ſaincts,

or the holy catholike Church: remiſſion of ſinnes: reſurrection of the fleaſh: & the life euerlaſting.
            By faith in Chriſt, be it neuer ſo ſaint, little or cold, we are mē
               bers in very dede of the catholike & holy church of Chriſte: that is, we haue cōmunion or feloweſhip with al the ſaints of God that euer were, bee, or ſhalbe. Wherby we may receaue great comforte: For though our faith be feble, yet the Churches faith (wherof our Sauiour Chriſt is the heade) is mighty enough: though our repē
               tance be littel, yet the repentance of ye churche, wherwith we haue communion, is ſufficient: though our loue be languiſhinge, yet the loue of the church & of the ſpouſe of the church, is ardent: and ſo of al other thinges we wante. Not

that I meane this as though any man ſhold think that our faith ſhoulde be in any or vpon any other, then only vpon god the Father, the ſonne, & the holy ghoſtener ther that any ſhonide thinke I meane therby any other merits or meane to ſaluation, then onely the merites and name of the lord Ieſus: but that I would the pore chriſtian conſcience, which by baptiſme is broght into gods church and made a member of the ſame thorow faith, ſhoulde not for hys ſinnes ſake, or for the want of anye No ſynne or wante of anye thynge, what ſo euer it bee, ſhoulde cauſe vs to diſpaire of Gods finall fauour and mercy. thinge he hath not, diſpaire: but rather ſhould knowe that he is a member of Chriſſes church & miſtical body, & therefore cannot but haue communion and felowſhip of both that is of Chriſt himſelfe being the lord, huſband, and

heade thereof, and of all that euer hath ben, bee, or ſhalbe mēbers of it, in al the good things that euer they haue had, haue, or ſhal haue. Stil doth the church pray for vs by Chriſtes cōmaundement: forgeue vs our ſinnes, leade vs not into temptation, deliuer vs from euil: yea Chriſt himſelf doth pray for vs, being members of vys bodie (as we vs in deede) if that we beleue, though it be neuer ſo litel. God graūt this faith vnto vs al, and increaſe it in vs. Amen. Out of this church no Pope nor prelate can caſte vs, or excōmunicate vs in dede, although exteriourly they ſegregate vs frō the ſocietie of gods ſainctes. But enough of this.
            As I woulde haue vs often to muſe vpon the catholike Church

or cōmuniū of ſaints) wherof we That we are partakers of this communion & felowſhip wee maye not doubt beinge receued ther vnto by baptyſme. may not doubte, in what ſtate ſo euer we be, vnder payne of damnatiō, being baptiſed in the name of the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt:) ſo woulde I haue vs to meditate vpon the other artycles folowing: that is, remiſſiō of ſinnes: reſurrection of the fleaſh: & life euerlaſting. It is an article of our faithe to beleue: that is, to be certayne, yt our ſinnes are pardoned: therfore doubt not therof, leſte thou become an Infideil. Though thou haue ſinned neuer None ſo greate or grenous a ſinner but there is mercy for him wyth the Lord. ſo ſore, yet nowe deſpaire not, but be certayne that god is thy God: that is, that he forgeueth thee thy ſinne. Therfore (as I ſaid) dout not thereof, for in ſo doinge thou putteſt a ſallet on the heade of thy ſoule, that the dew of gods grace

can not in dede droppe into it, but Cantic. 5 ſlippe by as faſte as it droppeth. Therefore without that ſallet or ſoule nightecap bee bareheaded: that is, hope ſtill in the mercy of the Lorde, and ſo mercye ſhall compaſſe thee on euery ſide.
            In like manner, the article of the reſurreiction of the fleſh, haue often in thy minde, beinge aſſured by this, that thy carcaſe and body ſhalbe rayſed vp againe in the laſt day when the Lord ſhall come to iudgement, and ſhalbe made incorruptable, immortall, glorious, ſpiritual, perfect, light, and euen lyke to the gloryous body of our Sauiour Ieſu chriſt: for hee is the firſte fruytes of 
                  〈◊〉
                
               Philip. 3 dead, and as god is all in all, ſo ſhal he be vnto thee in Chriſte. Loke therfore vppon thine owne

eſtate: for as he is ſo ſhalt thou be. As thou haſt borne ye image of the earthly Adam, ſo ſhalte thou 1. Cor. 15 beare the Image of the heauenly: therfore glorifie thou nowe god, both in ſoule and body. Wayt and loke for this day of the lord with groning and ſighing. Gather together teſtimonies of this which I do omitte for times ſake.
            Laſte of all, haue often in thy minde, life euerlaſting, wherunto thou art euen landinge. Death is the hauen that caryeth thee vnto this lande: where is all that can bee wiſhed, yea aboue all wiſhes and deſires: for in it wee ſhall ſee god face to face, which thing now Exod. 34 we can in no wiſe doe, but muſte couer our faces wyth Boyſes & Heltas, tyll the face or foreparts of ye lorde be gone by. Now muſt

we loke on his backe partes, beholding him in his worde, and in his creatures, & in the face of Ieſus Chriſte our mediatoure: but then we ſhal ſe him face to face, & 1. Cor. 13 we ſhall knowe, as we are knowen. Therfore let vs often think on theſe thinges, yt we may haue fayth, luſtely and cherefully to arriue at the happy hauen of death, which you ſe is to be deſired, and not to bee dread, to all thoſe that are in Chriſt, that is, to ſuche as to beleue in deede: which are diſcerned from thoſe that onely ſaye they do beleue, by dyeng tēporally, that is by labouring to mortify Roma. 6. thorow gods ſpirite, the affections of the fleſh: not yt they ſhould not be in thē, but that they ſhould not raigne in thē, that is in theyr mortal bodies, to geue euer them

ſelues to ſerue ſinne: whoſe ſeruaunts we are not, but are made ſernauntes vnto righteouſneſſe, being nowe vnder grace and not vnder the lawe, and therfore hath god mercifully promiſed that ſinne ſhal not raigne in vs:
            The whych he continually graunte for his truth, power, & mercies ſake
            Amen.
         
         
            
            A meditation
            
               A Meditatiō cōcerning ye kingdome of Chriſt, & that it is no corporall thing, as the Iewes & Anababtiſtes do faine: to whō ye Papiſtes (in maner) aſſent, makinge the church ſo glorious and gay a dame, far vnlike to be chriſtes Spouſe: who was here on earth in no ſuch felicitie & worldly glory, as their church is. They make more of the good wiſe then of the good men, and therefore ſet forth to vs a ſtrumpet for Chriſtes ſpouſe.
            
            
               OPen mine eies deare lord, to ſee thy kyngdome, for it is ſpirituall, and of carnall eies ſimply cannot be conſidered, & therfore leſſe ought we to maruell to ſee it contempned, and the children therof perſecuted: ye moſt

part of men, and ſpecially ye great men of the world being carnall & not ſpirituall, althoughe by title manye bee called ſo. Geue me thy light to ſee, that thy kingdōe (O chriſt) is thy ſitting on the right hande of thy father & ours, & thy interpellation and mediation for vs, & alſo thy geuing of pardon & forgeuenes of ſinnes, & the holye ſprite to thy church, that is, ſuch as beleue in thee and cal vpō god the father throughe confidence in thee: & hereto, thy ſanctifyinge of of them, that thou maiſt raiſe thē vp in ye laſte daye, to life & glory euerlaſting. Graūt me to know, yt for the atteining of al theſe bene fits (which be the liberties & priuilegies of thy kingedome) thou haſte ordeined ye miniſtery of thy goſpel & ſacramentes, thereby to

cal & bringe men to ye knowledge of thy father & thee, which is eternal life. Graunt yt I may feele in my ſelf liuely & cōfortably ye efficacy and vertue of thy holy ghoſte, which is effectual by ye miniſtery & word. And leſt afflictiōs ſhuld diſmay me, & ye cōpany of euil mē mingled wt the godly, ouerthrow me or offend me: graunt yt I may not only know how yt thy church & the true chyldren therof ſhal in this world vntil ye laſt day, ſuffer perſecution, & that gotes will be amongeſt the ſhepe, vntil the day of iudgement: but alſo yt I maye in affliction reioyce and glorifye thy holy name, being preſerued alwaies frō ye councel of the vngodly, from the way of the wicked, & from the ſeate of the ſcorneful: to delite in thy lawe night and day,

to be made ſpiritual & to haue the benefite of thy kingdome & prieſt hode, which be both ſpiritual, preſeruing thy people from ye tiranny of ſinne & Sathan, althoughe in this life y• permit their enemies to vexe thē, to thy further glory & their encreaſe in repentaunce and & godlines: which geue vnto mee and encreaſe in mee for thy holye names ſake.
               Amen.
            
            
               ¶ Scriptures prouing Chriſtes kingdome to be ſpiritual.
               My kingdome is not of this worlde. Thou haſt geuen Iohn. 18. him power ouer all fleſh, that how many ſoeuer thou haſte geuē vnto him, he might geue to Iohn. 17 ye ſame euerlaſtinge life. What is it? any worldly policy? no: therefore it foloweth: & this is euerlaſtinge

life, yt they may know thee Rom. 8. Eſay. 12. to be the only true God, & whom thou diddeſt ſende Ieſus Chriſt, which ſitteth on the right hande of god & prayeth for vs. The rote Eſay. 11. of Ieſſe ſhal ſtande vp and ye gentils ſhal make their praiers vnto him. &c. By theſe two ſentences we may ſee Chriſtes kingdome & prieſthode to be ſpirituall, and no polytike regimente. He prayeth for vs to his father, and ſo raygneth that he will be called vpon, wyll heare vs, ſatiſfie vs, & keepe vs with his holy ſpirite, as gods children: for they are ledde by the ſpirite of God: in their hartes he will write his law &c. which benefits let vs loke for, & no corporal kingdome. We are fellow heires with Chriſte. If ſo be we do ſuffer with him, we ſhalbe glorified

with hym. We are ſaued by hope. For thy ſake we are kylled al the day longe. In this worlde Pſal. 44. you ſhal haue affliction. Al yt wil liue godly in chriſt muſt ſuffer per Iohn. 16. 2. Tim. 3 ſecution. And many places there be, which teach vs ye the glory of Chriſtes kingdome is no worldly dominion or power, but a ſpiritual thing, that we ſhould be reſuſcitated & haue a new & an eternal life, righteouſnes & glory, euē ſuch as Chriſt hath. Beſids this Paule telleth yt Antechriſt ſhall 2. Theſ. 2 beare rule in the Churche, vntill Chriſt come to iudgement: then ſhal he deſtroy his kingdōe. So yt the true church of Chriſte ſhall not haue worldely dominion and kingedome, but rather be perſecuted, & eſpecially towardes thence of the worlde, as Peter telleth, yt
                  
as there was before Chriſtes cō
                  ming 1. Peter 2 in ye church, falſe prophets, & the regiment was with the aduerſaries whiche beare the name of ye church, vnder the whch they deſtroyed ye church: ſo ſhal it be in the church after Chriſtes tyme. There wilbe (ſaith he) many falſe teachers which wil deceane not a fewe or the fewer parte, but many & the greater part, as now the Papiſtes haue doone almoſte all Chriſtendom. Againe he ſayth yt there will come mockers, whych wyl make a mocke of religion, ſo that the church cannot but be perſecuted. Daniel plainly ſheweth 1. Dan. 7 yt the beaſtes, that is the empires of ye world: ſhalbe caſt into ye fire, when Chriſt ſhal come to iudgemēt: ſo yt ſome wicked Empires ſhal continue vntil the laſte day.

The true Church of Chriſte is carefull for inwarde beauty, as it is writtē of the kings daughter: wheras the papiſtical church nothinge Pſal. 45. paſſeth therof, but altogether careth for externall geare.
               So ſayth our Papiſtes in England: Come to the church & do as other men do outwardly, & kept your conſcience to your ſelues.
            
            
               ¶ Scryptures prouinge that in Chriſtes Church vppon earth there ſhalbe good and bad mingled vntil the day of iudgemēt.
               AS it was in the dayes of Lot, ſo ſhal it be in the cō
                  ming &c. In ye night there Luke. 17 Math. 13 ſhalbe two in one bed, one ſhalbe taken &c. Let them (the tares amongeſt the Corne he meaneth)

grow together vntil the harueſt. The Harueſte is the ende of the world: then the ſonne of man ſhal ſende forth his angels, & they ſhal gather all offence geuers oute of his kingedome, and thoſe whiche worke wickednes. So ſhal it go in the ende of the world: the Angels ſhall goe forthe, and ſeperate the euil from the righteous, & caſt them into the fornace of fier. By theſe ſentences we may ſee ye Hypocrites ſhall be mingled wt the godly vntil the day of iudgement.
               Whereas the Anabaptiſtes doe cite the Prophets, who ſpeaking of Chriſtes kingedome, vſe often figures and ſimilitudes of worldly Empires, that by temporall & viſible thinges we may ariſe to a depe conſideration of ſpirituall & eternall thinges in chriſtes king

dome, let vs learne ſo to doe: and agayne lette vs knowe, that the Ghoſpell is the expoſition of the Prophetes, and therefore thoſe corporal metaphors in the Prophetes, paynting forth the kingdome of Chriſt, muſt be interpreted accordynge to the Ghoſpell, which teacheth clerely Chryſtes kingdome to bee a ſpirituall and no temporal thynge, as before is ſhewed. Eſay. 53.
               
               Moreouer the Prophets euen them ſelues doe playnely ſhewe Chriſtes kingdome to be a ſpyrituall thinge. Do the not Daniell Daniel. 9 ſaye that Chriſte ſhall be kylled? And Eſaye alſo, doth not he ſaye that Chriſte ſhall geue hys lyfe for ſinne? So that we may ſee no affirmation of corporal dominion here on earthe in thys lyfe. Beſides

this, the Prophetes doe affirme alſo Chriſtes kingdome to be eternall, and therefore cannot be temporall. Figures and Metaphors can bee no otherwiſe thē Allegorically vnderſtanded. I nede not to tel howe that the prophetes vſe to ſpeake of Chryſtes kingdome, that they doe not dyſcerne the times of this life and of the life to come, becauſe Chriſtes eternall kyngedome is begonne in ſpirite and fayth in thys lyfe, and afterwarde endureth for euer. Howe be it ſome tymes, and often they do otherwyſe, & plainly ſhewe that Chryſtes kyngedome and Church ſhal ſuffer perſecution in thys life, as in the. 2. Pſal. and Pſal. 115. precious in the ſight of the Lorde is the death of his ſaintes. And Pſalme. 72.

Eſay. 30. Daniel. 12.
            
            
               ¶ That there is an euerlaſtynge life, where it is, & what knowledge and vnderſtanding therof may be had in thys life.
               THat there is an euerlaſtyng lyfe, none will deny but ſuch as wyl deny God. For if he be true and iuſte (or els he is not God) then can there not bee but an eternal life. That he hath both ſpoken it &. promyſed it in Math 25. 1. Cor. 15. Hebre. 4. 11. 13. 1. Peter. 1. it apereth, & els wher in very many places. So that to deny an euerlaſting life, is to deny God, to deny Chriſte, and all that euer he did: alſo to denye all pitie and religion: to condempne of folyſhnes all good men, Martyrs,

Confeſſors, Euangeliſtes, Prophets, Patriarkes. Sūina, the deniall of eternall lyfe is nothing els, but a denyal of the immortality of the Soule, and ſo a playne makyng of man nothyng better then beaſtes. If it be ſo, let vs then eate and drynke, for to 1. Cor. 16 morowe we ſhal die. Lorde deliuer vs from this Sadduceal and Epicureal impietie, & graunt vs for thy mercies ſake (deare God) that we may be aſſuredly perſwaded that there is in dede an eternall life & blyſſe with thee for thē that putte their truſte in thee: amongeſt whom accompte me for thy mercies ſake.
               Agayne, thys eternall life, Where this eternal life is and the place appointed for them that bee thy ſeruantes, all men doe graunt to bee with thee.

Not, becauſe thou arte euerye where, they doe therefore thynke ſo of eternall lyfe that it is euery where. For they by thy word do knowe, that in as muche as no 1 Iohn. 4 man can ſee thee and lyue, this eternall life and thy bleſſed preſēce is moſte pleaſaunte and hadde in fruition after in an other world, wherunto by corporal death they doe depart, and are tranſlated to a place aboue them, where thou dwelleſte in a lyghte where vnto no man can approch. Abrahams 1. Tim. 6 wſome (they reade) was aboue, as the place for the wicked was alowe and beneath. Helias was caught vp into heauen: and thy ſone our deare ſauiour praied, that wher he is, thoſe alſo might be which thou haddeſt geuē him, and might ſee his glory. Nowe

hee (deare father) we learne by thy ſpirite, was aſceuded and taken vp in his very body into heauen, whether Steueu loked vppe and ſawe thy Chriſt ſtanding on thy right hand, to whom he praied: Oh Lorde Ieſu receaue my Act. 8. 7 Spirite. Graunte I beſeche thee gracious God and father, that I maye haue a cleane harte more & more to ſee thee, and ſo in ſpirite to ſee and loke vppon often thys place: whether brynge me at the length in body alſo, I hūbly pray thee.
               Now, what a thing this euerlaſting What maner of thing this euerlaſtīg life is. lyfe is, no man is hable to conceaue, much leſſe hable to vtter: For the peace of God whych is eternal life, paſſeth all vnderſtanding. The eie hath not ſeene, the eare hath not hearde, neyther

can mans hart cōceaue thoſe thin ges, which thou (deare god) haſte 1. Cor. 2. prepared for them that loue thee. whatſoeuer therefore can be ſpokē or imagined of thy kingdome, of the clerenes, ioye, and felicitye of the ſame, is nothinge in compariſon: as we may ſee by thy Prophets, which (becauſe they could not otherwyſe) vnder corporall things haue ſhadowed the ſame. So that the confidence of eternal lyfe, what a thing it is, can in no wiſe be tolde. Howe ve it, ſomewhat we maye be broughte into ſome ſighte of it by earthly thinges, to thynke on thys ſorte: If God haue geuen here ſo manye thinges in a ſtraunge place, how many are the great good thinges that be at home? if in a priſon are ſo many mercies, how many are

they in the palace? If the wicked haue ſo many benefites, what is ye ſtore prepared for thy ſeruāts, Oh Lorde? if thy children fynde ſuch comforts in ye daye of teares and mourninge, what ſhall they fynde in the daye of the mariage? If wyth beaſtes men being haue ye vſe of ſo innumerable bleſſings, oh howe many are the bleſſinges which they ſhal enioye wyth thy Angelles, and with thee thy ſelfe (O deare God) when they ſhall ſee thee, and haue the fruition of thee, in whom is fulnes without lothing of all good and faire thinges: ſo that nothinge can be more deſited, and that for euermore?
               This thy Chyldren doe not ſo ſee, as they nowe beleue it: I ſay that euē in their bodies they ſhal ſee it for euer, as Iob ſaid: They Iob. 19.
                  
beleue that they ſhal ſee thee and their owne eies behold thee, whē theſe our corporall eyes, our bodyes being reyſed, ſhall doe theyr duties. Suche a knowledge of thee they beleue to haue, as ſhal not be onely intellectuall and by faith, as nowe it is: but euen a ful ſight and fruition, yea a coniunctiō & felowſhip with thee. Now they ſee but in a glaſſe, euen in a 1. Cor. 13 dark ſpeaking: but then they ſhal ſee face to face. For fayth though it be the ſubſtaunce of thinges hoped for, and a certaine dark ſight Heb. 11 of thee: yet it may not be cōpared to the rewarde of fayth, and glorious ſighte which we ſhal ſee in the lyfe to come, when fayth and hope ſhal ceaſe, Now thy childrē 
                  1. Iohn. 3 knowe that they bee thy ſonnes, thoughe it yet appeare not what

they ſhal be, we know (ſay they) that when our Chriſte God and man ſhal apeare, then ſhal we be like vnto him, for we ſhal ſee him euen as he is. Oh great prerogatiue to ſee Chriſt as he is: which is not to bee conſidered ſo muche for the manhod, as for the Godheade it ſelfe: as Paule doth alſo write, that when all thinges are ſubiect vnto the ſonne, then ſhall 1. Cor. 19 he be ſubiect vnto thee (deare father) allo, that God may bee all in all. And therfore Chriſte oure Sauiour prayed for vs, that we myght knowe thee the only true God. Not that our Chryſte thy Sonne, is not with thee the true coequal and ſubſtancial God: but that we might know howe that after the iudgement, ſuche a myſterie of hys mediatorſhip ſhall

not bee in heauen as is nowe in earth. Thē thou bleſſed trinitie, God the father, God the ſonne, & God the holy ghoſt, ſhalt be al in all: thou ſhalte be the ende of our deſires: thou ſhalt be loked vpon without ende: thou ſhalt bee loued without lothing: thou ſhalte be prayſed without werines. Althoughe lothſomnes be wonte to followe fulnes, yet our fulnes in the contemplaciō of thy pleaſurs, ſhal bring with it no kinde at all of lothſomnes. Sacietie of ioyes Pſal. 16. ſhall be in the beholdinge of thee: pleaſures are in thy righte hande for euer: we ſhalbe ſatiſfyed whē wee aryſe after thyne Image, I Pſal. 17. meane, in the reſurrection. Oh deare Father, ſhewe thy ſelfe vn to vs and we aſke no more. Oh graunt vs with thy Sainctes in

euerlaſtinge lyfe, to prayſe wyth perpetual praiſes, thy holi name. Happy then and happye agayne were we, if that day were come, that we myghte ſinge wyth thy Aungels, elders, and innumerable thouſands, a newe ſonge and ſay: thou chriſt Ieſu which waſte Apoca. 5. ſlayne, art worthy to receaue power, and ryches, and wyſedome, and ſtrengthe, and honoure, and glory, & bleſſing. In this bleſſed life al kind of maladyes, griefes, ſorrowes and euilles bee farre away, and all full of all kinde of mirthe, ioye, and pleaſure. Oh that we mighte ſee nowe a lyttle with S. Iohn that holye Cytie newe Ieruſalem diſcending from heauen, prepared of GOD as a bryde trunmed for her huſbande. Oh that we mighte nowe ſomething

heare the greate voice ſpeakynge out of the throne: beholde the tabernacle of GOD is with men, & he will dwell with them, Apoc. 21 and they ſhalbe his people, and he ſhall be vnto them their God: he wyll wype awaye all teares from theyr eyes, and death ſhall be no more, nor wepinge nor crying, nor ſorrowe, for the former thinges are gone.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Meditacion of the bleſſed ſtate and felicitie of the lyfe to come.
            THis body is but a priſon wherein ye ſoule is kepte, and that verely not beautifull & bright, but darke and moſt dirtie, diſquiet & fuſty, fraile, and filled vp with muche vermine and venemous vipers (I meane it cōcerning our affaccions) ſtanding in an ayre moſte vnholſome, & proſpect moſt lothſome, if a man conſyder the excrements of it by the eyes, noſe, mouth, eares, hands, feete and al the other partis. So that no bocardo, no little eaſe, no dungeon, no biſhops priſon, no gate houſe,

no ſinke, no pit maye be compared in any poynte, to be ſo euill a pryſon for the body, as the body is for and of the ſoule. whereby the chyldren of God haue bene occaſioned to crie, and lament their longe being in it. Oh ſayth Dauid, how longe ſhall I lye in this priſon? Oh wretch that I am, ſayth Paule, who ſhal delyuer me out of this body of ſinne? Rom. 7. which is an heauy burthen vnto ye ſoule, as ye wiſe mā ſaith. And therfore the godly crye, nowe let thy ſeruant depart in peace: Oh Luke. 2. that I were diſſolued & had put of this earthly and fraile tabercle: Take me vnto thee, and bringe my ſoule out of this priſon, Pſal 142 that it may geue thankes vnto thee, O Lord. For ſo long

as we be in this body, we cānot ſee the Lorde: yea it is an heauy habitation, and depreſſeth down ſore the ſpirite from the familiaritie, which it els ſhoulde haue with God.
            This world and life is an exile, a vale of miſerye, a wildernes, of it ſelfe being voyde of all vertues and neceſſaries for eternal life, & ful of enemies, ſorows, ſighings, ſobbinges, groninges, miſeryes, &c. In daunger to hunger, colde, heate, thirſt, ſores, ſicknes, temptations, troubles, death, and innumerable calamities: being momentanie, ſhort, vnſtable, and nothing but vayne, and therfore is cōpared to a warfare, a womās trauaile, a ſhadow, a ſmoke, a vapor, a worde, a ſtorme, a tempeſt,

in the whych Gods people feele greate moleſtations, grefes, and troubles, nowe of Sathan hymſelfe, nowe of the world, nowe of their owne fleſhe, & that ſo wonderfully, diuerſly, daungerouſly, and contrarily, that they are enforced to cry: Oh Lord whē ſhal we come and appere before thee? Whē ſhal this miſery ende? whē ſhall we be deliuered out of thys vale of miſery? out of this wyldernes? out of this continual affliction and moſt perilous ſeas?
            But where thou art (Oh lord and deare father of mercy) there is not only no priſon, no dolors, no ſorow, no ſighings, no teares, no ſicknes, no hunger, no heate, no colde, no payne, no temptations, no diſpleaſure, no malice, no pride, no vncleanes, no contention,

no tormentes, no horror, no ſinne, no filth, ſtink, dearth, death no weping, teares, miſery, myſchiefe: There is (I ſay) not only no ſuch thynge or any euill, noyſome, or diſpleſaunt thyng: but al libertie, all light, all pleſantnes, al ioy, reioycing, mirth, pleaſure, paſtime, health, wealth, ryches, glory, power, treaſure, honor, triumphh, comfort, ſolace, loue, vnitie, peace, concord, wiſedome, vertue, melodye, mekenes, felicitie, beatitude, and all that euer can be wiſhed or deſired, in moſte ſecuritie, eternitie, and perpetuitie yt may be thought, not only of mā, but of Angels and Archangels, yea aboue all thoughts. The eye 1. Cor. 2. hath not ſeene the lyke, the eare hath not heard it, nor no hart is able to conceyue in any poynt, any

part of the bliſſeful beatitude, which is wyth thee moſte deare God and father, moſt deare lorde and ſauiour, moſt gracious good God and comforter, where thou art (O bleſſed God) The Archā
               gels, Angels, thrones, powers, Dominations, Cherubi
                  •
               s, Ceraphins, Patriarkes, prophets, apoſtles, martyrs, virgins, confeſſors, and ryghteous ſpirites, Apoca. 4 ceaſe not to ſinge nighte and day holye, holye, holye, Lorde God of Hoſtes: honour, maieſtye, glory, power, empire and dominion be vnto thee, Oh God the creator, Oh Lord Ieſu the redeiner, Oh Apoca. 5. holy ſpirite the comforter.
            In recordation of this, oh how thy Children reioyce: howe contemne they the pleaſures of thys worlde? howe little eſteme they

anye corporall griefe or ſhame? how deſire they to be with thee? Howe amiable are thy tabernacles, Oh Lorde God of Hoſtes, Pſal. 84. (ſay they:) my ſoule hath a deſire to enter into the Courtes of the Lorde: my hart and my ſoule reioyceth in the liuing God: bleſſed are they that dwell in thy houſe, they yt may alwayes be prayſing thee. For one day in thy courtes is beter thē a thouſād els wher. I had rather bee a bore keper in the houſe of my God, then to dwell in the tentes of vngonlynes: for the Lord God is a lyght and defence. And againe, lyke as Pſal. 24. ye harte deſireth ye water brokes, ſo longeth my ſoule after thee, oh god: my ſoule is a thirſt for god, yea euen for the liuing god. Whē ſhal I come to appeare before the Pſal. 13.
               
prſence of god? My ſoule thirſteth for thee, my fleſh alſo lōgeth after thee in a barren & dry land, where no water is. They (thy chyldren I meane O lord) deſire the day of that their redemptiō: they ſtill crie, let thy kingedome Roma. 8. come: they cry, come lord Ieſus: they lift vp their heads, lokynge Apoc. 22. for thy apearing (oh lord) which wil make their vile body lyke to Philip. 3. thine own glorious and immortall body: for when thou ſhalt appeare, they ſhalbe like vnto thee. Math 14 Thy Angelles wil gather them together, & they ſhall meete thee in the cloudes, and be alwayes with thee. They ſhal heare thys Math 25 ioyfull voyce: Come ye bleſſed of my father, poſſeſſe the kingdome prepared for you, from the begin Math. 12 ning. Then ſhall they be like to

thy Aungels. Then ſhal they be Math. 13 like vnto the Sunne in thy king dome. Thē ſhal they haue crownes of glory, & be endewed with white garments of innocencie & Apoc. 7. righteouſenes, with palmes of victory in their handes. Oh happy is he that may but ſee that immortall and incorruptible inheritaūce, which they ſhal enioy for euermore.
            Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶ A ſhort introduction to the vnderſtanding of the Scriptures, conteininge the ſumme of all the Diuitie neceſſarie for a Chriſtian conſcience.
            By Iohn Bradford.
            
               
                  A
                Man that is regenerate and borne of God (the whiche thinge yt euery one of vs do beeleue, oure baptiſme the Sacramēt of regeneration doth require vnder paine of dampnation, and therfore let euery one of vs with the virgin Mary ſay, be it vnto me O Lorde according to

thy worde, accordinge to thy ſacramēt of baptiſme, wherin thou haſt declared our adoption: and let vs lament the dowting hereof in vs, ſtriuing againſt it as we ſhalbe made able of the Lorde) a man I ſay, that is regenerate, cō ſiſteth of two mē (as a man maie ſaie) namely of the olde man and of the newe man. The olde man is like to a mightie Giant, ſuch a one as was Goliath, for his birth is now perfecte. But the newe man is like vnto a little chylde, ſuche a one as was Dauide, for his birth is not yet perfecte vntill the day of his generall reſurrection.
            The olde man therefore is more ſtronger, iuſty, and ſtirring, then is the new man, becauſe the birth of the newe man is but begonne

now, and the olde man is perfectly borne. And as the olde man is more ſtirringe, luſtye, & ſtronger thē ye new man: ſo is ye nature of him cleane cōtrary to ye nature of ye new mā, as being earthly & corrupt wt Satans ſede, ye nature of ye new mā beīg heauēly & bleſſed with the celeſtial ſeed of god. So that one man, in as much as he is corrupt with the ſeede of the ſerpente, is an olde man: and in as muche as hee is bleſſed with the ſeede of God from aboue, he is a new mā. And as, in as much as he is an old man, he is a ſinner & an enemy to god: ſo in as much as he is regenerate, he is righteous, and helpe, and a frende to God, the ſeede of God preſeruīg him from ſinne, ſo that he cannot ſinne, as the ſeede of the ſerpente,

wherwith he is corrupt euen frō his cōception, inclineth him, yea enforceth him to ſinne & nothing els but to ſinne. Soo that the beſt part in man before regeneration, in Gods ſight, is not onely an enemie, but enmitie it ſelfe.
            One man therfore wich is regenerate, well may bee called alwaies iuſt, and alwaies ſinfull: iuſt in reſpect of Gods ſeed, and his regeneration: ſinfull in reſpect of Satans ſeed & his firſte birth. Betwixt theſe two men therfore, there is continuall conflicte & warre moſt deadly. The fleſh and olde man by reaſon of his birth that is perfect, doth often for a time, preuaile againſte ye new man (being but as a child in compariſon) and that in ſuche ſorte, as not onely other, but euē
               
                  
the children of God themſelues thinke that they bee nothing els but olde, and that the ſprit & ſeed of God is loſt and gone away, Pſal. 77 wher yet notwithſtandinge the the truth is otherwiſe, the ſpirit and the ſeede of god at the length appearing againe, and diſpelling away the cloudes, which couer the ſonne of gods ſeed from ſhininge, as the cloudes in the ayer do ye corporal ſonne: ſo that ſome times a man cannot tell by anye ſenſe, that there is any ſonne, the cloudes and windes ſo hiding it frō our ſiht: Euen ſo our cecitie or blindnes and corrupte affections ☞ doe oftē ſhadow the ſight of Gods ſeed in Gods children, as though they were plaine reprobates, wherof it commeth, that they praying accordinge to their

ſenſe, but not accordinge to the truth, deſire of god to geue them againe his ſpirit, as though they had loſt it & he had takē it away. Which thing God neuer doth in deede, althoughe he make vs to thinke ſo for a time: for alwayes he holdeth hys hande vnder hys childrē in their faules, that they lie not ſtil as other do which are not regenerate. And this is the difference betwixte Gods Children which are regenerate, and elect before all times in Chriſt, & the wicked caſt awayes, that the elect lie not ſtill continually in their ſinne as do the wicked, but at the length do returne againe by reaſon of gods ſeed, which is in them hid as a ſparkle of fier in the aſſhes: as we may ſee in Peter, Dauid, Paule, Marye Magdalin
            
               
and others.
            For theſe (I meane Gods Children) God hath made all things in Chriſt Ieſu: to whom he hath geuen this dignity, yt they ſhould bee his inheritance & ſpouſes.
            This our inheretour Chriſt Ieſus, GOD with God, light of light, coeternal and conſubſtanciall with the father and with the holy Goſt, to the end that he might become oure huſband (becauſe the huſband and the wyfe muſt be one body and fleſh) hath taken our nature vppon hym, communicating with it and by it in his owne perſon, to vs all his children, his diuine maieſtie, as Peter ſaith, and ſo is become 2. Pet. 1. fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bones ſubſtancially: as we are become fleſh of his fleſh and

bone of his bones ſpiritually, all that euer we haue pertaining to him yea euen our ſins: as al that euer he hath, perteineth vnto vs, euen his whole glory. So that if Satan ſhould ſōmon vs to aunſwere for our dettes or ſinnes, in that the wife is no ſutable perſon but the huſband, wee may well byd him enter his action againſt our huſband Chriſt, and he wyll make him a ſufficient anſwere.
            For this end (I meane that we might bee coupled & maried thus to Chriſt, and ſo be certein of ſaluatiō & at godly peace with god in our conſciences) god hath gegeuen his holy word, which hath two partes (as now the children of God do conſiſte of two men) one part of gods word beīg proper to ye old man, & the other part

of Gods word beinge proper to the new man. The part properly perteining to the old man is the law: the part properly perteining to the new man is the goſpell.
            The law is a doctrine which cō
               maundeth & forbiddeth, requiring doing and auoiding. Vnder it therfore are cōteined al preceptes, threatnings, promiſes vpon condicions of our doing & auoyding &c. The Goſpell is a doctrine which alwaies offreth and giueth, requiring on our behalfe, not as of worthines or as a cauſe but as a cerificat vnto vs, & therfore vnder it is conteined al the free and ſwete promiſes of god: as I am the lord thy god &c.
            In thoſe that be of yeres of diſcretiō, it requireth faith, not as a cauſe, but as an inſtrumēt wherby

                  
we our ſelues may be certeine of our good huſband Chriſt, and of his glorye: and therfore when the conſcience feleth it ſelfe dyſquieted for feare of Gods iudgement ☞ agaynſt ſinne, ſhe maye in no wiſe loke vppon the doctryne perteyninge to the olde man, but to the doctrine only that perteyneth to the newe man, in it not loking for that which it requireth, yt is Faith, becauſe we neuer beleue as we ſhould: but only on it which it offreth, which it geueth yt is, on gods grace & eternal mercy and peace in Chriſt. So ſhall ſhe bee in quiet, when ſhe loketh for it altogether out of her ſelf in Gods mercy in Chriſte Ieſu: in whoſe lappe if ſhe laye her heade with ſaiut Iohn, then is ſhe happy and ſhal find quietnes in deed.
               
when ſhe feleth her ſelfe quyete, then in Gods name let her looke on the lawe & vpon ſuch thinges as it requireth, therby to brydel and kepe downe the olde Adam, to ſlay that Goliath, from whom ſhe muſt nedes keepe the ſweete promiſes, being the bed wherein her ſpouſe and ſhe mete and lie together, as the wife will kepe her bed only for her huſbād, although in other thinges ſhe is contented to haue fellowſhip with others, as to ſpeake, ſitte, eat, drinke, go, &c. So our cōſciences, which are Chriſts wiues, muſt nedes kepe the bed, that is, Gods ſwete promiſſes, alonly for our ſelues and our huſbande, there to meete together, to embrace and laugh together, and to be ioyful together. If ſinne, the lawe, the deuyll, or

any thinge would crepe into the bed and lie there, then complaine to thy huſband Chriſt, and forth wyth thou ſahlte ſee hym playe Phinees parte. Thus my dearly beloued, I haue geuen you in fewe wordes a ſumme of all the Diuinitie which a chriſtian conſcience can not want.
         
         
            
            ¶ A Prayer, whiche Ihon Bradford ſayd a little before his death in Smithfelde
            
               MErcifull God and Father, to whom our ſauiour chriſt Math. 26 approched in hys feare and nede, by reaſon of death, & founde comforte: gracious God & moſt bounteous Chriſte, on whō Stephen called in hys extreame Actes. 7. neede, & receiued ſtrength: moſte beninge holy ſpirite, which in the middeſt of all croſſes & death, diddeſt comfort the apoſtle ſ. Paule, 2. Cor. 1. with more conſolations in chriſt, then he felt ſorrowes & terrours in the worlde: haue mercy vppon me a moſt miſerable, vile & wretched

ſinner, which nowe drawe nere the gates of death deſerued both in ſoule & body eternally, by reſon of my manifold horrible, old & newe tranſgreſſions, which to thine eyes (O lorde god) are opē and kuowen. Oh be merciful vnto me, and forgeue me for the bitter death and bloud ſheddinge of thine onely ſonne Ieſus Chriſte. And thoughe thy Iuſtice do require in reſpect of my ſinns, that nowe thou ſholdeſt not heare me, contemning thy dayly callinges: yet let thy mercy, which is aboue all thy works, and wherwith the earthe is filled, let thy mercy (I ſay) preuayle towardes me, thorow the merites & mediation of chriſt our ſauiour, for whoſe ſake it pleaſeth thee to bringe me forth now, as one of his witneſſes, &

a record bearer of thy verity and trueth taught by him, to geue my life therfore. To which dignity I do acknowledge (deare god) that there was neuer anye ſo vnworthy and vnmeete, no not the thefe that hāged with him on ye croſſe. I humbly therfore pray thee that thou wouldeſt accordingly, ayde, helpe, & aſſiſt me with the ſtrēgth and heauenly grace, yt with chriſt thy ſonne I may finde comforte, with Stephen I may ſee thy preſence and gracious power, wyth Paule and all others, whych for thy names ſake haue ſuffred afflictious and death, I maye finde ſo preſent with me thy gracious cō
               ſolation, that I may by death glorify thy holy name, ſet forth & ratify thy verity, comforte ye hartes of the heauy, confirme thy church

in thy truth, cōuert ſome that are to be conuerted, and ſo depart out of this miſerable world (wher I do nothing but dayly heape ſinne vpon ſinne) and enter into the fruition of thy bleſſed mercy: wherof now geue & increaſe in me a liuely taſte, ſenſe, and felinge, wherthrough the terrour of death, the torments of fier, the pains of ſin, ye darts of Sathan, & the dolours of hell, may neuer ouercome mee: but may be driuen away through the working of that moſt gracious ſpirite: whych now plēteouſly endue me withal, that through the ſame ſpirite I maye offer (as nowe I deſire & am redye to do) in chriſt & by him, my ſelf wholy, ſoule and body, to be a liuely ſacrifice, holy & acceptable in thy ſight (deare father) whoſe I am & alwaies

haue ben, euen frō my mothers wombe, yea, euen before ye world was made: to whō I commende my ſelfe, faith & name, familye & frendes, countrey, and al the whole church: yea, euen my very ennemies, accordinge to thy good pleaſure: beſechinge thee entierly to geue once more to this realme of Englande, the bleſſinge of thy worde againe, with godly peace, to the teaching and ſettinge forth of the ſame. Oh deare Father, now geue me to come vnto thee: purge & ſo purify me by this fier, in Chriſtes death and paſſiō, thorowe thy ſpirite, that I may be a burnte offeringe of ſwete ſmel in thy ſight, which liueſt & raygneſt with the Sonne & the holy ghoſt nowe and foreuermore, worlde without ende.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            Ephe. v.
            ☞ Awake thou that ſlepeſt and ariſe from the Dead, and Epriſte ſhal ſhew light vnto thee.
         
         
            
               Certein faults eſcaped.
               In the 7. leafe & firſt ſide, reade in the margent thus: By loking on our olde faulles.
               
               In the 13. leafe and ſecond ſyde adde to ye later note ī ye margēt: Felicitie which we obtain by Death.
               
               In the 43. leafe, in ye title of the Introduction read Diuinitie.
               
               And in the other titles, for Inſtruction read Introduction.
               
            
         
      
   