
      
         
            
            
            The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordnaunce.
            
            Contayning very neceſſary matters for all ſortes of Seruitoures eyther by Sea or by Lande.
            Written by William Bourne.
            
            
               CANTABO IEHOVAE QVIA BENEFECIT MIHI.
            
            Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke.
            1587.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ TO THE RIGHT honorable Lord, Ambroſe Dudley, Earle of Warwick, Baron of Liſle, of the moſt noble order of the Garter Knight, Generall of the Queenes Maieſties Ordnaunce within her highneſſe Realme and Dominions, and one of her Maieſties moſt Honorable priuie Counſell, William Bourne wiſheth long life, increaſe of Honor, with al happy ſucceſſe.
            
               RIght woorthie and Noble Earle, whereas I before this time haue writtē ſundry ſimple Treatiſes, whereof two of thē are extant in print, thone called the Regiment of the Sea, and the other the Treaſure for Trauellers, and now alſo this barbarous and rude thing, called the Art of ſhooting in great Ordnaunce, and as it is moſt cōmonly ſeen, that euery perſon doth moſt cōmonly cōmend that thing wherein he is moſt expert, and therefore ſome there are that doe moſt extoll Diuinitie, and great reaſon it is that it ſhould be ſo, for that it teacheth vs both to know God and to inſtruct others: alſo otherſome doe moſt preferre Philoſophie: otherſome the Lawe, with ſuch like as they are moſt delighted in. Alſo other there are, that doe not onely extoll them, but wil make arguments, and diſpute whether of them are moſt commendable and moſt worthie to be preferred aboue the other. There are alſo, that after long diſputation, doe not onely aſſigne euery Science his ſeuerall laude and praiſe, but alſo diſcourſe whether of them are moſt neceſſarie for a common wealth. And I am of that opinion, and that no man can denie,

but that the Arte of ſhooting in great Ordnaunce is neceſſarie to be aduaunced for the defence and mainteynance of a Kingdome, and countrey, and the common wealth thereof. Wherefore (Right honorable) being as one extraordinarily bolde, I preſent the ſame vnto you, for that I knowe your Lordſhippe can truely deſcerne and iudge in theſe cauſes, as one whoſe wiſedome is not vnknowne, hoping that your Honour will take this ſimple worke, as my good will, rather than the valour of the thing, or the fineneſſe of the penning of the matter. And thus I ceaſe to trouble your Honorable Lordſhip any longer at this time, deſiring you to accepte this ſimple Booke at the handes of a poore Gunner, as a true token of my good will towardes your Honour: deſiring God to proſper your Honor in all your doings in perfect health.
            
               By your Honours humbly at commaundement
William Bourne.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the Reader.
            
               GEntle Reader, it is poſſible that you would maruel that I ſhould write this booke called the Art of ſhooting in great Ordnance for two great cauſes: the one is this, firſt for that I haue not ſeene (to moſt peoples iudgement,) ſo great experience in theſe affayres, whereby you may thinke that I haue not knowledge ſufficient to be a teacher in theſe matters. And the ſecond cauſe is this: for that my order of teaching is contrary vnto all that haue taken vpon them to be teachers, or inſtructers in theſe matters or affaires before time. Therefore for to ſhew vnto you the cauſe that hath moued me to write this rude volūe, is this, for that we Engliſh men haue not beene counted but of late daies to become good Gunners, and the principall point that hath cauſed Engliſh men to be counted good Gunners, hath been, for that they are hardie or without fear about their ordnance: but for the knowledg in it, other nations and countries haue taſted better therof, as the Italians, French and Spaniardes, for that Engliſh men haue had but little inſtructions but that they haue learned of the Doutchmen or Flemings in the time of King Henry the eight. And the chiefeſt cauſe that Engliſh men are thought to be good Gunners, is this: for that they are handſome about their Ordnance in ſhips, on the Sea, &c. And furthermore, I doe thinke it good to ſhewe vnto you three great cauſes beſides diuers other ſmall cauſes, that the thing that hath letted or hindred Engliſh men to become cunning in the ſhooting of great Ordinance, although diuers prooues haue beene made at ſundrie times, and Ordnance hath beene had into the fielde, both in maiſter Bromefields time whē that he was Liefetenāt of the Ordnance, & at diuers times ſince, and yet thoſe prooues that haue beene made then were no proofes, but to cauſe thoſe Gunners that did ſee the experience of thoſe profes, to committe a further errour as touching the ſhooting

in great Ordnance, and the reaſon therof is this: the firſt & principal cauſe is, that they did make their proofe with a Quadrant, and ſo it ought to be, that is to ſay, the fourth parte of a Circle deuided into 90. equall partes, which ſome ſimple Gunners will call a Triangle, but there is no inſtrument ſo called, but onely a Quadrant: and the original of the making thereof is the fourth part of a Circle deuided into 90. equall partes, what forme ſo euer that it hath. And now the principal vſe of the quadrant, is to know what any peece will caſt at the mount of euerie Degree, and ſo from degree vnto degree, vnto the beſt of the Rander. And the cauſe that hath made the Gunners to commit error by the mounting of the peeces by the degree of the Quadrant, hath beene this, although that it be true that ſuch a peece will caſt the ſhot ſo many ſcores at the mount of ſo many degrees, and yet whē that they haue made proofe therof, they haue foūd it meere falſe, & yet the thing moſt true, although ſomtime the ſhot hath flien a great deale further, and ſometime much ſhorter, which cauſes were no other thing but the highnes or the lownes of the ground, for that there is ſeldome any ground that you ſhall find leuell, but it will be higher or lower then the ground that the peece ſtandeth vpon, as I doe more at large declare in the thirtenth chapter of the booke, and yet in the time of ſeruice there is no vſing of the Quadrant but in ſome caſes, and then take a great large one, for in a ſmall you may ſoone commit errour. And furthermore I doe know diuers that will haue inſtruments, and yet be vtterlie voide of the vſes of them, for it is the reaſon of the perſon in the doing of any thing, and not the inſtrumentes, for in the doing of any thing, if the perſon doth not conſider of all thinges with him and againſt him, he or they be apt to commit errour, &c. The ſecond great cauſe is this, in the vſing to giue leuell with a rule ſet out in inche partes: but vnto this they cannot order it, nor giue it no Method to know what any peece wil doe at any number of inches aduantage, for the peeces doe differ in caſting, according vnto their lengths, as I doe further ſhew in the booke. Wherefore the vſe of the inche rule according as they doe vſe it, is to no other

purpoſe, but onely to ſeeke out what numbers of inches will reach the marke, and that being knowne, then to keepe the length of the marke with that peece. And the neceſſarieſt thing that this kind of giuing of leuell in the time of ſeruice (as being in a Caſtell, Forte, or Towne, or ſuch like, the Gunner hauing charge of any peece,) is to beate al thoſe markes that be apte to doe any ſeruice at, and to know how manie inches will reach any marke, &c. but to become a cunning Gunner, he ſhall neuer be, although he ſhould ſhoote 100. ſhottes euerie day through a yeere, for that he neuer doth know by that meanes the diſtance of any marke, but in euerie peece he muſt make a new proofe, if that the peece be remoued or chaunged from that place. Wherefore I haue made a table, ſhewing how many inches, and what part of an inch will make a degree, and ſo vnto ten degrees whereby you may make a Methode to hit the length of the marke in anie peece at the firſt ſhot, as it doth appeare in the eight chapter of the booke, if ſo be that there were a true and exact table of proportion, of the caſting of the peece at the mount of euerie degree, but I haue not had ſo greate proofe but that I may bee deceiued, for I haue no other proofe but at my owne charges, and my abilitie is able to doe nothing to make any proofe in thoſe cauſes. The third great cauſe is this, I do know few Gunners, yea none at all in reſpect, that hath anie capacitie, to know the distance vnto anie marke aſſigned if that the marke be ſuch that they can not come vnto it directly by land, and yet there be verie true and exact wayes to know the diſtance vnto anie marke aſſigned, howſoeuer the thing is, if that it may be ſeene by Geometrie perſpectiue: and the lacke therof amongſt Gunners is the principalleſt point that doth deceiue thē, ſo that theſe three things doe vtterly deceiue moſt men: the firſt is this, the height or lownes of the ground: the ſecond the length of the peece: and the third not knowing the diſtance vnto the marke: for their reaſon in theſe cauſes that they doe ſuppoſe, can doe nothing, that is to ſay, to finde the diſtance vnto anie marke aſſigned, by looking vpon the ground, and that neuer can ſhew vnto them the diſtance vnto the marke but yet muſt be knowen either

by the Scale or croſſe ſtaffe, or elſe it muſt be knowen by the lines of Poſition, which is ſhewed in a booke of mine that is extant in Print, called the Treaſure for Trauelers, and alſo in a booke ſet forth by maſter Thomas Digges called Pantometria, wher in thoſe two bookes you ſhall finde meanes and waies both how to finde the true diſtance vnto the marke, and alſo how much that the marke is hier ground or lower ground, then the place that you are vpon, and alſo the length of the line Hipothenuſall, whether it bee vppe the hill or downe the hill, which is verie neceſſarie and profitable for all them that will vſe to ſhoote in great Ordnance, for to know, as all Gunners, Captaines, and Leaders of men, &c. And now friendly Reader, it is poſſible that ſome people will diſlike of me, for that I haue written this booke: ſome of them for that they doe thinke that they haue better knowledge in thoſe matters then I, and other ſome perhaps may be offended, for that they would not haue the thing knowen but amongſt thē
               ſelues, and otherſome poſſible will be offended with me that are Gunners, that are altogether without any knowledg in thoſe cauſes, that wold not haue their ignorāce knowen. So by theſe meanes I am aſſured that I ſhal purchaſe a great number of enemies, as I do know that I haue alreadie cauſed ſundry people to enuie me, as ſome Sea men do miſlike of me for writing of my booke called the Regiment for the Sea, and otherſome of late are offended with me for the writing and ſetting forth of my booke called the Treaſure for Trauelers, but notwithſtanding, I doe ſee that it is needfull to be knowen vnto a number of them that be Gunners, waying and conſidering with my ſelfe what a number there bee, that will take vpon them to be Gunners, yea and that maiſter Gunners, that are not ſufficient nor capable in thoſe cauſes, but are in reſpect altogether ignorant, ſtanding vpon no other thing but their antiquitie, that they haue ſerued as Gunners ſo long time. Wherefore I doe thinke it very neceſſarie for them to haue ſome good inſtructions: but as farre as I can ſee, euerie man maketh curteſie to doe the common wealth of our Realme of Englande any good therein, and as far as I can perceiue that no people

may better pleaſure the common wealth in the time of ſeruice, either by Sea or Land, then may good Gunners againſt the face of our enimies: for the Realme of England hath a great number of enimies: for as we haue ſeene by daily experience, that the Queenes progenitours aforetime were neuer long without warres, yet we haue a moſt gratious and louing Prince raigning ouer vs, which doth alw aies ſtudie for peace and tranquillitie: God graunt of his mercie that ſhe may liue long and raigne ouer vs. Amen. Yet nothwithſtanding, it is good for vs to ſtudie in the time of peace, how to defend our ſelues in the time of warres & troubles, as generally we prouide in harueſt for to liue in the winter. And for that cauſe haue I written this little treatiſe, not to the intent to teach thē that be cūning, but to giue inſtructiōs vnto thē that be of the ſimpleſt ſorte, &c. Wherfore (Gentle Reader) beare with my rudenes, for that I am ſo bold to be the firſt Engliſh man that put foorth any booke as touching theſe cauſes, and it is poſſible that there be a number would looke that I ſhoulde haue giuen them place, for that they are more worthy and ſkilfuller in theſe cauſes, thinking that I am to ſimple, for they doe not conſider how that God doth giue his giftes, as we ſee daily he giueth vnto one man riches, and another man pouertie, and one man to be a ruler, and an other to be inferior, one man wiſe & prudent, and an other ignorant, one man beautifull, and an other deformed, one mā of a tall ſtature, & an other of a low ſtature, one man ſtrong and luſtie, and an other weake & lame: although that they be of one conſanguinitie, linitie or kindred, ſuch is the maruelous workes of God. Wherefore men are not to be meaſured by elles, but vy vertue, for God is not partiall in his giftes, for hee hath ſhed his moſt precious blood for the redemption of all mankind, ſo that afore him all are one, for we are all his creatures and the ſheepe of his paſture, and the workes of his handes, ſo he is our God, and we are his people, ſo that we keepe his holy will and commaundements, but fleſh and blood is ſo fraile, that we can doe no good of our ſelues, for God worketh the will and deed in all his creatures, for by his holy ſpirit he doth giue ſundry gifts & al for

the profite both of our ſoules & bodies, as Saint Paul ſaith to the Corinthians, to one is giuen through the ſpirite the vtterance of wiſedome, to an other the vtterance of knowledge, by that ſame ſpirite to an other faith, by that ſame ſpirite to another the gifte of healing, by that ſame ſpirite to another profeſſing, to an other iudgmēt to diſcerne ſpirits, to another diuers tongues, to an other the interpretations of tongues, and al thoſe doth the ſpirite of God worke and diſtribute vnto euery man according vnto his moſt holy will and pleaſure. Then what a vaine generation of people be we to ſtriue againſt the wil & pleaſure of God, as who ſhould ſay that God is bound to be ruled by the wil and pleaſure of man. But what ſpeciall gifte ſoeuer God doth giue vnto man, let them giue him thanks therfore, and looke that they doe not abuſe the ſame gift, for if that they doe, it will be a ſnare to take them in, and ſo be an example vnto the whole world. For as ſoone as our heart is lifted vp with vanities, then entreth the Diuel, & he cauſeth a man to fall and decline from God, thinking with our ſelues, that the gift that God hath giuen vnto vs commeth of our ſelues. For as ſome do think that haue riches, that they haue it by their own induſtry, and ſome doing diuers other thinges, thinke that it commeth of themſelues, with diuers other ſpeciall gifts that god giueth vnto man, therefore whenſoeuer God doth giue any ſpeciall gift to any perſon, then let him giue him thankes therfore, vſing it to the lawd, praiſe, glorie, and honor of God, & to the profite of his neighbour, and the common wealth of his Natiue countrie, for great is the wickednes of the people vpon the face of the earth, as conſidering this in theſe our dayes, that the Biſhop of Rome with all his adherents, doth daily practiſe how and by what meanes to bring this our noble realme of England to vtter confuſion, therfore it is very meete and neceſſarie for vs to deuiſe how to preuent them, and then there is no doubt if that we doe our good will and indeuour, but the liuing God wil deliuer vs from the hands and ſnares of ſuch wicked Antichriſtes, that do ſeeke the blood of the Chriſtian ſeruants of God. Wherfore it is very meet for vs that be faithful Chriſtians and true ſubiectes to our prince and Countrie, to

arme our ſelues firſt with faith, ſecondly with manly courage, and thirdly with armor for our back, for let vs be aſſured without Gods mightie prouidence vnto the contrarie, that as ſoone as they haue vs at any aduantage, that then let vs looke for no other matter, but that they will giue the attempt, for ſuch is the wickednes of the malicious Papiſts, yea euē ſome of them are thoſe that ſhould or ought to be good ſubiects vnto their Prince and natiue coūtry. Wherfore I beſeech the liuing God to cōfound ſuch wicked Impes that ſhould ſeeke the deſtruction of their Prince, and eſpecially a vertuous, mercifull, and a godly Prince, and ſecondly the deſtruction of their natiue Realme and countrie, yea euen the nurce to them and their forefathers that hath yeelded vnto them all kind of foode and neceſſaries. What greater wickednes can there be in men? and they themſelues are bound by the lawes of God and alſo by the lawes of nature, to defend their Prince and Countrie: for we nor they haue no iuſt quarell to fight by the lawes of God, but onely to defend our Prince and countrie and the liberties therof. Therefore it is meet for vs to cal vnto God for mercie and grace, and then there is no doubt but that he wil deliuer vs, & turne all their wicked deuiſes vnto their own deſtruction, euen as thē that make a pitte for other and fall into it themſelues. Wherefore it is meet for al them that are Noble men and Magiſtrates, & ſuch as are in authoritie, to cheriſh and maintayne al thoſe that are good and vertuous ſubiectes and good members in the common wealth, and contrariwiſe, it is very neceſſary and conuenient to puniſh all wicked doers, and ſuch as doe annoy and hurt the common wealth, hauing no regard, neither for loue nor fauour, nor hatred or malice, neither for bribes nor friends, but to rewarde euery man according vnto their deſertes: for as it is ſin to ſuffer vice vnpuniſhed, ſo in like manner it is as euill to ſee Vertue not revvarded, cheriſhed nor mainteyned.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ Conſiderations to be had in ſhooting of Ordinance.
            
               Tenne principall things are to be conſidered in the ſhooting of Ordnance, to keep the length of the marke, or to make a perfit ſhotte at any marke aſſigned, according vnto the diſtance of the marke, and knowing what ſuch a peece wil do at ſuch an aduantage in mounting.
            
            1. The goodneſſe or badneſſe of the pouder.
            THe good pouder driueth the ſhotte further than the marke, the badde pouder ſhooteth ſhort of the marke: therefore you muſt vſe diſcretion in lading of the peece, according vnto the pouder.
            2. The lading of the peece.
            IF you doe giue the peece more than hir dutie, you doe ouerſhoote the marke: if you do giue hir leſſe than hir duty, you ſhoote ſhort of the mark: you muſt therefore giue the peece hir dutie and no more.
            3. The winde, and eſpecially to be mounted at much aduantage.
            THe winde with you, cauſeth you to ouerſhoote ye marke, according vnto the hardneſſe. The winde againſt you, maketh you ſhoote ſhort of the marke according vnto the hardneſſe. The winde one the ſide, the peece caſteth beſide the marke: therefore you muſt weather the marke, according vnto the hardneſſe of the winde, and the diſtance vnto the marke.
            4. Of the ſhotte.
            THe ſhotte too bigge or too high, it putteth the peece in daunger: for you muſt driue the wodde and ſhoote home vnto the pouder in the pecce, for if the ſhotte doe reſt any thing ſhort, it will breake the peece (or elſe it is a chaunce) in the vacant place betweene the pouder and the ſhotte. The ſhotte too low or ſmall, it will be too ſhorte of the marke, & alſo it will not do his execution according vnto the peece and the pouder, and it may chance to ſwarue in the deliuerance

out of peece, the therefore the ſhotte muſt be fitte for the peece
            5. Of the wadde or the pouder rammed in too hard or too looſe.
            THe pouder rammed in too hard, and the wadde alſo, and eſpecially the pouder being badde, or els not drye, it wil be long before the peece goe off, and alſo halfe the force of the pouder will be decayed, before the ſhotte bee deliuered, for that it bloweth out of the tutchhole, and alſo the peece will tremble before ſhee goe off, & that may cauſe the ſhotte to flee awrye from the marke, for that the peece is remoued from hir leuell: and alſo it will heate the peece, and make the peece daungerous to ſhoote in preſently afterwards.
            The pouder too looſe, and not well put vp with the rammer head, and alſo the wadde too ſlacke in like manner, will make the ſhotte to come ſhort of the marke by the meanes of the looſeneſſe: you muſt therefore put vp the pouder with the rammer head ſomewhat cloſe, and the wadde to go cloſe in, and driue it home vnto the pouder, but beate it not in too hard.
            6. Of the ſtanding of the peece.
            THe peece ſtanding ſo that it maye or doth recoyle vnto the lower ground, that is to ſay, that the grounde bee lower at the tayle of the peece, than it is where the wheeles ſtand, it ouerſhooteth the marke, for that in the deliuerance of the ſhotte, the breech goeth downewards, and the mouth vpwardes, and the peece is apte to recoyle downe the hill: and if that the ground be higher behind the peece then it is before the peece, then it may happen to ſhoote ſhorte: but that is but a chaunce, for that is not ſo apte to recoyle agaynſt a hill, as it will do downe the hill.
            And if it doth happen ſo, that the one wheele dothe recoyle faſter than the other wheele, then the peece will ſhoote awrye from the marke, or if any thing doe lette or ſtay the wheele, it may ſhoote awrye, for the deliuerance of the ſhotte

cauſeth the recoyle of the peece, which is nothing elſe, but the ſuddayne thruſting or the putting out of the ayre whiche is in the mouth of the peece.
            7. Of ſhooting towards a hill or valley with a Quadrant.
            IF you ſhoote towardes a hill, you ſhoote ſhorte in the giuing leuell with a Quadrant. If you ſhoote towardes a valley, you do ouerſhoot ye marke, as in the thirteenth Chapter you ſhall ſe the reaſon therof. If vppon a leuell ground, you ſhall keepe the length of the marke by the degrees of the Quadrante, otherwiſe not.
            8. If you giue leuell with an ynche rule, you ſhall ſhoote at no certaynetie, but in ſuch a peece as you doe knowe wel, for that it doth varie according vnto the length of the peece: as for example this, if you haue three Culuerings, the one is the ordinarie length, that is, twelue foote long: the other is more then the ordinarie length by two foote, that is, foureteene foote longe: and the thirde is ſhorter than the ordinarie length by two foote, that is, but tenne foote longe: nowe if you doe ſhoote at any marke, and doe knowe the diſtance vnto the marke, and alſo doe knowe, that a Culuering mounted at ſo manye ynches vantage, wyll reach the marke, and admitte that it wyll reache the marke at twelue ynches vā
               tage, nowe in the ſhorter peece, it ouerſhooteth the marke, and in the longer peece it ſhooteth ſhorte of the marke, and in that peece that hathe the ordinarie length, you ſhall keepe the length of the marke: and the cauſe thereof is this: In ye peece that is but tenne foote longe, the twelue ynches vantage commeth neere vnto ſyxe degrees wyth the Quadrante in the mounting: and in the peece of twelue foote long, the twelue inches commeth not to fiue degrees in the mounting with the Quadrant, and in the peece of foureteene foot long, it commeth but vnto foure degrees in the mounting with the Quadrāt, as in the eyght Chapter you may plainely ſee.
            
               
9. It is to be conſidered what diſpart your pecce muſt haue, if you doe giue leuell with an ynche rule at any aduantage, and alſo, if you doe ſhoote at any marke within the right line or poynt plancke, as in the fourth Chapter it is ſhewed.
            10. You muſt conſider whether the peece be truelie bored, as it is declared how you ſhall know it in the ſecond Chapter: and how to ſhoote with a peece that is not truely bored, you ſhall ſee by the eleuenth Chapter.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
            
               CHAPTER. I
               
                  How to know the goodneſſe or badneſſe of Pouder.
               
               
                  FIrſt concerning Powder, for that it is the chiefeſt matter as touching the ſhooting in Ordinance. According to ſome Authours, the firſt deuice of the making thereof beganne in Germany, by a Monke named Bertholdus Schwartus, neere about the yeare of oure Lorde. 1380. and ſince that time it hath bine put in practiſe from time to time, and from age to age, both by the learned Mathematicians, and alſo by the beſt Machaniſianes, beſides a number of other common people, as well by them that haue bine ſeruetours, in martial affayres, as all other, ſo that of the making of the peter, and alſo of the pouder, hath bin made great proofe vnto the vttermoſt, as touching the force of pouder, ſo that it is not vnknowē now in theſe dayes, what quantitie of euery ſeuerall ſortes of receiptes doth make the ſtrongeſt ſortes of pouder, beſides the perfit-refining of the ſalte peter, & alſo ye thorough working of the receiptes in the making of the pouder, ſo that it is now come to paſſe in theſe dayes, that the making of the pouder, and alſo the making of the ſaltpeter, is become (in reſpect) a common thing amongſt a number of people, as it is made commonly in many partes in Germanie by the Boures or huſbandmen, and alſo by the women: wherefore it were but ſuperfluous to ſay any thinge therein, conſidering how well the making thereof is knowen vnto a number of people, and therefore the principalleſt thinge in the ſhooting of Ordinance, is to knowe the goodneſſe or the badneſſe

of the pouder, and that is knowen after the common order, that is, by three kinde of meanes, firſt by the taſting of the tongue, knowing by the ſharpneſſe thereof, whether that there be ſufficient of the maiſter or peter or not: and ſecondly it is knowen by the coulour, for the good pouder hath ſomewhat a blewiſh coulour, and if it be Sarpentine pouder, then the pouder will be as fine as ſande, and as ſoft as floure, and that ſignifyeth, that it is well wrought, and otherwiſe it will be harſhe in your hande, and clammiſh, and looke with a darkiſh blacke coulour, and that ſignifyeth that it is wel wrought, and the maiſter not refyned: and the third & principall is knowen by the burning, for if it be verie good pouder, then in the burning, the fire wil be gone in ye twinckling of an eye at a verie ſuddayne, & wyll giue a ſnap or ſuddayne puffe, & nothing remaining afterwardes, but a white moke on that place whereas it was burned: but badde pouder in the burning fireth not ſo quickely, but fireth as dothe a fire worke, very ſlowly, makyng ſome hiſſing, and after the burning, there wyll remaine certayne burreles or knottes that wyll conſume vnto moyſture, and be darkiſhe, and that ſygnifieth that the peter or mayſter was not well refyned, neyther the pouder well wrought: And after the burning of ſome kinde of pouder, there wyll remayne certayne whyte burrles, or knottes (as before is rehearſed) that will remaine hard, and not conſume after the burning, and that ſygnifyeth, that the pouder dothe lacke of the maiſter or peter. And alſo here is one principall thinge to bee noted, that when pouder is drye, then the force of it in reſpecte, is as it were double, or a quarter ſtronger, than when it is moyſte and darkiſhe, whether the pouder bee goode or badde. And alſo that pouder that is verie good and well made, yet maye happen to become moyſte, as manye times by carriage too and fro in rayny weather, and alſo by laying it in ſome moiſt places, the caſke beeyng not very

cloſe and tyght, that the pouder may growe dankiſhe.
               And alſo thoſe kinde of pouders that the peter or maiſter is not well refyned, but left full of ſalte, although that the pouder bee neuer ſo drye when it is layd vp, yet it will giue agayne in rayny & heather, and become moyſt, how drye ſoeuer the place be that it is layde vp in. Wherefore there are a number of thinges to bee conſidered in pouder, as touching the ſhooting in great Ordinance, in a number of cauſes: for men of reaſon maye know by the burning, coulour, taſtyng, and the handling of pouder, which is good, & which is badde: but to ſay iuſtly how much the one ſorte of pouder is ſtronger or weaker than another ſorte of pouder is, that is harde to knowe, although he be the maker of the pouder, and hath wayed out perticularly the receiptes of the pouder: and the meanes thereof commeth to paſſe, as this, by the working thereof, and by the meanes of the drying thereof, and by the moiſting or giuing of it againe, and eſpecially if the pouder haue bin long made: ſo that it is a hard matter if a man haue of ſundry ſortes of pouder, to ſay iuſtly that thus much in weyghte of this ſorte of pouder, will doe as muche, that is to ſay, to bee equall in force, as ſo much in weyghte of that ſorte of pouder, vntill that it be putte in proofe in the ſhooting it in Ordinance. And thus I doe ceaſſe to write any more at this time of Pouder.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. II.
               
                  
                     To know whether any peece of Ordinance be truelie bored, by the helpe of certaine inſtrumentes.
               
               
                  TO know whether that any peece of Ordinance be truly bored, ther be diuers waies Geometrically for it to be done, but ſome of them be too tedious, therefore for an eaſie way, they muſt make this kinde of inſtrument of two peeces of ſmall timber, or two right ſtaues, that muſt be as long as the hollow or concauitie of the peece, which muſt be made in this forme, & the 
                     〈◊〉
                   muſt be made ſo faſt at ye one end, that it be not wider aſunder at the one end, than it is at the other end, & ſo made faſt, that they ſwarue not eyther wider or narrower: and then putting one of the 
                     ••
                  aues into the mouth of the peece, and ſo meaſuring or trying the peece rounde about with the ſtaffe that is without the peece, with an ynche rule, you ſhall know whether that the core or hollowneſſe of the peece do 
                     〈◊〉
                   right in the middle of the mettle, and if it doe not, you ſhall ſee howe much the mettell is thicker on the one ſide, than it is on the other. And alſo it is very good for you when you do meane to trie the peece, to prepare rammer head that is made fitte for the peece, and to put it vppon the ſtaffe that you do put into the peece, and to be made faſt vnto the ſide of the ſtaffe, and ſide of the rammer head, in ſuch ſort, that it may keepe the ſtaffe cloſe vnto the ſide of the peece, which it will do the better, if the rammer head be to low, and then to haue a peece of a Sheepes ſkinne made faſt, or nayled vnto the contrarie ſide of the rammer heade, and ſo it will keepe the long ſtaffe cloſe vnto the ſide of the peece, as by theſe two figures following you may perceiue.
               
                  
                  
               
               And furthermore, they may make this kinde of inſtrument following, of yron, or any other ſtuffe meete for the purpoſe, for to gripe the peece in euery place at your pleaſure.
               
               This inſtrumente muſte bee double the length of the hollow or concauitie of the peece, and then you muſte put one of the right ones into the mouth of the peece, and then griping the inſtrument together, then that parte that is without the peece, and that ſhall ſhewe you howe many ynches and partes of an ynche the mettall is of thicknes, without any fayle: and then trying the peece round about in euery place, the truth of the thicknes of the mettall ſhal appeare.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. III.
               
                  
                     How muche Pouder will ſerue any peece of Ordnaunce, by the weight of the peece, and weight of the ſhot: and at the end of this Chapter, there is a Table that doth declare the weight of Iron ſhott.
               
               
                  TO know how much powder will ſerue any peece of Ordnaunce, there be two ſpeciall points to be obſerued, that is to ſay, the weight of the ſhotte of yron, and the weight of the mettall of the peece: and this is a generall rule, the peece hauing a reaſonable length, that is to ſay, that according vnto the accuſtomable manner, according vnto the names of the peece or peeces, all thoſe peeces that haue two hundred weight of mettall, or vpwardes vnto one pounde weight of ſhotte, muſt haue as much Sarpentine pouder as the ſhotte waieth. And all thoſe peeces that haue three hundred weight in mettall, vnto one poūd weight of ſhot, doe require as muche Sarpentine pouder as the ſhotte wayeth, and one ninth parte more. And all thoſe peeces ye haue vnder two hundred weight of mettall, and more thā one hundred and a halfe, may haue as much Sarpentine pouder as the ſhot weieth, lacking one ninth part. And all thoſe peeces that haue one hundred & a halfe of mettall or there about, vnto one pound weight of the ſhotte, muſt lack 2/9 partes of pouder that the ſhotte waieth. And all thoſe peeces that haue but little more than one hundred, & vnder one hundred & a halfe, muſt lacke 3/9 partes of ye weight of the pouder that the ſhot waieth, yt is but ⅔ parts. Therfore for the making of Ladels for anye peece or peeces of Ordnaunce, this thing muſt be noted. Firſt, take the compaſſe of the ſhot for the peece yt you do make the Ladel for, and then diuide, or put the compaſſe of the ſhotte into. 5.

equall parts, and thē cut the plate of the Ladel in breadth of three of thoſe fiue partes, and put the other ⅖ partes away, and then bende the plate for the breadth of the Ladell, according vnto the compaſſe of the ſhotte, ſo that it may goe eaſily into the mouth of the peece: for ⅗ partes is for to hold the pouder, to the intēt to put it into the peece, and the ⅖ parts be put away, to be open to turne the pouder into the peece. And now furthermore, for the lenght of the plate of the ladell, heere is one thinge to be noted, that euery nine balles or ſhot being layde cloſe together, and the plate being bent, and cut off that breeadth before rehearſed, and the plate in length to be cut off, that number of ynches that the nine ſhottes dothe reache, and that plate being equally filled with Sarpentine pouder, wyll holde the iuſt weyghte in pouder that the ſhotte weyeth. Therefore for the length of the plate of the Ladell, thus you muſt vſe it as followeth. For to make a Ladell for a double Canon, and the peece weying generally more or leſſe. 7000. or. 8000. and the ſhott weying within little more or leſſe. 64. pounde, that is, but little more than one hundred of mettall, vnto one pounde weyght of the ſhot, therfore this peece may lack ⅓ part of the weyght in pouder that the ſhot weyeth: therefore they muſt cut the plate of the Ladell but. 3. times the length of the ſhot, in ynches and partes of ynches, and this Ladel twice equally filled, ſhall be the dutie of the peece. Then for to make a Ladel for a Demy Canon, as the peece in mettall weyeth generally more or leſſe. 5000 or. 5700. and the ſhotte weyeth more or leſſe. 34. pounde, whiche is about an hundred and a halfe of mettall, vnto one pounde weighte of the ſhotte, therefore you muſt cutte the plate of the Ladell three ſhots or balles and a halfe high, or. 4. ſhots or balles high. In ynches and partes of ynches, according vnto the fortifying of the peece with the mettall, and the Ladell twice

equally filled, to be the dutie of the peece. And for to make a ladell for a double Culuering, thoſe peeces being double fortified with mettall, and the peece waying generally more or leſſe foure thouſande, or foure thouſande eyght hundred, and the ſhotte waying more or leſſe 17. pounds, that is, about three hundred weight of mettall, vnto one pounde weight of ſhotte. Therefore you muſt cut the plate of the ladell in length about the height of fiue ſhotte or balles, in ynches and partes: this ladell being twice equally filled, ſhall be the dutie of the peece. And in like manner the demy Culuering, and Falcōs, and Falckonets, be double fortifyed with metall: therefore you muſt mak their ladell in length fiue ſhottes or balles, in ynches or partes, and that ladell twice equally filled, ſhal be the dutie of the peece. And furthermore, ſome Sakars and Minions haue but two hundred weigth of mettall vnto one pounde weight of the ſhotte: therefore you muſt cut the plate of the ladell in length but of foure ſhottes or balles & a halfe high: and that ladell twice equally filled, ſhall be the dutie of the peece. And furthermore, now of late yeares, they haue deuiſed a more ſtronger ſorte of pouder, and not without good cauſe why, for the baſe pouder is not ſo good, if that it ſhould come vnto ſeruice, as corne pouder, or any other pouder is, that hath receipt ynough, and well wrought: for the baſe pouder dothe heate and ſtreyne the peece more than the good pouder doth: for if it be rammed in hard, thē becauſe it is not ſo quicke in ye fiering, it lyeth and bloweth in the breech of the peece, before it can take fire, ſo by that meanes it heateth and ſtreineth the peece, and halfe of the force of the pouder is gone, before ye ſhotte be deliuered: and then they muſt vſe batement for to ſaue the peece. Nowe whereas they ſhoote good pouder, or cornepouder, they take much leſſe pouder, and it ſendeth the ſhotte quicker awaye, and it dothe not

heate the peece ſo faſt: for this we doe ſee by common experience, that a little heat by long continuance, doth heat more than a great heat by little continuance. And furthermore, in the ſhooting of good pouder, they ſhall not ſhew thēſelues ſo often vnto their enemies. And eſpecially, the pouder woulde be put in cartredges, for in mine opinion, it is a greate deale better, for to charge a peace in time of ſeruice with a Cartredge, than with a Ladell, for diuers conſiderations, as I doe more at large declarein the ſixth Chapter. And furthermore, for to charge a peece wt cornepouder, or any other good pouder, for the moſt parte, therof two pounde will goe as farre as three pound of Serpē
                  tine pouder. As for example: that double Culuering that requireth eyghteēe pounde of Serpentine pouder, twelue pounde of reaſonable corne pouder will ſerue, according to the goodnes of the making of the pouder. And furthermore, vpon good conſiderations, for diuers cauſes, and eſpecially for the Queenes Nauie, they haue deuiſed to make their Ordnaunce ſhorter than the accuſtomed manner, and ſo by that meanes they are lighter than the peeces before time made, and yet as ſeruiceable as the longer in ſome points, ſhooting that weight in pouder, and ye ſhotte that the heauier doth, in all poyntes as the other: for that mettall that is taken from the length of the peece, hurteth not the fortifiyng of the peece. And as for the making of the Cartredges for any peece, it is eaſie ynough to be done: for the compaſſe of the ſhotte, and the length of the Ladel, ſhall 
                     •
                  ule that matter well ynough. Nowe ſhall followe a rule to know the weyghte of the yron ſhotte, by the height of the ſhotte.
               
                  
                  
                     A Table to knowe the weight of yron ſhotte.
                     
                     A Shot of 2. ynches high, doth wey. 1. lb. 1. ounce. ¾.
                     A ſhot of. 2. ynches ¼ high, doth wey. 1. lb. 9. oūces. ⅓.
                     A ſhot of. 2. ynches d. high, doth wey. 2. lb. 2. ounces.
                     A ſhot. 2. inches. 3. quar. high, doth wey. 2. lb. 14. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 3. ynches high, doth wey. 3. lb. 12. ounces.
                     A ſhot. 3. inches a quar. high, doth wey. 4. lb. 12. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 3. ynches d. high, doth wey. 6. lb. lacke. 1. ounce.
                     A ſhot. 3. ynches. 3. quar. high, doth wey. 7. lb. 5. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 4. ynches high, doth wey. 8. lb. 15. ounces.
                     A ſhot. 4. inches a qua high, doth wey. 10. lb. 10. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 4. ynches d. high, doth wey. 12. lb. 10. ounces.
                     A ſhot. 4. inches. 3. qua▪ high, doth wey. 14. lb. 14. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 5. ynches high, doth wey. 17. lb. 5. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 5. ynches a quar. high, doth wey. 20 lb. 1. ounce,
                     A ſhot. 5. ynches d. high, doth wey. 23. lb. 2. ounces.
                     A ſhot. 5. inches. 3. quar. high, doth wey. 26. lb. 6. oūces.
                     A ſhot. 6. ynches high, doth wey. 30. pound.
                     A ſhot. 6. ynches a quarter high, doth wey. 34. pound.
                     A ſhot. 6. inches d high, doth wey. 38. pound.
                     A ſhot. 6. inches three quar. high, doth wey. 42. poūd.
                     A ſhot. 7. ynches high, doth wey. 48. pound.
                     A ſhot. 7. ynches a quarter high, doth wey. 53. pound.
                     A ſhot. 7. ynches d. high, doth wey. 58. pound.
                     A ſhot. 7. ynches three quarters high, doth wey. 64. lb.
                     
                     A ſhot. 8. ynches high, doth wey. 71. pound.
                     A ſhot. 8. ynches a quarter high, doth wey. 78. pound.
                     A ſhot. 9. ynches high, doth wey. 101. pound.
                     A ſhot. 10. ynches high, doth wey 138. pound.
                     A ſhot. 11. ynches high, doth wey. 184. pound.
                     A ſhot. 12 ynches high, doth wey. 240. pound.
                     A ſhot. 13. ynches high, doth wey. 305. pound.
                     A ſhot. 14. ynches high, doth wey. 380. pound.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. IIII.
               
                  To diſpart any peece of Ordnaunce truely.
                  
               
               
                  OF all thinges belonging vnto a Gunner, the chiefeſt is, to bring the mettall of hys peece euen, for elſe hee ſhall neuer ſhoote iuſt to his marke, which Gunners call diſparting of their peeces: and there be many wayes to do it. Nowe to diſparte your peece, do this, take a ſtring, ſuch a one as will not ſtretch, then gird your peece about hir tayle or great ende, in the very biggeſt place of the peece, then meaſure the line iuſtly how many ynches the peece was in the compaſſe, and then looke howe many. 22. ynches there be in the cōpaſſe, take ſo many. 7. ynches for the Dyametre, highte, or thicknes of the circle, for in al circles being perfect round, as timber, ſtone, or any other mettall, looke howe many. 22. ynches there be in the circumference or compaſſe, ſo many times. 7. there is in the Diametre or height, then the height or thicknes of ye breech of ye peece beeyng knowen, looke how many ynches and partes of an ynche it commeth vnto, then lay that vnto the mouth of the peece, and looke howe muche of that doth remayne ouer, then take halfe of that for your diſpart. But ſome doe vſe to gird them (as afore is ſaide) and do put that into three equall partes, but that is not the exacte way, although it dothe goe ſomewhat neere the matter. Some alſo wyll take a priming yron, and put it into the tutchhole, and then lay it vnto the mouth of the peece, and looke what it commeth vnto more than the meaſure, they will take that for their diſpart: but that maye deceiue them, as it is generally falſe. Wherefore this is a verye good way, to take youre rule of two foote long, and then

laye that croſſe the tayle of the peece then take a plummet of lead vpon a line or a ſtring. Firſt holde the plumbe line on the one ſide cloſe to the peece, that the line touche the peece without any bending, then on the other ſide, as circumſpectly as you can, that the plummet line touch the ſide of the peece, without any bending, and then laye that meaſure to the mouthe of the peece, and looke what the ouermeaſure commeth vnto, take halfe of that for youre true diſpart. Nowe for youre better inſtructions by thys figure.
               
               Firſt I lay my rule of two foote long vpon the tayle of the peece croſſe A and B and then I holde my plummet of leade firſt vpon the ſaide A as you may ſee, and then hold my hand vpon 

the other ſid B cloſe to the ſide of the peece, thē I do look how manye ynches the tayle of the

peece was from A and B, and I finde it nineteene ynches and a halfe: then I lay my rule vnto the mouth of the peece C and D, and finde that the mouth of the peece is fifteene ynches, ſo there remayneth foure ynches and a halfe: then I deuide the foure ynches and a halfe into two equal parts, & that is two ynches and ¼ which I take for my diſpart: then with my plūmet of leade, I goe vnto the mouth of the peece, and making a parpendicular line, and ſo I find the vppermoſt parte of the peece: then I take a ſtrawe, ſetting that perfitely vpright, according to the diſpart, two inches & a quarter aboue the mouth of the yeece, and make it  faſt with a little waxe, at the letter C, then bringing ye taile of the peece to the toppe of the ſtrawe which is my diſparte, leuel with my marke, there is no doubt, but I ſhall make a perfite ſhotte, ſo that it be as farre as within the caſt of the right line: for the diſparting of your peece, is but to bring the mouth of your peece before, to be as high as the tayle behinde. For this you muſt conſider, that he that can by arte lay the hollow of the peece right againſt the marke, muſt needes hit it, ſo that it be not farther than the peece doth caſt vppon the right line, for he that ſhall giue leuell to a peece without diſparting, ſhall ſhoote a great deale ouer the marke, bycauſe that the ſide of the peece is contrarie vnto the core or hollowneſſe of the ſame: for the mettall of the tayle of the peece, is a great deale thicker than the mouth. And furthermore, this is a very good way to diſparte all manner of peeces of Ordnaunce: take your Calapar compaſſes,

and ſo take the height of the tayle of the peece, then meaſure it with your rule and looke what it is more at the tayle, than it is at the mouth, take halfe that for your diſparte, and doing (as before is ſaid) there is no truer way, ſo that your Calapar compaſſes be large ynough to reach it. Now in like caſe, you may diſparte your peece with your Quadrant, and alſo with a ſquare, but to teach tedious wayes as long as a man may teach eaſilie, it were but ſuperfluous, and the eaſie wayes as good or better than the other.
               Now, as concerning chambred peeces, for the diſparting of them, there can be no perfecte writing, for it muſt be conſidered and handled, according vnto the forme of the Chamber, and faſhion of the hall of the peece, whether it be Sling, Foller, Portepeece, or Baces: but any reaſonable man, (when hee doth ſee the peece and the Chamber) may eaſily know what he muſt doe, as touching thoſe matters.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 5.
               
                  
                     How to giue leuell with any peece of Ordnaunce, to make a ſhotte, as the moſt ſortes of Gunners vſe to doe, although there be no Arte in it
               
               
                  FOr the making of a ſhotte, that is to ſaye, to giue leuell vnto anye marke aſſigned, with a peece of Ordnaunce, without the right line, according vnto the accuſtomable manner that Gunners vſe, for that they doe not knowe the diſtance vnto the marke, and therefore doe but giue a

geſſe what aduantage will reach the marke, and if that it be with an ynch rule, then thus they doe.
               Firſt by their iudgmentes they doe giue that ſo manye ynches aduantage as they ſuppoſe will reach the marke, and then by the firſt lighting or falling of the ſhot, hee doth ſee whether it be ſhorte or gone ouer the marke, and if it be ſhorte, then at the next ſhooting hee will giue the peece more aduantage by the ynch rule: and if it bee ouer, then he will giue the peece leſſe aduauntage with the ynche rule: and ſo by diuers times ſhooting off the peece at a marke, they will finde howe many ynches and partes will keepe the length of the marke. And if they doe not ſhoote with an ynche rule, then they will giue the peece the aduauntage by ſome aſſigned place beyonde the marke that they doe ſhoote at: and if the ſhotte doe light ſhorter, then they will giue the peece more aduantage at the next ſhotte: and if the ſhotte be farther then the mark, then they will giue the peece leſſe aduantage at the next ſhotte. And ſo by often ſhooting at the marke, they will hitte the length of the ſame, and then knowing at what marke the peece muſt bee mounted vnto righte ouer the marke, then they alwayes mounte the peece vnto that aduantage, and they ſhall alwayes keepe the length of the marke, with that peece at that marke, the peece to bee laden alwayes equally with Pouder.
               But by this order of ſhooting, hee ſhall neuer become cunning, although he ſhoote a thouſand ſhootes, for that there is no methode or order in the doing thereof, but onely with that peece at the marke: for if you doe ſhoote with another peece at that marke, although the peece dothe ſhoote that ſhotte, and that weighte in Pouder, the peece maye ſhoote vnder or ouer by the meanes of the length of the ſame, or the bigneſſe

or ſmalneſſe of the breech, and the mouth of the peece in mettall. And to bring that peece vnto any other place, they muſt doe as at the firſt, to proue what will reach the marke: and therefore this kind of ſhooting is to no purpoſe, but onely in a Towne or Caſtell, in the time of ſeruice, for him that hath the charge of Ordnaunce, to proue what the peece will doe at euery marke, as touching the keeping of the length of the marke, wherby they may the better ſhoote at their enemies when they doe ſerue, otherwiſe it will be to no great purpoſe: for as often as you doe alter or chaunge your peece, or take that peece away to ſerue in an other place, ſo oft you are to ſeeke, and to proue the thinge newe againe, whether you doe vſe to ſhoote with the ynch rule, or by the degrees in the Quadrant: for if you doe ſhoote with the ynch rule, then the length of the peece wil alter it as is ſhewed in the 8. chapter following. And if you ſhoote by the degrees in ye Quadrant, then the highneſſe or lowneſſe of the ground ſhall cauſe them to erre, as I doe ſhew in the thirteenth Chapter. Wherefore, if I were worthy to giue counſell, I could ſhew them how to vſe the matter, that they might atteyne to know the length of the marke at the firſt ſhotte, but I neuer ſaw it ſo handled, whereby they ſhould atteine it: for all the proofes that haue beene made as yet by Engliſhmen, are no proofe, but altogether to cauſe them that did ſee the proofe, to committe further errour, as touching the diſtance vnto the marke, or hitting the length of the marke.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. 6.
               
                  What a degree is &c.
               
               
                  FUrthermore, wheras this book is nam
                     •
                   
                  The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordnaunce, ſo in like manner I thinke it conuenient, to ſhew you what the word Arte meaneth or ſignifieth, which is, the deſcribing of a way or methode, how to atteyne to the certayntie of any matter. Which as hitherunto I haue not ſeen any ſuch book, althogh it hath been very neer two hundred yeeres ſince the firſt inuentiō of Ordnaunce: and excepte there bee any better booke in ſome mens hands, ſuch as I haue not ſeene, as it is like ynough that there may be, there is no Arte in any of them: yet I haue ſeene a number of bookes that haue beene written concerning Ordnance, but ſurely they that wrote thē, were not ſeene in any part of ye Mathematical ſcience, neither good Machaniſians, but (in reſpect) vtterly voyd of any ſcience: (in compariſon) no good order deſcribed in the ſhooting of Ordnaunce, to knowe what diſtance, the ſhotte is deliuered from the peece: neyther haue they knowen what inſtruments haue meaned. And although they haue named degrees in their bookes, yet it appeareth vnto me that they haue not knowledge what a degree ſignifieth, for that they haue named a Quadrant, a Triangle and other food and fooliſh by names. Wherefore they that haue written thoſe bookes that the Gūners haue amongſt them, were vtterly vnlearned in any manner of ſcience, which were in the beginning, in the time of King Henry ye eight, made by Flemmings: for in the wars in thoſe daies the King ſent ouer into Flaunders, and thoſe parts thereabout, to haue Gunners to ſerue him in the warres, & the Gunners haue no other bookes, but ſuch as were written

by them: wherefore I do thinke it good to ſhew vnto you what a degree is.
               A degree is a parte or deuiſion of a whole circle into 360. equall parts, as the the auncient fathers aforetime haue taught, and eſpecially in Aſtronomy. And it is very profitable for Gunners to knowe the vſe of them. The Quadrant that they doe occupie, is the fourth part of a circle, deuided into 90. equall parts, according vnto ye fourth part of the Heauens, for the zeneth or pricke in the Heauens (ouer the Crowne of your head, downe to the Horizon) is deuided into 90. equall partes, according vnto the Quadrant. As for example: If there were a perpendicular line let downe out of the Heauens vnto the earth, then ſhould the earth be a right line, and make a ſquare angle vnto the furtheſt parte of the Horizon that you can ſee, and ſo paſſe vnto the Heauens, as doth the Quadrant: and then the beſt of the Rander is 45. of theſe deuiſions, called degrees (as ſome mens opinion hath been) and that is half 90. and the ſaid. 45. degrees be the beſt of the Rander in ſome caſes, and that is with the winde, but otherwiſe, it is not, as it is further declared in the 5. Chapter. And for better example, I haue placed this figure.
               
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. 7.
               
                  
                     Howe to make a ſhotte vpon the right line, and alſo to know how much ground any peece of Ordnaunce doth driue or conuey the ſhot at the mount of euery degree of the Rander.
               
               
                  FUrthermore, any peece of Ordnaunce being truly diſparted, as is declared in the fourth Chapter, they may know at al times how for to ſhoote iuſt vnto the mark, eſpecially within point blank, & point blanke, is the direct fleeing of the ſhot, without any deſcending from the mouth of the peece vnto the mark, ye mouth of the peece to ſtand directly with the Horizon, ſo that it be vpon a plaine and leuell ground, as far as ye peece may caſt, hytting any thing that ſtandeth directly as hygh as the mouth of the peece, laying the hollowe or concauitie of the peece againſt the thing that you doe ſhoote at &c. And to ſhoote at anye marke vppon the right line, you ſhall doe it by this meanes: your peece being truely diſparted, and the diſpart ſette vppon the mouth of the peece, bringe the middle of the tayle of the peece to the toppe of your diſparte vppon the mouth of the peece, and the marke that you doe ſhoote at, all three vppon one right line, by the ſight of one of your eyes, and then foreſeeing that the peece ſtandeth vppon a leuell grounde, and the one wheele to bee as nimble as the other, this doone, there is no doubte but you may ſhoote as neere the marke with a Cannon as with a Hargabus, or Caliuer. This is moſt certaine. Therefore it is very neceſſary to know how far any peece wil conuey the ſhot vpon the right line, & that is ſomewhat hard to do, for

there is ſeldome any grounde, but is higher in one place than in another, and then if the peece ſhould bee layd cloſe vnto the ground, it woulde graze before that it were at the end of the right line, and then if the peece be in her carriage, the ſhotte will not graze before that it were deſcended, as much as the height of the carriage. And for to ſet vp any thing certaine at the end of the right line, it were too tedious, therefore in my opinion, this is one of the beſt wayes, in the finding what diſtance any peece conuayeth or driueth the ſhotte vppon the right line or any degree of the Rander, as thus: Repaire vnto a very leuell ground, as a plaine marriſh, that is iuſt water leuell, and then to finde the right line or point blanke, rayſe a butte or banke in that plaine grounde, and then ſette vppe a marke the iuſt height of the peece that lyeth in the carriage, and take a quadrant, with a rule faſt thereunto, and put the rule into the mouth of the peece, and coyne the breech of the peece vp and downe, vntill the plummet hang at the corner of the Quadrant, and then ſhall the Concauitie of the peece, lye right with the Horyzon, neyther higher nor lower: then ſhoote off the peece againſt the butte: if the ſhotte bee vnder the marke, it is more then the right line, then you muſt bringe the peece neerer vnto the butte, banke or marke: but if it be the iuſt height of the marke, then remooue the peece farther off from the marke, and ſo remoouing the peece for wardes and backwardes, you ſhal finde the true right line of the peece. By this order, you may trye the true right line of all manner of peeces of Ordnaunce. And whereas the opinion of diuers Gunners is, the one contrarie vnto the other, ſome holding an opinion, that the longer peece doth ouerſhoote the ſhorter, and ſome that the ſhorte doth ouerſhoote the longer: the troth is, that the longer peece doth ſhoote further than the ſhorter, although that in the mounting of a long

peece and a ſhorte with an ynche rule, the ſhorte peece dothe ouerſhoote the longer, although bothe ſhoote one ſhotte, and one ſorte and weyght of pouder, as you maye perceyue in the nexte Chapter following, and alſo in the beginning of the Booke in the eyght conſideration. &c. Furthermore, to knowe what anye peece of Ordnaunce wyll doe at the mounte of euery degree, and what diſtance of grounde the ſhott dothe flye, doe thys, the grounde beyng playne and leuell (as before is rehearſed) place the peece in thys manner: you muſte make a hole in the grounde, to the intent to make a platteforme, to ſet the peece vpon, in ſuch order, that the tronchions of the peece being in hir cariage, be iuſte in heigth leuell with the grounde, neyther higher nor lower: then take your Quadrant, and the rule faſtned thereto, and put the rule into the mouth of the peece, and ſo mount the peece vnto one degree, ſhooting off the ſame, and ſeeing the firſte graſe, meaſure the diſtance of grounde, and note or marke that: then in like manner mount the peece vnto two degrees, and ſo vnto three degrees, and ſo forth from degree to degree, vntill the peece bee mounted vnto the beſt compaſſe of the Rander. Thus ſhall you know what any peece will doe at the mount of euery degree. &c. But if you ſhoulde make youre proofe vppon ſuche grounde as is not leuell, then your proofe ſhoulde be erronious, for that the Quadrant ſheweth by the degree, howe muche it is higher than the Horizon, for if the ſhotte doe not finde grounde in his deſcending, equall with the heigth of the peece, the ſhotte fleeth further than it ſhoulde do. And alſo if the ground be higher than the place that the peece doth ſtand vpon, then the ſhot will be ſtayde the ſooner, by the meanes of the heigth of the ground, as I do more at large declare in the. 13. Chapter following. And for your better inſtruction of the mounting of the peece, I haue made this figure following.
               
                  
                  
               
               Firſte take the Quadrant, and put the rule of the Quadrante E into the mouth of the peece C, and then putting vp or downe the tayle of the peece A, till the plummet G fall vpon the corner of the Quadrant at D, then looke whatſoeuer you ſee right with the vpper ſide of the Quadrante H, ſhall be leuell with the mouth of the peece, and that is called the poynt blancke, for that vppon a leuell grounde wythoute anye hylles, as vppon the ſea, that all thinges ſtandeth ſo leuell, ſhall bee ryghte wythe the Horizon, that is to ſay, at the parting of the earthe and the Skye, by the ſighte of youre eye: and then puttyng downe the tayle of the peece A, the plummet line G wyll

hange at what degree you pleaſe towardes the myddle lyne of the Quadrant E, then the mouth of the peece B and C wyll goe vpwardes. &c. Nowe ſhall followe (according vnto the proofe that I haue made, but yet not to my contentation, neyther in reſpect to no purpoſe) the argumente of the proportion of the mountyng of euerye degree vnto the beſt of the Randare, according vnto the proofe that I haue made. Looke howe muche grounde the peece conueyeth the ſhotte from the ryghte lyne, vnto the mountyng of fyue degrees, that is as muche grounde as the ryghte lyne, and two nynth parts more, and from the mountyng of fyue degrees vnto tenne degrees the ſhotte is conueyed as muche grounde as the ryghte lyne, and 1/9 parte more, and from the mountyng of tenne degrees vnto fifteene degrees, the ſhotte is conueyed as muche grounde as the ryghte lyne iuſte. And from the mounting of fifteene degrees vnto the mountyng of twentye degrees, the ſhotte is conueyed halfe as muche grounde as the ryghte lyne iuſt: and from the mountyng of anye peece from twentye degrees vnto the beſt of the Randare, the ſhotte is conueyed in all aboute ⅔ partes of the ryghte lyne, and that is in a faire calme daye, and then two and fortie degrees is the beſte of the Randare, and wyth the wynde fyue and forty is the beſt of the Randare, and agaynſte the wynde, as the wynde is in bigneſſe, that is, one and fortye, or fortye, or nyne and thirty, or eyght and thirtie, or ſeauen and thirtye, or ſyxe and thirtye degrees, the wynde beeyng altogyther the ruler therof. Therfore it is but a folly to make accoumpte thereof, neyther is there any ſeruice aboue the mountyng of any peece of Ordnaunce, aboue. 20. degrees, excepte it be a morter peece, and the ſhotte is conueyed off grounde from the mouthe of the peece vnto the lightyng or fallyng of the ſhotte, to the beſte compaſſe

of the Rander, aboute fiue times and a halfe as muche groūd as the right line, being (as before is declared) within a little vnder or ouer, according as the winde bloweth more or leſſe, againſt the winde, or with the winde, and ſo forth. But here is one principall thinge to be conſidered, and that is this, that you do alwayes charge the peece wt iuſt one weighte, and one ſorte and kinde of pouder, for otherwayes, in the doyinge thereof, you may committe erroure, as before is declared in the firſte Chapter. As touching the knowing the goodneſſe of Pouder, for that it chanceth many times that they haue not always one ſort of Pouder, neyther alwayes of one mans making but of ſundry mens making, and ſo by that meanes, ſome Pouder is better than ſome is: therefore it is a harde matter for to know certainely, yt thus much in weight of thys pouder, is equall vnto the force of ſo muche in weighte of that ſort of Pouder: wherefore in mine opinion, that engine or little boxe that is deuiſed to proue the force of the Pouder is verye neceſſarie to be vſed, for by it you maye iuſtly know which ſorte of Pouder is ſtronger or weaker in force than the other, by waying alike ſome ſmall quantitie of eache ſorte, and ſo putting the pouder into the engine or boxe, and burning it, firſte the one ſorte, and then the other ſorte, and looke whiche ſorte of Pouder doth blowe, or lift the lidde of the boxe higheſt, that is the ſtronger ſorte of pouder, and you ſhall knowe by howe muche, by the teeth or notches that doe ſtay the lidde of the engine or boxe, and ſo by that engine or boxe, you may fitte the force of the pouder, that is to ſay, if that you doe occupye ſo muche pouder with anye peece of Ordnaunce. And for that you woulde keepe that length of the marke at ſuche an aduantage in mounting, if you haue no more of that ſorte of pouder, but that the pouder that you haue is eyther ſtronger or weaker, then do thus: wey

out ſome ſmal quantitie, as the weight of a grote or ſixepence, more or leſſe at youre diſcretion, as the engine or boxe is, and firſte burne that ſorte of pouder in the boxe that you do knowe the force of it alreadie, and then looke vnto what teeth or notch that the lidde of the engine or boxe is lifted vp vnto, and then wey out of the other ſorte of pouder the like weighte, and ſo burne that in the boxe or engine, and if it dothe blowe or lifte the lydde hygher than it was before, then it is a ſtronger forte of pouder, if not ſo high, then it is a weaker ſorte of pouder: and by the number of notches, you ſhall know how much. Therfore, if it be a ſtarger ſorte of Pouder than that you haue occupyed alreadie, then weye out a leſſer weyghte of the ſame, and burne that in the boxe or engine, and ſo doing, both by the weying and burning of it in the engine or boxe, vntill that it lifte or blowe the lidde of the engine, vnto the iuſte heygth that it was with the firſte ſorte of Pouder: but if the firſte ſorte of Pouder did blow or lifte the lydde higher than the other, then wey out more in weyghte than the firſte, and ſo by the weying and burning of it in the engine, vntyll the lydde be lyfted vnto the iuſt heygth that it was before, ſo by that meanes you ſhall knowe iuſtely howe muche weyghte of one ſorte of Pouder ſhall be equall with the force of that ſorte of Pouder, and ſo by this meanes, although you change the ſortes of your Pouder neuer ſo often, yet you may ſo fitte the peece by the weyghte of youre Pouder, that the peece of Ordnaunce ſhall keepe one length at the marke. Hauing this cōſideration, both in the lading and the wadding, to be in ſuch order, that is to ſay, to keepe a methode in the doing thereof, neyther to putte in the pouder too harde, neyther too looſe, neyther the wadde to goe in too looſe, neyther to be too much too harde, but reaſonable. And as touching the faſhion and the making of the engine

or boxe, I do omitt that in this booke, for that I doe ſhew it in my Booke, called The Inuentions or deuices, in the. 54. Deuice.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 8.
               
                  
                     Howe for to mount any peece of Ordnaunce by the degree with an Inch rule, with a Table, ſhewing what parte of an ynche rule wyll make one degree, and ſo vnto tenne degrees.
               
               
                  FOr the making of a perfite ſhotte at any degree of the Randare, & to haue a good length at yt marke, the diſtance of groūd beeing knowen, firſt it behoueth him for to knowe the force of his Pouder, whiche is ſhewed in the Chapter going before, and to haue his Pouder putte in Cartredges, eyther of Paper or Canuas, and the Pouder waied, that the one Cartredge bee not heauyer than the other, according vnto the peece, and the goodneſſe of the Pouder: for there can be no certaynetie when yt the peece is laden or charged, ſometime with more Pouder, & ſometime with leſſe: and eſpecially in the time of ſeruice, I do ſee, that there is no worſe lading or charging of Ordnaunce, than with a Ladell, whether that it be by Sea or by lande, for by the lading with a Ladell, it muſte bee twice filled, and then at euery tyme that the Pouder is putte into the peece, it muſte bee put vppe with the Rammer heade, ſo that they muſte eyther turne the other ende of the Ladell, or elſe if that the Rammer heade bee vppon the ſpondge ſtaffe, then he muſte change the ſtaues, whiche

is a greate cumber to doe in a narrowe roome. And alſo in the chargyng of a peece wyth a Ladell, hee cannot fill it ſo equally, but that the Ladell ſhall haue ſometyme more Pouder, and ſometyme leſſe Pouder, by a good quā
                  titye, and eſpecially if that hee dothe it haſtely as in the tyme of ſeruice it alwayes requireth haſte, and that may cauſe hym that gyueth leuell, to ſhoote vnder or ouer the marke, or too ſhorte, or too farre, although yt he hath found what aduantage wyll reach the marke.
               And alſo it is vnprofitable and daungerous to lade or charge a peece wyth a Ladell, for that the Pouder is apte to bee ſhedde or ſpylled beeyng haſtyly done, and then it is apte to bee fiered, conſidering what a daungerous poynte it is for the burning and ſpoyling of men.
               Wherefore if youre Pouder bee in Cartredges, and alſo weyed, the peece is more ſooner and eaſilyer laden or charged, and hee ſhall keepe the length of the marke the better, and alſo you maye keepe the Pouder the cloſer and better, and not ſo apte to bee ſhedde or pqylled, for when that the Cartredges bee fylled, then they may bee ſet vprighte in ſome Tubbe or Barrell, and then they maye take out one by one as neede ſhall require, and ſo couer the Barrell cloſe againe, that it maye bee wythout daunger.
               And nowe for the gyuyng of leuell wyth anye peece of Ordnaunce, and the marke more than the peece canne reache vppon the ryghte lyne, and the diſtance knowen vnto the marke, and alſo you knowing what ground the peece will conuey the ſhot vppon the right line, then by the order in the Chapter going before, you may know how māy degrees will reach ye mark. And for that it is ſomewhat tedious & difficulte to moūte

any peece of Ordnaunce with a Quadrante, excepte it be vpon a playne and leuell grounde, that the peece ſtandeth no more, but the iuſte heygth, or the lowneſſe of the mark, which happeneth very ſeldome. Therefore I doe thinke it very good to ſhew you howe to mount any peece of Ordnaunce by the degree, with an ynch rule, according to the length of the peece, and to knowe howe many ynches, and partes of an ynche will make or giue one degree vnto ten degrees. Hereafter is a Table, the length of the peece ſtā
                  deth in the margente towardes the lefte hande, & ye ſquare right againſte, that is the mount of one degree, and the vppermoſt number in euery ſquare, is the ynches, & the vndermoſt numbers is the odde partes of an ynche, and the Table beginneth at the length of the peece fiue foote and a halfe, and ſo encreaſeth by the half foote, till the peece be full fifteene foote longe.
               
                  
                  
                     ¶ This Table doth ſhew what part of an ynch rule will make one degree, and ſo vnto tenne degrees.
                     
                         
                        Degrees.
                         
                     
                     
                         
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        9
                        10
                         
                     
                     
                        Foote 5. ½ long.
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        9
                        10
                        11
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        3/22
                        3/11
                        9/22
                        6/11
                        15/22
                        9/11
                        21/22
                        1/11
                        5/22
                        4/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 6. long.
                        1
                        2
                        3
                        5
                        6
                        7
                        8
                        10
                        11
                        12
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        ¼
                        ½
                        ¾
                         
                        ¼
                        ½
                        ¾
                         
                        ¼
                        ½
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 6. ½ long.
                        1
                        2
                        4
                        5
                        6
                        8
                        9
                        10
                        12
                        13
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        4/11
                        8/11
                        
                           
                              •
                           /11
                        5/11
                        9/11
                        2/11
                        6/11
                        10/11
                        3/11
                        7/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 7. long.
                        1
                        2
                        4
                        5
                        7
                        8
                        10
                        11
                        13
                        14
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        5/11
                        10/11
                        4/11
                        9/11
                        3/11
                        8/11
                        2/11
                        7/11
                        1/11
                        6/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 7. ½ long.
                        1
                        3
                        4
                        6
                        7
                        9
                        10
                        12
                        13
                        15
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        6/11
                        1/11
                        7/11
                        2/11
                        8/11
                        3/11
                        9/11
                        4/11
                        10/11
                        5/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 8. long.
                        1
                        3
                        5
                        6
                        8
                        10
                        11
                        13
                        15
                        16
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        15/22
                        4/11
                        1/22
                        8/11
                        9/22
                        1/11
                        17/22
                        5/11
                        3/22
                        9/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 8. ½ long.
                        1
                        3
                        5
                        7
                        8
                        10
                        12
                        14
                        15
                        17
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        17/22
                        6/11
                        7/22
                        1/11
                        19/22
                        7/11
                        9/22
                        2/11
                        21/22
                        8/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 9. long.
                        1
                        3
                        5
                        7
                        9
                        11
                        13
                        15
                        17
                        19
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        10/11
                        9/11
                        8/11
                        7/11
                        6/11
                        5/11
                        4/11
                        3/11
                        2/11
                        1/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 9. ½ long.
                        2
                        4
                        6
                        8
                        10
                        12
                        14
                        16
                        18
                        20
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                     
                        Foote 10. long.
                        2
                        4
                        6
                        8
                        10
                        12
                        14
                        16
                        18
                        20
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        1/11
                        2/11
                        2/11
                        4/11
                        5/11
                        6/11
                        7/11
                        8/11
                        9/11
                        10/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 10. ½ long.
                        2
                        4
                        6
                        8
                        10
                        13
                        15
                        17
                        19
                        21
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        2/11
                        4/11
                        6/11
                        8/11
                        10/11
                        1/11
                        2/11
                        5/11
                        7/11
                        9/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 11. long.
                        2
                        4
                        6
                        9
                        11
                        13
                        15
                        18
                        20
                        22
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        3/11
                        6/11
                        9/11
                        1/11
                        4/11
                        7/11
                        10/11
                        2/11
                        5/11
                        8/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 11. ½ long.
                        2
                        4
                        7
                        9
                        12
                        14
                        16
                        19
                        21
                        24
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        9/22
                        9/11
                        5/22
                        7/11
                        1/22
                        5/11
                        19/22
                        3/11
                        15/22
                        1/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        12.
                        2
                        5
                        7
                        10
                        12
                        15
                        17
                        20
                        22
                        25
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        ½
                         
                        ½
                         
                        ½
                         
                        ½
                         
                        ½
                         
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 12. ½ long.
                        2
                        5
                        7
                        10
                        13
                        15
                        18
                        21
                        23
                        26
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        7/11
                        3/11
                        10/11
                        6/11
                        2/11
                        9/11
                        5/11
                        
                           
                              •
                           /11
                        8/11
                        4/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 13. long.
                        2
                        5
                        8
                        10
                        13
                        16
                        19
                        21
                        24
                        27
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        8/11
                        5/11
                        2/11
                        10/11
                        7/11
                        4/11
                        1/11
                        9/11
                        6/11
                        3/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 13. ½ long.
                        2
                        5
                        8
                        11
                        14
                        16
                        19
                        22
                        25
                        28
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        9/11
                        7/11
                        5/11
                        3/11
                        1/11
                        10/11
                        8/11
                        6/11
                        4/11
                        2/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 14. long.
                        2
                        5
                        8
                        11
                        14
                        17
                        20
                        23
                        26
                        29
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        10/11
                        9/11
                        8/11
                        7/11
                        6/11
                        5/11
                        4/11
                        3/11
                        2/11
                        1/11
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 14. ½ long.
                        3
                        6
                        9
                        12
                        15
                        18
                        21
                        24
                        27
                        30
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        1/30
                        1/15
                        1/10
                        2/15
                        ⅙
                        ⅕
                        2/30
                        4/15
                        9/30
                        ⅓
                        Partes.
                     
                     
                        Foote. 15. long.
                        3
                        6
                        9
                        12
                        15
                        18
                        21
                        25
                        28
                        31
                        Inches.
                     
                     
                        3/22
                        2/11
                        9/22
                        6/11
                        15/23
                        9/11
                        21/22
                        1/11
                        5/22
                        
                           
                              •
                           /11
                        Partes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
Then firſt repayre vnto the order of the Chapter that goeth before, and conſider by the diſtance that the peece conueyeth the ſhotte vpon the right line, and looke howe much the ſhotte maye bee conueyed at the mount of one degree, and ſo from degree to degree, till you haue the length in degrees, that the ſhot maye reach the marke, and then repayre vnto the peece, and meaſure how manye foote long the peece is, then according to the length of the peece, there is a Table in this Chapter going before, in the Margent of the which, towardes the lefte hand, that number is the length of the peece, then right againſt that number in the firſt ſquare, it doth ſhew how many ynces, and partes of an ynche will make one degree: and the nexte ſquare will ſhew you how many ynches, and partes of an ynch will make two degrees, and ſo forthe vnto the number of tenne degrees, and no more: and the cauſe is this, for that there is commonly no ſeruice to be done, aboue the mounting of any peece of Ordnaunce, more then tenne degrees, neither the ynch rule will ſerue any further, for that the degrees be taken out of the circumference of a circle, and not out of a right line. And now to vſe the matter in the handling of the rule, to make a perfite ſhot doe this: prepare your rule, and lette it be well deuided into ynches, halfe ynches, and quarters of ynches, and halfe quarters of ynches, and then lette there bee a ſlitte in the middle of the rule, and in the ſlitte, lette there bee made in braſſe or latine a ſighte, that it maye bee mooued vppe and downe at youre pleaſure, and then the rule is finiſhed. Nowe when you woulde make a ſhotte at anye marke, lette the peece bee truely diſparted, and the diſparte ſette vppon the mouth of the peece, or elſe, if the diſparte bee not ſette vppon the mouth of the peece, yet you muſt knowe perfectely the Diſparte of the peece, and to make accompte what number

of ynches it is, and to recken that as parte of the mounting of the peece by the degrees. Nowe the diſtance of grounde beeing knowen vnto the marke, and alſo to knowe howe many ynches, and partes of an ynche wyll make the number of degrees, the accoumpte of the diſpart beying made, or elſe the diſpart being ſet vpon the mouth of the peece, then ſet the rule vpon the breech of the ſame perfectly vpright, in ſuch order, as the toppe of the rule bee not nearer vnto the mouth, than that place of the breech of the peece that the rule doth ſtand vppon, whether the peece haue much aduantage, or little, ſo that the toppe of the rule muſt not hang backwards or forwards, but alwayes at on proportion from the mouth of the peece: that beeing done, turne the peece right vnto the marke, and then koyne the breech of the peece vppe and downe, vntill the middle of the mouth of the peece, or elſe the toppe of the diſparte, and the marke bee ſeene through the ſight, in the ſlitte of the rule, iuſt at the number of ynches, and parts of an ynche, that will anſwere vnto ſo māy degrees, as the Table in this Chapter going before doth ſhew. This being done, the ſhot ſhall haue a good lengthe at the marke. As for example, ſuppoſe that I doe ſhoote in a Saker that conueyeth or driueth the ſhot vpon the right line or point blancke. 26. ſkore, and the marke that I doe ſhoote at is 40. ſkore from the peece, then I haue eyther made proofe by the order preſcribed in the. 7. Chapter that goeth, before, or elſe I haue the Tables of ſome other men, as Tartalia ye Italian hath made Tables therof And ſo I do finde, that. 2. degres will reach the marke, then I do repaire vnto the peece and meaſure it, how many foote long the peece is, and I doe finde that the ſame is. 9. foote and a halfe in length from the mouth to the breech, then I repaire to ye Table in this Chapter before, wher I find that. 2. ynches doth make a degree iuſt, and now the peece

muſt be mounted vnto. 2. degrees iuſt, and then twiſe. 2. ynches, maketh. 4. ynches: then I do diſpart the mettall of the peece, as I do ſhew you in the. 4. Chapter, and ſo I doe finde that the mettall of the brech of the peece is an ynche and a halfe thicker at the brech, than it is at the mouth of the peece, and then I doe ſette vp a ruſh or a ſtraw on the mouth of the pece, and ſo making it faſt with a little waxe iuſt one ynche and a halfe aboue the mettall of the mouth of the peece, then I doe take the ynch rule, and ſo I do remoue the ſight in the ſlitte of the rule vnto iuſt. 4. ynches, and I doe ſet ye rule perfitely vpright vpon the middle of the breech of the peece, and ſo remooue the peece too and fro, and koyne the tayle of the peece vp and downe, tyll ſuch time as I may ſee the marke through the ſight in the ſlitt, and the toppe of the diſpart, all three vpon one right line, by the ſighte of my eye, and the ſight in the ſlitte, to ſtand at iuſt. 4. ynches, then ſhooting off the peece, you ſhall make a perfite ſhotte. And furthermore, if the diſparte bee not ſette vppon the mouth of the peece, then you muſte make accoumpte thereof, for that the peece dothe mount himſelfe one ynche and a halfe, therefore you muſte giue the peece but. 2. ynches & a half aduantage, to reach the marke. And furthermore, I will giue you a ſeconde example in the ſame peece at a greater diſtance, at. 80. ſkore frō the peece, and that is almoſt a mile, and then doing (as before is ſaid) to ſeeke howe many degrees will reach the marke, and I find that peece that driueth or cōuaieth the ſhot. 26. ſkore vpō the right line, that at. 9. degrees it wyll cōuey or driue the ſhot. 80. ſkore, and (as before is ſhewed) that in that pece that is. 9. foote and a halfe long. 2. ynches maketh iuſt one degree, and then the peece muſt be moū
                  ted vnto iuſt. 9. degrees, which is. 18. ynches, if the diſpart be ſet vpon the mouth of the peece, but if the diſparte bee not ſet vpon the mouth, then you muſt rebate ſo much of

the aduantage in the mounting, as the diſparte commeth vnto, and that is one ynch and a halfe. Therfore, you muſt ſet the ſight in the ſlitte, but vpon ſixteene ynches and a halfe, and ſo doing (as before is ſaid) the ſhot ſhall haue a good length at the mark. And furthermore, I had thought to haue placed a Table of proportion of the caſting of the peece at the moūt of euery degree, accordingly as ye peece doth conuey or driue the ſhotte vpon the right line, but that I haue not made any ſuch exact proofe, neither am I of that ability, neyther as farre as I can iudg, there is no man wil be at any ſuch charge. But the exacteſt matter yt I haue heard that Tartalia the Italian hath made perfit proofe therof before diuers of the nobility of Italy, whervpon, he hath made Tables (by reporte) very exact, yet I could neuer come by the ſighte of them, neyther are they in his Booke that he hath made for theſe cauſes.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 9.
               
                  What manner of courſe the ſhot flyeth in the ayre.
                  
               
               
                  AS I ſuppoſe, it is very neceſſarye to knowe what manner of courſe or proportion the ſhotte flyeth in the ayre in his compas, that is to ſay, at any degree mounted that the peece is ſhotte at the Randare. All thoſe peeces that be ſhotte at the mounting of anye degree aboue poynte blancke, and vnder the beſte of of the Randare, hath. 4. manner of courſes in hys dryuyng or flying, by the vyolence of the blaſt of the pouder, before the ſhotte come to the ground, ſo that the peece be ſhot againſt a leuelled groūd. The firſt courſe is by a right line, and ſo long as the ſhot goeth violently. And the ſecond courſe doth begin for to compaſſe, and yet flieth ſome what vpwards into the ayre,

that is to ſay, further aboue the earth circularly. The third courſe is for a certayn ſpace or quantitie at the higheſt diſtance from the earth. And the fourth courſe is, it commeth downewards circularly towards the earth, and ſo ſtouping more and more, till it commeth downe to the ground: as for example this: If any peece that is ſhotte at the beſt of the Randar, that is to ſay, at 45. degrees, and alſo at the mounting of thirtie degrees, and alſo at the mounting of fifteene degrees, and A ſignifieth the right line, and B the ſecond courſe in flying of the ſhot circularly vpwardes, and C ſheweth the vppermoſt courſe for flying at the fartheſt diſtance from the earth, and D ſheweth the circular falling or comming downewards, or the ſtoupiuꝭ or falling more circularly, than any of the other courſes or falling of the ſhotte, and the more neerer vnto the ground, the more circularly the compaſſe is made, as this figure doth ſhew.
               
                  
               
               Now furthermore, if any peece be ſhot in ye mounting of any degree, aboue. 45. degrees, then the ſhot ſhall haue a perpendicular line or fall, before that the ſhot ſhal come to the ground. Therefore I doe ſay, that the more that any peece is mounted aboue fiue and fortie degrees, by

the meanes of the perpendiculer or falling, that the ſhotte falleth ſhorter and ſhorter at the mounting of euery degree: therefore they do neuer mount any manner of peece aboue the compaſſe of. 45. degrees, except it be a Morter peece, and thoſe be mounted alwaies aboue. 45. degrees, for that the more the perpendicular line is, the more violently the ſhot commeth downe, and the more the peece is mounted, the higher into the ayre the ſhotte flyeth, and then the more is the perpēdicular line, and the neerer vnto the peece the ſhot falleth. Therefore that morter peece that is ſhot aboue. 45. degrees, the ſhot hath. 5. manner of courſes, that is to ſay: firſt his right line vp into the ayre: ſecondly, his cicular fleeing vp into the ayre: thirdly, his furtheſt diſtāce from the earth: fourthly, his circular comming downewardes: and fiftly, his direct fall or perpendicular line downe to the earth, as this figure may repreſēt, the one line to be the beſt of the Randare, the other lyne to be the mounting of. 15. degrees more than the beſte of the Randar: and the third, the mounting of. 30. degrees aboue the beſt of the Randar. And the cauſe that the ſhotte hathe his direct fall vnto the earth, is his naturall 
                  
courſe, for firſte it is driuen violently by the blaſt of the Pouder vp into the ayre by a right lyne, and then ſecondlye, as the violent drifte dothe decay, ſo it flyeth circularly, and thirdly, the force of the drifte beeing all decayed, it muſte needes haue hys naturall courſe, and all things that be of earthly ſubſtance, muſte needes returne to the earth agayne.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 10.
               
                  
                     How to mount a Morter peece for to lay the ſhotte at any diſtance appoynted.
               
               
                  FOr the ſhooting of Morter peeces, it is to be conſidered, that thoſe peeces muſt be mounted aboue the compaſſe of fiue and fortie degrees, for that theſe peeces are vſed at the ſeege of Townes, for the annoyance of their enimies, yt is to ſay, to the intent to beat downe their lodgings or houſes, with diueres other purpoſes more. And to haue the ſhotte to fal at any diſtance appointed, they muſt do this: For euery degree that thoſe peeces be mounted, the ſhot falleth ſhorter, as in the Chapter before is declared, & til yt the mouth of the peece doth ſtande directly on your perpendicular line or Zeneth or pricke, with the crowne of your head, and then the ſhotte ſhall fall directly into the mouth of the peece agayne, excepte that the accedence of the winde doth put it beſide the mouth of the peece, as this: firſt ſhoote this peece at the mount of fiue and fortie degrees, that is the beſte of the Randar, then meaſure the ground from the mouth of the peece vnto the firſt falling of the ſhotte, and ye meaſure being knowen, deuide that into fiue and fortye equall parts, and euery one of theſe parts of meaſure, ſhal be the

falling ſhorter of the ſhot, at the mounting of one degree. As for example, a Morter peece, that ſhooteth a. 180. paces at the beſte of the Randare, ſhall ſhoote at the mountyng of euery degree foure pace ſhorter: and ſo from degree vnto degree, till that the mouth of the peece ſtandeth directly vprighte with your Zeneth. Nowe for to ſhoote wyth youre Morter peece, doe this: firſt lay the rule E croſſe the mouth of the peece B, then take your Quadrante and ſet your ſquare place G vppon the rule E, then put downe the tayle of the peece A, til that the plummet line F fall at the corner of the Quadrant C, then ſhooting off youre Morter peece that is the beſt of the Randare, and putting downe the tayle of the peece A, till that the plummet line fall at tenne degrees towardes the middle lyne of the Quadrant D then that Morter peece that ſhooteth a hundreth and eyghtie paces at the beſt of the Randare, the ſhotte ſhall fall fortie pace ſhorter, that is, at a hundred and fortie pace from the peece, then at the mount of twenty degrees, the ſhotte ſhall fall 80. paces ſhorter, that is to ſay, at a hundred pace from the peece, then at thirtie degrees the ſhotte ſhall fal a hundred and twenty pace ſhorter, that is to ſay, threeſcore pace from the peece, then at the moūting of forty degrees, the ſhott falleth at a hundred and threeſcore pace ſhorter, that is, at twentie pace from the peece. And thus it may be ſeen, that from the mounting of euery degree the ſhat falleth ſhorter foure pace, and thus, by deuiding the beſt of the Randare into fiue and fortie equal partes, you ſhal know the mount of euery degree, at what diſtance the ſhotte ſhall fall from the peece, as by theſe figures following it doth appeare.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               CHAPTER. 11.
               
                  
                     How farre aboue the marke the ſhotte flyeth ouer the marke by the length of the peece, and diſtance vnto the marke,
               
               
                  FUrthermore, heer is one eſpeciall poynte to bee noted, for a number of Sea Gunners doe not vſe for to diparte theyr peece: and I doe thynk that a great nūber

of them can not doe it very well, for that cauſe they will ſay, yt they neede not diſparte their Ordnaunce. But if they do not diſparte their great Ordnaunce, and eſpecially thoſe new peeces that be nowe adayes made for the Shippes, they ſhall do but ſimple ſeruice, beſides the gret charge in waſt that they ſhall put them to that beare the charge thereof: for one ſhatte of the great Ordnaunce, is twenty times the charge of the ſmall peeces: and many of the ſmall peeces in a maner needeth no diſparte, but the great peeces: for the mettall of the tayle of the peece is a great deale bigger than the mouth of the peece. And this is generall for euer, looke howe muche that the mettall is thicker vppon the one ſide at the tayle of the peece than it is at the mouth of the peece, then looke howe manye times that the length of the peece is vnto the marke, ſo many times the thickneſſe of the mettall is thicker at the breech of the peece, than it is at the mouth, ſo many times the quantitie ſhall the ſhott flye ouer the marke, if ſo bee that the peece be ſhotte without diſparting, and the mark within poynt blanke, or the righte line of the peece: as for example thus, by a peece of Ordnaunce, that the mettall of the breech of the peece is thicker by three ynches on the one ſide, than it is at the mouth of the peece, and the peece is iuſt tenn foote longe, and the marke is iuſt twentye ſkore from the peece. Nowe the peece being tenne foote long, there is iuſt ſixe times the whole length of the peece in euery ſkore, for that a ſkore is ſixtie foote, and ſixe times tenne is ſixtie foote, then the mettall of the breech of the peece, being three ynchs thicker than it is at the mouth of the peece, ye peece ſhall caſt ouer the marke at the ende of euerye ſkore eyghteene ynches, for that the peece ſhooteth three ynches ouer the marke at euerye tyme the length of the peece, and then ſyxe tymes three ynches, maketh eyghteen ynches: ſo then it muſt needes

be ſayde, that at the ende of twentie ſkore, the peece muſt needes caſte twentie tymes eyghteene ynches ouer the marke, and twenty times eyghteene ynches, maketh three hundered and ſixtie ynches, and that containeth thyrtye foote, ſo that I doe conclude, that the peece whiche is but tenne foote long, and the mettall three ynches thicker on the one ſide at the breeche of the peece than it is at the mouth, and the marke twenty ſkore from the peece, thys peece being ſhorte wythout anye diſparting, being ſhotte agaynſt an vpright wall, then bringing the middle of the mouth of the peece, and the myddle of the tayle of the peece, and the marke, all three vppon one righte lyne, and then the ſhotte ſhall hytte the wall iuſte thyrtie foot right ouer the marke, and this ſhall be true without anye faile. Then this being true, what madd men be thoſe Gunners that will be of ſuch an opinion, that they neede not to diſpart their Ordnaunce.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 12.
               
                  
                     Howe to make a perfite ſhotte with a peece that is not truely bored, that is to ſay, that the core or hollowneſſe goeth not right in the middle of the mettall.
               
               
                  AS it chanceth many times thorough ye negligence or default of Founders, that ſome peeces be not truly bored, yt is to ſay, that the core or hollowneſſe of the peece runneth not right in the middle of the mettall, but ye core or concauitie declineth or leaneth more vnto the one ſide, than it dothe on the other, for although at the mouth of the peece the metal be round about of one like thickneſſe, yet at the breech

of the peece the mettall may bee thicker on the one ſide, than it is on the other, and then that peece wyll neuer ſhoote righte vpon the marke: and alſo, this peece is very daungerous to ſhoote in for feare of breaking. And this is generally for euer. Looke at that ſide that the mettall is moſt thickeſt at the breech, from that ſidewardes the pece doth caſt, and then righte againſt the thickeſt parte of the peece, there is the thinneſt ſide of the mettall, ſo that the mettall be perfit rounde on the outſide of the peece, and alſo the hollowe & concauitie wythin the peece, and towards the thickeſt ſide of the mettall of the peece, towards that ſide the peece caſteth. And for to knowe howe much, you may eaſily perceiue: looke how much the thickeſt ſide of the mettall is thycker than the thynner ſide, looke howe many times the hollowe of the peece is vnto the marke, ſo many times halfe the thickneſſe that ye metall is thicker on the one ſide, thā it is on the other, ſo māy times that proportion ſhal the ſhot flye wide of the mark, towards that ſide that the mettal of the pece is moſt thickeſt. As for example this, there is a peece, yt the mettall is thicker on the one ſide, than it is on the other ſide by two ynches, and the core or hollowneſſe from the tutchhole, vnto the mouth of the peece, is. 10. foote longe, and the marke that the peece is ſhot at, is 20. ſkore from ye peece: now there is. 6. times the length of the hollowneſſe of the peece in euery ſkore, and the peece caſteth one ynche awrye at euery time the length of the hollow of the peece, for that the mettall is thicker on the one ſide, than it is on the other by. 2. ynches, then take from the thicker ſide one ynch, and adde vnto the other ſide that one ynch, then it will ſet the hollownes of the peece right in the middle of the mettall, as it is. 5. ynches thick on the thicker ſide, and but. 3. ynches thicke on the thinner ſide, then take from. 5. ynches one ynche, and there doth remain but. 4. ynches, & then adde vnto. 3. ynches one ynche, and then it maketh. 4.

ynches, & then both the ſides be of one like thicknes: then (as before is ſaid) there is. 6. times the lēgth of the hollow neſſe of the peece in euery ſkore, ſo that the peece caſteth awry in euery ſkore. 6. ynches. Thē it muſt needes be ſaid, that at the ende of. 20. ſkore, the peece caſteth beſides the mark. 20. times, 6. ynches, and it maketh. 120. ynches, and that is. 10. foote iuſt. And furthermore, for to make a perfit ſhot with this kinde of peece, it is a ſtrange matter vnto Gunners, and they had neede to be very circumſpect for feare of ouercharging, for you muſt not giue this kind of peece pouder according vnto the weyght of the mettal, for that ſhe hath too much mettall on the other ſide, wher it doth noe good. And now for to make a ſhotte with this kind of peece, do this: firſt ſearch the peece with thoſe kind of inſtrumēts that I haue ſpokē of in the. 2. Chapter, then if the thickeſt part of the mettall be vpon the vpper ſide of the peece, that is to ſaye, at the tutchhole, the peece being as before is declared. 2. ynches thicker of mettal ther, than it is on the lower ſide, when that you haue diſparted youre peece truly, as though the hollowneſſe of the peece ran right in the middle of the mettall, ſette vp your diſpart vpon the mouth of the peece one ynch ye more, for that the mettall is thickeſt vpō the vpper ſide therof by. 2. ynches, and halfe. 2. ynches is on ynche: then bringing the middle of the tayle of the peece, and the top of youre diſpart, and them marke, all three vpon one right line, by the ſighte of your eye, the peece being ſhotte off you ſhall make a perfit ſhot vpon the right line. Then if the thickeſt part of the mettall by. 2. ynches be vnder the peece, that is to ſay, that at the tutchhole, the mettall is at the thinneſt, when you doe ſette vp youre true diſparte vppon the mouthe of the peece, rebate one ynche of the lengthe of the diſparte, or elſe the peece will caſte the ſhotte vnder the marke, for that the thickeſt ſide of the mettall is downewardes. And furthermore, if that the thickeſt parte

of the mettall chāceth in any other place, howſoeuer that it chāceth, then at the thickeſt ſide of the peece make a little marke, as you may do it wyth a little waxe as bygge as a pinnes head vpon the very breech of the peece: then when you haue diſparted this peece truely, as though the hollowneſſe of the peece did runne right in the middle of the mettall, ſett vp your diſparte vpon the ſide of ye mouth of the peece, as right as you can make it, with a line againſt the little waxe that is on the thickeſt ſide on the breeche of the peece, and then make the diſpart one ynche the more, for that it is ye thicker ſide with mettall by two ynches, and then bringing the toppe of the diſpart and the little waxe and the marke, all three vppon one right lyne, you ſhall make a perfite ſhotte. And furthermore, if that it chance ſo, that the thicker ſide doth lye ſomewhat vnderneath the peece, then ſet vp your diſpart vpon the thinner ſide of the peece, and alſo the little wax vpon the breeche of the peece, and then you muſt rebate one ynch from your true diſparte, and this by conſideration, there can bee no peece, but that you may make a perfite ſhott, for he that can by Arte lay the hollowe or concauitie of the peece againſte the marke, muſt needes hitt the marke, ſo that the marke be not farther off than the peece can reach vppon the right line: and this is true without any fayle.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 13.
               
                  
                     How to giue leuell at a marke vpon a hill or valley, with the Quadrant.
               
               
                  FOr the ſhooting at a hill or valley to giue leuell with the Quadrant, there is two principall thinges to be conſidered, and eſpecially, if that the marke be further than the peece will reach vppon the righte lyne. Firſt, when they doe knowe the diſtance

vnto the marke, and the marke more than that the peece will reache vpon the right line, then mount the peece ſo many degrees, till that the peece be able to reache the marke, then take your Quadrant, and looke through the two ſight of the Quadrant, the plummet hanging at libertie, till you may ſee the marke iuſtly vppon the hyll, winking with one of your eyes, then looke vpon what degree and place the plummet line doth hang vpon, then mounte the peece ſo many degrees more as that doeth come vnto, for the height of the hill, then that beeing done you ſhall make a perfecte ſhotte: as for example this: by a marke that ſtood vpon the ſide of an hill, and by Geometrie perſpectiue, the diſtance is founde to bee ſixtie ſkore from the peece, and now the peece is a Culuering, ſuch a one as ſhooteth thirtie ſkore vppon the right line or point blancke. Now the marke is thirtie ſkore more then the peece can reach vppon the right line, therefore you muſt mount the peece, till it be able to reach the marke, and that is, at the mount of foure degrees, as it doth appeare by the examining of the ſeauenth Chapter, and there you ſhall finde it to appeare to be at the mounte of foure degrees: nowe that being knowen, take your Quadrant, and take the number of degrees that the hill is in height, higher then the ground that you ſtand vpon, and that is done (as before is declared) and then you finde that the marke is fiue degrees higher than the grounde that your peece lyeth vpon, then adde that number vnto the other, and that maketh in all nine degrees iuſt, for that the peece is moūted foure degrees for to reach the marke, and fiue degrees for the height of the marke, whiche is higher grounde than that the peece doth lye vpon, then laying the peece right vppon the marke, there is no doubt but that you muſt needes make a perfite ſhotte, and to lay the peece right vpon the mark, the peece being mouuted

(as before is ſaid) then take a plummet of leade vpon a ſmall line or ſtring, and lette that be holden vp at the breech, at the very end of the peece, euen at the very middle of the tayle of the peece, then ſtand directly behind the peece, and wind the peece, till you doe ſee the midle of the mouth of the peece, and the marke, all three vpon one right line, by the ſight of your eye, winking with one of your eyes, and there is no doubt, but your peece doth lye right vpon your marke, and ſo forth. And nowe in like manner, if you doe mak a ſhotte towards a valley, and the marke more then the peece will reach vppon the righte line, then knowing the diſtance vnto the marke mounte the peece, till it be able to reach the marke, then turne your Quadrant, that the ſight go downewards, the plummet hanging at libertie, then you may ſee how many degrees the ground is lower, then the ground that the peece doth lye vpon, and rebate ſo many degrees as that number commeth vnto, and laying the peece right vpon the marke, there is no doubt but you ſhall make a perfite ſhotte, as by an example with that peece and at that diſtance before rehearſed, to a marke in a valley, the ground being lower at the marke you ſhoote at by three degrees, then that ground that the peece doth lye vpon: now you muſt mount the peece foure degrees to reach the marke, and then you muſt rebate three of thoſe degrees for the lowneſſe of the marke, and then you may conclude, that the peece being mounted but one degree, it doth ſhoote that diſtance that it did at nine degrees. And the reaſon thereof is moſt manifeſt, for that the one is vp the hill, and the other downe the hill. And furthermore, with that peece, and at that diſtance before ſpoken of, and alſo at that number of degrees downe the hill that the other was vp the hil, that was at fiue degrees, & now foure degrees will reach the marke vpon a plaine leuell ground, but for

that it is downe the hill, you muſt rebate fiue degrees. Wherefore you may conclude, that the peece muſt bee leuelled with the Quadrant, one degree vnder the poynt blaucke, that is to ſaye, lower then the Horizon by one degree, for that the deepeneſſe of the valley is the cauſe thereof. Wherefore in mine opinion, it is better for Gunners to vſe to giue leuell with an ynch rule, as I do afore declare in the eight Chapter, for I doe know, that this is the cauſe that hath deceiued a greate number that are meanly ſeene in thoſe matters, and for lacke of conſidering of thoſe cauſes that may happen or chaunce, hath diſcouraged many that would haue been wel ſeene in thoſe matters.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 14.
               
                  
                     Howe to make a perfite ſhotte vpon the lande, at the brode ſide of a Shippe that is vnder ſayle, and going.
               
               
                  FUrthermore, for the making of a perfite ſhotte vpon the lande, at a ſhippe that is vnder ſayle in a Riuer, the chiefeſt matter is, to haue good Pouder, that the peece may goe off ſo ſoone as ſhee hath fire giuen vnto her: and to ſhoote at her brode ſide, doe this: Firſt before ſhe commeth to you, view at what proportion ſhe commeth, that is to ſay, whether that ſhe commeth in the middle, or vnto any of the ſides, or vnto any other proportion, then your peeces beeing truely diſparted, lay your peece againſt ſome marke vpon the further ſide of the Riuer, that being done, then koyne vp the tayle of the peece, till the top of the diſpart ſtandeth with that proportion which the ſhip commeth vpon: that

being done, then it is good for you to haue another imagined marke, ſomewhat neerer the Shippe, beſides that marke which the peece lyeth vpon, like a twentie foote, according vnto the way of the Shippe, for if that the Shippe haue freſh way, then giue fire vnto the peece or peeres, twentie or thirtie foote, before that the Shippe commeth vnto your thwart marke that the peece lyeth right againſt, and this being diſcretely done, there is no doubt but you ſhall make a perfect ſhot. And furthermore, if it be vppon the Sea coaſt, where there is no land ſeene vpon the further ſide, then take a thwart marke by ſome Cloude that is alow neere the Horizon. And furthermore, if that any ſhippe doe go directly from you wards, or elſe come directly to youwards, then it is a ſmall matter to make a perfect ſhatte, that is to ſay, if that her head or ſterne be towards your Ordnaunce. &c.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 15.
               
                  
                     Howe to make a ſhotte out of one Ship vnto another, that although the Sea be wrought, or out of a Galley to a Shippe.
               
               
                  AS for Gunners that do ſerue by the Sea, muſt obſerue this order following. Firſt that they doe foreſee that all their great Ordnaunce be faſt breeched, and foreſee that all ther geare be handſome and in a readineſſe. And furthermore that they bee very circumſpect about their Pouder in the time of ſeruice, and eſpecially beware of their limſtockes & candels for feare of their Pouder, & their fireworks, & their Ourum, which is very daungerous, and much to bee feared. Then furthermore, that you do keepe your peeces as neer as you can, dry within, and alſo, that you keep their tutchholes

cleane, without any kinde of droſſe falling into thē. And furthermore, it is good for the Gūners to view their peeces, and for to know their perfect diſpart, and marke it vpon the peece, or elſe in ſome Booke or Table, and name euery peece what it is, and where ſhe doth lye in the ſhip, and name how many ynches, and half ynches and quarters of ynches the diſpart commeth vnto, and then in time of ſeruice, although that you haue no time to ſet vppe your diſparte you may conſider of it, and doe it well ynough. And furthermore, if that you were driuen to make a ſhot vpon a ſoddayne, and knowe not what diſparte woulde ſerue the peece, yet this you may doe, and ſpeede well ynough: firſt looke all alongſt by the ſide of the peece as neere as you may at the middle of the breech of the peece, vnto the middle of the mouth of the peece, and ſo by the ſight of your eye, lay it right againſt the marke, and then koyne vp the tayle of your peece faſt, for that giueth the peece the true height of the marke: then take the nexte ſight aloft vpon the peece, from the breech of the peece, vnto the mouth, and ſo laye the peece right vppon the marke. But you would iudge by the ſight of your eye, that the peece lye a great deale, vnder the marke: for that the mettall of the peece is a greate deale thicker then the mettall of the mouth of the peece, and therefore the ſight of the ſide of the peece, giueth her the true height of the marke, and then laying the peece right with the Ship that you doe meane to ſhoote at, looking well to youre Steeradge. Nowe furthermore, if the Sea be wrought or growen, & the Shippes do both heaue and ſet, then if you would make a perfect ſhot, do this: Firſt chooſe your peece between the Lauflau, and the mayne Maſt, vpon the lower Orloppe, if the Shippe may keepe the porte open, and for this cauſe you ſhal do it, for that the ſhip doth leaſt labour there: for any Shippe that doth heaue, and ſet neuer

ſo ſore, doth hang as though ſhe were vppon an Ariltree, there labouring leaſt, except ſhe doth ſeel or roule. But if any Ship hang any thing by the wind, it will not lightly ſeel or roule. Then if you doe make a ſhotte at another Shippe, you muſt bee ſure to haue a good helme-man, that can ſtirre ſteadie, taking ſome marke of a Cloude that is aboue by the Horizon or by the ſhadowe of the Sunne, or by your ſtanding ſtill, take ſome marke of the other ſhippe through ſome hole, or any ſuch other like. Then he that giueth leuell, muſt obſerue this: firſt conſider what diſparte his peece muſt haue, then laye the peece directly with that parte of the Shippe that he doth meane to ſhoote at: then if the Shippe bee vnder the lee ſide of your Shippe, ſhoote your peece in the comming downe of the Gayle, and the beginning of the other Ship to riſe vpon the Sea, as neere as you can, for this cauſe, for when the other ſhippe is aloft vpon the Sea, and ſhee vnder your Lee, the Gayle maketh her for to head, and then it is likeſt to doe much good.
               Now furthermore, if that the Shippe you doe ſhoote at haue the weather gage of you, then your peece that you doe ſhoote at her, muſt needes bee on the weather ſide of the Shippe: then giue fire vnto the peece in the righting of both the Shipps. When that the Gayle is ouer, you muſt awaite when the other Shippe doth beginne for to ariſe vpon the Sea, and eſpecially that part of the Ship that you doe meane for to ſhoote at, for this cauſe, for when that the Gayle is ouer, then both the Shippes doe righte, for if that you ſhould ſhoote in the helding of your Shippe, then you ſhoulde ſhoote ouer the other Shippe. And furthermore, if you ſhoote when the other Shippe is alofte on the toppe of the Sea, you haue a bigger marke than when ſhe is in the trough of the Sea. Therefore there is no better time for to giue

fire, then when ſhee is beginning to riſe vpon the Sea, that is, when you ſee her in the trough of the Sea: and you muſt vſe that according vnto the diſtance betweene two Shippes, for you muſt conſider, that the ſhotte muſt haue a time for to come to the ſhippe, for no man can deſcribe the thing ſo well, as hee that doth ſee the thing apparante before his eyes, for his reaſon in thoſe cauſes muſt helpe him, and the principalleſt thing is that, that hee that is at the Helme muſt bee ſure to ſtirre ſteadye, and bee ruled by him that giueth the leuell, and hee that giueth fire, muſt bee nimble, and readye at a ſuddayne. And alſo hee that is at the Helme, muſt bee nimble and ſteady, that is, to putte roomer, when that the other Shippe dothe putte roome, and for to loofe, when that the other Shippe doeth plye his loofe. And it is good for the Gunner to koyne the mouth of his peece, ſomewhat with the loweſt, rather then any thing with the hygheſt, for if that the ſhotte flyeth ouer the Shippe, then it dothe no good, but if that it commeth ſhorte of the Shipoe, it will graze in the water and riſe agayne, and ſpeede well ynough, ſo that it bee not too muche too ſhorte of the Shippe, for too muche too ſhorte dothe kill the ſhotte in the Sea and eſpeciallye if that the diſtance bee anye thing farre off. And furthermore, for the Sea fight, if the one doe meane to lay the other aboorde, then they doe call vp their company, eyther for to enter or to defend: and firſt, if that they doe meane for to enter (as you may knowe) that hee will preaſe to laye you aboorde, then marke where that you doe ſee anye Scottles for to come vppe at, as they will ſtande neere there aboutes, to the intente for to bee readie, for to come vppe vnder the Scottles: there giue leuell with your Fowlers, or Slinges, or Baſes, for there you ſhall bee ſure to doe

moſt good, then furthermore, if you doe meane for to enter him, then giue leuel with your Fowlers and Portpeeces, where you doe ſee his chiefeſt fight of his ſhippe is, and eſpecially be ſure to haue them charged, and to ſhoote, them off at the firſt boording of the Shippes, for then you ſhall be ſure to ſpeede. And furthermore, marke where his men haue moſt recourſe, there diſcharge your Fowlers and Baſes. And furthermore, for the annoyance of your enemie, if that at the boording that the Sippes lye, therefore you may take away their ſteeradge with one of your great peeces that is to ſhoote at his Rother, and furthermore at his mayne maſt, and ſo foorth. Thus muche haue I ſaid as touching Sea Gunners, for that I doe know they do meddle with no other fightes, and therefore it is meete for him to ſeeke as much as in him lyeth, for to annoy the enemie with fireworkes and Ordnaunce &c. And furthermore, if the Shippe doth ſeell or rowle, then the beſt place of the ſhip for to make a ſhotte, is out of the head or ſterne. And furthermore, for to make a ſhot out of a Galley, and eſpecially the Cannon that lyeth in the Caſe, or Prow, he that giueth fire, muſt be ruled by him that is at the helme, becauſe he can neyther koyne her vp nor downe, for that ſhe lyeth in the caſe, for he that ſtirreth, muſt giue leuell. And furthermore, the Cannon that lyeth in the caſe, can not lightly ſhoote a ſhippe vnder water, neither betweene the wind and the water, where that it is not on the Sea, and eſpecially if the Ship be at hand, for that ſhe lyeth leuell, for looke how high, that the peece is aboue the Sea, ſo high ſhall the ſhotte hitte any thing aboue the water, as farre as the peece can caſt vppon the right line. And for to make a ſhotte out of a Galley vnto a Shippe, for to ſtrike him vnder the water, or betweene the wind and the water. Firſt waight the Sippe lying in the trough of the Sea, when ſhe doth begin to riſe vppon

the Sea, and then in lyke manner, when you do ſee that the Galleys head doth beginne to deſcende, then giue fire vnto the peece, and you ſhall make a perfite ſhotte. Furthermore, if the Galley be in fight with another Shyppe in a calme, then the Shyppe will ſkant waue or ſtirre, and then the Galley may play off and on at hir pleaſure: and then to make a ſhotte at hande, is ſome matter, for in a calme, the Shyppes doe neither ryſe nor fall, but a little, in compariſon of any thing to the purpoſe: neyther dothe the Galleys head either heaue nor ſet to any purpoſe, if the Shippe be at hand, to the intent or purpoſe to ſhoote a Shippe vnder the watter. Therefore when you meane to ſtrike a Shippe vnder the water with a Galley, and dare not lay them aboorde, then koyle your Cabels forwards, with the trimming forwarde of your waightie geare into the Galleys head, ſo lowe, till it ſhall ſerue your turne, by bringing alſo your men forwardes: then by ye Steeradge with your Ores, or with your Helme, you may ſhoote againſt what part of the Shippe you will, and ſo ſhoote hir vnder water at your pleaſure.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 16.
               
                  In what order to place Ordnaunce in Shippes.
                  
               
               
                  ANd furthermore, I do think it conueniente to ſhew you how to fit or place Ordnaunce in any Shippe: & this is to be conſidered, firſt that ye cariag be made in ſuch ſhot, that ye peece may lie right in the middle of the port, & that the trockes or wheeles be not too hygh, for if ye treckes be too high, then it will keepe the cariage that it will not goe cloſe vnto the Shippes ſide, and by that meanes the

peece will not ſcant go out of the porte, excepte that the peece be of ſome reaſonable length: and alſo, if that the Shyppe doe holde that waye, the Trockes will alwayes rūne cloſe to the Shyppes ſide, ſo that if you haue any occaſion to make a ſhotte, you ſhall not bring the Trockes off from the Shyppes ſide, but that it will rūne too again. And the wheele or Trocke beyng very hygh, it is not a ſmall thinge vnder a Trocke wyll ſtay it but that it may runne ouer it, &c.
               And alſo, if that the Trocke be hygh, it wyll cauſe the peece to haue the greater reuerſe or recoyle, therefore, the lower that the wheeles or Trockes be, it is the better and ſo forth.
               Alwayes prouided, that the peece bee placed in the verye middle of the porte, that is to ſaye, that the peece lying leuell at poynte blancke, and the Shyppe, to bee vprighte, wythout anye helding, that it be as many inches from the lower ſyde of the porte beneath, as it is vnto the vpper part aboue iuſtely. And the deeper or hygher that ye portes bee vp and downe, it is the better to make a ſhot, for the heldyng of the Shyppe, whether that it bee the lec ſyde, or the weather ſyde of the Shyppe, for if you haue anye occaſyon to ſhoote eyther for wardes or backwards, the ſteeradge of the Shyppe wyll ſerue the turne, but if that the Shyppe dothe heelde muche, then if that the peece bee lette by the lower parte of the porte, then you muſte needes ſhoote ouer the marke, and if it bee lette by the vpper ſyde of the porte, then you ſhall ſhoote ſhorte of the marke. &c. Wherefore, when that the Carpenters dothe cutte out anye portes in a Shippe, then lette them cutte them out deepe ynough vppe and downe. &c.
               And alſo, it is verye euyll, for to haue the Orloppe

or Decke too lowe vnder the porte, for then the carriage muſte bee made verye hygh, and that is verye euill in dyuers reſpectes, for then in the ſhootyng off the peece, it is apte to ouerthrowe, and alſo by the labouring and the ſeelyng of the Shyppe, and ſo foorth.
               And furthermore, you muſte haue a conſyderation for the fytting of youre Ordnaunce in the Shippes, as thys, the ſhorter Ordnaunce is beſte to bee placed out at the Shippes ſyde, for two or three cauſes, as this.
               Fyrſte, for the eaſe of the Shyppe, for theyr ſhorteneſſe they are the lyghter: and alſo, if that the Shyppes ſhoulde heelde wyth the bearyng of a Sayle, that you muſte ſhutte the portes, eſpecially if that the Ordnaunce bee vppon the lower Orloppe, and then the ſhorter peece is the eaſyer to bee taken in, both for the ſhorteneſſe and the weyght alſo.
               In lyke manner, the ſhorter that the peece lyeth oute of the ſhyppes ſyde, the leſſe it ſhall annoy them in the tacklyng of the Shyppes Sayles, for if that the peece doe lye verye farre oute of the Shyppes ſyde, then the Sheetes and Tackes, or the Bolynes wyll alwayes bee foule of the Ordnaunce, whereby it maye muche annoy them in foule weather, and ſo foorth.
               And it is verye good for you to haue long Ordnaūce to bee placed righte oute of the Sterne of the Shyppe for two cauſes: the one is this.
               The peece muſte lye verye farre oute of the porte, or elſe in the ſhooting, it may blowe vp the Counter of the Shyppes ſterne.
               And alſo, the peece had neede be very large, for elſe it

will not go very farre out, for the worke of a ſhips ſterne hangeth very farre outwards from the decke or Orloppe vp to the port, ſo that the carriage may be cloſe belowe, but not aloft, &c. And alſo if you haue any chaſing peeces to ſhoote right forwardes, then they muſt bee long Oronaunce in like manner, ſo that you muſt fitte your Ordnaunce, according vnto the place that it muſt lye in, and alſo (as is before rehearſed) that it is not good for to haue the mountance or carredge to high. Therefore, if that the Orloppe or decke bee too lowe vnder the porte, then it is good for you to make a platforme vnder the port, that the trockes of the carredge may ſtand vpon. And alſo, when you doe take the meaſure of the porte, from the decke or Orloppe, to the end to fitte the mountance or carredge in height, that the peece may lye right in the middle of the porte, then you viewing the decke or Orlop, and conſidering what height you will haue the wheele or Trocke, and alſo marke whether or how that the Ships ſide doth hang inwards, or outwards, and alſo the Cambring of the decke or Orloppe, and then you perceiuing where the formoſt trockes doth or muſt ſtande, when that the carredge doth go cloſe to the porte. Then where as the very middle of the foremoſt trockes dothe ſtande, there take the true meaſure in heygth from the Decke or Orloppe, vpwards, and ſo ſhall you knowe iuſtly howe many ynches will laye the peece righte in the very middle of the porte: for if you doe take the meaſure of the heygth of the porte from the porte downe vnto the Decke or Orloppe, then by the meanes of the Cambering, the Decke or Orloppe, and alſo the wheeles or Trockes doth not come to ſtand right vnder the porte, ſo by that meanes the Decke or Orlop is higher inwards, and that ſhal cauſe you to make the mountance or carriage too high, for that the wheeles or Trockes that the carriage lyeth vpon, ſhall be a foote

more or leſſe into the Shipwards, and then looke into the Cambering of the Decke or Orloppe, that it riſeth inwardes more, than it is righte vnder the Porte, you ſhall take the meaſure ſo much too high for the peece to lay her right in the middle of the Porte &c.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 17.
               
                  
                     How to ſhoot at a moueable mark vpon the lande, and alſo what kind of ſhotte is the beſt to be vſed, according vnto the cauſe &c.
               
               
                  ANd furthermore, to ſhoote at any moueable marke vpō the land, either at Horſemen, or at footmen, when you do ſee thē comming, then place your Ordnance vpon ſome marke in their way, as right vpon ſome buſh, or any other marke that is in the high way, that they muſt come by, or moſt ſpecially at ſome place where there is a turning, for in a turning, there they doe tarrie longeſt before they be altered frō the marke, and then it is beſt ſhooting off your Ordnaunce to do any ſpoyle: and alſo vpon the land, you may try what any peece will do at any marke, as touching the keeping of the length of the marke, &c. And furthermore, as touching this, to knowe what kind of ſhotte is moſt meeteſt to bee vſed to doe ſeruice in a field, or otherwiſe, with their great Ordnaunce, as Cannons, or Culuerings, at a great diſtance, to ſhoote the whole yron ſhot as you doe at battery, & as they doe aproch neere, then to ſhoote Faucon ſhotte, and as they doe come neerer, Faconerſhotte, or ſmal baſe ſhotte, and at hand all manner of ſpoyling ſhot, as chayne ſhotte, or cliue ſhot, and diſcſhot, and ſuch other like. &c.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. 18.
               
                  
                     How you ſhal knowe if any peece of Ordnaunce bee ſufficiently mettalled, and alſo the cauſe that the Cannons doe not occupie the weight in Pouder that the ſhotte vveieth.
               
               
                  FOr to knowe whether that any peece of Ordnaunce bee ſufficiently metalled to beare her charge with Pouder, then this is generall, that in the chamber before the tutchhole, ſo farre as the Pouder doth reach to ye mouthwards, that the mettall be in thickneſſe as high as the ſhot round about the ſides of the peece, and ſomewhat thicker, and if that the mettal be not in thickneſſe as much as the height of the ſhotte, then ſhe is too ſlenderly mettalled, &c.
               And furthermore, the cauſe why the Cannons and other great Ordnaunce doth not ſhoote ſo much Pouder in weight as the ſhotte weieth, although that the rule and order of the founders of Ordnaunce, is to caſt the thicknes of the mettall as much as the ſhotte is in height of al ſorts of peeces, as wel in Cannons, as in al other ſortes of peeces, and yet the Cannon maye not haue the weight in Pouder that the ſhotte weyeth, as all ſmall Ordnaunce hath.
               And furthermore, the cauſe thereof groweth by this meanes, for in the doubling the thickneſſe of the mettall of the peece, it doth but increaſe as a platforme, or ſuperficiall, that is, for double meaſure, to be foure times the quantitie. And as for the ſhotte in the doubling of the meaſure, it is eight times the quantitie, and ſo it is in all

bodies as Cubes, or Globes, and ſuch other like, as I do more at large declare in the third part of my booke, called A treaſure for Trauellers. And yet you ſhall haue this example here by a ſhotte of three ynches high, and that ſhot wayeth three pound three quarters, the peece being a Minion, and the metall is three ynches thick. And now I haue another peece that the ſhotte is double the height, that is, ſixe ynches high, and the ſhotte will wey thirtye pounde, and now the mettall being double, is but ſixe ynches thicke, and the bigger ſhotte is eyght times the bigneſſe of the leſſer, and the meaſure but double, yet notwithſtanding, the diuerſitie is not ſo much as it ſeemeth: for if that both the peeces were caſt of one length, and double in meaſure, in compaſſe in all places, then the bigger peece ſhould wey foure times the weight of the leſſer. And this is the cauſe, that the Cannons muſt not haue the weight in pouder that the ſhotte wayeth, for the weight of the peece, and the weight of the ſhotte, muſt rule the matter, as I doe plainely ſhe we in the third Chapter of this booke going before.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. 19.
               
                  
                     In what order you ſhall giue leuell with your Ordnaunce at a batterie, to beate downe the walles of any place, and alſo what to obſerue, in the giuing fire vnto them.
               
               
                  AS I doe think, it is not vnmeet to ſhew by what order you ſhall giue your leuel, and ſhoote off your Ordnaunce at a Bat terie, that is to ſaie, to beate downe, or ſhake downe the walles of any Towne or fortreſſe: & for ye beating them down in the giuing of your leuell, and ſhooting them off, do this: after that you haue plāted your Ordnaunce, eyther in two places or in three places, as the place doth require, but in my opiniō, two places is ſufficiēt vnto one place, to beat it downe, to the intent to make a breach, and if it be vnto a Collion point, then it is beſt to place your battrey but into two partes, and otherwiſe as the place doth require, & then in giuing of leuel, do this. Firſt, wheras you do mean to beginne to make the breach, and being but at one place of your Ordnaunce, giue leuell with one peece belowe, at the bottome of the wall, and with the next peece a foote higher right ouer that, and with the third, right a fote ouer that, and ſo foorth vnto euery peece at that part of ye battery, ſauing you neede not giue the leuell vnto no peece, more than three quarters the heygth of the wall, and then in like maner, giue your leuell with your peeces at the other parte of youre battrie, vnto that place that the other part was layd right againſt, within a fadome or more, at youre diſcretion, as the place requireth, ſo that the one

place may flancke or beate againſt the other, croſſing in the middle of the wall, and when you doe meane to ſhoote them off, then giue fire vnto them all at once at both the places, that they may all beate and ſhake the wall at one time together, and then it will beate it downe or ſhake it downe the faſter, and the bottome being beaten away, the toppe will fall away of it ſelfe, and ſo when that you haue broken the wall, and ſtil do make it wider, then giue leuel at your diſcretion vpon the wall, obſeruing the order before rehearſed, both in the leuelling, and of the giuing of fire vnto the peeces, &c.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 20
               
                  
                     The weight of all manner of caſt peeces of Ordnaunce, from the Cannon, vnto the Fauconte, and alſo the weight of the ſhotte, and the weight of the Pouder that they doe occupie, with the height of the ſhot, and length of the peece and all ſuch other like cauſes, according vnto the names of the peeces, &c.
               
               
                  ANd furthermore, I do thinke it conuentient, to ſhew vnto thee the weight of the ſhot, and the weight of the Pouder that they doe wey, and the length and breadth of the Ladell, and the weight and length of ye peeces, according vnto their names. And firſt, for the Cānons, & there be of ſundrie ſortes. The eldeſt & biggeſt ſorte of the double Cannons, the mouth of them is in height. 8. ynches and a quarter. The ſhot is in height 8. ynches, and wayeth about 70. pound of yron, and the weight of the peece is about 8000. & in length, about 12. foote more or leſſe, and comporteth in Pouder. 46. pound Serpētine. The length of the Ladel is 24. ynches,

the breadth of the Ladell is. 15. ynches ½ &c.
               The ordinarie double Cannons, the peece is. 8. ynches high in the mouth, the ſhotte is in heigth. 7. ynches three quarters, it wayeth of yron about. 64. pounde, and the weight of the peece is about. 7500. and in length neere about eleuen or twelue foote long, and occupieth in Pouder. 42. pounde Serpentine, the length of the Ladell is 23. ynches a quarter, the breadth thereof fifteene ynches ¼ and the compaſſe of the ſhotte is foure and twentie ynches.
               The French double Canons, the peece is in the mouth ſeauen ynches three quarters, in heigth the ſhotte ſeauen ynches ½ high, and weyeth being of yron about. 58. pound, and the peece weyeth about ſeauen thouſande, and is in length as the other before rehearſed, comporteth in Pouder neere fortie pounde Serpentine: the length of their Ladels is but fifteene ynches, for that they doe lade their peeces with three Ladelfulles, and we heere in England but with two, and the bredth of the plate of their Ladell is fifteene ynches, &c.
               
                  Demy Cannons.
                  ANd firſt the Demy Cannons of the eldeſt ſorte, the peece is ſixe ynches three quarters in heigth, in the mouth, the ſhotte ſixe ynches and a halfe in heigth: the ſhotte of yron wayeth eyght and thirtie pound, and the weight of the peece is neere ſixe thouſande, and in length eleuen or twelue foote long, and occupyeth in Pouder ſixe and twentie pounde Serpentine, the length of the Ladell three and twentie ynches, the breadth of the plate of the Ladell twelue ynches ⅕ partes, and the compaſſe of the ſhotte is twentie ynches 3/7 partes.
                  
                     
The ordinary Demy Cannon, the heigth of the mouth is ſixe ynches and a halfe, the heigth of the ſhotte ſixe ynches a quarter, the weight of the ſhotte in yron thirtie three pounde, and the weight of the peece is about 5500. and the peece is in length tenne or eleuen foote, and her charge in Pouder is foure and twentie pounde Serpentine, the length of the Ladell is two and twentie ynches, and the breadth of the plate of the Ladell is twelue ynches.
                  Some ſortes of Demy Cannons, the heigth of the mouth of the peece but ſixe ynches, a quarter, the heigth of the ſhott ſixe ynches, the weight of the ſhotte of yron thirtie pound, and the weight of the peece fiue thouſand, or. 5400. the length as afore, her charge in Pouder foure and twentie pounde Sarpentine, the length of the Ladell three and twentie ynches, the breadth eleuen inches and a halfe.
                  The French Demy Cannon, and of ſome other foraine Nations, the height of the mouth of the peece but 6. ynches, the height of the ſhotte fiue ynches three quarters, the weyght of the yron ſhotte ſixe and twentie pound d. and the weight of the peeces fiue thouſande more or leſſe, their lengthes of the ordinarie ſort, and ſhooteth in Pouder two and twentie, or three & twenty pound Sarpentine, the length of the Ladell ſixteene ynches, and three Ladell fulles to charge the peece: the breadth of the Ladell eleuen ynches.
               
               
                  Culuerings.
                  THe elder ſorte of whole Culuerings, called of ſome Norborow Culuerings, the heigth of the mouth of the peece fiue ynches and a halfe, the heigth of the

ſhot. 5. ynches a quarter. The weyght of the ſhotte in yrō 20. pound. The weyghte of the peece. 4800. more or leſſe, their lengthes deuided, as. 12. or. 13. foote long, and ſhooteth in Pouder. 20. pound Serpentine, the length of the Ladell. 23. ynches, the breadth of the Ladell neere tenne ynches. &c.
                  The ordinarie whole Culuering, the heygth of the mouth of the peece. 5. ynches a quarter, the heygth of the ſhotte, 5. ynches. The weyghte of the ſhotte of yron. 17. pounde. The weyghte of the peece aboute. 4500. more or leſſe, the length of the peece. 12. foote, and comporteth in Pouder. 18. pounde Serpentine, the length of the Ladell 25. ynches, the breadth. 9. ynches. d. &c.
                  Culuerings, not ſo high as ordinarie, the heygth of the mouth of the peece. 5. ynches, the heygth of the ſhott foure ynches three quarters, the weyghte of the ſhot. 15. pounde, the weyght of the peece more or leſſe. 4300. the length of the peeces diuers, ſome the ordinarie length, ſome otherwiſe, and occupyeth in Pouder. 16. pound, or theraboutes Serpētine, the lēgth of the Ladel. 24. ynches, the breadth 9. ynches.
               
               
                  Demy Culuerings.
                  THe elder ſort of Demy Culuerings, the heigth of the mouth of the peece. 4. ynches three quarters, ye heigth of the ſhot. 4. ynches ½, the weyghte of the ſhotte. 12. lb. d. of yron, the weyght of the peece. 3200. the length of the peece. 12. foote more or leſſe, and their charge in Pouder 12. poūd Serpentine, the length of the Ladell, 22. ynches, their breadth. 8. ynches. d. &c.
                  The ordinarie Demy Culuering, the heygth of the mouth of the peece. 4. ynches d. the heygth of the ſhotte 4. ynches a quarter, the weyght of yron ſhotte. 10. pound, three quarters, the weighte of the peece. 27. hundred or

thereaboutes, the length of the peece. 10. foote more or leſſe, and will comport in Pouder. 11. or. 12. pounde Serpentine, the length of the Ladell. 21. ynches a quarter, the breadth. 8. ynches.
                  Demy Culuerings lower than ordinarie, the heyght of the mouth of the peece. 4. ynches a quarter, the heyghte of the ſhott. 4. ynches, the weyght of the ſhotte being of yron is neere. 9. pounde, the weyght of the peeces. 22. hundreth more or leſſe, the length of the peece. 9. or. 10. foote more or leſſe, and their charge in Pouder. 10. pound or. 10. poūd d. Serpentine, the length of the Ladell. 20. ynches, the breadth. 7. ynches, three quarters. &c.
               
               
                  Sakers.
                  SAkers of the oldeſt ſorte, the heygth of the mouth of the peece. 4. ynches, the heygth of the ſhot. 3. ynches three quarters, the weyght of the yron ſhotte. 7. pounde a quarter, the weyght of the peece. 1800. the length of ſome of thoſe peeces. 10. foot, and comporteth in Pouder. 7. pound a quarter Serpentine, the lēgth of the Ladell. 17. ynches, the breadth. 7. ynches a quarter.
                  Sakers ordinarie, the heyght of the mouth. 3. ynches three quarters, the heygth of the ſhotte. 3. ynches a halfe, the weyghte of the ſhotte of yron is neere. 6. pounde, the weyght of the peece. 1500. the length of the peece. 8. foote or. 9. foote, and hir charge in Pouder is. 6. pound, or thereaboute of Serpētine Pouder, the lēgth of the Ladel is. 15 inches thre quarters, ye breadth. 6. inches. 3. quarters. &c.
                  Sakers lower than ordinarie, the heigth of the mouth of the peece. 3. ynches a halfe, the heygth of the ſhotte 3. ynches a quarter, the weyghte of the ſhotte of yron. 4. pounde three quarters, or neere. 5. pound, the weyghte of the peece. 1300-or. 1400. the length of the peece, 8, foote, or there aboutes, and comporteth in Pouder. 5. pounde, or

5. pounded. Serpentine, the length of the Ladell is fifteene ynches, the breadth ſixe ynches and a halfe.
               
               
                  Minyons.
                  THe Minyon is. 3. ynches and a quarter high, in the mouth, the ſhotte is three ynches hygh, the weyghte thereof of yron, is three pound three quarters, the weighte of the peece, neere aboute. 1000. The length of the peece eyght foote or theraboutes, and ſhooteth in Pouder three pounde three quarters, or neere foure pound Serpentine, the length of the Ladell thirteene ynches d. the breadth 5. ynches and a halfe, ſome foraine peeces lower. The ordinarie Minyon, the mouth three ynches high, the ſhotte but two ynches three quarters, and weyeth of yron neere three pound, the weyght of the peece about nine hundred, the length of the ordinarie Minion, & ſhooteth in Pouder three pounde or thereaboute, the length of the Ladell. 13. ynches, the breadth. 5. ynches. &c.
               
               
                  Faucons.
                  THe Faucon, the heygth of the mouth of the peece. 2. ynches three quarters, the heygth of the ſhott. 2. and a halfe, the weyght of the yron ſhotte. 2. and half a quarter of a pound, the weyght of the peece ſeauen hundred, or ſeauen hundred and fiftie pound, the length of the peece ſeauen foote more or leſſe, and occupieth in Pouder two pound and a halfe, and the length of the Ladell is twelue ynches and a halfe, the breadth of the plate of the Ladell is. 4. ynches and a quarter. &c.
                  Some foraine Ordnaunces not ſo high as the Faucō, and the mouth of the peece. 2. ynches and a halfe high, the ſhotte. 2. ynches and a quarter high, and weyeth neere one pound three quarters, and the weyght of thoſe peeces ſixe hundred, or ſixe hundred and fiftie pounde, the length is

as the Faucon, and the charge is in Pouder neere two pounde, the Ladell is eleuen ynches and a quarter, the breadth foure ynches.
                  A Fauconet, the peece is. 2. ynches and a quarter high, in the mouth, the ſhotte two ynches high, and the yron ſhot weyeth one pounde, and neere halfe a quarter of a pound, and the weight of the peece is aboute. 360. or. 400 and the length fiue or ſixe foote, and the charge is of Serpentine Pouder, one pounde and a quarter, the Ladel is tenne ynches long, and the breadth of the plate of the Ladell. 3. ynches three quarters. And thus much I haue ſaid as touching all manner of peeces that ſhoote yron ſhotte, thinking this ſufficient for inſtructions. &c.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER. 21.
               
                  
                     How many ſhottes of Pouder ther is in a laſt of Pouder, from the cannon, vnto the Fauconet: and alſo, if that you are at any batterie, or in any Towne, Caſtell, or Shippe, how to know how much Pouder will ſhoote all youre Ordnannce, &c.
               
               
                  ANd alſo, I doe think it neceſſary for all ſorts of Gunners, to know how manye ſhottes of pouder they may haue eyther in a laſt of Pouder, as alſo in a hundred pounde, of Pouder according vnto the peeces, whereby they maye readily know, if that they haue any charge of Ordnaunce in any Towne, Caſtel, Forte, or Shippes, that they maye know whether that they haue Pouder to lade al their Ordnaunce throughout, & alſo how oftentimes about yt they may ſhoote al their Ordnaunce wt ſo much Pouder. And al ſo it is very neceſſary, if yt there be any Ordnaūce placed againſt any towne or fort, & if yt they haue anynūber of gret

Ordnaunce, as Cannons ſuch a number, and Demy Cannons ſuch a number, to the intente to batter downe the walles thereof: and then it is very neceſſary to know how much Pouder will ſhoote all thoſe Ordnaunce off at one time, and ſo forth, if that they would continue the batterie, to ſhoote. 40. or 50. times ouer all their Ordnaunce in one day, and ſo to know how many laſt of Pouder that the batterie will require to continue ſuche a number of dayes: wherefore I doe thinke it conuenient to ſhew vnto you what a laſt of Pouder is, and that is this. A laſt of Pouder is 24 hundred weight, caſke and all, and euerye hundred weight to contayne. 112. pound, ſo that you may make your accompte, that you haue 24. hundred pounde of Pouder in euery laſt, and ſo is allowed 12 pound in euery 100. weight, for the caſke, which is in al allowed for the caſke of a laſt of Powder, 288. pound. &c.
               And firſt this: the biggeſt ſortes of double Cannons doe occupie at one ſhotte. 46. pound of Sarpentine Pouder, and you haue. 2. charges in. 100 of pouder, and eight pounde remayneth ouer, ſo that you haue 52. ſhottes of Pouder, in a laſt of pouder, and 8. pound remayneth ouer. And if that it be ſuch a double Cannon, as doth occupie but 40. pound of Serpentine Pouder, then you haue 2 ſhots and a halfe of Pouder in euery. 100. weight of Pouder, that is iuſt. 60. ſhottes in a laſt of Pouder. &c.
               And alſo, thoſe Demy Cannons that doe ſhoote. 24. pound of Serpentine Pouder at one ſhot, they ſhall haue foure ſhottes in a hundred weight of Pouder, and foure pound remayneth ouer, and that is a hundred ſhottes, in a laſt of pouder iuſt &c.
               And alſo thoſe Culuerings that doe ſhoote eyghtteene pound of Sarpentine Pouder at one ſhotte, then there is fiue ſhootes in a hundred weighte of Pouder, and then there remayneth ouer tenne pound, ſo that there is a hundred

thirty three ſhottes in a Laſt of Pouder, & ſixe pound remaineth ouer. And furthermore, thoſe Demy Culurings that doe ſhoote eleuen pound of Serpintine Pouder at one ſhotte, then there is nine ſhottes in a hundred weight of Pouder, and one pound remaineth ouer, ſo that there is two hundred and eighteene ſhottes in a laſt of Pouder. &c. And alſo for thoſe Sakers that doe ſhoote ſixe pounde and a halfe of Serpentine Pouder at a ſhotte, then there is fifteen ſhottes in a hundred weight, & two or three poūd remaineth, ſo that there is. 369 ſhottes in a laſt of pouder. And furthermore, for Minions that ſhoote foure pound of Pouder at one ſhotte, then there is. 25. ſhottes in a hundred weyght, ſo that there is ſixe hundred ſhottes in a laſt of Pouder. And alſo thoſe Faucons that doe ſhoote two pound and a half of Pouder at a ſhotte, then there is forty ſhottes in a hundred weight, ſo that there is, 960. ſhottes in a Laſt of Pouder. And in like manner thoſe Fauconets that doe ſhoote one pound and a quarter of Pouder at a ſhot, then there is. 80. ſhottes in a hundred weight, ſo that there is. 192. ſhottes in a laſt of Pouder. And thus much I haue ſaide, as touching how many ſhottes of Pouder, according vnto ye peeces, yt there either is in a hūdred weight of Pouder, or in a whole laſt of Pouder. And furthermore, if you deſire to knowe how much Pouder would ſhoote off all the Ordnaunce, either in a Towne, Forte, or Shippe, then looke how many peeces there is of euery ſorte, and ſo vntil that you do know how many peeces there is of euery ſeuerall ſortes through a whole Towne, or Caſtell, or Shyppe, and then looke how many peeces there is of one ſorte, multiplie the number of thoſe peeces by the weight of the Pouder, that one of thoſe peeces doth ſhoote at one ſhotte, and that will ſhewe vnto you how many pounde of Pouder will ſerue all one ſorte of peeces, and by this order multiply euery ſeuerall ſorts of peeces by thēſelues,

& thē adde al your nūbers togither. & that ſhall ſhew vnto you how much Pouder wil ſhoote al your Ordnaunce off at one time. As for example this. Ther is a towne, yt hath 3. double Canons &. 6. Demy Canōs, and. 14. double Culuerings, &. 10. Demy Culuerings, &. 30. Sakers, and. 25. Miniōs, &. 28. Faucōs, &. 12. Fauconets, and. 36. Foulers, & my deſire is to know how much Pouder will ſerue all theſe peeces: therfore firſt, the. 3. double Canons, & they do ſhoote 40. lb. of Pouder, and. 3. times. 40. is. 102. & then ye Demy Canons do ſhoote. 24. lb. of Pouder, &. 6. times. 24. maketh. 144. lb. of Pouder, and then the. 14. double Culuerings & they do ſhoote. 18. lb. of Pouder, and. 14. times 18. maketh. 252. & then the. 10. Demy Culuerings & they ſhoote. 11. lb. of Pouder, and. 20. times. 11. maketh. 220. & now the. 30. Sakers and they do ſhoote. 6. lb. and a halfe of Pouder, and. 30. times. 6½ is. 195. and then ye. 25. Minions, & they do ſhoote. 4. lb. of Pouder. and 25. times. 4. maketh. 100. and then the. 28. Faucons, and they do ſhoot 2. lb. and a halfe of Pouder, and. 28. times. 2½ doth make 70. and then the. 12. Fauconets & they do ſhoote. 1. lb. and a quarter, and. 12. times. 1. ¼ doth make. 15. and now the 36. Foulers & they do ſhoote. 2. lb. ½ of Pouder, and. 36. times. 2. ½ maketh. 90. & now this being done, then adde al your numbers together, as this.
               
                  
                     
                        Names of peeces.
                        Peeces number.
                        Pouder in pounds.
                     
                     
                        Cannons.
                        3
                        120. pound.
                     
                     
                        Demy Cannons.
                        6
                        144. pound.
                     
                     
                        Culuerings.
                        14
                        252. pound.
                     
                     
                        Demy Culuer.
                        25
                        220. pound.
                     
                     
                        Sakers.
                        30
                        195. pound.
                     
                     
                        Minions.
                        20
                        100. pound.
                     
                     
                        Faucous.
                        28
                        70. pound.
                     
                     
                        Fauconets.
                        12
                        15. pound.
                     
                     
                        Foulers.
                        36
                        90. pound.
                     
                     
                        Summe totall.
                        174
                        1206. pound.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
And now by this you may conclude, that all this Ordnaunce doth ſhoote at one time, to ſhote thē off round once ouer doth require. 1206. lb. of pouder, & by this order you may know at al times, whether you are in any town, fort, Caſtell, or Ship, how much pouder wil ſerue al the Ordnaūce at your pleaſure. And furthermore, if ſo be you haue ſuch a quantity of Pouder, and if you would know howe oftentimes it would ſhoote all your Ordnaunce, rounde aboutes, then you knowing how much pouder will ſhoote all your Ordnaunce once, and as by the order before is repeated, then deuide your whole ſumme of Pouder by that nūber of the weight of the pouder that all your Ordnaūce requireth, & that ſumme that ſtādeth in the quantity line, ſhal ſhew you how oftentimes it wil ſhoote all your Ordnaunce off: As for example, by the Ordnaunce in a towne (as before is rehearſed) and ſuppoſe you haue. 20. Laſt of Pouder, and now to know how oftentimes it will ſhoote all your Ordnaunce off round about thorough the whole Towne, as you did ſee that al the Ordnaunce did require 1206. lb. of Pouder, & one Laſt of Pouder is 2400. lb. thē 20. Laſt maketh. 48000. lb. wherfore deuide. 48000. by 1206. and then there will ſtande in the quantity line. 39. and. 966. lb. will remayne ouer, ſo you may conclude, that twenty Laſt of Pouder will ſhoote all the Ordnaunce before rehearſed. 39 tymes ouer, and three quarters of them more, that is to ſaye, that it will ſhoote all the Ordnaunce off fortie times, lacking almoſt a quarter of them. &c. And alſo, if there were any batterie layde againſte a Towne, and then if that you doe knowe howe many Cannons or other peeces of Ordnaunce there is in the batterie, then you maye knowe (as before is rehearſed) howe muche Pouder that they wyll occupye at once ſhooting them off, and alſo if that you wyll ſhoote them off rounde fortye or fyftye tymes in one day, then

you may knowe howe much Pouder they will ſpende in one day: as this firſt (as before is rehearſed.) Multiply all the Ordnaunce of one ſorte togyther, by the weight of the ſhotte of Pouder, and ſo the other ſorts of Ordnaunce, and adde them togyther (as afore is ſaid) and that beeing knowen, then multiplie that by the number of times that you haue ſhotte them off, and that ſhall ſhewe vnto you the number of poundes that the Ordnaunce hath occupyed in that day: as for example this: Suppoſe that there is in a battery againſt a Towne. 24 double Cannons, and they doe ſhoote. 40. pounde of Pouder a peece, therefore multiplie. 24. times 40. and of that multiplication, there commeth 960. and then there is eightteene Demy Cannons, and they doe ſhoote. 24. pounde of Pouder a peece, and therefore multiply eyghteene times. 24. and that maketh. 432. pound, and then adde both the numbers togyther, that is to ſay. 960. and. 432. & they wil make 1392. ſo that you may ſee, that the whole battery dothe ſpende 1392. of Pouder at once ſhooting thereof againſt the wall of the Towne: and then ſuppoſe, that in a day the Ordnaunce hath beene ſhot off ſixe andfortie times, then how much Pouder ſhall be ſpent that day, then multiplying 1392. by ſixe and fortie, and that will mak 64032. ſo that you may conclude that the whole batterie hath ſpent in one day, 64032 pound of Pouder, and yt will be ſixe and twentie laſt and a halfe, and 432. pounde of Pouder, and then if that the batterie ſhoulde continue ſeauen dayes in that order, the whole ſumme in Pouder that ſhoulde be ſpent, amounteth vnto 448224. pound, and that maketh 186. Laſts, three quarters, and 24. pound: therefore by this order you may know from time to time, how much Pouder is ſpent at your pleaſure, whether that it be in a batterie or in a Towne, & alſo how much Pouder will ſhoote ſuch a number of Ordnaunce ſo many times

off at your pleaſure. And thus much I haue thought good to write vnto you for inſtructions. &c.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 22
               
                  How to knowe how many ſhotte doth wey a Tunne.
                  
               
               
                  ANd now in ſo much as I haue ſhewed in the Chapter going before, to know how much Pouder is occupied in Ordnance: ſo in like manner, I doe thinke it conuenient to ſhew vnto you how many ſhots of euery ſeuerall ſortes will wey a Tun weight, which is very neceſſary to be knowen, as wel for them that haue occaſion to tranſport them either by Sea or by land. And firſt this, a Tunne weight is 20. hundred, and euery hundred for to conteyne an hundred and twelue pound, ſo that a Tun is 2240. pounde in weight: and firſt, the double Cannons ſhotte, and thoſe that doe wey 64. pound, and then 35. ſhots doth wey a Tun: and then the Demy Cannons ſhots, and thoſe that doe wey 34. pound a peece, and then 62. or 63. of thoſe ſhots do wey a Tun: and the Culuering ſhot of ſeauentene pound a peece, and then 131. or 132. wil wey a Tun: & alſo the Demy Culuerings, and thoſe ſhots that do wey tenne pound a peece, and then there is 224. in a Tun. And furthermore, thoſe Sakers, that the ſhot doth wey ſixe pound, and there doth go. 373. or 374. vnto a Tun: and in like manner the Minions, and commonly their ſhottes doe wey three pounde three quarters, and 597. or 598. ſhots will wey a Tunne. The Faucons ſhots doth wey two pound & halfe a quarter, and 1054. or 1055. doth wey a Tunne: & the Fauconet ſhot weyeth one pound, and neere halfe a quarter of a pound, and. 1991. or 1992. doth wey a Tunne, And thus

much I haue ſaide, as concerning how many ſhottes of euery ſeueral ſortes doth wey a Tun weighte, but if that you haue a great number of ſhottes of ſeuerall ſortes, and you do deſire for to know how many Tunnes there is in all of them, multiply euery ſeuerall ſorte by themſelues, according vnto the weight, and ſo adding all the numbers togither, and then deuide that number by 2240. and it will ſhewe vnto you howe many Tunnes there is in the whole ſumme. As for example this, there is ſuch a number of ſhottes to be tranſported, either by Sea, or by land, and you woulde knowe howe many that there is of them, as firſt, that there is a thouſand Cannon ſhottes, and a thouſande two hundred Demy Cannon ſhotte, and two thouſand Culuering ſhotte, and three thouſand Demy Culuering ſhotte, and three thouſande fiue hundred Saker ſhotte, and foure thouſand Minion ſhotte, and fiue thouſande Faucon ſhotte, and ſixe thouſande Fauconet ſhotte, and nowe for to knowe their weighte, and firſt for the Cannon ſhotte, and thoſe that be ſeauen ynches three quarters high, and thoſe doth wey 64. pound a peece, and then being a thouſande ſhotte, then therefore multiplye a thouſand times 64. and that maketh 64000. and then there being 1200. Demy Cannons ſhotte, that are ſixe ynches a quarter high, and thoſe doe wey foure and thirtie pound a peece, and therefore multiplie 1200. times 34. and that maketh 40800. and then there is 2000. Culuerings ſhotte, of fiue ynches almoſt in heigth, and they do wey 17. pound a peece, and then multiply two thouſand times ſeauenteene, and that maketh 34000. and thē there is three thouſand Demy Culuering ſhotte, of neere foure ynches and a quarter in height, and they doe wey tenne pound a peece, therefore multiply three thouſande times tenne, and that maketh 30000. and then there is 3500. Saker ſhotte, that is three ynches and a halfe high,

and that weyeth, 6. lb. and therefore multiply. 3500. times 6. & of that there commeth 21000. & then there is. 4000. Minion ſhot, of iuſt 3. ynches high, and they doe wey 3. lb. 3. quarters a peece, and therfore multiply. 4000. by 3¾ & that wil make 15000. & then there is. 5000. Faucon ſhot, and they be 2. ynches and a halfe high, and doth wey. 2. lb. and halfe a quarter: therefore multiply 5000 by 2⅛ and that will be 10625. & then there is 6000. Fauconet ſhot, of 2. ynches high, and they do wey one pound, and halfe a quarter, & that commeth in weight 6750. and now adde al your numbers togither, as by this example following.
               
                  
                     
                        Names of peeces
                        Number of ſhots.
                        Weight in poundes.
                        Tunnes,
                     
                     
                        Cannons.
                        1000
                        64000
                        28 4/7
                     
                     
                        Demy Cannons:
                        1200
                        40800
                        18 3/14
                     
                     
                        Culuerings.
                        2000
                        34000
                        15 5/28
                     
                     
                        Demy Culuerings.
                        3000
                        30000
                        13 1
                              •
                           /28
                     
                     
                        Sakers.
                        3500
                        21000
                        9 21/56
                     
                     
                        Minions.
                        4000
                        15000
                        6 39/56
                     
                     
                        Faucons.
                        5000
                        10625
                        4 
                              •
                           33/448
                     
                     
                        Faconet.
                        6000
                        6750
                        3 1/224
                     
                     
                        Summe totall.
                        25700
                        222175
                        99 83/448
                     
                  
               
               And now, al thoſe numbers being added togither, doth make 222175. pound in weight. And now to know how many Tunnes there is in al them, deuide the 222175. by 2240. and that being done, then there will ſtande in the quantitie line. 99. and 415. will remayne ouer, ſo that you may conclude, that of all the ſhotte there is 99. Tunnes, and 415. lb. that is neer ⅕ parte of a Tunne more, ſo that there lacketh little more then three quarters of a Tunne of 100. Tunnes, and by this order or meanes, you maye knowe how many Tunnes of ſhot there is in any number of ſhottes. &c.
            
            
               
               CHAPTER. 23.
               
                  How and by what order the ſhot doth graze or glaunce vpon the lande, or water.
                  
               
               
                  FOr to know by what order that the ſhot doth graze or trondle either vppon the land, or the water, it is to be noted, that it dothe graze or trondle fartheſt, when that the peece is laid point blanke, if that you do ſhoote the peece towards the water, or aplaine or leuell ground, and then the ſhotte ſhall rūne or graze neere three quarters of the beſte compaſſe of the Randare, ſo that the ſhotte bee not lette by anye chance by the way: and there is on great diuerſitie in diſtance of the grazing or running of the ſhotte, betweene the land and the water, ſo that the ground be a playne and leuel groūd, and the water or Sea to be ſmooth. And here is one thing to be noted, as touching the grazing of the ſhotte, whether it be vpon the water or the land, looke by what proportion the ſhotte doth ſtrike or hitte the ground or water, by that proportion the ſhotte ſhall riſe againe, although that it flyeth not ſo farre in that proportion, as long as the ſhotte hath force or drifte in his flying, that is to ſay, if the ſhott do ſtrike or hitte any thing glauncingly that then it ſhall glance in that proportion from youwardes, and if do ſtrike or hitte anye thing directly, then it ſhall be driuen directly backe agayne, if it doe not enter or ſticke faſt in the thing that it hitteth, euen like the ſhadowe of the Sunne, or anye other thing in the water or glaſſe, or ſuch other like. As for exāple this. If you ſhoote anye peece of Ordnaunce towardes the water, and lay the peece at the poynte blanke, and the peece be but little

higher than the water, then ſhall the ſhotte runne grazing in this forme, to riſe againe by that proportion that it doth hitte the water, and ſo to runne, till that the great force be decayed, as this example doth ſhew.
               
               And furthermore, if you doe mount the peece at much aduantage, then it will not graze at all, if it do graze, then it will be made in this manner.
               
               And furthermore, if you doe ſhoote at any Shippe vpon the water, and you do ſhoote in that peece that do lye very high, and the ſhippe or marke neere hand, ſo that you muſt giue your leuell downewards, then if you doe giue your leuell ſhorte of the ſhippe, the ſhot will flye ouer the Shippe, by the meanes of the direct hitting of the water, for that the ſhot doth glaunce from the water, by that proportion that it doth hitte the water, as by this example.
               
               
                  
So that you may iudge by this example, by what proportion the ſhotte doth graze, either vppon the water or the lande: but the water is the more certayner and truer if it bee ſmooth and calme, for that the water is not harder in one place, than it is in another, as the ground is or may bee, and the directer that it hitteth, eyther the ground or the water, the more it doth kill the force of the ſhotte, and by this meanes it will flye the leſſer way: and the more glauncingly that it doth hitte eyther the ground or the water, the oftner it it doth glaunce or graze, and the further it flieth. &c.
            
            
               CHAPTER. 24.
               
                  
                     Howe to batter the walles of any Towne as well by night as by day
               
               
                  ALthough it hath not beene commonly vſed, yet notwithſtanding it may be eaſily done, for to plant their Ordnance ſo, that they may batter or beat down the walles of a Towne as well by night as by day, although the night be neuer ſo darke. And alſo there ſhal no light appeare vnto the enimie, as thus. Firſt after that your Ordnaunce is placed for your batterie, and you haue begunne to batter, & then the peeces being made ready for to ſhoote at the wall or place that you do mean to ſhoote at, and that you would continue for to ſhoote at the place all the night, then take a plommet of leade vpon a line or ſtring, the peece being right vpon the marke that you do meane to ſhoote at, then with a plō
                  met

and the line, firſt plome the middle of the mouth of the peece downe to the grounde, and looke where the leade falleth to the ground, there make a mark vpō the ground, and then in like manner plome the very middle of the taile of the breeche of the peece vnto the grounde, and there make a mark alſo vpon the ground, and then draw a right line from the one place vnto ye other, as long as you liſt, & then that right line wil lye right vpon the mark, thē take a large great Quadrant, ſet out with degrees, & parts of degrees, & the Quadrant, for to haue a rule faſtned vnto it, and then the peece being laid ready for to ſhoote at the marke, hauing the true height of the marke, that is to ſay, that the hollow or concauitie of the peece doe lye right vpon the marke, neither higher nor lower: then put the rule into the mouth of the peece, and looke at what degree or place that the plummet line dothe hang vppon, then note that in ſome Booke or paper, and then when that the night is come, and that you doe meane to ſhoote as well by night as by day, then firſt with your plommet of leade vppon a line, then plome the mouth of the peece right vppon the line that is vnder the peece, and that will laye the peece right vppon the marke, and then in like manner take the Quadrante, and putte the rule into the mouth of the peece, and then koyne the peece vppe and downe till that the plommet line doth fall vppon that degree and place that it did before, and then that in like manner will giue the peece the true heigth of the marke without any fayle. And for the ſee whether that the plommette line doth hang vppon the degree or place that it did before, and alſo to knowe by the line and the plommette with the lyne vppon the grounde vnder the peece, for to laye the peece ryghte vppon the marke, there muſte bee prepared a cloſe Boxe lyke a Lan-Lanterne,

made with boordes, with a dore or a lidde for to open and ſhutte, to the intente to ſee how the plommet doth hang, and ſo forthe, as for example, ſuppoſing that at the ſeege of a Towne, the Ordnaunce being placed, and had battred al the day, & to cōtinue that they ſhoulde not make vp their breach in the nighte, and furthermore, that the breach ſhoulde be made wyder in the morning, then they wente vnto the middle batterie called the perſers, and there tooke a plommet of leade and a lyne, the peeces beeing all charged and leuelled vnto the breache and markes appoynted, and firſte, the plommet at the middle of the mouth of the peece, and then righte vnder the plommet, they do driue in an yron pinne, and then in like manner at the tayle of the peece, they plome the peece, and righte vnder the plommet they driue another pinne into the ground, and for that they could not draw a perfite line, they made a line or ſtring faſt, longer than the length of the diſtance of the two pinnes by two yardes, and the line or threed did come righte ouer the head of thoſe two pinnes, and ſo paſſed a yard further at both the ends, than the two pinnes: & thus they did lay euery peece at that plate, and then the peeces lying ſtill, ready to haue fire giuen vnto them, then they take their Quadrant, beeing very large, of two foote in the ſemy Dyametre, that is to ſay, from the Senter of the circle, end euery degree was ſet out in foure partes, and put the rule into the mouth of the peece, and the plommet line did hang at one degree and a quarter iuſt, and that they did note in a booke for remembrance, and this being done, they ſhotte off theyr peeces. And now when that the nighte was come, and the ſame very darke, and the mornyng very foggy, or that they could not ſee the walles of the Towne, yet they battered the walles of the Towne as perfitely all the night, and as well as though it had bin by day, for euery time yt
                  
they had charged all their peeces, they did this, firſt, they did plome the mouth of the peece, and likewiſe at the taile of the peece, right vppon the line that was vnder ye peece, right vpon the mark, and then they toke their Quadrant, and put their rule into the mouth of the peece, thē koined the tayle of the peece vp and downe, till that the plummet line did fall vpon that degree and place that it did before the nighte, and that was at one degree and a quarter iuſt: and thus when they had laid all their peeces, then they ſhotte them off, and charged them agayne, and ſo contiūed all the night long.
               
               And ſo in this manner, they may in like caſe handle the two ſide batteries, but and if that it chance that the battering peeces doe lie vppon hygher ground than the place that is battered, then ye rule that is faſtned, muſt be vnto that place wheras the plommet is made faſt vnto, for

that the degrees goeth downewards towardes the lower ground as you may ſee by theſe two figures.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER. 25.
               
                  
                     How to plant Ordnaūce by night, to batter the walles of any Towne, or diſplace any Ordnaunce in any Bulwarkes, or any ſuch other like, as well by night as by day.
               
               
                  YEt furthermore, there maye be meanes founde, that if there be any Ordnaunce placed that doth damage or hurte you, and that you maye not come at it by no meanes in the daye for to diſplace their Ordnaunce, but vnto your greate hurt and loſſe, both of men and Ordnaunce, yet you may diſplace

them by nighte neere as well as by day, both for to place youre Ordnaunce in the night, and alſo for to ſhoote perfitly vnto the place in the night, although the nighte bee neuer ſo darke: and then if that you doe ſee cauſe, when that you haue beaten or diſplaced theyr Ordnaunce, you maye carye awaye youre Ordnaunce before it is daye, as thus. Firſt prepare an Aſtrolobe, the larger the better, and then two ſtakes or pinnes of yron like to a foote long, or there aboutes, according vnto your diſcretion, and alſo a ſledge or beetle, to driue thoſe ſtakes or pinnes into the grounde, and then viewing the grounde meete for the purpoſe a reaſonable diſtance from the place that you doe meane to beate in the nighte, goe into that place in the daye tyme, and firſte where you doe meane for to lay your Ordnaunce, there dryue in one of youre ſtakes, and then in lyke manner goe backawardes about twentye foote, and ſtande ſo, that you maye ſee the marke that you doe meane to ſhoote at ouer the toppe of the ſticke that you haue dryuen, and then there in that very place dryue your other ſtake, and then goe a little backewardes more, and viewe whether that the two ſtakes ſtand as one right line vnto the marke, and if that they doe not, you maye amende them, and ſette them ryghte, then take youre Aſtrolobe, and holde that vppon youre thombe by the ringe, and then turne youre Athilleyday or Rule wyth the two ſightes that is on the backe ſide of the Aſtrolobe vppe and downe, tyll that you maye ſee that place that you doe meane to ſhoote at, thorough the two ſyghtes of the Athilleyday holdyng that vppe before youre eyes, winking wyth one of youre eyes, ſtanding at that place where you doe meane for to place youre Ordnaunce that is betweene the two ſtakes, then looke vppon the Athilleyday or Rule wyth the two ſightes,

at what degree and place that the ende doth pointe vnto, then remēmber to write that degree, and place it in ſome Booke or Table, for that it is finiſhed: then in the nyghte you may bring your Ordnaunce vnto that place between the two ſtakes, and then place one of your peeces righte betweene the two ſtakes, and then take a threed or line, and make that faſt vnto the two ſtakes, and that ſhall lay the peece right vpon the marke. And then for to place the reſt, they muſt doe this. Firſt on the one ſide meaſure out iuſt how many foote you doe meane to lay your peeces in diſtance aſunder, then from the line of the ſtake, meaſure it truly, and there make a marke, or driue a ſtake: and then at the other end, at that certayne diſtance, there in like manner driue another ſtake: then betweene thoſe two ſtakes place another peece, and then make a line faſt vnto thoſe two ſtakes, and that in like maner ſhal lay the peece right vppon the marke, and then you may place another peece vppon the other ſide of the peece, and ſo forth. And then when your Ordnaunce is all charged, then plome the middle of the mouth of the peece right vpon the line, vnderneth the peece, and then in like manner, the middle of the taile of the peece to be plomed, that it ſtand right ouer the line, vnderneath the peece, and then take your Quadrant with the rule faſtned vnto it, and put the rule into the mouth of the peece, and then koyne the peece vp and downe, till the plommet line do fall vpon that degree and place that the Athilley day did pointe vnto vppon, the Aſtrolobe, and that ſhall giue the peece the true height of the marke. As for example, ſuppoſe this after the breach in the wall of the Towne was made ſautable, there the flanckes lay ſo, that they coulde not come neere vnto the breache, neyther could they plant their Ordnaunce for to diſplace thoſe flanckes, but that they ſhoulde bee beaten from their Ordnaunce to their great loſſe and hinderance,

therefore firſte they prepared an Aſtrolobe of the largeſt ſort, & two pinnes of yron made ſharp at the endes, to goe into the ground, and then they cauſed an aſſaulte to be giuen vnto the contrary ſide of the towne, and whileſt they helde them play there, then two or three choſe out thyr groūd meete for their purpoſe, and ther droue one pinne, and then they went backe twenty foote, and right againſt that pinne they droue another pinne ſo euē, that the two pinnes, and the place of the bulwarke where the flankers lay, were all there vpon one right line: and then one of thē tooke the Aſtrolobe, hanging it perpendicularly vpright, then they turned the Athilley day vp and downe, till hee mighte ſee thorough both the ſightes, the very place that the flanckers lay, and then they departed, and wente their way, and looked vpon what degree the poynte of the Athilley day ſtoode vpon, and found it to be vpon iuſt two degrees and a halfe, and that they wrote in a booke for remembrance, and then after a night or two, when they ſaw their time, the nighte being very darke, then they carried three peeces of artillerie, and placed the chiefeſt betweene the two pinnes, and vnto thoſe two pinnes they made a line faſt vnto them both cloſe vnto the ground, and then they placed vpon the one ſide, one of the peeces, and the other peece vpon the other ſide, as this. Firſt they meaſured out tenne foote from the formoſte pinne iuſt vpon the one ſide, making a perfit ſquare angle, and then in like maner they meaſured out. 10. fote more at the hindermoſt pinne, ſo that thoſe two pinnes ſtode iuſt. 20. fote aſunder, & ſo placed the peece betweene thoſe two pinnes: & nowe for that they muſt ſhoote all three peeces vnto one place where the flākers lay, & for that the peeces did lye. 10, foot aſunder, therefore they remoued the hindermoſt pinnes of both ye ſides. 4. inches, ſo that there was. 10. fote diſtāce, & 4. inches, & the cauſe was this, for that the marke was. 10.

ſkore off from the place where the peeces lay, and the peeces lay iuſt from the middle, vnto the middel, tenne foote aſunder, and the line vnderneath the peece, was iuſt twentie foote long, and there is thirtie tymes the length of the lyne vnderneath the peece vnto the marke, and thirtye inches maketh two foot and a halfe, and foure times two foote and a halfe, maketh tenne foote, ſo that the hyndermoſt pinne beyng remoued foure ynches further off, muſt needes lay that line iuſt vpon the marke that the middlemoſt lyeth vpon, without any faile, and in this order the one peece was placed on the one ſide, and the other peece on the other ſyde: and nowe thoſe peeces beeing charged, firſte they plome the mouth of the peeces righte vppon the lyne, and then in like manner the breeche or tayle righte vppon the lyne, and then they tooke theyr Quadrante, and putte the rule into the mouth of the peece, and koyned the breeche of the peece, till the plommet line fell at two degrees and a halfe iuſt, for that the Athiley day dyd ſhewe vnto them on the Aſtrolobe: and they ſhooting off thoſe peeces, they made a perfite ſhotte at the place appoynted, and thus they charged and ſhotte all the nyght, and then before day, when they hadde ſerued their turne, they conueyed their Ordnaunce from that place, for feare of being beaten away from them when it was day light.
               And furthermore, by that meanes in like manner, they may place their Ordnaunce in the night out of a Towne, to annoye their enimies, as they may or can by no deuice or practiſe, but by induſtry or policie they may be preuē
                  ted by practiſe, and eſpecially if that he doe knowe what the enimie doth meane for to doe, for this wee doe ſee many times in warres, that policie doth preuayle as oftentimes as greate and huge armies of menne of greate ſtrength, hauing all kinde of engines for that purpoſe, for

euen as it pleaſeth God, ſo goeth the victorie, although it commeth by a naturall cauſe, and that naturall cauſe that I ſpeake of, is knoweledge and induſtrie in thoſe affaires!
            
            
               CHAPTER. 26.
               
                  
                     How to keepe a Hauen or Riuer on the Sea coaſt for to ſincke a Shippe as well by night as by day in all pointes.
               
               
                  NOw for the keeping of a Hauen or Ryuer, there maye be ſuche meanes or wayes vſed by induſtrie, that you maye keepe a Hauen or Riuer in this ſorte, ſo that there may no Shippe paſſe neither by night nor by daye, but that hee ſhall be ſunke, or elſe he eſcapeth very hardly, although ye nighte be neuer ſo darke, ſo that the night be not Foggy or Miſtie, ſo that the Hauen or Riuer be not aboue a mile broad or ouer, as this. Firſt, if the entraunce of the Riuer be therefore, to haue a watche there, then as ſoone as the watch doth perceiue thē and their number, then they muſt haue a watchtoken, and that muſt be a light or lights vn to the Caſtell or Bulwarkes, and then the watchtokens beeing ſo agreed vpon that the Caſtels or Bulwarkes may know ye number of the Shippes by the forme of the lights of the Caſtels or Bulwarkes, if that they be on the one ſide, & the other on the other ſid, thē at certaine knowē places appointed for that purpoſe, and at a certaine diſtance from the Caſtels or Bulwarkes towards the Sea wardes, each of thē for to carrie a light thither, & to place the lightes as neere the water as may bee, and if that it

chanceth ſo, that ther is but one Caſtell or bulwarke, and none vppon the other ſide, then they hauing a bote or Skiffe, or any other craft, they may rowe ouer the water, and place their Lightes in that knowen place appoynted, and then afore nighte, that place beeing alwayes knowen vnto them, they may place their Ordnaunce right vppon that marke vppon the farther ſide of the water, the Light ſtāding alwayes to the Seawardes of the marke that the Ordnaunce is placed right againſt, like. 20. or. 30. foote, & then the night being neuer ſo darke, the light is ye better ſeene: then muſt the Shippes needes in their comming betweene the light and you, take away the ſightes of youre lightes, and then immediately, as ſoone as you do ſee that the light is ſhaddowed, then giue fire vnto thoſe peeces that be placed againſt your ymagined marke appoynted, & then there is no doubt but you ſhall make a perfit ſhott at that Shippe, being ſure that the mouth of the peece bee koyned lowe ynough, leaſt they ſhoulde ſhoote ouer the Shippe, & eſpecially if it be in a place where it doth ebbe and flowe: for at the full Sea, they muſt koyne the peeces at one proportion, and at a low water, at another proportion: and this being handled diſcretely, they ſhall not faile the hitting of ye Ship. And furthermore, as it is declared in the, 2. Chapter going before, they maye haue a line drawen vnderneath the peece vpon the ground for to lay their peeces right vpon their appointed marke at al times after yt they haue ſhot off their peeces in the night, then in the night they may place thē againe, &c. As for example, Heere with vs at graues end, as there is. 2. Bulwarkes ye one right againſt the other, the riuer of Thames running betweene them, and nowe they would keepe the riuer ſo, that there ſhoulde no Ship paſſe, neyther by night nor by day, but that they ſhould be ſonke: then they muſt keepe a watche at the Naſſe or poynt belowe, at the entrance of ye
                  
Tilberrie hope, and that is a mile and a halfe from the Bulwarke, and there alwayes they muſt needes ſee them, and their number of Shippes, and ſpecially by the help of a light vpon the further ſide of the water, and then they beeing knowen vnto the whatche, the watche muſt make vnto them a token by a light or lightes that they haue agreed vpon before, and then thorough the watche token, the Bulwarke knoweth that theyr commeth ſuch a number of Shippes, or but one or two as it chanceth, and then each of the Bulwarkes hath an imagined marke, twentie ſkore towards the Naſſe or Seawards, yt they do alwaies plant their Ordnaunce right againſt it, both by day, and by night, and then as ſoone as they doe ſee their watchtoken then both the Bulwarks do place their lightes hard vnto the water, like twenty foote to the Seawards of their imagined marke: then the peeces being planted and koyned, ſo that the diſpart ſtandeth vnderneath the poynt blanke at the full ſea one degree, and at the lowe water three degrees, then giuing fire vnto the peece or peeces, as ſoone as the Ship taketh away or ſhadoweth ye light, thē theris no doubt but they do ſtrike the Ship very neere ye water without any faile. And for that the lighte ſtandeth to the Seawards of the marke appointed, the ſhott muſt haue a time to come vnto the Ship, and the Ship goeth away in the meane time. And furthermore, when that the peeces bee charged againe, then the line that is vnderneath the peece, by plomming of hir at the mouth, and at the tayle of the peece, is laid right vpon the marke agayne: and thē furthermore, if the Shipp chance to paſſe further, ſcaping both the Bulwarkes, then they may haue more ymagined markes, and alſo lightes placed there, and in like manner, lines vnderneath the peeces right vpon thoſe markes. &c. And furthermore, you may know by the lightes, whiche ſide of the water the Ship commeth two wayes, and one

way is this, the land being higher then the water, and the lightes being placed hard vnto the water, if that the ſhip commeth hard vpon the further ſide of the water next vnto the light, then the hold of the ſhip will ſhaddowe the light, and if that ſhe commeth on your ſide, then the ſayles will ſhaddowe the lightes. And furthermore if the Ship commeth right in the middle of the water or Riuer, then both the Bulwarkes ſhall haue the lightes ſhaddowed at one time, and if the Ship come on the further ſide of the water from you, then your lightes will bee firſt ſhaddowed, and if on the ſide you be on, then your light will bee laſt ſhaddowed: and then furthermore for the making of a perfite ſhotte, if that the other Bulwarke ſhoote before you, then koyne the mouth of the peece one degree lower, for that the Shippe commeth vpon your ſide of the water, and then for the neereneſſe of her comming, you muſt needes koyne the peece ſo much the lower. &c.
            
            FINIS.
            
               
                  Some deſerue ere they deſire,
                  And yet ſhall lacke when they require,
                  Some deſire and neuer deſerue,
                  And gets the gayne the other ſhall ſterue.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶ The Table of the contents of this Booke, called The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordnaunce.
            
            
               FIrſt, tenne principall things to be conſidered in the shooting of Ordnaunce.

                     1. Pouder the goodneſſe or badneſſe
                     2. The lading of the peece.
                     3. The winde.
                     4. The shotte.
                     5. The wadde or pouder too harde or looſſe
                     6. The ſtanding of the peece.
                     7. Of shooting vp the hill or downe the hill.
                     8. Of the length of the peece.
                     9. Of the diſparting of the peece.
                     10. Whether the peece be truely bored.
                  
               
               Now beginneth the firſt Chapter of the Booke, called The Arte of shooting in great Ordnaunce, & firſt, as concerning pouder
               The 2. Chapter sheweth, how to knowe whether any peece of Ordnaunce be truely bored, by the help of certaine inſtruments.
               The 3. Chapter sheweth, how much pouder will ſerue any peece of Ordnaunce by the weight of the peece, and weight of the ſhot, and at the end of this Chapter there is a Table that doth declare the weight of yron shotte.
               The 4. Chap. sheweth how to diſpart any pece of Ordnāce truly.
               The 5. Chapter sheweth how to giue leuell with any peece of Ordnaunce to make a shotte, according as the moſt ſortes of Gū
                  ners doe vſe to do, although that there is no arte in it.
               The 6. Chapter sheweth what a degree is.
               The 7. Chapter sheweth how to make a shotte vpon the righte line, and ſo how to know how much ground that any peece of Ordnaunce doth driue or conuey a shott at the mount of euery degree of the Randare.
               The 8. Chapter sheweth, how to mount any pece of Ordnaunce by the degree with an ynch rule with a table, shewing what part of an ynche rule will make one degree, and ſo vnto tenne degrees.
               The 9. Chapter sheweth, what manner of courſe the shot flieth in the ayre.
               The 10. Chapter sheweth, how to mount a Morter peece, for to lay the shotte at any diſtance appoynted.
               The 11. Chapter is how far aboue the marke the shot flieth ouer the mark by the length of the peece, and diſtance vnto the marke.
               The 12. Chapter is, how to make a perfit shott with a peece that is not truly bored, that is to ſay, that the core or hollowneſſe goeth not right in the middle of the mettall.
               The 13. Chapter is how to giue leuell at a marke vpon a hill or valley with the Quadrant.
               The 14. Chap. is how to make a perfit ſhot vpon the land, at the broade ſide of a ship that is vnder ſaile, and going.
               The 15. Chap. is, how to make a ſhot out of one ship into another, although the sea be wrought, or out of a Galley into a shippe.
               
                  
The 16. Chapter sheweth vnto you in what order you should place Ordnaunce in Shippes
               The 17. Chapter sheweth vnto you how for to shoot at a moueable marke vpon the land, and alſo what kind of ſhotte is the beſt to be vſed according vnto the cauſe.
               The 18. Chapter sheweth, how you ſhall knowe if any peece of Ordnaunce be ſufficiently mettalled, and alſo the cauſe that the Cānōs do not occupie the weight in pouder that the shot waieth.
               The 19. Chapter sheweth in what order you ſhall giue leuell with your Ordnaunce at a batterie, to beate downe the walles of any place, and alſo, what to obſerue in the giuing fire vnto them.
               The 20. Chapter, sheweth the weight of al manner of caſt peces of Ordnaunce, from the Cannon, vnto the Faulcōnet, and alſo the weight of the shot & the weight of the pouder that they do occupie with the heigth of the shot, and length of the peece, and al ſuch other like cauſes, according vnto the names of the peeces
               The 21. Chapter sheweth, how many shottes of pouder there is in a laſt of pouder, from the Cannon, vnto the Fauconet, and alſo, if you be at any battry or in any towne caſtel or shippe, how to know how much pouder wil shoote al your Ordnaunce off.
               The 22 Chapter sheweth, how to know how many shotte doth wey a Tunne.
               The 23. Chapter ſheweth how and by what order the ſhote doth graze or glance vpon the land or water.
               The 24. Chapter is, how for to batter the walles of any Towne, as well by nighte as by day.
               The 25 Chapter doth declare how to plant Ordnaūce by night, to batter the walles of any Towne, or diſplace any Ordnaunce in any Bulwarkes, or any ſuch other like, as well by night as by day.
               The 26. Chapter doth declare how for to keepe a Hauen or Riuer on the Sea coaſt for to ſincke a shippe, as well by night as by day in all pointes.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            AT LONDON, Imprinted by Thomas Dawſon for Thomas woodcocke. An. Dom. 1587.
            
         
      
   