
      
         
            
            
            ¶All the examinacions of the Conſtante Martir of GOD M. Iohn Bradforde, before the Lorde Chauncellour. B. of Wincheſter the B. of London, & other cōmiſſioners: Whervnto ar annexed his priuate talk & conflictes in priſon after his condemnacion, with the Archbiſhop of york, the B. of Chicheſter, Alfonſus, and King Philips confeſſour, two Spaniſhe freers, and ſundry others. With his modeſt learned and godly anſweres.
            Anno. Domini 1561
            ¶Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶The Originall of his Lyfe.
            
               IOhn Bradford borne in Lancaſterſhire, in Mancheſter, a notable towne of that coū
               trey, was of his gētle parentes brought vp in vertue & good learning euen from his very childhode, & among other praiſes of his good educacion, he obtained as a chief gift, the cōnynge & redines of writing, which knowledge was not onely an ornamēte vnto him, but alſo an helpe to the neceſſary ſuſtētaciō of his liuing. About ye time, was one ſir Ihō Haringtō paymaſter to king Henry the .8. which at Boloign by order of knighthode beīg muche renomed, but yet by his own vertue a great deale more noble, was ther

ſuruier and paymaiſter of ye ſouldiers. Who then had the ſeruice of maſter Bradford, & ſo kept him both in his family & in his fauor: that it can ſcarce be told whether liued to other, ether more beloued or more profitable. For Bradford both lerned many things of him, & alſo experience and practiſe of thinges more increaſed & abounded. On the otherſide, he whiche tried his ſeruice ſo faithful, eſtemed him as a great treaſure & ſo loued him: that in all his affaires he would alwaies bee coupled wt him. In which trade of life when Bradford long time had bene cō
               uerſāt, ye way to riches ſemed not ſo farre of vnto him, if he woulde haue ſet his mind to gathering of worldly riches, but the immutable prouidēce of god drew him another

way. For after he was wery of this kind of life, & had made a diligēt and true accompt of his maiſters affairs: he deſired licēce to depart, and ſo wēt from him to the intent that he being rid of all other troubles, he might ſerue Ieſu Chriſte, the ſecrete working of goddes calling ſo mouinge him, which neuer ſuffred his minde to be at reſt: vntil it had fully & wholy poſſeſſed him: In ſo muche that after he had forſaken his maſter, & gotten him to the ſtudye of the law, his minde could not long abide in that trade of lawyers, but that forſaking alſo that kinde of ſtudy, in whiche he was not altogether ignorāt: he departed from the temple where he ſtudied ye cō
               mon and temporal lawes, to Cā
               bridge the temple of gods lawes

to apply thoſe ſtudies, which pertained more to the miniſterye of gods church. In the which, with what vehemens and force he labored, it is euident by this: yt the firſt yere of his comimng thether, he obteined degree of ſchole, and was made maiſter of art, & gatte the fauour and admiration of all men, that by and by he was choſē felowe of Penbrooke hall, where he ſo daily profited, by a certayn heauēly dexterite of his wit, that as he was had in eſtimaciō of all good men: ſo alſo he began to be welbeloued of Martin Bucer, which hoped of no ſmall fruit to procede, from that his ſo godlye diſpoſicion. wherefore he counſelled him, to beſtow his giftes and talent, to the common profyte of inſtructynge Chriſtes flock. To

whom when he had alledged hys weakenes and lack of learnyng: Bucer anſwered, that though he could not fede thē with fine cakes and white bread, yet he ſhould ſatiſfye them with barly bread, wer it neuer ſo courſe. By whoſe often exhortacions Bradforde beynge boldened, althoughe of his owne accord he was redy inough while he was altogether ī this thought it came happelye to paſſe, that by D. Ridly biſhoppe of London, he was ſent for from Cambridge, to take vppon him eccleſiaſticall orders and functiōs. Of whom beyng firſt made deacon and afterward licenſed to preach hauing a good ſtipēd out of the Cathedrall church of Poules: he diligētly labored in the miniſtery of publike teching in ye church of god, ſo lōg

as kinge Edwarde liuinge there could be any place for godly teachers. But when at lenght ye religiō changed by death of ye prince, and he neuertheleſſe exerciſed his office of preching: an occaſō was foūd and yet moſt vniuſt (becauſe that by the lawes it was not yet concluded) that his mouth being ſtopped he was thruſte into priſon: the occaſion was this. The xiii. day of Auguſt, one of the Popiſh ſect called Bourn afterward biſhop of Bathe, railed with many wordes moſt ſhamefully vpō king Edward, and the pure doctrine of the goſpel in his time preched, whoſo behaued himſelf, yt he had muche a doe to eſcape, but yt the multitude of hearers would haue laide hande vpon him, and pulled him out of ye pulpit, which

thīg they declared by manifeſt tokens. For ſo great was the indignacion of al men kindled againſt him, that neither with ye reuerence of the place, nor by the aucthoritie of the biſhop of London then preſent, nor at the lawful commandement of the Maire: this commocion of the people could be pacyfied. But as for Bourn, he was ſo ſtricken with feare bothe by the greatnes of the tumulte, & chieflye for a dagger whyche was throwne from the middes of the company againſt the pulpit: that he durſt not make an ende of hys ſedicious ſermond (much like the Oracions that the Tribunes in Rome wer wonte to make) nether would ye people ſuffer him: he hū
               bly deſired Bradford which ſtode behind his backe in the pulpit, yt
               
he would take his place & ſpeake to the people remembringe perchaunce, and not vnwiſelye vyrgils counſel.

                  That when among a people ſtoute
                  It chaunceth to betide
                  The multitude to make a fraye
                  Of wit ful often wide,
                  That ſtones & wepons flies a brode
                  and what come firſt to hande
                  Some ſadman cōmeth that for his right
                  Is loned of all the land:
                  Anon thei ceaſte and ſilence make,
                  And doune thei laie there rage
                  To harke at him, and he with ſpeche
                  their woode minds doth aſwage.
               
Neyther was his purpoſe diſappointed, for as ſone as Bradford ſtode forth in ye middeſt: al the tumulte was eaſilye appeaſed, & the people at the firſt ſight of him, wiſhed him lōg helth, crying Bradforde Bradforde god preſerue thy life Bradford. After yt with much

attenciō thei heard him entreat of quiet & chriſtiā obedience. Finally after his ſermond ended: the moſt part of thē went quietlye & peaſably home to their houſes. In the meane time amonge the reſidew which reſiſted (for it could not bee that in ſo great offence of ye multitude, al thinges could ſo quickly be quieted) there was a certayn gētleman with his two ſeruants, whiche comming vp the pulpytte ſtaires ruſhed againſt the doore, deſyring to enter vpon Bourn, I know not what he minded. Than Bradforde whiche ſeemed to knowe hym, and perceyuyng his entente: reſyſted as muche as he coulde, in the meane tyme, priuelye geuynge Bourne warnynge by hys Seruaunte, that hee ſhoulde auoyde the

preſente daunger as ſoone as he could. Bourne ſtreight waie flying vnto the Maior once againe, eſcaped death, & yet not thinking himſelfe ſafe ynoughe, he deſired Bradford that he woulde vouchſafe to be preſent and help him, til he mighte hide himſelfe in ſome houſe, that he might be ſafe from all feare and daunger, which gē
               tlenes he willingly perfourmed, that is to ſaie he couered him behinde with his gowne, till by the Maior and the Sherifes, he was ſafely brought into Poules ſcole. On this wiſe the railing preacher againſt king Edward, by Bradfordes helpe eſcaped death, which for his raylinge he had deſerued, whiche thing thei whiche woulde haue bene reuenged of him, dyd not diſſemble, for one of them opēly

teſtifying to Bradford. ſaid: Ah Bradforde Bradforde dooeſt thou ſaue his lyfe whiche will not ſpare thyne? goe too I geue thee his lyfe, but if it were not for thy ſake, I woulde thruſt thys beaſt through with my ſworde. Mayſter Bradforde the ſame daye after dinner preaching to the Londoners in the chiefe ſtreate of the citie, did ſharply rebuke them for this ſedicious and tumultuouſe behauiour, waytinge afterwarde at London what ſhould be thend of this buſineſſe. Thou haſt now reader ye whole diſcourſe of Bradfordes facte, whereby thou dooeſt vnderſtande what reward he deſerued of equall Iudges, for ſo godly ſeruice. Nowe heare what rewarde he receiued.
            Thre daies after this was done

he was ſente for by the counſell, & biſhoppes, to the towre where the Queene than laye, and was compelled before them to purge hymſelfe of ſedicion and hereſy, ſurely by the ſame reaſon, that ye lambe ſometyme was accuſed by ye wolfe for troubling the water, in which he dronke a greate deale lower than the woolfe, not that he had offended, but that the woolfe was an hungred, not that hee hadde troubled the water, but that he was not hable to reſyſte the other, whiche troubled it in deede. After the ſame ſorte was Bradforde ſette a fyer wyth the flame of that Sedicion, whyche hee alone dyd quenche, and ſo commaunded to pryſone, where abydynge almoſte twoo yeares

together hee ſuſtayned manye conflictes with the Papiſtes and other ſectes, he confirmed manye weake and coumforted the afflycted, he wrote alſo manye thynges, as hee hadde leyſure and got opportunitye by ſtealth. And among other thynges hee ſente manye Epiſtles, the copies whereof are extante, to the Citizens of London, to the Vnyuerſite and towne of Cambridge, to the townes of Walden and Mancheſter, alſo to hys twoo brethren theyr wyues and famylyes, in whiche Epiſtles, the ſyncere zeale of hys Chriſtyan heart and godlines, doth marueilouſly appeare. At lengthe after long labours & ſorowes, he was

priuily ledde from the counter by night to Newgate. The next daie earlye in the morninge, he was brought foorth into Smithfield, with an other younge manne called Ihō Lyefe being eightene yeres olde, he was there burnte. At London the firſte of Iulii. Anno M.D.LV.
         
         
            
            ¶The effect of .M. Iohn Bradfordes examinacion before the Lord Chanceller B. of Wincheſter, the B. of London and others in commiſſion the .22. of Aprill. Anno. Domini .1555.
            
               AFter the Lord Chancellor and the reſidew of the Queenes councel in commiſſion with him, had ended their talke with maſter Farrar late biſhop of S. Dauies: the vndermarſhal of the kings Bench was commaunded to bring in maiſter Bradford, who being come in to the preſence of the counſel ſitting at a table he kneling down on his knee, but immediately by my lord

Chauncelor was bidden to ſtand vp and ſo he did. Whē he was riſen the lord Chauncelor earneſtly loked vpon him, to haue (be lyke) ouerfaced him: but he gaue no place, that is, he ceaſed not in like maner, to loke on the lorde Chancelor ſtil and continuallye (ſaue ye once he caſte his eyes to heauen warde ſighing for gods help) and ſo outfaced him as they ſay. Thē the Lorde Chauncelor, as it were amaſed and ſome thing troubled: ſpake thus to hym in effecte, that of long tyme he had bene impryſoned iuſtly, for his behauioure at Poules croſſe the .xiii. of Auguſte Anno. 1554. for his falſe prechinge and arrogancye, takinge vppon hym to preache withoute aucthoritie. But nowe, quoth hee, the tyme of mercye is come, and

therefore the Queenes highneſſe myndyng to offer vnto you mercy, hath by vs ſente for you, to declare and geue the ſame, if ſo bee ye will with vs retourne. And quoth he yf you wyll dooe as we haue done, you ſhall finde as we haue founde I warraunte you. Theſe were the ſumme, and euen in maner, the words he ſpake. To theſe woordes maiſter Bradford ſpake, after reuerent obeyſaunce made, in thys maner. My Lorde and Lordes all, I confeſſe that I haue beene longe priſoned, and (with humble reuerence be it ſpoken) vniuſtlye, for that I dyd nothynge ſediciouſlye, falſelye, or arrogantlye, in worde or fact, by preching or otherwiſe, but rather ſought peace, & al godly quietnes as an obedient & faithful ſubiecte

bothe in going aboute to ſaue the biſhoppe of Bathe now, the
                  •
                M. Bourne the preacher at ye croſſe, and in preaching for quietnes accordingly. At theſe wordes or rather before he had fullye finiſhed them the lorde Chauncellor ſome thing ſnuffed, and ſpake with an admiracion, yt there was a loude lie. For quoth he, the fact was ſedicious as you my lord of Londō can beare witnes, you ſaye trewe my lorde, quoth the biſhop of Lō
               don. I ſawe him with mine owne eyes when he tooke vpon him to rule, and leade the people malypertly, therby declaring yt he was the authour of the ſedicion. Heare Iohn Bradforde replied, & ſayd: that notwithſtandinge my lorde biſhops ſeyng & ſayinge yt he had tolde, was the trueth, as one daye

quoth he, my lord god almightye ſhall reueile to all the world, whē we all ſhall come and appeare before him. In the meane ſeaſon becauſe I cannot be beleued of you, I muſt, and am ready to ſuffer, as now your ſayīgs: ſo whatſoeuer God ſhall licence you to doe vnto me. I know, quoth my lord Chā
               cellor then, thou haſte a gloriouſe tonge, & godlye ſhewes thou makeſt, but all is lyes that thou doeſt. And againe, I haue not forgotten how ſtubburne thou wert when thou werte before vs in the Towre, whether thou waſt committed to priſon concerning relygion. I haue not forgotten thy behauiour and talk, wher through, worthely thou haſt bene kepte in priſon, as one yt would haue done more hurt then I wil ſpeake of.

My Lorde (quoth Bradforde) as I ſayd, I ſay again, that I ſtād, as before you, ſo before god, & one day we ſhall al ſtand before him, The trueth then will be the truth, though you wyl not now, ſo take it. Yea my lorde (quoth he) I dare ſaye that my lorde of Bathe (M. Bourne) will witnes with me, yt I ſought his ſauegard, with the perill of myne owne life, I thank god therefore. That is not trew, quoth the biſhop of Lōdon, for I my ſelf did ſee thee, take vpō thee to muche. No, quoth Bradforde, I tooke nothinge vppon me, vndeſired and that of maſter Bourn himſelfe, as if he were here preſēt, I dare ſaye he woulde affirme it, for hee deſired me, bothe to helpe him to pacifie the people, and not to leaue him till he was in ſafety.

And as for my behauioure in the Towre, and talk before your hohours, if I did or ſaide any thing that did not beſeme me, if wherin your lordſhips woulde tell me: I ſhould and would ſhortely make you aunſwer. Wel (quoth my lord Chancelor) to leaue this matter, how ſaiſt thou now, wilt thou returne again, and doe as we haue done, and thou ſhalte receiue the Queenes mercy and pardon? M
                  •
                lorde, quoth Bradforde, I deſire mercy with gods mercy, but mercy with Gods wrathe, god keepe me from, althoughe, I thanke God therefore, my conſcience doeth not accuſe me that I did or ſpake any thīg, wherfore I ſhould nede to receiue mercye or pardon. For all that euer I did or ſpake, was agreinge to Goddes lawes,

and the lawes of the realm at that preſēt, and did make much quietnes. Well quoth my lord Chancelor, if thou make this bablīg rolling in thy eloquent tonge, beyng altogether ignoraunt and vayne glorious, and will not receyue mercy offered to thee: knowe for trueth that the Quene is mynded to make a purgacion of all ſuche as thou arte. The Lorde quoth Bradforde to fore whom I ſtand as well as before you, knoweth what vain glory I haue ſought, and ſeke in this behalf. His mercy I deſire, & alſo would bee glad of the Queenes fauor, to lyue as a ſubiecte without clogge of conſcience, but otherwiſe the lordes mercye is to me better then lyfe. And I knowe, quoth he, to whom I haue committed my life: euē to

his handes which will kepe it ſo, that no man maye take it awaye before it be his pleaſure. There ar 1
                  •
               . houres in the daie, and as long as they laſt, ſo long ſhall no man haue power theron. Therfore his good will be done, life in his dyſpleaſure is worſe then death, and death in his true fauour is trewe lyfe. I knowe wel ynough, quoth my Lorde Chauncellor, that wee ſhoulde haue glorious talke ynough of thee, be ſure therefore yt as thou haſt deceyued the people with falſe and deuiliſhe doctrine: ſo ſhalte thou receiue. I haue not deceiued, quod Bradforde, the people, nor taught any other doctrine, then by Gods grace I am (and hope ſhall be) ready to confirme with my lyfe. And as for deuiliſhneſſe and falſeneſſe in the

doctrine I woulde bee ſorye you could ſo proue it. Why (quoth the Biſhop of Dureſme) tell me what you ſay by the miniſtracion of the communion, as you now know it is: My lorde (ſaithe Bradforde) here muſt I deſire of your Lordeſhip, and of all youre honours: a queſtion, tofore I doe make aunſwere to any intergatorie or queſtion, wherewith you now begin. I haue bene .vi. tymes ſworne, yt I ſhould in no caſe conſent, to the practyſing of any iuriſdiccion, or any authoritie on the Biſhop of Romes behalf, within this realm of Englande. Nowe therfore (before God) I humbly pray your honours, to tel me, whether you aſk me this queſtion, by his aucthoritie or not? If you dooe I dare

not nor maye not aunſwere you anye thyng in his aucthorite you ſhall demaunde of me, excepte I would be forſworne, whiche God forbid. Haſt thou bene ſworne .vi. tymes quoth maiſter Secretarye Burne, what offices haſte thou borne? Here is an other lie, quoth my Lorde Chauncelor. Forſooth, quoth Bradfoode, I was thryſe ſworn in Cambridge, whē I was admitted maiſter of Arte, when I was admitted felowe in Pēbrock Hall, and when I was there, the Viſiters came thether and ſware the Vniuerſitye. Agayne I was ſworne when I entered into the myniſterye, when I hadde a prebende geuen me, and when I was ſworne to ſerue the Kynge a litle before his death.
            
               Tuſhe quoth my lorde Chauncelor, Herodes othes a man ſhould make no conſciēce at. But, quoth Bradford, mi lord, theſe othes wer no Herodes othes, nor no vnlawfull othes, but othes according to gods woorde, as you youre ſelfe haue well affirmed in youre boke de Vera obediētia. My lords quoth an other of the counſel, yt ſtode by the table, M. Rocheſter I wene, I neuer knewe wherfore this mā was in priſon before nowe, but I ſee wel, that it had not bene good that this man had beene abrode. What ſo euer was the cauſe he was laide in priſon I know not, but I now ſee well, yt not without cauſe he was, and is to be kept in priſone. Yea, quoth Secretarye Bourn, it was reported this parliament tyme by the Erle of Derby,

that he hath doone more hurte by letters, and exhortinge theſe yt haue come to him, in religion, thē euer he did when he was abrode by preachinge. In his letters he curſeth al that teacheth falſe doctrine (for ſo he calleth that whiche is not accordīg to that he taught) and moſte earneſtly exhorteth thē to whome he writeth to continue ſtill in that they haue receiued by him, and ſuch lyke as he is. All which woordes diuers others of of the counſel affirmed, wherunto the ſaide maiſter Bourn added ſaying, howe ſaye you ſerra (ſpeaking to Bradforde) haue you not thus ſediciouſlye written, and exhorted the people. I haue, quoth Bradford, written nor ſpoken any thing ſediciouſlye: and, I thanke god therefore, I haue not admytted

any ſedicious cogitacion, nor I truſt neuer ſhall dooe. yea, but thou haſte wrytten letters, quoth maiſter Secretary Bourne. why ſpeakeſt thou not, quoth my lord Chauncelour, haſt thou not written as he ſaith. That, quoth Bradforde, I haue wrytten, I haue written. Lorde God (quoth. M. Southwell) what an arrogant & ſtubburne boye is this, that thus ſtoutlye and dallyengly, behaue hymſelf before the Queenes coū
               ſell. whereat, one looked vpon an other, with diſdaynefull countenaunce. My lordes and maſters, quoth Bradforde, the Lorde God whiche is, and wyll iudge vs all: knoweth, that as I am certayne I ſtande nowe before his maieſtye, ſo wyth reuerence in hys ſyghte, I ſtande beefore you vnto

youre, and accordyngly, in woordes and geſture I deſyre to behaue my ſelfe. yf you otherwyſe take it, I doubte not but God in hys tyme wyll reuele it. In the meane ſeaſon, I ſhall ſuffer with all due obedyence, your ſayinges and deedes too, I hope. Theſe bee gay glorious wordes, quoth my Lorde Chauncelour, of reuerēce, reuerence, but as in al other thynges, ſo hrrein thou doeſt nothyng but lye. Well quoth Bradforde, I would God the authour of trueth, and abhorrer of lyes, woulde pul my tounge out of my head before you all, and ſhewe a terrible iudgemente on me here preſentlye: yf I haue purpoſed or dooe purpoſe, to lye beefore you, whatſoeuer you ſhall aſke me.
            
               Why then, quoth my lord Chancelor, doeſt thou not anſwer? haſte thou written ſuch letters as here is obiected againſt the? As I ſaid my lord (quod Bradforde) that I haue written I haue written. I ſtande nowe before you whiche eyther can laye my letters to my charge or not, if you lay any thīg to my charge that I haue writtē, if I denye it I am then a lier. we ſhall neuer haue done with thee I perceiue now, ſaith my lord Chā
               celor, be ſhort, be ſhort, wylt thou haue mercy? I praye God (quoth Bradforde) geue me his mercie, & if therwith you wil extend yours, I wyll not refuſe it, but otherwiſe I wil not. Heare was now much a dooe, one ſpeaking thus and other ſpeaking that, of his arrogancye in refuſing the Queenes

pardon whiche ſhe ſo louyngly▪ dyd offer vnto him. wherto Bradforde aunſwered thus: my lordes yf I may liue as a quiete ſubiect, withoute clogge of conſcience, I ſhal hartely thanke you, for your pardō, yf otherwyſe I behaue my ſelfe, then I am in daunger of the faute. In the meane ſeaſon, I aſke no more, but the benefite of a ſubiect, till I be conuinced of tranſgreſſiō. If I cannot haue this, as hitherto I haue not had, goddes good wyll be doone. Vppon theſe wordes, my lord Chauncelor begon a lōg proces, of the falſe doctrine, wherewith people were deceiued, in the dayes of kyng Edwarde, and ſo tourned the ende of his talk to Bradforde, ſayīg, how ſayſt thou. My lord, quoth Bradforde, the doctrine taught i
                  •
                K
                  ••
               g

Edwardes daies was gods pure religion, the whiche as I then beleued, ſo doe I nowe more beleue then euer I didde. And therein I am more confirmed and ready to declare it, by gods grace euen as he will, to the worlde, then I was when I firſte came into priſone. What religion meane you (quoth the biſhop of Duriſme, in Kynge Edwardes daies? what yeare of his raigne? Forſoth (quoth Bradforde) euen that ſame yere of hys raigne (my Lorde) that the kynge dyed and I was preacher. Heare wrote maiſter Secretary Bourn I wotte not what. Nowe after a lytle pawſyng, my Lorde Chauncelloure begynneth agayne to declare, that the doctryne taught in Kynge Edwardes dayes, was

hereſye vſynge for probacion and demonſtra
                  •
               ion therof no Scryppure nor reaſon but thys, that i
                  •
                ended wyth Treaſon and Rebellion, ſo that (quoth he) the verye ende were ynoughe to improue, that doctryne to bee naughte. Ah my Lorde (quoth Bradford) that you would enter in to Gods Sanctuarie, and marke the ende of this preſent doctrine, you nowe ſo magnifie. What meaneſt thou by that (quoth he) I wene we ſhal haue a ſnatche of rebellion euen now. No (quoth Bradforde) my lord I meane no ſuche ende as you woulde gather, I meane an ende whiche none ſeeth but thei yt enter into gods Sanctuarie. If a man loke but on preſēt thyngs, he wil ſone deceiue hīſelf. Heare now dyd my Lorde Chauncellor offer

againe mercye, and Bradford anſwered as before, mercye wt gods mercy ſhould be welcome, but otherwiſe he would none. Whervpon the ſaid lord Chancellor dyd ring a litle bel be like to cal in ſōe bodye, for there was preſent none in maner, but onelye theſe before named, and the biſhop of Worceſter. Now whē one was come in, it is beſte, quoth maiſter Secretarye Burne, yt you geue ye keper a charge of this fellowe. So was the vndermarſhall called in. you ſhall take this man to you, quoth my Lord Chauncelor, & kepe him cloſe, without conference with any man, but by your knowledge, and ſuffer him not to wryte anye letters. &c. For he is of an other maner of charge vnto you now, then he was before, and ſo thei departed,

the ſaid Bradford lokyng as cherefully as any man coulde doe, declaring thereby, euen a deſire to geue his lyfe, for confirmacion of that he hath taughte and written. And ſurely (yf he dooe) ſo his death wyll deſtroye more of the Philiſtines, as Sampſon dyd, then euer he dydde in hys lyfe, God almyghtie keepe hym and al his felowes bounde for the lordes ſake. Amen.
         
         
            
            ¶The effect of the ſecond examinacion of Iohn Bradforde in the temple of S. Marie Oueries, before the lorde Chauncelour and diuers other byſhoppes the .xxix. daye of Ianuarii .1555.
            
               AFter the excommunycaciō of Ihō Rogers, Iohn Bradford was called in, & ſtandynge before the lord Chancelour & other biſhops ſet wt him: the ſaid lord Chācelor ſpake thus in effect. That wheretofore the .22 of Ianuarie, they called the ſayde Bradford before thē & offred vnto hym ye Queenes pardō, although he had contēned ye ſame, & further he ſaid yt he would ſtifly & ſtoutly maintaine & defende therronious

doctrine holdē in ye daies of kyng Edward the .6. yet in cōſideraciō that the Queenes highnes is wō
               derfull merciful, they thoughte good eftſones to offer the ſame, mercy againe before it be to late. Therfore (ꝙ my lorde Chauncellour) nowe aduiſe you well, there is yet ſpace and grace tofore wee ſo procede, that you be committed to the ſeculer power, as we muſte do, and wil do, if you will not follow thexample of M. Barlowe & Cardmaker whō he there cōmended, adding oratoriouſly amplificacions, to moue the ſaide Bradford to yeld to the religiō preſētly ſet forth. After the lord Chauncellors long talke, Bradford began on this ſorte to ſpeake. My Lord (quoth he) & my lordes al, as now I ſtand in your ſyght before you,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſo I humbly beſeche your honors to conſider, that you ſit in ye ſight of the lord: who as Dauid doeth witneſſe is in the congregacions of iudges, and fittes in the myddeſt of thē iudgeing. And as you woulde youre place, to bee nowe of vs taken as gods place: ſo demonſtrate your ſelues, to folowe hym in your ſittyng, that is: ſeke no giltleſſe bloude, nor hunte not by queſtiōs, to bring into ye ſnare, them whiche are out of the ſame. At this preſente I ſtande before you, giltie or giltleſſe: if giltie, thē procede and geue ſentence accordinglye, if giltles, then geue me the benefite of a ſubiect, whiche hitherto I could not haue. Heare the Lorde Chauncellour replyed and ſaide, that the ſaid Bradford began with a true ſentence: Deus ſtetit

in ſinagoga. &c. but, ꝙ he, this and all thy geſture, declareth but Hypocriſie, and vain glory. And further he made much a do to purge himſelf, that he ſought no giltles bloud, and ſo beganne a lōg proceſſe, howe that Brodfordes facte at Poules croſſe, was preſūptuous arrogant, and declared a taking vpō him, to lead the people. whiche coulde not, but tourne to much diſquietnes, ꝙ he, in yt thou, ſpeakīg to Bradford, was ſo prefract and ſtout in religion, at that preſēt. For ye which as thou waſt thē committed to priſon, ſo hitherto haſte thou bene kepte in priſō, where thou haſte written letters to no litle hurte to the Queenes people, as by the reporte of therle of Darby in the parlement houſe, was credeblye reported. And to

this be added, yt the ſaid Bradford did ſtubbernly behaue himſelf, the laſt time he was before them, and therfore not for any other thynge now I demaund thee of (ꝙ he) but of & for thy doctrine & religiō. Mi lord (ꝙ Bradforde) where you accuſe me of hipocriſy & vain glory, I muſt & wil leaue it to the lordes declaraciō, which one daie wil open yours & my trueth: & heartye dealinges. In the meane ſeaſon I wil contēt my ſelf, wt the teſtimony of mine own conſcience. Which if it yelded to hipocriſy, could not but haue god my foe alſo, and ſo both god and man were agaynſt me. As for my facte at Poules croſſe, and behauior before you at the Towre, I doubt not but god wyll reuele it to my comfort. For if euer I dydde any thynge

which god vſed to publyke benefite, I think that, yt my dede was one: and yet for it I haue beene & am kept of lōg time in priſō. And as for letters & religion I anſwer (ꝙ Bradforde) as I did the laſte tyme I was beefore you. There diddeſte thou ſaye (ꝙ my Lorde Chauncellour) that thou wouldſt ſtubbernli & manly maintein therronious doctrine in kīg Edwardz daies. My lorde (ꝙ Bradforde) I ſaid the laſt time I was before you yt I had .6. times taken an othe, yt I ſhould neuer cōſent to the practiſing of any Iuriſdiccion on the biſhop of Rome his behalfe, and therefore durſte not aunſwere to any thynge ſhoulde be demaunded ſo, leaſt I ſhould be forſworn, whiche God forbid. Howe bee it ſauyng myne othe, I ſaid that I

was more confirmed in the doctrine ſet forth publike in kīg Edwardes daies, then euer I was, before I was put in priſone, and ſo I thought I ſhould be, & think yet ſtyll I ſhall bee founde more ready to geue my lyfe, as god wil, for the confirmacion of theſame. I remember wel (ꝙ my lord Chā
               celour) that thou madeſt muche a doe about a nedeles matter, as though the othe againſt the B. of Rome wer, ſo great a matter. So others haue done before thee, but yet not in ſuche ſorte as thou haſt done. For thou pretendiſt a cōſcience in it, whiche is nothinge els but mere hipocriſie. My conſciēce ꝙ Bradforde, is knowen to the Lorde, and whether I deale here in hipocritally or no, he knoweth. As I ſaide therfore then my lord,

ꝙ he ſo ſaye I againe nowe, that for feare leſt I ſhould be periured I dare not make anſwere to any thyng, you ſhal demaunde of me, yf my aunſweryng ſhould cōſent, to the practyſing of any iuriſdiccion for the .B. of Rome, here in England. Why, ꝙ my lord Chancelour, diddeſt thou not begin to tel, that we ar Dii and ſit in gods place, and nowe wilte thou not make vs aunſwere? My lorde, ꝙ Bradforde, I ſayde you woulde haue your place takē of vs now, as goddes place, and therefore I brought foorth that pece of ſcrypture, yt ye mighte be the more admoniſhed to folowe God and his wayes at this preſente, who ſeeth vs all, and well perceyueth, whether of conſcience I pretende thys matter of the othe or no. No, ꝙ my

my lord Chancelor, al men may ſe thi hipocriſy: for, if for thine othes ſake thou doeſt not aunſwere, thē wouldeſt thou not haue ſpokē as thou didſt, & haue aunſwered me at the firſt. But now mē may wel perceiue, yt this is but a ſtartynge hole to hide thy ſelfe in, becauſe thou dareſt not aunſwere, and ſo wouldeſt eſcape, blīdyng the ſimple peoples eies, as though of cō
               ſcience you did all you doe. That whiche I ſpake at the firſte (ꝙ Bradforde) was not a replicacyon or an aunſwere to yt you ſpake to me, & therfore I nede not to lay for me myne othe: for I thought, perchance you would haue more weyed what I did ſpeak, thē you did. But whē I perceued you did not conſidre it, but came to aſke matter whereto by anſwerynge I ſhoulde cōſēt to the practiſinge of

iuriſdicciō on the B. of Rome hys behalf here in Englande & ſo bee forſworne: thē of cōſcience & ſimplicitie I ſpake as I do yet again ſpeak, yt I dare not for conſcience ſake anſwere you, and therfore I ſeke no ſtartinge holes, nor goe about to blind the people, as God knoweth. For if you of youre honor ſhal tel me, yt you doe not aſke me any thyng, wherby my anſwering ſhould conſent to the practiſing to ye B. of Romes iuriſdicciō aſke me wherin you wil, and you ſhal here, yt I will aunſwere you as flatly as euer anye did yt came before you. I am not afrayde of death I thanke god, for I loke, & haue loked for nothīg els at your hands of long time. But I am afraid whē death cōmeth. I ſhould haue mater to trouble my cōſciēce

by the giltines of periury, & therefore doe aunſwer as I do. Theſe be but gaye glorious woordes, ꝙ my lorde Chauncelour, ful of hypocriſie and vaine glory. And yet doeſt not thou knowe, ꝙ he ſpeaking to Bradforde, yt I ſit here as B. of Wincheſter in mine own dioces, and therefore maye doe this whiche I doe, and more too? My lord, ꝙ Bradforde, geue me leaue to aſke you this queſtion, that my conſcience maie bee out of doubte in this matter. Tel me here coram deo before god, all this audyence beyng witnes, that you demaund me nothing, wherby my aunſwering ſhould conſent to & confirme the practiſe of iuriſdiccion for the B. of Rome here in Englād: and your honour ſhall heare me, geue you as flat and as plain anſwers

briefly, to whatſoeuer you ſhal demaund me: as euer any dyd. Here the lorde Chauncellor was wonderfully offēded, and ſpake much, howe that the B. of Romes aucthoritie, nede no confirmacion of Bradfordes aunſweringe, nor no ſuche as he was. And turned hys talke to the people, howe yt Bradforde followed craftye couetous marchauntes: which, becauſe thei woulde lende no money to theyr neighbors, whē thei wer in nede: would ſay, that they had ſworne ofte, they would neuer lende anye more money, becauſe their credytours had ſo ofte deceiued thē. Euē ſo thou (ꝙ he to Bradford) doſt at this preſent, to caſte a miſt in ye peoples eyes, to bleare them with an hereſie, which is greatter, and more hurtful to the cōmon welth,

pretende thine othe, whereby the people mighte make a conſcience where as they ſhoulde not. Why ſpeakeſt thou not? quoth he. My lord (ꝙ Bradford, as I ſaid I ſay agayne, I dare not anſwere you for feare of periury, from whiche God defende me: Or els I could tell you, yt there is a difference betwene othes. Some be according to faith and charitie, as ye othe againſt the B. of Rome. Some be agaīſt faith and charitie, as this, to denye my help to my brother in his nede. Here again ye lord Chā
               cellor was much offēded, ſtil ſaying, that Bradford durſt not anſwere: and further made muche a do to proue, that ye othe to ye B. of Rome was againſt charitie. But Bradford anſwered, that how ſo euer hrs honor toke him, yet was

he, aſſured of his meanīg, that no feare but ye feare of periury made him aferd to aunſwere. For as for death my lord (ꝙ he) as I knowe ther ar .12. houres in the day, ſo wt ye lord my time is appointed. And whē it ſhalbe his good tyme, then ſhall I departe hence. But in the meane ſeaſon, ꝙ he, I am ſafe ynough though al the worlde had ſworne my death. Into his hādes I haue cōmitted it, his good will be done. And, ꝙ Bradford, ſauīg mine oth, I wil anſwer you in this behalf, that the othe agaīſt the. B of Rome was not nor is not againſt charitie. Howe proue you yt, ꝙ my lord Chācelor. Forſoth, ꝙ Bradford, I proue it thus: That is not againſt charitie, whiche is not againſt gods worde: but this othe againſt the biſhop of Romes

aucthoritie in Englande is not againſt gods worde, therefore it is not againſt charitie. Is it not againſt gods woorde, ꝙ my Lorde Chancellour, that a man ſhoulde take a kyng, to be ſupreme heade of the church in his realme? No ꝙ Bradford (ſauing ſtyl mine othe) it is not againſt gods worde, but with it, being taken in ſuche ſence as it may be wel taken: that is attributing to the kinges power, yt ſoueraintie in all his dominions. I praye you, ꝙ the lorde Chauncelour, where finde you that? I finde it in manye places, ꝙ Bradforde, but ſpecially in the .13. to the Romaines, where Saint Paule writeth: euery ſoule to be obediēt to the ſuperiour power. But what power? que gladium geſtat, ye power verely which beareth the ſweord,

which is not the ſpiritual but the temporall power: As Chriſoſtome full well noteth (ꝙ Bradforde) vpon the ſame place, whiche youre honor knoweth better then I. He (Chriſoſtome I meane) ther plainly ſheweth, yt biſhops, prophetes, and apoſtles owe obedience to ye temporall maieſtrates. Here yet more the Lorde Chancelour was ſtered and ſaid, howe that Bradforde went about, to deny al obedience to the Queene, for his oth, & ſo (ꝙ he) this mā woulde make, gods woord a warrant of diſobedience. For he will aunſwere the Queene on this ſorte, that when ſhe ſayeth nowe ſweare to the B. of Rome, or obey his aucthoritye. No, wil he ſaie, for I am then forſworne, and ſo make the Queene

no Queene. No (ꝙ Bradforde) I go not about to deny all obediēce to the Queenes highnes, by deniyng obedience in this part, yf ſhee ſhoulde demaunde it. For I was ſworne to king Edward, not ſimply: that is, not onely concernyng his owne perſon, but alſo concerning his ſucceſſours. And therefore in denying to do the Quenes requeſt herein, I denye not her authoritie, nor become diſhobedient. Yes, that doeſt thou (ꝙ my Lorde Chancelor.) And ſo he beganne to tell a longe tale, howe if a manne ſhoulde make an othe to pay a .Cli. by ſuch a day, and the manne to whom it was due, would forgeue the debt. The debter woulde ſaie, no, you cannot do it, for I am forſworne thē. &c. Here Bradford deſired my lord Chauncellor, not to

trifle it, ſaying: yt he wondred, hys honor would make ſolemne othes (made to god) trifles in that ſorte. And make ſo great a matter concernīg vowes as thei cal it, made to the biſhop for mariage of prieſtes. At theſe wordes ye lord Chā
               celour was much offended, & ſaid he did not trifle, but (ꝙ he) thou goeſt about to denie obedience to the Queene, which now requireth obedience to the B. of Rome. No my lord (ꝙ Bradford) I dooe not denye obedience to the Queene, yf you would diſcerne betwene genus and ſpecies. Becauſe I may not obey in this, to reaſon, ergo I maye not obey in the other, is not firme. As if a mā let one ſel a pece of his inheritāce, yet this notwtſtādyng al his inheritāce is not let or ſold. And ſo in this caſe, all obedyence

I denye not becauſe I denie obedience in this branche. I wil none of thoſe ſimilitudes ſaid the lorde Chancellour. I would not vſe thē (ꝙ Bradforde) if that you wente not about to perſwade ye people, I meane that which I neuer mēt. For I my ſelf, not onely meane obedience, but wil geue enſample▪ of all moſt humble obedience to ye Queenes highnes, ſo long as ſhe requireth not obedience agaynſte god. No no (ꝙ my lorde Chauncelour) al men maie perceiue wel inough your meaning. There is no man, though he bee ſworne to the king, doth therfore break his othe, yf afterwardes he be ſworne to the Frenche king and to themperour. It is true my Lorde (ꝙ Bradforde) but the caſes bee not like. For here is an excepciō: thou

ſhalt not ſweare to ye. B. of Rome at any time. If in like maner we were ſworne, thou ſhalt not ſerue themperour &c. you ſee there were ſome alteracion and more doubt. But (ꝙ Bradford) I beſeche your honour, remembre what ye youre ſelfe haue written, anſweringe the obieccions here againſt, in youre boke de vera obedientia. Vincat modo domini verbi veritas. Let Gods woorde and the reaſons thereof beare the bell awaie. Heare the lord Chauncelor was throughlye moued, and ſaide ſtyll, howe that Bradforde had written ſedicious letters, and peruerted the people thereby, and did ſtoutly ſtand, as though he would defende the erronious doctrine in kynge Edwardes tyme, againſt all men, & now (ꝙ he) he ſaieth, he dare not

anſwer. I haue written no ſedicious letters (ꝙ Bradforde) I haue not peruerted ye people. But that which I haue writtē & ſpokē, yt wil I neuer deny by gods grace. And wher your L. ſaith, I dare not anſwer you: yt al mē may know I am not afraid, ſauīg mine oth, aſk me what you wyl, & I will plainelye make you anſwer by gods grace: although I now ſee my lyfe lyeth theron. But O lord (ꝙ he) into thy hands I cōmit it, come what come will: onelye ſanctifie thy name in me, as in one inſtrumente of thy grace. Amen. Now aſke what you wil (ꝙ Bradford) & you ſhall ſe I am not afraid by gods grace, flatly to anſwer. Well then (ꝙ my lord Chauncelour) how ſay you to the bleſſed ſacrament? do you not beleue,

there Chriſte to bee preſente concernynge his naturall bodye? My lorde (ꝙ Bradforde) I doe beleue Chriſt to be corporally preſēt, in his ſacrament duely vſed. Corporally I ſay, that is, in ſuch ſorte as he woulde, I meane Chriſte is there corporally preſēt vnto faith. Vnto faith (ꝙ my lorde Chaunceloure) wee muſte haue manye moe words to make it more plain. you ſhal ſo (ꝙ Bradford) but firſt geue me leaue to ſpeake twoo wordes. Speake on, quoth my lord Chancellour. I haue bene now a yeare and almoſte thre quarters in pryſone (ꝙ Bradforde) and of all thys tyme, you neuer queſtyoned wyth me heare aboutes, when I myghte haue ſpoken my conſcyence frankely, wythout peryll.

But nowe you haue a law to hāg vp and put to death, if a man anſwer, freely and not to your appetite. And ſo you nowe come to demaund this queſtion. Ah my lord (ꝙ Bradforde) Chriſte vſed not th
                  •
               s waye to bring men to faythe. No more did the Prophets or the Apoſtles. Rembeēr what Barnarde writeth to Eugenius the Pope: Apoſtolos lego ſtetiſſe iudicandos, ſediſſe iudicantes non legi. Hoc erit illud fuit
               ▪ &c. Here the Chā
               celor was appeaſed as it ſemed, & ſpake moſte gentlye, that he vſed not this meanes. It was not my doyng, although ſome there be) ꝙ he) that thinke this to be the beſte waie. I for my parte (ꝙ he) haue bene chalenged for being to gētle often times. The which thing the B. of London confirmed, & ſo did

almoſte all the audience, that he hadde been euer to mylde and to gentle. At whiche wordes Bradforde ſpake thus: My Lorde, ꝙ he, I praye you ſtretche out your gentlenes, that I maye fele it, for hytherto I neuer felte it. As ſone as be hadde ſpoken thus, the lord Chauncellour (belyke thynkynge Bradforde woulde haue hadde mercye and pardone, as Cardmaker and Barlow hadde) ſayd, that wyth all hys hearte not onely he, but the Queenes highneſſe woulde ſtretche oute mercye, yf wyth them hee woulde retourne. Retourne my Lord, quoth Bradforde, God ſaue me from that goyng backe. I meane it not ſo: But I meane, quoth he, that I was three quarters of a yere in the Tower, wythout paper penne or

inke, & neuer in al that time nor ſithē, did I fele any gentlenes from you. I haue rather loked for, as I haue hitherto founde, extremitie. And (ꝙ he) I thank God, I perceue now, you haue kept me in priſon thus long, not for any matter you had, but for mater you would haue. Goddes good wil bee done. Here was now, diuerſe, tellīg my lorde it was diner time, and ſo he roſe vp, leauing Bradforde ſpeaking, & ſayīg, that in ye after noone thei would ſpeak more with him. And ſo was he had into ye veſtry, & was there al that daye tyll darke nighte, and ſo was conueyed agayne to priſone: declaringe by his countenance great ioy in god: the whiche God increaſe in him.
         
         
            
            ¶The effect and ſumme of the laſt examinacion of that faithfull inſtrument of God Iohn Bradforde in the Churche of Saincte Marie Oueries the 29. daie of Ianuarii .1555.
            
               AFter the excommunicacion of Laurēce Saūders, Iohn Bradford was called in, and being broughte before the Lorde Chauncelour and other biſhops there ſittinge: the Lorde Chancelour began to ſpeak thus in effecte, that Bradforde beynge now eftſones com before thē, wold aunſwere with modeſtie and humylitye, and conforme hymſelfe to the Catholyke Churche wyth theym. And ſo yet myghte

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
he find mercy, becauſe thei would be loth to vſe extremite. Therfore he concluded with an exhortaciō, yt Bradforde woulde recante his doctrine. After the lorde Chancellor had ended his longe oracion, Bradforde began to ſpeak thus. As yeſterday I beſought your honour, to ſet in your ſighte the maieſtie and preſence of God, to follow him which ſeketh not to ſubuert the ſimple by ſubtil queſtiōs: ſo, quoth he, I humblye beſeche euery one of you to daie, for yt you knowe that giltles bloud wil crie vengeaunce. And thus, quoth he, I praie not your Lordſhip to do, as one that taketh vpon me, to cō
               demne you vtterly herin, but that you might bee the more admonyſhed to doe, that which none doth, ſo much as he ſhould do. For our

nature is ſo much corrupt that we are very obliuious and forgetfull of god. Again, ꝙ Bradford, as yeſterdaie I pretended my othe and othes againſte ye B. of Rome, that I ſhould neuer cōſent to the practiſing of any iuriſdiccion for him, or in his behalfe in the realme of Englande: ſo againe this day leſt I ſhould be periured. And laſt of al, as yeſterday the anſwer I made was by proteſtacion and ſauynge my oth: ſo would I your honours ſhould knowe, that myne ſhal be this daie. And this I do that when death, whiche I loke for at youre handes, ſhall come: I ſhall not be troubled with the giltines of periury. At theſe words ye lord Chancelor was wroth, & ſaid that they had geuē him reſpite to deliberate vntil this day, whether he would

recāt the hereſies of the bleſſed ſacrament, whiche yeſterday (ꝙ the lord Chancelor, before vs you vttred. My lord (ꝙ Bradforde) you gaue me no time of any ſuch delyberacion, neither did I any thing of the ſacrament, which you didde diſalow. For when I had declared a preſence of Chriſt to bee there to the faithful: you went frō the matter to purge your ſelfe yt you were not crewel, and ſo went to dinner. What, I perceiue (ꝙ my lord Chā
               celour) we muſt begin all agayne with thee: d
                  •
               d I not yeſterday tell thee plainely, that thou madeſt a conſcience where none ſhould be? Did I not make it plaine that the othe againſt the Biſhop of Rome was an vnlawfull othe?
            No (ꝙ Bradford) In dede my lord you ſaid ſo, ꝙ he, but proued is not

nor neuer can do. Oh lord god (ꝙ the lorde Chauncelour) what a felowe arte thou? Thou wouldeſte goe about to bringe into the peoples heades, that we, al the lords of the parliamēt houſe, ye knights, Burgieſſes, and all the whole, is periured. Oh what an hereſye is thys? Here good people ye may ſee what a Churliſhe hereticke thys felowe is. If I ſhoulde make an othe, I would neuer helpe my brother, or lende hym money in hys nede, were this a good aunſwere to tell my neyghboure, deſyringe my helpe that I hadde made an othe to the contrarye, I coulde not dooe it? Heare the lorde Chauncelor made muche a do, & a long time was ſpēt about othes, which wer good & which wer euil,

he capciouſly aſking of Bradford often anſwer of things cōcerning othes, which Bradford would not geue ſimply, but with diſtincciō, wherat the lord Chancelour was ſore offended. But Bradford ſtyll kept him at the baye: that the oth againſte the B. of Rome, was an vnlawfull othe, vſing therto, the Chancelors owne boke de Vera obedientia
               ▪ For confirmaciō: at the length thei came to this iſſue, who ſhould iudge of the lawfulnes of of the othes. And Bradford ſaid, the worde of God, accordynge to Chriſtes owne woordes. Iohn .12. ſaying: My word ſhal iudge. And according to the teſtimonie of Eſai .2. & Micheas .4. That goddes word coming out of Ieruſalē ſhal geue ſentēce amongſt ye gentiles. By theſe wordes my lord ꝙ he, I

will proue the othe againſt ye B. of Romes auctorite, to be a good, a godli, & a lawful oth. So therof the lord Chauncelor left his hold, ſayīg yt as ye other day he p̄tēded denyal of the Queenes aucthoritie & obedience to her highneſſe: ſo did he now. But Bradford, as the day before proued, that obedience in this point are particuler to the Quenes highnes. If ſhe ſhold demaūde an othe to the .B. of Rome beinge denied, it was a generall deniall of her aucthoritie and obedience to her, no more (quoth he) then the gift or leaſe of a ſole pece of a mans inheritance proueth, a ſale, gift, or leaſe of the whole inheritance. And thus muche a doe was made about the matter. The lord Chancelor talking muche, & vſing many examples of dette, of

going out of the towne to morow by othe, yet tarying tyll Fridaye & ſuche like, whiche triflinge talke Bradford did touche, ſaying, that it was a wonder, that his honour did wey cōſcience no more in this, and would be ſo earneſt in vowes for mariage of Prieſtes, made to biſhops, and bee careleſſe for Solemne othes made to God and the prince. Summa this was the ende, the lorde Chauncelour ſayde, the Queene might diſpence with it: & did it to al the whole realme. But Bradford ſaid, the Queenes highnes, could do no more but remitte her right. And as for the oth made to God, ſhe coulde neuer remytte. For as muche as it was made to God. At which woordes the lord Chancelour chafed wonderfully, and ſaid that in plaine ſentence he

ſlandered the hole realme of periury: and therfore (ꝙ he) to ye people, you may ſe how this felow taketh vppon hym, to haue more knowledge & cōſcience, then al the wiſe men of England, & yet (ꝙ he) he hath no conſcience at al. Wel (ꝙ Bradforde) my lord let al the ſtā
               ders by ſee, who hath conſcyence. I haue bene a yere & a half in pryſon, now before all this people declare, wherfore I was priſoned, or what cauſe you had to puniſh me▪ you ſayde the other daye in youre owne houſe, my Lord of London witneſſing with you, that I toke vppon me to ſpeake to the people vndeſyred. There he ſytteth by your Lordſhip, I meane my lord Biſhop of Bath, which deſired me hīſelf, for ye paſſiō of Chriſt I wold

ſpeake to the people, vpon whoſe wordes I commyng in to the pulpit: had like to haue bene ſlaine wt a naked dagger, which was hurled at me, I thinke, for it touched my ſleaue. He eftſones praied me, I woulde not leaue him, & I promiſed, as long as I liued, I would take hurt ye day before him, and ſo went out of the pulpit, & at length broughte him ſafe to a houſe. Beſides this: in ye after noone I prech at Bow church, & goyng vp into the pulpitte, one wylled me not to reꝓue ye people for ye fact (for ꝙ he) you ſhal neuer come downe aliue if you do it. And yet (ꝙ Bradford) notwithſtanding, I did in ye Sermond, reproue their fact, & called it ſedicion, at the leaſt .xx. tymes. For all whiche my doinge, I haue receiued this recompence, priſon a

yere & a half & more, & death, now which you go about. Let al mē (ꝙ Bradford) nowe iudge, wher conſciēce is. In ſpeking theſe words: ther was ye ēdeuored to haue letted it, but Bradford ſpake on, & let thē ſpeake what they would. And the lord Chancelour ſaid, yt for al his faire talke his fact at ye Croſſe was naught. No (ꝙ Bradford) my fact was good, as you youre ſelfe did bear witnes wt me. For when I was firſt before you in ye Towre you your ſelfe did ſaye yt the facte was good, but, ꝙ you, the mynde was euyll, wel then ꝙ I, my lord, in that you alowe my facte & condemne my mynde in it, I can not otherwiſe declare my mynd to mā thē by ſaying & doīg, god, I truſt, one day will open to my comforte what my mynde was, and what

yours is. Here the lord Chauncelour was offended & ſaide, that he neuer ſaid ſo, I (ꝙ hee) had not ſo litle wit, I trow, as not to diſcerne betwixt meaning & doyng, and ſo brought forth, litle to ye purpoſe, many examples, that mē conſtrue thynges, not by the meanynge of mā, but by their doings. But whē this coulde not ſerue: then cometh he to another matter, and ſaid, he was put in priſon at the firſt, becauſe he woulde not yelde, nor bee confirmable to the Queenes religion. Why (quoth Bradford) your honour knoweth, that you would not then reaſō with me in religiō, but you ſaide a time ſhould afterward be found out, whē I ſhould be talked wt al. But (ꝙ Bradford) if it were as your lordſhip ſaith, yt I was put in for religion, in yt my

religiō was thē auctoriſed by the publike lawes of the realm, could cōſciēce puniſh me or caſt me into priſō th
                  •
               rfore? Wherfore let al mē iudge in whō conſcience wanteth. Here cōmeth forth M. Chāberlain of Woodſtocke, & ſaid to the Lord Chancelor, yt Bradforde had bene a ſeruing mā, & was with M. Harington. True (ꝙ the lord Chancelour) & did deceiue his M. of .27 poundes, & becauſe of this, he wēt to bee a goſpeller, and a preacher (good people) and yet you ſe how he pretendeth cōſciēce. My lord, ꝙ Bradford, I ſet my fote to his fote whoſoeuer he be, yt cā come furth, & iuſtly vouch to mi face yt euer I deceiued my M. And as you ar chief iuſtices by office, in Englād, I deſire iuſtice vpō them yt ſo ſlander me, becauſe they cannot proue it.

Here my lord Chauncelour & M. Chamberlain wer ſtroke blanke, & ſaid thei heard it, but, ꝙ the lord Chauncellour, you haue an other maner of matter then this, for you are an heretike. yea, quoth ye B. of Londō, he did write letters to. M Pendleton▪ whiche knoweth his hand as wel as his own▪ your honor, quoth ye biſhop to the lorde Chancelour, did ſe them. That is not true, quoth Bradforde, I dyd neuer write to Pendleton ſithe I came into priſone, therefore I am not iuſtlye ſpoken of. yea but you indited it, quoth the B. of Londō. I did not, quoth Bradforde, nor know not what you meane, & that I offer to proue. Here commeth a nother, I trowe thei call him M. Allin one of the Clarks of the coū
               ſell, putting my lord in rememberance,

of letters ſent into Lanke
                  •
               
               ſhire. It is true, quoth the Lorde Chancelor vnto him, for we haue his hand to ſhew. I denie ye quoth Bradford, yt you haue my hande to ſhewe, of letters ſent into Lankeſhire, otherwiſe, then before you all I will ſtande vp and proue thē to be good and lawfull. Here was al anſwered, & therefore the lorde Chancelour began a new matter. Sir, quoth he, in my houſe the other day, you did moſte contempteouſly contempne the Queenes mercy, & further ſaid, you woulde maynteine the erronious doctrine in king Edwardes daies, againſt al men, & this you did moſt ſtoutly. Well (quoth Bradforde) I am glad that al men ſee, you had no matter to impriſon me afore that daie, iuſtlye: nowe ſaye I, that I

did not contētuouſly contemne ye Queenes mercy, but wolud haue had it with gods mercy, that is, without ſaying and doynge anye thing, againſt god and his truth▪ And as for maintenaūce of doctrine (becauſe I cānot tel how you wil ſtretche this woorde maintenāce) I will repete again yt which I ſpake. I ſaid I was more confirmed in the religion ſet foorth in king Edwardes dayes, then euer I was, & if god ſo would, I truſt I ſhould declare it, by geuing my life for the confirmacion and teſtificacion therof. So I ſaide then, & ſo I ſay again now, ꝙ Bradford. As for otherwiſe to mainteine it, then pertayneth to a priuate perſon: by cōfeſſiō (I thought not nor thinke. Well (ꝙ the lord Chancelor) yeſterday thou diddeſt mayntain

falſe hereſy, cōcernyng ye bleſſed ſacramēt, & therfore we gaue ye reſpite til this day, to deliberate. My lord (ꝙ Bradford) as I ſayde at ye firſt, I ſpake nothinge of the Sacramēt, but yt which you allowed, & therfore reꝓued it not, nor gaue me no time to deliberate. Why (ꝙ he) diddeſt thou not denye Chriſts preſence in the ſacramēt? No (ꝙ Bradford) I neuer denyed nor taught, but that to the fayth, whole Chriſts body & bloud was as preſente, as breade & wyne to the dewe receyuer. yea, but doeſt thou not beleue that Chriſtes bodye naturallye and reallye is vnder the forme of bread and wyne? My Lord (ꝙ Bradforde) I beleue Chriſt is preſēt there, to faith of ye dewe receyuer, as for tranſubſtanciacion, I plainely and flatlye

tell you I beleue it not. Here was Bradford called a deuil or ſclanderer for we axe no queſtiō, ꝙ ye lord Chancelor, of tranſubſtanciacion, but of Chriſts bodily preſēce. Why quoth Bradford, I denye not hys preſēce to the faith of the receuer, but denye that he is included in ye bred, or that the bred is tranſubſtanciated, If he be not īcluded ꝙ the B. of Worceſter, how is he then preſēt? Forſothe (quoth Bradford) my faith knoweth howe, though my tōg cannot expreſſe it, nor you otherwiſe thē by faith heare it or vnderſtand it. Heare was much a doe now, one Docter ſtarting vp & ſpeking this, another that, & the lord Chancelor talking muche, of Luther, zwīglius, & Oecolāpadiꝰ. But ſtil Bradford kept thē at this point, that Chriſt is preſēt to faith

and yt there is no tranſubſtanciacion nor including of Chriſt in the bread, but al this would not ſerue thē. Therfore an other biſhop aſked this queſtiō, whether ye wycked man receiued Chriſtes verye bodie or no? & Bradford anſwered plainly, no. Where the lord Chancelor made a long oracion, howe yt it could not be yt Chriſte was preſent, excepte that the euill man receiue hī. But Bradford put his oracion away in few woordes: that grace was at ye preſent offred vnto his lordſhip, although he receiued it not. So yt, ꝙ he, yt receyuing maketh not the preſens as youre lordſhip would affirme, but gods grace, trueth, & power, is ye cauſe of the preſence, the which the wicked yt lacketh faith cannot receue. And here Bradforde prayed hym

not to deuorce that, whiche God hathe coupled together, he hathe coupled al this together: take eate this is my bodye, he ſaieth not ſee pepe, this is my bodye, but take eate. Here the lorde Chancelour & the reſte of the Biſhoppes made a great a do, that Bradforde hadde founde out a toy, that no man els euer did, of the condicions, & the lord Chancelor made many words to the people, here aboute. But Bradford ſaid this, My lord ꝙ he, are not theſe woordes take eate, a cōmaundement? and are not theſe woordes, this is my bodye a promyſe? If you wil challenge the ꝓmiſe, & do not ye cōmandemēt, may you not deceue your ſelf? Here the lord Chancelor denied Chriſte to haue cōmāded any thīg in ye ſacramēt, or ye vſe of it. Why, ꝙ Bradford

my lord I pray you tel the people, what mode accipite manducate is, it is plain to childrē that Chriſt in ſo ſaying cōmandeth. At theſe wordes, the lorde Chauncellor made a great toying & trifling at the imperatiue mode, & fel to propoſing or examining as though he ſhuld teach a child, & ſo cōcluded that it was no cōmandement, but ſuch a phraſe as this, I praye you geue me drink which is no commandemēt I trow. But Bradford prayd him to leaue toying & trifling and ſaid thus: my lord, ꝙ he, if it be not a commandemēt of Chriſt to take & to eate the ſacramēt, why do any take vpō thē to cōmaund & make of neceſſity, that which god leueth free? as you do in making it a neceſſary commandemēt, that once a yere for al that be of lawful diſcrecion

to receiue the ſacramēt. Here the lord Chancelour calleth him againe Diabolus or ſlaunderer, & ſo began out of theſe woordes,Cori. 10. let a man proue himſelf & ſo eate of the bread (the bred ꝙ Bradford?) and drink of the cup, that was no cō
               mandemēt, for then, ꝙ he, if it wer a cōmandemēt, it ſhould bynde al men in al places, & at al tymes. O my lord, quoth Bradford, diſcerne betwene cōmandementes, ſome be generall that thei binde alwaies in all places and all perſones, ſome be not ſo generall as this is of the ſupper: The ſacramente of Baptiſm: of the appearing before the lord at Ieruſalē: Abrahās offring Iſaac. Here the lord Chancelor ſaid, what ſay you that Baptiſme is cōmanded: thē, quoth he, we ſhal haue .xi. cōmandementes.

In dede, quoth Bradford, I think you thinke as you ſpeake, for els you would not take the cup from the people, ſeyng yt Chriſte ſayeth, drink of it al. But howe ſaye you my lord quoth, Bradford, Chriſte ſayth to you biſhops ſpecially, ite predicate euangelium, goe & preache the goſpel, fede Chriſtes flocke, is this a cōmandement or not. Here was the lord Chancelor in a great chafe & ſaid as pleaſed him. Another I wene the B. of Durham, aſked him when Chriſt began to bee preſent in the ſacrament, whether before the receyuer receiued it or no? Bradforde anſwered that the queſtiō was curious, & not neceſſary, & further ſaid as the ſaid cup was the new teſtamēt, ſo the bred was Chriſts body: to him that receiueth it duely. But yet ſo ye bred

is bred, for in al ye ſcripture ye ſhal not find this propoſiciō, non eſt panis ther is no bred, & ſo he brought forth ſ. Chriſoſtō, Si in corpore eſſemus Summa much a do was here about, thei calling Bradford heretike: & he deſired them to procede a gods name, he loked for yt whiche god appointed thē to do. Loe (ꝙ the lord Chancelor) this felowe is now in a nother hereſy of fatal deſteny, as though all thynges wer ſo tyed together, yt of mere neceſſitie al thinges muſt come to paſſe. But Bradford praide him to take things as they were ſpoken, & not wreſte them into a contrary ſence. your lordſhippe (quoth hee) doth diſcerne betwixt god and manne, things are not by fortune to god at any time, thoughe to man they ſeme ſo ſome times. I (ꝙ Bradforde)

ſpake but as the Apoſtles ſpake lord (ꝙ he) ſee howe Herode & Pōcius Pilate wt the Prelates, ar gathered together againſt thee Chriſt, to do ye, which thy hande & counſell hath before ordained thē to do. Here began the lord Chācelor, to read ye excōmunicaciō & in ye excōmunicaciō when he came to ye name of Bradford, laicus, lay mā. Why (ꝙ he) ar you no prieſt? No (ꝙ Bradford) nor neuer was, eyther prieſt, eyther beneficed, either maried, either any precher, afore publike auctoritie had eſtabliſhed religion, but preached after publike auctoritie had eſtabliſhed religiō, & yet (ꝙ he) I am thus handled at your handes, but god I doubt not will geue his bleſſing where you curſe. & ſo he fel doun on his knees & hartely thāked god, yt he coūted

him worthy to ſuffer for his ſake, & ſo praide god to geue thē repentance & a good mind. After the excommunicacion was red, he was deliuered to the ſheriffes of London, and ſo had to the clinke, from thence to the coūter in the pultry, where he remaineth cloſe, without al company, bokes, paper, penne or ynke, loking for the diſſolucion of his bodye, in ye which god grant to hym hys ſweete mercye: throughe Chriſte oure Lorde. Amen.
         
         
            
            The ſome of the priuate talke had with maiſter Io. Bradford ſithen the .29 daie of. Ianuarie, by ſuche as the Prelats haue ſent vnto him.
            
               AFter my firſte arraygnement in the churche of Saincte Marie Oueris the .29. daye of Ianuarie, aboute▪ foure of the clocke in the euenynge, there came into the reueſtrye whither I was had after my arraigmente, and taried there al daye: a gentleman called Maiſter Thomas Huſſey of Linclonſhiere, whiche was ones an officer in the Duke of Norfolkes

houſe to inquire for one Stonīg, and when it was aunſwered hym by the vnder Marſhalles officers of the kinges benche, which were there with Doctour Taylour and me, that there was none ſuche: he came forthwith into the houſe, & toke acquaintaunce of me, ſainge further that he woulde come and ſpeake with me in ye morninge for old acquaintance ſake, for I was at muttrel iorney a pay maſter, in whiche he was and had often receiued money at my hādes. Now in the morninge about vii. of the cloke he came into the chamber, wher in I laye, and beinge alone with me, and ſet downe, he began a longe talke, howe that of loue & olde acquayntance he came vnto me to ſpeake vnto me, that which he would further vtter, the effecte

wherof was that I did ſo wonderfully (quod he) behaue my ſelfe before the lorde Chauncelour & the other Biſhoppes the other daye, that euen the verieſte enemies I had did ſee, howe that they had no matter againſte me: therefore aduiſed me, as thoughe it came of his own good wil without making anye other man priuie or aanye other procuringe hym, as he ſaid, that I would this daye (for quoth he anone you ſhall be called before them again) deſire therfore tyme & men to conferre with al. By reaſon wherof he thought that al men would thinke a wonderfull wyſedome, grauitie and goodnes in me: & by this meane I ſhuld eſcape the daūger whiche is nearer thē you be ware of ꝙ he. But I aunſwered breiflie & ſaid,

that I coulde not, nor woulde not make any ſuch requeſte, for then (quod I) occaſiō ſhould I giue to the people and to all other that I ſtode in doubting of the doctrine, the which thing I told hym I did not, but thereof was moſte aſſured, and therefore I would giue no ſuch offence. As we were thus talkinge, the Chamber dore was vnloked, and who ſhould come in at the dore, but one doctour Seyton, when he ſaw maiſter Huſſey: what ſyr quoth he, are you come before me? yea thought I, goeth the matter thus? and he tolde me no man knew of hys cōming. Wel Lord quoth I to my ſelfe, giue me grace to remember thy leſſon, Cauere ab hominibus iſtis, beware of thoſe mē,Mat. 10 Mat. 7. &c. caſt not your pearles before doges, for I ſee theſe men

become to hunte the matter yt the one maye beare witneſſe with the other. This doctor Seyton, after ſome bye talke of my age, of my Countrie, and ſuch like, he began a long ſermō of my lord of Cāterburye, maiſter Latymer, & maiſter Redley, and howe at Oxford they where not able to aunſwere any thinge at al, and therfore: my lord of Caunterburye deſired to conferre wyth the Byſhoppe of Dureſme and others. All whiche talke tended to this ende, that I ſhould make ye like ſute beinge in nothinge to be compared in learninge to my Lorde of Caūterburye, whiche thinge is moſte true. But I breiflye aunſuered as before I did to maiſter Huſſey, wherwith they were neither of thē both cōtented: and therefore they vſed

many perſuaſions, and Maiſter doctor ſaid, how that he had herd muche good talke of me, tellinge how that yeſternight maiſter Rū
               corne had made reporte of me, at my lorde Chauncelours table at ſupper, howe that I was able to perſuade as much as any that he knewe. And I my ſelfe quoth he, though I neuer herd you preache nor to my knowledge neuer ſawe you before yeſterdaie: yet my thought your modeſtie was ſuch, your behauour and talke ſo without malice and impacientye, that I wolde be ſorye you ſhould doo wourſſe then my ſelfe, and I tell you quoth he further, I doo perceaue that my Lorde Chauncelor hath a fauour toward you: wherfore be not obſtinate but deſire reſpite and ſew to ſome lerned men,

to confer with all, but ſtill I kepe me to my Cokoo I coulde not, nor wold not ſo offend gods people: I ſtode in no wauering, but was moſte certeyne of the doctrine I had taught. Here maſter Doctor waxed hote and called me arrogaunte, prowde, vayne glorious, and ſpake like a Prelate, hauing no other aunſwere of me but that he ſhould beware of iudging,Mat. 
                     •
                   Mat 
                     •
                  
                leſt he cōdempned him ſelfe. Howbeit this would not ſerue but ſtill he vrged me ſhowing howe merciful my Lorde Chauncellor was, and how charitablye they intertained me: Vnto which wordes I briefly ſhowed him, that I neuer foūd anye iuſtice, muche leſſe charitie. I ſpeake it for my parte (quoth he) in my Lord Chauncellor. And ſo ſhowed howe I hade ben in Priſon

howe I had ben handled and howe they had no matter now aageinſt me but ſuch as they ſhold haue by myn own confeſſion. But nothing of this talke moued maiſter doctor: who went from matter to matter, from this poynt to that poynte: and I gaue hym ſtil the hearnige and aunſwered not bycauſe he came to haue had ſomthing whereby my Lord Chauncellor mighte haue had ſemed to haue kepte me in priſon not cauſeles. When al their talke toke no ſuch effecte as they wold & loked for, maiſter Huſſey began to aſke me whether I would not admyte conference, if my lord Chauncelor ſhoulde offre it me publicklye: to whom I aunſwered this in effect, that conferēce, if it had ben offred before the lawe had bene made, or

cōference if it were offred, ſo that I might be at libertie to conferre, and as free as he with whome I ſhould conferre: then quoth I, it were ſome thing, but els I ſee not to what purpoſe cōference ſhould be offered, but to deferre yt whiche will come at the length, and the lyngering may giue more offence then do good. Hhowbeit quoth I, if my Lord ſhould make ſuche an offre of his owne▪ voluntarines: I will not refuſe to conferre withe whome ſo euer ſhall come. Maiſter doctor hearing this, called me arrogant ſtill, proud, and what ſo euer pleaſed hym, ſo that I beſought them both (becauſe I perceaued by them I ſhould ſhortely be called for) to gyue me leaue to talke with God, & to begge wiſedome and grace of hym, for quoth

I otherwiſe I am helpeleſſe. And ſo they with muche a doo departed. And I went to god and made my pore praier acordingly, which of his goodnes he did graciouſlie accepte and did helpe me in my neade, prayſed therfore be his holyename.
            Shortely after they were gone, I was had to ſaint Marie oueris and there taried vncalled for, till xi. of the clocke that is: till Maiſter Saunders was excommunicated.
            Vpon the .3. of Februarie, the Byſhoppe of London came to the Counter in the pultrie to diſgrad Maiſter Doctor Taylor, about one of the clocke at after noone, but before he ſpake to Maiſter, Tailour: I was called forth vnto him: when he ſawe me, of went

hys cappe, & out ſtretched he his hāde, and on this ſort he ſpake to me, that bycauſe he perceaued I was deſyrous to conferre withe ſome lerned man, therfore he had broughte maiſter Archedeacone Harpſfeld to me, and quoth he, I tell you, you doo like a wiſe man, but I praye you goe roundlye to worke, for the tyme is but ſhort: my Lorde, quoth I, as roundelyl as I can I wyll go to woorke with you, I neuer deſired to conferre with anye man nor yet doo, howbeit if you will haue anye to talke with me I am redy to heare and aunſwere hym. What quoth my Lord of London in a fume to the keper: did not you tell me that this man deſired conference? No my Lorde quoth he. I tolde you that he wold not refuſe to cōferre

with any, but I did not ſhewe to anye that it was his deſire. well quoth my Lord of London, maiſter Bradforde you are welbeloued, I pray you conſider your ſelf and refuſe not charitie when it is offered. In dede my Lord quoth I, this is finale charitte, to condemne a man, as you haue condempned me, whiche neuer brake the lawes, In Turckie a man may haue tought free, but in England I cold not fynd it, for I am condempned for my faith ſo ſone as I vttered it at your requeſte, before I had cōmitted any thing againſte the lawes. As for conference, I am not afrayed (quoth I) to talke with whome you will, but to ſaye that I deſire to conferre: that do I not. Well well quoth my Lorde of London, and

ſo called for maiſter Taylor, and I went my waye.
            Vpon the 4. of Februarie came one of my lord Chaūcellors gentlemen, ſent as he ſaid frō my lord as then being come frō the court. Thys was about .8. of the clocke the eueninge. The effecte & ende of his talke & meſſage was, that my Lorde his maiſter did loue me well, and therefore he offered me tyme to conferre if I woulde deſire it, but as I had aunſwered others in this matter, ſo I aunſwered him, that I wold neuer make that ſute, but quoth I, to cōferre with any, I will neuer refuſe: bycauſe I am certaine and able I thancke god, to defend by godlye learning, my faith. Thus with much a doo we ſhoke hands, and departed, he to his maiſter, and I

to my pryſon.
            Vpon the 7. of Februarie came one maiſter Wollerton a Chapplaine to the Biſhoppe of Lōdon to conferre with me: Who, when he perceaued that I deſired not his comming, beinge as one moſt certain of my doctrine. And therfore wiſhed rather his departing thē abiding: well maiſter Bradford quoth he, yet I pray you let vs conferre a litle, perchance you may do me good, if I can dooe you none. Vpon whiche wordes I was content to talke. He ſpake muche of the doctors and fathers, of the bread in the .6. chapiter of Iohn. And ſo wolde proue tranſubſtātiation: & howe that wicked mē do receiue Chriſts bodie. And I on the contrarie parte improued his aucthours, with much by

talke betwixte vs bothe, and the keper, who toke his parte litle to ye purpoſe. Sūma to this iſſue we came, that he ſhould draw out of the ſcriptures and doctours, his reaſōs. And I wold peruſe them, and if I could not aunſwere thē, I would giue place. And ſo I deſired him to do my reaſons, which I woulde make, and ſo departed for that daye.
            The next day following in the morning, he ſent me halfe a ſhete of paper written on bothe ſides, with no reſons how he gathered his doctrine, but onlye the bare ſentence: Panis quem ego dabo: The bread whiche I wil giue is my fleſhe. And the places in the 26. of Matth. 14. of Marke .22. of Luke, & the .10. and .11. to the Corinth. with ſome ſentences of the

doctors, all which made as much againſt him, as with hym al only one of Theophilactꝰ except in the after nowne he came himſelf, and then we had a longe bablynge to none effecte, and at the lenght he came to the church, and how that I ſhwarued frō the churche. Na▪ quoth I, that doo I not, but you do, for ye church is Chriſts ſpouſe and Chriſtes obedient ſpouſe, as▪ your church is not, which robbeth the people of the Lordes Cuppe, & of ſeruice in the Engliſh tonge. Why quoth he, it is not profitable to haue the ſeruice in Engliſhe, and ſo he brought forth this ſentence to proue it. Labia Sacerdotis cuſtodiant, legem. The lipes of the prieſtes ſhould kepe the law, and out of his mouth mē muſt loke for knowledge. Why quoth I ſhould

not the people thē haue the ſcriptures: wherfore ſerueth this of Chriſte, ſearche the ſcriptures.Ioh. 5. This quoth he was not ſpoken to the people, but to the Scribes, & learned men: wel quoth I, then the people muſt not haue the ſcriptures, whiche he affirmed bringinge fourth this. E
                     •
                   erunt docti a deo, They ſhalbe all taught of God. But muſt we, quoth I, lerne all at the prieſtes? yea quoth he, well then ſaid I, I ſee you would bringe the people to hange vppe Chriſt and let Barrabas goo,Luk. 23 as the prieſtes thē did perſwade the people. A which wordes he was ſo offēded: that he had no luſte to talke any more. Summa I gaue hym the reaſons. I had gathered againſt tranſubſtantiacion, and prayed hym to frame his in the

frame of reaſons, and I woulde aunſwere them, well quoth he, I wil do ſo, but firſt I wil anſwere yours. The whiche thing he hath not done hitherto, nor wil not: for I heare that he is ridden into the Country.
            Vpon the .12. of Februarye there came one of the Erle of Darby his men called Stephen Beiche, one of olde acquentaunce to me: who ſhowed me, that my lord ſent him to me, and willed me to tender my ſelfe, & he would be good lord vnto me. Whē I aunſwered, that I thancked his lordſhipppe for his good will towardes me, but quoth I, in this caſe I cane not tēder my ſelfe more then gods honour: then he ſet before me, my mother, my ſiſters, frends, kyndſfolkes, & Country, what a greate diſcomforte it wolde be vnto thē,

to dye as an Heretike, well ſyr, quoth I, I haue learned to forſake father, mother, brother, ſiſters, frends, and all that euer I haue, & mine owne ſelfe: or els I can not be Chriſtes diſciple. And ſo he tellinge me, that my death would doo much hurte, and ſuch lyke talke: we ſhoke handes. Howbeit, nowe I remember that in oure talke he aſked me, if my lord ſhould obtaine for me, that I might departe the Realme: whether I would not be content to be at the Quenes appointmēt, wher ſhe woulde appointe me beyond the ſea? No quoth I. I had rather be burned in Englande, then be burned beyōd ye ſea. For I know quoth I, that if ſhe ſhould ſende me to Paris, to louen &c. fourthe with they would burne me.
            
               Vpon the .14. of Februarie their came to me Perciuall Creſſewell one of my olde acquentaunce, and one that loueth my bodie well and my ſoule alſo, after his religion, bringing with hym, & as I learne a kynſman of maiſter Feckenham: who after much ado praied me, yt he might make labour for me, a gods name, quod I, doo, you may do what you wil, yea, but, quoth he. Tell me what ſuet I ſhould make. Forſoth ſaid I, that yt you wil doo, do it not at my requeſte, for I deſire nothyng at your hādes: if the Queene wil giue me life, I will thanke her, i
                  •
                ſhe will baniſhe me. I will thācke her, yf ſhe will condempne me t
                  •
                perpetuall priſonmente: I wy
                  •
                thancke her, if ſhe wil burne me I will thancke her. Here vpo
                  •
               
               
he wente awaye. And about a .xi. of the clocke. He and the other man came agayne, and brought a boke of Maiſter Mores makynge to rede ouer, the whiche boke I toke. But, quoth I, good Perceiuall. I am to ſure ſetteled, for beinge moued in thes matters. Oh, quoth he, if euer you loued me, do one thinge for me▪ what is that, quoth I, at the lenght, for I woulde not promes, ſayth he to deſire and name what lerned men or man you will haue to come vnto you, my Lord of yorke, my Lorde of Lyncolne, my Lorde of Bathe, my Lorde of of Chicheſter. &c. wil gladly come to you: No, quoth I, neuer wil I deſire thē, or any others, to come to conferre with me, for I am

as certein of my doctrine, as I am of anye thing: But for your pleaſure (quoth I) and that all men maye knowe I am not aſhamed to haue my faith ſifted and tried, bringe whome you will, & I will talke with them. So they went theyr waye. And about .3. of the clocke in the after nowne, cōmeth maiſter doctor Hardinge the Byſhoppe of Lincolnes Chaplaine, and after a greate and ſolempne proteſtation, (when he knew I deſired not his comming), how that he had prayed to God, before he came forth to turne his talke to to my good: he began to tell of the good opinion he had of me, and many God giue you good euen, ſo that our talke was to none effecte or purpoſe: ſaue yt I prayed hym, to conſider from whence he

was fallen, and not to followe the world or loue it, bycauſe the loue of God is not where it is,1. Io. Sūma he counted me in a dampnable ſtate: as one being out of the churche. And therfore wylled me to take hede to myſelfe, & not to dye in ſuche an opinion. what maiſter Hardinge (quoth I) I haue heard you with theſe eares, maintayne this that I ſtode in. I haue (quoth he) preached that the doctrine of tranſubſtantiation was a ſubtill doctrine, but otherwiſe I neuer taught it. And ſo enuyinge againſt marieges of prieſtes, and muche againſte Peter Marter, Martyn Bucer, & Luther, which for breakinge their vowes, were iuſtly giuē vp into hereſies quod he. I ſeing hym all togyther giuē vp into poperie, after admoniſhement

hereof, bad hym farewell.
            Vppon the .15. of Februarie about .4. of the clocke in the after nowne, cometh Percyuall Creſſewell, and the other man waytyng vpon maiſter Harpſfeld▪ Archedeacon of Londō, who after gētle ſalutation, and many formalities beganne a longe oracion. Howe that all men, euen the Infideles, Turckes, Iewes, Anabaptiſtes, and Libertines, deſire felicitie, as well as the chriſtians. And howe that euerye man thyncketh they ſhal attaine to it, by their religiō. To the whiche longe oracion I aunſwerred briefly: that he ſpake not farre a miſe. Then goeth he on, yea, but the waye, quoth he, thither is not all a like. And ſo he ſet furth, how infideles by Iupiter, Iuno, The Mahumet by

his Alcoran, the Iewe by his Thalmud: beleued to come to Heauen. For ſo manye I ſpake ſayth he: as beleue the immortalitie of the ſoule. And this long oracion, I as brieflie aunſwered: and ſaide he had ſpoken truelye. Well then, quoth he, here is the matter▪ the waye to this heauen. we maye not inuente anye newe waye. Their is but one waye, quoth I, and that is Ieſus Chriſte, as he hymſelfe doth witneſſe: I am the waye, here Maiſter Harpſfeld affirmed and denyed, and further ſayde, that I ment by Chriſte, beleuing in Chriſte, I haue lerned, quoth I, to diſcerne betwixte Faythe and Chryſte. Albeit I confeſſe that who ſo euer beleuethe in Chriſte the ſame ſhalbe ſaued.

No, quoth he, not all that beleue in Chriſt, for ſome wyll ſaye, lord Lorde, haue not we caſte oute deuilles &c? But Chriſte will ſay in the daye of iudgement to thoſe departe frō me, I knowe you not. yea ſyr, quoth I, you muſte make a difference, betwixte beleuing & ſaying. I beleue, as for example, if one ſhould ſay and ſwere he loued you: for all his ſaying you wil not beleue him, when you ſee he goeth aboute to vtter, and doo all euyll thinges againſte you. wel quoth he, this is not muche materiall. Theire is but one waye Chriſte. How come we to know him, where ſhal we ſeke to finde him? Forſoth quoth I, we muſt ſeke hym by his word, and in his word, & after his word. Verye good quoth maiſter Harpſfeld. But tell me now, howe

firſt we come into the companie of them that could tell vs this, but by Baptiſme. True, quoth I, baptiſme is the ſacrament, by the whiche exteriorlye we are inſert and engraf
                  •
               e into Chriſte, for I dare not, quoth I, exclude oute of Chriſte, al that dye without baptiſme, I wil not tye God where he is not bound. Some infants dye: whoſe parents deſire baptiſme for them, and maye not haue it. To thoſe, quoth he, we maye thincke perchaunce ſome mercie God will ſhew. yea, quoth I. thoſe infants whoſe parentes doo contēpne baptiſme, wil not I contempne vtterlye, becauſe the childe ſhall not beare the fathers offence. Well quoth he, we agree that by baptiſme then we are broughte, and (as one would ſay) begotten of chriſt,

for chriſte is oure father, and the churche his ſpouſe is our mother, as al men naturallie haue Adam for their father, and eue for theyr mother, ſo all ſpirituall men haue Chriſt for their father, & the churche for their mother, whiche churche. As Eue was taken out of Adams ſide: ſo was ſhe of Chriſtes ſide, where out flowed bloud, for ſatiſfaction & purging of our ſinnes. Al this is true, quoth I, and godlye ſpoken. Nowe then, quoth he, tel me whether this churche of Chriſte hathe not ben alwayies: yes, quoth I, ſithen the creacion of man, and ſhalbe for euer. Verie good, quoth he. But yet tel me, wether this churche is not a viſible Chuſche, or no: yes (quoth I) that it is, howbeit none otherwyſe viſible, then Chriſte was

here on earthe. That is no exterior pompe or ſhewe, ſetteth her forth commonlye. And therfore to ſee her we muſte put on ſuch eyes: as good men put one, to ſee and knowe Chriſte: when he walked here one earthe. For as Eue was of the ſame ſubſtaunce, Adam was of: ſo is the churche of the ſame ſubſtaunce, Chriſte is of. I meane fleſhe of fleſhe, and bone of hys bones, as Paule ſayeth, Ephe. 5. Looke therefore howe Chriſte was viſible knowen to be Chriſte, when he was on earthe: (that is by conſidering him after the word of God) ſo is the church knowen. I do not come to reaſon, ſaith he, at this preſent, & therfore I wil go on forward. Is not this a multitude? yes (ꝙ I) that it is.Virgi
                     •
                  
                Howbeit, quod la
                     •
                  et anguis in herba
               
You meane a ſutteltie in ye worde, what viſible multitude was ther in Helias tyme, or when Moyſes was on the mounte Aaron, and al Iſrael worſhipping the calfe. you goo from the matterr, quoth he, No nothinge at all ſaid I. For I doo but preuent you, knowynge wel where aboute you go, & therfore fewer wordes might ſerue: if that you ſo would. Well, quoth he, I perceaue you haue knowledge, and by a litle perceaue the more. Tell me yet more. whether this multitude haue not the miniſterie or preaching of gods word? Here ſyr, quoth I, you go aboute the buſhe. If you vnderſtande preaching, for confeſſing the goſpel: I wil go with you, or els yf you wil, you may know that perſecution often letteth preachinge▪
               
Wel, I meane it ſo, quoth he. Tel me yet more, hath it not the ſacramentes, quoth I, howbeit the myniſterie therof is often letted? But I wil put you of your purpoſe, becauſe I ſee where about you goo. If heretickes haue baptized and doo baptize, as they did in ſainct Cyprians time: you knowe thys baptiſme is baptiſme, and not to be reiterated. This I ſpeake, that the ſtaunders by might ſee, that thoughe the poptſhe church haue baptiſme, whiche we receaue of them: yet therefore is it not the true churche: nor neuer neade we to be baptized again. which thing he ſawe well ynoughe: and therfore he ſaid, I went frō the matter, addynge, that I had more errors, then one, or two. So ye ſay, quoth I: but that is not ynough,

till you proue them. Well, quoth he, this churche is a multitude, hath the preaching of the goſpell and the miniſtracion of the ſacramentes, and yet more, hath it not the power of iuriſdiction? Oh ſir, quoth I, whether goo you, you walke not wililey, ynough you cā not deceaue me (I thancke god): what iuriſdictiō is exerciſed in time of ꝑſecutiō, ī afflictiō. I meane quoth he, by iuriſdiction, admoniſhing one an other, and ſo forthe. well, go to ſaid I, what then? It hathe alſo, quoth he, ſucceſſion of Byſhoppes. And here he made muche adoo, to proue that this, was an eſſenciall point. you ſaye true, quoth I. For if this poīt fale you: all the church you go about to ſet forthe, will fall downe. you ſhal not fynd in all the ſcripture,

this is eſſentiall pointe of ſucceſſion of Byſhoppes, quoth I. In Chriſtes churche Antechriſt will ſitt. And Peter telleth vs, as it wente in the olde churche afore Chriſtes comming: ſo will it be in the newe churche, ſithen Chriſtes comming. That is, as their were falſe Prophetes & ſuche as bare rule were aduerſaries to the true Prophetes: ſo ſhal there be ſithen Chriſtes comming falſe teachers, euen as of ſuch as be byſhoppes, and beare rule amonges the people. you alwayes goo out of the matter, quoth he. But I wil ꝓue (ſaeth he) the ſucceſſion of Byſhoppes. Doo ſo, quoth I. Tel me quoth he, were not the Apoſtles byſhoppes? No, quoth I, excepte you will make a newe definition of Biſhoppes, that is, giue no certein

place. In dede ſayth he, the Apoſtles office was more thē byſhopes, for it was vniuerſal. But yet Chriſte inſtituted Byſhoppes in his Churche, as Paule ſaith, he hathe gyuen Paſtours, Prophetes, ſo that, I troue it be proued by the ſcriptures, the ſucceſſion of byſhoppe: to be an eſſentiall pointe. To this I aunſwered, that the miniſterie of godes word and miniſters: is an eſſenciall pointe, but to tranſlate this to byſhoppes and their ſucceſſiō, quoth I: is a plaine ſubtiltie. And therfore, quoth I, that it may be playne: I wyll aſke you a queſtion. Tell me whether the ſcripture knowe anye difference betwene byſhoppes, and miniſters, whiche you call priſtes. No ſaithe he, well, then goo on forwardes

quoth I: and lette vs ſee what you ſhall get nowe by the ſucceſ
               
                  •
               ion of Byſhoppes, that is of miniſtres, whiche can not be vnderſtande of ſuch Byſhoppes as miniſter not, but Lorde it. I perceaue, quoth he, that you are fare oute of the waye. For your doctrine, you can neuer ſhowe this a multitude, whiche miniſtrethe goddes woorde and his Sacramentes, whiche hath iuriſdiction and ſucceſſion of Byſhoppes, to haue from tyme to time beleued as you beleue, beginning nowe, & ſo go vpwards, as I wil do, quod he, of our doctrine. And therefore you are out of the Church, and ſo maye not be ſaued. Perchaunce you wil bring me downewardes, a ſhew to bleare the peoples eyes, but to goo vpwardes: that can

you neuer doo. And this is the true triall. To this I aunſwered, that he ought to giue me leaue to followe the ſcripture and examples of good men. Then ſaid, yea. Wel then, quoth I, Stephē was accuſed and cōdempned as I am, that he taught newe and falſe doctrine before the fathers of the churche, then as they were taken. Now what doth Stephen for his purgacion, but improued theire accuſacions. But how doth he it, by goinge vpwardes. No, but by goinge downewardes. Beginning at Abraham, and cōtinuing ſtil till Eſaias time, and the peoples captiuitie. From whence he maketh a great leape, vntill that tyme he was in) whiche was I thincke vpon a foure yeres) and called them by there right name

hell houndes, rather then, heauen houndes. On this ſorte ſyr, quoth I. will I proue my faith, & that you can neuer doo yours, yea, ſyr, quoth he. If we dyd knowe you had the holy goſte: then could we beleue you. Here might haue ben aunſwered, that Stephens enemies would not beleue he had the holy goſt, and therefore they dyd as they did. But in ſpeakinge he roſe vp, and the keper called, and others that ſtode bye to take his parte all againſte me. Howe be it gentlie, without anye tawntynge or rayling, onelye prayinge me to take hede to that maiſter Harpſfeld ſpeake, who ſtill ſaid I, was oute of the churche, and did contempne it, ſpitt againſt it, and I cannot tel what. But I ſtill affirmed that I was moſte certeine, I

was in Chriſtes churche, & could ſhewe a demonſtracion of my religion, from tyme to tyme continually. And ſo we made an ende, ſainge that in the mornynge he would come again vnto me. God our father,A prayer 
                     •
                  f M. 
                     •
                  rad
                  
                     •
                  ords. for the name and blod of his Chriſt: be merciful vnto vs, and vnto all his people, and kepe them frō al falſe teachers, & blind guides, whereby (alas) I feare me muche hurte wil come to this realme of England. God our father bleſſe vs, and kepe vs in his truth & pore church foreuer. Amē.
            Vppon the .16. of Februarye in the morning about .9. of ye clocke: there came again the ſaid maiſter Harpſfeld, and the other two with him. Nowe after a fewe wordes ſpoken: we ſate downe, & maiſter Harpſfeld, beginning a very long

oraciō, almoſt ther quarters of an houre lōg. Firſt repeting what, & how far we haue gone aſtraye, & beginnynge to proue vpwardes ſucceſſion of Byſhoppes here in Englād for .8. c. yeres, in Fraūce, at Liōs: for .xii.c. yeres, in ſpaine at Hiſpalen, for .viii.c. yeres in Italie at Millen, for .xii. c. yeres, goinge by that to proue his churche, whereto he vſed alſo ſucceſſiō of byſhopes, in the Eſt church for the more confirmacion of hys wordes, and ſo concluded with an exhortation, & an interrogation. The exhortacion, that I woulde obey this church, the interrogacion, whether I could ſhewe anye ſuch ſucceſſion for the demonſtraon of my church, (for ſo he called it whiche I followed). Vnto this his long oracion, I made a ſherte

aunſwered, howe that my memorie was euill for to aunſwere particularlye his long oracion, therfore I woulde generallye doo it, thinckinge that bycauſe his oracion was rather to perſwade, then to proue: that a general aunſwere would ſerue. So I told him, that if Chriſte, or his Apoſtles beinge here on yearth, hath him demaū
               ded of the Prelats of the churche then, then, to haue made a demonſtracion of the churche, by ſucceſſion of highe prieſtes, whiche had approued the doctrine he taught: I thincke, quoth I, that Chriſte hert would haue done as I doo. That is, haue brought furth that which vpholdeth the church: euē the veritie of the worde of God, taught & beleued, not of the high prieſtes (which of longe time had

perſecuted it) but by ye Prophetes & other good ſimple men, whiche perchaunce were counted for heretickes with the churche: that is with them, that were ordeyned highe prieſtes in the churche, to whome the true churche was not then tyed by any ſucceſſiō, but the word of god. And thus to thincke quoth I?2. Pet. 
                     •
                  
                Saint Peter gyueth an occaſion, when he ſaith: That as it went in ye church before chriſtes comminge: ſo ſhall it goo in the Churche, after his commynge, but then, the pillars of the Churche, were perſecutours of it. Therefore the like we muſte loke for nowe. Why, quoth be, I can gether, and proue you ſucceſſion in Ieruſalem of the high prieſtes. From Aarons time, I graunte, quoth he, but not ſuche ſucceſſion as allowed ye trueth. Why, quoth

he, did they not all allow Moyſes lawe: yes, quoth I. And kept it, for the bokes therof, as you do the Bible and holy ſcripture: but the interpretacion and meaning of it▪ they did corrupte, as I take it you haue done. And therfore the perſecutions they ſtirred vp againſt the Prophetes & Chriſte, was not for the lawe, but for the interpretacion of it, as you ſaie nowe: that we muſt haue the interpretaciō of the ſcriptures, at your hādes. but to make an ende, quoth I, death I do loke daily for, yea, hourely, & I thīke my time be but very ſhort. Therfore I had neade to ſpend in praier, as much tyme with god as I can, (whileſte I haue it) for his helpe and comforte. And therfore I praye you beare with me, that I do not more plainlye, and

in more woordes, aunſwere you longe talke. If I ſawe death not ſo nere me as it is, I woulde then weye euery peice of your oracion: (if you would giue me the ſome of them,) & I would aunſwere them, accordinglie I hope. But bicauſe I dare not, nor I wil not leaue of, lokinge and prouidinge for that whiche is at hande: I ſhall deſire you to holde me excuſed, becauſe I doo as I do. And I hartelye thancke you, for youre gentle good will. I ſhall hartelye praye GOD oure father, to giue you the ſame lyght and lyfe, as I wiſhe to my ſelfe. And ſo I beganne as to riſe vppe. But then maiſter Harpſfeld beganne to tell me, that I was in a verye perillous caſe, and he was ſorie to ſee me ſo ſetteled. Telling

further, that in dede he could tell me nothinge, whether death were fare of or nere. But that forceth not, quoth he: ſo that you did dye well. Well quoth I? yes. For I doubte not in this caſe, but to dye wel. For as I hope and am cercertain, my deathe ſhall pleaſe the Lord: ſo I truſt, I ſhall dye cherfullye, to the comforte of his chyldren. yea, but what if you be deceaued, quoth he: what quoth I, if you dyd ſaye the Sone did not ſhyne nowe. Then it did ſhine thoroughe the wyndowe where wee ſatt, wel, quoth he, I am ſorrie to ſee you ſo ſecure and careleſſe. In dede quoth I, I am more careleſe & ſecure, carnallie, then I ſhoulde be, God make me more vigilant. But in this caſe, quoth I, I can not be to ſecure, for I am moſt aſſured,

I am in the truth. That are ye not, quoth he, for you are not of the Catholike church. No, quoth I? thoughe you haue excommunicate me: yet am I in the Catholike church of Chriſte, and wil be a child of it, and an obediedt child for euer. I hope Chriſte will haue no leſſe care for me, then he had for the blynd man excommunicate of the Sinagoge. And, quoth I, further, I am certain that the neceſſarie articles of ye faith (I meane the .xii. articles of the Crede). I confeſſe & beleue with that, which you call the holy church. So that euē your church, hath taken ſome thing to muche vpon her, to excō
               municate me for that, whiche (by the teſtimonie of my Lord of Duriſme in his boke of the ſacramēt, latelye put furth) was free of manye

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
an. yeres after Chriſte, to beleue or not beleue: what is that quoth he? Tranſubſtantiation ſaid I. Why, you are not cōdempned therefore only, quod he. Yes quoth I, that am I, and bycauſe I denye, that wicked men do receaue Chriſtes bodie. No, quoth he, you agree not with vs in the preſence, nor in nothing els. How you beleue, quoth I, you knowe: for my parte I confeſſe a preſence of hole Chriſte, God, and man, to the the fayth of the receauour. No, quoth he, you muſte beleue a Reall preſence in the ſacrament. In the ſacramente, quoth I? No I will not ſhute hym vppe, nor tye hym to it, otherwiſe then faithe ſee the and permitteth. If I woulde include Chriſtes reall preſence in the ſacrament, or tye

hym to it otherwiſe, then to the Fayth of the receauer: then the wycked man ſhoalde receiue him, whiche I do not, nor will not beleue by goddes grace. More pitie, quoth he: but a man maye eaſelye ſee you make no preſence at all, and therefore you agree not therein with vs. I make a preſence, quoth I, and a true preſēce: but to the fayth of the receauer. What, quoth one, that ſtode by, of Chriſtes verie bodie whiche died for vs, yea, quoth I, euē of whole Chriſte: God, and man, to the faythe of hym that receaueth it. why, quoth maiſter Harpſfeld, this is nothing els, but to exclude the omnipotencie of God, and all kynde of myracle in the Sacrament. No, ꝙ I, I do not exclude his omnipotencie, but you rather

doo it. For I beleue that Chriſte can accompliſhe his promiſe, the ſubſtaunce of bread and wine beinge their ſtill: as well as the accidents. And, quoth I, I counte it a greate miracle: that common bread ſhoulde be made a ſpiritual bread, that is, a bread ordeined of God, not for the foode of the bodye, but rather for the foode of the ſoule. For when we come to the ſacrament, we come not feade our bodies, and therfore we haue but a litle peice of bred: but we come to feade our ſoules by faith, whiche the wicked waunte: and therfore they receaue nothynge but Panem Domini as Iudas did, and Panem Dominum, as the other the Apoſtles did. The wicked, ſaithe maiſter Harpſfeld, do receiue the verie bodie of Chriſte, but not the

grace of his bodie. No, quoth I, they receaue not the body, for it is no dead carkaſe. He yt receaueth it: receiueth the ſpirite, whiche is not with out grace I wyne. Wel, quoth he, you haue very many errors. you counte ye Maſſe for abhominacion, and yet ſaint Abroſſe ſaide maſſe. And ſo red oute of a boke written, a ſentence of ſainct Ambroſe to ꝓue it. Why, ſir, quod I, the maſſe, as it is now, was nothinge ſo in ſaint Ambroſe tyme. was not the moſt perte of the Canon, made ſithen by Gregorius, & Scolaſticus, and others. In ded, quoth he, a greate peice, of it was made as ye ſaye, by Gregorius, but Scholaſticꝰ was before S. Ambroſe tyme. I wene not, quoth I, howbeit I wyll not contend. Saint Gregorie ſaith, that the Apoſtles

ſaid maſſe, with out Cannons, onely with the lords praier. you ſaye true, quoth he, for the Canon is not the greateſte parte of the maſſe▪ The greateſt part, is the ſacrifice, eleuacion, tranſubſtantiacion and adoracion. I can awaye with none of thoſe, quoth I, No I thincke the ſame, quoth he. But yet Hoc facite telleth plain lye the ſacrifice of the churce▪ you conſider not well, quoth I, this worde ſacrifice, not diſcernynge betwixte the ſacrifice of the churche, and the ſacrifice for the churche. The ſacrifice of the Churche, is no propitiatorie ſacrifice: but a gratulatorie ſacrifice. The ſacrifice Chriſte hym ſelf offered: is the propitiatorie ſacrifice. And as for your Hoc facite is not referred to anye ſacrifyinge: but

to the whole action, takynge, eatynge. you ſpeake nowe, quoth he, not learnedlye, for Chryſte made his ſupper, onelye to the .12. not admittinge his mother, or any of the ſeuentie diſciples to it. Nowe the Apoſtles doo ſignifie the prieſtes. I thincke, quoth I, that you ſpeake▪ as you would mē ſhoude vnderſtand it, for els you woulde not kepe the Cup awaye from the Laitie. We haue greate cauſe to thācke you, that you wil giue vs the bread, for I perceaue you make it, as thoughe Chriſte had not cōman̄ded it to his whole church. Frō this talke he went to. ſhow me Eleuacion bringing out a place of Saint Baſilius de ſpiritu
               ▪ And I told him that I had red yt place which ſemeth not to make of eleuatiō. But, ꝙ I, be it as it is, I

haue ben in Priſon long, without bokes and all neceſſaries for ſtudie, and therfore I muſte omitte theſe thinges death draweth nye, & I by your leaue, muſt not leaue of to prepare for it. If I could do you good, quoth he, I woulde be right glad, either in ſoule or body for you are in a perellous caſe both waies. Sir, quoth I, I thāck you for your good wil. My cauſe is as it is: I thancke God it was neuer ſo wel with me: for death to me ſhall be life I truſte and hope in god. It were beſte for you to deſire maiſter Harpſfeld, quoth maiſter Creſſewell, yt he mighte make ſute for you, for a time, to cōferre. Vnto whiche woordes Maiſter Harpſfeld ſaid: that he would doe the beſte he could, for he pitied my caſe verie ſore, Sir, quoth I, to

deſire any bodie to ſewe for tyme for me, I neuer wil do it by godes helpe. For I am not wauerynge, nor I would not that anye bodye ſhould thincke, I were ſo. But if you haue the charitie and loue towardes me, you pretend, and ther to doo thincke that I am in an errour: I thincke the ſame ſhoulde moue you to doo, as you woulde be done by: as you thincke of me: ſo do I of you, that you are farre out of the way, & not only thincke it, but alſo am therof aſſured. In this and ſuche lyke gentle talke we departed: he ſaing yt he would pray for me, others willinge me, to deſire him, to ſue for me, whiche I did not. But I wiſhed hym as muche good as he did me. And as he was goinge and bad me farewell, he turneth againe & geueth

me Ireneus, prayinge me to read ouer a certeine place in it, whiche thīg I told him I wold, although I had red it before. At the dore the wife of the houſe mete hym, & aſked hym how he had done. Forſothe Maiſters, quoth he, I fynd alwaies one maner of mā of him, as I found him, ſo I leaue him. I pray you ſir, quoth ſhe, do hym no hurte. No quoth he, but if I can I wil do hym good. At after diner the ſame daye, maiſter Clayden my keper, commeth vnto me from the Erle of Darbye, with whome he had dyned beinge ſent for purpoſly, about me. Nowe after his cōming home, this was the ſome of hys talke. That the Erle would gladly haue me not to die. And therfore he would make ſute on my behalfe to ye Queenes gighnes.

Wherfore, quoth my keꝑ, you muſt tel me, what you wold haue him to do, yt to morow I may brīg hym worde, as he hath required me. Marie, ꝙ I, M. Clayden I hope I ſhal nead litle to make many wordes in telling you my ſute, as I hartely thāke his lordſhip of his good wil, and zeale, yt he beareth vnto me: ſo you know I can not deſire any to make ſut for me. If of his own will he do ſue for ꝑdon, baniſhmē, ꝑpetual priſon, or what his pleaſure ſhalbe for me, I were to blame, if yt I would take it vnthankefullye. Albeit I knowe deathe, and ſpedie diſpache were moſte well come vnto me, Well, quoth he, I will tell hym to morowe, ye thoughe you can not nor wil not make ſute, to any to ſue for you: yet you wil be content, If he on his lordſhipes good will will

labour on your behalfe. yea, quod I, and to tell you truth, where I perceaue that others doo ſue for me, (meaninge Perciual, Creſſuel and maiſter Harpſfeld) I had rather my Lord of Darbye ſhoulde doo it: for that my frendes & the countrye mighte leſſe be offended at hym, bycauſe he maſte haue the burning of me. After this talke with my keper maiſter Clayden: there cōmeth one of the Queenes ſeruauntes and officers, (whoſe name I will not reherſe) whiche after a litle talke fel down on his knees, and with teares beſought me, for the paſſion of Chriſte: that I would a litle loke to my ſelf, to make ſome ſute, &c. For, quoth he, (ſwearing an othe) it will not be longe vnto, before thou ſhalte be able to doo more good, then euer

thou dideſte. But I ſhewing my ſelfe not vnthankefull for his good will: departed from hym, as one litle luſting to heare ſuche counſell. Of him I lerned, tweſdaye followinge, was the vttermoſt daye I ſhoulde tarrye here. Within an houre after this mānes departure frō me: the keper maiſter Clayden called me, ſayinge that he perceaued, howe that my frend Perciual had told him, that maiſter Harpſfeld had written to maiſter doctor Martin: to be a meanes to the Counſell for lōger tyme for me. Where vpon, quoth he, I thincke it were beſte to ſend my Lord of Darbie worde of this to might: leſt he be preuēted. And I aunſwered thus. That as he thought good, ſo he mighte doo. But, quoth I, beware I hertelye

praye, that you doo not tell my lord any thing, that I deſire this. For if you do, it will in ye ende be more againſte you then with you. And he promiſed the ſame, and ſo departed oute of hande to the Court. Vpon the .17. day (whiche was ſondaye) in the after nowne, Perciual Creſſe wel ſent me word by him that came firſte with him, that if I woulde make anye ſute my ſelfe, or wil any to doo for me. I might ſpead, but els, quoth he, nothing wil be done, as he p̄ſently hath receiued anſwere of my lord Chauncelor. wel, quoth I, I am at a pointe, and ſo toke my leaue, lokinge ſtill when the Sheriffes woulde come for me. For I had heard ouer might, that one of the Garde whiche was appointed to cōueye me down, into Lākiſhiere:

had told one that they hade warning againſt to morowe for me.
            Vppon the .18. daye (whiche was tweſdaye) I hearde that the write for my execuciō was called in again, and the Sheriffe of Lā
               kaiſhiere diſcharged of me for ye preſente. And in the after nowne one of my Lorde of Darbis men brought me worde: howe that my lord had taken greate paines for me, and had kneled before, the Queene, and many more wordes, deſiring me ſom thing to ſe to my ſelfe now. But, quoth he, what, & how muche is done for you I can not tell, but this muche I thincke ſaith he, you ſhal haue your boks, and time ynough to peruſe them. Well, quoth I, I praye you hartelye, thancke my Lorde for hys good wil towardes me, I ſhal (as I haue done pray) yt God woulde

giue vnto hym, as to my ſelfe, the which is all I can do. For doinge for my ſelfe, as I woulde be ſorye that my lord or you, ſhuld thincke any waueringe in me for my doctrine: ſo I would be lothe, but to doo all for my ſelfe, that I can do with a good cōſcience. And as for tyme, quoth I, & bokes, although I ſee it is but a lingering of the tyme: yet I am glad of it, in this reſpecte: yt my lord, & others may know, I hold no opinion, but ſuch as I dare ſifte, and abide the reaſoning for, with any man. I truſt, you and many others ſhal ſe, that oure doctrine is true, & therefore dare and deſire to abide the light, and all mens lokynge on, where perchaunce it is bruted abrode, that we are altogether obſtinate: and cannot defend it by lernynge,

after this talke, there was a prieſt called maiſter Couppage: which began to exhorte me to take the iniuries done vnto me pacienlye. For, quoth he, I doubte not but if you wil come vnto vs: you ſhuld be more able to helpe manye, and your frendes alſo, then euer you were: bothe ſpirituallye and corporallye. If, quoth I, you kepe your maiſter Chriſte: I wil come vnto you, but other wiſe I knowe you not. This and ſuch like talke we had for that preſente, the Erle of Darbye his man appointynge maiſter Clayden my keper, in the mornyng to come to my Lord.
            Vpon the .19. day, whiche was wedneſdaye, Maiſter Clayden came from my lord, and in his name aſked me, whether I would be contente to ſpake with the kinges

confeſſor, and Alphonſus, a frier, & to ſend him worde. Sir, quoth I, you knowe, that as I deſire cō
               ferēce with no man: ſo I thancke God, I am not afraied to ſpeake with anye man: where vppon he ſent my Lord worde, as he ſaide. And ſo I herd nothing til the day followinge, howe that my Lorde of Darbye, had ſent backe again, two of his mē, which came to me, ſayinge that they were ſent to ſolicite my cauſe, but howe or what waye I could not lerne.
            Vpon the .21. daye, whiche was friday, the Archebiſhope of yorke, and the Byſhoppe of Chicheſter: came to the Counter to ſpeake with me. When I was come before them, they both, & ſpeciallye my Lord of yorke: vſed me verye gentlie, they would haue had me

ſit downe, and bycauſe I woulde not: they alſo woulde not ſitt, ſo we all ſtode, & whether I woulde or no, they would neades I ſhould put on, not onely my night cappe: but my vpper cappe alſo, ſayinge vnto me, that obediēce was better then ſacrifice. Now thus ſtāding togither, my Lord of yorke begā to tel me, howe that they were not ſente to me, but of loue and charitie we come to you. And I, quoth he, of olde acquaintaunce whiche I haue had woith you, more then my Lord of Chicheſter hath had. And ſo cōmended me of a godlye life &c cōcluding with a queſtion, how I was certain of ſaluaciō, & of my religion. Marie, quod I amittinge all formalities, ſaue yt I thācked thē for their good wil, by the word of god, by the ſcriptures,

I am certein of ſaluacion, and of my religion. Verye wel ſaid quod my Lord of yorke. But howe doo you knowe the worde of God and the ſcriptures but by the church? In dede my Lorde, quoth I, the churche was, and is a meane to bring a mā more ſpedely, to know the ſcriptures, and the woorde of God, as was the woman of Samaria was a meane yt the Samaritains knew Chriſt, but as when they had herd hym ſpeake, they ſaid now we know, yt he is Chriſt, not bycauſe of the woordes, but bycauſe we our ſelfes haue heard hym: ſo, quoth I, after we come to the hearing and reading of the ſcriptures ſhowed to vs, and diſcerned by the church: we doo beleue them, and know them, not by cauſe the church ſaith they are the

ſcriptures, but bicauſe they be ſo, beinge therof aſſured, by the ſame ſpirite whiche wrote and ſpake them▪ yea, quoth my lord of yorke, but you know in the Apoſtles time at the firſte, the word was not written. True, quoth I, if you meane it for ſome bokes, of the bokes of the newe Teſtamēt, but els, for the olde teſtament, Peter telleth vs that we haue Firmiorem ſermonem Propheticum, a more ſure worde of prophecie. Not, quod I, that it is ſimplie ſo, but in reſpecte of the Apoſtles perſons, whiche beinge a liue and compaſſed with infirmitie: attributed to the worde written more firmitie, as wherewith no faulte coulde be founde, whereas, for the infyrmitye of their ꝑſons, men perchaūce might haue founde ſome faulte at there perchīng.

Albeit in verie dede, no leſſe obedience & faith, ought to haue ben giuen to the one, then to the other, as being all of one ſpirite of truth. That place of Peter, quoth my Lorde of yorke, is not ſo to be vnderſtande of the worde of God written. yes ſir, quoth I, that it is and of none other. yea in dede, quoth my lord of Chicheſter, maiſter Bradford doth tel you ye truth in that pointe. Well, quoth my Lorde of yorke, you knowe that Ireneus and others, do magnify much the churche, and alledge the Churche againſte heretickes, and not the ſcriptures. True, quoth I, for they had to do, with ſuche heretickes: as dyd denye the ſcriptures, and yet dyd magnifie the Apoſtles: that they were inforſed, to vſe thoſe churches wherin

the Apoſtles had taught, and that churche ſtil had receiued the ſame doctrine. you ſpeake the verie truethe, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter, for the heretickes did refuſe all ſcriptures, excepte it were a peice of Lukes, goſpell. Then quoth I, the alledginge of the churche, can not be primarlye, or principallye vſed againſte me, whiche am ſo farre from denyinge of the ſcriptures, that I appele vnto them vtterlye, as to the onelye iudge. Io .xii. A pretye matter, quoth my Lorde of yorke, that you will take vppon you to iudge the Churche. I praye you where was your 
                  •
               hurche this manye yeres? for the Churche of Chryſte is Catholicke and viſible. Hytherto my Lorde, quoth I, I doo not iudge

the churche, when I diſcerne it, from that congregacion, & thoſe whiche be not in it. And I neuer denied the church to be Catholike and viſible, althoughe at ſome times, it is more viſible thē at ſom. I praye you, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter, tel me where the churche, which alowed your doctrine: was this .iiii.C. yeres▪ I will tel you my Lorde, quoth I, or rather you ſhall tell it you ſelfe. If you will tell me where the church was in Helias time, when Helias ſaid that he was lefte alone. That is no aunſwere, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter. I am more ſorye you ſaye ſo, quoth I: But this will I tell you lordſhipp, that the ſame eies, wherewith a mā might haue eſpied the church thē, yf you nowe had them: you would not ſaye it

were no anſwere. The fault why the churche is not ſene of you, is, not bycauſe the churche is not viſible: but bicauſe your eyes are not clere ynoughe to ſe it. you are much deceiued, quoth he, to make ſuch a collation, betwine the churche then, & now. Verie well ſpeks my Lord (quoth the Byſhoppe of yorke) for Chriſtes ſaith, Edificabo eccleſiam meam, I wyll buylde my churche, and not I do, or haue buyld it, but I will build it. My lord quoth I, Peter taught me to make this collacion, ſaying: as in the people there was falſe Prophetes, whiche were muche in eſtima
                  •
               ion afore Chriſtes comming: ſo ſhall there be falſe teachers nowe, and verye manye ſhall followe them. And as for your futurtence I hope your grace, quod

I, wil not exclude thereby Chriſts church not to haue ben before▪ but rather that there is no buyldinge in the Churche, but by Chriſtes woorke onelye. For Paule, and Apollo, be but waterers. In good faith maiſter Bradford, quoth my my lord of Chicheſter, I am ſorye, to ſee you ſo litle to mind the churche. He taketh vpon him (as they al doo) to iudge the church, quod my Lorde of yorke. A man ſhall neuer come to certentie, that doth as they doo. My Lorde, quoth I, take me beſeche you in good part, I ſpeake ſimplie what I thincke: and I deſire reaſon to aunſwere my obiections your affections & ſorowes can not by rules. If that you conſider the ende, and cauſe of my condempnacion: I can not thincke, but that it ſhoulde ſo
                  •
               
               
thinge moue your honours. you knowe it well ynoughe, for you herd it, no matter was layed againſte me, but what was gathered vppon myne one confeſſion. Bycauſe I denyed tranſubſtantiacion, and the wycked to receaue Chriſtes body in the Sacramente: therfore I was condempned, and excommunicate, but not of the Church: although the pillers of the ſame (as they be taken) dyd it. No, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter, I herd ſay: that the cauſe of youre priſonemente was, for that you exhorced the people, to take the ſword in the one hande, and the matocke in the other. I neuer ment any ſuche thynge, nor ſpeake any thynge in that ſorte my lord, quoth I. yea quoth my Lorde of

Yorke, you behaued your ſelfe before the Counſell, ſo ſtoutlye at the firſt, that you woulde defend the Religion then, and therefore worthelye were you puniſhed. your grace, quoth I, did here me aunſwere my Lorde Chauncellor in that pointe. But put the caſe I had ben ſo ſtote, as they and your grace make it: was not the lawes of ye realme on me ſide then? wherfore vniuſtlie I was puniſhed. Onely tranſubſtantiacion, which was had on myne owne confeſſion: was the thing, on which my lorde Chauncellor proceded. you denye the preſence, quoth my lord of yorke. I do not, quoth I, to the faith of the worthy receauer. Why quoth he, what is that? thē to ſaye that Chriſte lyeth not of the alter. No my lorde, quoth I, in dede I

beleue not ſuche a preſence. I ſemeth, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter, that you haue not red Chryſoſtome, for he poīteth it. Of truth my lord, quoth I, hitherto I haue ben kepte well ynough withoute bokes, howbeit this I remember of Chriſoſtome, that he lyeth vppon the altar, as the Seraphins do, touch our lips with ye coules of the altar in heauen, whiche is an Hiperbolicall locucion, as you knowe Chriſoſtome floweth with them. It is to euident quoth my lord of yorke, that you are gon to farre, but let vs come againe to ye churche, out of the whiche you are excommunicated, I am not, quoth I, my lord: Although they whiche ſeme to be in the churche, and of the churche, haue excommuninicate me, as the pore blind man

was Ihon .9. I hope Chriſt receueth me. you deceaue your ſelfe, ꝙ he, and here muche was ſpoken of excommunicacion. At the laſte, I ſaid my Lorde, I pray you beare with me, that whiche I ſhall ſimplye ſpeake before you. Aſſuredly, quoth I, as I thinck you did well, to departe from the Romiſhe churche: ſo I thincke you haue done wickedly to couple vs to it againe, for you can neuer proue it, which you make the mother Churche to be chriſtes churche. Oh maiſter Bradford, quoth my lorde of Chicheſter, you were but a childe when this matter began. I was a yonge man then, cōming from the vniuerſitie, went with the woorlde, but I tell you it was alwaies agaīſt my ſtomack▪ I was but a child then, quoth I▪
               
how be it as I told you I thincke you haue done euill, for nowe we are come to the wicked mā, which ſitteth in the Temple of god▪ that is in the churche, for it cannot be vnderſtād of the Mahumet or any out of the churche, but of ſuche as beare rule in the church▪ See, quoth my lord of yorke, howe you builde your faith vpō ſuch places of ſcripture as are moſte obſcure, to deceaue your ſelfe, as thoughe you were in the church where you are not. Well my lorde, quoth I, thoughe I might by your frutes iudge of you and others: yet will not I vtterly condempne you for euer: oute of the churche, for perchaunce you ſinne of ignoraunce▪ & if I were in your caſe, I thincke not, quoth I, that I ſhould not cō
               dēpne him vtterly yt is of my faith in the Sacrament knowinge as

you know, that at ye leaſt .viii.C. yeres after Chriſts, as my lord of Duriſme writteth: It was free to beleue, or not to beleue tranſubſtātiatiō. This is a toye, quoth he that you haue found out of your owne brayne, as thoughe a man not beleuing as the churche doth: That is tranſubſtantiacion were of the Churche he is an hereticke, and ſo none of the churche, quoth my lord of Chicheſter, that dothe hold any doctrine, againſte the definition of the Churche, as nowe you do hold againſt tranſubſtan
               
                  ••
               atiō. And he brought furth Ciprian whiche was no Hereticke, thoughe he beleued rebaptizinge of them, whiche were baptized of heretickes, bicauſe he held it, before the churche had defined it, where as if he had holden it after

then had he ben an hereticke. Oh my lord, quod I, wil you condempne to the deuil any man that beleueth truely, the .12. article of ye faith, wherein I take the vnitie of Chriſtes churche, to conſiſte, al thoughe in ſome pointes, he beleue not the definitions of that, whiche you cal the churche. If I ſhall ſpeake to you franckelye, I doubte not but he yt holdeth ſyncerlye the articles of oure belefe, thought in other thinges he diſſent from your definitions, yet he ſhalbe ſaued. yea, quod they both, this is your doctrine. No, quoth I, it is Paule, whiche ſaith, that if they hold the foundacion Chriſte, thoughe they build vppon hym. Hey ſtrawe and ſtouble: yet they ſhalbe ſaued. Lord god, quoth my lord of yorke, howe you delite to

leyne to ſo hard, and darke places of ſcripture, yea, quoth my Lord of Chicheſter, I will ſhewe you howe that Luther doth excommunicate zwinglius for this matter, ſo red a place of Luther, making for his purpoſe. My lord, quoth I what Luther writteth, as you muche paſſe not of, ſo do I in this caſe, my faith is not build of Luther zwinglius, or Ecolampadius in this point. And in dede to tel you truelye, I neuer red anye of their woorkes in this matter. As for their perſons, what ſo euer theire ſayinges were, yet doo I thincke aſſuredly, that they were and are gods children, and ſainctes with him. Wel, quoth my lord of yorke, you are out of the cōmunion of ye church, I am not, quoth I. For it cōſiſteth, & is in faith. Loo, quoth

he, howe you make your churche inuiſible, that would haue the comunion of it, to conſiſte in faithe, yea, and like your grace, quoth I, for to haue cōmuniō with ye churche, neadeth not viſibleneſſe of it, cōmunion conſiſteth, (as I ſaid) in faith, and not in exforior ceremonies, as appeareth both by Paule, whiche woulde haue Vnam fidem, & by Ireneus to Victor for ye obſeruaciō of Eſter, ſaing that Diſſonantiam ieiunii ſhould not Rumpere conſonantiam fide. That ſame place, quoth my lord of chicheſter, hath often euen wounded my cō
               ſcience, becauſe we diſceuered our ſelfes frō the Sea of Rome. Wel, quoth I, God forgeue you, for I thincke you haue done euyll, to bringe England thyther againe, your honors know, I am plain, &

therfore I beſeche you beare with me. Here my Lord of yorke toke a boke of paper, of common places out of his boſome, and red a peice of Saint Auguſtine Contra Epiſtolam fundamenti, howe that there were many thinges, that did hold ſaint Auguſtine in the boſome of the church, conſent of people and natiōs, aucthoritie cōfirmed with miracles, nouriſhed with hope, increaſed wyth charitie, eſtabliſhed with ātiquitie. Beſides this: there holdethe me in the churche, ſaith ſaint Auguſtine ſtil, the ſucceſſions of prieſtes, from Peters ſeate vntil this preſent Biſhoppe. Laſt of all the verye name of Catholicke doctrine dothe holde me. Loo, quoth he, howe ſaye you to this of Saint Auguſtine, point
                  •
                me oute your churche thus. My

Lord, quoth I, this of ſaint Auguſtine maketh as muche for me as for you, althoughe I might aunſwere, that al theſe, if they had ben alledged to bee ſo firme as you make them, they might haue ben alledged againſte Chriſt, and his Apoſtles, for ther was the lawe, and ceremonies conſented in by the people, confirmed with miracles, antiquitie, and continual ſucceſſion of byſhoppes frō Aarons tyme, vntil that preſent: In good faith, quod my lord of Chicheſter, maiſter Bradford, you marke to muche the ſtate of the churche, before Chriſts comming: Sir, quod I, therein I do but as Peter teacheth .2. Pet. 2. and Paule verye oftē. you would gladly haue your church heare, verye glorious, and as a moſt pleaſante Ladie, but as

a moſte pleaſante ladye, but as Chriſtes ſaith, Beatus eſt quicunque non fuerit offenſus per me: ſo maye his churche ſaye, bleſſed are they that are not offended at me. yea, quoth I, my lord you thinck none is of the church, but ſuch as ſuffer perſecutiō. what I thincke, quod I, god knoweth. I pray your grace, iudge me by anye wordes and ſpeaking, and marke what Paule ſaythe. Omnes qui volunt, all that wil liue godly in chriſt Ieſu, muſt ſuffer perſecutions. Sometime Chriſt church hath reſte here, but commonlye, quoth I, it is not ſo. And ſpecially towardes the end, her forme wil be more vnſemlye. But what ſaye you to ſainct Auguſtin, quoth he, where is youre Churche, that hath the conſent of people & nations? Mary, quod I,

al people & natiōs yt be gods people, haue cōſented with me & I wt them in the doctrine of faith. Loo, quoth he, howe you goo about to ſhifte of all thinges. No my lord, quoth I, I meane ſimplye, and ſo ſpeake god knoweth. S. Auguſtī quoth he, dooth here talke of ſucceſſiō, euen frō Peters ſea: yea, & like your grace, ꝙ I, that ſea, thē was nothīg ſo much corrupt as it is now, Wel, quod he, you alwaies iudge ye church. No my lord, quod I. As chriſts ſhep diſcerne chriſts voice, but they iudged not it: ſo they diſcerne the churche, but not iudge her. yes that you do ſath he
                  •
                No & like your grace, quoth I, ful wel may a mā doubte of ye Romiſh church, for ſhe obaeth not Chriſts voice, as chriſts true church doth, wherin quod he, ī latē ſeruis, ꝙ I,

& robbeth the Laytye of Chriſtes cuppe in the Sacramentes. Why quoth my lord of Chicheſter, Latten ſeruice was in England when the Pope was gon. True, quoth I, tyme was when the Pope was awaye, but not all Poperie as in Kyng Henrys dayes. Latten ſeruice, quoth my lord of yorke was appointed to be ſonge & had in ye Queare where only were. Clerici, that is ſuch as vnderſtād laten, ye people ſitting in ye bodie of ye churche prayinge their owne priuat prayers, and this, quoth he, maye well be yet ſene, by making of the Chaunſell and Quere, ſo as the people could not come in, or heare them: yea qut my lorde, quoth I, both in Chriſoſtomes tyme, and alſo in the laten churche in ſainct Ieromes tyme, as he writteth in

the preface I trowe to the Galathians, al the church ſaith, Amen. Aunſwering againe mightely Amen: whereby we maye ſee that ye prayers were made, that both the people herd them and vnderſtod them: you are to blame, quoth my Lorde of Chicheſter to ſaye that the churche robbeth the people of the Cup. Well my lord, quod I, turne it as pleaſe you, all men knowe that the Laitye hath none of it: In dede: ꝙ I, I would wiſhe the churche would defyne againe that they might haue it for my ꝑt, if god make free, quoth I, who cā define to make bound generallie. Well, quoth my lord of yorke, maiſter Bradford, we leſe but labour, for you ſeke to put awaye al thīgs yt be told you to your good, your churche no man can knowe, yes

that you maye well, quoth I. I pray you whereby: ſaid he, forſoth Chriſoſtome ſhoeth it. Tantummodo per ſcripturas onely by the ſcriptures, and thus ſpeaketh he verye often times togyther, as you well knowe, quod I▪ In ded, quod he, that is of Chriſoſtome In opere imperfecto, whiche maye be doubted of the thinge whereby the church may be knowen beſte is ſucceſſiō of Byſhoppes. No my lord, quod I, Lyra ful well writteth vppon Matthew, that Eccleſia non conſiſtit in hominibus ratione Poteſtatis ſecularis aut eccleſiaſtice, Sedin hominibus in quibus eſt noti
                     •
                  ia Vera et confeſſio Fidei et veritatis. And in Hilarius time, you know he writteth to Auxcentius that the Churche dyd rather Deliteſcere in cauernis, them Eminere, in primariis ſedibus.
               
Here commeth one of their ſeruauntes, and tolde them that my lorde of Duriſme taried for them at Maiſter yorkes houſe, for inded it was paſte .12. of the clocke, vppon a .4. howres they taryed with me. And after that there mā was come, they put vp there written bokes of common places, and ſaide they lamented my caſe, and ſo wiſhing me to red ouer a boke, whiche dyd doctor Crome good, as my Lorde of Chicheſter ſayde and wyſhyng me good in words, they wente there wayes, and I to my priſon.
            Vppon mondaye, whiche was the .22. of Februarie about .8. of ye clock in ye morning which was an howre ſoner then was appointed. There came to the Coūter, where I was in priſon to Spanniſhe

friers. Alphonſus and the kings Confeffor (as they ſaid) and with them twoo prieſtes, whiche were Engliſhe men, as I wene, & when the howſe was voyded of other companye: I was called donne, & beinge come before them a ſtoole was pouled out, and I bidden ſit doune: whiche thinge I did after a ſigne of ciuilitie geuen to them. Nowe thus ſitting beginneth the Confeſſor to ſpeake in latten, and aſke me in latten (for al our talke was in latten whether) I had not ſene nor herd of one Alphonſus, yt had writen againſt hereſies. And I aunſwered that I did not know him. well, quoth he, this man (pointing to Alphonſꝰ) is he. Verye good, quoth I. After this he beginneth to tell me, howe that of loue and charitie, by the meanes

of the Erle of Darbye, they come to me, bycauſe I deſired to conferre with them. And I anſwered that I neuer deſired there cōming nor to conferre with them, or any other, but, quoth I, ſeing you are come of charitie, as you ſaye, I cannot but thanckfully acknowledge it, and as for conference, though I deſire it not: yet, quoth I, I wyl not refuſe to talke with you, if you will. Than began Alphonſus to tel me, that it were requiſite I did pray vnto god, that I mighte followe the direction of gods ſpirite, and as he ſhould enſpire me, not being addicte to min owne ſelfe, will, and with: where vpō I made a prayer, & beſaught god to directe al our wille words, and workes, as the willes, words and workes of his children for euer,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
yea, quoth Alphonſus, you muſte praye with your herte. For if you ſpeake but with tong onely God, will not giue you his grace. Sir, quoth I. doo not iudge leſte you be iudged, you haue hearde my wordes now charitie would haue you to leaue the iudgement of the hart to god, you muſt, quoth Alphonſus be as it were a newter, & not wedded to your ſentence. But as one ſtandinge in doubte, praye and beleue, & be redye to receaue what god ſhall inſpire, for, quoth he, in vaine laboureth our tong to ſpeake els: Sir, quoth I, my ſentence if you meane it for Religion muſt not be in a doubting, or vncertein: as I thācke god, it is not euen for that where in. I am condēpned, I haue no cauſe to doubt. but rather to be moſt certein of it,

& therfor I pray god to confirme me more in it, for it is his truthe. And therfore bycauſe it may abid ye light, I dare be bolde to haue it loke on, & cōferre it with you or any man in reſpecte wherof I am glad of your cōming & thācke you for your cōming, althoughe (as I ſaid) I deſired not your cōminge, nwas willing of your cōming, or cold be cōtēt of it otherwiſe. Why, quod he, what is y• matter wherefore you were condempned, for we know not, ſir quod I, ī priſō haue I ben all moſt two yeres, I neuer trāſgreſſed any of ye lawes: wherfore I might iuſtlye be puniſhed. But becauſe I frāckly confeſſed, whereof I repēt not my faith concerninge the ſacrament being demaūded in theſe two points. One that there is no trāſubſtantiaciō,

the other that the wicked doo not receaue Chriſtes bodie,▪ Lett vs quoth, he loke a litle on the firſte, do you not beleue chriſts preſence raallye and corporallye in the forme of bread? No, quoth I. I doo beleue that there Chriſt is preſent to the faith of the worthye receauer, as there is preſent bread and wyne to the ſences, and outwarde man, as for any ſuche preſence of including and placing Chriſte, I beleue not, nor dare not do. Why, quoth he, I am ſure you beleue Chriſtes natural body is circumſcriptible. And here he made muche a do, of two natures of Chriſt, howe that the one is euery where, & the other is in his proper place, demaunding queſtiōs here about whiche I aunſwered with etiam, that is affirmatiuelye, bycauſe

they were ſuche, as no wiſe man would haue ſpente any ſuch tyme about as he did, for I neuer herd of any, that woulde haue denyed them. Nowe then, commeth he to this concluſion (whiche I prayed hym, he woulde make: for els he had forgotten) howe that becauſe chriſtes body was circumſcriptible concerninge the humanitye in in heauen, therfore it was ſo in the bread. This hanges not togither, quod I, becauſe you are here. Ergo you are at Romme, it is out of Fraunce, bycauſe chriſtes body is in heauen. Io. it is in the Sacramēt vnder the forme of bread. No wiſe man wil graunt it, quoth I. why, quoth he, you wil beleue nothing but that which is expreſely ſpoke, in the ſcriptures, yes ſyr, quoth I, I will beleue what ſo euer

you ſhall by demonſtracions out of the ſcriptures declare vnto me, he is obſtinate ſaieth he to his fellow: But, quoth he, to me is not god able to do it. yes ſyr, quoth I But heare the queſtiō is of gods will, and not of his powre: Why, quoth he. Doth he not ſay plainlye this is my bodye? yes, quod I, and I denye it not, but that it is to the faith of the worthie receuer. To faith, quoth he? howe is that? Forſothe ſyr, quoth I, as I haue no tong to expreſſe it: ſo I know you haue no eares to heare and vnderſtād it, for faith ſeyth more, then man can vtter, yea, but, quod he, I can tel all that I beleue, you beleue not muche then, quoth I. For if you beleue the ioies of heauen: if you beleue no more then you can tell, you wyll not muche

deſire to come thyther, for as the mynde is more capable and receauable then the mouth, ſo it conceaueth more then the tonge can expreſſe, Chriſte ſayth, it is hys bodie, quoth he. And ſo ſaye I after a certein maner, quoth I: After a certein maner, quoth hee that is after another maner then it is in heauen, ſaint Auguſtin, quoth I telleth it more plainlye, that it is Chriſtes bodye, after the ſame maner circuncyſion was the Couenaunte of God, and the ſacrament of faith, is faith, or to make it more plaine, as Baptiſme, and the water of baptiſme is regeneration. Verye wel ſaid, quoth he, Baptiſme and the water therof is a ſacrament of gods grace & ſprit in the water, cloſing the baptiſme.

No ſyr, quoth I, away with your incloſing on the ſame ſorte chriſts bodye is in the bread, on whiche ſorte the grace and ſpirite of God is in the water. In ye water, quod he: is gods grace by ſignificacion: ſo is the bodye in the breade, quoth I, in the Sacrament, you are muche deceaued, quoth he, yt make no difference beetwene the ſacramētes that be ſtāderes, and the Sacramētes that are traunſeuntes, and paſſers by. As for example, the ſacramente of Order whiche you denye, thoughe ſaint Auguſtine affirme it, is ſtanderd although the ceremonie be paſte. But in baptiſme ſo ſone as the bodie is waſhen, the water ceſſeth to be a ſacrament. True good ſyr, quoth I. And ſo it is in the lordes ſupper, no longer then it is in vſe,

is Chriſtes ſacrament. Here was maiſter Alphonſus wounderfullye chafed, and ſpeake (as often he had done before) ſo: that ye hole houſe dyd ringe againe with an Echo. He hath a great name of lerning. But ſurely he hath litle pacience. If I had ben any thynge whete: one houſe could not haue kepte vs bothe. At the lenght he cometh to that point, that I could not find in ye ſcripture, baptiſme, and the Lords ſupper, to haue any like ſimilitude togither. And here (lord god) what aray he mad, how that we would receaue nothinge but ſcripture: & yet we are able to proue nothing by the ſcripture, Father, ꝙ I, for ſo I called him, God forgiue me if I dyd amyſſe, be paciente, and you ſhall ſee, yt by the ſcripture I will finde

baptiſme and the Lords ſupper, coupled togither. No, quoth he, that canſt thou neuer doo, let me ſee one texte of it, and a great ado he made. At the lenght: ſyr, quoth I, Paule ſayeth, that as we are baptized into one bodie: ſo we are Potati in Vno ſpiritu, we haue dronken of one ſpirite, meaninge it of the Cuppe in the Lordes ſupper. Paule hath no ſuch wordes quod he▪ yes that he hath, quoth I. I trowe he hath not, quoth the kinges confeſſor. Giue me a Teſtament, quoth I, and I wil ſhowe it to you: ſo a prieſt that ſate by thē gaue me his teſtamente, & I ſhowed them the plaine texte. Here was nowe lokinge one vpon an other, finallye this ſimple ſhifte was founde: that Paule ſpake not of the ſacramēt. Wel, ſir quod

quoth I, thoughe the texte be plaine, yet I wene the fathers do expoūd it ſo, eſpecially (except my memorie faile me:) Chriſoſtome doth it. Here I ſeing thē blancke: I began to tel them howe I had byn handled in priſon, with oute boke, paper, pen, yucke, and howe vniuſtly I had ben handled, and prayed them, that as they tolde me their comminge was to do me good: ſo they woulde doo it, and not to do me hurte, whiche thyng they much marked not, becauſe of the foyle they had, which I would haue ſuppreſſed. Alphonſus therfore whiche had the Teſtamente in his hande, and turned ouer leafe by leafe: at the lenght he commeth to the .5. to the Corinthiens: and there red howe that he was giltye, whiche made no

difference of the lordes bodie, yea ſyr, quoth I, but therwith he ſayeth, he that eateth of of the bread, callinge it bread ſtil, and that, after conſecraciō as you cal it. And ſo brought furth the ſentence of the .10. to the Corinthe: the breade whiche we breake. &c. Oh, quoth he, how ignoraunt are you which knowe not that thinges retaine the names they had after their cō
               uerſion: as Moyſes Rood. And here they called for a Bible, and ſo was all moſte a quarter of an houre, before he could find out the place, finding faulte at the Bible: bycauſe it was Vataples Bible. At the lenght when he had found it: lord God howe he triumphed but I cooled the heate furthwith for ſyr, quoth I, there is mencion made of the conuerſion, as

well as the ſame appered to the ſence, but, quoth I, here you cannot fynd it ſo, finde me one worde how the bread is conuerted: and I will then ſaye, you bringe ſome matter, that maketh for you. At theſe wordes he was troubled, & at the lenght, he ſaid, howe that I hanged on mine owne ſence. No, quoth I, that doo I not. For I will bringe you furth (for .viii.C. yeres after Chriſte) the fathers of the church, to cōfirme this which I ſpake. No, quoth he, you haue the churche againſte you. I haue not quoth I, chriſt church againſt me. yes yt you haue ſayth he. And ſo aſked me what the church was. Marie, quoth I, Chriſts wife, the cheare, and ſeate of veritie. Is ſhe viſible, quoth he. ye that ſhe is, quoth I, if that you wil put on the

ſpectacles of gods word to loke on her. This churche, quoth he, hath defyned the contrarye, and that will I proue by all the good fathers continuallye, frō Chriſtes Aſcencenſion, euer, for .15.C. yeres at ye leaſte, cōtinually. What, will you proue ſo quoth I, tranſubſtantiation? yea, quoth he, that ye bread is turned īto Chriſts bodie. you ſpeake more then you can do quod I. That do I not quod he. Then quod I. I wil giue place. Wil you beleue quod he. Beleue▪ ꝙ I▪ is gods gift, therfore cannot I ꝓmiſe, but I tel you, quod I, that I wil giue place, & I hope ſhal beleue gods truth, alwaies ſo good is he. Here he foūd a grreat faulte wt me, yt I would not deſerne betwixte Habitum et actum, as though Actus, which he called credulitie,

had ben in our powre, but this he let paſſe, & cōmeth againe, aſking me, if he could proue it, as he ſaid: whether that I would giue place. yea ꝙ I, that I wil. Here was called for, paper, pen and yncke, to writte. And then I ſaid, what and if that I proue it you, continuallye for .viii.C. yeres after Chriſte, at the leaſt, the ſubſtabnce of bred to remayne in the Sacrament, by the teſtimonie of the Fathers: what will you do, quod I? I will giue place, quod he, with this, paper came in. Then ſaid I, writte you, howe that you wyll gyue place, if I ſo proue, & I wil write, that I wyll gyue place yf you ſo proue. Bycauſe you are the aunciente, you ſhall haue the preeminaunce. Lord God howe angry he was nowe, and ſaid that he

came not to lerne at me, & ſo ſaide here is two witneſſes (meaning it of the two priſtes) and they be ſufficiedt. And ſo here about we had much ado to none effecte: but to a plaine ſcolding, if I had not giuē place to the furor of Alphonſus, for he was verye teſtie and haſtie, and here he diſpreaſed Bucer, and all that praiſed hym, with muche other talke. At the lenght, the confeſſor aſked me of the ſeconde queſtion what it was. Sir, quoth I, that the wicked men receaue not Chriſtes bodie in the ſacrament, as Sainte Auguſtin ſpeaketh of Iudas, that he receaued Panem domini but not panem dominū. S. Auguſtin ſayth not ſo, quoth Alphōſus. yes yt doth he, quoth I, & ſo they roſe vp, & talked no more of that matter, but aſked me how

they ſhould get me all the fathers and old aucthors, that proue and affirme the bread to be turned into Chriſtes bodie. Sir, quoth I, you maye ſone doo it, howbeit bycauſe you ſhall not trouble youre ſelf: if I maye haue my bokes, I nead no more but notes of ye places. Thus they went their waies, howe they brooked my talke: I cā not tell, for they bad me not farewell. After they were gon, commeth one of the prieſtes, and willed me not to be ſo obſtinate. Sir quoth I, be not you ſo wauering. In all the ſcriptures cannot you find me non eſt panis. yes thst I can, quoth he, in .5. places. Then will I eate your boke, quoth I, ſo the boke was opened, but no place founde, and he wente his waye ſmiling. God helpe vs.
            
               Vpon the .21. of Marche, by the meanes of one of yt Erle of Darby his men, lefte behind my lorde, his maiſter, for ye ſoliting of my cauſe as he ſaid to me: there came to the Coūter to diner, one maiſter Collior, ones warden of Maūcheſter, & the ſaid ſeruaūt of ye Erle of darbie, of whome I lerned ye maiſter doctor Weſtone Deane of weſtm̄, would be with me in y• after none aboute .2. of the clocke, or before. At diner therfore when the ſayd warden dyd diſcommend kynge Edwarde, and went about to ſett furth the aucthoritie of the Pope, whiche I with ſtode, defendinge the kinges faith, that it was Catholike, and that the aucthoritie of the Byſhoppe of Rome his ſupremycie was vſurped, bringing furth the teſtimonie of Gregorie

which calleth ye name of ſupreame head to be a title of yt foriner to an techriſt: a woman priſoner was brought in, where vpō I toke occaſiō to riſe frō the table, & ſo went to my priſon Chāber to begge of god grace, and helpe therin, continuing there ſtil vntil I was called down to ſpeake which maiſterſter Weſton. So ſoone as I came into the hall: maiſter weſton verye gentlie toke me by the hand, & aſked me how I did, with ſuch other talke. At ye lenght he willed auoidaunce of the chāber, ſo they all went out, ſaue maiſter weſton himſelf, maiſter Collior, ye Erle of Darbie his ſeruaūt, yt ſubdeane of we wm̄, the keꝑ maiſter Clayden, & the ꝑſon of the churche wher the Counter is. Nowe then he beginneth to tel me, how yt he was often

mynded to haue come vnto me, beinge therto deſired of the Erle of Darby and, quod he, after that I perceaued by his man, that you could be cōtented rather to ſpeake with me, then any others: I could not but come to do you good if I cā, for hurt be ſure I wil not. Sir quoth I. When I perceued by the reporte of my lord ſeruaunte, that you did beare me good will more (as he ſaid) thē any other of your ſorte: I told him thē, that therfore I could be better contente & more willing to talke with you, if you ſhould come vnto me. This did I ſay, quoth I, other wiſe I deſired not your comminge. Well, quoth he, nowe I am come to talke with you, but before we ſhal entre into any talke, certein principlis we muſte agre vppon, whiche ſhalbe

this daies worke. Firſte, quoth he, I ſhal deſire you to put awaye all vayne glorie, and not to holde any thinge for the praiſe of the world. Sir, quoth I, Auguſtine maketh that in dede a peice of the definition of an hereticke, whiche if I can not put awaye cleane (for I thincke there wil a ſpice of it remayne in vs, as longe as this fleſhe liueth) yet I promiſſe you by the grace of god, that I purpoſſe not to yeld to it, god I hope will neuer ſuffer it to bare rule in them, that ſtriue there againſte, & deſire all the dregges of it vtterly driuen out of vs. I am gladde. quoth he, to here you ſaye ſo, although in ded, quoth he. I thīcke you do not ſo muche eſteme it, as others doo. Secondly I would deſire you that you wil put away

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
ſingularitie in your iudgement & opiniōs, ſyr, quod I, god forbed yt I ſhould ſticke to any ſingularitie or priuat iudgement in godes religion. Hitherto I haue not deſired it, neither do, nor mind at any time, to hold any other doctrine then is publicke, & Catholicke, vnderſtāding catholicke, as good men do, according to gods worde. Very wel, quod he, this is a good dayes woorke, I hope to do you good: and therfore nowe thirdly, I ſhal pray you to write me Capita of thoſe thinges, where vppon you ſtand in the Sacrament, and to ſende them to me, betwixte this and wedneſdaye nexte, vntil whiche tyme, yea vntil I come to you againe, be aſſured that you are with oute all perill of death. Of my fidelitie I warraunte you,

therfore awaye with all dubitacions &c. Sir, quod I, I wil write to you the groundes I 
                  •
               ene to, in this matter. As for death if it come: well come be it, this whiche you require of me, ſhalbe no great let to me therin. you knowe ſaith he, that Saint Auguſtin was a Manicean, yet was he conuerted at the lenght: ſo I haue good hope of you. Sir, quod I, becauſe I wil not flater you: I would you ſhoulde flatlye knowe, that I am euen ſetteled in the religion wherfore I am condempned. yea but, quod he, if it be not the truth, and if you ſee euident matter to the contrarie, will not you then giue place? God forbed, quod I, but that I ſhould alwayes gyue place to the truthe. I would haue you to pray ſo, quod he. ſo I doo

quoth I, and that he wil more and more cōfirme me in it, as I thācke god he hath done, and doth: yea, but, quoth he, praye with a condiciō if you be in it. No. ſyr, quod I, I cānot pray ſo, bycauſe I am ſetteled and aſſured of his truthe. Wel, quoth he, as the lerned byſhoppe aunſwered Saint Auguſtines mother that thoughe he was obſtinat: yet the teares of ſuche a mother coulde not but wene her ſonne: ſo, quod he, I hope your prayers. (For min eyes did ſhowe that I had wepte in prayer) cannot but be herde of God thoughe not as you woulde, yet as beſte ſhall pleaſe god, do you not, quod he, remember the hyſtorie hereof, yes ſyr, quoth I. I thincke it to be of ſaincte Ambroſe. No, quod he, that it is not, and here he woulde

haue layed a wager: and began to triumphe ſayinge. As you are ouerſeen herein, ſo you are in the other thinges. Well ſyr, quoth I. I will not contend with you for the name, this I remember ſainct Auguſtin writteth in his Confeſſions. After this talke he begon to tel: howe that the people were by me procured to withſtand the Queene, but I badde him hange me vppe, as a traytour, and a theif: if euer I encouraged any to rebellion, whiche thinge my keper and others that were there of the prieſts affirmed on my behalf. So muche talke there was at Epheſios, bowe he had ſaued men goinge in the carte to be hanged, ſuche like. The ende was this, that I ſhoulde ſend? vnto hym, capita doctrine of the ſupper, and

after wedneſday he woulde come vnto me again, and thus departed he, after that he had droncken to me in beare and wine, I omitte here, talke of Oxford, of bokes of German writters, of the feare of death, and ſuche other talke whiche are to no purpoſe.
            Vpon the .28. of Marche came to the Counter Doctor Pendelton, and with hym Maiſter Collior, ones warden of Maunchecheſter, and Stephen Beiche. After ſalutacions, maiſter Pendelton begā to ſpeake to me, that he was ſorrie for my trouble. And further, quod he, after that I did know you could becōtēt to talk wt me I made the more ſpede, being as redye to doo you the good, and pleaſure that I can, as you would wiſhe &c. Syr, quod I,

the maner howe I was contente to ſpeake with you was on this ſorte, maiſter Beiche was often in hand with me, whom he ſhould bringe vnto me, and named you amongeſt other. And, quod I, I remember that I ſayd, I had rather ſpeake with you then wyth anye of all other. Nowe the cauſe I ſo would, I will brieflye tell you, I remember that ones you were (as farre as a man mighte iudge) of the religion that I am of, at this preſente. And I remember that you haue ſette fourthe the ſame earneſtly. Gladlye therefore woulde I learne of you, what thynge it was, that moued your conſcience to altre: & gladly would I ſee what thing it is or was yt you haue ſeen ſithē, which you ſawe not before. Here

maiſter Pendeltō was ſom thing abaſhed, as appeareth by his fō
               bling in his ſpech. Maiſter Bradforde, quod he, I do not knowe wherfore you are condempned. Marye, quod I, tranſubſtantiacion is the thinge, wherof I am condempned, and alſo the denyall of wicked men to receaue Chriſts bodie, wherin I would deſire you to ſhewe me what reaſons, which before you knewe not, dyd moue your conſcience to altre: for ones as I ſayd you were as I am in religion. Heare again maiſter Pendelton halfe amaſed, begon to excuſe him ſelfe, if it would haue bē, as though he had not denyed fullye tranſubſtantiacion in dede, all though the word, quod he I ſaid was not in ſcripture. & ſo he made an endleſſe tale of the thinge that

moued hym to altre. As far as I cold perceaue, it was becauſe he had loked to muche, and giuen to muche diligence and eſtimacion, to Luther and Melancton. But, quod he, I will gether to you the places, and ſend them. And here he deſired me, that he mighte ſee a Copie of that, which I had ſent maiſter Weſton, the whiche I did promiſe hym. This is a ſome of the effectual talke we had. Beſides whiche talke, we had a reaſonninge a litle, whether euil men did receaue Chriſtes bodie. I no. & he, yea. I ſaid they receaued not the ſpirite, Ergo not the bodie: for it is no carcaſe, quoth I, hereto I brought out ſaint Auguſtin, how Iudas receaued Panem domini, and not Panem dominum, how that he muſt be in corpori Chriſti, that

muſt receaue Corpus chriſti, which he went about to put awaye, with idem, and not, ad idem, out of ſaint Ierome and howe that in cotpore Chriſti, was too bee vnderſtande of al that be in the viſible church, althoughe they be not in the inuiſible churche with God, whiche I denied to be Sainte Auguſtines meanynge, and ſaide alſo: that ſaint Ieromes allegations could not make for that purpoſe. Again we had talke of tranſubſtantiacion. He bringeth furth Ciprian, Panis quem dedit Dominus natura mutatus. And I expounded Natura, not for the ſubſtaunce. As quod I, the nature of an herbe is not the ſubſtaunce of it: ſo the breade chaunged in nature, is not to be taken for chaunged in ſubſtaunce, for nowe it is ordeyned

not for the food of the bodie ſimplye, but rather for the food of the ſoule. And here I broughte fourth Gelaſius, whome he ſaide was a Pope. yea marye, quod I. But his fayth, is my faith, quod I, for the Sacrament, if you wold receaue it. From this talke we wente to talke, wether Accidentia were Res or no. If they be properlie Res, quod I, then be they ſubſtaunce, and if they be ſubſtaunce, (in that we muſte haue Tetreſtrem rem, and eayrthlye ſubſtaunce in the Sacrament as Ireneus ſaithe): then muſte we not denye bread, quod I. But he ſaide that colour was the earthelye thynge, and called it an accidentall ſubſtaunce. And ſo here aboutes wee hadde muche

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
babling to none effecte. I omitte the talke we had of my Lorde of Caunterbury, of Peter Martirs boke, of his letter laied to my charge. When he was condempned of ye church, whether Dic eccleſie et ce
               ▪ was of the vniuerſall churche, or of a particular churche, which at the lenght he graunted of vayne glorye, whiche he willed me to be ware of at his comming furth of the Countre, and ſuche like talke. A litle before his departinge, I ſayde this. Maiſter doctor, quod I, as I ſaide to Maiſter weſton the laſte daye, ſo ſaye I vnto you againe, that I am the ſame man in religion againſte tranſubſtantiacion ſtill, which I was when I came into priſō: for, quod I, hitherto I haue ſeen nothynge in anye pointe, to infirme me. At

whiche wordes he was ſom thing moued, & ſaid, that, that was not Catholicke▪ yes, quod I, and I truſte ſo to proue it, euen by the teſtimonie of the catholicke fathers, vntill Concilium Lateranenſe, and there abouts. The keper maiſter Clayden deſired hym to tarrie diner, whiche thing he denyed: bycauſe had els wheare promiſed. And ſo wente his waye: ſayinge, that he woulde came after to me: god one father, be with vs al, and giue vs the ſpirite of his truth for euer. Amen.
            In the after nowne about .5. of the clocke, cometh maiſter weſtō, whiche ſente worde to the keper, that he would haue ben with me▪ by .2. of the clocke. Nowe when I was come down out of my priſon chamber vnto him: he very gentlye

ſaluted me, deſired the companye: euerie man to departe, and ſo ſat donne, and I beſides hym. And after that he had thancked me for my writtinge vnto hym: he pulled out of his boſome the ſame writing, which I had ſent hym. The copie whereof in Engliſhe (for I did writte it in Laten) ſhal immediatly follow this communicacion. And before he began to read it, he ſhowed me, that he aſked of my conuerſacion at Cambridge ſithen his being wyth me, &, quod he, maiſter Bradford bycauſe you ar a mā, not giuē to the glorie of this world, I wil ſpeake it before your face: your life I haue lerned was ſuch there alwaies, as al mē, euen y• greateſt enemies you haue: can not but praiſe you, & it. And therfore I loue you, quod

he muche better then euer I did. Nowe, quod he, I will reade ouer your argumēts, & ſo we wyll conferrthē. Such they ar, that a man may well perceaue you ſtande of conſcience, & therfore I am glad, and the more redye to pitie you. So he began to rede the firſt, and there beganne to tell, howe that thoughe the worde tranſubſtantiacion began but lately: yet the thinge, quod he, was & hath bene ſithen Chriſtes inſtitucion. And I told him, that I did not contend, or hange vppon the worde onlye: but vpō the thing which, quod I, is as newe as the worde. Then went he to the ſecond, and there broughte oute ſainte Auguſtine, howe that if an euil man, goinge to the deuyll, did make his will: his ſonne and heyre would not ſaye, hys father dyd lye in it,

or ſpeake tropically. Much more Chriſte, quod he goinge to god, did neuer lye nor vſe any figuratiue ſpeach in his laſte wil and teſtament. Do you not remember this place of ſaint Auguſtin, quod he? yes ſyr, quod I. But I remē
               ber not that ſaint Auguſtine hath thoſe wordes, tropice or fyguratiue, that is figuratiuelye ſpoken as you reherſe. For a man maye ſpeake a thinge figuratiuely and lye not, as Chriſte did in his laſt ſupper. After this he wente to the third, and broughte furtho Ciprian, howe that the nature of the bread is turned into fleſhe. Here faith he that my Lord of Caunter burie expoundeth nature, for qualitie by Gelaſius, the whiche interpretacion ſerueth for the aunſwere of your third argumēt, that

Chriſte called breade his bodye, that is the qualitie, forme, and apparaunce of bread. And further quod he, the ſcripture is wonte to call thinges, as they auerr, by the ſame names. As Symon the Leper, not whiche was ſo preſentlye, but bicauſe he had ben ſo. Syr, quod I, Cipriā wrote before Gelaſius, therfore Ciprian muſt not expound Gelaſtus, but Gelaſius, Ciprian, and ſo they both teache that bread remaineth ſtil. As for thinges hauinge ſtill the names they had maketh nothinge to aunſwere this except you could ſhew, that this nowe were no bread
                  •
                as eaſelye a mā might haue knowen and ſeen then, Simon to haue ben healed and cleane from hys Leproſey. After this he wente to the foerth of the Cuppe, the which he

din not fully red but digreſſed into a longe talke of Ciprians Epiſtles De aquarus, Alſo of Saint Auguſtine, expoundinge the breakinge of bread by Chriſte to his. 2. Diſciples goinge to Emauſe, to be of the Sacramente, with ſuch other talke to no certein purpoſe, and therfore I prayed him, that in as muche as I had written to hym, the reaſons that ſtabliſhe my faith againſt tranſubſtantiacion: ſo he woulde doo the lyke to me, that is, aunſwere myne by writinge, and ſhew me moo reaſons in writinge, to confirme trā
               ſubſtantiaciō, which he promiſed me to doo, and ſaid that he would ſende or briynge it to me agayne, with in three dayes. And ſo when he hadde ouerlye reade my argumentes, and heare and there

ſpeake, litle to the purpoſe for auoidynge of them, and therfore I eftſones prayed him to giue me in writtynge, his aunſweres: he began to tell me, how, & what he had done for Grymbolde, & howe that I neade not to feare anye reproche or ſlander I ſhoulde ſuſtaine, belike meanīg, to haue me ſecretly, to haue come to them, as Grymbold dyd, for he ſubſcribed. And therefore I ſpeake on this ſorte vnto hym. Maiſter Deane, quod I, I wold gladly that you ſhould not conceaue of me, that I paſſe of ſhame of men, ſimplye, in this matter: I rather would haue you to thincke of me, as the verye truth is: that hitherto, as I haue ſeene, nor heard nothinge to infirme my faith againſte tranſubſtā
               tiaciō: ſo I am no leſſe ſetled in it.

then I was at my comminge hyther. I loue, quod I, to be plaine with you, & to tell you at the firſt, that you ſhall finde at the laſt. In good fayth Maiſter Bradforde, quod he, I loue you the better for your plainneſſe: & do not thincke otherwiſe of me, quod he, but that you ſhall find me plaine in al my talke with you. Here he began to aſke me of my impriſonment, and condempnacion. So I began, & told hym, how I had ben hādled, wheare at the ſemed to wounder: yea in playne wordes he ſaide, I had ben handled otherwiſe, then I had gyuen cauſe: & ſo ſhowed me, howe that my Lorde of Bath reported, that I had deſerued a benefite at the Queenes hande, and at all the Counſels. In this kind of talke we ſpent an houre almoſt.

and ſo as one wery I did ariſe vp▪ and he called in the keper, and before hym bad me be of good comforte, and to bee out of all peril of death. Mary ſir quoth the keper, but it is in euery mās mouth: that hee ſhal dye to morowe. Whereat, he ſemed ſome thyng halfe amaſed, and ſayde, hee woulde goe before euenſong, before the Queene and ſpeake to her on my behalfe. And I thynke, the Queene hadde almoſte ſupped at that preſente, for it was paſte ſixe of the clocke. Before the keper I tolde hym againe, that ſtyll I was the ſame manne I was at the firſte, and til I ſhould ſee matter to touch conſcience to the contrary: muſt nedes ſo continewe. The keper deſyred me, to hearken to mayſter Doctours counſayle, and prayed. M.

Doctor to bee good vnto me. And ſo after we hade dronke together: maiſter Doctor with moſt gentle woordes, tooke his leaue for three dayes. Nowe when he was gone: the keper tolde me, how that mayſter Doctor ſpake opēly, how that he ſawe no cauſe why thei ſhould burne me. Whiche ſentence for the ambiguitie of the meaning, made me ſorye leſte I had behaued my ſelfe in any thinge, wherin he gathered anye conformableneſſe to them in their doctrine, which god knoweth I neuer as yet dyd ſo. God oure father bleſſe vs, as hys chyldren, for euer, and keepe vs from all euyll for euer. Amen. Vpon the fifth daye of Apryll came maiſter Doctor Weſtō to the coū
               ter aboute .2. of the clocke in the

after noone, who excuſed hymſelfe for beyng ſo long abſent: partely by ſickenes, partely for that Doctor Pendleton tolde hym that hee woulde come vnto me, and partely for that (quoth he) I withſtoode certaine Monckes, which would haue come agayne into Weſtminſter. After whiche talke, he told me howe that the Pope was dead, and then he tolde me, how he had ſpoken to the Queene for me, and how that death was not nere vnto me. Laſte of all, he excuſed himſelfe, for not aunſwering myne argumentes againſt tranſubſtanciacion: becauſe my commynge to daye (quoth he) was more by fortune then of purpoſe. I woulde gladlye (quoth I) omittyng all other talkes, haue ſeen an aunſwer to my argumentes.
            
               Why (quoth he) you haue remembered ſome thynge what I ſpake to you, whē I was laſt with you. No ſir (quoth I) I neuer called them in maner to mynde, ſythen that tyme, as well becauſe I hoped you would haue writtē them: as alſo for that they ſemed, not to bee ſo materiall. In good faith (ꝙ he) I cannot ſee any other or better waye for you, then for to ſubmit youre ſelf to the iudgement of the Churche▪ Marye ſo I wyll ſir (quoth I) yf ſo be, by the churche you vnderſtand Chriſtes church. Lo (quoth he) you take vpon you to iudge the church. No ſir (quoth I) that doe I not, in takyng vpon me to diſcerne, I do not iudge the church. yes that you do (quoth he) and make inuiſible. I dooe neyther, quoth I. Why, ſayth he, who

can ſee youre churche? Thoſe ſir, quoth I, that haue ſpiritual eyes, wherewith they mighte haue dyſcerned, Chriſtes viſible conuerſacion heare vpō earth. Nay, quoth he, Chriſtes churche hath thre tokens, that all men may looke well vpon: namely, vnitie, antiquitye, and conſent. Theſe thre, quoth I, may be as well in euil as in good, as well in ſynne as in vertue, as well in the deuyls churche, as in Gods churche. As for enſaumple, quoth I, Idolatrie amongeſt the Iſraelites had al thoſe thre. Chriſoſtome telleth plainly, as you wel knowe ſaide I, that the church is well knowen, Tantummodo per ſcripturas alonely bi the ſcriptures. In good faithe, ꝙ hee, you make your churche inuiſible, when you wyll haue it knowen alonelye by

the ſcriptures. No ſir (quoth I) the ſcriptures dooe playnely ſet furth to vs, the churche, that all menne maye well ynough, thereby know her, yf thei liſt to loke. The church (ꝙ hee) is like a Towre or towne vppon a Hyll, that al men may ſe. True ſir (quoth I) al men that be not blynde. Viſible ynough is the churche, but menues blindnes is great. Impute not therefore to the churche, that whiche is to bee imputed to mens blindenes. Where (quoth he) was your church forty yeares agoe? or where is it nowe? excepte in a corner of Germanye. Forſooth ſir (quoth I, the churche of Chriſt is diſperſed, and not tied to this or that place, but to ye word of god: ſo that where it is, there is Gods churche, yf it bee truelye

taught. Loe (ꝙ hee) is not thys to make the church inuiſible? Poi
                  •
               n me out a realme, a hundreth yeres paſte, whiche mayntayned youre doctryne. Syr (quoth I) yf you wyl, or woulde well marke the ſtate of the church, before Chriſtes commynge, with it now, (as ſaint Paule and Peter wylleth vs) I thynke you woulde not looke for ſuche ſhewes of the churche to be made: as to poynte it oute by realmes. You knowe (quoth I) that in Helyas time both in Iſrael, and els where, Gods churche was not poyntable: and therefore cryed he oute that he was lefte alone. No marye, quoth he, dyd not God ſay that there was .7000 whyche hadde not bowed theyr knees to Baale? Loe, ſayeth he, 7000. ſhewe me ſeuen thouſande a

hundreth yeares agoo of your religion. Syr (quoth I) theſe .7000. were not knowen to men, for then Helias woulde not haue ſayde, that hee hadde bene before left alone. And thys is playne ynough, by that whiche the texte hathe, namelye, that God ſayeth Reliqui, I haue reſerued to me .7000. Marke that it ſayeth, God had reſerued to hym ſelfe to hys own knowledge, as I doubt not but the hundreth yeares agoe, God hadde hys, 7000. in hys proper places, thoughe menne knewe not thereof. Well maiſter Bradforde (ſayeth hee.) I wyll not make youre caſe woorſe, then for tranſubſtanciacion, all thoughe I knowe that we agree not in Other matters. And I praye you (quoth he) make you it youre

ſelfe not woorſe. If I canne dooe you good I wyll, hurte you I wyll not, I am no Prynce, and therefore I cannot promyſe lyfe: excepte you wyll ſubmytte youre ſelf, to the diffinicion of ye church. Syr (quoth I) ſo that you wyll defyne me your churche, that vnder it, you brynge not in a falſe churche: you ſhall not ſee but that we ſhal ſoune bee at a poynt. In good fayth maiſter Bradford, (quoth hee.) I ſee no good wyl be doone, and therefore I wyl wiſhe you as muche good as I can, and hereafter I will perchaunce come or ſende to you agayne, and ſo he ſent for maiſter Weale and departed. Nowe after his departynge: commeth the keper maiſter Claydon, and Stephen Beiche, and they were verye hotte with me,

and ſpake vnto me in ſuche ſorte that I ſhould not loke but to haue thē vtter enemies vnto me, notwithſtandyyng the frendeſhippe, they both haue hitherto pretended. God bee wyth vs, & what matter is it who bee agaynſte vs.
         
         Finis.
      
      
         
            
            ¶Imprinted at London, in Fleetſtrete, at the Signe of ye Faucon by William Griffith, and are to be ſold at the litle ſhop in ſaincte Dunſtones churchyard. Anno .1561. The .xiii. daie of Maye.
         
      
   