
      
         
            
            AN EPYTAPHE
vpon the Death of the Right worſhipfull, Sir william
GARRAT Knight: and chiefe Alderman of the Queenes Maieſties Citie of LONDON.
Who deceaſed the. 27. of SEPTEMBER. 1571. ANNO AETATIS SVE. 64.
            
               EVen as the PYLATE traines the reſt,
            that trauaile would attayne:
            And by the compaſſe of his Carde,
            deſcribes his Iorney playne:
            Euen ſo the trauayle of this worlde
            apparant ſeemes to bee,
            From Childhood firſt to middle ſtate:
            Then finallie wee ſee:
            From crooked Age vnto the Houſe,
            that mortall Creatures win:
            Our Mother deare the Earth, of whom
            our Subſtance did begyn.
            Whiche full Effect conſidered well, as Flowers in the Field:
            we may conceiue this outwarde man, in tract of time ſhall yeld,
            And hange the head: for as the ſhade that glydeth on the wall,
            compared with the Lillie faire, ſo ſodaine is our fall.
            As here before our eyes we may proſpectiue plainly trie,
            A Mirrour and a lookyng Glaſſe, for euerie Wight to ſpie,
            In Countrey ſoyle, (O LECTOR deare.) of Conſulſhippes degree:
            A Lanterne bright to Iuſtice Seate, heare playnly thou maiſt ſee
            Bereaued of breath: a Knight no leſſe, then Worſhips Citie clame:
            for Rector of the Publique weale, that GARAT had to name.
            From middle Age by ſage aduiſe purſuyng Vertues lore:
            Whiche is the cauſe that doth augment, his Worſhip euermore.
            In Godlines, or ſacred lyfe, his ſteppes, the Lorde hath bleſt:
            whoſe endleſſe Fame reuiueth ſtill, though Corps be now ſuppreſt
            By Natures courſe. In time, vnto the poore a perfect ſtaye:
            maintayning Iuſtice equailie, from euerie daye to daye.
            A Patron of his Countrey deare intombde he hath, to name:
            For as the Senate graunts him right, the Cōmons ſay the ſame.
            Though then that Fate hath him aſſignd, his Pageant thus to play
            Still puttyng vs in Memorie, that we ſhall walke that waye.
            There is not one, that can reproue, one Title of his right,
            But as he was, (euen ſo he died:) to lyue a faithfull Knight.
            And gaue the Onſet to the fleſh, and conquered hath the ſame:
            As Champian bould, by Shield of Faith, to glorie of his name.
            Diſdayning Earthly trade, or meane: embracing Heauenly light:
            Committyng to the handes of God, his inwarde man or Spright.
            If that as then ſuche noble Actes, enlarge his loyall prayſe:
            And by accompt of iuſt deſertes, his treble Honour rayſe.
            What rufull loſſe hath all the ſtate, of Senatours degree?
            with whome for Counſaile graue, he was accepted wont to bee.
            Or els what teares may Publique weale, effuſe in wofull plight?
            Since fatall Doome hath pluckt frō them ſo ſage & wiſe a Knight
            What double loſſe hath Ladie his? (that vertuous Matron graue,)
            Whom God had linckt to him as Spouſe, for terme of lyfe to haue.
            What loſſe hath Children deare, of him? what loſſe hath ſeruants al?
            what loſſe hath eche that flood in neede, for Counſell his to call?
            What loſſe hath rich? what loſſe hath poore? what loſſe hath ech eſtate
            what remedie? nought helpes herein, but wayle our wofull Fate.
            Yet nought at all preuailes our teares, therfore to God I pray,
            (Sith he is gone:) the reſt may walke, his redy Path and waye:
            And ſpecially, his Brethren ſage: that ſit on Iuſtice Seate,
            Their Worſhips hartes, the Lorde direct, vnto his glorie greate.
            Mayntainyng iuſtly euerie cauſe, and plantyng Vertues right,
            So that therby the Cōmon Weale, may flooriſh cleare and bright
            In happie ſtate, moſt proſperouſlie, great ioye for to be ſeene:
            To ſpred her Branches in reſpect, as doth the Olyue greene.
            Graunt this O God eternally, that when this race is ronne:
            Their Worſhips may obtain the Fame that GARRAT hath begon.
            FINIS.
            
               DIXI. N. BOVR.
            
         
         
            ¶This Race preſents a Pilgremage,
            Or Tragicall Diſcourſe on Stage:
            Whiche once begon, drawes to an ende;
            Let Death therfore be thought on frende:
            And feare no whit the Campe to yelde,
            So longe as Fayth may be thy Shield.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in the
vpper ende of Fleetelane, by Richarde Iohnes:
And are to be ſould at his Shop, ioynyng to the Southweſt Doore
of ſainct Paules Churche. 1571. October. 2.
         
      
   