
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     
                        IOHN BRADEFORD
                        portrait of John Bradford
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The complaynt of Veritie, made by Iohn Bradford.
                  An exhortacion of Mathewe Rogers, vnto his children.
                  The complaynt of Raufe Al
                     
                        •
                     erton and others, being priſoners in Lolers tower, & wryten with their bloud, how god was their comforte.
                  ¶A ſonge of Caine and Abell.
                  The ſaieng of maiſter Houper, that he wrote the night before he ſuffered, vppon a wall with a cole, in the newe In, at Gloceter, and his ſaiyng at his deathe.
                  ANNO DOMINI. 1559.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  
                     ❧ The complaint of Veritie.
                  
                     O Heauen, O earth, to thee I cal,
                  To witnes what I ſaye:
                  whych am cauſeleſſe in
                  England thrall,
                  and put to great decay.
                  Veritie of all thinges the light,
                  I am that thus do mourne:
                  Sent from God to teache them right,
                  whiche in this world be borne.
                  And that of me none might it dout
                  
                     
                        •
                     heron ſo euer I preache:
                  I haue for me the word throughout,
                  
                     
                        •
                     s Chriſtes Goſpell doth teache.
                  This truthe to Englande haue I taught
                  with trauel and with paine.
                  And for my hyre now am I ſought,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ruelly to be ſlaine.
                  I that from bondage dyd the ſhield,
                  whiche was before oppreſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     m now by the as captiue held,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or prechyng to the beſt.
                  
                     From death to life I did thee bring
                  that thou might liue for aye:
                  And now my life for wel doing,
                  to death thou ſeekeſt a pray.
                  was there euer age ſo cruell.
                  that thus coulde me rewarde:
                  So ſoone to caſt into exile,
                  whome they did once regarde.
                  what vnrighteouſnes haue ye founde,
                  on me whome thus ye ſpite:
                  Let them ſpeake that wold me cōfound
                  by reaſon and by write.
                  I ſeke without vnfained clokes,
                  to mayntayne that is right:
                  But falſitie with her painted lokes,
                  wyll not abyde that ſyght.
                  O falſe time of iniquitie,
                  O ſeaſon moſt vniuſt:
                  where exiled is Veritie,
                  and caſt downe to the duſt.
                  what though falſe Iudges doe me dam
                  as Suſan was moſt chaſte:
                  yet by a Daniell ſure I am,
                  to be abſolued at the laſte.
                  
                     The Lord ſend me a iudge vpright
                  to liſten to my cauſe:
                  Then dout I not to put to flight.
                  thoſe that nowe lye and gloſe.
                  Now whether ſhall I for remedy,
                  ſeeke that I may it fynde:
                  Thou Lord direct my ſteppes ready.
                  to ſome that will me frende.
                  The clergy ſay I am hereſy,
                  with me they fyght apace:
                  For faſhed blindes them ſo wilfully,
                  they haue no better grace.
                  Learned men which did me defend.
                  doe now their iudgement turne:
                  For liuynges ſake they do intend,
                  lyke wandering ſtarres to runne.
                  The lawiers ſay they could not thriue
                  ſince Scripture came in place:
                  Their vauntage is whē men do ſtriue,
                  and not by truth and peace.
                  The gentlemen whiche once me had,
                  
                     
                        •
                     n praiſe and eke in price:
                  Now ſay for them I am to ſad,
                  and would haue them be wiſe.
                  
                     The Marchaunt man ſaith he muſt lyue
                  and cannot with me gaine:
                  But all to riches his mind doth giue,
                  with much daunger and paine.
                  Wemen ſay they muſt nedes obey,
                  thir huſbandes when they lyſt:
                  Therfore in them I may not ſay,
                  to haue anye greate truſt.
                  The common ſort vnlearned be,
                  to them I may not leane:
                  They knowe not by deuinitie,
                  my cauſe for to maintaine.
                  Thus haue all perſons ſom pretence
                  from me quite to decline:
                  And am put to my owne defence,
                  to keepe my ſelfe from ruyne.
                  yet in this may I glory plaine,
                  that though with fewe I ſtand:
                  I am of power and ſtrength certaine
                  more then all my foes band.
                  For God ſo hath indued my tonge,
                  with wyſdome and with grace:
                  That I can ſhew ther doings wrong
                  which dare ſtand face to face.
                  
                     Therfore mine enemies vilanouſly
                  put me from mens hearinges:
                  Leaſt I ſhould moſt manifeſtly,
                  tell them of their leaſynges.
                  For this they would out of mennes eyes
                  Gods worde to kepe ſo hie:
                  That where they preache boldly lyes,
                  none might agaynſt them replye.
                  Al to maintaine their pompe & pryde
                  their belly, ſlouth and eaſe:
                  They force me in thraldome to bide,
                  for that I them diſpleaſe.
                  Ah, England what is the treſpas,
                  that againſt god thou haſt done?
                  That thou wouldſt loue darkenes alas
                  more then light of the Sunne.
                  Ah Ile of moſte nobilitie,
                  why art thou become bande?
                  To that proude harlots falſitie,
                  the ruine of all the lande.
                  Woo that I muſt that day beholde,
                  whiche came to make the free,
                  I would I had thee neuer tolde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     he trueth in eache degree
                  
                     Then were thy ſynne muche more les
                  whiche knowledge maketh great:
                  And of the ſame mightſt ſeeke redres,
                  to turne away the threate.
                  This dampnacion God doth ſay,
                  the father of all right:
                  That light is come nowe of the day,
                  yet in darkenes men more delight.
                  Thus do I wepe wt aboundāt teares,
                  with ſighes and eke with grones:
                  Ah that men wil not geue their eares
                  vnto my lawfull mones.
                  Finis quod Iohn Bradforde.
               
               
                  ¶ The inſtruction of a Father to his Children, which he wrote a few dayes before his burnynge.
                  GIue eare my Chyldren to my wordes.
                  Whome God hathe dearelye bought:
                  Lay vp his lawes within your hertes
                  and print them in your thought.
                  
                     For I your father haue foreſene,
                  the frayle and fylthy way:
                  Which fleſh & bloud would folow faine
                  euen to their owne decay.
                  For all and euery liuyng beaſt,
                  their cribbe do knowe full well:
                  But Adams heyres aboue the reſt,
                  are ready to rebell.
                  And all the creatures of the earth,
                  full well do kepe their way:
                  But Adams heires euē frō their birth,
                  are apt to goe aſtray.
                  For earth and aſhes is his ſtrength,
                  his glory and his gayne:
                  And into aſhes at the length,
                  he ſhall returne againe.
                  For fleſhe doth floriſhe lyke a floure,
                  and growe vp like a graſſe:
                  And is conſumed in an houre,
                  as it is come to paſſe.
                  For I the ymage of your yeares,
                  your treaſure and your truſt:
                  Am nowe dyeng before your face,
                  and ſhal conſume to duſt,
                  
                     For as you ſee your Fathers fleſhe,
                  conſumed into clay:
                  Euen ſo ſhall ye my children deare,
                  conſume and weare away.
                  The ſun, the moone, & eke the ſtars,
                  that ſerue the day and night:
                  The earth and euery earthly thinge,
                  ſhall be conſumed quyte.
                  And al the worſhip that is wrought
                  that hath bene heard or ſene:
                  Shal clean cōſume & turne to nought
                  as it had neuer bene.
                  Therfore ſee that ye folowe me,
                  your father and your frende:
                  And enter into the ſame lande,
                  which neuer ſhall haue ende.
                  I leaue you here a little booke,
                  for you to looke vpon:
                  That you may ſee, your fathers face,
                  when he is dead and gon.
                  Who for the hope of heauenly thinges
                  while he did here remayne:
                  Gaue ouer all his golden yeares.
                  in priſone and in payne.
                  
                     where I among mine iron bandes,
                  incloſed in the darke:
                  A fewe dayes before my death,
                  did dedicate this warke.
                  And in example of your youth,
                  to whome I wiſhe all good:
                  I preche you here a perfect trouth,
                  and ſeale it with my bloud.
                  To you mine heires of erthly things
                  wich I do leaue behinde:
                  That you may reade & vnderſtande,
                  and keepe it in your minde.
                  That as ye haue bene heires of that
                  whiche once ſhall weare a way:
                  Euen ſo ye maye poſſeſſe that parte,
                  which neuer ſhall decay.
                  In folowinge of your fathers feete,
                  in truth and eke in loue:
                  ye may be alſo heires with him
                  for euermore aboue.
                  Haue god alwayes before your eyes
                  withal your whole intente:
                  Commit not ſinne in any wiſe,
                  keeke his commaundement.
                  
                     Abhorre that arrant hoore of Rome
                  and all her blaſphemies
                  And drinke not of her decretales,
                  nor yet of her decrees.
                  Geue honour to your mother deare
                  remember well her paine:
                  And recompence her in her age,
                  in lyke with loue againe.
                  Be alwaies ayding at her hand,
                  and let her not decay:
                  Remember well your fathers fall.
                  who ſhould haue bene her ſtay.
                  Geue of your portion to the poore,
                  as riches doth aryſe:
                  And from the needy naked ſoule,
                  turne not away your eyes.
                  For he that will not here the crye,
                  of them that ſtand in neede:
                  Shal crye himſelfe and not be harde,
                  when he would hope to ſpeede.
                  If God haue geuen you increaſe.
                  and bleſſed well your ſtore:
                  Remember ye are put in truſt,
                  to miniſter the more.
                  
                     Beware of foule and filthy luſt,
                  let ſuche thinges haue no place:
                  kepe cleane your veſſels in the Lord
                  that he may you embrace.
                  ye are the temples of the Lord,
                  
                     
                        •
                     or ye are dearly bought:
                  And they that do defile the ſame,
                  ſhall ſurely come to nought.
                  Poſſeſſe not pride in any wiſe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     uilde not your houſe to hie:
                  But haue alwaies before your eies,
                  that ye be borne to dye.
                  Defraude him not that hired is,
                  your labour to ſuſtaine:
                  But giue him alwaies out of hand,
                  his peny for his paine.
                  And as you would an other man,
                  againſt you ſhould procede:
                  Doo you the ſame to them againe,
                  when they do ſtand in neede.
                  And part your porcion to the poore,
                  in money and in meate:
                  And feede the fainted feable ſoule,
                  with that whiche ye ſhould eate.
                  
                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
                     Farewall my true and louyng wyfe,
                  my Children and my frendes:
                  I hope in God to haue you all,
                  when all thinges haue their endes.
                  And if you doe abide in God,
                  as you haue now begonne:
                  your courſe I warrant ſhalbe ſhorte,
                  you haue not longe to ronne.
                  God graūt you ſo to ende your daies
                  as he ſhall thinke it beſt:
                  That I may haue you in the heauens
                  where I doe hope to reſt.
                  ¶Finis quod Mathewe Rogers.
               
               
                  
                  A lamentable complaynt of the afflicted, vnto god our onely healper.
                  ARyſe O Lord, why ſlepeſt thou?
                  ſet to thy hand in tyme of neede:
                  That wicked men thē ſelues may know
                  
                     
                        •
                      be but mortal men in deed.
                  They doe exalt them ſelues on hie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     r to caſt downe the ſimple ſorte:
                  
                     
                        •
                     oſtinge of their aucthoritie,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et none careth for Ioſephes hurte.
                  They robbe the poore and fatherles,
                  
                     
                        •
                     king their good by violence:
                  
                     
                        •
                     he faythfull flocke they doe oppres,
                  
                     
                        •
                     herof we haue intelligence.
                  If we to them will not agree,
                  
                     
                        •
                     en ſhall we neither bye nor ſell:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut faſt in priſon for to lye,
                  ſtockes and Irons the trueth to tel.
                  
                     
                        •
                     hē they haue caught vs in their net
                  
                     
                        •
                     n wil they not forgo their pray:
                  
                     
                        •
                     th ſhameful words they do vs thret
                  
                     
                        •
                     uenting miſchiefe euery daye.
                  
                     Againſt the truth they kick & ſpurne,
                  & breath out threates wt maine & might
                  All Gods elect with fyre they burne,
                  or els doe put them to their flight.
                  They ſpoyle and waſt in euery place,
                  the people that doe feare the lorde:
                  Like rauening wolues void of al grace
                  thus they ſuppres Gods holy worde.
                  Locuſters they are withouten fayle,
                  ryſing out of the bottomles pitte:
                  Like ſtinking ſcorpions is their tayle,
                  throughout ye world gods flocke to bite.
                  The very trueth do they caſt downe,
                  what can the righteous doe withall:
                  Refuſyng Chriſt the corner ſtone,
                  & with their workes build vp the wal.
                  Thus are we killed all the day longe,
                  for thy names ſake we ſuffer payne:
                  As ſimple ſheepe bochers amonge,
                  ſo vnder tyrauntes we remaine.
                  They feede thy flock with their decrees
                  mainteining them with fyre & ſword:
                  Thus they defende moſt wicked lyes,
                  and kil the ſaintes of chriſt our Lord.
                  
                     Wilt thou now hide thy face O lorde
                  the time of our tribulacion:
                  while the enemies of thy worde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e ſet vp their abhominacion.
                  Thy promiſſe Lorde we doe beleue
                  at thou wilt helpe vs in due tyme:
                  though that tirauntes doe vs greue,
                  death or life yet we are thyne.
                  For this we knowe aſſuredly,
                  
                     
                        •
                     e lordes right hād can ſone chāge all:
                  
                     
                        •
                     herfore we praye moſte hartely.
                  
                     
                        •
                     his churche in generall.
                  Helpe now O lord for thy names ſake
                  
                     
                        •
                      all mens thoughtes ar vaine truly:
                  
                     
                        •
                     is of my lyfe my leaue I take,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ſting for euer to dwell with thee.
                  
                     
                        •
                     is. ꝙ Raffe Allerton.
               
               
                  
                  A briefe reherſal of parte of the aucthours trouble, entituled God is my comforte.
                  IN trouble and aduerſitie,
                  we do finde moſt aſſuredlye
                  As the perfyt doeth teſtify,
                  that God is our comforte.
                  We do not feare the euil daies,
                  nor folow not the wicked waies:
                  Of Antechriſt nor yet his lawes,
                  for God is our comforte.
                  Although we haue bene tyed in fetters
                  ſo hath bene ſome of our betters:
                  As Peter Iohn and ſuch others,
                  yet God was their comforte.
                  Both all day and night in the ſtockes
                  with prety Irons and double lockes:
                  Abydyng tauntes rebukes & mockes
                  yet God is our comforte.
                  If we doe our Bochers diſpleaſe,
                  then are we caſt in little eaſe:
                  And often bytte with lyce and fleas,
                  yet God is our comforte.
                  
                     Sumtime we are in lowlers tower,
                  or in the colehouſe ſtinkyng flower:
                  Lokyng when they wil vs deuoure,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut God is our comforte.
                  With whips & rods they do vs threat
                  
                     
                        •
                     aiyng doubtles we ſhall you beate:
                  If we will not the rownd God eate.
                  
                     
                        •
                     et God is our comforte.
                  we may not pray if it be harde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nto God that is our ſauegarde:
                  
                     
                        •
                     age him ſay they for a rewarde,
                  
                     
                        •
                     hough God be his comforte.
                  If we ſinge a Godly ſonge,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut of the ſtockes we are not longe:
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd then they ſay we liue wronge:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut God is our comforte.
                  Let them not haue theyr meate ſay they
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd their drinke ſe you kepe awaye:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ut bread and water eche other day,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et God is our comforte,
                  They did keepe vs ſo Gentilly,
                  ſtockinge vs ſo tenderly:
                  
                     
                        •
                     ntill the bloud in our houſe dyd lye
                  
                     
                        •
                     et God is our comforte.
                  
                     Our Byble they haue taken awaye
                  and our bookes whereon we dyd pray,
                  with other thinges the truth to ſaye
                  yet God is our comforte.
                  Although wt cords thei haue vs bounde
                  with gibes and giuers tricke and roūd,
                  yet in our troubles we haue founde,
                  that God is our comforte.
                  what if they burne vs in the fyre,
                  let this be onely our deſyre:
                  To raigne with God in his empyre,
                  for he his our comforte.
                  Let all people be glad with me,
                  that ſtandes to Chriſtes veritie:
                  And take the croſſe vp ioyfully,
                  for God is our comforte.
                  Se that no troubles turne your ha
                        •
                     
                  
                  nor of the fleſhe to feare the ſmart:
                  So ſhall you ſurely haue your parte
                  with Chriſt your whole comforte.
                  Finis. quod. R. A.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The ſonge of the poore priſoners in Lolers tower.
                  CAyne wilt thou not withdrawe
                  thy hande.
                  to ceaſe thy frowarde wyll:
                  wilt thou lift vp thy firy brande,
                  and vexe poore Abell ſtill.
                  Though Abel haue no fleſhly ſtrengthe
                  thy furious wrath to tame:
                  yet God wil preſerue him at the length
                  to thy rebuke and ſhame.
                  Although his fleſh thou lay ful lowe
                  thy wrath to ſatiſfie:
                  yet by the death of Lamethes bowe,
                  for his bloud thou ſhalt die.
                  Though Iſmael had the greater ſtay
                  before the promis begonne:
                  yet God bad Abraham put away,
                  the bond maide with her ſonne.
                  Though Iacob fled his brothers ire
                  to cauſe the fury ceaſe:
                  yet God gaue him his whole deſire,
                  and brough
                        •
                      him home in peace.
                  
                     when Iſrael out of Egipt fled,
                  from him that helde them thrall:
                  The lord preſerued the righteous ſede,
                  and drowned their enemies all.
                  when that Golias in his great pryde
                  his hie blaſtes out did blowe:
                  The lord ſoone laied his pompe aſyde
                  and brought his boaſtinges lowe.
                  when king Saule ſought Dauids life
                  without Dauids offence:
                  The Lord at laſt ended that ſtrife,
                  and Saule made recompence.
                  when Acheor to a tree was bounde.
                  becauſe he truth did tell:
                  He was ſoone healed of that wounde,
                  by the God of Iſraell.
                  when Holifernus in his rage.
                  againſt Goddes flocke did ſtand:
                  Then ſoone did his pryde aſſwage.
                  euen by a womans hand.
                  when A man made a gallowes ſtrong,
                  for Mardocheus the Iewe:
                  Himſelfe was hanged theron ere long,
                  for God is iuſt and true.
                  
                     when Suſan was without refuge,
                  and like to ſuffer paine:
                  The Lord that is a righteous iudge
                  did pay her foes againe.
                  As Daniell in the Lions den,
                  was kept from wo and greefe:
                  So God preſerueth righteous men.
                  and ſendes them quicke reliefe.
                  when that the ouen was made red hot,
                  the children to deſtroy:
                  Gods angel the flame out ſwot,
                  and walked with them in ioy.
                  when Peter & Iohn in pryſon were,
                  for preaching of Gods worde:
                  Gods angel did the doore vnbarre,
                  as Luke doth well recorde.
                  Thus by examples ſtrong and ſure,
                  the Scripture doth witnes:
                  The enemies power can not endure,
                  for God doth it ſuppres.
                  when God made all thinges with his word,
                  he bleſt it with increaſe:
                  But ſoone the deuil brought Caine the ſword,
                  & bad him breake the peace.
                  
                     So from that day vnto this houre,
                  Cain hath the ſworde in hande:
                  Seking ſtill Abell to deuoure,
                  either by ſea or lande.
                  For by the deuils great enuie,
                  came death amongſt mankynde:
                  And all that his dere children be,
                  fulfill their fathers mynde.
                  Dere chriſtians be not nowe afraide
                  to doe your maiſters will:
                  For he doth promiſe to be your aide,
                  and your defence from ill.
                  His mercy is to ſuccour thoſe
                  that truſt to him at neede:
                  Feare not for God will your bands loſe
                  as he hath promiſed.
                  Therfore ſticke harde vnto the worde
                  the whiche you haue profeſſed:
                  And then no doubt but that the Lorde
                  will ſee your cauſe redreſſed.
                  Now ſeing we ſhall deliuered be
                  as Eſdras doth declare:
                  By death or life, what cauſe haue we
                  either to doubt or care.
                  
                     But onely in our Lorde Ieſus,
                  to put our confidence:
                  who in theſe daies is vnto vs,
                  a tower and ſtrong defence.
                  All prayſe be to the liuing God,
                  which iudgeth righteouſly:
                  And in all ages fulfyls his worde,
                  his name to magnify.
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  ¶The wordes of Maiſter Houper at his death.
                  
                     O Lord Ieſus, that for whoſe loue I leaue wyllyngly this lyfe and deſyre the bytter death of the croſſe, with the loſſe of all my worldlye thinges, then eyther to abyde, the blaſphemie, of thy moſte holye name, or to abey vnto menne, in breakynge of thy Commaundementes, thou ſeeſt Lorde that where I myght lyue in wealth, to worſhip a falſe god: and to honour thine ennemy, I chooſe rather the tormentes of my bodye, and the loſſe of this my lyfe, and I haue counted all thynges but vile duſt and donge, that I mighte wyn thee, whiche death is more deare vnto mee then thouſandes of gold and ſyluer, ſuch loue Lorde, haſt thou laid vp in my breſt, that I honger for thee as the deare that is wounded, deſireth the ſoile, ſo ſend thy holy comforter to ayde comfort, and ſtrengthen this weke

peece of yearthe, whiche is of it ſelfe, empty of al ſtrēgth, thou remembreſt that I am, but vyle duſte and donge, and of my ſelfe able to doo nothinge, therfore O Lorde, as thou of thine a cuſtomed loue, haſt bidden me to this banket, & counted me worthi to drink of this thy cuppe amōgeſt thine elect, giue me ſtrēgth againſt this thy ellyment, that as to my ſight it is moſte yrkeſom, & vntolerable, ſo to mi mind it may at thy commaundemēt, go as an obediēt ſeruaunt be ſwete and pleſant, and through the ſtrength of thy holy ſpirite, I may paſſe through the fury of this fire, into thy boſom according to thi promiſſe, and for this mortal lyfe, receyue an immortalitie, and for this corruptible receiue an incorruptibilite, accept this bornt ſacrifcie O heauenly Father, not for the ſacrifice ſake, but for thy dere ſonnes ſake my ſauiour, for whoſe teſtimoni I offer this my free wyl, offering with al

my hart, with al mi ſtrength, with al my ſoule, Oh heauenli father, forgeue mee my ſinnes: as I forgeue all the worlde, O ſwete ſonne of God my ſauyour ſprede thy winges ouer me, O God the holy ghoſt, comforte ſtrengthen and ſtabliſh me, and as through thy mighty power thou haſt brought me hyther to death, ſo condyth me in to euerlaſting bliſſe, O Lord into thy handes I commende my ſpirite, thou haſte redemed me O God of truthe, Lorde haue mercye vpon me, Chriſt haue mercy vpon me, Lord haue mercy vpon me. Amen.
                  ¶Finis.
               
               
                  ¶ Theſe are the wordes that Maiſter Iohn Houper wrote on the wall with a cole, in the newe Inne in Gloceter, the night before he ſuffered.
                  COntent thy ſelfe with pacience,
                  wt chriſt to beare ye croſſe of payne
                  
                     
                     
                        •
                     ho can or will recompence,
                  
                     
                        •
                      thouſand folde with Ioyes againe,
                  
                     
                        •
                     et nothing cauſe thy hart to fayle,
                  
                     
                        •
                     ainch out thy bote, hoiſe vp thy ſaile
                  Put from the ſhore,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd be thou ſuer thou ſhalt attayne,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nto the porte that ſhall remayne,
                  For euer more.
                  
                     
                        •
                     ere not death pas not for bandes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     nly in God put thy whole truſt:
                  
                     
                        •
                     r he wil require thi blod at their hāds
                  
                     
                        •
                      thou doſt know yt once die thou muſt,
                  Only for that thy life if thou geue,
                  
                     
                        •
                     eth is no deth but amens for to liue
                  Do not diſpaire.
                  Of no worldly tirant ſee thou dreede,
                  
                     
                        •
                     y cōpace whiche is gods worde ſhall the leade
                  
                     
                        •
                     nd the wind is faire.
                  ¶Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  TWO NOTABLE Sermons, Made by that worthy Martyr of Chriſt, Maſter Iohn Bradford: the one of Repentance, and the other of the Lords Supper, now newly imprinted.
                  Peruſed and allowed, according to the Queenes Maieſties Iniunctions.
                  Imprinted at London by Simon Stafford, dwelling on Adling hill. 1599.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Chriſtian Reader, Thomas Samſon wiſheth the felicity of ſpeedy and full conuerſion to the Lord.
                  
                     
                        GOdly learned men doe write and publiſh bookes, to profit the age in which they doe liue, and the poſterity. This deſire was in the Authour of this 
                        •
                     reatiſe, Maſter Iohn Bradford, who was the Prea
                     
                        •
                     er and publiſher of this Sermon of Repentance. 
                        •
                     nd now, to the end that we, which do liue on earth 
                        •
                     ter him, and are the poſterity, may take as much or 
                        •
                     ore profit by it, then they did, to and for whom in 
                        •
                     s life time he did both preach & publiſh it, the ſame 
                        〈◊〉
                      labour is by newe Imprinting publiſhed againe. 
                        •
                     othing is added to this Sermon, or altered in it: 
                        •
                     ely to the Sermon of Repentance before printed, 
                        •
                     dded another Sermon of the Lords ſupper, which 
                        •
                      alſo made, & was neuer printed before. And aptly 
                        •
                     lt thou ſee (good Reader) theſe two Sermons ioy
                     
                        •
                      together. For in diligent peruſing of the laſt, 
                        •
                     u ſhalt ſee howe neceſſarily he draweth the do
                     
                        •
                     ne of Repentance to them all, which do with due 
                        •
                     paration receyue the holy Sacrament of Chriſt. 
                        •
                     e not know which of the Sermons I ſhould moſt 
                        •
                     ſe: I wiſh, that by reading both, thou maiſt make 
                        •
                      great profit. In both theſe Sermons, thou ſhalt 
                        •
                     e Bradford preaching Repentance with his 
                        •
                     e penne.
                  
                     They are counted the moſt profitable Teachers, which haue themſelues good experience by practiſe in themſelues, of that which they do teach to others▪ ſuch as may ſafely ſay, Brethren, be ye followers of me, & looke on them which walk ſo, as ye haue vs for an example, Phil. 3.17. And ſurely, ſuch a patterne was M. Bradford in his life time, of this doctrine of Repentance, which in both theſe Sermōs he teacheth, that I which did know him familiarly, muſt needs giue to God this prayſe for him, that among men I haue ſcarcely known one, like vnto him. I did know whe
                        •
                      and partly how it pleaſed God by effectuall calling to turne his heart vnto the true knowledge, and obedience of the moſt holy Goſpell of Chriſt our Sauiour. Of which God did giue him ſuch an heaue
                        •
                      hold, and liuely feeling, that as he did then knowe that many ſinnes were forgiuen him, ſo ſurely he declared by deedes, that he loued much. For where 
                        •
                      had both gifts & calling, to haue employed himſe
                        •
                      in ciuill and worldly affayres profitably, ſuch 
                        〈◊〉
                      his loue of Chriſt, and zeale to the promoting 
                        •
                      his glorious Goſpell, that he changed not onely t
                        •
                      courſe of his former life, as the woman did, Luke but euen his former ſtudie, as Paul did change 
                        〈◊〉
                      former profeſsion and ſtudy.
                  Touching the firſt, after that God touched 
                        •
                      heart with that holy and effectuall calling, he ſ
                        •
                      his Chaynes, Rings, Brooches, and Iewels of go
                        •
                     
                     
which before he vſed to weare, and did beſtowe the price of this his former vanity, in the neceſſary reliefe of Chriſts poore members, which he could heare of, or finde lying ſicke, or pyning in pouerty. Touching 
                        •
                     he ſecond, he ſo declared his great zeale & loue to promote the glory of the Lord Ieſus, whoſe goodnes 
                        ••
                     d ſauing health he had taſted, that to doe the ſame more pithily, he changed his ſtudy; and being in the 
                        •
                     nner Temple in London, at the ſtudy of the cōmon 
                        •
                     awes, he went to Cambridge, to ſtudie Diuinitie, where he heard D. Martin Bucer diligently, & was 
                        •
                     ight familiar & dere vnto him. In this godly courſe 
                        •
                     e did by Gods bleſſing ſo profit, that that bleſſed Martyr, D. Ridley, then Biſhop of London, did, as 
                        •
                     t were, inuite him & his godly companion M. Tho. Horton, to become fellowes of Penbrooke Hall in Cambridge: And afterwards, the ſaid D. Ridley 
                        •
                     alled our Bradford to London, gaue him a Prebēd 
                        •
                     n Paules Church, lodged him in his owne houſe 
                        •
                     here, & ſet him on work in preaching. And beſides often preaching in London, & at Paules Croſſe, and ſundry places in the country, and ſpecially in Lancaſhire, he preached before K. Ed. the 6. in the Lent, the laſt yere of his reigne, vpon the 2. Pſalme; and there in one Sermon, ſhewing the tokens of Gods iudgement at hand, for the contempt of the Goſpel, as that certaine Gentlemen, vpon the Sabboth day, going in a whirry to Paris Garden, to the Bearebayting,

were drowned: & that a dog was met at Ludgáte, carying a piece of a dead child in his mouth: he with a mighty and propheticall ſpirit ſayd, I ſummon you all, euen euery mothers child of you, to the iudgement of God, for it is at hand; as it folowed ſhortly after, in the death of K. Edward. In which ſtate and labour of preaching he continued, till the cruelty of the papiſts cut him off, ſo as thou mayſt reade in the hiſtory of his life & death, compiled by that faithful ſeruāt of the Lord Ieſus, M. Iohn Foxe.
                  In deed he had many pulbacks, but God ſtill helped forward his choſen ſeruant, in that trade of life, to the which he had called him: in which he ranne forward ſo happily, that he did outrun me & other his companions. For it pleaſed God, with great ſpeed to make him ready and ripe to Martyrdome; in which through Chriſt he hath nowe gayned the crowne of life. But in all ſtops and ſtayes he was much helped forward by a continuall meditation, & practiſe of repentance & faith in Chriſt; in which he was kept by Gods grace, notably exerciſed al the daies of his life. Euen in this meane time he heard a Sermon, which that notable preacher, M. Latimer, made before K. Edward the 6. in which he did earneſtly ſpeak of reſtitutiō to be made of things falſly gotten: which did ſo ſtrike Bradford to the heart, for one daſh of a pen which he had made, without the knowledge of his maſter (as full often I haue heard him confeſſe with

plenty of teares) being Clarke to the Treaſurer of the Kings campe beyond the ſeas, and was to the deceiuing of the King, that he could neuer be quiet, til by the aduice of the ſame M. Latimer, a reſtitution was made. Which thing to bring to paſſe, he did willingly forbeare & forgo all the priuate & certaine patrimony which he had in earth. Let all bribers & 
                        •
                     olling Officers, which get to themſelues great reuenues in earth, by ſuch ſlippery ſhifts, followe this example, leaſt in taking a contrary courſe, they take a 
                        •
                     ōtrary way, & neuer come where Bradford now is.
                  But beſides this, our Bradford had his daily exerciſes and practiſes of repentance. His maner was to make to himſelf a Catalogue of al the groſeſt & moſt enorme ſinnes, which in his life of ignorance he had committed, and to lay the ſame before his eyes when he went to priuat praier, that by the ſight & remembrāce of thē, he might be ſtirred vp to offer to God 
                        •
                     he ſacrifice of a cōtrite heart, ſeeke aſſurance of ſal
                     
                        •
                     ation in Chriſt by faith, thanke God for his calling from the waies of wickednes▪ & pray for increaſe of grace, to be conducted in holy life, acceptable and 
                        •
                     leaſing to God. Such a cōtinual exerciſe of conſci
                     
                        •
                     nce he had in priuate prayer, that he did not count himſelfe to haue prayed to his contentation, vnleſſe 
                        •
                     n it he had felt inwardly ſome ſmiting of heart for ſinne, & ſome healing of that woūd by faith, feeling 
                        •
                     he ſauing helth of Chriſt, with ſome chāge of mind

into the deteſtation of ſinne, and loue of obeying the good will of God. Which things doe require that inward entring into the ſecret parlour of our hearts, of which Chriſt ſpeaketh, and is that ſmiting of the breſt, which is noted in the Publican, Matth. 7. & is the ſame to the which the Pſalmiſt exhorteth thoſe men looſe in ſinne, Pſa. 4.5. Tremble ye and ſinne not: ſpeak in your ſelues, that is, Enter into an accoūt with your ſelues, When you are on your couches, that is, whē ye are ſolitary & alone. And be quiet, or ſilent: that is, Whē ye haue thus ſecretly, & deeply conſidered of your caſe and dealing, ye ſhal ceaſe to thinke, ſpeak, and do wickedly. Without ſuch an inward exerciſe of prayer, our Bradford did not pray to his ful cōtentation, as appeared by this: He vſed in the morning to go to the cōmon praier in the Colledge where he was, & after that, he vſed to make ſome praier with his Pupils in his chāber. But not content with this, he then repaired to his own ſecret praier, & exerciſe in praier by himſelfe, as one that had not yet prayed to his own mind: for he was wōt to ſay to his familiars, I haue praied with my Pupils, but I haue not yet prayed with my ſelfe. Let thoſe ſecure mē marke this wel, which pray without touch of breſt, as the Phariſee did; & ſo that they haue ſaid an ordinary prayer, or heare a cōmon courſe of praier, they thinke they haue prayed wel, & as the terme is, they haue ſerued God wel, thogh they neuer feele ſting for ſin, taſt of

groning, or brokē heart, nor of the ſweet ſauing helth of Chriſt, thereby to be moued to offer the Sacrifice of thankſgiuing, nor chāge or renuing of mind, but as they came ſecure in ſin, & ſenſeleſſe, ſo they doe depart without any chāge, or affecting of the heart; which is euē the cradle, in which Sathan rocketh the ſinnes of this age aſleepe, who thinke they do ſerue God in theſe curſory praiers, made only of cuſtome, when their heart is as far from God, as was the heart of the Phariſe. Let vs learne by Bradfords exāple, to pray better, that is, with the heart, & not with the lips alone, Quia Deus non vocis, ſed cordis auditor eſt, as Cyprian ſaith▪ that is, becauſe God is the hearer of the heart, & not of the voice: that is to ſay, not of the voice alone, without the heart, for that is but lip labour. This cōſcience of ſin, & exerciſe in praier had Bradford, cleane contrary to that curſed cuſtome of thoſe graceleſſe mē, which do ioy to make large and long accoūts of their leudnes, & do glory therein; ſo feeding their delights with their liues paſſed, as the dog returneth to ſmell to his caſt gorge, & the horſe to his doūg; ſuch as the Prophet Eſay 39. ſaith, They declare their ſinnes as Sodom, they hide them not, wo be to their ſoules. It goeth with thē, as Ieremy 3.3. ſaid, Thou haſt a vvhores forehead: thou vvouldeſt not be aſhamed. God giue theſe men better grace; elſe aſſuredly they ſhall finde woe, woe, to their very ſoules.
                  Another of his exerciſes was this: He vſed to make

vnto himſelfe an Ephemeris, or a Iournall, in which he vſed to write all ſuch notable things, as either he did ſee or heare, ech day that paſſed. But whatſoeuer he did heare or ſee, he did ſo pen it, that a man might ſee in that booke, the ſignes of his ſmitten heart. For if he did heare or ſee any good in any man, by that ſight he foūd and noted the want thereof in himſelf, and added a ſhort praier, crauing mercy & grace to amend. If he did heare or ſee any plague, or miſery, he noted it as a thing procured by his own ſins, & ſtil added, Domine, miſerere mei, Lord, haue mercy vpō mee. He vſed in the ſame booke to note ſuch euill thoghts as did riſe in him; as of enuying the good of other men, thoghts of vnthankfulnes, of not cōſidering God in his works, of hardnes & vnſenſibleneſſe of heart, when he did ſee other moued and affected. And thus hee made to himſelfe, and of himſelfe, a booke of dayly practiſes of repenta
                        •
                     .
                  Beſides this, they which were familiar with him, might ſee how he, being in their cōpany, vſed to fall often into a ſudden & deep meditation, in which he would ſit with fixed coūtenance & ſpirit moued, yet ſpeaking nothing a good ſpace. And ſometimes in his ſilent ſitting, plenty of teares ſhuld trickle down his cheeks. Sometime he would ſit in it, & come out 
                        •
                     f it with a ſmiling coūtenance. Often times haue I 
                        •
                     tten at dinner and ſupper with him, in the houſe of 
                        •
                     at godly harbourer of many preachers & ſeruants

of the Lord Ieſus, I meane M. Elſyng, when eyther by occaſion of talk had, or of ſome view of Gods benefits preſent, or ſome inward cogitation & thought of his owne, he hath fallen into theſe deepe cogitations, & he would tell me in the end ſuch diſcourſes of them, that I did perceiue, that ſomtimes his teares trickled out of his eyes, as well for ioy as for ſorrowe. Neyther was he onely ſuch a practiſer of repentance in himſelfe, but a cōtinuall prouoker of others thereunto, not only in publike preaching, but alſo in priuate conference & company: for in all companies where he did come, he would freely reproue any ſin & misbehauior which appeared in any perſon, eſpecially ſwearers, filthy talkers, & popiſh praters: ſuch neuer departed out of his cōpany vnreproued; & this he did with ſuch a diuine grace & Chriſtian maieſty, that euer he ſtopped the mouthes of the gainſayers: for he ſpake with power; & yet ſo ſweetly, that they might ſee their euil to be euil, & hurtfull vnto them, and vnderſtand that it was good in deede, to the which he laboured to drawe them in God.
                  To be ſhort, as his life was, ſuch was his death: His life was a practiſe, an example, & prouocation to repentance. At his death, as the foreſaid hiſtory witneſſeth, when he was burned in Smithfield, and the flames of fire did flye about his eares, his laſt ſpeach publikely noted & heard, was this, Repent, England. Thus was our Bradford a preacher, & an example

of that repentance which hee did preach. Ionas preached to Niniue repentance; and all Niniue, the King, Princes, people, olde and young repented. To England Bradford did preach, and yet doeth preach repentance: and ſurely England hath nowe much more cauſe to repent, then it had when Bradford liued, and preached repentance: for all ſtates and ſorts of perſons in England, are now more corrupt, then they were then.
                  Let therefore now Bradfords Sermon, his life, his death, moue thee, O England, to repent all thy peril: I wiſh & warne, that as in Niniue, ſo in England, all from the higheſt to the loweſt, do vnfainedly repent. They which are of the Court, they which are of the Church, they which are of the Citie, they which are of the Countrey, Princes, Prelates, and people: let all & euery one repent & depart frō that euill which he hath in hand, and turne wholy to the Lord. And I do humbly beſeech thy Maieſtie (O glorious Lord Ieſus) which didſt come to bleſſe Iſrael, turning euery one of them from their ſinnes, to worke nowe by thy Spirit in our hearts, the ſame ſound repentance, which thy Holineſſe did preach to men, when thou ſaydeſt, Repent, for the Kingdome of God is at hand. This work in vs, O gracious God our Sauior. Amen.
                  And now, Reader, I leaue thee to the reading and practiſing of that repentance, which Bradford here teacheth.
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  To the Chriſtian Reader, Iohn Bradford wiſheth the true knowledge and peace of Ieſus Chriſt, our alone and ſufficient Sauiour.
                  
                     
                        GReat and heauy is Gods anger againſt vs, as the moſt grieuous plague of the death of our late King (a Prince of all that euer was ſithen Chriſts aſſenſion into heauen in any Region peereleſſe) now fallen vpon vs, doeth prognoſticate. For when Gods iudgement hath begunne with his Childe, this our deare darling, let other men thinke as they can, I ſurely cannot bee perſwaded otherwiſe, but that a grieuous and bitter cuppe of Gods vengeance is ready to bee powred out for vs Engliſh men to drinke of. The whelpe God hath beaten, to fray the bandogge. Iudgement is begunne at Gods houſe. In Gods mercie to him-wards, he is taken away, that his eyes ſhould not ſee the miſeries which we ſhall feele.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           eb. 11.He was too good to tary with vs, ſo wicked, ſo froward, ſo peruers, ſo obſtinate, ſo malicious, ſo hipocritical, ſo couetous, vnclean, vntrue, proud, and carnall a generation. I will not goe about to paynt vs out in our colours: All the world which neuer ſawe England, by heareſay ſeeth England: God by his plagues and vengeance, I feare me, will paynt vs out, & point vs out▪ We haue ſo mocked with him and his Goſpell, that we ſhall feele it is no bourding with him.
                  Of long time we haue couered our couetouſneſſe and carnality vnder the cloake of his Goſpell; ſo that all men ſhall ſee vs to our ſhame, when he ſhall take his Goſpell away, and giue it to a people that will bring foorth the fruites of it: then ſhall we appeare as we be. To let his Goſpell tarry with vs, he cannot; for we deſpiſe it, contemne it, are glutted with it: We diſdaine his Manna: it is but a vile meate, thinke we: We would be agayne in Egypt, and ſit by the greaſie fleſhpottes, to eate agayne our garlike, onyons, and leekes. Sithens Gods Goſpell came amongſt vs, we ſay nowe, we had neuer plentie; therefore againe let vs goe and worſhip the Queene of heauen.

Children beginne to gather ſtickes,
                        Iere. 44. the fathers kindle the fire, and the women make the cakes, to offer to the Queene of heauen, and to prouoke the Lord to anger. The earth can not abide nowe the words and Sermons of Amos. The cauſe of all rebellion, is Amos and his preaching.
                        Amos 7. Act. 17. It is Paul and his fellowes, that make all out of order. Summa, the Goſpell is nowe, 
                        
                           •
                        antonpripſica, and catharoa tou eobou, The outcaſt and curſe of the Realme, and 
                        •
                     o are the Preachers: therefore out of the doores with them. So that I ſay, God 
                        •
                     annot let his Goſpell tarrie with vs, but muſt needes take it away, to doe vs ſome pleaſure therein: for ſo ſhall we thinke for 
                        •
                      time: as the Sodomitanes thought, when 
                        •
                     ot departed from them:
                        Gene. 19. Gene. 7. as the old world 
                        •
                     hought, when Noe crept into his Arke: as 
                        •
                     he Ieruſolomitanes thought, when the A
                     
                        •
                     oſtles went thence to Peltis. Then were 
                        •
                     hey mery, then was al paſtime.
                        Exod. 32 When Mo
                     
                        •
                     es was abſent, then went they to eating & drinking, and roſe againe to play: Then was 
                        •
                     ll peace, all was well, nothing amiſſe. But 
                        •
                     las, ſuddenly came the flood, and drowned 
                        •
                     hem: Gods wrath waxed hotte againſt

them. Then was weale away, mourning and woe: then was crying out, wringing o
                        •
                      handes, renting of clothes, ſobbing and ſighing for the miſeries fallen; out of the which they could not ſcape. But, Oh ye
                        •
                      mourners & criers out, ye renters of clothes, why mourne ye? what is the cauſe of your miſerie? The Goſpell is gone; Gods word is little preached, you are not diſquieted with it; Noe troubleth you not; Lot is departed; the Apoſtles are gone. What now is the cauſe of theſe your miſeries? Will you at the length confeſſe, it is your ſinnes? Nay, nowe it is too late; God called vpon you, and you would not heare him: therefore yell and crye out nowe; for he will not heare you. You bowed your eares from hearing of Gods law: therefore your praier is execrable.
                  But to come againe to vs Engliſh men: I feare me (I ſay) for our vnthankfulnes ſake, for our impietie and wickedneſſe, as God hath taken away our King, ſo will he take away his Goſpell: yea, ſo we would haue it, then ſhould all be well, thinke many. Well, if he take that away, for a time, perchaunce, we ſhal be quiet, but at length we ſhall feele

the want to our woe, at length he will haue at vs, as at Sodome, at Ieruſalem, and other places. And now hee beginneth to brew ſuch a brewing, wherein one of vs is like to 
                        •
                     eſtroy an other, and ſo make an open 
                        •
                     appe for forraine enemies to deuoure vs, 
                        •
                     nd deſtroy vs. The father is againſt the 
                        •
                     nne, the brother againſt the brother; and 
                        •
                     orde, with what conſcience? O bee thou 
                        •
                     ercifull vnto vs, and in thine anger remember thy mercie, ſuffer thy ſelfe to be 
                        •
                     treated, be reconciled vnto vs, nay, recon
                     
                        •
                     ile vs vnto thee. O thou God of iuſtice, 
                        •
                     udge iuſtly: O thou ſonne of God, which 
                        •
                     ameſt to deſtroy the woorkes of Sathan, 
                        •
                     eſtroy his furours now ſmoaking, and almoſt ſet on fire in this Realme. Wee haue 
                        •
                     nned, we haue ſinned, and therefore art 
                        •
                     hou angrie: O be not angrie for euer. Giue 
                        •
                     s peace, peace, peace in the Lord: ſet vs to worke againſt ſinne, againſt Sathan, againſt our carnall deſires, and giue vs the victorie 
                        •
                     his way. This victorie we obtaine by faith. This faith is not without repentaunce, as her Gentleman Vſher before her. Before her I ſay, in diſcerning true faith, from falſe faith, lip-faith, Engliſhmens faith: for elſe

it ſprings out of true faith.
                  This Vſher then, Repentance, if we truely poſſeſſed, we ſhould bee certaine of true faith, and ſo aſſured of the victorie ouer death, hell, and Sathan. His woorkes then which hee hath ſtirred vp, would quaile, God would reſtore vs politique peace, right ſhould be right, & haue right: Gods Goſpell ſhould tarrie with vs, Religion ſhould be cheriſhed, Superſtition ſuppreſſed: and ſo we yet ſomething happie, notwithſtanding the great loſſe of our moſt gratious Liege ſoueraigne Lord. All theſe would come to paſſe you ſee, if the Gentleman Vſher I ſpeake of, I meane, Repentance, were at Inne with vs. As if he be abſent, we may be certaine, that Ladie Faith is abſent. Wherefore, we can not but be vanquiſhed of the world, the fleſh, and the deuill, and ſo will Sathans woorkes proſper, though not in all thinges to bleare our eyes, yet in that thing which hee moſt of all deſireth. Therefore, to Repentance, for our ſelues priuately, and for the Realme and Church publiquely, euerie one ſhall labour to ſtirre vp both ourſelues and others. This, to the ende that for my part I might helpe, I haue

preſently put foorth a Sermon of Repentance, which had lyen by me halfe a yeere at the leaſt, for the moſt parte of it. For the laſt Summer, as I was abroade preaching in the Countrey, my chaunce was to make a Sermon of Repentaunce, the which was earneſtly of diuers deſired of mee, that I ſhould giue it them written, or elſe put it foorth in Print. The which thing to graunt, as I could not (for I had not written it) ſo I tolde them, that had ſo earneſtly deſired it.
                  But when no nay would ſerue, but I muſt promiſe them to write it as I could: I conſented to their requeſt, that they ſhould haue it at my leiſure. This leyſure I prolonged ſo long, that as (I weene) I offended them: ſo did I pleaſe my ſelfe, as one more glad to reade other mens writings, then in ſuch ſort to publiſh mine owne, for other men to reade: not that I would others not to profite by mee, but that I, knowing how ſlender my ſtore is, would be loth, for the enemies to haue iuſt occaſion of euill ſpeaking, and wreſting that which ſimply is ſpoken.
                  But when I conſidered this preſent time,

to occaſion men nowe to looke vpon all thinges, in ſuch ſort as might mooue them to godlineſſe, rather then to any curious queſtioning: I, for the ſatisfying of my promiſe, and profiting of the ſimple, ignorant, and rude, haue now cauſed this Sermon to be printed: the which I beſeeche God for his Chriſtes ſake, to vſe as a meane, whereby of his mercie, it may pleaſe him to worke in me, and many others, true hearty repentance for our ſinnes, to the glory of his name.
                  
                     Thus fare thou vvell in the Lord,
                     
                        The xii. of Iuly. 1553.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  A fruitfull Sermon of Repentance, made by the conſtant Martyr of Chriſt, Maſter Iohn Bradford. 1553.
                  
                     
                        THe life wee haue at this preſent, is the gift of God, in whome wee liue, mooue, and are, and therefore hee is called Iehoua. For the which life, as we ſhould be thankefull, ſo we may not in any wiſe vſe it after our owne fantaſie, but to the ende for the which it is giuen and lent vs, that is: to the ſetting forth of Gods prayſe and glory, by repentance, conuerſion, and obedience, to his good will and holy lawes, whereunto his long ſuffering doeth, (as it were) euen drawe vs, if our heartes by impenitencie were not hardened. And therefore our life in the ſcripture is called a walking, for that as the body dayly draweth more and more néere his ende, that is the earth: euen ſo our ſoule draweth dayly more and more néere vnto death, that is, ſaluation, or damnation, heauen or hell.
                  Of which thing, in that we are moſt careleſſe, and very fooles, (for we alas, are the

ſame to day, wee were yeſterday, and not better or néerer to God, but rather néerer to hell, Sathan, & perdition, béeing couetous, idle, carnall, ſecure, negligent, proude, &c.) I thinke my labour cannot bée better beſtowed, then with the Baptiſt, Chriſt Ieſus, & his Apoſtles, to harpe on this ſtring, which of all other is moſt neceſſarie, and that in theſe dayes moſt ſpecially. What ſtring is that, ſayth one? Forſooth, brother, the ſtring of Repentance, the which Chriſt our Sauiour did vſe, firſt in his Miniſterie, & as his Miniſter at this preſent I will vſe vnto you all:
                        Mat. 4. 
                     Repent, for the kingdome of heauen is at hand.
                  
                  This ſentence thus pronounced, & preached by our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, as it doth commaund vs to repent, ſo to the dooing of the ſame, it ſheweth vs a ſufficient cauſe to ſtirre vs vp thereunto, namely for that, The kingdome of heauen (which is a kingdome of all ioy, peace, riches, power and pleaſure) is at hand, to all ſuch as doe ſo, that is, as doe repent: So that the meaning hereof is, as though our Sauiour might thus ſpeake preſently: Syrs, for that I ſée you all walking the wrong way, euen to Sathan, and vnto hell fire, by following

the kingdome of Sathan, which now is coloured vnder the vaine pleaſures of this life, and fooliſhneſſe of the fleſh moſt ſubtilly, to your vtter vndooing & deſtruction: beholde, and marke well what I ſay vnto you: The kingdome of heauen, that is, an other manner of ioy and felicitie, honour, and riches, power and pleaſure, then you now perceiue, or enioy, is euen at hand, and at your backes, as if you will turne againe, that is, Repent you, you ſhal moſt truely and pleaſantly féele, ſée, and inherite. Turne againe therefore, I ſay, that is, Repent, for this ioy I ſpeake of, euen, The kingdome of Heauen is at hand.
                  
                  Héere we may note, firſt the corruption of our nature, in that to this commaundement, Repent you, he addeth a cauſe, For the kingdome of Heauen is at hand: For by reaſon of the corruption & ſturdines of our nature, God vnto al his cōmaundements. commonly eyther addeth ſome promiſe to prouoke vs to obedience, or elſe ſome ſuch ſufficient cauſe, as cannot but tickle vs vp to hearty labouring for ye doing of ye ſame: as here to the commandement of doing penance, he addeth this Aetimologe or cauſe, ſaying: For the kingdō of heauen is at hand.
                  
                  
                     Againe, in that hée ioyneth to the commaundement the cauſe, ſaying: For the kingdome of heauen is at hand. We may learne that of the kingdome of heauen, none (to whom the miniſterie of preaching doth appertaine) can be partaker, but ſuch as repent and doe penaunce. Therefore déerely beloued, if you regard the kingdome of heauen, in that you cannot enter therein, except you repent: I beſeech you all of euery eſtate, as you would your owne weale, to repent and doe penaunce. The which thing that ye may doe, I will doe my beſt now, to helpe you by Gods grace.
                  But firſt, becauſe wee cannot well tell what repentance is, through ignoraunce, and for lacke of knowledge, and falſe teaching: I will (to begin with all) ſhew you what repentance is. Repentance, or penance is no Engliſh woorde, but wée borrow it of the Latiniſts, to whom penance is a forethinking in Engliſh, in Greeke, a béeing wiſe afterwards, in Hebrew, a conuerſion or turning, the which conuerſion or turning, in that it cannot be true & hearty, vnto God eſpecially, without ſome good hope or truſt of pardon, for that which is already done and paſt: I may well in this

ſort define it, namely, that penance is a ſorrowing or forethinking of our ſinnes 
                        •
                     aſt, an earneſt purpoſe to amend, or turning to God with a truſt of pardon.
                  This definition may bee deuided into three partes: Firſt, a ſorrowing for our 
                        •
                     innes: Secondly, a truſt of pardon, which otherwiſe may bée called, a perſwaſion of Gods mercie by the merites of Chriſt, for 
                        •
                     he forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes: And thirdly, a purpoſe to amend, or conuerſion to a new life. The which third or laſt part, can not be called properly a parte, for it is but an effect of penance, as towards the ende yee ſhall ſée by Gods grace. But leaſt ſuch as ſéeke for occaſion to ſpeake euill, ſhould haue any occaſion though they tary not out the end of this Sermon: I therefore deuide penance into the thrée foreſayde partes: of ſorrowing for our ſinne, of good hope or truſt of pardon▪ and of a new life. Thus you now ſée▪ what penance is: a ſorrowing for ſinne, a purpoſe to amend, with a good hope or truſt of pardon.
                  This penance not onely differeth from that which men commonly haue taken to bee penance, in ſaying and dooing our enioyned Lady Pſalters, ſeuen Pſalmes, faſtings,

Pilgrimages, Almes déedes, and ſuch like thinges, but all from that which the more learned haue declared, to conſiſt of thrée parts, namely, Contrition, Confeſſion, and Satiſfaction.
                  Contrition, they call a iuſt and a ful ſorrow for their ſinne. For this word, iuſt and full, is one of the differences, betwéene contrition and attrition.
                  Confeſſion, they call a numbring of all their ſinnes in the eare of their ghoſtly Father: for as (ſay they) a Iudge cannot abſolue without knowledge of the cauſe or matter, ſo cannot the Prieſt or ghoſtly father abſolue from other ſinnes, then thoſe which he doth heare.
                  Satiſfaction, they call amends making vnto God for their ſinnes, by their vndue workes, Opera indebita, Workes more then they néed to doe, as they tearme them▪ This is their penaunce which they preach, write, and allow. But how true this geare is, how it agréeeth with Gods worde, how it is to bee allowed, taught, preached, and written, let vs a little conſider. If a man repent not, vntill hee haue a iuſt and full ſorrowing for his ſinnes (dearely beloued) when ſhall he repent? For in as much as

hell fire, and the puniſhment of the deuils, is a iuſt puniſhment for ſinne: In as much as in all ſinne, there is a contempt of God, which is all goodnes, and therefore there is a deſert of all ylneſſe: alas, who can beare or féele this iuſt ſorrow, this full ſorrow for our ſinnes, this their contrition, which they 
                        •
                     e ſo diſcerne from their attrition? Shall 
                        •
                     ot man by this doctrine, rather deſpaire, 
                        •
                     hen come by repentance? If a man repent 
                        •
                     ot vntil he haue made confeſſion of all his ſinnes in the eare of his ghoſtly father: if 
                        •
                      man cannot haue abſolution of his ſinnes 
                        •
                     ntill his ſinnes bee told by tale and num
                     
                        •
                     er in the Prieſtes eare (in that, as Dauid ſayth) none can vnderſtand, much 
                        •
                     eſſe then vtter all his ſinnes, Delicta quis intelligit? Who can vnderſtand his ſinnes?
                      In that Dauid of himſelfe complayneth elſe where, how that his ſinnes are ouerflowed his head, and as a heauy burthen doe oppreſſe him, alaſſe, ſhall not a man by this doctrine, bee vtterly driuen from repentance? Though they haue gone about, ſomething to make plaiſter for their ſores of confeſſion or attrition, to aſſwage this geare, bidding a man to hope well of his contrition, though it bée not ſo full as

is required, and of his confeſſion, though h
                        •
                      haue not numbred all his ſinnes, if ſo be
                        •
                      that he doe ſo much as in him lyeth: deerely beloued, in that there is none, but that herein he is guiltie (for who doth as much as he may) trow ye that this plaiſter is no like ſalte for ſore eyes? Yes vndoubtedly▪ when they haue done all they can, for the appeaſing of conſciences in theſe pointes, this is the ſumme, that we yet ſhould hope well, but yet ſo hope, that we muſt ſtand in a mammering and doubting, whether our ſinnes be forgiuen. For to beléeue, Remiſsionem peccatorum, that is: To be certaine of forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, as our Créede teacheth vs, they count it a preſumption. O abomination, and that not onely herein▪ but in all their penance, as they paint it.
                  As concerning ſatiſfaction by their Opera indebita, Vndue workes, that is: by ſuch woorkes as they néed not to doe, but of their owne voluntarineſſe and wilfulneſſe (wilfulneſſe in déede) who ſéeeth not monſterous abomination, blaſphemy, and euen open fighting againſt God? For if ſatiſfaction can bée done by man, then Chriſt dyed in vaine, for him that ſo ſatiſfieth, and ſo reigneth he in vaine, ſo is he a Biſhop & a

Prieſt in vaine. Gods Law requireth loue to God with all our heart, ſoule, power,
                        Deu. 6.2 Mat 22 Mar. 20. Lu. 10. might and ſtrength: to that there is nothing can be done to Godward, which is not con
                     
                        •
                     yned in this commaundement: nothing can be done, ouer and aboue this. Againe,
                        Iohn. 3. Chriſt requireth to manwarde, That wee ſhould loue one another, as hee loued vs: 
                     
                        •
                     nd trowe we, that wee can doe any good 
                        •
                     ing to our neighbour ward, which is not 
                        •
                     rein comprized?
                  Yea, let them tell me, when they do any 
                        •
                     hing ſo in the loue of God, & their neigh
                     
                        •
                     our, but that they had néede to crie: Re
                        
                           •
                        itte nobis debita noſtra,
                     
                        Mat. 6. 
                     Forgiue vs our 
                           •
                        nnes. So farre are we off from ſatiſfying. 
                        •
                     oth not Chriſt ſay: When you haue done 
                           •
                        ll things that I haue commanded you, ſay,
                     
                        Lu. 17. 
                     
                        
                           •
                        hat you bee but vnprofitable ſeruauntes? Put nothing to my worde, ſayth God. Yes,
                        Apoc. 22 Deu. 4.1 
                     
                        •
                     oorkes of Supererogation, (yea, ſuper
                     
                        •
                     bomination) ſay they. Whatſoeuer things 
                           •
                        re true (ſayth the Apoſtle S. Paul) whatſoeuer things are honeſt, whatſoeuer thinges 
                              •
                           re iuſt, whatſoeuer things are pure, what
                           
                              •
                           oeuer things pertaine to loue, whatſoe
                           
                              •
                           er thinges are of good reporte, if there be any vertue, or if there be any prayſe: haue
                     
                     
                        〈2 pages missing〉
                     
                     
For to omit the teſtimonies I brought out of Iohn and Paul, which the blinde cannot but ſée: I pray you remember the text out of Eſai, which euen now I rehearſed, being ſpoken to ſuch as were then the people of God, and had bin a long time, but yet were fallen into grieuous ſinnes, after their adoption into the number of Gods children. It is for mine owne ſake (ſayth God) that I put away thy ſinnes. Where is your parting of the ſtake nowe? If it bee for Gods owne ſake, if Chriſt bée the propitiation
                        •
                      then recant, except you will become Idolaters, making your works God and Chriſt. Say as Dauid teacheth: Not to vs Lorde, not to vs, but to thy name be the glory.
                  
                  And it is to be noted, that God doth caſt in their téeth, euen the ſinne of their firſt father, leaſt they ſhoulde thinke that yet perchaunce, for the righteouſneſſe & goodneſſe of their good fathers, their ſinnes might bée the ſooner pardoned, and ſo God accept their workes.
                  If they had taken Satiſfaction, for that which is done to the Congregation publiquely, by ſome notable puniſhment, as in the Primitiue Church, was vſed to open offenders, ſparkles whereof, and ſome traces

yet remayne, when ſuch as haue ſinned in adulterie, goe about the Church with a Taper in their ſhirtes: Or if they had made Satiſfaction for reſtitution to manward, of ſuch goods as wrongfully are gotten, the which true penance cannot bée without: Or if by Satiſfaction, they had meant a new life, to make amendes to the Congregation thereby, as by their euill life they did offend the Congregation, in which ſence the Apoſtle ſéemeth to take that which he writeth in 2. Corin. 7. where the old Interpreter calleth Apologian, Satiſfaction, which rather ſignifieth a defence or anſwering againe. If I ſay, they had takē Satiſfaction any of theſe wayes, then they had done well, ſo that the Satiſfaction to God had béene left all onely to Chriſt.
                  Againe, if they had made Confeſſion, eyther for that which is to God priuately, eyther for that which is to the Congregation publiquely, eyther for that which is a frée conſultation with ſome one learned in Gods booke, and appointed thereunto, as firſt it was vſed, and I wiſh were now vſed amongſt vs, either for ye which is a reconciliation of one to another, it had béene ſome thing: yea, if they had made it for

faith, becauſe it is a true demonſtration of faith:
                        
                           
                              •
                           om. 1. as in Paul we may ſée, when hée calleth Chriſt the Captaine of our Confeſſion, that is, of our faith (and ſo Confeſſors were called in the Primitiue Church) ſuch as manfully did witnes their faith with the peril of their liues: if, I ſay, they had taken it thus, then had they done right well.
                  And ſo Contrition, if they had left out their ſubtill diſtinction, betwéene it and attrition, by this word iuſt or full, making it a heartie ſorrow for their ſinnes, then wée would neuer haue cryed out againſt them therefore. For we ſay, penance hath thrée parts, Contrition, if you vnderſtand it for a hearty ſorrowing for ſinne, Confeſſion, if you vnderſtand it for faith, of frée pardon in Gods mercie, by Ieſus Chriſt, and Satiſfaction, if you vnderſtand it not to Godwards (for that onely to Chriſt muſt be left alone) but to manward in reſtitution of goods wr
                        •
                     ngfully or fraudulently gotten, of name hindred by our ſlaunders, and in newneſſe of life: although, as I ſayd before, and anon will ſhew more plainely by Gods grace, that this laſt is no part of penance in déed, but a playne effect or fruit of true penanes.
                  
                     I might héere bring in examples of their penance, how perilous it is to bee embraced: but let the example of their graund Sire Iudas ſerue, in whome we ſée all the parts of their penance, as they deſcribe it, and yet notwithſtanding hee was damned. He was ſorie enough, as the effect ſhewed: hee had their contrition fully, out of the which he confeſſed his fault, ſaying: I haue betrayed innocent blood: and thereunto hée made ſatiſfaction, reſtoring the money hee had receyued. But yet all was but loſt, hée hanged vp himſelfe, his bowels burſt out, and he remaineth a child of perdition for euer. I would wiſh that this example of Iudas, in whom yée ſée the parts of their penance, contrition, confeſſion, and ſatiſfaction, would mooue them to penance, and to deſcribe it a little better, making hope or truſt of Gods frée mercie a piece thereof, or elſe with Iudas they will marre all.
                  Perchance theſe words, contrition, confeſſion, and ſatiſfaction, were vſed as I haue expounded them at the firſt. But in that wee ſée ſo much daunger and hurt by vſing them without expoſitions, eyther let vs ioyne to them open expoſitions alwayes, or elſe let vs not vſe them at all, but ſay

as I write, that penance is a hearty ſorrow for our ſinnes, a good hope or truſt of pardon through Chriſt, which is not without an earneſt purpoſe to amend, or a new life. This penance is the thing, whereto all the Scripture calleth vs. This penance doe I now call you all vnto: this muſt bée continually in vs, and not for a Lent ſeaſon, as we haue thought: this muſt increaſe dayly more and more in vs: without this we cannot be ſaued.
                  Search therefore your heartes all, all ſwearers, blaſphemers, lyers, flatterers, baudy, or idle talkers, ieſters, bribers, couetous perſons, drunkardes, gluttons, whoremongers, théeues, murtherers, ſlanderers, idle liuers, negligent in their vocation, &c. All ſuch, and all other as lament not their ſinnes, as hope not in Gods mercie for pardon, and purpoſe not heartily to amend, to leaue their ſwearing, drunkennes, whoredome, couetouſneſſe, idlenes, &c. All ſuch, I ſay, ſhall not or cannot enter into Gods kingdome, but hell fire is prepared for them, wéeping, and gnaſhing of téeth: whereunto, alas, I feare me, very many will néeds goe, in that very many will be as they haue bin, let vs euen to the wearing

of our tongue to the ſtumpes, preach and pray neuer ſo much to the contrary, and that euen in ye bowels of Ieſus Chriſt: as now I beſeech you all, all, all, and euery mothers child, to repent and lament your ſinne, to truſt in Gods mercie, and to amend your liues.
                  Now me thinks, ye are ſomewhat aſtonied: whereby I gather, that preſently you deſire this Repentance, that is: this ſorrow, good hope, and newneſſe of life. The which that you may the rather attaine, and get to your comforts, as I haue gone about to be a meane to ſtirre vp in you (by Gods grace) this deſire of Repentance, ſo through the ſame grace of God, will I goe about now to ſhew you, how you may haue your deſire in this behalfe.
                  And firſt, concerning this part, namely, ſorrow for your ſinnes, and hearty lamenting of the ſame: For this, if you deſire the hauing of it, you muſt beware, that you thinke not, that of your ſelues, or of your owne frée will, by any means you can get it. You may eaſily deceiue your ſelues, and mocke your ſelues, thinking more of your ſelues then is ſéemely. All good things, and not péeces of good things, but all good

things,
                        
                           
                              •
                           im. 1. ſayth Saint Iames, come from God the Father of light. If therefore penance be good (as it is good) then the parts of it be good.
                        Reg. 2. From God therefore do they come, and not of our frée will. It is the Lord that mortifieth, that bringeth downe, that humbleth,
                        
                           
                              •
                           erem. 31 ſaith the Scripture in ſundry places: After thou haddeſt ſtricken my thigh (ſaith Ieremie) I was aſhamed.
                      Loe, he ſayth, After thou haddeſt ſtricken me: & therefore prayeth hee, euen in the laſt words almoſt, hée writeth: Turne vs, O Lord, and we ſhall be turned.
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           am. 5. The which thing Dauid vſeth very often. Wherefore firſt of all, if thou wouldeſt haue this part of penance, as for the whole,
                        Act. 12. Tim. 2 becauſe it is Gods gift, ſo for this part goe thou vnto God, & make ſome little prayer, as thou canſt, vnto his mercy, for the ſame, in this or like ſort.
                  Merciful Father of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe I haue ſinned & done wickedly, and through thy goodneſſe haue receyued a deſire of Repentance, whereto this thy long ſufferance doth draw my hard heart, I beſéech thée for thy mercies ſake in Chriſt, to worke the ſame Repentance in me, and by thy ſpirite, power, and grace ſo to humble, mortifie, and feare my conſcience

for my ſinnes to ſaluation, that in thy good time thou mayſt comfort and quicken me againe, through Ieſus Chriſt thy déerely beloued Sonne. Amen.
                  After this ſort, I ſay, or otherwiſe, as thou thinkeſt good, if thou wilt haue this firſt part, Contrition, or ſorrow for thy ſins, do thou beg it of God through Chriſt. And when thou haſt aſked it, as I haue laboured to driue thée frō truſting in thy ſelfe, ſo now I go about to moue thée from flattering of thy ſelfe, from ſluggiſhnes & negligence, to be diligent to vſe theſe meanes following. Vnto prayer, which I would thou ſhouldeſt firſt vſe as thou canſt: ſecondly, get thée Gods Law as a glaſſe to toot in: for in it, and by it, commeth the true knowledge of ſinne, without which knowledge, there can be no ſorrow. For how can a man ſorrow for his ſins, which knoweth not his ſinnes? As when a man is ſicke, the firſt ſtep to health, is to know his ſickneſſe: euen ſo to ſaluation, the firſt ſtep, is to know thy damnation due for thy ſinnes.
                  The Law of God therefore muſt be gotten and well tooted in: that is, we muſt looke in it ſpiritually, & not corporally, or carnally, as the outward word or letter dooth declare

and vtter: and ſo our Sauiour teacheth vs in Matthew, expounding the ſixte and ſeuenth commandements, not onely after the outward déede, but alſo after the heart, making the
                        •
                     e the anger of the heart, a kind of murther, luſting after an other mans wife, a kind of adulterie.
                  And this is one of the differences betwéene Gods Law and mans law, that of this (mans law I meane) I am not contemnable, ſo long as I obſerue outwardly the ſame. But Gods Law goeth to the roof and to the heart, condemning mee for the inward motion, although outwardly I liue moſt holily. As for example: If I kill no man, though in my heart I hate, mans law condemneth mee not: but otherwiſe doth Gods law. And why? for it ſeeeth the fountaine whence the euil doth ſpring. If hatred were taken out of the heart, then loftineſſe in looks, detraction in tongue, and murther by hand, could neuer enſue. If luſting were out of the heart, curioſitie in countenance, wantonneſſe in words, baudy boldneſſe in body would not appeare.
                  In that therefore this outward euill ſprings out of the inward corruption: ſéeing Gods Law alſo is a Law of libertie,

as ſaith ſaint Iames: and ſpirituall,
                        Iam. 2. Rom. 7. as ſaith 
                        •
                     aint Paul: perfectly and ſpiritually it is to 
                        •
                     e vnderſtood, if we will truely come to the 
                        •
                     nowledge of our ſinnes. For of this 
                        •
                     nward corruption, reaſon knoweth but 
                        •
                     ittle or nothing. I had not knowen (ſaith Paul) that luſting (which to reaſon,
                        Rom. 7. and 
                        •
                     o them which are guided onely by reaſon, 
                        •
                     s thought but a trifle:) I had not knowen (ſayth he) this luſting to haue béene ſinne, 
                        •
                     f the Law had not ſayd, Non concupiſces, Thou ſhalt not luſt.
                  
                  To the knowledge therefore of our ſinne (without which we cannot repent, or bée ſorte for our ſinne,) let vs ſecondly get vs Gods Law, as a glaſſe to toote in: and that not onely literally, outwardly, or partly, but alſo ſpiritually, inwardly, & throughly. Let vs conſider the heart, and ſo ſhall we ſée the foule ſpots we are ſtained withall, at leaſt inwardly, whereby we the rather may bee moued to hearty ſorrow and ſighing. For as Saint Auſtine ſayth, it is a glaſſe which feareth no body, but euen looke what a one thou art, ſo it painteth thée out.
                  In the Law wee ſée it is a foule ſpotte, not to loue the Lord our God, with all (I

ſay) our heart, ſoule, power, might and ſtrength, and that continually.
                  In the Law it is a foule ſpot, not onely to make to our ſelues any grauen Image or ſimilitude, to bowe thereto, &c. but alſo no
                        •
                      to frame our ſelues wholy after the Image whereto we are made, not to bowe to it, to worſhip it.
                  In the Law we ſée that it is a foule ſpot, not onely to take Gods name in vaine, but alſo not earneſtly, heartily, and euen continually to call vpon his name onely, to giue thanks vnto him onely, to beléeue, to publiſh, and liue in his holy word.
                  In Gods Law wee ſée it is a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely to bée an open prophaner of the Sabboth day, but alſo not to reſt from our owne woords and works, that the Lorde might both ſpeake and woorke in vs and by vs, not to heare his holy woord, not to communicate his Sacraments, not to giue occaſion to others to holineſſe, by our example in godly works, and reuerent eſtéeming of the miniſterie of his woord.
                  In Gods Law we ſée it is a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely to be an open diſobeyer of our Parents, Magiſtrates, Maſters,

and ſuch as bee in any authoritie ouer vs, 
                        •
                     at alſo not to honour ſuch euen in our 
                        •
                     earts, not to giue thankes to GOD for 
                        •
                     em, not to pray for them, to ayd, to helpe, 
                        •
                      relieue them, to beare with their infir
                     
                        •
                     ities, &c.
                  In Gods Law we ſée it is a foule ſpot in 
                        •
                     ur ſoules, not onely to be a manqueller in 
                        •
                     atred, malice, proud looks, brags, backe
                     
                        •
                     iting, rayling, or bodily ſlaughter: but al
                     
                        •
                     o not to loue our neighbours, yea, our enemies, euen in our hearts, and to declare 
                        •
                     he ſame in all our geſtures, woords, and works.
                  In Gods law we ſée it a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely to bee a whoremonger in luſting, in our hearts, in wanton looking, in vncleane and wanton talking, in actuall dooing vnhoneſtly with our neighbours wife, daughter, ſeruant, &c. But alſo not to be chaſt, ſober, temperate in heart, lookes, tongue, apparel, déeds, and to helpe others thereunto accordingly, &c.
                  In Gods Law wee ſée it is a foule ſpot to our ſoules, not onely in heart, to couet, in looke or woord to flatter, lye, colour, &c. in déede to take away any thing which pertayneth to an other: but alſo in

heart, countenance, word and déede, not t
                        •
                      kéepe▪ ſaue, and defend that which pe
                        •
                     
                     taineth to thy neighbour, as thou woulde
                        •
                      thine owne.
                  In Gods Law, wee may ſée it a foul
                        •
                      ſpot, not onely to lie or beare falſe witneſſ
                        •
                      againſt any man, but alſo not to haue as great care ouer thy neighbours name, as ouer thine owne.
                  Sinne in Gods Law, it is we may ſée, and a foule ſpot, not onely to conſent to euill luſt, or carnall deſires, but euen the very naturall or carnall luſtes, and deſires themſelues, for ſo I may call them: nature it ſelfe, being now ſo corrupted, are ſinne, and ſelfe-loue, and many ſuch like. By reaſon whereof, I trow there is none that tooteth wel therein, but though he be blameleſſe to the world, and faire to the ſhew, yet certainly, inwardly his face is foule arayed, and ſo ſhamefull, ſaucie, mangie, pockie and ſcabbed, that he cannot but be ſorie at the contemplation thereof, & that ſo much more by how much he continueth to looke in this glaſſe accordingly.
                  And thus much concerning the ſecond meane to the ſtirring vp of ſorrow for our ſinne, that next vnto prayer, wée ſhould

                     
                        •
                     ofe in Gods law ſpiritually. The which 
                        •
                     ting, if we vſe with prayer, as I ſayd, 
                        •
                     et vs not doubt, but at the length Gods 
                        •
                     irite will worke, as now to ſuch as be
                     
                        •
                     eue, for to the vnbeléeuers all is in vaine, their eyes are ſtarke blind, they can ſee 
                        •
                     othing) to ſuch as beléeue (I ſay) I truſt 
                        •
                     eme thing is done euen already. But if 
                        •
                     eyther by prayer, nor by tooting in Gods 
                        •
                     aw ſpiritually, as yet thy hard vnbelee
                     
                        •
                     ing heart féeleth no ſorrow, nor lamen
                     
                        •
                     ing for thy ſinne: Thirdly, looke vpon the 
                        •
                     ag tyed to Gods Law: for to mans law 
                        •
                     here is a tag tyed, that is, a penaltie, and that no ſmall one, but ſuch a one, as cannot but make vs to caſt our curriſh tayles betwéene our legs, if we beléeue it, for all is in vaine, if we be faithleſſe, not to beléeue before we féele.
                  This tag is Gods malediction or curſe. Maledictus omnis (ſayth it) qui non permanet in omnibus quae ſcripta ſunt in libro legis, vt faciat eam. Loe, accurſed (ſayth he) is all, no exception, all, ſayth God, which continueth not in all things (for he that is guiltie of one, is guiltie of the whole, ſayth S. Iames:) in all things therefore, (ſayth the holy Ghoſt) which are written in the booke

of the law to doe them. Hee ſayth not, to heare them, to talke of them, to diſpute of them, but, to doe them.
                  Who is he now that dooeth theſe? Rara anis, few ſuch Byrds, yea, none at all. For all are gone out of the way, though not outwardly by word or déed, yet inwardly at the leaſt by default, and wanting of that which is required: ſo that a child of one nights age is not pure, but (by reaſon of birth-ſinne) in danger of Gods malediction: then much more wee, which alaſſe, haue drunken in iniquitie, as it were water, as Iob ſayth: But yet alas we quake not.
                  Tell me now, good brother, why do you ſo lightly conſider Gods curſe, that for your ſinnes paſt, you are ſo careleſſe, as though you had made a couenant with death and damnation, as the wicked did in Eſayes time? What is Gods curſe? At the Popes curſe with booke, bell, and candle, O, how trembled wee, which heard it, but onely though the ſame was not directed vnto vs, but vnto others? For this Gods curſe, which is incomparable, more ſell and importable, and is directed to vs, yea, hanging ouer vs, all by reaſon of our ſinnes: alas, how careleſſe are wee? O faithleſſe hard

hearts. O Iezabels gheſts, rocked and layd aſléepe in her bedde. O wicked wretches, which béeing come into the depth of ſinne, doe contemne the ſame. O ſorrowleſſe ſinners, and ſhameleſſe ſhrinking harlottes.
                  Is not the anger of a King death? and is the anger of the King of all Kings, a matter to be ſo lightly regarded as wee doe regard it, which for our ſinnes are ſo retchleſſe, that we ſlugge and ſléepe it out? As waxe melteth away at the heate of the fire (ſayth Dauid) ſo doe the wicked periſh at the face or countenance of the Lord.
                  If, déerely beloued, his face bee ſo terrible and intolerable for ſinners, and the wicked: what trow wée his hand is? At the face and appearing of Gods anger, the earth trembleth: but we earth, earth, yea, ſtones, yron, flints, tremble nothing at all. If wee will not tremble in hearing, woe vnto vs, for then ſhall we bee craſhed in pieces in féeling. If a Lyon roare, the beaſtes quake: but wee are worſe then beaſts, which quake nothing at the roring of the Lyon, I meane ye Lord of hoſts. And why? becauſe the curſe of God, hardnes of heart, is already fallen vpon vs, or elſe we

could not but lament and tremble for our ſinnes: If not for the ſhame and foulenes thereof, yet at the leaſt, for the malediction and curſe of God, which hangeth ouer vs for our ſinnes.
                  Lorde bee mercifull vnto vs for thy Chriſts ſake, and ſpare vs, in thine anger remember thy mercies towards vs: Amen.
                  
                  And thus much for the third thing to the moouing of vs to ſorrow for our ſinnes, that is, for the tag tyed to Gods Law, I meane, for the malediction & curſe of God. But if our hearts bee ſo hard, that through theſe, wee yet féele not heartie ſorrow for our ſinnes: let vs fourthly ſet before vs examples paſt and preſent, olde and new, thereby the holy ſpirite may be effectual to worke in his time this woorke of ſorrowing for our ſinne.
                  Looke vpon Gods anger for ſinne in Adam and Eue, for eating a péece of an apple. Were not they, the déereſt creatures of God, caſt out of Paradiſe? Were not they ſubiect to mortalitie, trauaile, labour, &c. Was not the earth accurſed for their ſins? Doe not we all, men in labour, women in traueiling with child, and all in death,

mortalitie and miſerie, euen in this life feele the ſame? And was God ſo angrie for their ſinne, and hee béeing the ſame God, will he ſay nothing to vs for ours (alas) more horrible then the eating once of one piece of an apple?
                  In the time of Noe and Lot, God deſtroyed the whole world with water,
                        Gen. 6. and the Cities of Sodom and Gomorra,
                     
                        Gen. 19 
                     Seboim and Adamah, with fire and brimſtone from heauen for their ſinnes, namely, for their whoredoms, pride, idleneſſe, vnmercifulnes to the poore, tyranny, &c. In which wrath of God, euen the very babes, birds, fowles, fiſhes, hearbes, trées, and graſſe periſhed: and thinke we that nothing will be ſpoken to vs, much woorſe and more abominable then they? For all men may ſée, if they will, that the whoredomes, pride, vnmercifulneſſe, tyranny, &c. of England, farre paſſeth in this age, any age that euer was before. Lots wife looking backe,
                        Gen. 19 was turned into a ſalt ſtone: and will our looking backe againe, yea, our running backe againe to our wickedneſſe, doe vs no hurt? If we were not already more then blinde Béetles, we would bluſh. Pharao, his heart was hardned ſo, that no miracle could conuert

him: if ours were any thing ſoft, we would begin to ſob.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ua and 
                           •
                        aleb.Of ſixe hundred thouſand men, all onely but twaine entred into ye Land of promiſe, becauſe they had ten tymes ſinned againſt the Lord, as hee himſelfe ſayth: and trow we,
                        
                           
                              •
                           um. 14 that God wil not ſweare in his wrath, that wee ſhall neuer enter into his reſt, which haue ſinned ſo many ten times, as wée haue toes & fingers, yea, haires on our heads and beards (I feare me) and yet we paſſe not.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           euit. 24 
                           
                              •
                           um. 15The man that ſware, and he that gathered ſticks on the Sabboth day, were ſtoned to death: but wee thinke our ſwearing is no ſinne, our bribing, rioting, yea, whorehunting on the Sabboth day, pleaſeth God, or elſe wee would ſomething amend our maners.
                  
                     
                        Reg. 5.
                     Helias negligence in correcting his ſonnes, nipped his necke in two: but ours which pamper vp our children like puppets, will put vs to no plunge? Helias ſonnes for diſobeying their fathers admonition, brought ouer them Gods vengeance: and wil our ſtubburneſſe doe nothing?
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        . Reg. 
                        
                           •
                        1.22.
                     Sauls malice to Dauid, Acabs diſpleaſure againſt Naboth, brought their bloud

to the ground for dogs to eate, yea, their children were hanged vp and ſlaine for this geare: but wee continue in malice, enuie,4 Reg. 4. Re. 1 and murther, as though wee were able to wage warre with the Lord.
                  
                     Dauids adulterie with Bethſabe, was viſited on ye child borne, on Dauids daughter, defiled by her brother, and on his children, one ſlaying another, his wiues defiled by his owne ſonne, and himſelfe driuen out of his Realme in his old age, and otherwiſe alſo, although he moſt heartily repented his ſinne: But wee are more déere vnto God then Dauid, which yet was a man after Gods owne heart, or elſe we could not but tremble, and begin to repent.
                  The rich gluttons gay paunch filling: what did it? it brought him to hell: and haue we a placcard, that God will doe nothing to vs?
                  
                     Achans ſubtill theft prouoked Gods anger againſt all Iſrael: and our ſubtiltie, yea, open extortion, is ſo fine and politike, that God can not eſpie it.
                  
                     Gehezi his couetouſneſſe, brought it not the Leproſie vpon him, and on all his ſéed? Iudas alſo hanged himſelfe. But the couetouſneſſe of England is of another cloth &

colour. Well, if it were ſo, the ſame Tallor will cut it accordingly.
                  
                     Anania and Saphira by lying, linked to them ſudden death: but ours now prolongeth our life the longer, to laſt in eternall death.
                  The falſe witnes of the two Iudges againſt Suſanna, lighted on their own pates: and ſo will ours doe at length.
                  But what goe I about to auouch ancient examples, where dayly experience doth teach? The Sweate the other yéere, the ſtormes the Winter following, will vs to weigh them in the ſame balances. The hanging and killing of men themſelues, which are (alas) too rife in all places, require vs to regiſter thē in the ſame roules. At the leaſt in Children, Infants, and ſuch like, which yet cannot vtter ſinne by word or déed, wée ſée Gods anger againſt ſinne, in puniſhing them by ſickneſſe, death, miſhappe or otherwiſe, ſo plainly, that we cannot but grone and grunt againe, in that we haue guſhed out this geare more aboundantly in word and déed.
                  And héere with me a little looke on Gods anger, yet ſo freſh, that we cannot but ſmel it, although wee ſtoppe our noſes neuer ſo

much, I pray God we ſmell it not more freſh hereafter, I meane it forſooth (for I know you looke for it) in our déere late Soueraigne Lord the Kings Maieſtie. You al know he was but a Child in yéeres, defiled he was not with notorious offences: Defiled, quoth he? nay, rather adorned with ſo many good gifts, and wonderfull qualities, as neuer Prince was from the beginning of the world. Should I ſpeake of his wiſedome, of his ripeneſſe in iudgement, of his learning, of his godly zeale, heroical heart, fatherly care for his Commons, nurcely ſolicitude for Religion? &c. Nay, ſo many things are to bee ſpoken in commendation of Gods excéeding graces in this Child: that, as Saluſt writeth of Carthage, I had rather ſpeake nothing, then too litle, in that, too much is too little. This gift God gaue vnto vs Engliſh men, before all Nations vnder the Sunne, and that of his excéeding loue towards vs. But alas, and welaway: for our vnthankefulnes ſake, for our ſinnes ſake, for our carnalitie and prophane liuing, Gods anger hath touched, not onely the body, but alſo the mind of our King, by a long ſickneſſe, and at length hath taken him away by death,

death, cruell death, fearefull death. O, if Gods iudgement be begun on him, which as he was the chiefeſt, ſo I thinke the holyeſt, and godlyeſt in the Realme of England, (alas) what will it be on vs, whoſe ſinnes are ouergrowne ſo our heads, that they are climed vp into heauē? I pray yo
                        •
                     , my good brethren, know that Gods anger for our ſin towards vs, cannot but be great, yea, too fell, in that we ſée it was ſo great, that our good King could not beare it. What followed to Iewrie, after the death of Ioſias? God ſaue England, and giue vs repentance: my heart will not ſuffer me to tarie longer héerein: I trow this will thruſt out ſome teares of repentance.
                  If therefore to prayer for Gods feare, the tooting in Gods glaſſe, and the tag thereto will not burſt open thy blockiſh heart, yet, I trow, the toſſing to and fro of theſe examples, and ſpecially of our late King, and this troubleſome time, will tumble ſome teares out of thine heart, if thou ſtill pray for Gods ſpirit accordingly. For who art thou (thinke alwayes with thy ſelfe) that GOD ſhould ſpare thée, more then them whoſe examples thou haſt heard? What friends haſt thou? Were not of theſe

Kings, Prophets, Apoſtles, learned, and come of holy ſtocks? I deceiue my ſelfe, (thinke thou with thy ſelfe) if I beléeue that God, béeing the ſame God that he was, wil ſpare me, whoſe wickedneſſe is no leſſe, but much more then ſome of theirs. Hee hateth ſinne now, as much as euer hee did. The longer hee ſpareth, the greater vengeance will fall: the déeper hee draweth his Bow, the ſorer will the ſhaft pierce.
                  But if yet thy heart be ſo hardened, that all this geare will not mooue thée, ſurely thou art in a very euill eſtate, and remedie now I know none. What, ſaid I, none? Know I none? Yes, there is one, which is ſureſby, as they ſay, to ſerue, if any thing will ſerue. You looke to know what this is. Forſooth, the Paſſion and death of Ieſus Chriſt. You know, the cauſe why Chriſt became man, and ſuffered as he ſuffered, was the ſinnes of his people, that he might ſaue them from the ſame. Conſider the greatneſſe of the ſore, I meane ſinne, by the greatnes of the Surgion, and the ſalue. Who was the Surgion? No Angell, no Saint, no Archangell, no power, no creature in heauen nor in earth: but onely hée, by whom all things were made, all things

are ruled alſo, euen Gods owne deareling, and onely beloued Sonne, becomming man.
                  Oh what a great thing is this, that could not be done by the Angelles, Archangelles, Potentates, Powers, or all the creatures of God, without his owne Sonne? who yet muſt néeds be thruſt out of heauen, as a man would ſay, to take our nature, and become man. Heere haue yee the Surgion: great was the cure, that this mightie Lord tooke in hand.
                  Now, what was the ſalue? Forſooth, déere geare, and of many compoſitions: I cannot recite all, but rather muſt leaue it to your hearty conſiderations. Thrée and thirtie yéeres was he curing our ſore. Hée ſought it earneſtly by faſting, watching, praying &c. The ſame night that hee was betrayed, I reade how buſie he was about a plaiſter in the garden, when he lying flat on the ground, praying with teares, and that of bloud not a few, but ſo many as did flow downe on the ground againe, crying on this ſort: Father, (ſayth hée) if it bee poſsible, let this cup depart from me. That is, If it be poſſible, that elſe the ſinnes of mankind can be taken away, graunt that it

may be ſo. Thou heardeſt Moſes crying for the Idolaters: Thou heardeſt Lot for the Zoarites: Samuel, Dauid, and many other for the Iſraelites: And déere Father, I onely am thine owne ſonne, as thou haſt ſaid, in whom thou art well pleaſed: wilt thou not heare me? I haue by the ſpace of three and thirtie yeeres, done alwayes thy will: I haue ſo humbled my ſelfe, that I would become an abiect amongſt men, to obey thée. Therefore (déere Father) if it be poſſible, graunt my requeſt, ſaue mankind, now without any further labour, ſalues, or plaiſters. But yet (ſayth he) not as I wil, but as thou wilt.
                  
                  But Sir, what heard hée? Though hée ſweat bloud & water, in making his plaiſter for our ſore of ſinne, yet it framed not. Twiſe hee cryed without comfort: yea, though to comfort him, God ſent an Angel, wee yet know, that this plaiſter was not allowed for ſufficient, vntill hereunto, Chriſt Ieſus was betrayed, forſaken of al his Diſciples, forſworne of his déerely beloued, bound like a Théefe, belyed on, buffeted, whipped, ſcourged, crowned with thornes, derided, crucified, racked, nayled, hanged vp betwéene two théeues, curſed

and rayled vpon, mocked in miſerie, and had giuen vp the ghoſt: then bowed downe the head of Chriſt, that is, God the Father, which is the head of Chriſt: then allowed he the plaiſter, to bée ſufficient and good for the healing of our ſore, which is ſinne. Now would God abide our breath, becauſe the ſtinke, that is, damnation or guiltineſſe, was taken away by the ſwéet ſauour of the breath of this Lambe, thus offered once for all.
                  So that héere, déerely beloued, wée as in a glaſſe may ſée, to the bruſing of our blockiſh hard hearts, Gods great iudgement and anger againſt ſin. The Lord of lords, the King of kings,
                        Gen. 6. Gen. 19. the brightneſſe of Gods glory, the Sonne of God, the Deareling of his Father, in whom he is well pleaſed, hangeth betwéene two théeues, crying for thée and mée, and for vs all: My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken mee? Oh hard hearts that wée haue, which make tuttes for ſinne. Looke on this: toote in the very heart of Chriſt pearced with a ſpeare, wherein thou mayſt ſée, and reade Gods horrible anger for ſinne. Woe to thy hard heart that pierced it.
                  And thus much for the firſt part of Repentance,

I meane, for the meanes of working contrition. Firſt, vſe prayer: then 
                        •
                     ooke on Gods Law: thirdly, ſée his curſe:
                        Gen. 19. fourthly, ſet examples of his anger before thée: and laſt of all, ſet before thée the death of Chriſt.
                  From this and prayer ceaſe not, till thou féele ſome heartie ſorrow for thy ſinne. The which when thou féeleſt, then labour for the other part, that is, faith, on this ſort.
                  As firſt, in Contrition I willed thée not to truſt to thy frée will, for the attayning of it: ſo doe I will thée in this. Faith is ſo farre from the reach of mans frée will, that to reaſon it is plaine fooliſhnes. Therefore, thou muſt firſt goe to God, whoſe gift it is: thou muſt, I ſay, get thée to the Father of mercie, whoſe worke it is, that as he hath brought thée downe by Contrition, and humbled thée, ſo hee would giue thée faith, rayſe thée vp, and exalt thée.
                  On this maner therefore, with the Apoſtles, and the poore man in the Goſpell, that cryed: Lord encreaſe our faith: Lord helpe my vnbeleefe, pray thou and ſay: O mercifull God and deare Father of our Lord & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, in whom as

thou art well pleaſed, ſo haſt thou commanded vs to heare him, for as much as hee often biddeth vs to aſke of thée,2. Tim. 2 and thereto promiſeth that thou wilt heare vs, and graunt vs that which in his name we ſhall aſke of thée: loe, gracious Father, I am bold to begge of thy mercie, through thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſt, one ſparkle of true faith, and certaine perſwaſion of thy goodneſſe & loue towards me in Chriſt, wherethrough I béeing aſſured of the pardon of all my ſinnes, by the mercies of Chriſt thy ſonne, may be thankefull to thée, loue thée, and ſerue thée in holineſſe and righteouſnes all the dayes of my life.
                  On this ſort I ſay, or otherwiſe as God ſhall mooue thée, pray thou firſt of all, and looke for thy requeſt at Gods hand, without any doubting, though foorthwith thou féeleſt not the ſame: for oftentimes wee haue things of GOD giuen vs, long before we féele them as we would doe. Now vnto this prayer, vſe thou theſe meanes following.
                  After prayer for faith, which I would ſhould be firſt, ſecondly, becauſe the ſame ſpringeth out of the hearing, not of Maſſes, Mattins, Cannons, Councels, Doctours,

Decrées, but out of the hearing of Gods 
                        •
                     oord, get thée Gods woord, but not that 
                        •
                     art which ſerueth, ſpecially to Contrition, that is the Law: but the other part, which ſerueth ſpecially to conſolation and certaine perſwaſion of Gods loue towards thée, that is, the Goſpell or publication of Gods mercie in Chriſt, I meane the frée promiſes.
                  But héere thou muſt know, that there are two kinds of promiſes: one, which is properly of the Lawe: another, which is properly of the Goſpel. In the promiſes of the Law, wee may indéed behold Gods mercie, but ſo, that it hangeth vpon the condition of our worthines, as, if thou loue the Lord with all thy heart, &c. thou ſhalt find mercy. This kind of promiſes, though it declare vnto vs Gods loue, which promiſeth where he néedeth not: yet vnto him that féeleth not Chriſt, which is the end of the Law, they are ſo farre from comforting, that vtterly with the Law they bring man to great deſpaire: ſo greatly we are corrupt, for none ſo loueth God as hée ought to doe. From theſe therefore get thée to the other promiſes of the Goſpell, in which we may ſée ſuch plentie and francke

liberalitie of Gods goodneſſe, that wee can not but be much comforted, though we haue very déepely ſinned. For theſe promiſes of the Goſpell doe not hang on the condition of our worthineſſe, as the promiſes of the Law doe: but they depend and hang on Gods trueth, that as God is true, ſo they cannot but be performed to all them which lay holde on them by faith, I had almoſt ſaid, which caſt thē not away by vnbeliefe.
                  Marke in them therefore two things, namely, that as wel they are frée promiſes, without any condition of our worthineſſe: as alſo, that they are vniuerſall, offered to all, all (I ſay) which are not ſo ſtubburne, as to kéepe ſtill their hands, whereby they ſhould receyue this almes in their boſoms, by vnbeliefe. As concerning Infants and children, you know I now ſpeake not, but concerning ſuch as be of yéeres of diſcretion. And now you looke that I ſhould giue you a taſte of theſe promiſes, which are both frée and vniuerſall, except none but ſuch as except themſelues. Well, you ſhal haue one or two for a ſay.
                  In the 3. of Iohn, ſayth our Sauiour: So God the Father loued the world, that hee would giue his dearling, his owne onely

Sonne, that all that beleeue in him ſhould 
                           •
                        ot periſh, but haue euerlaſting life. Loe, 
                        •
                     r, hee ſaith not, that ſome might haue life: 
                        •
                     ut all, ſayth he. And what all? All yt loue 
                        •
                     im with all their hearts? all yt haue liued a 
                        •
                     odly life? Nay, all that beléeue in him. Al
                     
                        •
                     hough thou haſt liued a moſt wicked & hor
                     
                        •
                     ible life: if now thou beléeue in him, thou 
                        •
                     halt be ſaued. Is not this ſwéet geare?
                  Againe ſayth Chriſt: Come vnto me, all 
                           •
                        ee that labour and are laden, and I will re
                        
                           •
                        eſh you. Let vs a litle looke on this letter: Come vnto me. Who ſhould come? Lords, Prieſts, Holy men, Monkes, Friers? Yea, 
                        •
                     oblers, Tinkers, whores, théeues, mur
                     
                        •
                     herers alſo, if they lament their ſinnes. Come vnto me (ſayth he) all ye that labour 
                           •
                        nd are laden, that is, which are afrayd of 
                        •
                     our ſinnes. And what wilt thou do, Lord? And I wil refreſh you (ſayth he.)
                  O, what a thing is this: And I will re
                        
                           •
                        eſh you? Wot you who ſpake this? Hée 
                        •
                     hat neuer told lye: He is the trueth, there 
                        •
                     as neuer guile found in his mouth: and 
                        •
                     ow wil he be vntrue to thée, good brother, 
                        •
                     hich art ſorie for thy grieuous ſinnes? No 
                        •
                     rſooth: heauen and earth ſhal paſſe and pe
                     
                        •
                     iſh, but his word ſhall neuer fayle.
                  
                     Saint Paul ſayth, God would haue al men ſaued: Loe, he excepteth none. And to Titus: The grace of God bringeth ſaluation to all men.
                      As from Adam al haue receiued ſinne to damnation: ſo by Chriſt all haue grace offered to ſaluation, if they reiect not the ſame. I ſpeake not now of Infants, I ſay: nor I néed not to enter into the matter of Predeſtination. In preaching of repentance, I would gather where I could with Chriſt.
                  
                     As ſurely as I liue, (ſayth God) I wil not the death of a ſinner. Art thou a ſinner? Yea. Loe, God ſweareth, hée will not thy death. How canſt thou now periſh? Conſider with thy ſelfe what profite thou ſhouldeſt haue to beléeue this to bee true to others, if not, to thy ſelfe alſo: Sathan doth ſo. Rather conſider with Peter, that the promiſe of ſaluation perteineth not onely to them which are nie, that is, to ſuch as are fallen a little: but alſo to all, to whō the Lord hath called, be they neuer ſo farre off.
                  Loe, now by mee the Lord calleth thée, thou man, thou woman, that art very farre off. The promiſe therefore pertayneth to thée: néeds muſt thou be ſaued, except thou with Sathan ſay, God is falſe: And yet if

thou doe ſo, God is faithfull, and can not denie himſelfe: as thou ſhalt féele by his plagues in hell, for ſo diſhonouring God, to thinke that hée is not true. Will hée bée found falſe now? The matter hangeth not on thy worthines, but it hangeth on Gods trueth. Clap hold on it, and I warrant thée, Chriſt is the propitiation for our ſins, yea, for the ſinnes of the whole world: beléeue this, man: I know thou beléeueſt it: ſay therefore in thy heart ſtill, Domine audage mihi fidem: Lord encreaſe my fayth: Lord helpe my vnbeleefe.
                      Bleſſed are they which ſée not (by reaſon) this geare, but yet beléeue. Hope, man, paſt all hope, as Abraham did.
                  And thus much for a taſte of theſe promiſes, which are euery where, not onely in the new Teſtament, but alſo in the old. Reade the laſt end of Leuiticus 26. The Prophet Eſay 30. Where hee ſaith: God tarrieth looking for thee, to ſhew thee mercie. Alſo the 40. and ſo foorth to the 60. Reade alſo ye 
                     2. Reg. 24. Pſa. 33. Ioel. 2. &c.
                  
                  Howbeit, if this geare will not ſerue, i
                        •
                      yet thou féeleſt no faith, no certaine perſwaſion of Gods loue: then vnto prayer and diligent conſidering of the frée and

vniuerſall promiſes of the Goſpell: Thirdly, ſet before thée thoſe benefits which God hath to foregiuen thée, and preſently giueth thée. Conſider how hee hath made thée a man or a woman, which might haue made thée a Toade, or a Dog. And why did hée this? Verily, becauſe he loued thée. And troweſt thou, that if hee loued thée when thou waſt not, to make thée ſuch a one, as he moſt graciouſly hath made thée: will he not now loue thée, béeing his handy worke? Doth he hate any thing that he made? Is there vnableneſſe with him? Doth he loue for a day, and ſo farewell? No forſooth, he loueth to the end, his mercie endureth for euer. Say therefore with Iob: Operi manuum tuarum, porrige dexteram, that is: To the worke of thy hands, put thy helping hand.
                  
                  Againe, hath hée not made thée a Chriſtian man or woman, where if hee would, hée might haue made thée a Turke or Paynim? This thou knoweſt hee did of loue. And dooſt thou thinke his loue is leſſened, if thou lament thy ſinne? Is his hand ſhortened for helping thee? Can a woman forget the child of her wombe? And though ſhee ſhould doe it, yet will not I forget thée,

ſayth the Lord. He hath giuen thée lyms, to ſée, heare, goe, &c. He hath giuen thée wit, reaſon, diſcretion, &c. Hee hath long ſpared thée, and borne with thée, when thou neuer purpoſedſt to repent: and now thou repenting, will hee not giue thee mercie? Wherefore doth hee graunt thée to liue at this preſent, to heare him to ſpeake this, and mee to ſpeake this: but of loue to vs all? Oh, therefore let vs pray him, that he would adde to this, that wee might beléeue theſe loue tokens, that hee loueth vs, and indéed hee wil doe it. Lord, open our eyes, in thy gifts, to ſée thy gracious goodneſſe. Amen.
                  But to tarie in this I will not. Let euery man conſider Gods benefites, paſt and preſent, publike and priuate, ſpirituall and corporal, to the confirming of his faith, concerning the promiſes of the Goſpell, for the pardon of his ſinnes.
                  I wil now go about to ſhew you a fourth meane to confirme your faith in this geare, euen by examples. Of theſe there are in the Scriptures very many, as alſo dayly experience doth diuerſly teach the ſame, if wee were diligent to obſerue things accordingly:

wherefore I will bee more briefe héerein, hauing reſpect to time, which ſtealeth faſt away.
                  
                     Adam in Paradiſe tranſgreſſed grieuouſly, as the painfull puniſhment, which we all as yet doe féele, prooueth, if nothing elſe. Though by reaſon of his ſinne, he diſpleaſed God ſore, and ran away from God, (for hée would haue hid himſelfe, yea, hée would haue made GOD the cauſer of his ſinne, in that he gaue him ſuch a mate, ſo farre was he from aſking mercie) yet all this notwithſtanding, God turned his fierce wrath, neither vpon him nor Eue, which alſo required not mercie, but vpon the Serpent Sathan: promiſing vnto them a ſéed, Ieſus Chriſt, by whom they at the length ſhould be deliuered. In tokē whereof, though they were caſt out of Paradiſe for their nurture, to ſerue in ſorrow, which would not ſerue in ioy, yet hee made them apparell to couer their bodies: a viſible Sacrament, and token of his inuiſible loue and grace, concerning their ſoules. If God was ſo mercifull to Adam, which ſo ſore brake his commandement, and rather blamed God, then aſked mercie: troweſt thou, O man, that hee will not bee mercifull to

thée, which blameſt thy ſelfe, and deſireſt pardon?
                  To Cain hee offered mercie, if he would haue aſked it. What haſt thou done, ſayth God? The voyce of thy brothers bloud, crieth vnto me out of the earth. O mercifull Lorde (ſhould Cain haue ſayd) I confeſſe it: But alas, hee did not ſo, and therefore ſayd God: Now, that is, In that thou deſireſt not mercie: Now, I ſay, be thou accurſed &c. Loe, to the Reprobate he offered mercie, and will he deny it thée, which art his Child?
                  
                     Noah, did he not ſinne and was drunke? Good Lot alſo, both in Sodome diſſembled a litle with the Angelles, prolonging the time: and out of Sodome, he fell very foule: as did Iudas, and the Patriarches againſt Ioſeph, but yet I wéene they found mercie. Moſes, Myriam, Aaron, though they ſtumbled a litle, yet receyued they mercie: yea, the people in the wilderneſſe often ſinned and diſpleaſed God, ſo that hee was purpoſed to haue deſtroyed them. Let mee alone (ſayth hee to Moſes) that I may deſtroy them. But Moſes did not let him alone, for he prayed ſtill for them, and therefore God ſpared them. If the people were ſpared

through Moſes prayer, they not praying with him, but rather worſhipping their golden Calfe, eating, drinking, and making 
                        •
                     olly good cheere: why ſhouldeſt thou doubt whether God will be mercifull to thee? hauing, as in deede thou haſt, one much better then Moſes to pray for thee, and with thee, euen Ieſus Chriſt who ſitteth on the right hand of his Father, and prayeth for vs, beeing no leſſe faithfull in his Fathers houſe, the Church, then Moſes was in the Synagogue. Dauid that good King had a foule foyle, when hee committed whoredome with his faithfull ſeruants wife, Bethſabe: whereunto hee added alſo a miſchieuous murther, cauſing her huſband, his moſt faithful Souldier Vrie to bee ſlaine, with an honeſt company of his moſt valiant men of warre, and that with the ſword of the vncircumciſed.
                  In this his ſinne, though a great while he lay aſléepe, (as many doe now a dayes, God giue them good waking) thinking that by the Sacrifices he offered, all was well, God was content: yet at length, when the Prophet by a Parable, had opened the poke, and brought him in remembrance of his owne ſinne, in ſuch ſort, that hee gaue

iudgement againſt himſelfe: then quaked he, his Sacrifices had no more taken away his ſinnes, then our Sir Iohns Trentals, and wagging of his fingers ouer the heads of ſuch as lye aſléepe in their ſinnes (out of the which when they are awaked, they wil well ſée, that it is neyther Maſſe nor Mattins, bleſſing nor curſing will ſerue,) then I ſay, he cryed out, ſaying: Peccaui, Domine: I haue ſinned, ſayth hee, againſt my Lord and good God, which hath done ſo much for mée. I cauſed indéed Vrie to bee killed, I haue ſinned, I haue ſinned. What ſhall I doe? I haue ſinned, and am worthy of eternall damnation. But what ſayth God by his Prophet: Dominus (ſayth he) tranſtuli
                           •
                         peccatum tuum, non morieris: The Lord hath taken away thy ſinnes, thou ſhalt not die.
                      Oh good God, he ſayd, but, Peccaui, I haue ſinned:
                      but yet from his heart, and not from the lippes onely, as Pharao and Saul did, and incontinently hee heareth: Thou ſhalt not die, the Lord hath taken away thy ſinnes: Or rather hath layd them vpon an other, yea, tranſlated them vpon the backe of his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, who bare them, and not onely them, but thine and mine alſo, if that wee will now crie but from our

hearts, Peccauimus: Wee haue ſinned, good Lord, wee haue done wickedly, enter not into iudgement with vs, but bee mercifull vnto vs after thy great mercie, and according to the multitude of thy compaſſions, doe away our iniquities, &c. For indéed, God is not the God of Dauid onely: Idem Deus omnium, He is the God of all: So that, Quicunque inuocauerit nomen Domini, ſaluus erit. He or ſhée, whoſoeuer they bee that call vpon the name of the Lord, ſhal be ſaued. In confirmation whereof, this Hiſtorie is writtē, as are alſo the other which I haue recited, & many mo which I might recite. As of Manaſles the wicked king, which flew Eſai the Prophet, and wrought very much wickedneſſe: yet the Lord ſhewed mercie vpon him béeing in priſon, as his Prayer doth teach vs. Nabuchodonozor, though for a time he bare Gods anger, yet at the length he found mercie. The Citie of Niniue alſo found fauour with God, as did many other, which I will omit for times ſake, and will bring forth one or two out of the new Teſtament, that wee may ſée God to be the ſame God in the new Teſtament, that he was in the old.
                  I might tell you of many, if I ſhould

ſpeake of the Lunatike, ſuch as were poſſeſſed with Deuils, Lame, Blind, Dumbe, Deafe, Lepers, &c. But time will not ſuffer me: one or two therefore ſhall ſerue. Marie Magdalen had ſeuen deuils, but yet they were caſt out of her: and of all others, ſhée was the firſt that Chriſt appeared vnto, after his reſurrection. Thomas would not beléeue Chriſts reſurrection, though many told him, which had ſéene and felt him: by reaſon whereof, a man might haue thought that his ſinnes would haue caſt him away. Except I ſhould ſee and feele (ſaith hee) I will not beleeue. Ah wilfull Thomas: I wil not, ſayth hee. But Chriſt appeared vnto him, and would not léeſe him, as hée will not doe thée, good brother, if that with Thomas thou wilt kéepe company with the Diſciples, as Thomas did. Peters fall was vgly, hée accurſed himſelfe, if euer hée knew Chriſt, and that for feare of a Gyrle, and this not once, but euen thrée diuers times, and that in the hearing of Chriſt his Maſter: but yet the third time Chriſt looked backe, & caſt on him his eye of grace, ſo that hee went out and wept bitterly. And after Chriſts reſurrection, not onely did the Angels will the woman to tell Peter, that

Chriſt was riſen, but Chriſt himſelfe appeared vnto him ſeuerally: ſuch a good Lord is he.
                  The Théefe hanging on the Croſſe, ſayd but this: Lorde, when thou commeſt into thy Kingdome, remember mee: And what anſwere had hee? This day (ſayth Chriſt) ſhalt thou be with me in Paradiſe. What a comfort is this, in that he is now the ſame Chriſt to thée and mee, and to vs all, if wee will runne vnto him? for hee is the ſame Chriſt to day and to morrow, vntill hee come to iudgement. Then indéed, hee will be inexorable: but now is he more ready to giue, then thou to aſke. If thou crie, hee heareth thee, yea before thou crie.
                  Crie therefore, bee bold, man, hee is not partiall.
                        
                           
                              •
                           ai. 31. 
                           
                              •
                           et. 7. Call, ſayth hée, and I will heare thée: Aſke and thou ſhalt haue: Séeke, and thou ſhalt finde: though not at the firſt, yet at the length. If he tarie a while, it is but to trie thee.
                        
                           
                              •
                           b. 10. 
                     Nam veniens veniet, & non tardabit: Hee is comming, and will not be long.
                  
                  Thus haue you foure meanes, which you muſt vſe to the attayning of faith, or certaine perſwaſion of Gods mercie towards you, which is the ſecond part of penance,

namely, prayer, the free and vniuerſall promiſes of Gods graces, the recordation of the benefits of God, paſt and preſent, the examples of Gods mercie. Which although they might ſuffice, yet will I put one more to them, which all onely of it ſelfe, is full ſufficient: I meane, the death of the Sonne of God, Ieſus Chriſt: which if thou ſet before the eyes of thy mind, it will confirme thy placcard: for it is the great Seale of England, as they ſay, yea, of all the world, for the confirmation of all patents and perpetuities of the euerlaſting life, whereunto we are all called.
                  If I thought theſe, which I haue before recited, were not ſufficient to cōfirme your faith, of Gods loue towards ſuch as do repent, I would tarie longer herein. But becauſe I haue béene both long, and alſo I truſt, you haue ſome exerciſe of conſcience in this daily (or els you are too blame) I wil but touch & goe. Conſider with your ſelues what we are, miſers, wretches & enemies to God. Conſider what God is, euen hée, which hath all power, maieſtie, might, glory, riches, &c. perfectly of himſelfe, & needeth nothing, but hath all things. Conſider what Chriſt is: concerning his Godhead, coequal

with his Father, euen hee by whom all things were made, are ruled and gouerned: concerning his manhood, the onely Dearling of his Father, in whom is all his ioy. Now Sir, what a loue is this? that this God which néedeth nothing, would giue wholy his owne ſelfe to thée his enemie, wreaking his wrath vpon him ſelfe, in this his Sonne: as a man may ſay, to ſpare thée, to ſaue thée, to winne thée, to buie thée, to haue thée, to enioy thée for euer. Becauſe thy ſinne hath ſeparated thée from him, to the end thou mighteſt come eftſoones into his company againe, and therein remaine: hee himſelfe became, as a man would ſay, a ſinner, or rather ſinne it ſelfe, euen a malediction or curſe: that wée ſinners, wee accurſed by our ſinne, might by his oblation or offering for our ſinnes, by his curſe, be deliuered from ſinne, and from malediction. For by ſinne, hee deſtroyed ſinne, killing Death, Sathan, and Sinne, by their owne weapons, and that for thée and mee (man) if wee caſt it not away by vnbeleefe. Oh wonderfull loue of God. Who euer heard of ſuch a loue? the Father of Heauen for vs his enemies, to giue his owne deare Sonne, Ieſus Chriſt, and

that not onely to bee our Brother, to dwell among vs, but alſo, to the death of the Croſſe for vs? Oh wonderfull loue of Chriſt to vs all, that was content and willing to worke this feate for vs. Was there any loue like to this loue?
                  God in déede hath commended his charitie and loue to vs heerein, that when wee were very enemies vnto him, hee would giue his owne Sonne for vs. That wee béeing men, might become, as you would ſay, Gods, God would become man. That wee beeing mortall, might become immortall, the immortall God would become mortall man. That we earthly wretches might be Citizens of Heauen, the Lord of Heauen would become, as a man would ſay, earthly. That wee beeing accurſed, might be bleſſed, God would bee accurſed. That wee, by our father Adam, beeing brought out of Paradiſe, into the puddle of all paine, might be redeemed, and brought into Paradiſe againe, God would bee our Father, and an Adam thereunto. That we hauing nothing, might haue all things, God hauing all things, would haue no thing. That wee beeing vaſſailes, and ſlaues to all, euen to Sathan the Fiend.

might be Lords of all, and of Sathan: the Lord of all would become a vaſſaile, and a ſlaue to vs all, and in danger of Sathan. Oh loue incomprehenſible. Who can otherwiſe thinke now, but if the gracious good Lorde diſdayned not to giue his owne Sonne, his owne hearts ioy, for vs his very enemies, before wée thought to begge any ſuch thing at his hands, yea, before we were? who, I ſay, can thinke otherwiſe, but that with him, hee will giue vs all good things? If when we hated him, and fled away from him, he ſent his Sonne to ſéeke vs: who can thinke otherwiſe, then that now wee louing him, and lamenting, becauſe we loue him no more, but that he wil for euer loue vs? He that giueth the more to his enemies, wil not hée giue the leſſe, trow you, to his friends? God hath giuen his owne Sonne, then which thing nothing is greater, to vs his enemies: and wee now béeing become his friends, will he deny vs faith, and pardon of our ſins? which though they bee great, yet in compariſon they are nothing at all. Chriſt Ieſus would giue his owne ſelfe for vs, when wee willed it not: and will he now deny vs faith, if we will it? This will is his earneſt, that hee

hath giuen vs truely to looke indéed, for the thing willed. And looke thou for it in déed: for as he hath giuen thee to will, ſo will he giue thée to doe.
                  Ieſus Chriſt gaue his life for our euils, and by his death he deliuered vs. O then, in that hee liueth now, and can not die, will he forſake vs? His heart bloud was not too deare for vs, when we aſked it not: what can then bee now too deare for vs, aſking it? Is he a changeling? Is he mutable as man is? Can hee repent him of his gifts? Did he not foreſée our falles? Payd not he therefore the price? Becauſe hee ſaw wee ſhould fall ſore, therefore would hee ſuffer ſore. Yea, if his ſuffering had not béene enough, he would yet once more come again. God the Father, I am ſure, if the death of his Sonne incarnate, would not ſerue, would himſelfe and the holy Ghoſt alſo become incarnate and die for vs.
                  This death of Chriſt therefore looke on, as the very pledge of Gods loue towards thée, whoſoeuer thou art, how deepe ſoeuer thou haſt ſinned. See, Gods hands are nayled, they cannot ſtrike thee: his feete alſo, he cannot runne from thee: his armes are wide open to embrace thee: his head hangs

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
downe to kiſſe thee, his very heart is open, ſo that therein ſee, toote, looke, ſpie, peepe, and thou ſhalt ſee nothing therein, but loue, loue, loue, loue to thee: hyde thee therefore, lay thy head there with the Euangeliſt.
                  This is the clift of the Rocke wherein Helias ſtood. This is the pillow of downe for all aking heads.
                  Anoint thy head with this oyle: let this oyntment enbaulme thy head, and waſh thy face.
                  Tarie thou heere, and cocke ſure thou art, I warrant thee. Say with Paul, What can ſeparate me from the loue of God? Can death, can pouertie, ſickeneſſe, hunger or any miſerie, perſwade thee now, that God loueth thee not? Nay, nothing can ſeparate thee from the loue wherewith God hath loued thee in Chriſt Ieſus: whom he loueth, he loueth to the end. So that now where aboundance of ſinne hath beene in thee, the more is the aboundance of grace. But to what end? Forſooth, that as ſinne hath raigned to death, as thou ſéeeſt, to the killing of Gods Sonne: ſo now Grace muſt raigne to Life, to the honouring of Gods Sonne, who is now aliue, and can not die any more.
                  
                     So that they which by faith féele this, cannot any more die to God, but to ſinne, whereto they are dead and buried with Chriſt.
                  As Chriſt therefore liueth, ſo doe they, and that to God, to righteouſneſſe and holineſſe. The life which they liue, is In fide Filii Dei: In the faith of the Sonne of God. Whereby you ſée, that now I am ſlipt into that, which I made the third part of penance, namely, newneſſe of life, which I could not ſo haue done, if that it were a part of it ſelfe indéed, as it is an effect or fruit of the ſecond part, that is, of faith, or truſt in Gods mercie. For he that beléeueth, that is, is certainely perſwaded, ſinne to be ſuch a thing, that it is the cauſe of all miſerie, and of it ſelfe ſo greatly angereth God, that in heauen nor in earth, nothing could appeaſe his wrath, ſaue alonely the death and precious bloodſhedding of the Sonne of GOD, in whom is all the delight and pleaſure of the Father: hee, I ſay, that is perſwaded thus of ſinne, the ſame cannot but in heart abhorre and quake, to doe or ſay, yea, to thinke any thing willingly, which Gods Law teacheth him to bee ſinne.
                  
                     Againe, hee that beléeueth, that is, is certainely perſwaded, Gods loue to bée ſo much towards him, that where through ſinne he was loſt, and made a firebrand of hell, the eternall father of mercy, which is the omni-ſufficient God, & néedeth nothing to vs, or of any thing that we can doe, to deliuer vs out of hell, and to bring vs into heauen, did ſend euen his owne moſt déere Sonne out of his boſome, out of heauen into hell, as a man would ſay, to bring vs, as I ſaid, from thence into his owne boſome and mercie, wee béeing his very enemies: hee, I ſay, that is thus perſwaded of Gods loue towards him, and of the price of his redemption, by the deare bloud of the Lambe immaculate, Ieſus Chriſt, the ſame man cannot but loue God againe, and of loue doe that, and heartily deſire to doe better, the which might pleaſe God.
                  Trow you, that ſuch a one, knowing this geare by faith, will willingly welter and wallow in his wilfull luſts, pleaſures and fantaſies? Will ſuch a one, as knoweth by faith, Chriſt Ieſus to haue giuen his bloud to waſh him from his ſinnes, play the Sow, to welter in his puddle of filthie ſinne and vice againe? Nay, rather then

he will be defiled againe by wilful ſinning, he will waſh often the féet of his affections, watching ouer the vice ſtill ſticking in him, which as a ſpring, continually ſendeth out poyſon enough, to drowne and defile him, if the ſwéete water of Chriſtes paſſion in Gods ſight, did not waſh it, and his bloud ſatiſfie the rigour of Gods iuſtice, due for the ſame.
                  This bloud of Chriſt ſhed for our ſinnes, is ſo deare in the ſight of him that beléeueth, that he will abhorre in his heart, to ſtampe it, and tread it vnder his féete. He knoweth now by his beléefe, that it is too much, that hitherto he hath ſet too little by it, and is aſhamed thereof. Therefore, for the reſidue of his life, hée purpoſeth to take better héed to himſelfe, then before hee did. Becauſe hée ſéeeth by his faith, the grieuouſneſſe of GODS anger, the fouleneſſe of ſinne, the greatneſſe of Gods mercie, and of Chriſts loue towards him, hée will now bee héedie to pray to GOD to giue him his grace accordingly, that as with his eyes, tongue, hands, féet, &c. hée hath diſpleaſed God, doing his owne will: euen ſo now with the ſame eyes, tongue, eares, hands, féete, &c. hee may diſpleaſe

his owne ſelfe, and doe Gods will: Willingly will he not doe that which might renew the death of the Sonne of God. Hée knoweth he hath too much ſinne, vnwillingly in him, ſo that thereto hee will not adde willing offences.
                  This willing and witting offending and ſinning, whoſoeuer doth flatter himſelfe therein, doth euidently demonſtrate and ſhew, that hee neuer yet indéed taſted of Chriſt truely. Hee was neuer truely perſwaded, or beléeued, how foule a thing ſinne is, how grieuous a thing Gods anger is, how ioyfull and precious a thing, Gods mercie in Chriſt is, how excéeding broad, wide, hie and déepe, Chriſts loue is: Perchance he can write, prate, talke, and preach of this geare: but yet he in part by faith, neuer felt this geare.
                  For if hee did once féele this geare indéed, then would he bée ſo farre from continuing in ſinne, willingly and wittingly, that wholy and heartily hee would giue ouer himſelfe to that which is contrary, I meane, anew to life, renewing his youth, euen as the Eagle doth.
                  For as we, béeing in the ſeruitude of ſin, demonſtrate our ſeruice, by giuing ouer our

members to the obeying of ſinne, from iniquitie to iniquitie: euen ſo, we béeing made frée from ſinne, by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, and endued with Gods ſpirit, a ſpirit of libertie, muſt néeds demonſtrate this fréedome and libertie, by giuing ouer our members to the obedience of the ſpirit: by the which we are lead and guided from vertue to vertue, and all kind of holines. As the vnbeléeuers declare their vnbeléefe, by the woorking of the euill ſpirit in them, outwardly the fruits of the fleſh: euen ſo the beléeuers declare their faith, by the working of Gods good ſpirit in them outwardly the fruits of the ſpirit. For as the Deuill is not dead in thoſe which are his, but worketh ſtill to their damnation: ſo is not God dead in them which bee his, but worketh ſtill to their ſaluation. The which working is not the cauſe of the one or the other béeing in any, but onely a demonſtration, a ſigne, a fruit of the ſame: As the Apple is not the cauſe of the Apple tree, but a fruit of it.
                  Thus then you ſée briefly, that newnes of life, is not in déed a part of penance, but a fruit of it, a demonſtration of the iuſtifying faith, a ſigne of Gods good ſpirit poſſeſſing

the heart of the penitent: as the old life is a fruite of impenitencie, a demonſtration of a lip-faith, or vnbeliefe, a ſigne of Sathans ſpirit, poſſeſſing the heart of the impenitent, which all thoſe be, that bee not penitent.
                  For meane I know none: He that is not penitent, the ſame is impenitent: hee that is not gouerned by Gods ſpirit, the ſame is gouerned by Sathans ſpirit. For all that bée Chriſtians, are gouerned with the ſpirit of Chriſt, which ſpirit hath his fruits. All other that bee not Chriſts, are the Deuils. Hee that gathereth not with Chriſt, ſcattereth abroad.
                  Therefore, dearely beloued, I beſéech you to conſider this geare, and deceyue not your ſelues. If you bee not Chriſts, then pertayne you to the Deuill: of which thing the fruits of the fleſh doth aſſure you, as whoredome, adulterie, vncleanneſſe, wantonneſſe, Idolatry, witchcraft, enuy, ſtrife, contention, wrath, ſedition, murther, drunkenneſſe, gluttony, blaſphemy, ſlothfulneſſe, idleneſſe, bawdy talking, ſlaundering, &c. If theſe Apples grow out of the Apple trées of your hearts, ſurely, ſurely, the Deuill is at Inne with you, you are his

birds: whom when he hath well fed, he wil broache you and eate you, chaw you and champe you, world without end, in eternall woe and miſerie. But I am otherwiſe perſwaded of you all. I truſt you bee all Chriſt Ieſus his people and children, yea, brethren, and by faith.
                  As ye ſee your ſinnes in Gods Law, and tremble, ſigh, ſorrow and ſob for the ſame: euen ſo you ſée his great mercies in his Goſpell and frée promiſes, and therefore are glad, merrie and ioyfull, for that you are accepted into Gods fauour, haue your ſins pardoned, and are endued with the good ſpirit of God, euen the ſeale and ſigne Manuel of your election in Chriſt before the beginning of the world.
                  The which ſpirit, for that he is the ſpirit of life, giuen to you, to worke in you, with you, and by you héere in this life, ſatiſfaction and holineſſe, whereunto you are called, that yée might be holy, euen as your heauenly Father is holy: I beſéech you all by admonition and warning of you, that you would ſtirre vp the gifts of God, giuen to you generally and particularly, to the edifying of his Church: that is, I pray you, that you would not moleſt the good

ſpirit of God, by rebelling againſt it, when it prouoketh and calleth you to goe on forwards, that the which is holy, might yet be more holy, hee which is righteous, might bee more righteous, as the euill ſpirit moueth and ſtirreth vp the filthy to be yet more filthy, the couetous, to be more couetous, the wicked, to be more wicked.
                  Declare you now your repentance, by works of repentance. Bring forth fruits, and worthy fruits.
                  Let your ſorrowing for your euils, demonſtrate it ſelfe, departing from the euils you haue vſed.
                  Let your certaintie of pardon of your ſinnes through Chriſt, and your ioy in him bee demonſtrated, by purſuing of the good things which Gods word teacheth you. You are now in Chriſt Ieſus, Gods workmanſhip, to doe good works which God hath prepared for you to walke in.
                  For the grace of God that bringeth ſaluation vnto all men, hath appeared, and teacheth vs, that wee ſhould deny vngodlineſſe and worldly luſts, and that we ſhould liue ſoberly, righteouſly, and godly in this preſent world, looking for that bleſſed hope and glorious appearing of the mighty God,

and of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, which gaue himſelfe for vs, to redéeme vs from al vnrighteouſneſſe, and to purge vs a peculiar people vnto himſelfe, feruently giuen vnto good works.
                  Againe, Titus 3. For we ourſelues alſo were in times paſt vnwiſe, diſobedient, deceiued, ſeruing luſts, and diuers pleaſures, liuing in maliciouſneſſe and enuy, full of hate, and hating one another. But after that the kindneſſe and loue of God our Sauiour to manward appeared, not by the déeds of righteouſneſſe which wee wrought, but of his mercie he ſaued vs by the fountaine of the new birth, and with the renewing of the holy Ghoſt, which he ſhedde on vs aboundantly through Ieſus Chriſt our ſauiour, yt wee once iuſtified by his grace, ſhould be heires of eternall life through hope. This is a true ſaying. But I will make an end, for I am too tedious.
                  Dearely beloued, repent your ſinnes, that is, be ſorie for that which is paſt, beléeue in Gods mercie for pardon, how déepely ſoeuer you haue ſinned, and both purpoſe and earneſtly peruſe a new life, bringing forth worthy and true fruits of repentance. As you haue giuen ouer your

members from ſinne to ſinne, to ſerue the Deuill, your tongues to ſweare, to lie, to flatter, to ſcold, to ieſt, to ſcoffe, to baudie talke, to vaine iangling, to boaſting, &c. Your hands to picking, groping, idleneſſe, fighting, &c. Your féete to ſkipping, going to euill, to dancing, &c. Your eares to heare fables, lyes, vanities, and euill things, &c. So now, giue ouer your members to godlineſſe, your tongues to ſpeake, your eares to heare, your eyes to ſée, your mouthes to taſte, your hands to worke, your féete to go about ſuch things as may make to Gods glory, ſobrietie of life, and loue to your brethren, and that dayly more and more, diligently: for in a ſtay to ſtand you cannot, eyther better or worſe you are to day, then you were yeſterday. But better I truſt you bee, and will be, if you marke well my Theame, that is, Repent you. The which thing that you would doe, as before I haue humbly beſought you: euen ſo now yet once more I doe againe beſeech you, and that for the mercies of God in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord: Repent you, repent you, for the kingdome of heauen (that is, a kingdome full of all riches, pleaſures, mirth, beautie, ſwéetneſſe, and eternall felicitie) is at hand.
                     
The eye hath not ſéene the like, the eare hath not heard the like, the heart of man cannot conceyue the treaſures and pleaſures of this kingdome, which now is at hand to ſuch as repent, that is, to ſuch as are ſorie for their ſinnes, beléeue Gods mercie through Chriſt, and earneſtly purpoſe to leade a new life. The God of mercie, through Chriſt his Sonne, graunt vs his holy ſpirit, and woorke in our hearts this ſorrow, faith, and new life, which through his grace I haue ſpoken of, both now and for euer. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  An other Sermon, made alſo by the ſaid maſter Iohn Bradford, vpon the Lords Supper.
                  
                  
                     
                        THere are two Sacraments in Chriſtes Church:Two Sacraments in Chriſts Church. the one of imitation, that is, wherewith we be inrolled, as it were, in the houſhold and familie of God, which Sacrament, we call Baptiſme: the other, wherewith we be conſerued, fed, kept and nouriſhed, to continue in the ſame familie, which is called the Lords Supper, or the body and bloud of our Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, broken for our ſinnes, and ſhed for our tranſgreſſions.
                  Of the former Sacrament, that is, of Baptiſme, to ſpeake now I am not purpoſed, becauſe occaſion and time ſerue not ſo thereto. Of the ſecond therefore,Baptiſm is in place of Circumciſion. Chriſtian mens children ought to be baptized. will I ſpeake ſomething by Gods grace, if that firſt you remember this, that Baptiſme in Chriſts Church, now, ſithens Chriſts death, is come in place of Circumciſion, which was in the ſame Church afore Chriſts comming. Whereby wee may ſée, that Chriſtian Parents ſéeme to bee no

leſſe bound to offer their Infants & Babes to be baptized, that they may be taken and accounted of vs, as members of Chriſts myſticall body, whereunto they are receiued and ſealed:
                        Gal. 4. then were the Hebrues their children to bee taken as pertayning to the couenant and league with God, wherewith they were inrolled, alonely the circumſtance of the eight day, not neceſſarie to be obſerued, béeing now abrogated.
                  But to come againe, of the Lords Supper, I am purpoſed preſently to ſpeake, through the helpe of God, becauſe wee are aſſembled in Chriſt (I hope) to celebrate the ſame.
                  Now, that the things which I ſhall ſpeake, may bee better obſerued, and caried away of you, I will tell you how, and in what ſort I will ſpeake of it. Thrée things would I haue marked, as the principals and ſcopes, whereto I wil referre all that I ſhall at this time ſpeake thereof. They be theſe: Who, what, and wherefore. That is, (to make it more plaine) Who did inſtitute this thing which we are about to celebrate, this is the firſt.
                  The ſecond is, What the thing is, which is inſtituted.
                  
                     And the laſt is, Wherefore, and to what end it was inſtituted: whereby we ſhall be taught how to vſe it.
                  For the firſt, Who did inſtitute this Sacrament and Supper. You all doe know,Who did inſtitute this Sacrament. that things are more eſtéemed ſometime for the dignitie and authoritie of the perſon, ſometime for the wiſedome of the perſon, ſometime for the power and magnificence of the perſon, and ſometime for the tender loue and kindneſſe of the perſon. If néed were, I could by examples ſet forth euery one of theſe, but I hope it is not neceſſary. Now then, how can the thing which wée bée about to celebrate, but bée eſtéemed of euery one highly, in that the Author of it doth want no dignitie, no authoritie, no wiſdome, no power, no magnificence, no holineſſe, no tender loue and kindneſſe? but hath all dignitie, authoritie, wiſedome, power, magnificence, holines, tender loue, mercie, glory, and all that can be wiſhed abſolutely.
                  Hee is GOD eternall, coequall, and ſubſtantiall, with the Father, and with the holy Ghoſt, the Image of the ſubſtance of GOD, the wiſedome of the Father, the brightneſſe of his glorie,

by whome all things were made, are ruled and gouerned. He is the King of all Kings, and the Lord of all Lords. He is the Meſsias of the world, our moſt deare and louing brother, Sauiour, Mediatour, Aduocate, Interceſſour, Huſband, Prieſt. So that the thing which commeth from him, cannot but bee eſtéemed, loued, and embraced, if dignitie, authoritie, wiſdome, power, glory, goodnes, and mercie like vs. Yea, if any thing that can bee wiſhed, like vs, then cannot this which our Lord did inſtitute, but like vs, and that ſo much the more, by how much it is one of the laſt things which hee did inſtitute & command. God open our eyes, to ſée theſe things accordingly: ſo ſhall we come with more reuerence to this Table of the Lord: which thing hee graunt for his mercies ſake. Amen.
                  And thus much for the firſt, who did inſtitute this Sacrament.
                  
                      Nowe to the ſecond, What the Sacrament is.What the Sacrament 
                           •
                        s. If we ſhall aſke our eyes, our noſe, our mouth, our taſte, our hands, and the reaſon of man: they will all make a conſonant anſwere, that it is bread and wine. And verely, héerein they ſpeake

the trueth and lye not, as by many things may bee proued, although the papiſts prate their pleaſure to the contrary.
                  And here, my dearely beloued, I thinke I ſhall not bee either tedious or vnprofitable vnto you, if that I tary a litle in ſhewing this veritie, that the ſubſtaunce of bread and wine remaine in the Sacrament, after the wordes of conſecration (as they call them) be ſpoken. Whereby we may learne howe ſhameleſſe beaſtes they bee,Vpon tranſubſtantiation, all poperie almoſt i
                           •
                         builded. which would enforce men to beleeue Tranſubſtantiation, which is an errour, whereupon in a manner dependeth all Poperie. For it is the ſtay of their Prieſthood, which is neither after the order of Aaron, nor after ye order of Melchiſedech: but after the order of Baal, which thing is ſomething ſéene by their number. For the falſe Prophets and Prieſtes of Baal were alwaies many moe in number, when the wicked were in authoritie, then the true Prieſts and Prophets of the Lorde, as the holy Hyſtories of the Bible doe teach. Reade the third of the Kings, the 18. Chap.
                  That in the Supper of the Lorde,The Sacrament of the popiſh Maſſe not the Sacrament of Chriſts body. or in the Sacrament of Chriſtes body (which

the Papiſts call the Sacrament of the Altar) as though that were Chriſts Sacrament, which thing they can neuer prooue: For it béeing peruerted, and vſed to a contrary end, as of ſacrificing propitiatorily, for the ſinnes of the quicke and of the dead, of Idolatrie, by adoring or worſhipping it by godly honour, &c. is no more Chriſts Sacrament, but an horrible prophanation of it, and therefore as Chriſt called Gods Temple, which was called an houſe of prayer, for the abuſing and prophaning of it by the Prieſts, a denne of Théeues: ſo this which the Papiſts call the Sacrament of the Altar, full truely may wee call an abominable Idoll: And therefore I would all men ſhould know that the Sacrament of the Altar, as the Papiſts now doe abuſe it, omitting certayne ſubſtantial points of the Lords inſtitution, and putting in the ſtead thereof their owne dregs & dreames, is not the Sacrament of Chriſts body, nor the Lords Supper: whereof when wee ſpeake reuerently, as our duetie is wée would not that men ſhould thinke wee ſpeake it of the popiſh Maſſe: (that I ſay) in the Supper of the Lord, or in the Sacrament of Chriſts body, there remaineth the

ſubſtance of bread and Wine, as our ſenſes and reaſons doe teach, theſe many things alſo doe teach the ſame.
                  Firſt,The firſ
                           •
                         reaſon againſt Tranſſubſtantiation. the holy Ghoſt doth plainely tell vs, by calling it often bread, after the words of Conſecration, as 1. Corinthians 10. Is not the bread which we breake, a partaking of the body of Chriſt, ſayth Paul?
                  Loe, plainely he ſaith: The bread which we breake, Not onely calling it bread, but adding thereto breaking, which cannot be attributed, eyther to Chriſts body, whereof no bone was broken, eyther to any accident, but muſt needs bee of a ſubſtance, which ſubſtance if it bee not Chriſts body, cannot be but bread.
                  As in the 11. Chapter, foure times hee plainely calleth it: Hee that eateth of this bread: Hee that receiueth this bread, &c. And in the Acts of the Apoſtles we reade, how that (in ſpeaking of the Communion) They mette together to breake bread, &c. So that it is plaine, that the ſubſtance of Bread and Wine doe remayne in the Supper, after the woords of Conſecration: As alſo may appeare plainely by Chriſts owne words, which

calleth that which hée gaue them in the cuppe, Wine, or the fruite of the Vine, as both Matthew & Marke doe write. Whereby we ſée that there is no Tranſſubſtantiation of the Wine: and therefore may we alſo ſée, that there is no Tranſſubſtantiation of the bread.
                  
                     An aunſwere to the Papiſts ca
                        
                           •
                        ill for 
                           •
                        he foreſaid reaſon. Mat. 26 Exod. 7.As for the Papiſts cauilling, howe that it hath the name of bread, becauſe it was bread: as Simon the Leper, was called ſtill Leprous, though he was healed: or as Moſes Rod, being turned into a Serpent, was called a Rodde ſtill, it prooueth nothing. For there was in the one a plaine ſight, and the ſenſes certified that Simon was no Leper: and in the other plaine mention, that the Rod was turned into a Serpent. But concerning the Sacrament, neyther the ſenſes ſée any other thing then bread, neyther is there any mention made of turning. And therefore their cauill is plainly ſéene to be but a cauill,The ſecōd reaſon againſt Tranſſubſtantiation. and of no force. But to come againe, to bring moe reaſons againſt Tranſſubſtantiation.
                  Secondly, that the ſubſtance of bread remayneth ſtill, the very text doeth teach. For the Euangeliſts, and the Apoſtle

Saint Paul doe witneſſe,
                        Mat. 26 Mar. 14 Luke 22 1. Cor. 11 that Chriſt gaue that to his diſciples, and called it his body which hee tooke, on which hee gaue thanks, and which hee brake: but he tooke bread, gaue thanks on bread, and broke bread, Ergo, he gaue bread, and called bread his body, as he called the Cuppe, the new Teſtament.
                  So that it followeth by this, that there is no Tranſubſtantiation. And this reaſon I my ſelfe haue promiſed in writing, to prooue by the authoritie of the Fathers, namely, Ireneus. Tertullian, Origine, Ciprian, Epiphanius, Hieronimus, Auguſtinus, Theodorete, Cirill, Bede, if ſo bee I may haue the vſe of my bookes.
                  Thirdly, that in the Sacrament, there is no Tranſubſtantiation of the bread,The third reaſon againſt Tranſſubſtantiation 1. Cor. 1
                           •
                        
                      by this reaſon I doe prooue: Like as by our ſauiour Chriſt, the Spirit of trueth ſpake of the bread, This is my body: So ſayth the ſame ſpirit of trueth, of the ſame bread, That wee many, are one body, and one bread, &c.
                  
                  So that as it appeareth, the Sacrament not to bee in the Church, by Tranſubſtantiation, euen ſo is it not Chriſts naturall body, by Tranſubſtantiation.
                  
                     
                     The fourth reaſon 
                           •
                        gainſt 
                           •
                        ranſub
                        
                           •
                        tanti
                        
                           •
                        tion.Fourthly, I prooue that there is no Tranſſubſtantiation by Luke and Pauls wordes, ſpoken ouer the Cuppe. For no leſſe are they effectuall to Tranſſubſtantiate the Cup: then their words ſpoken of the bread, are operatorious and mighty to Tranſſubſtantiate the bread. For as they ſay of the bread, This is my body, ſo ſay they of the Cup, This Cup is the new Teſtament: Which thing is abſurde to bee ſpoken or thought, eyther of the Cup, or of the thing in the Cup by Tranſſubſtantiation. Yea, rather in ſaying theſe wordes, This Cup is the new Teſtament: wee are taught by their coupling this worde, Cup, to the demonſtratiue, This, how we ſhould in theſe wordes, This is my body, knowe that this word, This, doeth there demonſtrate bread.
                  
                     The fift reaſon.Fiftly, that the ſubſtance of bread remaineth in the Sacrament, as the reaſons before brought foorth do prooue, ſo doth the definition of a Sacrament. For the Fathers doe affirme it,Ireneus. Auguſtinus. Chriſoſtomus. to conſiſt of an earthly thing, and of an heauenly thing, of the word, and of the element, of ſenſible things, and of things which bee perceiued by the minde. But Trāſſubſtantiation taketh

cleane away ye earthly thing, the element, the ſenſible thing, and ſo maketh it no Sacrament. And therefore the definition of a Sacrament full well teatheth, that bread which is the earthly thing, the ſenſible thing, and the element remaineth ſtill, as ſaint Auguſtine ſaith: The worde commeth to the element, (he ſayth not, taketh away the element,) and ſo it is made a Sacrament.
                  Sixtly, the nature,The ſixt reaſon againſt Tranſſubſtantiation. Cyprian in Sermone de Chriſmat. Auguſtinus a Bonifacium.
                      and propertie of a Sacrament, teacheth this alſo which I haue affirmed. For as Cyprian writeth, that Sacraments beare the names of the things which they ſignifie: ſo doeth ſaint Auguſtine teach, that if Sacraments haue not ſome ſignification with the things where of they be Sacramentes, then are they no Sacraments.
                  Now, in the Lordes ſupper this ſimilitude is firſt in nouriſhing, yt as bread nouriſheth the body: ſo Chriſts body broken, feedeth the ſoule, Secondly, in bringing together many into one, that as in ye Sacrament, many graines of Corne are made one bread: many Grapes are made one lyquour and Wine: ſo the multitude which worthily receiue the Sacrament,

are made one body with Chriſt and his Church. Laſt of all, in one vnlikely likelineſſe or ſimilitude, that as bread eaten, turneth into our nature: ſo we rightly, eating the Sacrament by faith, turne into the nature of Chriſt.
                  So that it is plaine to them that wil ſée, that to take the ſubſtance of bread away, is cleane againſt the nature and propertie of a Sacrament.
                  I will ſpeake nothing how that this their doctrine of Tranſubſtantiation, beſide the manifold abſurdities it hath in it, (which to rehearſe I omit) it vtterly ouerthroweth the vſe of the Sacrament, and is cleane cōtrary to the end wherefore it was inſtituted, & ſo is no longer a Sacrament, but an Idoll, and is the cauſe of much Idolatrie, conuerting the peoples hearts from an heauenly conuerſation, to an earthly, and turning the Communion, into a priuate action, and a matter of gazing and piping, of adoring and worſhipping the worke of mens hands, for the liuing God, which dwelleth not in Temples made with mens hands, much leſſe, lyeth he in Pixes and Cheſts, whoſe true worſhippe is in ſpirit and veritie, which God graunt

vs all to render vnto him continually. Amen.
                  The Sacrament of Baptiſme doth alſo teach vs,The ſeuenth reaſon againſt tranſubſtantiation. that as the ſubſtance of the water remaineth there: ſo in the Lords Supper, remaineth the ſubſtance of bread after conſecration. For as by Baptiſme we are engraffed into Chriſt, ſo by the Supper we are fedde with Chriſt. Theſe two Sacraments, the Apoſtle gladly coupleth together, 1. Cor. 10. and 1. Cor. 12. Wee are baptized into one body (ſayth hee) and haue drunke all of one ſpirit: meaning it by the Cuppe, as Chryſoſtome and other great learned men doe well interprete it. As therefore in Baptiſme is giuen vnto vs the holy Ghoſt, and pardon of our ſinnes, which yet lie not lurking in the water: ſo in the Lords Supper, is giuen vnto vs the Communion of Chriſts bodie and bloud, that is, grace, forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, innocencie, life, immortalitie, without any Tranſubſtantiation, or including of the ſame in the bread. By Baptiſme,
                        Gal. 3. the old man is put off, and the new man put on, yea, Chriſt is put on, but without Tranſubſtantiating the water. And euen ſo it is in the Lords Supper. Wee by fayth ſpiritually

in our ſoules doe féed on Chriſts body broken, do eate his fleſh and drinke his blood: doe dwell in him, and he in vs, but without Tranſſubſtantiation.
                  
                     An anſwer to the Papiſts cauill for the foreſaid reaſon.As for the cauill they make, that we are baptized into one body, meaning thereby the myſticall body, & not the naturall body of Chriſt, whereby they would enforce that wee are fed with the naturall body of Chriſt, but wée are not ingraffed into it, but into the myſticall body, and ſo put away the reaſon aforeſaid. As for this cauill, I ſay, wee may ſoone auoyde it, if ſo bee that we will conſider how that Chriſt, which is the head of the myſticall body, is not ſeparate from the body, and therefore to be ingraffed to the myſticall body, is to bée ingraffed into the naturall bodie of Chriſt, to bée a member of his fleſh, and bones of his bones: as Pope Leo full wel doeth witneſſe, in ſaying, that Corpus regenerati fit caro crucifixi: The body (ſayth hée) of the regenerate, is made the fleſh of Chriſt crucified. And héereto I could adde ſome reaſons for ye excellency of Baptiſme. I tro
                        •
                     e it bée more to bee gotten, then to be nouriſhed. As for the excellent miracle of the patefaction of the Trinitie, and the

deſcending of the holy Ghoſt in Baptiſme in 
                        •
                     viſible forme, the like whereto was not ſeene in the Lordes Supper: I will omitte to ſpeake of 
                        •
                     urther, then that I would you ſhould knowe howe it were no maſtery, to ſet foorth the excellencie of this Sacrament, as well as of the Supper.
                  It is a plaine ſigne of Antichriſt,The eight reaſon. to deny the ſubſtance of bread and wine to bée in the Lordes Supper after conſecration: For in ſo dooing and graunting Tranſſubſtantiation, the propertie of the humane nature of Chriſt is denied. For it is not of the humane nature, but of the diuine nature, to bée in many places at once As Didymus, De ſpiritu ſancto, doeth prooue thereby the diuinitie of the holy Ghoſt.
                  Now grant Tranſſubſtantiation, and then Chriſtes naturall body muſt needes bee in many places, which is nothing elſe but to confound the two natures in Chriſt, or to deny Chriſts humane nature, which is the ſelfe ſame that Saint Iohn ſaith, to deny Chriſt to be come in the fleſh. And this who ſo doeth, by the teſtimonie of Saint Iohn, is an Antichriſt in his ſo doing, whatſoeuer otherwiſe he doe prate.

Reade Saint Auguſtine in his Epiſtle to Dardanus, and his 50. and 30. Treatiſe vpon Saint Iohn, and eaſily you ſhall ſée how that Chriſts body muſt néeds bee in one place. Oportet in vno loco eſſe: But his trueth is in all places.
                  
                     The ninth reaſon.If there bee no ſubſtance of bread in the Sacrament, but Tranſubſtantiation, then Chriſts bodie is receyued of the vngodly, and eaten with their téeth, which is not onely againſt S. Auguſtine (calling this ſpéech, Except you eate the fleſh of the ſonne of man, &c. A figuratiue ſpéech:) but alſo againſt the plaine Scriptures, which affirme them to dwell in Chriſt, and Chriſt in them, and they to haue euerlaſting life that eate him, which the wicked haue not, although they eate the Sacrament. Hee that eateth of this bread, (ſayth Chriſt) ſhall liue for euermore. Therefore they eate not Chriſts bodie, but (as Paul ſaith) they eate in iudgement and damnation, which I trow be an other manner of thing then Chriſts body.
                  And this doth ſaint Auguſtine affirme, ſaying: None do eat Chriſts body, which is not in the body of Chriſt, that is, (as he expoūdeth it) in whō Chriſt dwelleth not, & he

in Chriſt. Which thing the wicked doe not, becauſe they want faith and the holy Spirite, which be the meanes whereby Chriſt is receiued.
                  To the things which I haue brought héerefoorth, to improue Tranſubſtantiation, I could bring in the Fathers to confirme the ſame, which ſucceeded continually many hundreth yéeres after Chriſt. Alſo I could ſhew that Tranſubſtantiation is but a newe doctrine, not eſtabliſhed, before Sathan (which was tyed for a thouſand yéeres) was letten looſe. Alſo I could ſhewe, that euer hitherto, ſince it was eſtabliſhed, in all times it hath bene reſiſted and ſpoken againſt. Yea, before this doctrine, the Church was nothing ſo endowed with goods, landes, and poſſeſſions, as it hath béene ſince. It hath brought no ſmall gaine, no ſmall honour, no ſmall eaſe to the Cleargie: and therefore no maruaile though they ſtriue and fight for it.
                  It is their Maozim, it is their Helena. GOD deſtroy it with the breath of his mouth, as ſhortly he will for his names ſake. Amen.
                  If time would ſerue, I could and would heere tell you of the abſurdities which

come by this doctrine: but for times ſake I muſt omit it. Onely for Gods ſake ſee this, that this their doctrine of Tranſſubſtantiation is an vntrueth, already I haue proued, and forget not, that it is the whole ſtay of all Poperie, and the pillar of their Prieſthood: whereby Chriſts Prieſthood, Sacrifice, Miniſterie, & Trueth is letted, yea, peruerted, and vtterly ouerthrowne.
                  GOD our Father, in the blood of his Sonne Chriſt, open the eyes and minds of all our Magiſtrates, all other that beare the name of Chriſt, to ſée to it in time, to GODS glory, and their owne ſaluation. Amen.
                  Now to returne to the ſecond matter, what the Sacrament is, you ſée that to the ſenſes and reaſon of man, it is bread and wine: Which is moſt true, as by the ſcriptures, and otherwiſe I haue already proued: and therefore away with Tranſſubſtantiation.
                  But héere, leaſt wee ſhould make it no Sacrament, for a Sacrament conſiſteth of two things: and leaſt a man ſhould by this gather, that wee make it none other thing but bare bread, and a naked ſigne, and ſo rayle at their pleaſure on vs, ſaying, How

can a man be guiltie of the body and blood of Chriſt, by vnworthy receiuing of it, if it be but bare bread, & ſo forth? For this purpoſe I will now ſpeake a litle more héereabout, by GODS grace, to ſtoppe their mouthes, and to ſtirre vp your good hearts, more to the worthy eſtimation and perception of this holy myſterie.
                  When a louing friend giueth to thée a thing, or ſendeth to thee a token (as for an example, a napkin, or ſuch like) I thinke thou doeſt not as thou ſhouldeſt do, if that with the thing thou conſidereſt not the mind of thy friend that ſendeth or giueth the thing, and according thereunto eſtéemeſt and receyueſt it.
                  And ſo of this bread thinke I, that if thou doe not rather conſider the mind of thy louer Chriſt, then the thing which thou ſéeeſt: yea, if thou doe not altogether conſider Chriſts mind, thou dealeſt vnhoneſtly, and ſtrumpetlike with him. For it is the propertie of ſtrumpets, to conſider the things giuen and ſent them, rather then the loue and mind of the giue
                        •
                      & ſender: whereas the true louers doe not conſider in any poynt, the things giuen or ſent, but the mind of the partie.
                  
                     So wee, if we bee true louers of Chriſt, muſt not conſider barely the outwarde thing which we ſee, and our ſenſes perceiue, but rather altogether we muſt and ſhould ſée & conſider the minde of Chriſt, and héereafter and accordingly to it to eſtéeme the Sacrament.
                  But how ſhall we know the minde of Chriſt? Forſooth, as a mans minde is beſt knowen by his word: ſo by Chriſts worde ſhall we know his minde.
                  Now his words bee manifeſt, and moſt plaine: This (ſaith he) is my body: therefore accordingly ſhould we eſtéeme, take, and receiue it. If he had ſpoken nothing, or if he had ſpoken doubtfully, then might we haue béene in ſome doubt. But in that he ſpeaketh ſo plainely, ſaying, This is my body: who can, may, or dare be ſo bolde as to doubt of it? He is the trueth and can not lye, hee is omnipotent and can doe all things: therefore it is his body. This I beleeue, this I confeſſe, and pray you all heartily to beware of theſe and ſuch like wordes, that it is but a ſigne or a figure of his body: Except yee will diſcerne betwixt ſignes which ſignifie onely, and ſignes which alſo doe repreſent,

confirme and ſeale vp (or as a man may ſay) giue with their ſignification. As for an example: An Iuie buſh, is a ſigne of Wine to be ſold: the budding of Aarons Rod, did ſignifie Aarons Prieſthood, allowed of the Lord: the reſeruation of Moſes Rod, did ſignifie the rebellion of the children of Iſrael: the ſtones taken out of Iordane, Gedeons fléece of wooll, &c. Such as theſe, be ſignes ſignificatiue, and ſhew no gift. But in the other ſignes, which ſome call exhibitiue, is there not onely a ſignification of the thing, but alſo a declaration of a gift, yea, in a certaine manner, a giuing alſo: As Baptiſme ſignifieth not onely the cleanſing of the conſcience from ſinne, by the merits of Chriſts blood, but alſo is a very cleanſing from ſinne. And therefore it was ſayd to Paul, that he ſhould ariſe and waſh away his ſinnes, and not that hee ſhould ariſe and take onely a ſigne of waſhing away his ſinnes. In the Lords Supper, the bread is called a partaking of the Lords body, and not onely a bare ſigne of the Lords body.
                  This I ſpeake not, as though the elements of theſe Sacraments (were Tranſſubſtantiate) which I haue already impugned

eyther, as though Chriſts body were in bread or wine, eyther were tyed to the elements, otherwiſe then Sacramentally, and ſpiritually, eyther that the bread and wine may not, and muſt not bee called Sacramentall, and externall ſignes: but that they might be diſcerned from ſignificatiue and bare ſignes onely, and bee taken for ſignes exhibitiue, and repreſentiue. By this meanes a Chriſtian conſcience will call and eſtéeme the bread of the Lord, as the body of Chriſt. For it will neuer eſtéeme the Sacraments of Chriſt after their exterior appearance, but after the words of Chriſt.
                  Whereof it commeth, that the Fathers, as Chryſoſtome and others doe ſpeake with ſo full a mouth, when they ſpeake of the Sacrament: for their reſpect was to Chriſts words. If the Schoolemen which followed, had the ſame ſpirit which they had, then would they neuer haue conſented to Tranſſubſtantiation. For with great admiration ſome of the Fathers doe ſay, that the bread is changed or turned into the body of Chriſt, and the wine into his blood: meaning it of a mutation or change,

not corporall, but ſpirituall, figuratiue, Sacramentall, or myſtical. For now it is no common bread, nor common wine, béeing ordained to ſerue for the foode of the ſoule. The Schoolemen haue vnderſtood it, as the Papiſts now preach of a ſubſtantiall changing, as though it were no great miracle, that common bread ſhould now bee aſſumed into that dignitie, that it ſhould be called Chriſts body, and ſerue for a celeſtiall foode, and be made a Sacrament of his body and blood.
                  As before therefore I haue ſpoken,Chriſts preſence i
                           •
                         the S
                           •
                        pper. I would wiſh that this Sacrament ſhould be eſtéemed & called of vs Chriſtian men, after Chriſts words, namely, Chriſts body, and the wine Chriſts blood, rather then otherwiſe. Not that I meane any other preſence of Chriſts body, then a preſence of grace, a preſeruer to Faith, a preſence ſpiritually, and not corporally, really, naturally, and carnally, as the Papiſts doe meane. For in ſuch ſort Chriſts body is onely in heauen, on the right hand of God the Father almightie, whither our faith in the vſe of the Sacrament, aſcendeth and receyueth whole Chriſt accordingly.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        n ob
                        
                           •
                        ction.Yea, but one will ſay, that to call the Sacrament on that ſort, is to giue an occaſion of Idolatrie to the people, which will take the Sacrament which they ſee, ſimply for Chriſts bodie, as by experience wée are well taught: and therefore it were better to call it bread, and ſo leſſe harme ſhould be, eſpecially in this age.
                  
                     An an
                        
                           •
                        were.To this obiection I anſwer, that indéed great Idolatrie is committed to, and about this Sacrament, and therefore men ought, as much as they can, to auoyd from occaſioning or confirming it.
                  But in as much as the holy Ghoſt is wiſer then man, and had foreſight of the euils that might bee, and yet notwithſtanding, doth call it Chriſts bodie: I thinke wee ſhould doe euill, if we ſhould take vpon vs to reforme his ſpéech.
                  If Miniſters did their dueties in Catechizing and Preaching, then doubtleſſe, to call the Sacrament Chriſts body, and to eſtéeme it accordingly, could not giue occaſion to Idolatrie, and confirme it.
                  Therefore woe vnto them that preach not.
                  There bee two euils about the Sacraments,

which to auoyde, the holy Ghoſt hath taught vs For leaſt we ſhould with the Papiſtes, thinke Chriſtes body preſent in, or with the bread really, naturally, and corporally to be receiued with our bodily mouth (where there is no other preſence of Chriſtes body then ſpirituall, and to the faith) in many places he kéepeth ſtill the name of bread, as in the Epiſtle to the Corinthians, the tenth and eleuenth Chapters. And leaſt we ſhould make too light of it, making it but a bare ſigne, and no better then common bread, the holy Ghoſt calleth it Chriſtes body, whoſe ſpéech I wiſh we would followe, and that not onely as well to auoyde the euill which is now a dayes moſt to be feared, concerning the Sacrament, I meane, of contemning it, as alſo for that no faithfull man commeth to the Sacrament to receiue bread ſimply, but rather, yea, altogether to communicate with Chriſtes body and blood. For elſe to eate and drinke (as Paul ſaith) they haue houſes of their owne.
                  The contempt of the Sacrament, in the dayes of King Edward, hath cauſed theſe plagues vpon vs preſently, the Lorde bee

mercifull vnto vs. Amen. And thus much for the obiection, of calling the Sacrament by the name of Chriſtes body.
                  
                     Ano
                        
                           •
                        her ob
                        
                           •
                        ection of Chriſts preſence in the Sacrament.What (ſaith one?) to cal the Sacrament Chriſts body, and to make none other preſence then by grace, or ſpiritually to faith, which is of things hoped for, and of things which to the bodily ſences doe not appeare, is to make no preſence at all, or to make him none otherwiſe preſent, then hee is in his worde when it is preached: and therefore what neede wée to receiue the Sacrament, in as much as by this doctrine, a man may receiue him dayly in the fielde, as well and as much as in the Church, in the celebration and vſe of the Sacrament?
                  To this obiection, I firſt anſwere, that in deede, neither the Scripture nor Chriſtian Faith will giue vs leaue to make any carnall, reall, naturall corporall, or any ſuch groſſe preſence of Chriſts naturall body in the Sacrament.
                  For it is in Heauen, and the Heauens muſt haue it (as ſayeth Pete
                           •
                        
                     ) till Chriſtes comming to iudgement, except

wée would denie the humanitie of Chriſt, and the veritie of mans nature in him. The preſence therefore which wee beléeue and confeſſe, is ſuch a preſence, as reaſon knoweth not, and the world cannot learn, nor any that looketh in this matter with other eyes, or heareth with other eares, thē with the eares and eyes of the Spirit, and of Faith.
                  Which Faith, though it bee of things hoped for, and ſo of things abſent to the corporall ſences, yet this abſence, is not an abſence in déede, but to reaſon, and the olde man, the nature of Faith beeing a poſſeſſion of things hoped for. Therefore, to graunt a preſence to Faith, is not to make no preſence at all, but to ſuch as know not Faith. And this the Fathers taught, affirming Chriſt to bée preſent by grace, and therefore not onely a ſignification, but alſo an exhibition and giuing of the Grace of Chriſtes body, that is, of life, and of the ſéede of immortalitie, as Cyprian writeth. Wée eate life, and drinke life, ſayth Saint Auguſtine. We féele a preſence of the Lord by Grace, or in Grace, ſayth Chryſoſtome.
                     
We receiue the celeſtiall foode, that commeth from aboue,Athana
                        
                           •
                        us. Hyla
                        
                           •
                        ius. ſaith Athanaſius. We receiue the propertie of the naturall coniunction, and knitting together, ſayth Hillarius. Wee receiue the nature of the fleſh, the bleſſing that giueth life in bread and Wine,Cyrillus. ſayth Cyrillus. And elſewhere hee ſayth, that with the bread and Wine, we eate the vertue of Chriſts proper fleſh, life, grace, & the propertie of the body of the onely begotten ſonne of God, which thing he himſelfe expoundeth to be life.Baſilius. 
                     Baſilius ſayth, that we by the Sacrament receiue the myſticall Aduent of Chriſt, grace, and the very vertue of his very nature.Ambro
                        
                           •
                        ius. Epiphanius. Hieronimus. Chriſoſtomus. 
                     Ambroſe ſaith, that we receiue the Sacrament of the true body. Epiphanius ſayth, we receiue the body or grace. And Hierome ſayth, that wee receiue ſpirituall fleſh, which hee calleth other fleſh, then that which was crucified. Chriſoſtome ſaith, that wee receiue influence of grace, and the grace of the holy Ghoſt. Saint Auguſtine ſayth,Auguſtinus. that we receiue grace and veritie, the inuiſible grace and holineſſe of the members of Chriſtes body. All the which ſayings of the Fathers, doe confirme

this our faith and doctrine of the Sacrament, wee granting in all things héerein vnto them, and they in like manner vnto vs. And therefore the lying lyppes, which both belye the Doctours, as though they graunted a carnall and reall preſence of Chriſtes body, naturally and corporally after the Papiſtes declaration and meaning: and which belye vs alſo, as though wee denied all preſence of Chriſt, and ſo made it but a bare ſigne.
                  Theſe lying lips the Lord will deſtroy, if they repent not, and with vs beléeue, and teach the trueth, that the Sacrament is the foode of the Soule a matter of faith, & therefore ſpiritually and by faith, to be talked of and vnderſtanded: which faith they want, & therefore they erre ſo groſely, in that they would haue ſuch a preſence of Chriſt, as is contrary to all the Scriptures, and to our Chriſtian Religion: whereby commeth no ſuch commoditie to the receiuer, as by the Spirituall preſence which wée teach, and according to GODS word do affirme.
                  For we teach theſe benefites to bee had

by the woorthy receiuing the Sacrament, namely, that wée abide in Chriſt, and Chriſt in vs. Againe, that wee attaine by it a celeſtiall life, or a life with GOD: moreouer, that by Faith and in Spirite, wée receiue not onely Chriſtes body and blood, but alſo whole Chriſt, GOD and man. Beſides theſe, wée graunt, that by the woorthy receiuing of this Sacrament, we receiue remiſſion of our ſinnes, and confirmation of the new Teſtament. Laſt of all, by woorthy receiuing, wée get an increaſe of incorporation with Chriſt, and amongſt our ſelues which bée his members: then which things, what more can be deſired? Alas, that men conſider nothing at all, howe that the coupling of Chriſtes body and blood to the Sacrament, is a ſpirituall thing, and therefore there néedes no ſuch carnall preſence as the Papiſtes imagine. Who will deny a mans Wife, to be with her Huſband, one body and one fleſh, although he be at London, and ſhée at Yorke? But the Papiſtes are carnall men, guided by carnall reaſon onely, or elſe would they knowe howe that the holy Ghoſt, becauſe

of our infirmitie, vſeth metaphorically the wordes of abyding, dwelling, eating and drinking of Chriſt, that the vnſpeakeable coniunction of Chriſt with vs, might ſomething be knowen. GOD open their eyes to ſee it. And thus much for this.
                  Now to that part of the obiectiō, which ſayth, that wee teach Chriſt to bee none otherwiſe preſent in the Sacrament, then in his worde: I would that the obiectors would well conſider, what a preſence of Chriſt is in his worde. I remember that ſaint Auguſtine writeth, how that Chriſts body is receiued ſometime viſible, and ſometime inuiſible
                  The viſible receite, hee calleth that which is by the Sacrament: the inuiſible receite hee calleth that which by the exerciſe of our faith, with our ſelues, wee receiue. And ſaint Herome, in the third booke vpon Eccleſiaſtes affirmeth that wee are fed with the body of Chriſt, and we drinke his blood, not onely in myſterie, but alſo in knowledge of holy Scripture. Wherein hee plainely ſheweth, that the ſame meate is offered in the words of the Scriptures,

which is offered in the Sacrament, ſo that no leſſe is Chriſtes body and blood offered by the Scriptures, then by the Sacramentes. Vpon the 147. Pſalme, he writeth alſo, that though theſe wordes: He that eateth my fleſh, and drinketh my blood: may bee vnderſtoode in myſterie, yet he ſayth, it is more true to take Chriſts body and his blood, for the worde of the Scriptures, and the doctrine of God. Yea, vpon the ſame Pſalme hee ſayeth plainely, that Chriſtes fleſh and blood is powred into our eares, by hearing the worde, and therefore great is the perill, if we yeeld to other cogitations whylſte wee heare it. And therefore, I trow, Saint Auguſtine ſayth, that it is no leſſe perill to heare GODS word negligently, then ſo to vſe the Sacrament. But héere of may no man gather, that therefore it néedeth not to receiue the Sacrament, or to affirme that a man may as much by himſelfe, meditating the word in the fielde, receiue Chriſts body, as in the Church, in the right vſe of the Sacrament. For Chriſt ordaineth nothing in vaine, or ſuperſtitiouſly, hee ordaineth nothing whereof wee haue

not néede: Although his authoritie is ſuch, that without any queſtioning, his ordinances are to be obeyed.
                  Againe, though in the field a man may receyue Chriſts body by faith, in the meditation of the word, yet deny I that a man doth ordinarily receiue Chriſts bodie, by the onely meditation of Chriſts death, or hearing of his word, with ſo much ſight, and by ſuch ſenſible aſſurance (whereof GOD knoweth our infirmitie hath no ſmall néed) as by the receite of the Sacrament, not that Chriſt is not ſo much preſent in his word preached, as hee is in, or with his Sacrament: but becauſe there are in the perception of the Sacrament, more windowes open for Chriſt to enter into vs, then by his woord preached or heard. For there, I meane in the word, he hath an entrance into our hearts, but onely by the eares, through the voice and ſound of the words: but heere in the Sacrament, he hath an entrance by all our ſenſes, by our eies, by our noſe, by our taſte, and by our handling alſo.
                  And therefore the Sacrament full well may bee called, ſéeable, ſenſible,

taſteable, and touchable words. As therefore, when many windowes be opened in an houſe, the more light may come in then when 
                        •
                     here is but one opened: euen ſo, by the perception of the Sacraments, a Chriſtian mans conſcience hath more helpe to receiue Chriſt, then ſimply by the woord preached, heard, or meditated.
                  And therefore mee thinketh, the Apoſtle full well calleth the Sacraments, obſignations, or ſealings of Gods promiſe. Read Rom. the 4. of Circumciſion. And thus much for the anſwere to the obiection aforeſayd.
                  Now to returne from whence wée came, namely, to the conſideration of the ſecond thing, what the Sacrament is: I haue told you, that it is not ſimply bread and wine, but rather Chriſts body, ſo called of Chriſt, and ſo to be called and eſtéemed of vs▪ But héere let vs marke what body, and what blood Chriſt called it.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        hriſts 
                           •
                        eſence the 
                           •
                        pper.The Papiſts ſtill babble: This is my body, This is my blood. But what body it is, what blood it is, they ſhew not.
                  Looke therefore my dearely beloued, on Chr
                        •
                     ſts owne words, and you ſhal ſee, that

Chriſt calleth it his body broken, and his blood ſhedde. Marke, I ſay, that Chriſt calleth it his body which is broken, his blood which is ſhedde preſently, and not which was broken, or ſhall bee broken, which was ſhedde, or ſhall be ſhedde, as the Greeke Texts doe plainely ſhew: thereby teaching vs, that as God would haue the Paſſeouer called, not which was the Paſſeouer, or which ſhall be the Paſſeouer, but plainely the Paſſeouer, to the end that in the vſe of it, the paſſing ouer of the ſtriking Angell, ſhould be ſet before their eyes as preſent: ſo in the celebration of the Lords Supper, the very Paſſion of Chriſt ſhould be as preſent, beholden with the eies of faith.
                  For which end, Chriſt our Sauiour did ſpecially inſtitute this Supper, ſaying: Doe ye this in remembrance of mee: or as Paul ſayth: Shew you the Lords death till hee come.
                  
                  The Supper of the Lord then, is not ſimply Chriſts body and blood, but Chriſts body broken, and his bloud ſhed. Wherefore broken? Wherefore ſhedde? Forſooth,

that teacheth Chriſt himſelfe, ſaying: Broken for you, Shed for your ſinnes, and for the ſinnes of many. Héere now then wee haue occaſion in the vſe of the Sacrament, to call to mind the greatneſſe and grieuouſneſſe of ſinne, which could not be taken away by any other meanes, then by the ſhedding of the moſt precious blood, and breaking of the moſt pure body, of the onely begotten ſonne of GOD, Ieſus Chriſt, by whom all things were made, all things are ruled and gouerned, &c.
                  Who conſidering this geare, ſhall not bee touched to repent? Who in receite of this Sacrament, thinking that Chriſt ſaith to him: Take, eate, this is my body, which is broken for thee: This is my blood which is ſhedde for thy ſinnes: Can but tremble at the grieuouſneſſe of his ſinnes, for the which ſuch a price was payd? If there were no plague at all elſe, to admoniſh man of ſinne, how grieuous a thing it is in Gods ſight, ſurely that one were enough. But alas, how are our hearts bewitched through Sathans ſubtilties, and the cuſtome of ſinne, that wee make ſinne, a thing of nothing? God open our eyes

in time, and giue vs repentance, which we ſée this Sacrament doth, as it were, enforce vs vnto, in the reuerence and true vſe of the ſame.
                  Againe, in hearing that this which wee take and eate, is Chriſts body broken for our ſinnes, and his bloud ſhedde for our iniquities, wée are occaſioned to call to mind the infinite greatnes of Gods mercie and trueth, and of Chriſts loue towards vs. For what a mercie is this, that God would for man, béeing loſt through his wilfull ſinnes, be content, yea, deſirous to giue his owne onely Sonne, The Image of his ſubſtance, the brightneſſe of his glorie, béeing in his owne boſome, to bée made man for vs, that wee men by him, might be, as it were, made Gods? What a mercie is this, that GOD the Father ſhould ſo tender vs, that hee would make this his Sonne, béeing equall with him in diuinitie, a mortall man for vs, that wée might be made immortall by him? What a kindneſſe is this, that the almightie Lord ſhould ſend to vs his enemies, his deare darling to bee made poore, that wee by him might be made rich? What bowels of compaſſion

was this, that the omnipotent Creator of Heauen and earth, would deliuer his owne onely beloued Sonne for vs creatures, to be not onely fleſh of our fleſh, and bone of our bones, that wee might by him through the holy Ghoſt, be made one with him, and ſo with the Father, by communicating the merits of his fleſh, that is, righteouſneſſe, holineſſe, innocencie, and immortalitie: but alſo to be a ſlaine Sacrifice for our ſinnes, to ſatiſfie his iuſtice, to conuert or turne death into life, our ſinne into righteouſneſſe, hell into Heauen, miſerie into felicitie for vs? What a mercie is this, that GOD will rayſe vp this his ſonne Chriſt, not onely to iuſtifie and regenerate vs? but alſo in his perſon, to demonſtrate vnto vs our ſtate, which we ſhall haue: for in his comming we ſhall be like vnto him.
                  Oh wonderfull mercie of God, which would aſſume this his Chriſt, euen in humane body, into the heauens, to take and keepe there poſſeſſion for vs, to leade our captiuitie captiue, to appeare before him alwaies praying for vs, to make the throne of Iuſtice a throne of mercy, the ſeat of glory a ſeat of grace, ſo that with boldneſſe

we may come and appeare before God, to aſke and find grace, in time conuenient. Againe, what a veritie and conſtant trueth in God, is this, that he would, according to his promiſe made firſt to Adam, and ſo to Abraham, and others in his time, accompliſh it, by ſending his ſonne ſo graciouſly? Who would doubt hereafter, of any thing that he hath promiſed?
                  And as for Chriſts loue, oh, whoſe heart can bee able to thinke of it any thing as it deſerueth? He being God, would become man: hée being rich, would become poore: he being Lord of all the world, became a ſeruant to vs all: hée beeing immortall, would become mortall, miſerable, and taſte of all Gods curſes, yea, euen of hell it ſelfe for vs. His blood was nothing too deare, his life hee nothing conſidered, to bring vs from death to life.
                  But this his loue néedeth more heartie weighing, then many words ſpeaking: and therefore I omit and leaue it to your conſiderations. So that in the receiuing of this Supper, as I would, you would tremble at Gods wrath for ſinne: ſo would I haue you to couple to that terrour and feare,

true faith, by which ye might be aſſuredly perſwaded of Gods mercie towards you, and Chriſts loue, though all things elſe preached the contrary.
                  Doe euery of you ſurely thinke, when you heare theſe words, Take, eate, this is my body, broken for your ſinnes: Drinke, this is my blood ſhedde for your ſinnes: That God the eternall Father embracing you, Chriſt calleth and cleppeth you moſt louingly, making himſelfe one with you, and you one with him, and one with another amongſt your ſelues.
                  You ought no leſſe to bee certaine now that God loueth you, pardoneth your ſins, and that Chriſt is all yours, then if you did heare an Angell out of heauen ſpeaking ſo vnto you. And therefore reioyce and bee glad, and make this Supper Eutharichiam, a thankeſgiuing, as the Fathers named it. Be no leſſe certaine, that Chriſt and you now are all one, then you are certaine, the bread and wine is one with your nature and ſubſtance, after you haue eaten and drunke it. Howbeit, in this it differeth, that you by faith are, as it were, changed into Chriſt, and not Chriſt into you, as

the bread is: for by faith he dwelleth in vs, and we in him. God giue vs faith in the vſe of this Sacrament, to receiue Chriſt, as hee giueth vs handes to receiue the element, ſimbole, and viſible Sacrament. God grant vs not to prepare our téeth and belly (as Saint Auguſtine ſaith) but rather of his mercie, hee prepare and giue vs true and liuely faith, to vſe this and all other his ordinances to his glory and our comforts. He ſweepe the houſes of our hearts, and make them cleane, that they may bée a worthy harborough and lodging for the Lord. Amen.
                  Now let vs come and looke on the third and laſt thing, namely,Wherefore the Sacrament was inſtituted. wherfore the Lord did inſtitute this Sacrament. Our nature is very obliuious of GOD, and of all his benefits. And againe, it is very full of dubitation and doubting of GODS loue, and of his kindneſſe. Therefore to the ende theſe two things might bee ſomething reformed and holpen in vs, the Lorde hath inſtituted this Sacrament: I meane, that wee might haue in memorie the principall benefite of all benefits, that is, Chriſtes death, and that wee might bee

on all parts aſſured of Communion with Chriſt, of all kindeneſſe, the greateſt that euer God did giue vnto man. The former to bée the ende, wherefore Chriſt did inſtitute this Sacrament, hee himſelfe doeth teach vs, ſaying: Doe yee this in remembrance of me. The latter, the Apoſtle doeth no leſſe ſet foorth, in ſaying: The bread which we breake, is it not the partaking, or Cōmunion of the body of Chriſt? Is not the Cuppe of bleſsing, which wee bleſſe, the partaking or Communion of the blood of Chriſt? So that it appeareth, the ende wherefore this Sacrament was inſtituted, was and is, for the reformation and help of our obliuion, of that which we ſhould neuer forget, and of our dubitation of that whereof we ought to bee moſt certaine.
                  Concerning the former, namely, of the memorie of Chriſts death, what commoditie it bringeth with it, I will purpeſely for times ſake omit. Onely a little will I ſpeake of the commodities comming vnto vs, by the partaking and Communion wée haue with Chriſt. Firſt, it teacheth vs, that no mā can communicate with Chriſt, but the ſame muſt néedes communicate

with Gods grace & fauour, where through ſinnes are forgiuen. Therefore, this commoditie commeth herethrough, namely, that we ſhould be certaine of the remiſſion and pardon of our ſinnes. The which thing we may alſo perceiue by the Cup, in that it is called the Cup of the newe Teſtament: to which Teſtament is properly attributed on God behalfe, obliuion or remiſſion of our ſinnes. Firſt, I ſay, therfore, the Supper is inſtituted to this end, that he which worthily receiueth, ſhould bee certaine of the remiſſion and pardon of his ſinnes and iniquities, how many and great ſoeuer they be. Howe great a benefite this is, onely they knowe, which haue felt the burthē of ſinne, which of al heauy things, is the moſt heauy. Againe, no man can communicate with Chriſtes body and blood, but the ſame muſt communicate with his ſpirit, for Chriſts body is no dead carcaſe. Now he that cōmunicateth with Chriſts Spirite, communicateth as with holines, righteouſneſſe, innocencie, and immortalitie, and with all the merites of Chriſtes body: ſo doeth hee with GOD and all his glorie, and with the Church, and all

the good that euer it or any member of it had,Note, though I apply this thus: yet I would not that any man ſhould thinke, that Communionem ſanctorum, in the Creed, is not ſet foorth there for the better explication of that which preceedeth it, namely, what the holy Catholique Church is. hath, or ſhall haue: This is, The Communion of Saints, which we beleeue in our Creede, which hath wayting on it, Remiſſion of ſinnes, Reſurrection of the fleſh, and life euerlaſting.
                  To the ende that we ſhould be moſt aſſured and certaine of all theſe, Chriſt our Sauiour did inſtitute this his Supper, and therefore would haue vs to vſe it. So that there is no man, I trowe, which ſeeeth not great cauſe of giuing thankes to God, for this holy Sacrament of the Lord, whereby if wée worthily receiue it, wée ought to bée certaine, that all our ſinnes whatſoeuer they bée, are pardoned clearely: that wée are regenerate and borne againe into a liuely hope, into an inheritance, immortall, vndefiled, and which can neuer wither away: that wee are in the fellowſhip of GOD the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt: that wée are Gods Temples, at one with God, & God at one with vs: that wée are members of Chriſtes Church, and fellowes with the Saintes in all felicitie: that wee are certaine of immortalitie, in ſoule and body,

and ſo of eternall life: then which thing, what can bée more demaunded? Chriſt is ours, and we are Chriſtes, he dwelleth in vs, and wée in him. Oh happy eyes that ſée theſe things, and moſt happy heartes that feele them. My deare brethren, let vs pray vnto the Lord, to open our eyes to ſée theſe wonderfull things, to giue vs faith to féele them. Surely we ought no leſſe to bee aſſured of them, nowe in the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament: then wée are aſſured of the exteriour ſymboles and Sacraments. If an Angell from Heauen ſhould come and tell you theſe things, then would you reioyce and bée glad. And my deare hearts in the Lorde, I, euen nowe, though moſt vnworthy, am ſent of the Lorde to tell you no leſſe, but that you worthily receiuing this Sacrament, ſhall receiue remiſſion of all your ſinnes, or rather certainetie that they are remitted, and that you are euen now Gods darlings, Temples, and fellow inheritours of all the good that euer he hath. Wherefore ſée that you giue thanks vnto the Lord for this his great goodneſſe, and prayſe his Name for euer.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           •
                        n ob
                        
                           •
                        ection 
                           •
                        f vn
                        
                           •
                        orthy 
                           •
                        ecei
                        
                           •
                        ing.Oh, ſayth one, I could be glad in very déed, and giue thanks from my very heart, if that I did worthily receiue this Sacramēt. But (alas) I am a very grieuous ſinner, and I feele in my ſelfe very little repentance and faith, and therefore I am afraid that I am vnworthy.
                  
                     The an
                        
                           •
                        were.To the anſwering of this obiection, I thinke it neceſſarie to ſpeake ſome thing of the woorthy receiuing of this Sacrament, in as great breuitie & playnneſſe as I can. The Apoſtle willeth all men to prooue and examine themſelues, before they eate of the bread, and drinke of the Cup: for they that eate and drinke vnwoorthily, eate and drinke damnation.
                  Therefore this probation and examination is neceſſarie. If men will try their golde and ſiluer, whether they bee copper or no: is it not more neceſſarie, that men ſhould trie their conſciences? Now, howe this ſhould bée, the Papiſts teach amiſſe, in ſending vs to their auricular Confeſſion, which is impoſſible. The true probation, and tryall of a Chriſtian conſcience, conſiſteth altogether in Faith and repentance. Faith hath reſpect to the

doctrine and Articles of our Beliefe: repentance hath reſpect to maners and conuerſation. Concerning the former, I meane of Faith, we may ſée the Apoſtle teacheth vs. 2. Corinthians 11. Concerning the latter for our conuerſation, thoſe ſinnes which are commonly called mortall, or deadly, are to be remooued. Theſe ſinnes are diſcerned from other ſinnes, by the Apoſtle, Rom. 6. in ſaying: Let not ſinne reigne and beare a ſwindge in you in your mortall bodies. For truely, then wée ſinne deadly, when wée giue ouer to ſinne, and let it haue the bridle at his libertie, when wée ſtriue not againſt it, but allowe it, and conſent to it. Howbeit, if we ſtriue againſt it, if it diſpleaſe vs, then truely, though ſinne bée in vs (for we ought to obey GOD without al reſiſtance, or vnwillingneſſe) yet our ſinnes bee not of thoſe ſinnes, which ſeparate vs from God, but for Chriſts ſake ſhall not bée imputed vnto vs beléeuing.
                  Therefore, my dearely belooued, if that your ſinnes doe now diſpleaſe you, if you purpoſe vnfeinedly to bee enemies to ſinne in your ſelues and in others, as you may, during your whole life, if you

hope in Chriſt for pardon, if you beléeue according to the holy Scriptures and Articles of the Chriſtian Faith, ſet foorth in your Creede: if I ſay, you now truſt in GODS mercy through Chriſts merits, if you repent, and earneſtly purpoſe before God to amend your life, and to giue ouer your ſelues to ſerue the Lorde in holineſſe and righteouſneſſe all the dayes of your life, although before this preſent, you haue moſt grieuouſly ſinned; I publiſh vnto you, that you are woorthy gheſts for this Table, you ſhall be welcome to Chriſt, your ſinnes ſhall be pardoned, you ſhall be endued with his ſpirit, and ſo with Communion with him and the Father, and the whole Church of God, Chriſt will dwell in you, and you ſhall dwell in him for euermore.
                  Wherefore, behaue your ſelues accordingly, with ioyfulnes and thankeſgiuing. Doe you nowe appeare before the Lorde: make cleane your houſes, & open the doores of your hearts by repentance & faith, that the Lord of Hoſtes, the King of glory, may enter in: and for euer héereafter beware of all ſuch things, as might diſpleaſe the

eyes of his Maieſtie. Flie from ſinne, as from a Toade, come away from Poperie, and all Antichriſtian Religion, be diligent in your vocations, be diligent and earneſt in prayer, harken to the voyce of God in his word with reuerence, liue worthy your profeſſion. Let your light in your life ſo ſhine, that men may ſee your good works, and glorifie your Father which is in heauen. As you haue béene darkeneſſe, and followed the works of darkeneſſe, ſo now hence forth bee light in the Lord, and haue ſocietie with the woorks of light. Now hath God renewed his couenant with you, in Gods ſight now are you as cleane, and healed from all your ſores of ſinnes. Goe your wayes, ſinne no more, leaſt a worſe thing happen vnto you. Sée that your houſes béeing new ſwept, bee furniſhed with godlineſſe and vertue, and beware of idleneſſe, leaſt the Deuill come with ſeuen ſpirits worſe then himſelfe, and ſo take his lodging, and then your latter end will bee worſe then the firſt.
                  God our Father, for the tender mercie and merits of his ſonne, bee mercifull vnto vs, forgiue vs all our ſinnes, and giue

vs his holy ſpirit, to purge, cleanſe, and ſanctifie vs, that wee may bee holy in his ſight through Chriſt, and that we now may be made ready, and worthie to receyue this holy Sacrament, with the fruits of the ſame, to the full reioycing & ſtrengthening of our hearts in the Lord. To whom be all honour and glory, world without ende. Amen.
                  
                     To God be all prayſe for euer.
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   