
      
         
            
            
            Inuentions or Deuiſes. Very neceſſary for all Generalles and Captaines, or Leaders of men, as wel by Sea as by Land: Written by William Bourne.
            An. 1578.
            At LONDON Printed for Thomas VVoodco dwelling in Paules Churchyard, at the ſigne of the black Beare.
            
               decorative border
            
         
         
            
            
            To the right Honourable his ſingular good Lorde, the Lorde Charles Howard, Baron of Effingham, Knight of the moſt noble order of the Garter.
            
               POndering with my ſelfe (right noble and worthie Lorde) howe J might by ſome meanes or waies, ſhew my ſelfe in any reſpect, partely to requite your Honourable Lo: great gentlenes and good coū
               tenaunce alwayes borne towards me from time to time, I could not holde my ſelfe ſatisfied, vntill I had ſome thing to preſent vnto your Lordſhip, whereupon I am ſo bolde as to dedicate this rude and ſimple Treatiſe vnto your worthyneſſe, hoping that you will accept it, as a true token and a ſigne of my good will towards your humble Lordſhip. The thing is ſuch, as you haue already ſeene the written copie at

my good Lord and Masters hande the Earle of Lincolne: the content thereof is, as touching Inuentions or Deuiſes, and firſt of Martiall affayres by Sea, and concerning ſhips: and then doe followe deuiſes appertaining vnto Ordinance: and in like manner Deuiſes of the walls of towns, Caſtels and Forts: and alſo there are Deuiſes as touching Martial affayres by land, with other ſuch like, as the Contents of the table in the beginning of the booke dooth ſhew. (I hoping that your good Lordſhip will take theſe ſimple and rude Deuiſes in good parte) beſeech God to proſper your Honour in all your attēpts, and to giue happy ſucceſse in all your doings, with increaſe of Honour, and long life, in perfect health. Amen.
            
               By your Honours at commandement,
William Bourne.
            
         
         
            
            The Preface to the Reader.
            
               FRiendlie Reader, it is poſsible that you may diſlike of mee, for that I am ſo boulde, as to publiſh theſe hard and difficulte matters of diuers newe Inuentions or Deuiſes, the which ſome of them I haue gathered by one meane, & ſome by another, but the moſt part of them hath been mine owne inuention vpon ſundry cauſes in the affaires that I haue had to doo. And as it may chance at ſometime any perſon may be driuen vnto an extremitie, and the thing ſeemeth vnpoſsible to bee auoyded, yet by ſome ſmall and ſlender Deuiſe the danger thereof may bee preuented, whereas otherwiſe the perill thereof muſt needes haue happened: and yet that thing that hath preuented the cauſe, hath been thought to bee of no importance when that it hath beene knowne, and before it hath been known it hath ſeemed moſt vnpoſsible: wherefore I haue thought it good for to drawe them together into this rude and barbarous volume, more for that to haue them in remembrance, if that there dooth happen any cauſe to vſe them, than the fineſſe of the writing or penning of them, for the writer thereof is moſt vnlearned and ſimple, deſiring you gentle Reader, to beare with my rudeneſſe, conſidering that it is the good will that I

doo beare vnto my natiue Countrey, for to profit the common wealth as much as lieth in me, which is the occaſion that hath made mee to write theſe rude and ſimple Inuentions or Deuiſes: Although there is no doubte, but that there be a great number of moſt excellent and Politique and wiſer or finer heades: that I being ſo rude and ſimple a perſon, to preſume to be a medler in thoſe cauſes, for that the firſt inuentions or Deuiſes is are concerning matters by Sea and ſhips, both in martial affayres and otherwiſe therevnto appertaining: And alſo there be Inuentions or Deuiſes of Ordinance, aſwell for ſeruice as otherwiſe therevnto appertaining: and alſo there be Inuentions or Deuiſes, as touching the walles of cities, townes or caſtels appertaining vnto Martiall affayres: & in like manner there be Inuentions or Deuiſes, as touching matters in the field, as wel meet for Generalles as for Captaines or leaders of mē, with other neceſſary Deuiſes or Inuentions, as in the table following it doth appeare, the which Inuentions or Deuiſes are verie neceſſary to bee had in memory, although that it is poſsible that thoſe men that hath bin trayned of long time in Martial affaires, perhaps may or doo know a great number of better Deuiſes than theſe, yet notwithſtanding I haue written theſe, and although for their ſimpleneſſe they wil do them no good, yet I am aſſured that they wil or can do thē no hurt, although that they bee but of a ſimple mans inuenting, for all Artes, Sciences, or faculties, had a beginning before they came vnto their perfection: and yet it is poſsible there hath bin diuers inuentions that haue come

vnto no perfection or purpoſe, and yet notwithſtanding they are rather to bee better commended than thoſe perſons that haue great reuenewes or liuings of their owne, yea and ſome haue great liuings of the Queenes highneſſe, & yet they do practiſe no other thing, but how to liue eaſily, to ſatisfie their luſt and pleaſure, and ſome of them, if they doo practiſe any thing, that ſhal be but miſchief in the cōmon wealth, &c. For by practiſing, they may attaine vnto knowledge in any affayres, though it be poſsible that ſome will ſay that in Martiall affaires that practiſe is to no purpoſe, if that hee haue not ſeene the ſeruice in the field. And alſo it may be ſaide againe, that there is a number that haue ſeene ſeruice in the fielde, and yet haue no iudgement at al in thoſe affaires, for that we may ſee by common experience, that ſome perſons haue been trained vp all the dayes of their life, to goe vnto the ſea 20. 30. and 40. yeares, and yet haue no knowledge to be the Maſter of a ſhip to take charge, for that they wil practiſe nothing: & other ſome perſons by practiſe be able to take charge in the ſpace of 3. or 4. yeres, and be as ſufficient men as thoſe, to take charg, that haue bin maſters the ſpace of 20. yeres, &c Wherfore we may ſee the practiſe doth much auaile, for by practiſe he that hath ſeen but a litle experience of ſeruice, by cōſideratiō of that ſeruice that he hath ſeen, may practiſe further: for it is not poſsible if a mā had ſeen ſeruice a hundreth yeres, yet at a time in ſeruice in the field there may happen ſuch a matter, that in al that time the like hath not bin ſeene nor happened: therefore in the reading of ſuch authors as haue

written in any affayres, although that hee hath had no great experience in the matter, yet practiſe ſhall much auaile him: ſo that you may conclude, that he that hath ſeene much and hath neuer practiſed nothing, can haue no iudgement in any matter, then you muſt needes confeſſe, that hee that hath ſeene little and dooth practiſe, may haue ſome iudgement, &c. But then it muſt needes bee ſaide, that hee that hath ſeene experience and dooth practiſe, muſt needes become cunning, according vnto the ſharpeneſſe of his wit, and the valiantneſſe of his courage: And furthermore, if one ſhould aske this queſtion, and as it is many times ſaide, if that ſuch a noble man came in the field, that it is no fighting againſt him, but if that hee dooth come into the fielde hee ſhall haue the victorie, and the queſtion is true that it will come ſo to paſſe, then what ſhould be the cauſe therof? Now it is poſsible ſome will alledge one cauſe, and ſome another cauſe, as I haue heard a number of mens opinions, and yet few or none of them the trueth: for admit that there may bee two men elected or choſen, ſo indifferently in all reſpectes as may bee poſsible, both in wiſdome, ſtature, age, and manhoode or courage, and in all other matter alike, and that they doo not differ in no reſpect, and thoſe two men haue been trained vp in ſeruice in the fielde of long time, and haue ſeene great experiences in ſeruice in the fielde, as in ſieges, and in being beſieged, and in the dooing of other great exploytes, and they haue beene both of them alwaies in thoſe ſeruices, that if the one hath been there, the other hath beene

heere in like manner: but the one in the beginning being a Noble mans ſonne, did alwaies ſerue neare the Generall, or as one in counſell with the Generall, and hath at more yeares of age ſerued as a General, & the other hath alwayes ſerued but as a common Souldier, or an inferour officer or Captaine: & admitte the one of them ſhould come into the field, the one againſt the other of them, and their ſtrength or number of men to be in manner equall: and admit that he that hath the ſmaller power is the Noble man, there is, no doubt, except great fortune be, but that he that is the Noble man that hath ſerued as a Generall, ſhall preuaile and haue the victory, and the cauſe is this, hee that dooth ſerue as a General, or hath beene in counſell with the Generall of long time, he doth know how for to prouide and ſet forth an armie: and contrarywiſe he that hath ſerued but as an inferiour Captaine, hath no other care, but to traine his men: the Generall and his counſell, doth foreſee where for to lodge and prouide for the armie, and all other neceſſary matters, and haue their ſpyalls abroad, and doe know what manner of men be meeteſt for al maner of purpoſes, and in like manner doe know what manner of ground is beſt to encounter with the enemies, and alſo knowing howe the enemies are prepared, & ſo accordingly doth order and prepare his battell, to prepare for euery miſchiefe that may happen, for that hee hath ſeene and heard ſo oftentimes the experience of thoſe matters, wheras thoſe that haue ſerued as inferiour Captains or Souldiers, haue neuer had any occaſion to conſider

of thoſe matters, but onely to traine their ſouldiers & to make them handſom, how to keepe their order, and to handle their weapon: but for any other order of inbattelling of themſelues, if that they came for to fight in the field, it was alwaies at the diſcretiō of the Generall and his Counſell. And furthermore, admit that in the fighting of a field that they are ouerthrowne, or haue giuen the ouerthrow, the Generall of the army & his Counſel haue perfect intelligence by what meanes that hath happened, & what thing ſtoode with them, & what thing ſtood againſt them, that is to ſay, if that they that were ouerthrowne had foreſeene ſuch a cauſe, then they had not been ouerthrowne, & alſo they that did giue the ouerthrow, if that theſe had not done ſuch a thing they had not preuailed: ſo that the General & his Counſell dooth perfectly vnderſtand of the matter, what was with them, and what was againſt them, for that they doo heare what hath happened in euery place in the armie, if that it bee worthie of knowing, whereas hee that dooth ſerue but as an inferiour Captaine, dooth heare nor ſee no other matter, but thoſe matters that haue happened in his own band, or neare vnto him: and the Generall and his Counſell haue authority to ſend for, and to examine euery perſon, that can ſay any thing in any matter whatſoeuer that it bee, &c. And furthermore, there is a greater matter than this, whereby that thoſe that are the Generals or in counſell neare about the Generall, if that they bee giuen vnto practiſe and haue good wittes, whereby that they may haue a great deale further inſtructions and

knowledge in thoſe affaires, than any other common Captaine or Souldier: which is this: for what is hee that is a Souldier or any other perſon, but if that he dooth knowe any further matter or skill and ſecret than any perſon dooth knowe, but that hee will make meanes to ſhewe it vnto the Generall, whereby that hee may haue the better rewarde or entertainement; ſo that you may conclude, that if fortie or fiftie thouſand men were in the fielde, that if that there bee any perſon that haue any knowledge or cunning, but that it will bee vttered and ſhewed vnto the Generall, then if the Generall bee valiant, liberall and wiſe, as it is a place for a wiſe man, there is no doubtes but that if hee bee giuen to practiſe thoſe matters, hee muſt needes of force become moſt excellent, for that an infinite number of other mens practiſes are put into their heades, ſo that of force they muſt needes exceede all other men in Martiall affaires, whereas he that is but an inferiour Captaine, although that hee bee giuen vnto practiſe, can neuer attaine to that which the other hath, for that hee hath not the like inſtructions in thoſe affaires, not to bee a Generall except great fortune bee. And thus (gentle reader) I doo ceaſe to trouble you any longer, deſiring you to beare with my rudeneſſe, that I ſhould take vpon mee to publiſh any new Inuentions, and eſpecially in theſe affayres, conſidering what a number of wiſe and valiant Gentlemen and Souldiers, and other learned perſons there hee in Englande. And there is no doubte, but that they doo knowe a

number of better than theſe, but yet I am aſſured, although that it will doo them no good, yet it wil doo them no hurte, and it is poſsible that in the reading of theſe rude Inuentions, they may finde in ſome of them, that thing that may pleaſure them, and they themſelues may further gather of them: for at the firſt Inuenting of any Arte or Science, yet they that came after them brought it vnto perfection: ſo that vpon theſe rude and baſe Inuentions, that there may bee ſome further matter gathered of them, and may come vnto perfection, although ſome of them doo come vnto little purpoſe, &c. And thus gentle Reader, I deſire you to beare with my rudenes, although that I haue written any thing that you may miſlike of, for that ſome of them perhaps may ſeeme to bee but trifles or toyes, yet it may bee poſsible that ſome of them, if that it bee equallie conſidered of, may doo ſome pleaſure vnto you.
         
         
            
            The Table of the Contents of the Deuiſes, and firſt for Martiall affayres by Seas and Ships, &c.
            
               THe firſt Deuiſe is how for to knowe, whether that anie ſhip be hier of boorde, than the ſhip that you are in, and alſo whether ſhe dooth vnder top you or ouer top you, and to knowe it iustlie a myle before that you doo come at her, &c. Fol. 1.
               
               The 2. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to arme a ſhip for to fight with your enemies, &c. Fol. 2.
               
               The 3. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to vſe a plaine or open deck with hatches, that it is not poſſible to enter the ſhip without ſpoyling of the enemies. Fol. 3.
               
               The 4. Deuiſe is, what to obſerue in the laying of any ſhip aboord. Fol. 4. & 5.
               
               The 6. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to preuent a man of warre, that he ſhal not be able to lay you aboord, nor to enter his men with eaſe, but that ten men ſhall bee able to keepe out one hundred. Fol. 5.
               
               The 7. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to ſinke a ſhip that hath laid you aboord, without ſhooting of Ordinance. Fol. 5. & 6.
               
               The 8. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to diſcomfite a whole nauie of ſhips that doo ride in any place, for the defence thereof, although that you bee not the fourth part of their ſtrength. Fol▪ 6. & 7.
               
               The 9. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to diſcomfite an armie of ſhips by ſea, where the principall force dooth ſtand by one or two ſhips, &c. Fol. 7. & 8.
               
               The 10. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to encounter with an armie of ſhips of warre by ſea, &c. Fol. 8.
               
               
                  
The 11. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make prouiſion that another ſhip ſhall not come aboorde of you, to put you in ieopera die of firing, &c. Fol. 8.
               
               The 12. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to paſſe by any castle that dooth ſtand by the mouth of any hauen or harbour, that they must come ſo neare that they cannot paſſe, but to be put in ieopardie of ſincking, &c. Fol. 9.
               
               The 13. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to preuent him that meaneth to blowe your men ouer boorde when that you haue entred your men, & alſo by what meanes you may burne & amaze his mē, and to make the ſhip the eaſier to be entred, &c. Fol. 9.
               
               The 14. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to vſe a ſhip that ſhee ſhall not ſinke, but alwaies ſwimme and beare ſayle, &c. Fol. 10.
               
               The 15. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make prouiſion in a ſhip for to ſaue your men from being ſpoyled with the great Ordinance, &c. Fol. 10. & 11.
               
               The 16. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to chaine a hauen or riuer, although that it be a mile broade ouer, in ſuch ſort that no ſhip ſhall paſſe by night nor by day, &c. Fol. 11.
               
               The 17. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make a ſhip to draw or goe but a little way into the water, and yet to ſaile well by the winde. Fol. 12.
               
               The 18. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make a ſhip or barke in that order, that you may ſincke vnto the bottome with her when you liſt, and alſo how for to make her ſwimme aboue the water againe at your pleaſure, and being ſuncke vnto the bottome, the men in her to be ſafe from drowning. Fol. 13. 14.
               
               The 19. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you may make a boate to goe without cares or ſaile, &c. Fol. 15
               
               The 20. Deuiſe, is as touching a water mill in a boate. Fol. 15.
               
               The 21. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make an engine or inſtrument to knowe the way or going of a ſhip, that is to ſay, to knowe how faſt or ſoftly that any ſhip goeth, to knowe how many leagues that ſhe hath gone, for any time aſſigned, &c: Fol. 15. 16. & 17.
               
               
                  
The 22. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you may make ropes faſt vnto a ſhip that is ſuncke, &c. Fol. 17. & 18.
               
               The 23. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make ſuch prouiſion that a man may goe downe vnto the bottome of the ſea, and remaine there, and make ropes faſt vnto any thing at his pleaſure, and be ſafe, &c. Fol. 19.
               
               The 24. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to make a Grapnell in ſuch ſort, that the more waight it hath, the faſter it holdeth. Fo. 20
               
               The 25. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to finde a leake in a ſhip, if that it bee in ſuch a place that you cannot ſee where that the water doth come in. Fol. 20.
               
               The 26. Deuiſe ſheweth you, how for to get vp vnto the top of a maſt of a ſhip, that hath neuer a rope faſt thereunto, &c. Fol. 21.
               
            
            
               Deuiſes of Ordinance.
               THe 27. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to keepe a riuer by night, that is to ſay, to ſhoote perfectly at a ſhip by night with a peece of Ordinance, the ſhippe beeing vnder ſaile and going. Fol. 22.
               
               The 28. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to vſe a batterie, to ſhoote both night and day, and to ſhoote perfectly vnto the marke, &c. Fol. 22.
               
               The 29. Deuiſe ſheweth you for to bring Ordinance vnto any place in the night, and to giue leuell vnto the marke in the night, and to ſhoote perfectly at it, if that the night be neuer ſo darke, as ſoone as your Ordinance is placed, &c. Fol. 23.
               
               The 30. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to ſhoote at a ſhip that is vnder ſaile and going. Fol. 24.
               
               The 31. Deuiſe is, how for to vſe that peece that is not truely bored, to make a perfect ſhot. Fol. 24.
               
               The 32. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make prouiſion to carrie a Cannon ouer any Marriſh ground or owes, if that it bee neuer ſo ſoft, and in like manner to place a batterie vpon any ground how ſoft ſo euer it be. Fol. 25.
               
               
                  
The 33. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to cleere a peece of Ordinance that is cloyed with the ſhot, or ouer charged with powder, and the ſhot will not goe home. Fol. 25. & 26.
               
               The 34. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to vncloy the touch hole of a peece, if that there bee any ſpicke or nayles driuen into her. Fol. 26.
               
               The 35. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to carrie a Cannon ouer a riuer or water without any boate. Fol. 27.
               
               The 36. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to knowe, whether that any peece of Ordinance be ſufficiently mettalled or not. Fol. 28
               
               The 37. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to knowe whether that anie peece bee cleere within, and without any hony combes. Fol. 28.
               
               The 38. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to breake any peece of Ordinance with his ordinary charge or loading, and the ordinary ſhot, &c. Fol. 28. & 29
               
               The 39. Deuiſe ſheweth vnto you, how if that in the giuing of leuell, that if you doo lay the peece but an inch awry, how for to knowe how much that it will be awry at the marke, &c. Fol. 29.
               
               The 40. Deuiſe ſheweth, how if that a citie or towne be beſieged, & haue no Ordinance, by what meanes that they may make them Ordinance to defend themſelues. &c. Fol. 30.
               
               The 41. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to out ſhoote another perſon with all one ſhot, and with one ſorte, and one waight of powder. &c. Fol. 31.
               
               The 42. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to ſhoote three times in a peece at one lading of her, &c. Fol. 31. & 32.
               
               The 43. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make any peece of Ordinance to goe off at any houre or time appoynted, by it ſelfe, and no perſon there. Fol. 32.
               
               The 44. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make a peece goe off when you liſt, and no perſon there. Fol. 32. & 33.
               
               The 45. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you ſhall know whether that any peece of Ordinance bee truely bored, that is to ſay, whether that the hollownes of the peece be right in the middle

of the mettall, &c. Fol. 33.
               
               The 46. Deuiſe ſheweth, whether the peece bee taperred bored, that is to ſay, to be wider towards the mouth of the peece than it is at the bottome or breach, &c. Fol. 34.
               
               The 47. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you ſhall knowe the true thickneſſe of the mettall of any peece in euery place. Fol. 35.
               
               The 48. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to know how many inches, or what part of an inch will make a degree in any peece of Ordinance, &c. Fol. 35. & 36.
               
               The 49. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to leuell a peece in a ſhip, at any marke or ſhip. &c. Fol. 36.
               
               The 50. Deuiſe, is as concerning the flancking the front of a batterie, &c. Fol. 37.
               
               The 51. Deuiſe, is as concerning the mountant carriage for ſhips Ordinance. Fol. 37. & 38
               
               The 52. Deuiſe is, as concerning the making of draught or field carriage, to lade them backwards behinde the men. Fol. 38
               
               The 53. Deuiſe is, as touching a skrewe to coyne a peece of Ordinance, to what leuell you liſt. Fol. 38. & 39.
               
               The 54. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make an engine, for to know the ſtrength or the weakenes of powder. Fol. 39.
               
               The 55. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make a ball of mettall, and in the time of ſeruice it doth exceede all other fire workes. Fol. 40. & 41.
               
               The 56. Deuiſe is, as touching the making of a truncke for to ſhoote Caliuer or Harquebuze ſhot. Fol. 42
               
               The 57. Deuiſe is, as touching an engine for to take vp the ſide of any peece of Ordinance. Fol. 42.
               
               The 58. Deuiſe is, how to make a charge to lade any peece at one time. Fol 42. & 43.
               
               The 59. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make an engine for to way your powder or your ſhot, &c. Fol. 45.
               
               The 60. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to ouerthrowe the wall of any Towne, without any ſhooting of Ordinance, &c. Fol. 46.
               
               
                  The 61. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to breake downe the walls of a towne or caſtle, or to breake downe ſtrong and huge gates, &c. Fol. 46. & 47.
               
               The 62. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make a skalling ladder, in ſuch ſort, that they that are vppon the ladder ſhall haue the aduantage of the fight, of them that are vppon the vamers of the walles of any towne or caſtle, whether that it bee to ſtand at the puſh of the pike, or otherwiſe. Fol. 47. & 48.
               
               The 63. Deuiſe ſheweth you, how that you may preuent the vndermining of any towne, although that it be a towne ſituated in a drie place. Fol. 49.
               
               The 64. Deuiſe ſheweth you, how that you ſhall knowe where that vnderminers be in the ground. Fol. 50.
               
               The 65. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make away or a vaut in the ground to place powder in, to blowe vp any Castle or Fort, or the walles of a towne, and how to make the trayne to giue fire, &c. Fol. 50. 51. & 52.
               
               The 66. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to direct the way in the ground for the vndermining of it, to come right vnder any place aſſigned, which is the principalleſt poynt in vndermining, &c. Fol. 52. & 53.
               
               The 67. Deuiſe ſheweth, how if that any Towne haue a breach in a wall, and the batterie is ſo continued that they cannot make it vp, then it doth ſhewe vnto you how to make it defenſible, &c. Fol. 53.
               
               The 68. Deuiſe ſheweth you, if that you will caſt a ditch out of the ground, and would make a wall or rampier of that ſtuffe, and you would haue the wall ſo thicke, then this Deuiſe will ſhewe vnto you, how hie it will be of that ſtuffe, and if that you would haue it ſuch a heigth, then you may know in like manner how thicke that it will be of that ſtuffe, &c. Fol. 53. 54. & 55.
               
               The 69. Deuiſe is, as touching how for to make the trenches for an armie, or the curtens of the walles of any fortifications. Fol. 56.
               
               The 70. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make the trenches againſt  any towne that is beſieged, that the people may paſſe from the Camp & to the Camp, without being ſpoyled, which is commonly called a rolling trench. Fol. 56. & 57.
               
               The 71. Deuiſe ſheweth, by what meanes they may make ſuch prouiſion to ſhadowe the place whereas great Ordinance is planted, that the ſmall ſhot ſhall not annoy them that are occupied about the great Ordinance, if that it bee vppon ſuch platformes or places, that there is no baskets to defend them, or to ſhadowe them. Fol. 57. 58.
               
               The 72. Deuiſe is, as touching the knowing of any thing done, or for to be done ſpeedily, &c. Fol. 58. & 59.
               
               The 73. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to conuay letters ſecretly. Fol. 59.
               
               The 74. Deuiſe ſheweth you, how to conuay any great quantitie of letters or bookes, that you would not haue them found, and to conuey them ſecretly and not to be knowne. Fol. 60.
               
               The 75. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you ſhall know the minds of your friends, what they will doo, or what that you ſhould doo for them. Fol. 60. 61. 62.
               
               The 76. Deuiſe ſheweth you, how that you may ſend letters vnto your friends, and alſo receiue letters, although that you be ſo beſieged in a towne or fort, that no man neither come vnto you, nor you paſſe foorth. Fol. 62.
               
               The 77. Deuiſe doth ſhewe, how many men will ſtand vppon any peece of ground, they being in their battaile or marching forme, whereby that you may view what number of men that there may be of them, &c. Fol. 62. 63. & 64.
               
               The 78. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to know how many rancks of men will bee in a mile of length, whereby you may by the view of their marching know the number of them. Fol. 64 and 65.
               
               The 79. Deuiſe ſheweth, the ſquare roote or number or battell of any number of men. Fol. 65. & 66.
               
               The 80. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to imbattell your ſelfe ſquare vpon the ground, that is to ſay, that the ground ſhall be

as many foote the one way, as it is the other way, and alſo there is a table made for that purpoſe. Fol. 67. 68. & 69.
               
               The 81. Deuiſe ſheweth vnto you, if that you haue any charge or battell giuen vnto the ſide or flancke of the battell, then on the ſuddaine the ſide of the battell ſhall be as ſtrong as the front. Fol. 70.
               
               The 82. Deuiſe ſheweth you a way, for to knowe how many men will be in arancke, and how many ranckes that there ſhall be of them for any number of men aſſigned to bee ſquare vpon the ground, what ſpace ſo euer that you would haue betweene man and man, both in length and breadth, and alſo for to know how many foote of ground ſquarely they will ſtand vpon or occupie. Fol. 70. 71. 72. & 73.
               
               The 83. Deuiſe ſheweth you a way for to knowe this, when that you haue ſorted your weapons and knowing the number of weapons of euery ſorte, and you would be ſo many men in a ranck, that doth ſhew vnto you how many ranckes that there will be of them of every ſorte of weapons. Fol. 73. 74.
               
               The 84. Deuiſe ſhweth this, if that you are imbattelled, and would take another peece of grounde, which you cannot doe, except that you muſt paſſe through a ſtraight, this Deuiſe doth ſhew vnto you, how that you may paſſe thorow and neuer alter the forme of your battell. Fol. 74. & 75.
               
               The 85. Deuiſe ſheweth, howe that you may ſhift your ſelfe from one number of men in a ranck. vnto another number of men in aranck, and doe it with eaſe. Fol. 75. & 76.
               
               The 86. Deuiſe ſheweth, if that it were ſo that in the forefronts if that the men were ſpoyled either with ſhot, or by any other misfortune, it doth ſhew you to ſupply thoſe roumes with men preſently againe. Fol. 76. & 77.
               
               The 87. Deuiſe is, touching the conſiderations of things in the ioyning of battels, what things are to be foreſeene. Fol. 78. & 79.
               
               The 88. Deuiſe ſheweth you, what is to be done if that you are too weake for your enemies. Fol. 79. & 80.
               
               The 89. Deuiſe ſheweth you, what places to goe vnto for

refuge, if that your enemies haue gotten betweene you and home. Fol. 80.
               
               The 90. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you may carrie your match cloſe and not be ſeene in the night, and alſo by that meanes you may kepe it from the wet in raynie weather. Fol. 80. & 81
               
               The 91. Deuiſeſheweth, how you ſhall know if that it be in the night, if that there be any horſemen ſtirring, if that the night be neuer ſo darke. Fol. 81.
               
               The 92. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to trauell by night or by day, in ſuch places that you would not be ſeene. Fol. 82.
               
               The 93. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that an armed man may ſwim ouer a riuer. Fol. 82.
               
               The 94. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you may make a bridge vpon a ſodaine, that a whole armie of men, and their cariages may paſſe ouer any riuer or hauen, if that it bee not of too great a breadth. Fol. 83.
               
               The 95. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make ſuch prouiſion, that you may make as many boates in one day, as ſhalbe able to carry a whole armie of men ouer a hauen or riuer at one time, and of that prouiſion you ſhall carry with you, one cart or Wagon ſhal beare as much of that ſtuffe, as ſhal make as many boates, as ſhall beare 5 or 6. hundred of men at once. Fol. 83. 84. & 85.
               
               The 96. Deuiſe doth ſhew vnto you how that you may draw your Ordinance before in the front of the armie, and their mouthes forwards ready to be ſhot off, and the horſe behinde the Ordinance, &c. Fol. 85. & 86.
               
               The 97. Deuiſe in like manner doth ſhew howe for to drawe or driue the Waggons or cartes, and the horſe to be behinde. Fol. 86.
               
               The 98. Deuiſe is, as concerning certaine ſmall Ordināce, for to impale an armie. Fol. 86. & 87
               
               The 99. Deuiſe is, as touching pikemen againſt horſemen. Fol. 88.
               
               Th 100. Deuiſe ſheweth, how that you ſhall know whether that any ground be higher or lower than the ground that you

doe ſtand vpon. Fol. 88. & 89.
               
               The 101. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to know whether that it be poſſible to bring water vnto any place from the head of any ſpring, and how hye that it may be raiſed. Fol. 89.
               
               The 102. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to turne a water another way, &c. Fol. 89. & 90.
               
               The 103. Deuiſe ſheweth vnto you, if that you haue any occaſion to lift or wey any thing vp from the ground, and to doe it after colepreſſe wiſe, and you knowing the waight of the thing that is to be lifted, and then you may know before hand whether it will lift the thing or not. Fol. 90. & 91.
               
               The 104. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to lift any thing with a wheele, and you knowing the waight of that thing that is to be lifted, then you may know what waight will lift it or wey it vp, as the leſſe weight will wey the bigger, which is knowen by the compaſſe of the wheele, and the compaſſe of the axeltree. Fol. 91.
               
               The 105. Deuiſe ſheweth vnto you, if that one wheele doth turne another, then you may knowe if that the one wheele bee turned once about, you may knowe how many times that the other wheele ſhall bee turned about by the number of teeth. Fol. 91. 92.
               
               The 106. Deuiſe ſheweth in like manner if one wheele doth turne another without teeth, as with a rope or chaine, then by the turning of the one you may knowe the turning of the other, by the circumference of both the wheeles. Fol. 92.
               
               The 107. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to place a glaſſe in a houſe or chamber, for to ſee what things bee abroade in the fieldes. Fol. 92. 93. & 94.
               
               The 108. Deuiſe ſheweth, how for to make yron, leade, or ſtone, or any kinde of mettall to ſwimme, without the ayde of any thing to helpe it, or cauſe it to ſwimme. Fol. 94.
               
               The 109. Deuiſe ſheweth, how it may be poſſible to burne any thing that is apt to take fire, as gunpowder, Ocum, or Flexe, or pitch, or ſuch other like, halfe a mile, or a mile from you, and to doo it by glaſſes. Fol. 95. & 96.
               
               
                  
The 110. Deuiſe ſheweth, how it is poſſible to ſee a ſmall thing a great diſtance of, as to reade a letter a quarter of a mile from you, or to ſee a man foure or fiue miles of, and to viewe a towne or castell ſixe or ſeauen miles of, and to ſee the windowes thereof. Fol. 96. & 97.
               
               The 111. Deuiſe ſheweth, how to make a crane or engine, that may lift a great weight, as 100. to wey 100000. weight. Fol. 97. & 98.
               
               The 112. Deuiſe is as touching the making of engines to thruſt from or to pul to you, with great force or ſtrength. Fo. 98.
               
               The 113. Deuiſe is, as touching the making of ſtrange workes, as the braſen head that did ſeeme to ſpeake, or birdes of woode or mettall made by Arte to flie, and birdes made of woode or mettall to ſing ſweetely, at certaiue houres appoynted, &c. which the common people dooth maruell at. Fol. 98. 99.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               Now ſhall follow certaine Deuiſes as touching Martiall affayres by Sea and Shippes.
               
                  
                     FIrſt this, whether any Ship be higher or lower of boord than the Ship that you be in, & alſo whether you do ouer top hir, or vndertop hit; it is very neceſſarie for him that is a Captaine of a Ship to knowe, for by that meanes there may growe great aduantage, by the knowledge of it, and in like manner great inconuenience by not knowing of it: for when he dooth knowe before that hee dooth lay a Ship aboorde where for to enter his men to the moſt aduantage, and alſo it is a great likelyhoode to doo moſt good. And this way you ſhall knowe it moſt certainelie: ſtand you vpon the Poope of your owne Ship, and looke you vpon the other Ship, and if you doo ſee the Horizon circle ouer the top of the Poope of the other Ship, then the Ship that you are in, is higher of boorde than the other Ship, but if you doo ſee any parte of the other Ship higher than the line of the Horizon, then that part of the other Ship is higher of boorde than your Ship, by ſo much as you doo ſee aboue the line of the Horizon, for this is generall for euer, looke whatſoeuer you do ſee euen with the Horizon, is iuſt in height equall with your eye, neither higher nor lower▪ ſo that by this meanes you may know what height any Ship is in euerie place, comparing hir by your Ship, as this. If your owne

Ship be higher than the other Ship, then goe you lower in your owne Ship, vntill ſuch time as you doo ſee that part of the Ship euen with the Horizon, and then looke vpon your owne Ship, and marke where the Horizon cutteth, then that part of your Ship is iuſt equal in heigth with the other, & by this meanes you may view any Ship in euery place at your pleaſure: and then to knowe whether the other Ship dooth ouertop you, or vndertop you, either goe vp your ſelfe, or ſend vp vppon the ſhroudes, and then where you doo ſee the top of the other Ship iuſt with the Horizon, then your eye is in heigth iuſt with the other Ships top, whether you be vnder or ouer the top of your owne Ship, and this is true without any fayle, as I doo further ſhew in the firſt Booke of the Treaſure for Trauellers, the 8. Chapter.
               
               
                  The 2. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, how to arme a Ship of warre, to fight with another Ship or Ships, this muſt be conſidered, that you keepe your men as cloſe as you may, for beeing ſpoyled with ſmall ſhot, or Quarrels, & Arrowes: wherefore you muſt haue a bonnet of a ſayle, or elſe ſome other Canueſſe ſtretched and made faſt all alongſt the waſt and deckes of the Ship, and alſo to arme the forecaſtell & the Poupe with Mantels or gownes and ſuch other like, to ſhaddow your men, and then in like manner your tops to be armed, to ſhadow your men: but now in theſe daies, the topfight is vnto little effect, ſince the vſe of Caliuers or Muskets in Ships; for a man may arme the top for the Quarrels or Arrowes, but it is not poſſible to arme it againſt the Caliuers: wherefore it is not good to haue many men in the tops in theſe dayes, for they will be but ſpoyled. And alſo, you muſt catharp your ſhroudes, and alſo to haue a netting to goe with chaynes in your waſt, & in like

manner abaft your maine ſhroudes, according to the building and contriuing of the Ship, and then you muſt appoynt your ſmall ſhot to ſtand at the loupes & ſuch other like places, to beate at your enemies: in like manner the Gunners to vſe their great Ordinance, & ſo conſequently euery perſon to look to his charge that the Captaine hath appoynted him to doo.
                  And alſo, the Captaine muſt appoynt the Carpenter to goe into the holde of the Ship, with ſuch prouiſion as is meet for the purpoſe, to ſtop any leake if any chance. And alſo, to ſend downe the Surgion into his Caben, which ought and muſt be in the holde of the Ship, and he for to haue all ſuch prouiſions as is meete for his purpoſe in a readineſſe, to the end to dreſſe the hurt men. And theſe things ought the Captaine of any Ship to foreſee aforehand, with diuers other cauſes, as the things ſtall require, which I for breuitie doo omitte.
               
               
                  The 3. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you may make a plaine Decke or Orloppe, that hath but plaine hatches, and hath no other fight, that it ſhall be in manner vnpoſſible to win the Ship, without the ſinking or ſpoyling of the Ship, as this, to take vp two of the hatches, one before, and another abafte, as you ſhall ſee it moſt conuenient for your purpoſe, and at the corner of the hatch make a hole with an Auger, ſo that at the foure corners of the hatch there bee foure holes, and ſo right againſt euery hole, when the hatch is laide, bore it with that Auger downe thorough the comings and the beames and all at the foure corners, and then take a peece of wood of a ſeauen or eyght ynches long, and three or foure ynches thicke, whether it bee rounde or ſquare it is all one matter, and then bore a hole with the Auger thorough the little peece of wood,

thorough the middle, beginning at the one end, and out at the other ende, and ſo to haue for euery corner of the hatch, a bolte of yron, with a good broade head, and to be of length to goe through the hatch, the chockes of wodde endlong, and the comings of the hatch and beame, and all that it may bee afore locked vnderneath, and this to vſe two of the hatches, and then when you doo ſee cauſe, you being a Merchant man, that any Ship dooth aſſayle you, then ſet vp the two hatches in the Ship, and looke that the boltes be ſure locked vnderneath the Decke, and then theſe hatches will lie ſeauen or eyght ynches higher than the reſt, ſo by that meanes there can no man come vppon the Decke, but that they may either lanch a Pike at him, or ſhoote a Calyuer, or vſe a Croſſebowe, or drawe a long bowe, and ſo generally there is no weapon, but that they may vſe at them rounde aboute the hatch, that it is not poſſible to bee vnſpoyled vpon the Decke, and beeing two hatches, vſed thus, the one hatch ſhall cleare the other. And this deuiſe is a hundred times better than the Spardeckes, &c.
               
               
                  The 4. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching the laying of any Ship aboorde. If your Ship bee higher of boorde than the other Ship, then view hir where that the beſt place is for to enter hir, that is to ſay, where ſhee hath leaſt force againſt you to defend hirſelfe, & where your men may enter with moſt eaſe: & of that the other Ship be higher of boord than your Ship, thē you muſt lay hir aboord, that you may come vnto the cheyne walles to enter by the ſhrouds, either the fore ſhrouds, or the mayne ſhrouds, &c. And furthermore, this muſt be moſt principally obſerued, if you haue any cōſort or conſorts of any other Shippe, or Shippes, that dooth come to helpe you, or you come to helpe them, that you doo not

lay them aboord the one vppon the one ſide, and the other vppon the other ſide, for then the one of you ſhall doo the other of you hurt, ten times more than the enemies, both with your great Ordinance, and alſo with your ſmall ſhot, and your owne Quarrels, and Arrowes: wherefore if that the other Ship be aboord alreadie alongſt the ſide, then if that you cannot haue roome to lay him aboorde on that ſide, then lay him aboord athwart the Stemme, or athwart the Stearne, as you ſhall ſee to your moſt aduantage, but in any wiſe come not aboord on the other ſide, for then you ſhall ſpoyle your ſelfe, & your conſort in like manner.
               
               
                  The 5. Deuiſe.
                  IF ſo be any Ship hath layd you aboord, and that you are too weake for him, then if ſo bee that you doo ſee the winde and the tide to bee all as one, or if that it bee calme, then vppon a ſuddaine put downe an Ancker, and then as ſoone as euer your Ship doth ride, then the tide will carrie the other Ship away from you, and then if that the winde and the tide be all one, it is not poſsible for the other Ship to come neere you againe, not vntill the tide doth turne, to come vnto the windward againe.
               
               
                  The 6. Deuiſe.
                  AND if any Ship doo giue you chace, and you do know that you are too weake for him, and alſo, although he ſayleth better than your Shippe, then when he doth come neere vnto you, and there is no remedie but he muſt needs lay you aboorde, then goe you hence afore the winde betweene your two ſheetes, and then as the other Ship dooth fetch vpon you, and bee readie to lay you aboord, alwaies keepe your Stearne vnto him, and ſuffer him not to come vp by your ſide, ſo ſhall you driue them to enter at your

Stearne ouer your Poope, and then they ſhal enter ſo painfully, for that they muſt clamber vp by their owne Ships bouleſpret, ſuch a narrowe place as the Stearne is, that a fewe men ſhall bee able to keepe them out, and this you may doo with eaſe, as long as you haue roome to goe afore the winde, that hee ſhall neuer bee able to lay you aboord, but onely at your Stearne, ſo that the Steeradge be well looked vnto, for as ſoone as you doo ſee him preace to come vp by your ſide, then louffe you from him, and ſo by this meanes he ſhall not bee able to come neere any other place but your Stearne. &c.
               
               
                  The 7. Deuiſe.
                  IF any Shippe hath layd you aboord about your bowes, and if you would ſincke him, then let your Ancker next vnto him hang a Cockbell with a ſtrong Painter, or rope, that the croſſe or Floukes may hang a little vnderneath the water, and then by the meanes of the heauing and ſetting of both the Shippes with the Sea, the Ancker will rent or plucke out the plancke of the Ships ſide with Ancker Floukes, and yet it will doo your owne Shippe no great hurt, for that ſtill the Ancker hangeth leuell but at one heigth, and the moſt hurt that it may doo vnto your own Shippe, it will pike but a hole, but for the other Shippe, ſhe falleth downe vppon it with her whole weight a fadome long together, which muſt needes with two or three plonges rent out the plancke of the ſhips ſide. &c.
               
               
                  The 8. Deuiſe.
                  IF that an armie of Shippes doo ride in any Hauen or Riuer to defend any place, or to keepe any place for receiuing of any more ſtrength or vittailes, & that they meane to ride there ſtill, and haue placed themſelues in ſuch order,

that no ſhip may paſſe by them, either to man a place, or to vittaile that place, thus it may be done: firſt this, prepare ſuch a ſufficient number of bad or olde ſhips as ſhall be conuenient, and then put ſuch kind of ſtuffe into them as will quickly bee fiered, and then when you doo ſee conuenient time that the winde and tide dooth ſerue your turne, ſend thoſe olde ſhips before with a fewe men for to gouerne them vnder ſaile, and with boates to ſaue themſelues, and then let them a little before ſet them on fire, and lay the principall ſhips aboord croſſe their Halce or Stemme, and then there is no doubt but they ſhall driue them to let ſlip their Anckers, or conſume them with fire, and then the moe men that there bee in number aboord, the greater ſhalbe their terror, if that they haue not boates enough to ſaue themſelues, and then preſently after that, you may come in, and doo your exployte, for that they will bee in ſuch a maze with the fire, that you may doo what you liſt: for if this deuiſe had been put in practiſe by Countie Mongomery when he went vnto Rochell, there is no doubt but they had both diſcomfited, or ſpoyled all thoſe ſhips that did ride before Rochel, and alſo the Count Mongomery might haue landed at his pleaſure.
               
               
                  The 9. Deuiſe.
                  WHere there is any Fleete that doth paſſe through the Sea, that dooth carrie either ſome principall perſon of eſtate, or els ſome great quantitie of treaſure or other riches, and haue certaine ſhips of great force to waft them, and to doo ſuch an exployte, to come by the ſpoyle of the, it may be thus handled, if it be not diſcloſed: the ſecrets of the matter is this. Get ſome great ſhips of countenance that are but bad, & let them ſeeme to be the Admirall, & to encoūter with their Admirall or principal ſhips of force, & then when that they be aboord, to ſet thē on fire, hauing

ſuch things aboord as will burne with great terror: and this will ſet a Ship on fire very ſuddainly, ſet a great Cawderne of Pitch or Tarre vppon the fire, and make a great fire vnder it, and then let all the tackle aboue the head bee newly tarred, and alſo haue ſuch things neere, as will take fire preſently, and then whileſt you are aboord of them, ſet fire on it, and it will bee at the top on a ſuddaine, and ſo ſhall you conſume both the Ships with fire, and the men in your Ship are alreadie prepared to ſaue themſelues with their boates: then the other Ships may followe the ſpoyle or chace at their pleaſure, and then when they do ſee their chiefeſt force taken from them, then they will be diſcouraged preſently.
               
               
                  The 10. Deuiſe.
                  THe principalleſt matter for to encounter with an armie of Shippes by Sea, is, to haue the weathergage of them for diuers cauſes, and for that thoſe cauſes are not vnknowen vnto moſt men, I do ceaſe for the ſaying of any thing therein: and in like manner neuer goe aboue two Shippes in a rancke, for if you doo, the one ſhall annoy the other of them, and the cloſer you doo enforce your enemies, the more aduantage you ſhall haue of them, for one ſhall hinder or hurt another of them.
               
               
                  The 11. Deuiſe.
                  IF you haue any great principall Ship of great force of Ordinance, and for feare of thoſe Deuiſes before ſpoken of, leaſt any Ship doo come aboord, to put you in danger of fiering, then it is beſt to prepare certaine ſtrong Maſts for to put out at the ports round about the Shippe, and to haue peeces framed with boults without boord, twentie or thirtie foote from the Ship, from one Maſt vnto another,

that no Ship may come betweene them, and thoſe framed Maſts may lie within boord, vntill ſuch time as occaſion ſhall be to vſe them, and to take them in, and put them out at their pleaſure, as need of ſeruice doth require.
               
               
                  The 12. Deuiſe.
                  IF it happen ſo that there bee any place where there is an exploit to be done, as the ayding of any place either with men, or vittailes, or ſuch other like, and there is Ordinance ſo placed at the entrance, that it ſeemeth not poſsible to paſſe it, for that the Channell commeth ſo neere vnto the Ordinance, yet by this meanes at a ſuddaine it is poſsible for a whole Fleete to paſſe, as this. Prepare two or three old great ſhippes more or leſſe, according vnto the diſcretion of them that haue viewed the place, where the Ordinance is that you do meane to paſſe with your fleete, then ſeeing your time conuenient, run aground with thoſe olde Ships right in the face of the Ordinance, with their ſayles ſtanding, and then they will ſhaddow with their holds and ſayles all the reſt of the fleete, till ſuch time as they ſhall be paſt the principall danger of the Ordinance.
               
               
                  The 13. Deuiſe.
                  IF you haue laide any Ship aboord, and you doo perceiue that he hath made a traine, to the intent that when you haue entred your men, to blowe them ouer boord, to preuent that, doo this: firſt prepare certaine earthen pots made of purpoſe, that will holde two or three pounde of powder more or leſſe at your diſcretion, and that the pot haue three or foure little eares round about the ſide, that you may make a little peece of match faſt thereunto vpon euery ſide of the pot, which being filled with powder, and the mouth of the pot beeing ſtopped, and the peeces of

match ſet on fire, then where you doo perceiue that the traine is made, there throwe in of theſe pots, and then the fall of the pot will breake the pot, and ſo the match that hangeth by the pot ſide, will ſet the powder on fire, and ſo ſet fire on their traine, &c. And alſo theſe pots be very neceſſarie to be throwne whereas men doo ſtand thicke, for to burne them, and to amaze them with the powder. And alſo of theſe pots they may throwe into the place of the chiefeſt fights of the ſhippes, to amaze the men, and ſo by that meanes they may the eaſilier enter the ſhip. &c.
               
               
                  The 14. Deuiſe.
                  TO cauſe a ſhip that ſhe ſhall not ſincke: firſt let her be ſufficiently balleſted, and then prepare as many caskes as halfe the ſhippes burthen commeth vnto, and let all the caskes bee made cloſe and tight, that no water may come into them, & then the caske being layd cloſe vnto the balleſt, and fraped down cloſe, that it doth not ſtirre, then the ſhip will not ſincke for any leake, for the caske will make her ſwim, and the balleſt will make her beare ſaile. The like may bee done by making cloſe of the hatches, ſo that the Orlop be vnder the water, ſo that the ſperkets be tight.
               
               
                  The 15. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, for to make prouiſion in a ſhip that your men bee not ſpoyled with great Ordinance, and eſpecially to preuent the haile ſhot, and Croſſebarre ſhot, or cheyne ſhot, and yet your men to ſtand in a readineſſe at all times, then doo this: firſt prepare Elmen planckes of 4. or 5. or 6. ynches thicke, or any other plancke of ſuch wood as will not rent or ſplenter, and then in ſuch a conuenient place vnder the Decke, let it be ſtrongly ſtanſhioned all alongſt the middle of the ſhip with two rowes of

ſtantions, and to bee of 4▪ or 5. foote aſunder betweene the two rowes of ſtantions, and that will bee like the caſe in a Galley that the Canon lieth in, and then that done, throw all the old ropes you can get, and fill that full therewith, and then when you are in fight with your enemies, looke of what ſide he is of you, then thoſe men that are not occupied, either about the Ordinance or the tackling of the Ship ſailes, may go vnto the further ſide of thoſe plancks, and be ſafe from the violence or ſpoiling of them with the ſhot, for the ropes that are within the caſe, wil kill the violence of the ſhot, and eſpecially the Croſſebarre ſhot, or cheyne ſhot, which is the chiefeſt ſpoyling of men, and yet notwithſtanding the men are in a readineſſe whenſoeuer you haue any occaſion to vſe them, whether it be to enter the other Ship, or to defend that Ship which you are in.
               
               
                  The 16. Deuiſe.
                  FOr the preuention of the 8. Deuiſe, that is to ſay, to let them that ſhould paſſe by any Bulwarke or platforme, they muſt cheyne their Hauen or harborrow, if it be of any great breadth, then it muſt bee done in this manner: for that the cheyne is of ſuch great weight, that it is almoſt vnpoſsible to make any engines to ſtretch or wey the Cheyne aboue the water, therefore when the cheyne is laid croſſe the water, they muſt prepare certaine great Lighters made of purpoſe, with certaine engines, as Capſtines, or Geares, or ſuch other like deuiſes, to wey the cheyne aboue the water, and ſo to let the Lighter ride by the ſaid cheyne at all times, and when they would haue Shippes to paſſe too and fro, then the Cheyne may be ſuncke to the bottome, and when that they would haue no Shippes paſſe, then the Lighters may wey the Cheynes. Being neere vnto any place, whereas Ordinance is planted, it is not poſsible to paſſe in. And by this meanes they maye cheyne a

harborough that is a mile broade ouer, hauing Lighters ſufficient enough to wey the cheyne aboue the water. And alſo by this deuiſe, they may ſtop any paſſage vpon a ſuddaine, although they haue no cheyne, when it is ſo darke, that the watch of any Caſtle or Bulwarke cannot ſee them to make faſt ſome great Cabell croſſe the water, and to vnder-run the ſayd Cabell with boates.
               
               
                  The 17. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to make a Ship to drawe or goe but little into the water, and to hold a good winde, and to ſaile well both by and large, were very neceſſarie, and eſpecially in theſe our ſhallowe Seas, amongſt ſuch a number of ſands and banckes, and as I haue ſhewed in my third Booke, called A Treaſure for Trauellers, the 6. and 7. Chapter, how to alter the bigneſſe of Shippes, and to keepe that molde and proportion in all poynts. Wherefore if you would haue a Shippe to drawe but a little water, and to ſaile well by the winde, then doo this, ſhe muſt haue a flat bottome, like as the Binelanders and Plaites haue on the other ſide of the Sea in Flanders, and as I haue ſhewed in the 9. Chapter in my booke before mentioned, that all Ships that bee ſlatie, will ſaile well with the winde: but now to make it to ſaile well by the winde, then doo this. That place where as the Keele ſhould ſtande, muſt bee open into the Shippe, and made tight on both the ſides, as high or deepe as the Ship dooth goe into the water when ſhee is loden, and in that there muſt be made a thing to be letten downe, and to bee wound vp againe as neede ſhall require, which thing muſt bee in this manner, to bee as long as almoſt the length of the Keele, and to bee well plancked and made ſtrong, according vnto the bigneſſe of the Shippe, and to bee beaten downe into the water foure or fiue foote, according vnto the quantitie of the Ship, and then when you would

haue it to hold a good winde, cauſe that to bee let downe into the water, and then that will not ſuffer the Ship to fall to Leewardes: and then when that the winde is large, and that you are to paſſe any ſhallowe water, it may bee wound vp againe, and by this meanes you may make a Ship of a hundred Tunnes not to drawe fiue foote water, hauing length and breadth correſpondent to beare the tonnage.
               
               
                  The 18. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo it is poſſible to make a Ship or a Boate that may goe vnder the water vnto the bottome, and ſo to come vp againe at your pleaſure, as this, as I haue declared in my Booke called The Treaſure for trauellers, in the 4. Booke called Staticke, that any thing that ſinketh, is heauier than the proportion of ſo much water, and if it bee lighter than the magnitude of ſo much water, then it ſwimmeth or appeareth aboue the water, according vnto the proportion of weight, and then this being true, as it is moſt certaine, then any magnitude or body that is in the water, if that the quantity in bigneſſe, hauing alwaies but one weight, may bee made bigger or leſſer, then it ſhall ſwimme when you would, and ſinke when you liſt: and for to make any thing doo ſo, then in the ioyntes or places that doo make the thing bigger and leſſer, muſt be of leather, and in the inſide to haue Skrewes to winde it in and alſo out againe: and for to haue it ſinke, they muſt winde it in to make the thing leſſe, and then it ſinketh vnto the bottome: and to haue it ſwimme, then to winde the ſides out againe, to make the thing bigger, and it will ſwimme, according vnto the body of the thing in the water. And to make a ſmall Ship or Barke or Boate, do this, the Barke being made of purpoſe, let there be good ſtore of Baleſt in the bottome of hir, and ouer the Baleſt as lowe as may

be, let there be a cloſe Orloppe, ſuch a one, that no water may come into it, and then in like manner at a ſufficient heigth, to haue another cloſe Orlop that no water may come through it, and that being done, then bore both the ſides full of holes betweene the two cloſe Orlops: and that being done, then make a thing like the ſide of the Barke or Ship that may goe vnto the ſide of the Ship, the one for the one ſide, and the other for the other ſide, and that muſt be made ſo tight and cloſe, that no water may come thorough it, and that done, then take leather, ſuch a quantitie as is ſufficient for to ſerue your purpoſe, and that leather muſt bee nayled cloſe, with ſuch prouiſion, that no water may ſoake thorough it, and to be of that largeneſſe, that the thing may goe cloſe vnto the Barke or Ship ſide when you would, and come in againe, to let ſufficient water in, that it ſhall not be able to ſwimme. And now this being done, then you muſt make prouiſion of Skrewes or other engines, to winde the two things on the inſides of the Barke or Ships, that you may winde them in or out at your pleaſure and that done, then for the hatch or Skotel, that you muſt goe in or out, you muſt haue leather round about it, that you may bring that together as a purſſe mouth, and ſo with a ſmall Skrewe, you may winde it ſo cloſe together, that being in the bottome of the water, there ſhal no water come in, and that done, then you muſt haue one Maſt, that muſt bee of ſuch ſufficient bigneſſe, that it muſt haue a hole bored thorough the one end vnto the other, as a Pompe hath: and that done, then when that you liſt to nnke, then you muſt ſound the deepeneſſe of the water, and foreſee that the water will not riſe higher than the top of the Maſt, for the hole that goeth thorough the Maſt muſt giue you ayre, as man cannot liue without it: & now when you would ſinke, then with your Skrewes winde the two ſides inwards, and water will come into the holes, and ſo the Ship or Barke will ſinke vnto the bottome,

and there it may reſt at your pleaſure: and then when that you would haue it ſwimme, then with the Skrewes winde out the things on both the ſides, and that will thruſt the water out againe at the holes, and ſo it will riſe and come vp aboue the water, and ſwimme as it did before, &c.
               
               
                  The 19. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you may make a Boate to goe without oares or Sayle, by the placing of certaine wheeles on the outſide of the Boate, in that ſort, that the armes of the wheeles may goe into the water, and ſo turning the wheeles by ſome prouiſion, and ſo the wheeles ſhall make the Boate to goe.
               
               
                  The 20. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo, they make a water Mill in a Boate, for when that it rideth at an Anker, the tyde or ſtreame will turne the wheeles with great force, and theſe▪ Milles are vſed in France, &c.
               
               
                  The 21. Deuiſe.
                  ANd in like manner, they may make an engine to know the way or going of a Ship, for to knowe how faſt or ſoftly that any Ship goeth, which is very neceſſarie for al them that goeth of long voyages, in a number of cauſes. The inſtrument is to be made in this manner. There muſt be made a little ſmall Boate, and then there muſt bee placed a wheele in the Boate, that the armes thereof muſt goe in the water, and ſo as the Ship paſſeth or goeth in the Sea, ſo the way of the Ship doth turne the wheele by the armes that goeth in the water of the Sea, and from

that wheele or wheeles that goeth on the outſide of the little Boate, there commeth an Axeltree▪ & vpon that there is a note, with ſixe or eight teeth more or leſſe, as the deuiſer or maker ſhall ſee good, and that note ſhall turne another wheele by the teeth, on the Circumference: and the wheele worke may bee ſo framed or pitched, that when the wheele on the outſide of the little Boate hath gone 50. or 100. times about, that the note on the Axeltree ſhall turne the inner wheele but once about, and then the thing being tryed, that when the wheele with armes that goeth in the water, hath gone once about, that the Ship hath gone ſo many foote or ynches iuſtly, and then when the wheele on the outſide hath gone ſuch a number of times about, then the inner wheele is turned once about▪ and then it may be ſaide, that the Ship hath gone ſo much, when the wheele is turned once: and then that wheele ſhall haue a note vpon the Axeltree thereof, and turne another wheele by the teeth of the Circumference, and ſo you may make one wheele turne another, and to haue ſo many motions, that the laſt wheele ſhall not bee turned about, vntill the Ship hath gone 500. or 1000. leagues. As for example this. The wheele that goeth on the outſide of the little Boate, when that it is turned round once, the Ship hath gone iuſt ſixe foote, that is, one Fadome, and now the note that goeth on the Axeltree, dooth turne a wheele by the teeth, in ſuch ſort, that when the outward wheele hath gone 100. times about, that it is turned once, and then you may conclude, that when the firſt wheele on the inſide of the Boate hath gone once about, that the Ship hath gone 600▪ foote, or 100. Fadomes: and now this firſt wheele dooth turne another wheele in the like order, that is, for 100. turning, to turne the other but once, & then you may conclude, that the Ship hath gone 100. times 100. Fadome, and that maketh 10000. Fadomes, and that conteineth foure leagues, and then there

is an Axeltree on that wheele with a nut that turneth a third wheele by the teeth on the Circumference, in that order as before is ſhewed, that when the ſecond wheele is turned 100. times about, that the wheele is turned once, and then you may conclude, that when the third wheele is turned once about, that the Ship hath gone 100. times foure leagues, that is 4000. leagues. And by this order, this engine or inſtrument ſhall ſhew vnto you how much the Ship hath gone, by the turning of the wheeles. And to ſee and know how the wheeles dooth turne, then there muſt bee made certaine ſpurres, ſuch as the hand or the poynters of the dyalles of a Clocke hath, to come from euery wheele, and ſo to be marked round about, in ſuch order as the dyalles haue for the houre of the day, but thoſe diuiſions may bee diuided but into eyght partes or ſixeteene partes, and ſo the directer that commeth from the firſt wheele, will ſhewe in his turnings the number of Fadomes, and the ſecond wheele will ſhew the number of leagues, and the third wheele may ſhew you the number of skores of leagues, and ſo to haue another to ſhewe the number of 100. leagues, and ſo foorth at your pleaſure you may make as many motions in it as you liſt, as it ſhall be moſt meeteſt for the purpoſe, & beſt for continuance. And this inſtrument being towed in a little ſmall cloſe Boate, will ſhewe vnto you the way of any Ship, that is to ſay, how faſt or ſoftly that the Ship goeth thorough the water, &c. The deuiſer of this engine or inſtrument was Humfrey Cole.
                  
               
               
                  The 22. Deuiſe.
                  AS I haue declared in the fourth part of my Booke called A Treaſure for Trauellers, how to wey ſunken Ships, ſo in like manner I doo thinke it good to ſhewe how to make their ropes faſt vnto any ſuncke Ship, if it bee

ſuncke very deepe in the water that they may come by no part thereof at a lowe water, then it is very tedious and difficulte to make any ropes faſt vnto it, for that no man may come at it to make any ropes faſt vnto any ſtrong place thereof: yet the Venetians and the Jtalians doo vſe to diue vnder the water, which we here in England cannot doo for two cauſes. Firſt, our Countrey is more colder than theirs. And ſecondly, their Sea water is more clearer than ours for two reſpects, for their water dooth not ebbe and flowe as ours dooth, ſo that the waſh of their Sea is alwaies in one place, and our water dooth rife and fall, and the water ſometime beateth in one place, and ſometimes in another place, which dooth cauſe our water to bee alwaies thick, and in like manner by the meanes of the ebbing and flowing, it cauſeth a tide or ſtreame to run too and fro, which will not ſuffer the water to be cleare, and ſo foorth.
                  And alſo, the Venetians and Italians haue (when that they doo diue vnder the water) a place of refuge to take ayre or breath in, by ſome great veſſell of mettall of ſufficient bigneſſe, and of weight, and let it downe vnto the bottome, with the bottome of the veſſell directly vpwardes, ſo ſtanding vppon three or foure feete vppon the ground in the bottome of the Sea, and being letten preciſely downe with the bottome vpwardes, it is full of ayre, and then when that they cannot holde their breath no longer, then they doo repayre vnto the ſaide veſſell, the feete thereof being ſo high, that they may goe eaſilie vnder it, and there vnder the veſſell they doo breath themſelues in the ayre in the bottome of the Sea, &c. But Engliſhmen be not vſed to doo that: wherefore in my opinion, this is a very good way, that Engliſhmen may vſe to make their ropes faſt vnto any ſoncken Ship or veſſell at a ſtill water, that is to ſay, at a lowe water, or a full Sea in the night, to prepare certaine Glaſſes

being made of purpoſe, to bee tyght, that water cannot get in, and to put lightes or Candles into them, and then let them downe whereas the ſoncken Ship is, ſo ſhall they ſee how for to take the beſt holde of the Ship, and then hauing prepared their Gratnels and their engynes, they may catch holde of the ſuncken Ship at their pleaſure, for you may ſee any light thorough the water, and alſo any thing that is neere vnto the lighte. &c.
               
               
                  The 23. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, they may make ſuch prouiſion that any man may goe downe vnto the bottome of the water, and remaine there at his pleaſure, as this: firſt prepare leather, and make a caſe of it in this manner. Firſt for his head, and that muſt bee made large ynough, and then there muſt bee two holes for his eyes, and then ſet in Glaſſe, and make it tight round aboutes it, and ſo make the body and the ſleeues for his armes, and to bee cloſed ſo cloſe, that no water may come into it. And that done, then there muſt bee a long Truncke made of Leather that muſt bee hollowe within, that muſt bee longer than the deepeneſſe of the water, and that muſt bee tighte too, and then at the vppermoſt ende or top there muſt bee a bowle, or ſuch a thing that will ſwimme, that through the Truncke that is like a rope, the ayre may paſſe downe vnto him that is in the bottome of the water, and ſo the man that is put into the caſe of Leather, and that beeing made tyght, that no water may come in vnto him, and eſpeciallie vnto his Mouth and Noſe, and ſo to haue ayre to come downe thorough the Trunck of leather, then he hauing ſight thorough the Glaſſe, hee ſhall bee able to endure to tarrie in the water, and alſo to ſee in the water how for

to make ropes faſt vnto any thing that is ſonke in the water, &c.
               
               
                  The 24. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo for the making of a Grapnell, that ſhall holde faſt any thing it hapneth to take holde of, it muſt bee in this manner, that is to ſay, that it muſt be made of good yron, and very ſubſtantiall and ſtrong, of two peeces, to goe vpon a very ſtrong pin, that the ioynte may goe too and fro, and then the end that muſt take holde, the endes muſt be turned inwards, like as a paire of Pincers dooth, and then aboue the ioynt or pinne, then the ropes muſt bee made faſt thereunto vpon both the cheekes or endes thereof; and that done, the more weight that this kinde of Grapnell taketh holde of, the faſter it keepeth it, by the meanes that the ropes vpon the vpper end by the meanes of the weight, dooth drawe it togetherwards, ſo by that meanes the thing that it hath taken holde of cannot ſlippe from it, &c.
               
               
                  The 25. Deuiſe.
                  IF any Ship haue a leake in hir, and will not be found, for that you cannot ſee where the water dooth come in, then take an earthen pot, and leaue nothing in the pot, and then a boordes ende, and ſet the mouth of the pot vppon the boordes ende, with the pot vpon it in the holde of the Ship, and then lay your eare, and hearken vnto the pot, and if you be neere vnto the leake, you ſhall heare the running in of the water, and the neerer you doo come, the more breefer you ſhall heare it, and the farther off you bee, the leſſe you ſhall heare it, ſo by the remouing of it tuo and fro, you ſhall heare in what place it is in the Ship, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 26. Deuiſe.
                  ANd if a Ship haue her Maſts ſtanding, and neuer a rope faſt vnto the top of it, and for to get vp vnto the toppe thereof, then this he muſt doo, they muſt firſt prepare eyther a greene ſtrong withie, & for that the Maſt is ſmooth, then there muſt bee made a certaine number of things of yron, with a hole through them as a beadeſtone hath, or as the Trockes for the parrell of a Maſt, but they muſt bee three cornered and ſharpe, that it may take holde of the wood, and not ſlip, and then they being put on the withie, or ſuch other like, then let that part that is about the maſt, haue thoſe triangles of yron, and the other part to goe about the bodie of him that doth goe vp the Maſt, in ſuch forme, that it may bee ſo ſlacke, that hee may ſet his feete vpon the Maſt with eaſe, and ſo hee ſetting his feete vpon the Maſt, and leaning backwards, ſhall raiſe himſelfe, and when that his feete is as high as he can, then he muſt giue his bodie in, and then iam or lift the withie vp higher with his handes at a ſuddaine, and ſo by that meanes he may get vnto the top of the Maſt, for in leaning backwardes, and the harder that hee leaneth, he cauſeth that things that are about the Maſt, that they will not ſlippe. &c. And by this order, the Neagers in Ginny doo vſe to goe vp vnto the top of a tree, and if that it were 60. or 70. foote high without a bough. And if that the Maſt haue Treſeltries at the top thereof, then they may doo this, to make a ſmall line faſt vnto an arrowe, and ſo to ſhoote it ouer the toppe of the Maſt, and then with the ſmall line or ſtring you may drawe vp a bigger, and ſo ſtill from the leſſe vnto the bigger, vntil that you haue ſuch a one vp as will ſerue your turne to goe vp by. &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 27. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching the keeping of a Hauenor Riuer by night, in ſuch ſort, that you would haue no ſhippe nor other veſſell to paſſe, neither by day nor by night, then you muſt deuiſe ſome imagined marke or markes vpon the farther ſide of the water, & then you muſt plant your Ordinance right vppon thoſe markes, and then in the night you muſt place lights in thoſe places, and then if that there dooth come any Ships in the night, they will ſhaddowe or take away the ſight of the light from you, and then you may be aſſured, that the ſhip is right with the mouth of the peece, and then you ſhooting off your peece, you ſhal hit the ſhip if that it bee diſcreetly handled, as I doo more at large declare in the 26. Chapter of my booke, called, The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  The 28. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to continue a batterie both night and day, you muſt doo this: when that all your Ordinance bee laden and leuelled vnto the breach or markes aſsigned, and would continue the ſame day & night, then take your Quadrant, and looke at what degree that the peece lieth, and then plome the middle of the mouth of the peece downe vnto the ground, and there make a marke, and then plome the middle of the taile of the peece down vnto the groūd, and there in like manner make another marke, and then drawe a right line from both the markes, and the line to be longer by two yards, than the two marks, and that done, you may continue to ſhoote all the night, for the degrees in the Quadrant will giue the peece the true heigth of the marke, and the line vnderneath the peece will lay the peece right vpon the marke, as I doo more at large declare

in the 24. Chapter of my booke, called, The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  The 29. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to plant Ordinance in the night, and to ſhoote preſently at any marke aſsigned, doo this. Firſt, ſeeke the ground meete for your purpoſe, and then take an Aſtrolobe, and hang that vppon your thombe by the ring, and then turne the Athilleyday or rule with the ſights vp and downe, vntill that you doo ſee the marke that you doo meane for to ſhoote at through both the ſights of the Athilleyday, the Aſtrolobe for to hang perfitely vpright, and then looke vppon the Aſtrolobe at what degree that the Athilleyday dooth poynt vnto, and keepe that in remembrance, for that giueth the peece the true heigth of the mark, and then where that you doo meane for to plant your Ordinance, there make a marke, and then goe backwards twentie foote, and then view the marke that you do meane for to ſhoote at, that it be right ouer the marke that you haue made vppon the grounde, and right with that marke make another marke, and then goe a little further backwards, and then view it againe, and ſee that the mark that you doo meane for to ſhoote at, and the other two markes that you haue made vppon the ground, to bee all three vpon one right line by the the ſight of your eye, and if that they bee not, then you may amende them, and ſet them right, and then thoſe two markes will rule the matter, ſo that you may lay the peece right vpon the marke, and then you bringing your Ordinance in the night, you may ſhoote preſently, as I doo more at large declare in the 25. Chapter of my booke, called, The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 30. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching how to ſhoote at a Ship tha
                        •
                      is vnder ſaile in a Riuer, they muſt doo this, they muſt plant their Ordinance againſt ſome ymagined marke, vppon the farther ſide of the water, and then when that they do ſee that the ſhip doth begin to cloſe the ymagined mark that their Ordinance lieth right againſt, then giue fire vnto the Ordinance, and they ſhall make a perfite ſhot, as I doo more at large declare in the 14. Chapter of my booke, called, The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  The 31. Deuiſe.
                  IF that you haue a peece of Ordinance that is not truely bored, that is to ſay, if the core or concauitie doo not goe right in the middle of the mettall, but that it dooth leane more the one way than it dooth the other way, that peece will neuer ſhoote right vpon the marke, except they doo this: looke toward which ſide the mettall of the peece is moſt thickeſt, vnto that ſide the peece will caſt the ſhot, and for remedie thereof they muſt do this. Firſt they muſt ſeeke where the mettall is moſt thickeſt, and that beeing knowne, then when that you doo ſet vp the diſpart of the peece, you muſt put halfe the diuerſitie of the thickeſt of the mettall, that it is thicker on the one ſide more than it is on the other ſide, vnto the length of the diſpart, and then you muſt ſet the diſpart iuſtly vppon that ſide and place that the mettall is moſt thickeſt, and then when you doo make any ſhot with that peece, you muſt giue your leuell iuſtly vppon the thicker ſide of the peece, that is to ſay, the mettall of the breech of the peece, and the diſpart, and the marke, to bee all three vppon one right line by the ſight of your eye, as I doo more plainly ſhewe in the 12.

Chapter of my booke, called, The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  The 32. Deuiſe.
                  IF that any place be to be beſeeged that ſtandeth vppon a mariſh ground, ſo that it is thought vnpoſsible for to bring the Cannon vnto it, yet notwithſtanding it is poſſible by this deuiſe both for to bring the Cannon vnto it, and alſo for to place the Cannon againſt it, although that the ground be neuer ſo ſoft. Firſt, let them prepare a flat bottomd boate for euery Cannon, & if that it were a Cannon of 8000. weight, the boate but 20. foote long, and 8▪ foote broad, if that boate were in the water, the boate will ſwim with that Cannon at one foot deepneſſe going into the water, then it is a plain caſe whether that it be mariſh ground or owes, it will not ſinke halfe ſo much to be drawne ouer it, being in the boate, and the boate to be made tight, that no water or durt doo come in: and then if that the ground be ſo ſoft, that they can bring no horſes to make the drawe it, yet it may be drawne by men, and 80▪ men will draw it, and if euery man do draw but 100. weight, the boate to be made at that end that goeth forwards flatlong, that it may ſtrike againſt nothing. And I am of that opinion, that it is not poſsible to make any better kinde of platforme to place their Ordinance vpon in the boate, for if the ground were neuer ſo ſoft, it can ſinke no further into it, nor ſo far neither, as it will into the water. And by this meanes they may both bring their Ordinance, and place their Ordinance in any groūd how ſoft ſo euer it be, at their pleaſure.
               
               
                  The 33. Deuiſe.
                  IF that it hapneth ſo that you haue any peece of Ordinance, which when you haue laden her, the ſhot will not

goe home vnto the powder, and that the peece is ſo cloyed, that if the peece bee ſhot off, ſhee will breake: to ſaue the peece, and vncloy the peece, doo this: for if that it were in any place of ſeruice, if the peece doo breake, there may happen three great daungers, as this. Firſt, the lacke of the thing when they ſhould vſe it. And ſecondly, the loſſe of the value of the thing. And thirdly, the hurt that may happen by that meanes. &c. And for to vncloye the peece, if that you cannot by no meanes, ſtall the peece, and then put in cleane water at the tutchhole, vntill that it dooth ſtand full of water, and then koyne vp the breach of the peece, that the mouth of the peece may ſtand dripping downewards▪ and ſo let the water drop out of the mouth a two or three daies, and ſtill put in more water, and keepe the tuchhole full of water, and ſo by that meanes the water will ſoake out all the Peeter from out of the powder in the peece, and then that being done, you may prime freſh pouder in at the tuchhole, as much as may be ſufficient to blow out the ſhot that is in the peece, and in like manner you may ſaue the Peeter, by ſetting a tubbe or veſſell vnder the mouth of the peece. &c.
               
               
                  The 34. Deuiſe.
                  IF through treaſon or otherwiſe, the enemies haue cloyed the touchholes of your Ordinance, and that you haue no Drill for to bore it out vpon the ſuddaine, and yet you are driuen to vſe your Ordinance, then ſcale your peece, both the ſhot and the wadde, but not the powder, and then put in a lower or ſmaller ſhot without a wadde, and then make a traine of powder from the powder in the peece, vnto the mouth of the peece, and then giue leuel vnto your enemies, and ſo giue fire at the mouth of the peece, and then the force of the blaſt of the powder will blowe out the naile or ſpike out of the tuchhole: but if it do not, then

heate the peece there abouts the tutchhole, and then take a quantitie of waxe or clay, and make it like a cop about the tutchhole, and then take oyle and heate it hot, and powre it on the tutchhole, and that will ſo ſeeke by the fides of the nayles, that when you doo loade the peece and ſhoote her off (as afore is declared) there is no doubt but it will blowe out the nayle, and cleere the tutchhole of the peece.
               
               
                  The 35. Deuiſe.
                  IF ſo be it hapneth ſo, that there is in the paſing of an armie a riuer or water in the way, and the water to bee of great deepenes, and they hauing no boates, and that they can make prouiſion to put ouer their men, now to carrie ouer their Ordinance, they may do this: firſt, with planck and timber let them make a thing ſquare like a platforme, of ſufficient ſtrength, and then let them place one of their peeces of Ordinance vppon it, and then let them prepare emptie caske, and let them bee made tight, and then take as many of theſe caske as may be ſufficient to boy or ſwim with the ſayd peece of Ordinance, and then let this caske bee made faſt, and fraped hard vnto the ſayd platforme round about the ſayd platforme, aloft vpon the platforme, for the platforme muſt not be vpon the caske, for then the weight of the peece would ouerthrowe the platforme, and ſo they may conuey their Ordinance ouer any hauen or riuer, without boates, and ſo they may make as many of theſe platformes as is ſufficient to ſerue their turne, and you may know how many caske will boy or ſwimme with any peece of Ordinance, as this: fiue tunne of caske will carrie a double Cannon, foure tunne will carrie a demie Cannon, and three tunne or leſſe will carrie Culuering, &c. taking any thing more than a pipe or boat vnto 1000. weight of the peece. &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 36. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe whether any peece of Ordinance be ſufficiently mettalled to beare her charge with powder, then this is generall, that in the clamber before the tutchhole, ſo far as the powder doth reach to the mouthwards, that the mettall is in thickneſſe as high as the ſhot is round abouts, and ſomewhat thicker, and if that the mettall bee not in thickneſſe as much as the heigth of the ſhot, then ſhe is too ſlenderly mettalled.
               
               
                  The 37. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe whether that any peece of Ordinance bee cleere within without any honey combs or cracks, then take a ſteele Glaſſe when that the Sunne ſhineth, and then turne the beame or ſhaddowe of the Sunne into the peece mouth, and ſo you ſhall ſee into the peece, whether there bee any flawes or hony combs in the peece by the light of the Sunne vppon the Glaſſe. And alſo, if the Sunne ſhine not, then take a ſhort Candles ende, and then take a long pole ſticke, that may reach vnto the bottome of the peece, and make a clift in the end of the ſticke, and then put that into the mouth of the peece vnto bottome, if you ſee cauſe, and ſo you ſhall ſee if that there be any faults in the peece in like manner.
               
               
                  The 38. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you may breake any peece of Ordinance, although that the peece of Ordinance be ſufficiently mettalled, & without cracks, flawes, or hony combs, and alſo hauing no more but her common charge or lading, as this. If that it hapneth ſo that you might come by

your enemies Ordinance, and they being laden alreadie, you might cauſe them to breake at the next ſhooting of them in this manner. Prepare certaine things made of yron, made of purpoſe, of a foote long or more at your pleaſure, and the poynt to be very thin and ſharpe, and ſmooth, and at the other end to be halfe an ynch thick or more, and to be ſmooth and taper ground from the poynt vnto the greater end, and then put into the peece that thing cloſe vnderneath the ſhot, and then the ſhot being round, it is apt to run vpon that, and then the peece being ſhot off, the ſhot will be choaked, or ſtick faſt in the peece by the meanes of the bigger ende of the thing of yron put into the peece, for that the ſhot hath no roome for to goe by, and then the violent blaſt of the pouder muſt needes breake the peece.
               
               
                  The 39. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching the giuing of leuell with any peece of Ordinance, and for to knowe if that the leuell be laide awry, and for to knowe how much awry the ſhot will be at the marke, it is thus knowne; looke how many times that the length of the peece is vnto the marke, ſo many times that quantitie that the peece is laide awry, ſo many times that quantitie that the length of the peece is vnto the marke, ſo much it ſhall be awry at the marke: as for an example, the peece is ten foote long, and it is laide one ynch awry beſide the marke in the giuing of leuell, and the marke is twentie skore from the peece, and there is ſixe times the length of the peece in euery skore, and the marke beeing twentie skore off, the ſhot muſt bee ſixe time twentie ynches beſide the marke, and that is ten foote, as I doo more at large declare in the tenth Chapter of my Booke called The Art of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 40. Deuiſe.
                  IF that any place be beſeeged, & haue no Ordinance for to defend themſelues as many times in the middle of a Countrey that are not neere the fronters, there may bee great Cities or Townes that are well walled, that hath no Ordinance, and may many times lack diuers things meete to defend themſelues, as powder and ſhot, &c. and yet they haue ſtrength ynough of men to defend themſelues, and yet notwithſtanding they may make prouiſion for to make both Ordinance, and alſo powder and ſhot, &c. although that they haue no other mettall, but onely leade: and there is lightly no Citie nor Towne, but that it hath leade good ſtore, & then they may make them Ordinance of leade to ſerue their turne by the good foreſight in the baſting thereof, that is to ſay, to put in the more ſubſtance of the mettall: for let them make the thickneſſe of the mettall to be round aboutes, once and a halfe the heigth of the ſhot, the peece will bee able to beare the ordinarie charge of powder, and then the weight of that peece will bee more than double the weight of that peece which is of braſſe or yr ou: And in a Towne where as is helpe ynough, it maketh no great matter for the weight, for that they haue no great cauſe for to tranſport it very far. And alſo, they muſt not ſhoote in thoſe peeces too often at a time, for heating of them too hote, but they may ſhoote moderatlie, and vſe them ſo, that they doo not ouerheate them, &c. And as for powder, the vſe of the making therof is commonly knowne vnto all men, and there is no Towne, but that the earth in ſome places is good for to make the Petre of. And as for ſhot that may be caſt of any mettall therefore if that they haue any perſons of experience, they may both make them Ordinance, and alſo powder and ſhot to ſerue their turne, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 41. Deuiſe.
                  NOw ſhall follow two or thee deuiſes, which is a common queſtion among Gunners, although that there is no vſe of ſeruice in it, and that dooth appertaine vnto Ordinance, more for pleaſure in the wagering thereof, than to any other purpoſe, as this to ſay, I wil out ſhoote any perſon in one peece with all one kinde of ſhot, both in weight and otherwiſe, and with one kinde of powder, and with equall weight, and in the like kinde of aduantage in all poyntes, and that is by this meanes, the ſhot to be both fit for the peece: then prepare a peece of linnen cloth or wollen, and then wooll that ſame round about the ſhot, that the ſhot may goe ſtiffe into the peece, that it may goe home vnto the powder, and in ſo dooing, you ſhall ſhoote further than it would doo, if it were vnwoolled. And alſo, if that you doo ſhoote in a peece both with one kinde of ſhot, and with one weight of powder, and like aduantage in all poyntes, the laſt ſhoote ſhall ouer ſhoote the firſt by this meanes, for that the peece is made warme, and that cauſeth the powder to fire the better together, &c.
               
               
                  The 42. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, how to lade a peece at one time, and to make the peece to ſhoote three times off at the once lading of the peece, which is done in this manner. Firſt prepare a peece of ſmall match that will keepe fire, or elſe a peece of blew threed, and that will keepe fire, and then put the one ende of that into the mouth of the peece, ſo that the ende goe vnto the breeche of the peece, and the other ende to hang out, and then lade the peece but meanely, ſo that ſhe haue not hir full charge, and then put in a cloſe wad, and then lade the peece againe but

meanely with ſome leſſe Pouder than it had at the firſt, and then put in another cloſe wad, and that done, then lade hir the third time, and put vp the Pouder cloſe, but you neede not wad it, except you liſt, and then ſet the end of the threed on fire, and that will fire the firſt, and make the peece goe off, and yet the threed burneth ſtill, and ſo ſhooteth off the middlemoſt, and afterwards it burneth vnto the laſt, & ſo the peece hath ſhot off three times, and this you may do by handling it diſcreetly, and may ſhoote a ſhoote at euery time.
               
               
                  The 43. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to make a peece goe off at any houre or time appoynted, although that there be no perſon there to giue fire vnto the peece, yet this you may doo, and it will goe off at any time appoynted, as this. Firſt the peece being charged, take a match, and proue what length it will bee burned in an houre, & when you know iuſtly how much in length will be burned in an houre, then according vnto that time that you would haue the peece goe off, meaſure out ſo much iuſt in length as wil be a burning in that time, and then at that place, let it be laid at the tutchhole, the peece being primed to lay powder vpon the match, & then the other ende to bee fired, then when the match is burned vnto the powder, the peece will goe off, and ſo by this meanes the peece will goe off at any houre or time appoynted, whether that it bee in long time, or ſhort time, &c.
               
               
                  The 44. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to make a peece goe off when that you liſt, you nor no other perſon being there for to giue fire vnto it, you muſt doo this, the peece being loden and primed, then in

the tutchhole take a peece of ſmall wyer, of two or three ynches long, and bend it, that both the endes may come together, and then put that into the tutchhole of the peece when that the peece is primed, and the bought ende to ſtand vpwards, and then put the ende of a long ſtring through it, and then lay a little powder vpon the tutchhole, and there make a peece of match faſt vnto it, and let the match be lighted, and then the other ende of the line you may carrie vnto what place you liſt, and then when that you would haue the peece ſhot off, then drawe or pull the line or ſtring, and it will giue fire vnto the peece, &c. And alſo you may ſet powder on fire with a burning glaſſe where the Sunne ſhineth.
               
               
                  The 45. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe whether that any peece of Ordinance be truely bored, that is to ſay, that the core or hollowneſſe dooth goe right in the middle of the mettall, that it doo not decline or leane more vnto the one ſide, than it dooth vnto the other ſide, for to knowe the ſame, doo this. Take two ſtreightſtaues, and make them faſt at the one ende, that they bee not wider aſunder at the one ende than they bee at the other ende, and ſo made faſt, that they doo not ſwarue; and then put one of the ſtaues into the mouth of the peece neere vnto the tutchhole, and then trie the peece round about on euery ſide with an ynche rule, and ſo you ſhall knowe whether that the core or hollowneſſe dooth goe right in the middle of the mettall, and if that it doo not, you may knowe by the ynch rule how much it doth differ, &c. as I doo more plainely ſhew in the ſecond Chapter of my Booke called The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 46. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe whether that any peece of Ordinance be tapered bored, that is to ſay, that it is wider at the mouth, than that is within towards the breech of the peeces, that you ſhall knowe by this meanes, take a rammer head vpon a ſtaffe that is the true heigth of the mouth of the peece, which within a quarter of an ynch, or els that it may goe cloſe, and then put that into the peece, and if that it doo go down vnto the breech of the peece, then it is not tapered bored, but if that it will not, then it is tapered in that place, and then take a lower rammer head, and then proue againe, and ſo by making diuers proofes, you may know how much that the peece is tapered bored in euery place, and the peece may be ſo tapered bored, that it may bee much the worſe, and the ſame may bee ſo tapered bored, that it is neuer the worſe, but rather the better. They are the worſe tapered bored that are wide at the mouth, and narrower and narrower inwards, for this cauſe, that thoſe that do lade the peece, and do not know it, may put in a ſhot that he dooth thinke is fit for the peece, and that may reſt by the way, and not goe downe vnto the powder, and that may chance to breake a peece. And alſo, if the ſhot bee ſo ſmall, that it will goe downe vnto the powder, then it is poſſible the ſhot being too ſmall for the mouth of the peece, that it may ſwarue in the deliuerance, and alſo, the ſhot wil not flie ſo far as it would do if it were cloſe for the mouth of the peece, &c. Now thoſe tapered bored peeces that be neuer the worſe, as thoſe that are all of one heigth equall within a foote, or a foote and a halfe of the breech, and afterwardes vnto the tutchhole is narrower & narrower, thoſe peeces are not the worſer, but rather the better in ſome reſpects, for that it is ſtronger, ſo that the ſhot may goe cloſe vnto the powder, for the greateſt

fault that may happē by that meanes, is this, that the plate of the ladell muſt bee the rounder bent, and alſo in the ſponging, there may bee a fault: for if the Sponge bee too big, it will not goe vnto the bottome, and if it be fit for the bottome, then it wil be to low for the reſt of the peece, &c.
               
               
                  The 47. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe how thick any peece is in mettall in euery place, you may knowe it by the 44. deuiſe going before, as you doo trie whether the peece bee truely bored: and alſo if the peece bee truely bored, you may trie the thickneſſe of the mettall in this manner, take the thickneſſe of the whole mettall with your Calleper Compaſſes vpon the outſide of the peece, and then trie it with an ynch rule how many ynches high the mouth of the peece is, and then pull that from the whole thickneſſe of the mettall, and then looke what dooth remaine, then halfe that ſhal be the true thickneſſe of the mettal of the peece in that place that you haue meaſured, and by this meanes you may knowe the thickneſſe of the mettall in euery place, &c. And alſo, if that you haue no Caleper Compaſſes, then you may plome the peece vppon both the ſides with a plommet of leade vpon a ſtring, by laying a twofoote rule croſſe the breech of the peece, dooing afterwards as before is rehearſed▪ And alſo, if that it be a round peece, then you may gird the peece, and ſo finde the thickneſſe of the whole mettall, as I doo more declare in the fourth Chapter of my Booke called The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance.
                  
               
               
                  The 48. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe how many ynches, or what parte of an ynch will make a degree in any peece of Ordinance, to

be leuell at any marke, with an ynch rule, it is thus known: firſt meaſure the length of the peece, how many foote it is in length, and then double that meaſure, & then multiply that number of feete into ynches, that done, as 7. vnto 22. ſeeke the circumference of ſuch a circle (that is to ſay) firſt multiply that number of ynches, double the length of the peece by 22. & look what that commeth vnto, deuide that againe by 7. & that will ſhew the circumference of ſuch a circle, and then deuide that number againe by 360. & that will ſhew vnto you how many ynches & parts of an ynch will make a degree, &c. as I doo ſhewe how many ynches and what parts of an ynche will make a degree, for the length of ſundry peeces in the 8. Chapter of my booke called The Arte of ſhooting in great Ordinance, &c.
               
               
                  The 49. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching the making of a ſhot by Sea out of one Ship vnto another, this is to be conſidered, the heauing and the ſetting of the two Ships, and alſo the ſtirring, as I doo more at large declare in the 14. Chapter of my Booke called The Art of ſhooting in great Ordinance, but to giue leuell vnto any marke or ſhip for the rightneſſe thereof, this is the beſt way in a Ship not to ſtand poring at the breeche of the peece, as it is commonly vſed amongſt Gunners, but to giue leuell right do this. You hauing giuen the peece the height that ſhee ſhall lie at, then as you ſhall ſee cauſe, bid him that is at the helme to goe aloofe, or romer, and then let one ſtand ready with a lintſtock to giue fire, and then ſtand you right behinde the peece a two or three yardes off, & then marke the middle of the mouth of the peece, and the middle of the tayle of the peece, that by the caſting off, the Ship be right with, the mark by the ſight of one of your eyes, then giue fire, & you may be aſſured that the ſhot goeth right, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 50. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo in the placing of a batterie againſt any Town, it is to bee foreſeene that you may flancke the front of the batterie, and alſo the pits or ditches that you haue laid your labourers in, that do hale the bouſing tackels to bring the Ordinance vnto their places againe when that they are laden. &c.
               
               
                  The 51. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching the Ordinance in ſhippes, and eſpecially that Ordinance that is vnder the Decks, for that it is very troubleſome to hale them in, and lade them, and eſpecially if that the ſhip doth held with a Sailbearing. And alſo, it is troubleſome to make a ſhot at any marke if that the ſhip doth held, for that both the Trocks or wheeles will alwaies runne cloſe vnto the ſhips ſide, ſo that he ſhall neuer bring the peece right vppon the marke, except that he be able to coon the ſhip for to doo it with the Steeradge. Wherefore in my opinion the carriage of of the Ordinance that is vnderneath the Deck, were much more readier and eaſier to be handled, to bee made in this forme following, that is to ſay, the carriage for the lower parts to goe vppon foure lowe Trockes, as the common mountant carriage that in the ſhippes is now vſed, but the vpper part that the tronions lieth in, to goe vpon an Axeltree or Standard, as a Windmill doth, and then this peece when it is either to bee pulled in, or els to bee laden, then there is no more to bee done, but to bring the peece right backe vppon the Trockes, and then as ſoone as the mouth of the peece is within the port, then to beare the breech or taile about, as you doo the taile of a Mill, and then you may lade her, and ſo turne her mouth againſt the port againe,

and ſo put her out without any lifting of the Trocks of the peece about, as is now vſed, which is a great payne and a trouble in a great peece of Ordinance, and alſo, they cannot bring the peece vnto the marke, except it be by the Steeradge (as before is declared) and if that the ſhip dooth heeld, but if that the peece be in this kind of carriage, then although that the ſhip dooth heeld neuer ſo much, and although that both the forewheeles or Trockes doth runne cloſe vnto the ſhippes ſide, yet notwithſtanding the peece lying in that kinde of carriage before rehearſed, yet neuertheleſſe the peece may be put off from the one ſide of the port vnto the other at your pleaſure, as farre as the port will giue leaue, for that the peece is to bee put too and fro euen as a brace that ſtandeth on a Mych, for that the peece doth ſtand vpon an Axeltree or Standard, as a mill doth. &c.
               
               
                  The 52. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo there is deuiſed by a high Dutchman, how to make the carriage for any ſmall peece of Ordinance, as a Falcon, or Falconet, or a Rabnet, to lade her backwards, and ſo to turne her forwards againe, and ſo ſhoote her off, for that this peece hath no Axeltree, but that there is made faſt vnto the carriage or ſtock, two ſtoopes, or part or ends of an Axeltree, whereon the two wheeles doth goe vpon, ſo by that meanes the breech or taile of the peece, is to bee letten downe, and the mouth of the peece to be turned topſey turuey right backwards, for that there is neither Axeltree nor tranſome in the ſtocke or carriage, to let the turning of the peece ouer againe. &c.
               
               
                  The 53. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo there is deuiſed by Iohn Skinner, one of the Queenes Maieſties men, a certaine ſerewe, to ſet vnderneath

the taile of any peece of Ordinaunce: ſo that you may bring her vnto what leuell that you liſt, without any coynes: which is very neceſſarie to bee vſed for great Ordinance in a number of cauſes, for that it ſhall take away the charge of the carrying of coynes, and yet much more better than the coynes be. &c.
               
               
                  The 54. Deuiſe.
                  ANd as touching this, how for to make an Inſtrument or Engine for to knowe the goodneſſe or the badneſſe of powder, (that is to ſay) to know the ſtrength or weakeneſſe thereof, they may doo it in this manner: firſt, make in mettall or yron a round boxe, of an ynch and a halfe in breadth more or leſſe at your diſcretion, and of two ynches deepe more or leſſe, at your diſcretion, and then let that be placed ſo, that it may ſtand vpright, and haue a little tuchhole at the lower part thereof, and then let the vppermoſt part at the mouth thereof, haue in mettall or yron a lid or couer, that may goe with a ioynt vpon the one ſide thereof, and the couer or lid to be of a reaſonable weight, & the other ſide of the couer or lid right againſt the ioynt to haue a ſquare hole fitted of purpoſe, and then vppon that ſide that the ioynt of the couer or lid is of, there muſt bee raiſed a thing that muſt haue of yron or other mettall a part of a circle, and the ende of that muſt goe through the ſquare hole in the lid or couer, and the other ende to goe with a pinne or ioynt right ouer the ioynt of the couer or lid, and the ſayd crooked thing or part of a circle, to haue teeth or notches, like vnto a Sawe, and the teeth to ſtand vpwards, and then it is finiſhed, and then, whenſoeuer that you liſt to prooue the ſtrength of powder, and you hauing of diuers ſortes of powder, then wey ſome ſmall quantitie of the powder, and then put that into the Boxe, and then let downe the couer or lidde, and then giue fire vnto it at

the touchhole, and then the powder will blowe vp the couer or lid, and then the teeth or notches being well filed or trimmed of purpoſe, will holde vp the lid at the higheſt, and yet not ſtaying in the blowing of it vpwards, for that the teeth ſtandeth ſo, to ſtay it that it ſhal not come downwards, and then trying or prouing diuers ſorts of powder, you ſhall knowe which is the beſt or ſtrongeſt powder, or weaker pouder, by the blowing vp of the lid or couer, you putting in the powder by weight. &c. And this is the forme of the engine or inſtrument.
                  
                     
                        Lid.
                        Boxe.
                        Tuchhole.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The 55. Deuiſe.
                  AS diuers Gunners and other men haue deuiſed ſundry ſorts of fire-works for the annoyance of their enemies, yet as farre as euen I haue ſeene or heard, I neuer know not heard of any good ſeruice done by it, neither by ſea nor by land, but onely by powder, and that hath done great ſeruice,

for that the force of it is ſo mightie, and commeth with ſuch a terror. But for their other fire-workes, it is rather meeteſt to be vſed in the time of pleaſure in the night than for any ſeruice. And for to make this kind of ball, do this: Prepare the mould of a double Culuering ſhot, and that is fiue ynches high, and then take clay, and make it round in a ball, as much as a Minion ſhot, that is three inches high, and then let it be dried as the Founders doo vſe to drie their moulds, and then ſtick that clay round about with yron nayles, leauing the nayles an ynch without the clay, and then put that moulde of clay into the moulde of the Culuering ſhot, and looke that the nayles do ſo beare, that the ball of clay doo ſtande right in the middle of the mould of the Culuering ſhot, and alſo, make the mould of clay, ſo that it may haue a tuchhole to come into the clay, and then take Bell mettle or other courſe pot braſſe, and then fill the mould of the Culuering ſhot with that mettell, and that being done, then it is finiſhed, and ſo make as many of them as you liſt, and then that being done, picke out all the clay againe that is in the ball, that was caſt in the Culuering ſhot mould, and then fill that with good corne powder, and then that beeing filled neere full, then take ſome receite of ſoft fire worke, that will not burne too haſtily, and fill vp the reſt of the ball, and then it is perfectly finiſhed. And then in the time of ſeruice either by ſea or by land, it is very good to throw in amongſt your enemies, where they doo ſtand thicke, as they bee very good to defend a breach, or ſuch other like cauſes, as this, to take it in his hand and to fire it, and then to throw it amongſt your enemies, and as ſoone as the fire-worke is burned vnto the powder, the ball will breake in a thouſand peeces, & euery peece in a manner will doo as much hurt as a Harquebuze ſhot, ſo that there is no kind of fire-worke comparable to this kind of Ball, for ſeruice in the time of neede.
               
               
                  
                  The 56. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo as touching the fire workes, they may make a truncke that may ſhoote 20. or 30. or 40. Caliuer or Harquebuze ſhot, and deliuer euery ſhot ſeuerally by it ſelfe, and to come out with great force, as this: let the Truncke of fire-worke be made according vnto the accuſtomable manner, and with the kinds of receites, and then either the wood being thicker than of cuſtome, or els ſome pretie pipes of yron put into the ſides of the Troncke, and to go through vnto the fire worke in the Trunck, and then fill all thoſe with good corne powder, and a ſhot after it, and then as the fire worke dooth burne downewards, ſo it doth ſhoote offal the Harquebuze ſhot that is on the outſide of the Trunck, if that there were 40. of them. &c.
               
               
                  The 57. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo there is deuiſed a certaine Engine, that goeth ſome with a ſcrewe, and ſome with a nut, vppon teeth that you may lift vp the ſide of a whole double Cannon, ſetting it vnder the Axeltree, and ſo you may take off the wheele of the Cannon, & theſe be very much vſed in Germany, & in Dutchland, to lift vp the ſide of a great Dutch wagon when that it is laden. &c.
               
               
                  The 58. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, for that I haue ſeene the inconuenience thereof, as touching the lading of Ordinance in ſhips, and eſpecially of thoſe Ordinance that are vnder the Decks, in the time of ſeruice, when that they doo charge their Ordinance with a ladel, it is very comberſome, for that the ladle muſt be twiſe filled, and the twiſe turning of

the rammer head, is trouble ſome in a ſtreight roome, beſides the openneſſe of the powder, in the dooing thereof, whereby there may grow great inconuenience, if that they be not very circumſpect in the doing thereof, and furthermore for to lade a peece with a carteredge, there is this inconuenience in the dooing thereof: for if that the peece haue any hony combes in it, that may chance to ſtay or let the carteredge, in ſuch ſort, that you ſhall ſcant get the carteredge home vnto the bottome of the peece: for if by chance that the carteredge ſhould double, or ſticke, or goe awry by the way, you ſhall haue very much for to doo to driue it home vnto the bottome of the peece, whereby in the time of ſeruice there might happen great inconuenience to be ſo combered &c.
                  Wherefore I will ſhewe vnto you how that you may make an Engine that you may call a charge that ſhall lade a peece at one time, and ſhall be done as ſoone as you ſhall doo it with a carteredge, and alſo you may emptie the carteredge into the charge, and ſhall ram vp tho powder all at once, and lay it more cloſer than the ladle without the turning of the ladle or of the rammer head, and ſhall keepe the powder more cloſer than the ladie ſhall, and the making thereof followeth as this: firſt take a ladle head, ſuch an one as the ordinarie ladles hath, and then take the plate, ſuch a plate as you make all ladles of, but that you muſt haue more plate than the ladle hath, and then when that you would make this Engine or charge for a peece, then bende the plate rounde, that it may goe eaſily into the mouth of the peece, and then make it faſt vnto the 
                        ••
                     
                     dell head▪ that is fit for that peece, and let the plate of the charge bee of ſuch length, that it may holde ſo much powder as is ſufficient to lade the peece, and then the hole that is in the charge head, let that bee made wider than the ordinarie Ladle heades, that it may haue a ſtaffe goe eaſilie through it, to that intent that you

may drawe it in and out at your pleaſure: and then fitting that with a ſtaffe, then put vpon that ſtaues end a rammer head made of purpoſe, that may goe fit and cloſe in & out through the plat of the charge eaſily, and then let there be another ſmaller ſtaffe made faſt vnto the charge head, and then it is finiſhed: and then whenſoeuer that you liſt to lade a peece with that charge, doo this firſt: drawe in the rammer head cloſe vnto the bottome of the charge, and then fill the charge with powder, and then put that into the mouth of the peece, holding that by both the ſtaues, and ſo putting it vnto the bottome of the peece, and then thruſt in the rammer hard with one hand, and then drawe backe the charge ſtaffe with the other hand, & ſo drawing backe the plate of the charge, the rammer head thruſteth out all the powder, and ſo the rammer head doth put vp the pouder cloſe in the peece, and will lade the peece cleane without the ſpilling of any powder, and dooth make but one worke of all: which (in my opinion) is very neceſſarie to beevſed in the time of ſeruice, and is leſſe worke than to doo that with a ladell, and if that your powder bee in carteredges, you may put in the carteredge into the charge, or els you may emptie it into the charge, at your diſcretion.
                  
                     The charger.
                     The rammer.
                     The charge & rammer
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 59. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching the making of an engine or inſtrument, which is very neceſſarie for Gunners for to haue to fit euery peece, with his true weight of pouder, & eſpecially for to wey the carteredges that bee filled with powder, & is leſſe troubleſome than to haue a paire of Ballance: neither ſhal he vſe to haue ſo many weightes, for that one weight of halfe a pound, ſhall be able to weye 50. or 60. pound, which kinde of things are altogether vſed in ſouth Spaine, to wey all kinde of Marchandiſe, which they do cal Statery: & it is thus made: Firſt prepare one ſcale, & then let that be ſtringed as a ſcale, or ordinary ballance is, with a hooke at the end of the ſtrings, & then make a beame of yron or wood about three quarters of a yarde long, more or leſſe at your diſcretion, & then within an ynche of one of the endes let it haue a pin through, and a claue or ſuch a thing as all other ballance haue to holde it vp by, that the pin may goe through, & to be pliant to goe too and fro, euen as all other ballance hath, and then to haue one weight, & that to haue a ring, and then, when that you would wey any thing, put the ring vpon the longer part of the beame, to be marked with notches, and at ſuch a notch the ring of the weight being there, it will wey one pound, & at another notch, two pounde, and at another 3. pound, and ſo forth, vnto 40. or 50. pounde, which is a very neceſſarie thing for Gunners to haue, to wey their things withall, and is but of ſmall charge.
                  
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               of Martiall affaires by lande, as touching the walles of Townes or Fortes.
               
                  The 60. Deuiſe 
                  AS touching this, how for to ouerthrowe the wall of any Towne or Fort, or Caſtell, it may bee thus done without any Ordinance, ſo that it bee not watered about it, as this, take certaine great timber, and vnderſhoare or prop the wall in diuerſe places, and that done, then dig or vndermyne the wall, all alongſt the wall ſide as long: as you doo thinke it ſufficient for your purpoſe, and ſo vndermyne it, vntill that you bee more then halfe waye vnder the foundation of the wall, and then make fiers vnto euery one of the ſhores or proppes, and burne them aſunder, and then as ſoone as the wall dooth miſſe the ſhoare or prop, and the foundation of that ſide digged away, the wall muſt needes fall preſently, &c. And by this meanes they may burne the parcoleſes or gates of any Caſtle or Forte, if that they be not of yron.
               
               
                  The 61. Deuiſe.
                  FVrthermore, they may in like manner breake downe the walles of any Caſtle, or Fort, or Towne, with great rammes made of purpoſe, with great heads of yron and ſteele, ſome may be made to hang by prouiſion, and to be drawne backe by the ſtrength of men, and ſo by violence to runne againſt the walles of a Towne, and otherſome may bee made to runne on wheeles, and to runne with violence of a number of men againſt

the Walles, and ſo breake them downe, and alſo theſe kindes of prouiſion bee moſte ſpecialtie too breake downe the Gates or Parcolleſes of anie Caſtle or towne.
               
               
                  The 62. Deuiſe.
                  HOW to make a ſcaling ladder in ſuch ſort that they that are vppon the ladder, ſhall haue the aduantage in the fight of them that are vppon the vamer of the walles of any Towne, or Caſtle, or Fort, whether that it bee to ſtand at the puſhe of the pike, or handling of any other weapon whatſoeuer that it bee, and this ladder that I ſpeake off muſt be made in this manner. Firſt prepare your ſtuffe accordingly, of ſufficient ſtrength, and then according vnto the accuſtomable manner, make a double ladder of three pieces of timber, and ſtaue it accordingly, as of cuſtome it hath beene vſed beforetime, and then the viewe of the place being taken, that is to be ſcaled, for to make the length of the ladder, then make the length of the ladder accordingly, that it may ſtand or reſt within a foote or two, or three, of the heigth of the top of the Wall, and then for the top of the ladder, doo you cut three peeces of ſmall timber of ſixe foote long, and then let them bee made faſt by ſome meanes at the vpper ende of the ladder, that it may ſtand like a platforme vpon the toppe of the Ladder to the wall-wards, and then let there bee three braces ſtand, or made faſt vnderneath the platforme vppon the toppe of the ladder, to beare the platforme from the three ladder ſtaues, vnto the three peeces of the platforme on the toppe of the Ladder, and then to that purpoſe, that men may bee able to ſtand vppon the platforme, on the top of the Ladder there may be ſawen certaine fillettes

of light boordes, that are ſtrong, ſuch as are vſed to bee made for the ſpardeck or grating of Ships, that may lye ſo cloſe together, that a mans foote cannot goe thorough, and then at the lower ende of the ladder, to haue three pikes vppon the three pieces of timber, that the ladder doo not ſlip, when that it is ſet vnto the wall, and then the ladder is finiſhed. And then to raiſe the ladder to ſet it vnto the wall, they muſt make a forke of timber that muſt bee as long as the ladder, and that forke dooth ſerue both for to raiſe the ladder, and alſo to ſtand vnderneath the platforme of the ladder, to bee a ſtaye to helpe to beare the waight of the men vppon the top of the ladder, &c. And this ladder being raiſed, a number of them, they may ſtand on the toppes of the ladder, as firmely as they that doo ſtand vpon the vamer of the wall, and ſixe men may ſtand and fight vpon the top of euerie one of the ladders, and handle his weapon, for there may ſtand three ranckes of men vpon the platforme, beſides them that are comming vp the ladder. And this ladder is twentie times better than the other kindes of ladders in all theſe reſpectes. If the other plaine ladders bee too long, then they that do defend, may by force put them ouer: and if that the ladder bee to ſhort but one foote, it will bee ſo painefull vnto them that ſhall riſe, to recouer the wall, that one man may keepe downe ten men: but in this kinde of ladder, if that it bee three or foure or fiue foote too ſhort, yet they may ſtand and fight, and one may helpe another ouer the wall being armed men, they may get ouer with eaſe.
                  The forme of the ladder dooth followe.
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  The 63. Deuiſe.
                  IF any towne or fort bee ſituated in a drie ground, when that they bee ſubiect vnto vndermining, then to auoyde the danger thereof, they may doo thus, let them firſt make a vent downe in ſome place within the towne, and ſo dig deepe vnder the foundation of the towne, and alſo vnder the towne ditch, and then when that they haue digged without the ditch, then let them dig all about vnder the ground, as they may conueniently, and ſo make a waye round about the Towne, vnderneath the ground, on the outſide of the towne: and the ſoyle that they doo dig out, in the digging of it, they may rampier the walls with that ſtuffe, and then whenſoeuer that they are beſieged, and doo doubt vndermining them, they may make ſearch euery day in the ſaide place, and ſo it is not poſſible for them to vndermine, but that they ſhall heare them, and perceiue where that they be: and alſo that place will bee a let vnto them. And then you may vſe againſt them what pollicie that you liſt, to annoy them at your pleaſure, and preuent them of their purpoſe, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 64. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, for to know whether there be any vndermining in the ground, and where that they be, it is thus knowne: take a lattine baſon, and goe vnto the place that you doo ſo ſuſpect that vnderminers may bee, and ſet that baſon vppon the ground, and then put fiue or ſixe peaſon into that baſon, and if that there bee any vnderminers neere hand, then at euerie ſtroke that they that are in the ground doo make with their tooles, the peaſe will make a iarre in the baſon: and alſo the effect will the more appeare, if that you doo binde a ſackefull of woll as hard as you can, then ſetting the baſon wiith peaſe vppon that, you ſhall heare euery ſtroake that is made in the ground, and this is one of the beſt things that may bee deuiſed to be placed in any place, for to knowe where that vnderminers bee, as in the Deuiſe going before, to place it in the vaute vnder the ground, or alſo where that there is no ſuch way vnder the ground, yet they may make diuers ventes or deepe holes in the ground: and this being placed there, they ſhall heare euery ſtroke that the vnderminers doo ſtrike, &c.
               
               
                  The 65. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, how for to make a caue, to the intent to place powder, and to to giue fire to blowe vp any fort or bulwarke, or the wall of any Towne, it is thus to be done, when that you doo begin for to digge, to make your vent into the ground, let it be of ſome diſtance from the place that you doo meane to blowe vp, and then when that you are entred into the ground, then doo not digge right toward the place, but indent it ſometimes one way, and ſometimes another way, that the way be not ſtreight,

to this ende, that you may fortifie the vent of the way ſo ſtrongly, that it may be able to reſiſt the force of the blaſt of the powder, and the vent of the way to be as narrowe, as may bee neere vnto the place or vaut that the powder is placed, and in like manner to digge as deepe as you may into the ground, and ſo when you haue digged neere, vntill you doo come vnto the place that you doo meane to blowe vp, then you may digge ſomewhat nerer vpwards, that you doo not place the powder too deepe vnder the ground, but at a reaſonable diſtance, and then in the roome that you doo place the powder in, there let it bee right ouer the powder or vaut of 7. 8. or 9. foote higher thā the barrels of powder, to this intent, that it might take his vent vpwards, for the ayre that is in that hollowe place, will be the occaſion of the lifting, or rayſing, or rending of the ground right ouer it. And then when that you haue placed the powder in the vaut that is ſufficient for to ſerue your turne, and the more in quantitie, the greater ſhall bee the effect of the raiſing of the thing. Then before that you doo ramme vp, or make vp the vent of the way you muſt make your prouiſion for the place to giue fire vnto; which is beſt to be done, by making a tronke in boordes, made and ſawen of purpoſe, to be of length from the mouth of the entrance, vnto the vaut that the powder dooth ſtand in, and that muſt be placed or laide al alongſt, that it may be cloſe, and the prouiſion put into it, that muſt giue fire vnto the powder in the vaute: and then ramme vp the waye that was made vnto the vaute that the powder ſtandeth in, both with earthe and ſtrong timber, &c. and that troncke of boordes ſhall keepe the prouiſion of the traine, without anye foyle or moyſture to hurte it. And you may make your prouiſion ſo, that you maye chooſe whether you will giue fire by a trayne, with a match lying all alongſt in it, made of purpoſe, boyled in

certaine mixtures rolled in Serpentine powder, or elſe by a ſmall lyne, to goe with a pulley, all alongſt the truncke or caſe, and the lyne to paſſe through a great quantitie of powder, in the vaute, where the powder ſtandeth, & then when that you would giue fire vnto the powder, then to make the fire faſt vnto the line, and ſo to drawe the fire vnto the powder by alyne, &c.
               
               
                  The 66. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, for to digge a way in the grounde, to come right vnder any place aſſigned, the way beeing crooked, indenting ſometimes this way, and ſometimes that way, as it may not be made ſtreight, that is ſomewhat difficulte, and asketh a good conſideration in the dooing thereof: for if that the powder be not placed right vnder that thing that is meant to bee blowne vp, then the thing ſhould be of little effect: wherefore in the ordering of the way of a mine to come right vnder any place aſſigned, it muſt be thus handled: firſt, they muſt knowe the true diſtance vnto the place that is meant to bee blowne vp, from the place that you doo begin for to dig, or enter into the ground, and that being knowne, then looke preciſely, which way that the place dooth beare, and then drawe or make a plat of the ſame, with a ſcale or truncke of meaſure thereunto apperteining, and then according vnto the diſtance, from the entrance, vnto the place aſſigned, draw out how many foote or yardes that you will goe, firſt on the one ſide, and then on the other ſide, indenting the way in the ground, and not to goe right vpon the place aſſigned, and ſo by that meanes, knowing what quantitie of meaſure, you haue gone, firſt one way, and then another way, in the grounde, and by that proportion in the way, both by the direction of the way, and the quantitie of meaſure: in the way you may go directly

vnto the place aſsigned in the ground, and you may marke your plat firmely, how that you will do it, before that you doo enter into the ground, according vnto the diſtance of the places aſsigned. And alſo it may happen ſo, that when that you are in vndermining in the ground, and haue purpoſed to goe ſo many foote one way, and ſo many foote an other way, and that you haue made your plat ſo, yet there may bee ſuch impediments or lets in the ground, that you cannot doo it according vnto your firſt meaning, then you may mend it and alter it in your plat, according vnto the way that you may goe, and ſo to come vnto the true place aſſigned, and ſo you may alter your plat according vnto the place that you may goe, vntill that you doo atteyne to come vnto the place aſsigned, to marke the vaute in the ground to place the powder in it. &c.
               
               
                  The 67. Deuiſe.
                  IF it happen ſo, that thoſe that haue beſeeged a Towne, haue made a breach in the wall of any Towne, and that they doo continue to batter both night and day, ſo that they cannot make vp their breach in the night: then the next way is to make that place defenſible in this manner: let them caſt a ditch or trench within, on the inſide of the wall all alongſt the breach, right againſt it, of a ſufficient depth, and of widenes, to bee defenſible, and then let them place their Ordinance againſt the breach, and alſo flankers in like manner, to ſcoure the ditch within on the inſide of the wall. &c.
               
               
                  The 68. Deuiſe.
                  I Doo thinke it not vnmeete to bee ſpoken of this, for to knowe if any ditch or trench be caſt, that if the ditch bee made ſo many foote broade in the brimme, and ſo many

foote broad in the bottome, and ſo many foote deepe, that if you would haue a wall or rampire made of that ſtuffe, if you would haue it ſo many foote broade in the bottome, and ſo many foote broade on the top, then to know iuſtly how many foote high the wall will be of that ſtuffe, which is hewed out of the ditch, when the earth is ſettled: or els for to know if that you would haue the wall made ſo high, then to knowe what thickneſſe that would beare, being made of that ſtuffe which is hewed out of the ditch: and for to knowe that, doo this. Firſt, according vnto the wideneſſe of the ditch in the brimme and in the bottome, put both the numbers together, and that done, then take halfe that number, and then according vnto the deepneſſe that you meane to make the ditch, multiply the two numbers together, that is to ſay, the number offeet of the depth of the ditch, and the breadth thereof at the brim, and the bottome being added both together, and then looke what number it commeth vnto, then if you would knowe how high it would make the wall at ſuch a thickneſſe at the bottome, and the top, then adde theſe two numbers both together, and then take halfe that, and deuide that out of the number of the ditch ſo multiplied, and that number that ſtandeth in the quantitie line, ſhall bee the heigth of the wall. And furthermore, if you would haue the wall ſo many foote high, and would know how many foote thick it would bee of that ſtuffe, then deuide the heigth out of the number of the ditch ſo multiplied, and that which ſtandeth in the quantitie line, ſhall be the thickneſſe of the wall in the middle, and then you knowing that, you may vſe the thickneſſe of the bottome and the top at your diſcretion. And for the better vnderſtanding of the matter, you ſhall haue this example by a ditch that I would haue made of 20. foote broade in the bottome, and 10. foote deepe, and I would haue a wall made of that ſtuffe, to bee ſixteene foote at the bottome of the wall, and eight foote

at the top of the wall; now my deſire is to knowe how many foote high it would be, of that ſtuffe that commeth out of the aforeſaid ditch when the wall is ſettled and dried; you ſhall knowe it thus: firſt adde the wideneſſe of the brim, and the bottome of the ditch both together, & that is twentie foote for the brimme, and twelue foote for the bottome, and thoſe two numbers together, maketh 32. then take halfe that number, and that is ſixteene, and then the deepnes of the ditch being tenne foote, multiply them two numbers together, that is to ſay, ſixteene times tenne, and that maketh 160. and now I would haue the wall ſixteene foote broade at the bottome, and eight foote at the top, and thoſe two numbers added together, maketh 24. and halfe that is 12. foote: now my deſire is, to know how many foote the wall will bee high, which to knowe, doo this: deuide the 160. by 12. which is the thickneſſe of the wall in the middle, and that number that ſtandeth in the quantitie line, is the heigth of the wall, and that commeth vnto thirteene foote and foure inches iuſt, ſo that you may conclude, that a ditch being caſt, that is twentie foote at the brimme, and 12. foote in the bottome, and 10. foot deepe, will make a wall of ſixteene foote at the bottome, & eight foote on the top, and 13. foot ½ in heigth. &c. Furthermore, by the example of the ditch, I would haue the wall fifteen foote high, my deſire is to know how thick the wall would be of that ſtuffe, then deuide the aforeſaid number of 160. by 15. and then there will ſtand in the quantitie line 10. and 10. will remaine ouer, ſo that you may conclude, that the wall of 15. foote high, will be 10. foote thicke, & eight inches, and then you may at your diſcretion, make it as broade in the bottome as you liſt, and looke what you do broade it in the bottome, it will lacke the ſame at the top. Therefore if you make it 15. foote at the bottome, it will be but ſixe foote, and eight inches at the top.
               
               
                  
                  The 69. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching the intrenching either of an armie, or the incloſing of a Towne, they muſt obſerue this order, that they may flancke the corteyne of the trenches, and in the more places, that they may flancke the more ſtronger, is the places ſo intrenched, and alſo moſt ſpecially to flank the corners, or collyan poynts, and alſo the waies or torne peeces, where that there is vents for people to paſſe in and out: and alſo that order is to bee obſerued in the building of any fortification, as the walles of Cities, or Townes, or Forts, or Caſtles: for if it be ſo that they cannot flanck the ſides of the walles, the thing can bee of no force, as commonly all thoſe Caſtles and Forts that were builded in the time of King Henry the eight, were rounds, or parts of rounds, which are of no force, for that they cannot flancke the ditches. Wherefore I had thought for to haue ſhewed what manner of corteyne of a wall is the beſt kind of fortification, which I doo omit, and you may make the number of corners or collyans poynts, with the cortaines of the walles, according vnto the quantitie or bigneſſe of the Citie, Towne, or Fort, at your diſcretion, as neede doth require, as foure ſquare, or fiue ſquare, or ſixe ſquare, or ſeauen or eight ſquare, as neede ſhall require, according vnto the bigneſſe of the place. &c.
               
               
                  The 70. Deuiſe.
                  ANd as touching the beſeeging of a Towne, they muſt deuiſe to make a trench, that the people may paſſe to the Campe and from the Campe, without being ſpoyled with the ſhot of the Towne, which is commonly called a rolling trench, and it muſt be thus made, as comming nere within the ſhot of the Towne, at ſome conuenient place,

either comming out of ſome wood, or els behind the brow of a hill, there to begin to caſt the trench, firſt to goe right out one way and caſt the earth to the townwards, and then to turne another way, and ſo to caſt the earth towards the townwards, and ſo to continue, firſt one way and then an other way, vntill that you doo come vnto the Campe, and ſo in that trench the people may paſſe too & fro with ſafetie, and alſo they that are in the towne cannot know what number of men there doth paſſe too and fro, &c.
               
               
                  The 71. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, I doo not thinke it vnmeete to be ſpoken of how for to ſhadowe men on a platforme, where that they are vnprouided of baskets, as it may happen in diuers places on a platforme by the ſea ſide, or on a platforme on the top of the wall of any towne, or in ſuch other like places, when there happeneth to be any ſeruice on the ſuddaine, where as great Ordinance is placed, and that for the openneſſe or bareneſſe of the place, that they haue nothing to ſhaddowe them, but that the ſmall ſhot dooth or may beate them from their Ordinance: then to preuent that, this is the remedie, for to prepare canuas, and ſet vp ſtanchines all alongſt, and ſo to ſhaddowe their men with the canuas, and then when that the peeces bee laden, then with a peece of a line to drawe vp the nether edge of the canuas, and ſo to leuell the peece, and ſhoote it off vnder the canuas, and ſo by that meanes the enemie ſhall ſee no marke to ſhoote: for otherwiſe they will bee ſhooting at the place whereas they doo ſee any number of men together: but if that they doo not ſee to what place that men doo aſſemble together, they cannot tell where for to ſhoote with their ſmall ſhot. And alſo, I doo not thinke this deuiſe hurtfull to bee vſed vppon the tops of the walles of a towne, whereas men haue any great

recouerie, and alſo if that any man liſt to looke towards the enemie, he may but put vp the cloath, and ſee better than they may doo out of any lops, for that they will alwaies awaite with their ſmall ſhot, to ſee if that there be any pearing out at the lops to ſhoote at them.
               
               
                  The 72. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, how for to knowe of any things done, or to bee done ſpeedily and in the ſhorteſt time, ſome haue deuiſed to do it by one meanes, and ſome by another meanes, as this: by the preparing of certaine ſwift horſes, being layd in diuers places, at the end of euery eight or ten miles, to the end to haue freſh horſes, &c. which is the beſt way. And other ſome haue deuiſed to doo it, by trayning vp of a dog to goe betweene two places, and then he being beaten from the one place, will runne vnto the other place directly, and then when that they would haue any letters ſent ſpeedily, then they haue made prouiſion to hang them about the dogs necke, &c. and a dogge will runne a great way in a little time, if hee had reaſon and did vnderſtand what he were willed for to doo, but the ſwifteſt way is to bee done by that meanes which the Romanes taught the Engliſh Britaines, when they cauſed them to make a wall to defend themſelues againſt the Picts, which was by certaine tronckes made of braſſe layd in the wall: and at the ende of euery two or three mile they had a gate, which was both watched and warded, and ſo by that meanes whenſoeuer that they had any occaſion to giue any warning vnto them that ſhould defend the ſayd Picts, then looke vnto what place that the Picts did make any aſſault vnto them, they were certified through the ſayd trunckes of braſſe, where that they were, and what hurt they had done, and what number that there were of them, &c. and by this meanes they would haue word what was done, and what

was to be done twenty or thirty miles in one houre ſpace. Wherefore in my opinion this is a very good deuiſe for to be vſed in the walles of any towne of warre, to bee layd all alongſt the walles of the towne from the one gate vnto the other gate, whereby there might bee warning giuen from any one place vnto another vpon the ſuddaine. &c.
               
               
                  The 73. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, how for to conuey letters ſecretly, and not to be found and knowne, whereas there is great awaite layd▪ and great ſearch made vpon euery perſon that doo paſſe too and from for letters, you may doo this: you hauing ſome Dogge or ſome bad Spaniell that will not bee loſt from you: and ſome Dogge that will not come vnto hand to bee taken vp, prepare a coller for him that may be hollowe within, and let it be a coller to looke vnto woorth nothing, and in that coller you may conuey your letters without any ſuſpition, for the man may be ſearched, and yet the Dogge will followe his maſter running too and fro, and no perſon can tell whoſe Dogge it is, and will as ſoone take the Dogge to be ſome of their owne companies, as otherwiſe. &c.
                  Another way to conuey letters ſecretly, is, to make vp the letters and roule them vp rounde together, and then they may cauſe ſome kind of boxe to be made of mettall, with a cloſe couer, to be round and long, ſo that it may goe into the mougth of a bottell, and then the letters being put into that ſmal boxe, and the boxe couered and made cloſe that no licour can ſoake into it, then put that boxe into the bottell, and then you may fill it with wine, or ſuch other like, and ſende that by any perſon that you would haue them come vnto, and it will not lightly be ſuſpected. &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 74. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, if that you haue any great quantitie of letters or bookes that you would conuey ſecretly, and would not neither loſe them, nor haue them found, nor knowne, and that there is waight layd for ſuch things, then doo this: firſt prepare a runlet or ſmall barrell, that will be made tight, of ſufficient bigneſſe to hold thoſe letters or bookes, and then lap them in a ſeare cloth, and then take off the head of it, and put them into the ſmall barrell, and then put in the head of it againe and hoope it vp cloſe againe, and make it tight that no lickour may come into it, and then take a great caske, a butte or pipe, or a hoſhead at your diſcretion, and then take out the head of that and put in the ſmall barrell with letters, and ſo put in the head of the great caske againe, and ſo make it tight againe, and then you may fill that cask with wine, or with whatſoeuer you liſt, &c. And then that caske or peece of wine lying amongſt other, it may be tranſported from place to place at your diſcretion, and neuer to be knowne what is in it, no otherwiſe than the other caske, and it may be taſted at any of the heads or ſides in euery place, as the other veſſels are in al poynts, and there ſhall be nothing ſeene nor knowne: and alſo it is very good for you to ſow the little barrel in a peece of courſe wollen cloath, and then it will not knocke in the veſſell to be heard in the remoouing of it too & fro, and then you may tranſport it either by water or byland, and it will neuer be ſuſpected. &c.
               
               
                  The 75. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, there may be ſuch meanes made, that you may knowe the minde of your friends, although that you may not come at them, nor ſende vnto them, by

the forme of certaine lightes in the night, as this, you hauing conſulted or talked together, that if that they doo ſhew you ſo many lights, and ſtanding on ſuch a faſhion or forme, that it ſignifieth ſuch a thing is done by the enimie, or elſe that you muſt doo ſomething, and in ſuch a forme, that it ſignifieth ſuch a thing, &c. accordingly vnto the tokens that you haue agreed vpon, &c. And furthermore, you may deuiſe by the formes of lightes in the night, to cauſe your friends to write a letter by, and ſo by that meanes to declare your whole minde vnto your friendes: as this, you hauing agreed vpon them, that if that there be ſo many lightes, and ſtand after ſuch a faſhion, that it ſignifieth to wright A, and if ſo many lightes, and in ſuch a forme, then to write B, and ſo foorth vnto the numbers of the letters, according vnto the forme & number of the lightes ſo ſhewed, and then at the ende of euery word ſo written, to ſhew but one light for a ſtop, for the ende of a word, &c. vntill that you haue finiſhed. And furthermore, in like manner by lightes in the night is the moſt ſpeedieſt thing to haue any thing knowne, that may be to giue warning vnto any countrey to bee in a readineſſe vppon the ſoddaine, as we here in England, doo prepare for the vſe thereof, by the firing of the beakons, &c. And furthermore it is vſed vnto a further practiſe vnderneath the king of Spaynes dominions, vpon the ſouthe coaſt called Andelazia, within the ſtraights of luberaltare the ſea being called Mare Mediterraneum, as there is ſmall towers all alongſt the coaſt that they doo keepe watch in, and at the ende of euery league or in leſſe diſtance, there is one of thoſe ſmall towers: and it is ſo ordeyned amongſt them, that they can tell whether that any of the Turkes, or Moores galleys hath been on the coaſt, and what number of Galleyes that there bee of them▪ and whether that they haue landed or been a ſhoare, and whether that they be gone or remayning ſtill, by the very forme and the

numbers of lights, that the one tower doth ſhew vnto the other, and by this meanes of thoſe lightes they will knowe of things done a hundreth leagues from them all alongſt the coaſt in one night, for that the one of the towers dooth take of the other tower, &c.
               
               
                  The 76. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you being in a towne, if that you doo knowe that you ſhall bee beſieged, you may make ſuch prouiſion before hand, that you may ſend letters, and receiue letters of your friends from time vnto time, wherby that you may declare your pleaſure and your eſtate to your friends, and alſo to know your friends minde, &c. as this, if that there is an Pigeon or Doue houſe in the towne, let them be well cheriſhed before hand, and then carry a certaine nūber of thoſe Pigeons vnto your friends, and in like manner take a certaine number of Pigeons from your friends, and then let them bee kept cloſe in a houſe that they cannot get away, and when that you are beſieged that you cannot ſend vnto your friends nor your friends vnto you, then when you liſt to ſend any letters, take one of thoſe Pigeons, and make the letter faſt about her necke, by ſome prouiſion, that it dooth not trouble hir wings, and ſo ſhe will repayre vnto thoſe Douehouſes that ſhe hath been cheriſhed at, and hath been long vſing vnto, & then the Douehouſe being ſearched euery night▪ you ſhall come by the letters, &c.
               
               
                  The 77. Deuiſe of Martiall affaires by lande.
                  AS touching Martiall affayres, I haue ſeene no greatexperience, therefore I am more bolde than wiſe, for to

ſay any thing therof, conſidering the great number of diſcreete & valiant Gentlemen and Souldiers, that hath been trayned vp of no ſmall time in thoſe affayres, that I being ſo ſimple & rude, ſhould in any reſpect meddle therewith: but yet notwithſtāding, they may make the leſſe account thereof, and not enuy the rude writer of it, for that they be but written, as ſlender Deuiſes: and firſt this for to know, if that you haue viewed any peece of ground, to knowe how many men it will receiue to ſtand in their marching forme, according vnto Tartalias order that he deſcribeth, and not according as Nicolas Machauells deſcription, to allow for euery man three foot in breadth, & ſeauen foote in length, but according vnto the order of Tartalia, to alowe for euery man three foot in breadth, & but ſixe foot in length. Wherfore I do think it neceſſary to know how many men will ſtand in their marching forme vpon any ground, for two neceſſary cauſes, & the one is this, if that you haue vewed the ground, & do know the length & the breadth thereof, then you may know how many men that it wil receiue, and by that meanes you doo know whether that it be big enough, or too ſmall to ſerue your purpoſe, &c. And the ſecond poynt is this, by that meanes you may know vpon the view of any ground, how many men that there be of your enemies, if that they be either in their battell forme, or in their marching forme, as they will bee alwaies if that they be going, except that it bee for pollicie ſake, as if that they would ſhewe themſelues to bee fewer in number than they are, then they will goe cloſer together than they doo of cuſtome, and if that they woulde ſhewe themſelues to bee more in number than they are, then they will goe wider aſunder than of cuſtome. And for to knowe how many men will ſtand vpon any peece of grounde, doo this firſt, when that you doo knowe the length and the breadth of any peece of ground, how many foote that it is, then multiply them together, that is to

ſay, the number of feete of the length, with the number of feete of the breadth, and then looke what that number commeth vnto, and then deuide that number by 18. and that will ſhewe vnto you the true number of men, that will ſtand in their marching forme, according vnto Tartalis order, that is to ſay, to alow euery man three foote in breadth, and ſixe foote in length, &c. and now according vnto our Engliſh meaſure, that is to ſay, to knowe how many men will ſtand vpon an aker of ground, as an aker of ground dooth containe of our land meaſure 160. rodes or poles, of 16. foote and a halfe in length, and that will make in ſquare meaſure 208. foote and 8. ynches and better euery way ſquare, ſo that there will ſtand vpon one aker of ground in their marching forme, alowing vnto euery man three foote in length and ſixe in breadth. 2420. men, & after that rate you may know how many men will ſtand in any peece of ground, how bigge or ſmall ſoeuer that the ground is, as a quarter of an aker wil receiue 605. men, ſo that leſſe then ſeauen roddes of ground, will receiue 100. men, &c.
               
               
                  The 78. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, I do think it conuenient for to ſhew how many ranckes of men will bee in the length of a myle whereby that if you doo ſee the length of men in their marching, you may giue a very neare geſſe of their number: as this, an Engliſh myle dooth containe 5000. foote, and then (as before is declared) to alowe for euerie ranke 6. foote, wherefore deuide the 5000. foote by ſixe, and that will ſhewe vnto you how many ranckes of men will be in a myle in length, as it is 833. ranckes, ſo that you may conclude that there will bee 416. ranckes in halfe a myle, and 208. rankes in the length of a quarter of a myle, and in the length 600. foote, iuſt 10
                        •
                     . ranckes, and that is

leſſe than part of a myle, and then you knowing how many men that there is in a rancke, you may know the number of men, &c.
               
               
                  The 97. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore I do think it conuenient for to ſhewe vnto you, how to ſet a battell ſquare, that is to ſay, for diuers numbers of men, and the number of men being knowne, to haue ſo many men in a ranke, as the number of ranckes commeth vnto, and firſt for 100. the ſquare roote, and ſo increaſing by the halfe hundred, vnto 500. and then increaſing by the 1000. vntill it be 40000. the firſt number is the number of men, the ſecond is the ſquare roote or battell, and the reſt is the remainder that will not be ſquare.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        The Table for the 29. Deuiſe.
                        
                           The number of men.
                           The Square roote or bat
                           The Remainder.
                            
                           The number of men.
                           The Square roote or bat
                           The Remainder.
                        
                        
                           100
                           10
                           0
                            
                           10000
                           100
                           0
                        
                        
                           150
                           12
                           6
                            
                           11000
                           104
                           184
                        
                        
                           200
                           14
                           4
                            
                           12000
                           109
                           119
                        
                        
                           250
                           15
                           25
                            
                           13000
                           114
                           4
                        
                        
                           300
                           17
                           11
                            
                           14000
                           118
                           76
                        
                        
                           350
                           18
                           26
                            
                           15000
                           122
                           116
                        
                        
                           400
                           20
                           0
                            
                           16000
                           126
                           62
                        
                        
                           450
                           21
                           9
                            
                           17000
                           130
                           100
                        
                        
                           500
                           22
                           16
                            
                           18000
                           134
                           44
                        
                        
                           600
                           24
                           24
                            
                           19000
                           137
                           231
                        
                        
                           700
                           26
                           24
                            
                           20000
                           141
                           119
                        
                        
                           800
                           28
                           16
                            
                           21000
                           144
                           264
                        
                        
                           900
                           30
                           0
                            
                           22000
                           148
                           96
                        
                        
                           1000
                           31
                           39
                            
                           23000
                           151
                           199
                        
                        
                           1100
                           33
                           11
                            
                           24000
                           154
                           284
                        
                        
                           1200
                           34
                           44
                           1
                           25000
                           158
                           36
                        
                        
                           1300
                           36
                           4
                            
                           26000
                           161
                           79
                        
                        
                           1400
                           37
                           31
                            
                           27000
                           164
                           104
                        
                        
                           1500
                           38
                           50
                            
                           28000
                           167
                           111
                        
                        
                           1600
                           40
                           0
                            
                           29000
                           170
                           100
                        
                        
                           1700
                           41
                           19
                            
                           30000
                           173
                           71
                        
                        
                           1800
                           42
                           36
                            
                           31000
                           176
                           24
                        
                        
                           1900
                           43
                           51
                            
                           32000
                           178
                           316
                        
                        
                           2000
                           44
                           64
                            
                           33000
                           181
                           239
                        
                        
                           3000
                           54
                           84
                            
                           34000
                           184
                           144
                        
                        
                           4000
                           63
                           31
                            
                           35000
                           187
                           31
                        
                        
                           5000
                           70
                           100
                            
                           36000
                           189
                           279
                        
                        
                           6000
                           77
                           71
                            
                           37000
                           192
                           136
                        
                        
                           7000
                           83
                           111
                            
                           38000
                           194
                           304
                        
                        
                           8000
                           89
                           79
                            
                           39000
                           197
                           191
                        
                        
                           9000
                           94
                           164
                            
                           40000
                           200
                           0
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 87. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore for that the ſquare roote or battell is not the ſtrongeſt way for you to imbattell your ſelfe, for that the front is much narrower than the ſide or flanck of the battel, wherefore in mine opinion, and alſo it is the opinion of diuers of them that haue written in Martial affayres, that the ſtrongeſt way for to imbattell himſelfe, is to bee ſquare vpon the ground, that is to ſay that the ſide of the battell, and the front of the battell be as many foote one way, as it is the other way, and then the number of men in the front will be double vnto the number of the ranckes, and ſo by that meanes there be the more men occupied to fight all at one time, &c. wherefore I doo thinke it good to ſhew vnto you, how many men bee in a rancke on the fronte, and alſo how many ranckes that there will be in the ſide or flancke, and alſo in how many foote of ground ſquare euery way, that they may ſtand vpon, accordingly as before is rehearſed, allowing euerie man three foote in breadth and ſixe foote in length, beginning at 100. vntill that they bee 2000. and then increaſing by the 1000. vntill that they be 40000. And the firſt numbers is the number of men, and the ſecond is the number of men in a rancke for the fronte, and the third numbers, is the numbers of ranckes for the ſide or flancke, and the fourth numbers, is the remaine that will neither come in to bee a whole rancke in the fronte, neither will they bee ſufficient to ſerue to make one more in a rancke. Wherefore they are to bee imployed according vnto the will of the General or the Captaines of the leaders of thoſe men, &c. and the fifth number is the number of the ſeate that thoſe men may ſtand vpon in their battell forme, to bee ſquare on the ground, that is to ſay, to be ſo many foote euery way, &c. And now followeth the table of the things rehearſed.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                        The Table for the 80. Deuiſe.
                        
                           The number of men, the vvhole ſum.
                           The number of men in a rancke.
                           The number of ranckes.
                           The Remainder.
                           The number of feete that the grounde is ſquare.
                        
                        
                           100
                           14
                           7
                           2
                           42
                        
                        
                           150
                           16
                           9
                           6
                           51
                        
                        
                           200
                           20
                           10
                           0
                           60
                        
                        
                           250
                           22
                           11
                           8
                           66
                        
                        
                           300
                           25
                           12
                           0
                           74
                        
                        
                           350
                           26
                           13
                           12
                           78
                        
                        
                           400
                           28
                           14
                           8
                           84
                        
                        
                           450
                           30
                           15
                           0
                           90
                        
                        
                           500
                           31
                           16
                           4
                           94
                        
                        
                           600
                           35
                           17
                           5
                           103
                        
                        
                           700
                           36
                           19
                           16
                           111
                        
                        
                           800
                           40
                           20
                           0
                           120
                        
                        
                           900
                           42
                           21
                           18
                           126
                        
                        
                           1000
                           45
                           22
                           10
                           133
                        
                        
                           1100
                           47
                           23
                           19
                           140
                        
                        
                           1200
                           48
                           25
                           0
                           147
                        
                        
                           1300
                           50
                           26
                           0
                           153
                        
                        
                           1400
                           53
                           26
                           22
                           158
                        
                        
                           1500
                           55
                           27
                           15
                           164
                        
                        
                           1600
                           57
                           28
                           4
                           170
                        
                        
                           1700
                           58
                           29
                           18
                           174
                        
                        
                           1800
                           60
                           30
                           0
                           180
                        
                        
                           1900
                           61
                           31
                           9
                           183
                        
                        
                           2000
                           62
                           32
                           16
                           189
                        
                        
                           3000
                           76
                           39
                           36
                           231
                        
                        
                           4000
                           88
                           45
                           40
                           267
                        
                        
                           5000
                           100
                           50
                           0
                           300
                        
                        
                           6000
                           109
                           55
                           5
                           328
                        
                        
                           7000
                           118
                           59
                           38
                           354
                        
                        
                           8000
                           126
                           63
                           62
                           378
                        
                        
                           9000
                           134
                           67
                           22
                           402
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The Table for the 80. Deuiſe.
                        
                           The number of men, the vvhole ſum.
                           The number of men in a rancke.
                           The number of ranckes.
                           The Remainder.
                           The number of feete that the grounde is ſquare.
                        
                        
                           10000
                           140
                           71
                           60
                           423
                        
                        
                           11000
                           148
                           74
                           48
                           444
                        
                        
                           12000
                           155
                           77
                           65
                           464
                        
                        
                           13000
                           160
                           81
                           40
                           483
                        
                        
                           14000
                           166
                           84
                           56
                           501
                        
                        
                           15000
                           172
                           87
                           36
                           519
                        
                        
                           16000
                           179
                           89
                           69
                           536
                        
                        
                           17000
                           184
                           92
                           72
                           552
                        
                        
                           18000
                           189
                           95
                           45
                           568
                        
                        
                           19000
                           195
                           97
                           85
                           584
                        
                        
                           20000
                           200
                           100
                           0
                           600
                        
                        
                           21000
                           205
                           102
                           90
                           614
                        
                        
                           22000
                           209
                           105
                           55
                           628
                        
                        
                           23000
                           214
                           107
                           102
                           642
                        
                        
                           24000
                           218
                           110
                           20
                           657
                        
                        
                           25000
                           223
                           112
                           24
                           670
                        
                        
                           26000
                           228
                           114
                           8
                           684
                        
                        
                           27000
                           232
                           116
                           88
                           696
                        
                        
                           28000
                           237
                           118
                           34
                           710
                        
                        
                           29000
                           241
                           120
                           80
                           722
                        
                        
                           30000
                           245
                           122
                           110
                           734
                        
                        
                           31000
                           248
                           125
                           0
                           747
                        
                        
                           32000
                           253
                           126
                           122
                           758
                        
                        
                           33000
                           257
                           128
                           104
                           770
                        
                        
                           34000
                           261
                           130
                           70
                           782
                        
                        
                           35000
                           265
                           132
                           20
                           794
                        
                        
                           36000
                           268
                           134
                           88
                           804
                        
                        
                           37000
                           272
                           136
                           8
                           816
                        
                        
                           38000
                           275
                           138
                           50
                           826
                        
                        
                           39000
                           278
                           140
                           80
                           837
                        
                        
                           40000
                           283
                           141
                           97
                           848
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The 81. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as it is the ſtrongeſt way for you to imbattell your ſelfe to be ſquare vpon the ground, for that there is the more men occupied to fight, ſo in like manner it is the weaker way than to be ſquare in number, if that you ſhould haue any charge giuen vnto the flancke or ſide of the battell: wherefore I doo thinke it very neceſſarie for to ſhewe vnto you, how that the ſide of the battell may be as ſtrong as the front, if that the weapons be ſorted thereafter, for that they ſhall haue as many men in a rancke for the ſide, as there is in the front, vppon the ſuddaine, and the battell neuer depart from that ground, as this, the number of men in the front, being double vnto the number of ranckes, then if there bee any charge giuen vnto the ſide of the battell, the ground being ſquare, then it is but to turne their faces vnto their enemies, and then two ranckes will make one iuſt: as for an example, of one hundred men, and to bee ſquare vppon the ground, there ſhall be foureteene men in a rancke, and ſeauen ranckes, and the ground ſhall bee 42. foote ſquare: then if that they haue a charge giuen vnto the ſide, then they turning their faces vnto their enemies, then they are but ſeauen in a rancke and foureteene ranckes, and then there is ſixe foote a ſunder betweene euery man, then let the next rancke come vnto the firſt rancke, and then there will bee foureteene men in a rancke, and ſo euery two rancks may make one ranck, and then there is but three foote as was before betweene euery man in the front of the battell, and ſixe foote betweene euery rancke, &c.
               
               
                  The 82. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, I do thinke it conuenient for to ſhew vnto you, how for to bee ſquare vppon the ground, for

any number of men, what ſpace ſoeuer that you woulde haue betweene man and man, both in length and breadth is according vnto the order of Nicholas Machiuel, which is in length for euery man 7. foote, and in breadth 3. foot, or elſe if that you would haue your armie of men to ſhew bigger and to be ſquare vpon the ground, then your ſpace betweene man and man muſt be wider, as to allowe nine foote in length for euery man, and foure foote in breadth, according vnto the minde or fancie of the Generall, &c. Although the accuſtomable manner hath beene according vnto the opinions of diuers authors in Martiall affayres, to allow but 6. foote in length & 3. foote in bredth, called of moſt authors the broad ſquare, according vnto the tables in the eightie Deuiſe. And now to be ſquare vpon the ground, thē what ſpace ſoeuer that you would haue betweene man and man, both in length and breadth, then doe this firſt, looke how many foote that you will allow in length of grounde for euery man, then you muſt multiply your number of menne, by the number of feete in length, that done, then deuide that number ſo multiplyed by the number of feete in breadth that you doe allowe for euery man: and that done, then extract the ſquare roote of that number, and that ſhall ſhewe you howe manie men ſhall bee in a ranck for the front of the battell, and then to know how many ranckes of menne, doo this, looke how many men that you haue in the ranck for the front, then deuide that number by your proper or true number of men, and that ſhall ſhew vnto you howe many ranckes that there ſhall be of them, &c. As for an example thus; I hauing thirty thouſand men, and I would know howe many men that there will be in a rancke, and howe many ranckes of them to be ſquare vpon the ground, allowing for euery man 7 foote in length, and 3. foote in breadth, according vnto Nicholas Machiuels order, and to knowe that, doe this, firſt your number of men being 30000. and

allowing 7. foote in length for euery man, therefore multiplie 30000. by 7. and that commeth vnto 210000. and then deuide that number againe, by that number in feete that you do allow in breadth for euery man, and that is by 3. wherefore deuide 21000. by 3. and then there wil ſtand in the quantitie line 70000. then extract the ſquare roote of 70000. and there will ſtand in the quantitie line 264. ſo that you may conclude that 264. men ſhall be in a ranck for the front of the battell. And now to know how many rancks of men that there ſhalbe for the ſide or flanck of the battell, then doo this: your number beeing 264. men in a rancke, and your number of men being 30000. wherefore deuide the 30000. by 264. and then there will ſtande in the quantitie line 113. and then remaineth ouer 168. ſo that you may conclude, that 30000. men to ſtand ſquare vppon the grounde, allowing ſeauen foote in length, and three foote in breadth, for euery man, will be 264. men in a rancke, and 113. ranckes, and 168. men will remaine ouer, which 168. men you may imploy at the diſcretion of the Generall: and alſo it will make one man more in a rancke, and then there ſhall bee 265. men in a rancke, and 113. ranckes, and 55. men will remaine ouer, &c. And alſo by this order, you may imbattell your ſelfe ſquare vpon the ground, what ſpace ſoeuer that you would be between man and man in length and breadth: wherfore I will giue a ſecond example, you hauing tenne thouſand men, and would haue nine foote in length for euery man, and foure foote in breadth, wherefore multiplie tenne thouſand by nine, and that maketh 90000. then deuide that 90000. by foure, and then there will ſtand in the quantitie line 22500. then extract the ſquare roote of 22500. and then there will ſtand in the quantitie line one hundred and fiftie: ſo that you may conclude, that 150. men ſhall bee in a rancke for the front of the battell, and then your number of men, beeing 10000. therefore deuide the number of

men by the front, that is to ſay, 10000. by 150. and then there will ſtand in the quantitie line 66. and then there remaineth ouer 100. ſo that you may conclude, that 10000. men, alowing euery man 9. foote in length, and 4. foote in breadth, to ſtand ſquare on the ground, will bee 150. men in a rancke, and 66. ranckes, and 100. will remaine ouer, which 100. men will make one man more in a rancke, that is 151. men in a rancke, and 66. ranckes, and 34. men will remaine ouer, & ſo by this meanes you may inbattell your ſelfe ſquare vppon the ground, what ſpace ſoeuer that you would haue betweene man and man both in length and breadth, and then if that you would know how many foot ſquare in ground that they doo occupie, then it is but to doo this: multiplie the number of men in a rancke, by the number of feete that they doo occupie in breadth, & that ſhall ſhew vnto you how many foote ſquare is the ground that they doo occupie, or els you may doo this: multiplie the number of rancks by the ſpace of the number of feete, that they haue in length, & that in like manner ſhewes the ſquare of the ground that they do occupie in like manner. &c.
               
               
                  The 83. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you hauing any number of men, and you hauing ſo many weapons of euery ſorte more or leſſe as it happeneth, whether that you would be ſquare on the ground or otherwiſe, you knowing how many men that you would be in a rancke, you may knowe how many ranckes that there will bee of euery ſorte of weapon at your pleaſure, as this, that is no more but to deuide the number of weapons of euery ſorte, by that number of men that you would be in a rancke, and that number that ſtandeth in quantitie line ſhall be the number of ranckes. &c. And thus by deuiding euery ſort of weapons by it ſelfe, by a number in a rancke, you ſhall perfectly know how many

ranckes that there ſhall bee of euery forte of weapon, &c. And thus I do ceaſe to ſay any further, as touching the ſetting of the ſorts of the weapons, referring that vnto them that are expert in thoſe cauſes, and alſo the formes of ſundrie battels, as triangles, double and ſingle battell, called the halfe Moone, either with the hornes or corners forwards or backwards, and the ſleeues or wings of battels. I will not take vpon me to deale in thoſe cauſes, but I do referre that vnto thoſe men of experience in ſuch affayres.
               
               
                  The 84. Deuiſe.
                  NOw you beeing imbattelled in any place, where that you are neere vnto your enemies, and yet for an aduantage ſake, you would take another peece of grounde more better for your purpoſe, and yet you cannot come vnto it in your battelforme by the means of ſome ſtraight that you muſt paſſe through before that you can come vnto it, and for that you are imbattelled, and would not alter them from that forme of battell: then to paſſe through the ſtraight do this, the place being viewed before hand, how many men may march through in a rancke through that ſtraight, and then appoynting your officers, as the Captaines of the hundreds, and the vintners, or the other officers for that purpoſe, to march through the ſtraight, according vnto that number that you may march through, and then when that they doo come at the ſtraight, let the whole battell ſtay, & then if that it be ſo narrow that there may but 3. men paſſe through, more or leſſe as the place is, then begin at the ſide of the battell, and then let 3. of the front begin to enter and march in, and then 3. of the next rancke, and ſo foorth vnto the laſt rancke, and then at the end of the laſt rancke, let them 3. of the firſt rancke follow againe, and ſo foorth, vntill that they be all entred & gone into the ſtraight, and then when that the firſt 3. in a rancke

is through the ſtraight, let them ſtay, and then let the next 3. in a rancke come vp by them, vntill that hee that was in the front be with them that are in the front that firſt entered the ſtraight, &c. and ſo let them all ſtay, and the one come vp by the ſide of the other, vntill that the whole battell be in that forme that it was before. &c.
               
               
                  The 85. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, if that you in the marching haue any occaſion to ſhift the number of men in a rancke, that is to ſay, to be ſometime more men in a ranck, and ſometime fewer men in a rancke, and yet would keepe your weapons ſorted as they were at the firſt, as in the Deuiſe next before in the paſſing through a ſtraight, where the weapons that were in the front are diſperſed in euery place, according vnto the often ſeparating of the front of the battell, ſo that in that forme they are but weake, if that they were abroade out of the ſtraight where that they might haue any charge or battell giuen vnto them: wherefore for an eaſie way to ſhift your ſelfe to bee what number of men in a rancke that you liſt, and to keepe your weapons ſorted as they were before, and not to bee altered, but them that were in the front to be in the front ſtill, and ſo conſequently in euery place to be as they were before, &c. And now for a ſpeedie way for to bring your men from one number of men vnto another, this is to be noted, if that you bee 3. men in a rancke and would be 5. then 5. ranckes will make 3. ranckes: and you being 3. ranckes and would be 7. in a rancke, then 7. ranckes will make three ranckes: and being three in a rancke, and would bee nine in a rancke, then three ranckes will make one: and being three in a rancke, and would be eleuen, then eleuen will make three: and being three in a ranck, and would be thirteene, then thirteene will make three: and being three in a rancke, and would

be 15. then 5. ranckes will make one: and then if that you would be 17. in a rancke, then 17. ranckes will make 3: and if that you would be 19. in a rancke, then 19. will make 3: and if that you would bee 21. in a rancke, then 7. will make one rancke, &c. And if that you be 5. men in a rancke, and would bee 7. in a rancke, then 7. ranckes will make 5: and ſtill you being 5. in a rancke, and would bee 9. then 9. will make 5: and if that you would bee 11. in a rancke, then 11. will make 5: and if that you would be 13. in a ranck, then 13. wil make 5: & if that you would be 15. men in a ranck, then 3. ranckes will make one, &c. And furthermore, you being 7. men in a rancke, and would bee 9. then 9. ranckes will make 7: and you being ſtill 7. and would bee 11. then 11. will make 7: and if that you would be 13. in a rancke, then 13. will make 7: and if that you would be 15. then 15. will make 7: & if you would be 17. then 17. will make 7: and if that you would be 19. then 19. will make 7: and if you would be 21. then 3. ranckes will make one, &c. And furthermore, by that ſame order you being the more men in a rancke and would bee fewer, then as is ſhewed before you being 21. in a rancke, and would bee but 3. then one will make 7. ranckes: and if you being 21. men in a ranck, and would be but 5. then 5. ranckes will make 21: and if that you would be but 7. in a rancke, then one rancke will make 3. ranckes, &c. And ſo by this meanes you may alter your ſelfe from one number vnto another, and neuer vnſorte your weapons, as when that you liſt to alter your number of men in a rancke, then it is but to appoynt your officers in euery place at the ende of ſo many ranckes, to poynt them into what number that you doo aſſigne them &c. at your pleaſure.
               
               
                  The 86. Deuiſe.
                  ANd if that it happen when that you are ſet in your battell forme, and your enemies at hand readie to fight

with you, and by fortune either of great Ordinance or by ſmall got, that the front or diuers ranckes of your battell that the men are ſlayne or ſpoyled, and then if that your enemies doo encounter with you, then you muſt needs be ouerthrowne, except that the front and thoſe rankes bee new ſupplied or finiſhed againe with men: neither you muſt not be out of order, for then in like manner you ſhould be ouerthrowne: and to runne away then you in like manner ſhould be ouerthrowne: wherefore this is to be noted, and that thoſe that are the officers of the bandes haue a diligent foreſight, that as ſoone as any mā is ſtroake downe by any miſfortune, that the roome bee ſupplied againe forthwith: which way is this to be done, and neuer to be out of order for the matter, and the ranckes afore to be furniſhed forthwith, and this the Souldiers muſt haue this Inſtructions, that as ſoone as he dooth ſee his foreman ſtroken downe or miſſing, that he doth ſtep into his place and ſo euery one of them to ſteppe forwards vntill that it doo come vnto the laſt rancke, and ſo by that meanes that thoſe men, that were taken away in the firſt ranckes, that they ſhall be turned vnto the hindermoſt ranckes of all, &c. And this they may doo both in their marching or going, as well as in ſtanding ſtill, for in the going hee muſt goe faſter than his fellowes, vntill that he dooth come ſo farre forwards till that the ranckes bee furniſhed againe, & if ſo bee that it were ſo, that in the firſt ranckes that the men were ſpoyled vntill the middle of the battell, ſhould neuer ceaſe but to ouer goe his fellowes, vntill that hee were in the forefronte of the battel, and ſo in al the rankes, vntil the laſt ranke to come forwardes in like manner, and ſo by that meanes the wantes of men ſhould be in the hinder part of the battell, and furniſhed in the forepart of the battell, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 87. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching the ioyning of battell, there is great policie, and wiſedome, both in the ſorting of their weapons, & alſo in the imbattelling of them, conſidering in what forme that your enemies bee in, and how that they are prepared both in their weapons and otherwiſe, and ſo you to imbattell your ſelfe againſt them, that you may haue the aduantage of them if that it be poſſible, conſidering of euery thing that may happen, as well of things that are againſt you, as of things with you, that is to ſay, conſidering of the number of men of both the ſides, the furniture and the weapons on both the ſides, the forme of the battels on both the ſides, the aduantages of the groundes, whether that it bee by hill, or by any other meanes, as the winde, or the Sunne or water, or ſuch other like, &c. And alſo there is great matters that may happen by the vſing of ſome kinde of fight, conſidering of the weapons on both the ſides, for they muſt vſe the fight of any weapon, according vnto that weapon that hee fighteth againſt, and ſo ſeeke the aduauntage that waies if that it may bee: as in my opinion, if that there were two battels readie to bee ioyned together, the one againſt the other, and the number of men on both the ſides to be equall, and alſo in their appoyntment weapons and furniture to bee a like, and alſo in forme of battell all one, and alſo the one to haue no aduantage of the ground of the other, neither in no other thing, but to be all alike in all poynts, &c. and ſuppoſe that the fronte of both the battels is pikes, and the one as many men in a rancke as the other, yet it is poſſible that the one may ouerthrowe the other at the firſt meeting of the battell without any recouerie, by the meanes of the order of the fighting: as this: the one battell commeth

according vnto the accuſtomable manner, thinking to to ſtand at the puſhe of the pyke with them, and the other battell comming in that forme in like manner, vntill that they are in manner hard vnto them, and then vppon the ſuddaine, they doo all the fore fronte run in narrower and together ſo cloſe as they can, comming in ſhoulder vnto ſhoulder, and then the ranckes that are behinde, for the quantitie of neare the halfe of the battell, dooth the like, and ſo dooth come cloſe vnto the backe of them that are before, and ſo running with great violence, and the poyntes of their pikes forwards, that they muſt pearce and enter the fronte of the other battell, for they that are before muſt needes run in vnto them, for that they that are behinde doo force them in: and they that are of the other battell muſt needes giue way, or elſe fall downe and be troden vnder feete, and then if that they bee once ſeparated, and put out of their order, they muſt needes be ouerthrowne with out any recouery, &c.
                  Wherefore there is great policie to bee vſed in fighting at the ioyning of battels, and alſo in the ſorting of their weapons, and alſo in the forme of the battels, as in the deuiding of themſelues in ſundry battels, as wings and ſuch other like, which I paſſe ouer, referring it vnto thoſe that haue ſeene the experience thereof.
               
               
                  The 88. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, if that it happē ſo that you do chance for to be ouer matched, and that you doo knowe that your enemies bee to ſtrong for you, by the great ſtrength of their horſe men, and the number of men to many for you, that if you ſhould fight with them, that you muſt needes be ouerthrowne, then to preuent them that they ſhall not be able to giue any charge vpon you, then inuiron

or compaſſe your ſelfe round about with your carriages, that is to ſay, with your wagons or cartes, and ſo by that meanes the horſemen ſhall not be able to enter vpon you, neither the foote men, but that you ſhall bee able to defend them, &c. and if that it happen ſo that you haue not ſufficient of wagons or cartes to inuiron or compaſſe you round about, then you may goe neare vnto ſome hedge or ditch, or ſuch other like to bee your refuge for the one ſide, and then you may place your carriages on the other ſide, &c.
               
               
                  The 89. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, if that it happen ſo, that you are abroade with a band of men, and that you are belay de betweene you and home, both by horſemen and by foote men, and that it is not poſſible for you, but if that they doo charge vpon you, but that you muſt be ouerthrowne, and you hauing no wagons or carriages to compaſſe your ſelfe, then repayre vnto ſuch a place that is full of buſhes, as thornes, and brambles, and there you may with eaſe defende your ſelfe, for that the Horſemen ſhall not bee able to giue any charge vppon you, and alſo as for the footemen you may defende your ſelfe, &c.
               
               
                  The 90. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, if that it dooth happen ſo, that you are driuen to trauell by night, whether that it bee to doo any exployte or otherwiſe, and that you are ſmall ſhot as harquebuſhes or caliuers, and that you would carry your match cloſe, that you would not haue it to be ſeen of the ſcoutes, or watch of your enemies, then you muſt doo this, euerie man muſt prepare a peece of a cane of

fiue or ſixe ynches long, and muſt put a ſtring thereunto, and hang that by his girdle, as you doo the ſheathe of a knife: and the peece of cane muſt bee open at both the endes, and then the matche being light, you muſt put into the hollow cane that ende that is light, and ſo the match will burne in the cane, and the light thereof nebee eſpied, &c. and this Deuiſe is very good to carrie your match in the rainie weather, for that the wet ſhall not touch the fire of the match, and you may euer, as the match burneth, feede it, or put it in further and further, &c.
               
               
                  The 91. Deuiſe.
                  AND furthermore, if that you haue any watch or ſcoutes abroade in the night, and that you woulde knowe whether that there be any horſemen comming, and the night being ſo darke that you cannot ſee if that any were comming, yet by this meanes you may knowe if that there were any comming, as this, make a hole in the ground with a dagger or knife, of a two or three ynches deepe, and a three or foure ynches ouer, and then ſtoupe downe vnto the ground, and lay your eare thereunto, and then you harkening vnto it, if that there be any horſemen comming you ſhall heare them, and you ſhall knowe whether that they doo come faſt or ſoftely, and whether that there bee one or two, or a number of them, by the very noyſe of the ground, halfe a myle before that they doo come neare vnto you by the verie noyſe of the grounde: and alſo if that it be vpon ſome kinde of ground, you may heare them more than a mile, and alſo vpon ſuch ground you may heare footemen a quarter of a myle, and whether that there bee but one or two or a number of them.
               
               
                  
                  The 92. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching them that doo trauell by night in ſuch places, that is, in their enemies countrey, and that cannot trauel by day for feare of being ſpied, neither dare keepe the common highe way for feare of being met withall, as it may happen by them that haue beene taken of enemies, and haue broken priſon, or otherwiſe to carry letters, & ſuch other like, then it behooueth them to knowe which way that the place dooth ſtand from them, that is to ſay, vnto what quarter of the world, whether that it be Eaſt, Weſt, North or South, & then according as the place doth beare, ſo to direct their way, and according vnto that to coaſt ouer the Countrey the neareſt way, & to gouerne them by night in their way, they muſt vſe the North ſtar, & ſo in the night to direct their way by that, if it be ſtar light, & by day they may vſe the needle of a Diall when they trauell in ſuch places that be out of the hye way, as in wooddes, forreſts, & ſuch other like places, and if that they haue no Diall, then they muſt note the place of the Sunne riſing and the ſetting, and the place of noone, &c. vntill that they doo come neare vnto the frontiers of the Countrey where their friends are, &c.
               
               
                  The 93. Deuiſe.
                  AND if an armed man be purſued, and is in danger to bee taken except that hee may ſwimme ouer a water, then for him to ſwimme, hee may prepare this, to make a thing to beare about him, as a girdle made of leather and ſowed tight, and blowe that full of winde by a pype that muſt bee made faſt therevnto, and ſo that thing will make him ſwimme, although hee haue an armour on his backe.
               
               
                  
                  The 94. Deuiſe.
                  ANd if that an army of men and their carriages are to paſſe ouer a riuer or water, and they hauing no prouiſion of boates, yet they may make a bridge in this manner, firſt prepare caske, as pypes, or hogſheades, and then take long timber, and then make a frame therewith in this manner, to frame two peeces together ſomewhat ſhorter in breadth than the length of the caske, like vnto a ladder, but much bigger and ſtronger, and you hauing prepared a ſufficient number of theſe, then take your caske being made tight, and then take thoſe timbers ſo made together, and then put the caske betweene two of theſe framed timbers, the one being laide cloſe vnto the other, and then make faſt thoſe two frames, the one being of the one ſide of the caske, and the other on the other ſide of the caske, and then make them ſo faſt, that the caske will not ſtirre, and ſo to make it ſo long that it will goe ouer the riuer or water, and ſo to haue two ranckes of caske in thoſe formes, and then thoſe two ranckes of caske being placed croſſe the riuer, then prepare plankes to lay vpon thoſe two ranckes of caske cloſe together, and then being made faſt vnto the timber that they doo not ſtirre from the place, then the whole armie may paſſe ouer, and their carriages and all, for that the caske will not ſuffer the bridge for to ſincke, although that they doo drawe the Ordinance ouer it, &c.
               
               
                  The 95. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, if that an army of men be for to paſſe ouer a broade water, where that there dooth runne a great tyde or ſtreame, and by the meanes of the great breadth, and the ſwift ſtreame, it is not poſſible to make

any bridge to paſſe ouer it, yet notwithſtanding it is poſſible to carrie ſuch prouiſion with them, that may make ſo many boates within leſſe time than a day, as will carrie the whole armie ouer at once, although that the water were two or three myle ouer it, & yet that prouiſion that they ſhould carry with them, ſhould not aske any great matter in carriage, for one wagon or cart ſhould carrie as much prouiſion to make boates to carry ouer 400. or 500. men, &c. As this, firſt, prepare leather, and then let them make the mould of a boate of 20. or 30. foot long more or leſſe, at your diſcretion, and in deepeneſſe three or foure foot at your diſcretion, and of 8. foot broade more or leſſe at your diſcretion, and that done, let the leather bee made like the moulde of the boate, that it may be fitte to bee drawne on vppon it, and the ſeames ſo ſowed or cloſed, that it dooth not leake, that it may bee tight to holde out water, and that done, then to haue in ſundry places certaine ſtrops or ſtrings to make it faſt, and then it is finiſhed, and then it may be folded vp and laide in cartes or wagons, and then you may make ſuch a number of them as ſhall bee ſufficient to ſerue your turne, as a boate of 30. foote long, and eyght foote broade, and foure foote deepe, will carrie a 40. or 50. men at eaſe, &c. And then whenſoeuer that you do meane to paſſe the army ouer any riuer, then repayre vnto ſome place neare vnto the riuer ſide, where there is ſome yong woodes, & then that ſhall ſerue your turne, to the intent to make your boates: as this, cut downe of that yong wood, and then cut one maine peece to make it for the keele of the boate, and to cutte that of that length according to the length of the moulde that was firſt made, and ſo a peece for the ſtemme and the ſterne poſt, accordingly vnto the firſt moulde made, and then certaine poles to ſerue for the ſides, and ſo forth▪ and ſo conſequently to euery place, and then let them be framed and nayled together in all places, & that done let the

leather bee drawne on ouer that, and then made faſt with the ſtrops, and then it is finiſhed: and then for that the men may not tread vppon the leather in the bottome of the boate, they may either prepare bordes, or els to make hardels of purpoſe, and then theſe boates being put into the water, they will ſwimme aſwell as any other boates, and may rowe too and fro, if that it were to go 100. miles, &c. Wherefore they muſt make ſome prouiſion of oares for them.
               
               
                  The 96. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as is before expreſſed in this booke of Deuiſes of Ordinance, that in the carrying of their field Ordinance, as their Sakers, and their Minions, and their other field peeces, that when that they doo trauell amongſt their enemies, or otherwiſe in the front of their battels, when that they doo ſee that their enemies be ready to giue charge vppon them, eyther with their horſemen or footemen, they may drawe or carrie their field Ordinance before the battell, and their mouthes forwards and laden, and may ſhoote them off vnto their enemies, and yet the horſes ſhall ſtill drawe forwards, and be behind the Ordinance, ſo that their Artillerie ſhall goe forwards as faſt as the armie of men, and alwaies in the front of the battell: as this, where as the accuſtomable manner is for to haue the Lymers that the horſes doth drawe in, to bee made faſt vnto the ſtocke or carriage of the peece, and ſo to drawe it with the breech or taile forwards: this muſt bee vnto the contrarie, for it ſhall haue no Lymers at al, but in the ſtead of the Lymers it muſt haue a long peece of timber, as of Fyrre, or ſuch as they make maſts of, & that muſt be made faſt vnto the carriage or ſtocke of the peece, in ſuch ſorte that it doth ſtand faſt, that it may not ſwarue by no means, and to ſtande backwardes right out from the taile of the

peece wards, and the peece of timber or maſt to be of ſufficient bigneſſe and length, according vnto the peece of Ordinance, and then they may make their prouiſion of their horſe harneys faſt vnto the long peece of timber, and the horſes heads to goe towards the peece of Ordinance ward, the one halfe of the number of horſes vpon the one ſide of the long peece of timber, and the other halfe on the other ſide, and then the horſes in their drawing ſhall thruſt the peece of Ordinance forwards, ſo that the horſes ſhall goe behind the peece, and the mouth of the peece forwards towardes their enemies, ſo that they may ſhoote them off continually without any ſtaying, ſo that the horſes will be ruled: but if that the horſes will not be ruled, yet then they may be driuen forwards by the long peece of timber, with the ſtrength of men▪ &c.
               
               
                  The 97. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as you doo ſee by the laſt Deuiſe, for the drawing of the Ordinance, and the peece for to goe before the Ordinance, ſo in like manner if that it ſhould happen ſo, that you had no Ordinance with you, but had carriage with you, as wagons or carts, then in my opinion it were very good to bee ſet in the front of the battell, for the preſeruation of them againſt the horſemen, as before is ſayd, to haue a long peece of timber made faſt behinde the cart or wagon, and ſo to drawe it, and the cart or wagon to goe before the horſes, &c.
               
               
                  The 98. Deuiſe.
                  IT furthermore ſeemeth vnto me to bee very neceſſarie, and eſpecially for an armie of men that ſhould trauell amongſt their enemies, or alſo where as any battell is to bee fought, my opinion is, that this kind of prouiſion were very neceſſarie both for the forefront of an armie, and alſo

for to impale them rounde abouts, and that is this, for to prepare certaine ſmal Ordinance, ſo that it be not too heauie, as Muskets and ſmall ſingle Baces, and ſome Calabaſſes that doo ſhoote ſmall ſtones, as ſingle and ſuch other like. And then let them prepare ſmall light wheeles of 4. foote hye, and ſo prepare an Axeltree for two of thoſe wheeles, and place thoſe ſmall Ordinance vppon them in ſome hanſome prouiſion made of purpoſe, and that done, then thoſe ſmall Ordinance may be driuen forwards with the mouth towards their enemies by men, for any mā may drawe or thruſt forward 3. or 4 ſcore pound waight, being vpon wheeles, better or withmore eaſe than he ſhalbe able to beare 20. pound waight, & theſe ſmall light Ordinance may be driuen forwards being vppon wheeles, as men doo commonly driue a wheelebarrowe, and ſo the mouth ſhall be forwards, and he behind the peece, and the peece may haue a ſight as the Caliuers haue, ſo that he may ſhoote as neere with that peece, as they may do with a Caliuer: but the force of that peece is ſixe times more than the force of the Caliuer, ſo that it is not poſsible for to make any armour of proofe to keepe out the force of that ſhot: wherefore I am of this opinion, that being vppon plaine ground, that any man may trauell as far in a day with a ſmall peece with all his prouiſion with him, as any man with a corſelet furniſhed: for he that trauelleth with that peece may hang all his prouiſion of powder and ſhot vpon the Axeltree of his peece, and ſo trauel with eaſe: & alſo any armie of men being inuironed round with ſuch kind of prouiſion, with the helpe of the other Ordinance & prouiſion before ſpecified, that it is not poſſible for any horſemen to enter in vpon them, but that they may defend them for the horſes cannot run ouer the wheeles and carriage of this kinde of ſmall Ordinance, but that they that are within thoſe ſmall Ordinance, may defend them with their pikes and Caliuers, and their other weapons, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 99. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, as touching the force of horſemen, when that they doo giue the charge vppon any band of men, they doo come with no ſmall force, the horſes being luſtie and ſtrong: wherfore ſome mens opinion hath been this, that if that the pikemen, for that they are the ſtrength of the armie, and eſpecially to defend the horſemen, that if that euery pikeman did prepare a bladder blowne, and a few peaſon in them, and ſo made faſt hard vnto the head of the pike, and ſo ſhaking the pike, the peaſe in the bladder will make a great noyſe, and ſo feare the horſes, that the horſes will skant come vppon them that haue their pikes in that order, the luſtier horſes the more they will be feared, except that they be the better broken vnto thoſe cauſes, &c.
               
               
                  The 100. Deuiſe.
                  AS touching this, to knowe whether that any ground be hier or lower than the ground that you do ſtand vpon, that is knowne by that order, as in the firſt Deuiſe by the line of the Horizon, that alwaies looking and marking, how the furtheſt part that you doo ſee, doth cut vpon that ground that you doo deſire to knowe, whether that it bee hier or lower, and looke at what heigth you doo ſee the Horizon, that is equall in heigth with the ſight of your eye, and then rebating that heigth vpon the other ground, then that is equall with your feete, and if that you doo ſee the Horizon circle ouer the other ground, then the ground is lower than the ground that you doo ſtand vppon, &c. And alſo if that you are amongſt hilles, and that you can not ſee the Horizon circle, then you may knowe whether that it bee hier or lower, by a ſquare, hanging a plummet

of leade at the corner, and ſet the edge of the ſquare iuſt with the line, and then take your ſight by the vpper part thereof, and ſo beholding the place, you ſhall knowe whether that it be hier ground or lower. &c.
               
               
                  The 101. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to knowe whether that it bee poſsible to bring the water of any ſpring vnto any place aſſigned, it is thus knowne, or to knowe how hie that it may be raiſed, it will alwaies come vnto any place that is any thing in lowneſſe vnderneath the place that the ſpring commeth foorth of, and it may in like manner be raiſed in heigth at your pleaſure, ſo that it be any thing lower than the head thereof, allowing for a mile in diſtance to the head of the ſpring, to bee three inches and a halfe hier than the place that you would raiſe it vp vnto, and for two miles 14. inches, &c. from the circularneſſe of the earth, &c. and for to knowe whether the ground bee hier or lower, it is declared in the Deuiſe going before.
               
               
                  The 102. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo the principalleſt annoyance that you can doo vnto any towne that is beſieged, is to take away their freſh water, whether it be by any riuer or Conduits: & to take away a water courſe or riuer, this muſt be cōſidered: firſt view the ground that the ſame doth paſſe through, & that done, looke where there is any ground lower or inferiour in heigth vnto it, and alſo how the paſſages may bee led beſides the towne, & not to ſeeke to the towne wards againe, and then cut trenches or ditches to leade or carrie the water another way: and that done, make a damme at that place you mean to ſtop the water, to turne the courſe, that it may goe beſides the towne, as alwaies water is apt

to ſeeke vnto the place any thing lower than it ſelfe: but if that it happen ſo that the water courſe is betweene two hills, that there be no roome to turne the water from the town, then you may poyſon their water with diuers things that the ſame may annoy them, but if that they haue water brought vnto them by conduits, then you may but digge betweene the conduit head and the towne, and cut the pipes thereof, and ſo by that meanes for to take away their water. And this is one of the principaleſt annoyances that you may doe vnto any place, &c.
               
               
                  The 103. Deuiſe.
                  FOr that I doe think it very neceſſary and conuenient, for to ſhew vnto you howe for to knowe what waight that you are able for to payſe or lift vp from the grounde, if that is to ſay, to let the one end vnder it, and to wey or preſſe downe the other ende, that it were after the order of colepreſſe wiſe, that is to ſay, to let the one ende vnder it and to wey or preſſe downe the other ende, for that it is vſed many times about the lifting of great and heauy things, as the lifting of great and heauy Ordinaunce, or great and heauy timber or ſtones, and it is thus knowen, how much or what weight that it will lift or payſe vp: looke how much of the colepreſſe is more ouer that which beareth the thing vnderneath, more the one way than it is the other way, ſo accordingly unto that proportion the thing will be lifted, as the thing of 100. waight, laying the coale-preſſe thereafter, wil wey vp a 1000. waight, yea 5000. as you doe place the thing for the purpoſe: As for an example, this the thing that I haue for to lift vp is a 1000. waight, and the peece of timber that I doe make my waving tree that it is eleauen foote long and better, wherefore I doe place the block or thing vnderneath at one foote, from the thing that is to be lifted, and ſo I doe

lay the waying tree that it is 10. foote ouer the one way, and but one foote the other way, and lying in that forme a 100. waight will wey vp the 1000. waight, and by this order you may make your prouiſion in that ſorte, that you may lift any thing at eaſe. &c.
               
               
                  The 104. Deuiſe.
                  AND furthermore, in like manner you may knowe what wayght will bee lifted with a wheele: as this, looke how much in Deametre or in circumference that the wheele doth exceede the axeltree that the roape goeth about, ſo much in proportion ſhall the wheele lift the leſſer waight, to raiſe or lift the bigger: as for an example, a wheele of 12. foote in Diametre, and hath an axeltree that the roape goeth about of one foote in Deametre, then a perſon that wayeth a little more than 100. waight to goe in the wheele, ſhall wey a thing of twelue hundreth waight, and according vnto the compaſſe of the wheele, and the compaſſe of the axeltree, that the leſſer waight will wey vp the bigger: and the like effects be in the often foldings of roapes, for to runne in pulleys, as wee may ſee by the tackles of ſhippes, &c.
               
               
                  The 105. Deuiſe.
                  AND alſo in wheeles, if that one wheele doe turne an other, you may know by the one wheele, how oftentimes that the other wheele ſhall turne it about, whether that the wheeles doe turne or goe by teeth, or as ſome doe terme them by cogges, or by a roape or line, &c. As this, if that the one wheele doth turne the other by teeth, then it is knowne by the number of teeth, taking in the other wheele, as if the nūber of teeth of the one wheele be double vnto the other, then for the one wheele in the going

about one time, the other ſhall bee turned two times, &c. And if that it be ſo that the number of teeth be ten times the leſſer, then at the going of the bigger wheele one time the leſſer ſhall bee turned tenne times abouts: and in like manner, if the number ofteeth were 100. times the number of the leſſer, then for the once going about of the one, the other ſhall bee turned 100▪ times, alwaies according vnto the number of the one, by the number of the other, proportion for proportion, accordingly vnto the number of the teeth in both the wheeles. &c.
               
               
                  The 106. Deuiſe.
                  ANd alſo in like manner you may knowe, how many times that one wheele dooth turne the other wheele about, that the one wheele doth turne the other wheele by a rope or line, or by a chayne, or ſuch other like, as this by the circūference of both the wheeles; for if the one wheele bee double the circumference, or compaſſe of the other, then for the going of the bigger wheele once about, the leſſer ſhall turne twiſe about: and furthermore, if the bigger be ten times the compaſſe of the leſſer, then for the going of the bigger wheele one time, the leſſer ſhall turne ten times about, &c. accordingly vnto the circumference or compaſſe of both the wheeles, proportion vnto proportion, &c.
               
               
                  The 107. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, it is poſsible for to place a glaſſe in a chamber or a parler in a houſe, for to ſee any thing abroade in the fields, or if that it be neere vnto any hauen or riuer where as ſhippes or boates doo paſſe too and fro, that they may ſee in the glaſſe within the houſe, the things that are abroade, as playnely as if that they ſhould goe

abroade and get them vp vnto ſome high hill, or high tower, for to ſee them of purpoſe, the which thing is very neceſſarie, either for men of Honour or Gentlemen for to beholde in their chambers what is abroade in ſome ſuch partes of their ground, as they haue any pleaſure for to beholde and ſee into it, what is ſtirruing: therefore that quantitie that it will ſhewe as their Deere in their parkes, or cattell in their paſtures, or what perſons that there is ſtirring in their Gardens or Orchardes: and alſo it is very neceſſarie for a Captaine or the Generall of a Towne, Forte or Caſtell, whether that it be in ſuch places, that is, within the lande, or that they haue any charge to looke towards the ſea or hauen, or riuer, it is very neceſſary for them, for that the glaſſes may be ſo placed, that they may ſee if that there bee any ſhips comming or going in the ſea, riuer or Hauen, or any perſons in the high way. But the greateſt impediment that the glaſſes haue, you ſhall ſee no great circuite of grounde in compaſſe, except that the glaſſes be very large, and alſo the windowe that the ſight commeth in at, be large in like manner, &c. And furthermore▪ for the placing of a glaſſe in a chamber or parlour, to ſee the things abroade, it muſt bee thus done, firſt you muſt prepare diuers glaſſes of a great proportion, that are very perfect and good looking glaſſes, either of ſteele or Chriſtall, and that done, the place muſt bee viewed where that it muſt ſtand, for it is not poſſible to place a glaſſe in ſome chabers to ſee any thing abroad, but it muſt be in ſuch a chamber as is conuenient for the purpoſe, that hath a very high roufe, and that hath windowes that are of a great heigth from the floore, or elſe ſome high Tower neare vnto it, &c. And if that the place be conuenient for that purpoſe, then this you muſt doo firſt, the place muſt bee aſſigned that you would ſee in the glaſſe, and then whether the place bee farre of or nearer, then you muſt place the firſt glaſſe alofte againſt a windowe

that is open vnto that place, and that done, if that it be very high, then turne the ſhadowe of the glaſſe accordingly as you doe ſee cauſe for your purpoſe, bringyng the beame downewardes: and agaynſt that glaſſe place an other glaſſe to receyue the beame or ſhadowe, of the thyngs abroade, and that done, you may turne the beame or ſhadowe of that glaſſe downewardes vnto what place that you liſte, and ſo place an other glaſſe agaynſt that at your diſcretion, and ſo to place as many glaſſes, vntill that you haue brought it vnto the place that you woulde bryng it vntill, and then to ſette all the glaſſes faſt, for if that any of them bee ſturred neuer ſo little, then the beame or ſhadowe will be turned out of the glaſſe, &c. And by this meanes you may conuey the beame or ſhadow of any thyng by glaſſes made of due proportion from one place vnto an other, vntill that you haue brought it vnto what place you doe deſire at your pleaſure, and ſo by that meanes to ſee in a houſe what things be abroade.
               
               
                  The 108. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to cauſe yron, leade, ſtone, or any kinde of mettall what ſoeuer it be, to ſwimme in the water, without the ayde of any thing to ſupport it or beare it, is this to be done, to make it hollow or concaue lyke a boll, or boate, or a trough, or what ſhape ſo euer that it haue, vntill that the ſides may be rayſed ſo hie, that the water can not come ouer the toppe of the ſide, vntill that there is the magnitude or quantity of the rate for euery foote ſquare to bee in waight vnder. 50. pound, and the more that it is lighter the better it ſwimmeth, and then it will ſwimme without any fayle, &c.
               
               
                  
                  The 109. Deuiſe.
                  AS it is not vnknowne in reſpect vnto all perſons, that you may burne any thing that is apt to burne with a glaſſe at hand, which is done by the Sunne beams pearſing through the glaſſe, for that the Sunne beames bee vnited and knit all together in the center thereof, which is the very cauſe that it burneth, and as we doo reade that Archimedes burned the Romane Nauie at Syracuſa in the Iland of Sicilia, ſome haue ſuppoſed that he did burne thē with ſuch kind of glaſſes, which is moſt vnpoſſible: wherfore it muſt needes be, that they were burned with diuers glaſſes, and the reflection of the Sunne beames turned vnto them. But this is to be noted, that it is poſsible that fewer glaſſes may ſerue to burne any thing there in that Latitude, than that it will doo here in this Latitude, for that the Sunne beames be more hoter: for the Latitude of Syracuſa is but fiue and thirtie degrees and a halfe, and to burne anything any great diſtance off with glaſſes, it requireth to haue ſome ſight in Geometrie, or els it is not poſsible for to doo it, and for to burne any thing that is apt to burne, it muſt bee thus handled: they muſt prepare a number of glaſſes made of mettall, ſuch as the common people call of ſteele, made of purpoſe, and well poliſhed, and to place thoſe glaſſes to burne, as if that it were gunne powder, flaxe or towe, or occom, pitch, tarre, or ſuch like things that will take fire quickly, the Sunne ſhining very bright: then ſet the glaſſe againſt the Sunne, and then turne the reflection beame or ſhadowe to the place aſsigned that you would burne, and then place another glaſſe in the like manner, and turne the reflection beame or ſhadow vnto that place in like manner, right vppon the firſt ende of the beame or ſhadowe, and ſo to place more glaſſes, and to bee ſure

that all the reflected beames or ſhadowes doo reſt vppon one place, and ſo by a great number of glaſſes to multiply the heate, that in the ende it will bee ſet on fire and burne: but you muſt be ſure that all the reflected beames or ſhadowes doo reſt in one place, or elſe it will be vnto no purpoſe, and at a great diſtance you ſhall haue much to doo to decerne or ſee it, &c. Wherefore you muſt haue the ayde of Geometry, to vſe it according vnto the diſtance, and to place the glaſſes in a frame, which I doo omit at this time for breuitie.
               
               
                  The 110. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to ſee any ſmall thing a great diſtance of from you, it requireth the ayde of two glaſſes, and one glaſſe muſt be made of purpoſe, and it may be made in ſuch ſort, that you may ſee a ſmall thing a great diſtance of, as this, to reade a letter that is ſet open neare a quarter of a myle from you, and alſo to ſee a man foure or fiue miles from you, or to view a Towne or Caſtell, or to ſee any window or ſuch like thing ſixe or ſeauen myles from you. And to declare what manner of glaſſes that theſe muſt bee, the one glaſſe that muſt be made of purpoſe, is like the ſmall burning glaſſes of that kinde of glaſſe, and muſt bee round, and ſet in a frame as thoſe bee, but that it muſt bee made very large, of a foote, or 14. or 16. inches broade, and the broader the better: and the propertie of this glaſſe, is this, if that you doo behold any thing thorow the glaſſe, then your eye being neare vnto it, it ſheweth it ſelfe according vnto the thing, but as you doo goe backwardes, the thing ſheweth bigger and bigger, vntill that the thing ſhall ſeeme of a monſtrous bigneſſe: but if that you doo goe to farre backe, then it will debate and be ſmal & turne the faſhion downewards. But now to vſe this glaſſe, to ſee a ſmall thing a great diſtance, then doo this, the thing or

place that you would view and diſcerne, ſet that glaſſe faſt, and the middle of the glaſſe to ſtand right with the place aſſigned, and be ſure that it doo not ſtand oblique or awry by no meanes, and that done, then take a very fayre large looking glaſſe that is well poliſhed, & ſet that glaſſe directly right with the poliſhed ſide againſt the firſt glaſſe, to the intent to receiue the beame or ſhadow that cōmeth thorow the firſt placed glaſſe, and ſet it at ſuch a diſtance off, that the thing ſhall marke the beame or ſhadowe ſo large, that it may ſerue your turne, and ſo by that meanes you ſhall ſee in the looking glaſſe a ſmall thing a great diſtance, for if that the firſt placed glaſſe be well made, and very large, you may deſcerne and knowe the fauour or phiſnomie of a man a mile of from you: wherefore in my opinion, this is very neceſſary in diuers reſpects, as the viewing of an army of men, and ſuch other like cauſes, which I doo omit, &c.
               
               
                  The 111. Deuiſe.
                  FOr to make a crane, engine or ginne, to wey any great waight, you may knowe before hand what it will wey, as in the 109. Deuiſe, and alſo you may multiply the thing in ſuch ſorte, that you may make a 100. waight to wey or lift vp 20000. yea 100000. waight if that you will, as thus, the crane or engine that hath a wheele of 12 foote in Deametre, and the axeltree is a foote in Deametre, now one perſon going in the wheele of any thing more than 100. waight, will way 1200. waight, and then you making another wheele of that Deametre, and the axeltree alſo, and a rope to goe about the circumference of the firſt wheele, vnto the axeltree of the next wheele, then that perſon to goe in that wheele, will way or lift 14400. And furthermore, if that you doo make a thirde wheele of that Deametre in all poyntes, then that perſon

going in that wheele, ſhould wey or lift vp. 172800. and that contayne. 86. tunnes, but then it will ryſe but very ſlowly, and that thing that doth beare or ſupport it vnderneath, had neede be very ſtrong to beare ſuch a huge weyght, and alſo the firſt wheeles: and by this order you may multiply the thing to lift wayght infinitely.
               
               
                  The 112. Deuiſe.
                  ANd furthermore, you may make an engine to thruſt from you or to pull vnto you, to lift vp or to preſſe downe with great force, eyther to goe with wheeles as before is declared, or elſe to goe with skrewes, or to goe with both, as to thruſt open huge and ſtrong gates, or elſe you taking good hold, to pull them open vnto you wards, and will make but little noyſe in the doyng thereof, but you muſt be ſure to ſet the engine faſt, if to thruſt from to be ſtrongly and well backed, and to pull to them it muſt be ſtrongly bolſtered before, ſufficient to be of force to ſerue the turne.
               
               
                  The 113. Deuiſe.
                  AS touchyng the makyng of any ſtrange workes that the world hath maruayled at, as the braſen head that did ſeeme for to ſpeake: and the Serpent of braſſe for to hiſſe: or a Doue of woodde for to flie: or an Eagle made by arte of woode and other mettall to flie: and byrdes made of braſſe, tinne or other mettall to ſing ſweetely, and ſuch other lyke Deuiſes, ſome haue thought that it hath bene done by inchantment, which is no ſuch thing, but that it hath bene done by wheeles, as you may ſee by clockes, that doo keepe tyme, ſome goyng with plummets, and ſome with ſprings, as thoſe ſmall clockes that be vſed in tablets to hang about mens neckes. And as the

braſen head, that ſeeme for to ſpeake, might bee made by ſuch▪ wheele work, to go either by plummets or by ſprings, and might haue time giuen vnto it, that at ſo many houres end, then the wheeles and other engines ſhould bee ſet to worke: and the voyce that they did heare may goe withbellowes in ſome truncke or trunckes of braſſe or other mettall, with ſtoppes to alter the ſound, may bee made to ſeeme to ſpeake ſome words, according vnto the fancie of the inuenter, ſo that the ſimple people will maruell at it. And for to make a bird or foule made of wood & mettall, with other things made by arte, to flye, it is to bee done to goe with ſprings, and ſo to beate the ayre with the wings as other birds or fowles doe, being of a reaſonable lightnes, it may flie: and alſo to make birds of mettall to ſing very ſweetly, and good muſicke, it may bee done with wheeles, to goe at any houre or time appoynted by plummets, and then to haue pipes of tinne or other fine mettall to go with bellowes, & the pipes to haue ſtops, and to go with a barrell or other ſuch like deuiſe, and may bee made to play or ſing what note that the inuenter ſhall thinke good when he dooth make it: and alſo there may bee diuers helpes to make it to ſeeme pleaſant vnto the eares of the hearers, by letting the ſound or wind of the pipes to paſſe through or into water, for that will make a quauering as birds do. &c. And alſo you may make a ſmall puppet, either like a man or woman, to ſeeme to goe by wheeles and ſprings, and ſhall turne and goe circular according vnto the ſetting of the wheeles and ſprings, and alſo the birds made to flie by Arte, to flie circularly, as it ſhall pleaſe the inuenter, by the placing of the wheeles and ſprings, and ſuch other like inuentions, which the common people would maruell at, thinking that it is done by Inchantment, and yet is done by no other meanes, but by good Artes and lawfull.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   