
      
         
            
            
            THE RASING OF THE FOVNDATIONS of Brovvniſme. WHEREIN, AGAINST ALL THE WRItings of the principall Maſters of that ſect, thoſe chiefe concluſions in the next page, are, (amongſt ſundry other matters, worthie the Readers knowledge) purpoſely handled, and ſoundly prooued. ALSO THEIR CONTRARIE ARGVMENTS AND OBIECtions deliberately examined, and clearly refelled by the word of God.
            
               Iſaiah cap. 57. ver. 21.
There is no peace, ſaith my God, to the wicked.
            
               CONFIDITE. VICI MVDV . IOA . IO. VHI TVA MORS VICTORIA 1 COR 15. CONFERET CAPVT TVV. GEN. 3.  ERO MORSVS INFERAT TVVS O
                     •…
                  . 13. .IESVS. CHRISTVS. 
            
            Imprinted at London by Iohn Windet, dvvelling at Pawles wharfe at the ſigne of the Croſſe keyes, and are to be ſold at the Roſe in Powles churchyard. 1588.
         
         
            
            The chiefe concluſions in this Booke.
            1 No man ought to depart the Communion, for anie open vnworthie ones reſorting vnto it.
            2 A faithful Chriſtian may keepe himſelfe free, from the pollution of the knowne wicked, at the Sacrament, and yet not ſeparate himſelfe. And how.
            3 Open notorious offenders, not ſeparated from a congregation of Chriſt, doe not thereupon vnſanctifie the ſame, ſo as to make it no Church of Chriſt.
            4 It may be a true Church of God, that hath in it diuerſe corruptions, both in doctrine and practiſe.
            5 The Church of England is not more vnſound, than diuerſe vndoubted Churches haue beene, from which no ſeparation was counſailed.
            6 No man ought to ſeparate himſelfe from the Church of England, for the defectes and corruptions that are therein.
            7 By fayth onely viſible Churches haue their account and being in Chriſt.
            8 Diſcipline is not of the eſſence or being of a Church.
         
         
            
            To the right worſhipfull his verie louing couſin. M. Thomas Huſsey Eſquire, all encreaſe of Chriſtian knowledge, zeale and worſhip.
            
               
                  AS I haue made you a beholder, & vſed your name in my firſte conflict with this kinde of men (louing couſin) ſo in my proceeding, and to the verie ende (which God ſhall giue whē he ſeeth it good) I truſt, I may be bold, to continue the ſame courſe. Wherefore now againe I returne, preſenting vnto you, not Glouers matters, in any of thoſe points plainly and profeſſedly, which then were betweene vs: but the generall and great heades of that ſchiſme, wherein he was firſt ouertaken: and that ſpecially betweene Browne (the famous achbuylder of ſuch ruinous foundations) and me: though others alſo are not omitted where opportunitie is offered. For ſo haue theſe matters, vpon the occaſion of the Admonition, growne ſomewhat large at length, as now appeareth. By my former writing I had ſtirred (as it

ſeemeth) the hornets neſt. By this (I hope) I ſhall either driue them in again, or els take away their ſtings, ſo as they ſhall ſeldomer hurt any. Thoſe 8. concluſions, wherewith you ſee I front the aduerſarie, are as ſo manie Canons, to beate downe (through the power of God) the paper wals of his proude bulwarke. The ſielie defences that he maketh at euery aſſault, & entering of his breaches, you ſhall iudge your ſelfe, in this booke, comming as it were to the very ſight and view of the ſeueral actiōs. It may be, you haue alredie heard ſomwhat, of the courſe and behauiour of this people. For though their ful ſwarme and ſtore be (as it is moſt likely) in London, and the partes neare adioyning: yet haue they ſparſed of their companies into ſeuerall partes of the Realme, and namely, into the West, almoſt to the vttermoſt borders thereof. For which cauſe, (mee thinkes) I haue reaſon yet ſo much the more to bee confirmed in this choyce of my dedication, ſith ſo, the rather, as by your hand and meanes, this benefit of diſcouering their iniquitie, and making knowne their poiſon, may more readily be communicated vnto many in thoſe parts. And as you are now in the ſeruice of your prince, eſteemed a worthy man to haue the leading & training of ſo many, to be prepared for the defence of your countrey and of this land, againſt the bodily enemy, ſo may that fauour

be manifoldly greater, which the king of kings ſhall in this ſeruice vouchſafe you, by making you moreouer, as an vpholder and deriuer of theſe defences of his truth, into thoſe weake parts of your countrey. Whereinto ſuch vndermining aduerſaries haue entred, & caried away many ſoules frō the common means of their ſaluation: namely the preaching of the Goſpell, which is called of the Apoſtle, the power of God vnto Saluation,Rom. 1.17. to all that beleeue. And thus alſo, if in the mids of your weapons (as it were) you ſhal allot your times likewiſe, to the preparing & attaining skil, weapons, and ſtrength to fight the Lords battails against your ſpiritual aduerſaries, happy & happy again ſhal you be. Your diligence, & watchfulnes in the ſeruice of your God and Queene in this life, ſhall find reſt & perpetual peace & quietnes herafter. Yea your renoume increaſing here on earth, ſhalbe much more abundantly increaſed, ſo as no earthly pen can deſcribe it, namely, when the king of glory ſhall ſet a crowne vpon your head. Thinke on theſe things (moſt louing couſin) as I doubt not you do, and propound that worthy captaine Cornelius vnto your ſelfe, as a companion to walke with, or at leaſt, as an example to imitate. And let that which others take for a reaſon to hold them backe, bee a double ſpurre vnto you in this caſe: Namely the generall contrarie practiſe of the

multitude. Remember that he, that coulde not lie, hath ſayde it, Narrovve is the vvay that leadeth to life, and fevve there be that finde it. And, Striue to enter in at the narrovve gate. A worde to the wiſe is ſufficient.2. Pet. 3.1. And hereby I hope I ſhall but ſtirre vp your pure minde (as the Apoſtle ſpeaketh) which is already forwardly running in this race. Neuertheles, I haue counted it my duetie, alwayes, and by all good occaſions, to put you in remembrance of theſe things. For your wealth and good estate both of bodie and minde, are of neere and deere accompt and price with me, as the Lorde knoweth: to whoſe gratious guiding and protection, I moſt humbly commende you, and all yours. From London, the 12. of the ſixth Moneth.
            
               Your worſhips euen in all the dueties of a louing kinſman, S. B.
            
         
         
            
            ¶To the Chriſtian Reader, The ſpirit of trueth, and of wiſdome in ſobrietie through Chriſt Ieſu.
            
               ALthough (Beloued) the iudgement and practiſe of ſome men of ſpeciall accompt in the Church of God, haue to this day held this impreſſion in me, that I eſteeme the captaines and antient bearers of this ſchiſme, vnworthie the honour of any ſet conflict, and publique confutation: yet is it come to paſſe (by the prouidence of the onely wiſe God) that I haue bene, parte after parte, and one occaſion pulling on another, drawne (as it were) by head and ſhoulders through the deepe of this buſineſſe. And the labour nowe accompliſhed, I am ſo farre from repenting, that I am in good aſſurance, through the mercie God, of a two-folde benefite to ariſe thereby: the one is, of ſtopping that violent ſtreame of ſeducing, wherein daily ſuch numbers of the yonger and weaker ſorte of Chriſtians are caryed out of our aſſemblies: principally becauſe the zeale of ſuch, being greater then their knowledge, becommeth an apt pray and bootie, for the inſtruments of deceit to practiſe vpon. And this agreeth with the exhortation of the Church,
                  Cantic. 2.15. when ſhe ſayeth: Take vs the foxes, the litle foxes, corrupting the vines, whilest our vines bring foorth the first grape. the other benefite is, that hereby thoſe impure mouthes ſhall be daſhed, that hertofore in their malitious defence of corruptions, haue made no conſcience, to clothe all thoſe, that haue duetifully vrged the proceeding of our church

vnto perfection, in one liuerie, with theſe ſchiſmaticall ſpirites, that ſo they might purchaſe vnto them, both from magiſtrate and common people equall hatred and auoydance. This booke ſhal by the grace of God, teſtifie vnto all that make any conſcience to diſcerne truth from lyes, that there is as much difference betwixt thoſe, whō they in their bitterneſſe, woulde thus match together, as is betweene that childe, that in tender affection, reprooueth and laboureth the refourming of his mother, whome hee ſeeth by her vndiſcreete behauiour, to become a reproche among women: and him that vnder pretence of the hate of her vncomely behauiour, ſhoulde plucke out her bowels, and forſake her In this my trauaile, I haue cared, as much as I could, to husbande the time vnto the reader, and therfore haue both cut off many idle diſcourſes (which the aduerſarie woulde haue drawne mee into) and alſo haue ſo ſounded the matters that I haue delt with, by al the writings, printed or otherwiſe, that are probably vouched theirs, as that, I hope, the godly ſpirit ſhall find me no trifler, but ſuch a ſerious and ſincere diſputer as the weight of the cauſe hath required. I was (I graunt) in compariſon of others, as a woman of too weake a conſtitution to conceiue and bring forth any ſuch child: but the Lord hath had his way & purpoſe herein. And as (I proteſt before the Lord & his holy angels) with much feare and trembling, I haue from the beginning applied my ſelfe vnto this worke: ſo yet in the doing thereof (through the mercifulneſſe of my God) I haue bin aſsiſted with much cōfort, and great aſſurance, euen in ſome things, that ſeemed at the firſt, ſo in wrapped, by Satan, with ſo many intricate folds & knittings, as could hardly or neuer by me (for I ſhame not to acknowledge my weakneſſe herein) bee brought to any cleare triall and expedite diſſolution.
            Of mine aduerſaries I rather knowe the nature then the number. Although (as it hath beene obſerued) ſundrie among them, from time to time, haue laboured

to be leaders, and ſo vpon the ſpurre of emulation haue gallopped as hard as they could: yet without all queſtion, there is none among them that can iuſtly take the garland from Rob. Browne.
               That this ſchiſme may worthily take the name of Browne. His writings doe foreiudge the cauſe agaynſt all his competitors. And albeit newe maiſters are riſen among them, that nowe, in a freſh hote moode, condemne his coldneſſe and colourable dealing, and that worthily: yet they muſt, euen Barow and Greenwood, with the reſt, acknowledge him the ſhop of their ſtore, and the ſteele of their ſtrength: for arguments, obiections and ſhiftes, to colour, and (if it were poſsible) to vphold their craſie cauſe withall. Let them not diſdaine (therefore) that he ſhould beare the name, as the father of that familie and brood, which, of late yeares in a quarell for the Diſcipline, haue made that rende in the aſſemblies of Englande. But ſome will obiect, that theſe that I name, agree not among themſelues: and therefore cannot be accounted of one familie. I am not ignorant, that they are at oddes betweene themſelues, but yet ſo, as that neither partie will ioyne member-like with our Churches in the woorde and Sacraments. In doctrine I knowe they differ, but diuerſitie of practiſe was cauſe thereof. Barow and Greenewood nakedly diſcouered their profeſsion, and are priſoners. Browne cunningly counterfeiteth conformitie, & diſſembleth with his owne ſoule, for libertie. They fullie beleeuing, the Church of England to be no Church of God, but vtterly to be auoyded in al things, as his writings haue taught them, made conſcience to ſeparate themſelues at all poynts, accordingly. He, though hee haue contriued that cup, whereby he hath thus transformed them, as into beaſts, yet himſelfe taking better delite in humane ſhapes, liketh not to enter with them into their lot. Hence cōmeth that grudge, quarrell and heartburning among them. They expoſtulate with him as a coward, and one that ſhrinketh in the wetting. He againe nippeth them for their egerneſſe, in running before their olde maiſter, and thereby obſcuring

his light, as though the truth (forſooth) had firſt bin reuealed by them. It ſeemeth, they would not heare a ſermon, to gaine their libertie. But it is manifeſt, that he to redeeme trouble, hath learned to apply himſelfe to all times, places, and perſons. Nowe in this their iarre, manie ſtrange paradoxes and groſſe abſurdities haue paſſed betweene them: arguing both ſides to haue truſted in their ſtrength, and therefore to haue beene deſtitute of the ſpirit of truth to guide their pennes. Barow and Greenwood denie,
               As appeareth in a writing that came from Brownes hand of this matter. 
               that our preachers doe preach the woorde, and that they doe, or can beget fayth. They ſay, The wicked haue no woorde of God, no graces of GOD, no ſpirituall or ſanctifyed graces, that they doe no good, that they may not teach, teſtifie, preach or counſaile anie woorde of GOD, anie religion or dutie of religion. That they haue no kinde of promiſe nor bleſſing: and that there is no Communion to bee had with them in ſpirituall graces. They denie fayth to come neceſſarily, by the woorde of GOD: and ſay, It may bee begotten without anie promiſe of the woorde. Beeing demaunded, what faith doeth beleeue: They aunſwere: God, without anie conſideration of his woorde and promiſe. Likewiſe beeing asked, howe they came by their fayth, it ſeemeth they aunſwered, as it pleaſed God: namely, by his ſpirite: but not acknowledging the outwarde meanes. Some of them graunt, our preachers beget fayth or beleefe of the woorde, but not the fayth of Chriſt. Hee prooueth it not the fayth of Chriſt, becauſe it hath not good woorkes: And that alſo he prooueth full wiſely (forſooth) becauſe they haue euill woorkes; Which hee ſpecifieth to be Idolatrie, Rebellion and Bondage. They ſay, our miniſters bring a newe Goſpell. That the lawe in their mouthes, and the ſacrifices or preſumptuous ministerie of Korah, Dathan and Abiram are alike. And they make no better account of our Pariſh meetings, than of the meetings at the groaues and hill altars. O wofull men, and drunken with the wine of their owne headie conceites. Browne againe, for feare all theſe reproches ſhoulde

light vppon him, becauſe hee commeth into our Churches, minſeth the matter euerie where,See further pag. 135. with theſe ill ſtampt diſtinctions, Of the better, and woorſer ſort of our preachers: (wherein hee leaues his meaning doubtfull ſtill,) and of ioyning with vs in the common graces, both worldly and ſpirituall, but not as in one bodie, and couenant of the Church. O mocker: Let the Lorde iudge thy hypocriſie, for no man can ſounde it. Concerning the diſputation of both parties in this matter if I bee asked my iudgement, this muſt I ſay: Browne hath ſufficiently ouerthrowne the maine aſſertions of his young maiſters, as hee calleth them, in proouing our preachers to haue a calling, becauſe they bring the woorde: that they preach the woorde, becauſe they beget fayth: For examples: in him and themſelues they haue done it, ergo, &c. And that, The knowledge of reformation and diſcouerie of Church corruptions came firſt to them by their preaching, ergo, &c. And as they number vp all the euils they can finde in the doctrine and practiſe of our preachers, to prooue they can doe no good, nor beget faith: hee contrariwiſe by a full floud of their true doctrine, and good fruits (whereof he maketh a copious catalogue) woorthily quencheth the furious flame of their ſlaunderous tongues. Alſo by the ſitting of the Scribes and Phariſees in Moſes chaire, and the commaundement of hearing them, he verie ſufficiently proueth that wicked men may preach Gods worde, and being in ſuch office, charge and calling, ought to be heard. The cauils they make againſt theſe things, are ſuch, as ſhew them wilfully to ſtoppe their eares, leaſt the ſounde of truth ſhoulde ſmite their hearts. In theſe pointes I teſtifie, that Browne hath well confuted their furie. But if one for Barow and Greenwood ſhoulde ſay theſe wordes vnto Browne, Though they haue well deſerued to bee thus quited and conuinced for their follie, yet not at your handes: I knowe not what he might well replie: for I am ſure, if they had beene ſo well aduiſed, as to haue preſſed him through all their controuerſie, with his owne bookes &

writings, they muſt needes haue made him as mute as anie fiſh. And I doubt not, but the Reader ſhall bee fully perſwaded hereof, before he come at the ende of this booke. For as for Browne, the maſterworkeman of all their mad building, notwithſtanding that in this place, vpon this preſent occaſion, there want not further matter to decipher him: who maketh his religion alwayes proportionable to his owne humour and neceſsitie: and ſo hath euer vſed, to propound his owne laſt, to make all his diſciples ſhooes by: yet will I referre the reader to the gathering of the proofe of theſe thinges, out of other places in this booke: & ſpecially (amongſt the reſt) where I lay open his honeſt and well meaning ſubſcription. Onely I will produce a teſtimonie or two of maſter Harriſons, who in his life time was bewitched by Browne, to his euident vndoing, partly, by fleeing with him into the lowe Countreys, and partly, by ſtretching his purſe ſo wide, to the printing of his booke. In a certaine letter he writeth to one of London thus, concerning the diuiſion that fell among Browne and them beyond the ſeas. In deede the Lorde hath made a breache amongeſt vs, for our ſinnes haue made vs vnwoorthie to beare his great and woorthie cauſe. M. B. hath caſt vs off, and that with the open manifeſting of ſo many and ſo notable treacheries, as I abhorre to tell, and if I ſhould declare them, you could not beleeue me. VVhich becauſe this ſheete and many moe woulde not ſuffice to rehearſe, I will meddle with no particular thing, to declare it. Onely this I teſtifie vnto you, I am well able to proue, that Caine dealt not ſo ill with his brother Abel, as he hath dealt with me. Againe towards the ende of that letter, hee writeth thus. Alſo I would admoniſh you to take heede howe you aduenture your ſelfe to be a meane, to ſpread abroade any of that parties bookes, except it were more tending to the glorie of God then it is. For in the firſt booke there is manifolde hereſie: and the other vpon the 23. of Matthewe, is a patterne of all lewde frantike diſorder, whoſe haue eyes to ſee it. And I do not doubt but that the Lord will yet driue him on to worſe and worſe, ſeeing he hath ſo notably fallen

from him. Giue not your ſelfe ouer to be abuſed: the Lorde open your eyes, and giue you grace to take profite by my writing, euen as I do giue it with a well meaning minde to doe you good. Alſo in his treatiſe vpon the 122. Pſalme, hee imputeth to Browne, a leaning to Antichristian pride and bitterneſſe. Mee thinke theſe teſtimonies from ſuch a man as I haue named, ſhould ſet ſuch a brand of ſhame vpon his forehed, as that euerie man ſhould abhorre the ſight of him, whileſt he continueth ſo to be like himſelf. And here perhaps the moſt of his ſect will anſwere that they doe indeed acknowledge ſuch thinges in him, and therefore doe alſo worthily ſhunne him for a ſlidebacke. O, but why doe they not withall, forſake the whole courſe, which God hath ſo curſed? yea, vpon the which, he hath ſet from the beginning, ſo leageable a print of horrible ſucceſſe? not onely in the outward things thereof, which were indeede (of it ſelfe) too weake an argument, but alſo in the inwarde ruines and downefall of iudgement, to the dayly corrupting of ſound doctrine, euen from worſe to worſe, as I haue ſhewed. Which beeing a proper and infallible note, that God ſigneth the wayes of the wicked withall, to be diſcerned, argueth all outward miſproſperings, which accompanie it, to carie likwiſe the ſame ſtampe of Gods diſpleaſure vpon them. O that you would bee wiſe therfore in time, and learne vnderſtanding, ere it be too late. Salomon ſayth,
                  Pro. 10.11. 
               The mouth of the righteous is a well ſpring of life: but violence couereth the mouth of the wicked.
               1. Pet. 4.14.15.16. And Peter ſayth, If any man ſuffer as a Christian, let him not bee aſhamed, but let him glorifie God in this behalfe. But withall he chargeth vs to looke to it, that none of vs ſuffer as a murtherer, or as a thiefe, or an euill dooer, or as a buſie bodie in other mens matters. If God haue made it a happie condition, to be perſecuted for righteouſneſſe ſake, then foloweth it contrarily, to be a curſed, and deſperate condition, to ſuffer impriſonment, loſſe of goods, or life, for diſordered wayes, ſuch as the worde of God cannot warrant. If any thinke that by applying this to the Browniſts, I ſhall begge the

queſtion, to him (I hope) ſhall the reading of this booke, giue proofe ynough, to free me from all ſuſpect of ſuch vniuſt preſumption. The Lord for his great mercy grant, that all of vs in the Church of England, from the higheſt, vnto the loweſt, to whom the hearing of this controuerſie ſhal come, may not onely be directed in iudgement, to the attaining of the truth herein, but withall (likewiſe) deepely pricked at the hearts (as the rather put in minde by the ſcourge of this ſchiſme) to ſearch out our ſinnes, and humbly powre out our ſoules for them, before the throne of mercie: if ſo be, the Lord will yet heare vs, for this, and remoue our iniquities from before his preſence; and ſo the plagues which he hath deuiſed againſt vs for the ſame. For our many and ſtrange ſinnes, doe procure many and ſtrange iudgements (whereof this is not the leaſt) to breake in amongſt vs. Yea the Lord for his great mercy, grant our Magiſtrates ſincere hearts, ſtill to purge the Church of all offences, our miniſters skilfull boldneſſe, to doe the meſſage of God as becommeth them, euerie priuate man, humilitie, to the diligent attendance of the worde: and the whole body of this Church, a ioyfull growth, and going forwarde to the fulneſſe of Chriſt, that ſo all enemies mouthes may bee ſtopped, and the mightie name of Iehouah be magnified ouer all. Amen. Come Lord Ieſu: come quickely.
         
         
            Faults in the print.
            Pag. 4. line 7 for rites, reade remembrance. pag. 22. li. 31 read importunitie. pag. 36 li. 18. one ſenſe. pag. 37 li. 16 ſuch lowde. li. 20. force of it. pag 51. li. 14. daſtardlike. pag. 63. li. 6. are to ſhewe. pag. 66. li. 10. no vſe. pag. 114. li. 31. wreſter. pag. 115. li. 13. thought and ſickeneſſe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The doubts and obiections of a certaine diſciple of Robert Brownes, vvherein, being vrged to come to Church, the ſaid partie deſired firſt to be reſolued.
            
               ACcording to Chriſtian dutie, I require you in Gods behalfe, that you will reſolue mee of theſe doubts following, by good euident proofe and warrant out of the worde, as it is your duetie to doe.
            For, where as in doubtes that may ariſe concerning any thing in the booke of common prayer, the preface annexed to the ſame booke, by permiſsion of her Maiestie, not onely giueth all men free libertie, but willeth them to demaund the reſolution of ſuch doubts, of the Biſhop of the Dioces, or of the paſtor of the pariſh. I therefore, for the quieting of my conſcience, doe deſire to be reſolued, for he that doth any thing in religion with doubt of conſcience, is condemned,
                  Rom. 14.23. becauſe hee doeth it not of faith: for whatſoeuer is not of faith is ſinne, and the reward of ſinne is death. Set downe in writing your proofes, by euident Scriptures out of Gods word, that I may examine them by other Scriptures, and vſe no ſophisticall reaſons, nor vaine philoſophie, for I am forewarned by the holy Ghost, that we be not deceyued by ſuch.
            Among the reſt, I will at this time, deale with you, but with two things: the one is, the want of gouernement and diſcipline, according to the rule of Gods worde. And the other is, the abuſe and pollution of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, for want of

diſcipline according to Gods word.
            Let vs make tryall of the true gouernement and diſcipline of the Church of God, according to Christs commandement, to put it in vſe.
                  Matth. 18.15.16.17. verſes.
                First, to tel my neighbour his fault charitably, between him and mee alone, and ſo forth, by admonitions, if hee bee obstinate, then by excommunication, by the conſent of the Church, and all to call him to repentance, and amendment of life: and we ſee, that neither you, nor wee, can put this in vſe in your Church aſſembly, as God hath commanded. But on the contrary, you muſt haue ſworne men, after the inſtitution of the Papiſts, Firſt to go tel the Biſhop, or ſome of his hirelings, or Courtkeepers, & they without admoniſhion, will alone excommunicate, and for money will reſolue by the cannon law of the Papiſts, before we ſee repentance, and amendment of life. Thus I ſee the commandement of God reiected and broken, through their traditions, which is ſinne.
            And alſo for the Lords Sacrament of the Supper, trial ſhould bee made by the gouernement of the Church, of a ſanctified people, & ſo to be a cōmunion of Saints, & ſo worthy receiuers, by tryall of their faith and repentance, and by the rule of Gods worde: the other refuſed for their wicked life, vntill they repent, and amend their liues. But in your aſſemblies or Church, from 16. or 18. yeeres old, or vpward, all are compelled by lawe to come, though he be a couetous perſon, a proud perſon, a drunkard, a defrauder of right, or oppreſſor, or blaſphemer, which in contempt of God, in his life, and manners, maketh but a tuſh or a light matter of ſinne, and of Gods iudgement for ſinne: of which ſort, are the greateſt number in your pariſh, beſides railers, and liars and ſuch like.
            And nowe I demaund, whether Christians are to ioyne, and partake as one body with them in the Sacrament, being vnreformed, yea, or no. Seeing we are forbidden to eate with ſuch, or to haue felowſhippe with them, by the commaundement of the holy Ghoſt, vnleſſe it bee in worldly affaires. For proofe, Reade theſe Scriptures. 1. Cor. 59, 10, 11, 12, 13.2. Theſ 3.14.6.2. Tim 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Rom. 16.17, 18. Ephe. 5.7.8.1. Theſ. 5 21.22. Anſwere me (as I haue ſayd) by the worde of God only, and alone. without the iudgement of man, for I can not be reſolued thereby, they are ſo contrary one to an other.
         
         
            
            ¶ An Anſwere reſolutorie to the doubtes and obiections aforeſaid.
            
               THREE poyntes you put downe vnto me, whereunto you require mine anſwere. Firſt, is a compariſon of the true gouernement of the Church with ours. The ſecond is of diſorders that fal out, at the miniſtration of the Lords ſupper. The third is your queſtion drawne from the two former poyntes.
            1 To the firſt I graunt you, that you ſay, thus farre: as namely that wee cannot redreſſe faultes ſo fully as is to bee wiſhed.
            
            2 To the ſeconde, it is vntrue that you ſay, the lawe compelleth all aboue xvi yeres olde (without any exception) to communicate: for the lawe intendeth a worthines, as may appeare, by prouiding cenſures for the vnworthy. Againe, it is vntrue, that you charge vs to make a confuſe mingling with open offenders without diſcerning: for both wee may, and doe debarre thoſe that are notoriouſly knowne to be in life offenſiue: and do both enquire, and are readie to receiue any iuſt and probable information, againſt whom-ſoeuer in our charge that walke inordinately. Yea, informe you vs duely, of thoſe ſinners, which you ſay our Pariſh is ſo ful of, and you ſhal not find them I truſt to diſquiet you at the Lordes table. If you ſay, we cannot performe this ſo throughly as by an Elderſhip, then I graunt ſo much of your ſecond poynt alſo.
            
               3 Herehence you aſke: whether Chriſtians are to ioyne, and partake as one body, with them in the Sacrament, being vnreformed. I anſwere that in reſpect of outward ioyning and partaking wee may, and ought not to withdrawe our ſelues, for the preſence of the wicked. My reaſons are theſe: firſt, becauſe the preſence of the wicked hindreth not the celebratiō of the riter of Chriſt, nor the communicating of his body and blood to the faithfull ones. I prooue that thus, if the preſence of the wicked ſhould hinder the actiō, we muſt grant that their preſence doth it, either in reſpect of it ſelfe ſimply: or elſe in reſpect of vs that ſo iudge and eſteeme of them. Now, that the very preſence it ſelfe of the wicked hindreth not, it is clere, by the ſtorie of the inſtitution of the Supper by our Lord Ieſus himſelf: who would not haue ſuffred that wicked Iudas to haue bene preſent at the celebrating of the feaſt, if the very preſence of a wicked man could haue depriued the reſt of the benefit of the action. Beſides, this point ſhould cauſe vs continually to doubt in the action, becauſe there may be ſome hypocrite, & vnworthy receiuer alway amongſt vs, and yet his ſinnes ſo ſecretly caried, as the Church cannot detect him. But I ſuppoſe you will ſay, that the preſence of the wicked hindreth the cō
               munion of the faithful, in reſpect of thoſe faithfull that ſee ſuch amongſt them as are vnworthy communicants. I anſwere: Firſt, if the making voyd the benefit of the Sacrament depend vpon the knowledge that the faithfull haue of the vnworthynes of ſome that are preſent, then you grant me thus much, that as many of the faithful, as are not priuy to ſuch preſence, ſo many do ſoundly enioy the benefit of the Sacrament. Nowe then let vs ſee, howe it commeth that the reſt ſhould be depriued.
            That the preſence of the vn worthy, in reſpect of the knowledge and priuity of ſome of the faithful there preſent, cannot any way hinder the action to them, I proue it thus: and putting the caſe by your ſelfe, I ſay particularly you your ſelf (if otherwiſe in Chriſt you come worthy)

cannot be damnified by another in that a&ion. For this ſentence is perpetual and vniuerſall.
                  Ezech. 18.20. 
               The righteouſneſſe of the righteous ſhall bee vppon him, and the wickedneſſe of the wicked ſhall bee vpon himſelfe. You wil aſke mee, but if I ſee one there, that I eſteeme vnworthy, howe can I outwardly ioyne with him, and not be partaker with his ſinne? I anſwere, firſt, our eſteeming of any vnworthy, cō
               meth either by heare-ſay, or our own certain knowledge. That which cometh by heare-ſay, is to bee beleeued no further than the credit and competencie of the witneſſes doe reach. If they haue bene truely reported, or our ſelues haue knowne any thing by them, then no doubt (if we haue walked wiſely and faithfully) wee haue alſo proceeded by admonitions ſo farre with them, as that it is ſufficiently knowne, we hate their ſinne.This (at leaſt) is come to paſſe, that howſoeuer it fall out with them. Which courſe if you ſhal obſerue, is there any more required at the hands of you a particular member? and if you haue thus walked towards them in the vprightnes of our conſcience, doing the dueties of a particular member, to your fellow members, how can the preſence of any vnworthy one which you ſee there, hinder the benefit of the communion vnto you? For, the righteouſneſſe of the righteous ſhall bee 
                     •
                  ppon him, and the wickedneſse of the wicked ſhall bee vppon himſelfe. If you obiect that we haue not an Elderſhippe, and that therefore you cannot proceed by admonition in ſuch ſort as is appoynted by the word: I anſwere, that hindereth not, but that you may ſo farre ſufficiently) make knowne your hatred to ſinne in whomſoeuer, as may teſtifie againſt, and giue euident checke to the prophane preſumptiō of any vnworthy ones, in your knowledge. Neither are you herein to feare ioyning with ſuch, (which you doe not) becauſe they preſume to the Lords table at the ſame time that you come. For the action is ſpiritual, and the ioyning ſpiritual, by one faith in Chriſt Ieſus. Which faith as you haue in common onely with the faithfull, ſo are you incorporated vnto Ieſus Chriſt onely with the faithfull. The reſt may be ſaid to be at the

Communion, but yet are none of the Cōmunion, according as S. Paule ſaith,1. Cor. 11.22. 
               They eat and drinke their owne damnation. But you wil ſay, as touching the outward & ſenſible ioining I am not to bee excuſed. Yes, your former proteſting againſt their ſinne doth clere the matter to the full peace of your cōſcience, inaſmuch as there is frō the Lord no further power granted to any particular mēber. But it ſemeth by your quotations, you wil deny this to be true. And becauſe the places mētion ſeparating & ſhūning the cōpanie of inordinat brethren, you wil gather frō thence to ſeparate your ſelf frō the Cōmunion, if you eſpie any vnworthy ones there. Indeed if you proue that euery particular mēber of a cōgregatiō hath this power, then haue they far more thā I haue ſpoken of: but this wilbe found a chiefe thing, wherin you haue ouerſhot your ſelf. By the ſcriptures that you quote, you ſay it maybe proued, That we are forbidden to eate with ſuch, or to haue felowship with thē, vnles it be in worldly affairs. Now if your exceptiō of (worldly affaires) be wel gathered, then this is it you would ſay, That thoſe places of ſcripture do proue, that we are directly forbidden to eate, or outwardly ioine with thē at the Lords table. I haue conſidred the places, and am ſory to ſee you ſo miſtaught. I would you had drawn one argumēt out of your 6. places, that I might quickly haue ſeene your building. I am Perſwaded, if you had heard the places but read vnto you, without the peruers wreſting of others, you wold haue vnderſtood them more truly than now ye haue applied thē. I returne them therefore againe to your better cōſideratiō, proteſting vnto you in the feare of the Lord, that if you examine them in the humilitie of your heart, with a ſimple deſire of the truth, you will ſee and teſtifie, that without great wrōg doing to the word of grace, you cannot conclude frō thoſe places, that either we are forbidden the outward ioining at the Lordes table, or elſe haue libertie giuē vs in worldly affaires (as you terme it) to vſe familiar conuerſation with inordinat brethren. For it is moſt certain & euident that in all thoſe places (read

them who will) the precept and admonition of the Apoſtle is concerning priuate conuerſation and behauiour towards inordinat profeſſors: there being not a ſyllable ſet downe touching our dealings in publike Churches meetings & exerciſes. But here although your euidence haue thus failed, it wilbe required perhaps at my hands, that I ſet down ſome profes to the cōtrary, to the ouerthrow of this your opiniō, & to make my laſt argument the ſtrōger: which was, that a particular member hath no further to deal in this caſe than by proces of admonitiō. 1. Remēber that the church is the body of chriſt,
                  Ephe. 1.22.23.1. Cor. 12. Ephe 4.15.16. Col. 2.19. Rom. 12.4.5.6.7.8. who is the head ther of. This body alſo conſiſteth of many mēbers hauing diſtinct offices & placing: which body as alſo euery mēber therof, receiue from the head life & increaſe, but ſo as that they be not ſundred & diſtract, but ſet together by ioints & ſeames with loue. Now if the church be thus reckoned the body in reſpect of the head whervnto it groweth, & the particular mēbers, be mēbers of the ſame body in reſpect that they grow & cōtinue in it, & ſerue vnto the vſe to the whole, as members do in a naturall body, conſider what foloweth, & how abſurd it is that you ſay, That a particular mēber may ſeparate it ſelfe frō the whole, in conſideration of ſome vnworthy and vnclene parts. Is it meete, that, becauſe ſome (yea, let it be that the moſt) of the mēbers of a body be brokē, lamed, or diſeaſed, the reſt that are ſound ſhuld forſake the vnitie of the body? were it not to deſtroy the whole? & (in ſtead of ſtrengthning the whole againſt the infection of thoſe parts) were not that to cōſpire againſt the whole, & vtterly diſable it to withſtand the cōtagion of the parts? for take away knitting togither of the mē
               bers, and is not then the body deſtroied? whereas on the cōtrary, if the ſound mēbers continue in a bodily vnitie, though ſome parts be long time ſicke, there is poſsibilitie of their recouery: yea though they ſhould not, yet may the body liue though with ſome inconuenience of their maime or blemiſh. But if you ſay (they being corrupt & not ſeparate may elſe infect mee) and herein ſeeme to ground your ſelfe vpon that place to the Corinthians.

               Know you not, that a little leauen leaueneth the whole lumpes? I anſwer, the Apoſtle doth there vrge them to the excommunicating of the inceſtuous perſon, but ſtirreth no mā to depart from the Church, no not in caſe of ſo ſecure a negligence as the Corinthians had committed. It is one thing, that we being humbled and afflicted at the dangerous examples of euil mēbers amongſt vs, muſt labour to ſeparat thē, for the better helth of the whole bodie: (and this in deed is the purpoſe of S. Paul to teach the Corinthians in that place) but it is farre another thing to ſay as you meane, That all the ſounde members must ſeparate themſelues, if the vnſounde remaine vnſeparated: and of this the Apoſtle there giueth no inkeling, which certainely had bene neceſſarie, if the daunger to euery particular mēber ſhould be altogether ſuch as you pretend. For whereas you vnderſtand the compariſon of the leauen to be ſuch, as that the remaining of vnſounde members in the Church, ſhould be accounted of as great force to infect the whole Church, as the leauen in leauening a whole lumpe,The likeneſſe is in qualitie, not in equalitie. you are greatly deceyued. For thoſe two things in that caſe, are compared in likeneſſe of nature, not in there equalitie of effecting. Like as you ſhould ſay, the conuerſation of two or three righteous men conuerteth a whole companie, euen as a little ſalt ſauoureth a whole pot full of liquor: we know it were a trueth that you ſhould ſpeake, but if I ſhould therof gather that you make thoſe two cauſes of equall force, in reſpect of their matter, to worke their effect, ſhould I not doe you great wrong? No doubt I ſhould. For the liquor neuer faileth to be ſeaſoned of the ſalt, but it is commonly tried that the greateſt number of a companie remaineth wicked ſtill, notwithſtanding the righteous. Such alſo, if you marke it, is the ſimilitude of the leauen: for the effect of it followeth neceſſarilie in the maſſe of meale: but it is not of ſuch neceſsitie that in a whole congregation all become vnſanctified for ſome. Let the Church at Corinth be an example hereof. If the whole congregation had

bin infected, and ſo vnſanctified, through the remaining of that wicked man amongeſt them, woulde the Apoſtle (thinke you) haue ſtill intituled them, The Church of God,
               1. Cor. 1.1. 
               and ſanctified ones in Chriſt Ieſu? there had bene no reaſon in it. What then (will ſome ſay) to what ende did the Apoſtle put them in minde of the effect of leauen, when he chalenged them for their negligence? euen to the ende that they being put in minde of the reſemblance that is betwene the nature of leauen, & the wicked, in that both are diſpoſed to infect that which is neere them, might haue more care to vſe all the meanes that God hath put into their hands to auoide the daunger. For as the remaining with the godly tendeth to the reforming of the wicked: ſo the remaining with the wicked, tendeth to the deforming of the godly, yet doeth neither of both fall out alway neceſſarily, eſpecially vpon a whole companie or congregation. Therefore,Out of the places quoted before. ſeeing a Church is as the bodie of Chriſt, and the ſame bodie conſiſteth alſo of many members, euerie of which is ſo to exerciſe the office of his place, as that all may concurre to the conſeruation and encreaſing of the whole vnto a perfect body, it followeth neceſſarily, that no true member ought to ſeparate it ſelfe, for any cauſe, ſo long as there is life in the bodie, and abiding with the head. For I truſt you wil not ſay that the remaining of a knowne wicked one doth ipſo facto extingiſh life in the bodie, and ſeparate the ſame from the heade Chriſt. Neither may you thinke to auoide me by obiecting, that you ſeparate not your ſelf from the bodie by going from one congregation to another, in that euerie faithfull congregation, in reſpect that Chriſt is the head thereof, hath this ſame reſemblance of a bodie. For if that be a good reaſon, then Paule ſaide not well to the Corinthians, that,1. Cor. 1.12.13. to addict themſelues ſo ſeuerally to diuerſe teachers of the ſame Goſpell, tendeth to the parting of Chriſt. We knowe well they all helde Chriſt the foundation (vnder which teacher ſoeuer, they profeſſed it) yet in that, ſome choſe Paule with neglect of the other

Apoſtles, ſome Apollo, others Cephas, and others held Chriſt, without eſteeming the meanes of teachers, they were iuſtly charged to be in dāger of ſchiſme, whileſt they ſo continued. Howe then can they be excuſed, that forſaking the congregation, whereunto through the prouidence of God, by their dwelling, they are gathered and ioyned, doe conſort themſelues with ſome others, as the affection of their ſpeciall liking leadeth thē. Howe can they (I ſay) bee excuſed for beeing guiltie of parting Chriſt?
            To conclude therefore (for this time) ſince it is (as I hope) plainly prooued. Firſt, That the preſence or remayning of the vnworthie in a Congregation, cannot keepe backe the benefite of Chriſt from the faithfull of the ſame. Secondly, That particular members haue from the Lord no further power & authoritie in caſe of offences than by admonition: and that their chiefe regarde muſt be, by vnitie to prouide for the continuance of the whole congregation, which in this caſe is conſidered as the bodie of Christ. Thirdly, That the practiſing and proceeding of particular members, beyond the limittes of admonition, as namely for ſome offences, to depart from one Congregation (where the reaſon of their dwelling requireth them to be) and ioyne themſelues to another, breedeth ſchiſme, and diuiſion of Chriſt. It followeth of the firſt point, that you may ioyne with vs: and of the two latter, that you ought not to depart from vs of this Congregation, vnleſſe you will ſhewe your ſelfe to bee a rebellious member to the bodie, and bee found guiltie of diuiding Chriſt. Of which things now I beſeech you, by the mercies of God, to haue a due conſideration.
         
         
            
            A ſeconde Anſwere or Reioynder to Brownes replie for the doubts and obiections of his Diſciple.
            
               WHat deſire I haue W. F. to withdrawe you from errour, and to bring you to the trueth, as the Lorde who ſearcheth the heart, knoweth at full, ſo no man that ſeeeth theſe my willing labours taken in the behalfe thereof, can with any charitie doubt of it. And though I haue nowe leſſe hope than I had (ſeeing you without all iudgement to diſcerne the ſpirit of error and arrogancie, which is ſo nakedly ſeene in the framer of your replie) yet, as by the teſtimonie of two or three witneſſes, ſo ſhal my loue of your ſaluation, be made manifeſt by this my comming againe vnto you. So much therefore at the leaſt, through the goodneſſe of God, I ſhall gaine: if there come more, I ſhall receyue it as aduantage, & praiſe his moſt holy name for all. Beare with mee if I followe not your teachers humour in aunſwering, for (if there were nothing elſe) my time is more precious vnto me.
            1 Vpon my grant, that in our Churches we cannot redreſſe faults ſo fully as is to be wiſhed, he gathereth ſix hereſies, for errours ſoundeth not full inough in his lauiſh mouth, but becauſe they are without all demonſtration, no man is bound to beleeue him.
            2 Whereas you ſaide, The lawe compelleth all to communicate that are aboue ſixtene yeeres olde: I anſwered, The lawe intendeth a worthines, & yelded this reaſon, becauſe it prouideth cenſures for the vnworthie. Your leader ſaith, I falſifie the queſtion, & the lawes. For the queſtion, let that be iudged by others. And in that he chargeth the lawes to enforce a confuſe mingling, with what face can he do it?A lier hath need of a good memorie. If hee remember the 2.3.4. pages of that brainleſſe anſwere to maſter Cartwrights letter, where amongeſt others of like nature, are theſe wordes: Wee knowe that the

lawes doe puniſh all outward groſſe wickedneſſe, or ſuffer it to be puniſhed, as namely idolatrie, &c. and if there bee any vice vnpuniſhable by the law,
               The lawes enforce not a confuſion at the Lords ſupper. 
               yet the lawes doe ſuffer either the Church, or euerie houſeholder or gouernour, to correct (ſo it be not against lawe) ſuch as are vnder their charge. Againe. Alſo for the diſcipline, in gathering the worthie from the vnworthie, the lawe appointeth it,
               Pag. 4. 
               and giueth leaue to make exception, both in publique iudgement, and in Churches, againſt vnworthie perſons: as againſt drunkenneſſe, fightings, murther, adulteries, ſtealth ſlanders, &c. and yet alſo doe giue libertie to the Church to vſe their owne diſcipline. Let him nowe looke who is his aduerſarie in this. Whereas I bid you informe vs of inordinate walkers that we may remoue them, he ſayth: We muſt firſt haue an order of diſcipline establiſhed. If hee meane by an order of diſcipline, ſome kinde of order of diſcipline to debarre the vnworthie, then it cannot be denied, but we haue an order for it, as the anſwerer to maiſter Cartwright, in the wordes afore rehearſed, in behalfe of the lawes, acknowledgeth: if he would not bee ſo ſhortly taken, but haue his wordes vnderſtood of that onely ordering of diſcipline which the worde of God ſetteth out, then as I reuerence that for the onely and vnchangeable ordinance of the almightie, ſo finde I none a greater aduerſarie thereunto than he: nay than you all, if you all be of that iudgement hee is that wrote your replye. For (beſides other thinges that I will not nowe enter into) whereas I acknowledge that in our Church, though wee haue ſome abilitie to withſtand open prophanations, yet that the gouerning by an Elderſhip is far to be preferred for the expectation of a happie ſucceſſe: he openeth his mouth as an enemie, but with much falſhoode and folly. Firſt hee ſayth, I make an Elderſhippe, a part of your ſeconde point, leauing out diſcipline. I ſayde before, wee haue vſe of the diſcipline to remooue the inordinate, onely this I graunted withall, that if you ſhould obiect, that wee haue not ſo good vſe of it, as if it were ordered by an Elderſhippe, my ſelfe woulde

ioyne with you in that poynt. Nowe if hee had but ſo good vſe of his vnderſtanding, as wee haue of this diſcipline, he would haue diſcerned, that I added this only to preuent ſuch an obiection from you, and not that I thruſt it into your ſecond poynt, as to make it a part thereof. Secondly hee ſayth, by Elders we meane Aldermen, as that we ſeeke no other but by ciuill power and authoritie to force the vnruly. Whereunto if I ſhoulde anſwere hee was madde, I ſhould fauour him much, in mouing pitie for him: and if it be not taken ſo, both friends and enemies,A diſcouerie of Brownes Diſcipline. muſt needes ſet a harder ſentence vppon him. Againe, he taketh it not neceſſary, but ſuperſtitious, to ſtand vppon the chooſing of Elders, as the ſtate of our Church nowe ſtandeth: and in ſtead thereof, hee ſupplyeth, that the forward of euery Pariſh put forth themſelues by viſiting, counſailing, withdrawing, comforting &c. to performe the buſines. Wherin he gratifieth the enemies of diſcipline with this, that the fourme of Church gouernement is changeable. Beſides, let the wiſe conſider, whither that bee not apparantly a confuſed courſe, wherein euery one that luſteth may gouerne. Hee ſuppoſeth, conſidering the times, that an agreement were better than a choiſe. As though there can bee obedience, and ſo agreement, where thoſe that gouerne are not choſen. His conſideration of the times warranteth no man to runne before hee bee called. Hee giueth another reaſon: that rather God may haue the praiſe in prouoking and calling them, then man in chooſing them. This I perceiue is Brownes Anarchie, and thus I ouerthrowe it. Whatſoeuer courſe of obedience tendeth more or rather to the praiſe of God then another, that ſame is alwayes to bee preferred before the other. But hee ſaith, that for men to put forth themſelues to execute diſcipline, tendeth rather to the praiſe of God, then if they be choſen: Therefore we muſt conclude, (if hee ſay true) that to offer our ſelues, is alwaies to bee preferred in this caſe before chooſing and ſo it ſhall follow by conſequence, that the order of ordayning ſet downe by the ſpirit of God, is

not the beſt courſe of all others. Alſo when as it is hereby intended, that the forwarde profeſſors, vppon their owne inward motions and feelings, ſhall thus take vpon them to bee Elders, and the others muſt ſo acknowledge them, it followeth thereuppon connexiuely, that theſe inward motions and feelings muſt be holden warrant inough, both for them-ſelues to take vppon them Church-callings as alſo to bind other mens conſciences to obey them. For if this teſtimonie of their feeling, bee not an authenticall warrant to the conſcience, how ſhall either parties walke in faith?
                  Rom. 14.2.3. So then if this bee not to leade vs into the lake of Anabaptiſticall reuelations, I knowe not what can bee. But hee proceedeth ſaying: As for the names of Elders and other ceremonies in ordeyning, ſeeing they are made mockeries and matters of perſecution, I iudge it ſuperſtition to make them vnchangeable. As the names of things are not too ſtiffely to bee ſtoode vppon, ſo I doubt whether the mockeries and perſecution you meane, bee cauſe inough to alter theſe. Howbeit whatſoeuer may bee graunted in ſuch reſpects for the names, and ſome other outward circumſtaunces,
                  Act. 13.2.3. Act. 14.2.3. 1. Tim. 3.2.3.4.5.6.7. Compar. with titus 1.5. 1. Tim. 3.8.9. compa. with Act. 6.5. as thinges not eſſential, yet touching the order of ordeyning by choiſe, for as much as that is the wiſedome of the worde, and neceſſary to the auoyding of confuſion, ſuch reſpects can haue no force at all againſt it. In that hee calleth this ſticking to the ordeyning of Elders, ſuperſtition, I would but haue giuen it to his raſhnes, ſaue that hee addeth, that it is to make in force the Popiſh Sacrament of orders. Which bewrayeth him for a wicked betrayer of Gods trueth, in that hee yeeldeth the hard vrging of the holy ordinaunce of God, to giue maintenance or force, to the lewde and braine-ſicke imaginations of man. I ſurceaſe to proſecute the abſurdities of theſe aſſertions more curiouſly, as annoyed with the ſtench that floweth from ſuch Gangraenes: onely, if hee ſhall bee your leader in this poynt alſo, as in others, then both you and your fellow diſciples, muſt now at length leaue to moue

any more quarrels about the calling of our miniſters. For you heare that no ſolēne nor ſet order in their calling is neceſſary: yea he telleth you in plaine words: That the obedience of the worthy vnto them, is a calling by man, and the agreement of the wiſest is a chooſing. I cal you to witnes of this his francke gift, leſt hereafter hee woulde reuoke it.
            4 My anſwere to your queſtion hee ſayth is darke, doubtfull, ſhifting, vntrue, and cauelling. The three laſt let him take to him-ſelfe, my conſcience is cleere: in whatſoeuer ſeemeth darke or doubtfull, I am ready,That Chriſtians may partake in the Sacrament with wicked ones, and not be defiled with their ſinne. yea deſirous to giue as good addreſſe, as the reaſonable reader ſhall require. Your queſtion was in this ſort propounded, Whether Chriſtians may ioyne and partake as one body in the Sacrament with wicked ones? Whereby I conceiued your iudgement to bee this, that if there bee any at the Sacrament that you knowe to bee vnworthy, you ought not then to communicate, but goe away, as fearing leaſt you coulde not communicat, but bee partaker of their ſinnes. To this I anſwered as deliberatly and playnely as I coulde, and ſo as may eaſily appeare, I allowe, no other ioyning with ſuch, then as their preſence and eating at the ſame table may bee called a ioyning. Which I prooue wee may and ought to ſuſteine, not ſecurely and careleſſely (as hee taketh mee) but with this condition vnderſtoode (if wee can-not remoue them) which I ſuppoſed my whole drift and reaſons following muſt needes haue made you perfect in. So my firſt reaſon is, not as hee hath ſhaped it, but thus: if the preſence of the wicked cannot hinder the celebrating of the remembrance of Chriſt, nor the effectuall cōmunicating of his body and blood to the faithful ones, thē may we (hauing faith,) effectually comunicate notwithſtanding their preſence. But the firſt is true, therfore the latter followeth. Herehence he gathereth many abſurdities and groſſe errors, with bringing in Traitors, infidels, Turkes, Popes to the cōmuniō. But he miſrekoned in three points which cauſed him to erre in the ſūme. Firſt, in that hee

vnderſtandeth mee to ſpeake of a careleſſe communicating, which he could not haue done, if the Lord had not ſmitten him with blindnes, ſith I afterwards plainely declare what dueties hath bene done of vs before communicating: The ſecond, what I anſwere to your queſtion concerning dueties of vs, that is to ſay particular members, to do in this caſe, hee receiueth as though I ſpake of the body of the congregation, how it ſhould be caried & ordered in the Sacraments. The third, he putteth an impoſſible caſe, as though Infidels, Turkes, Popes, remayning ſuch, ſhould come to our communion. In all which you may ſee him full of that ſame vaine Philoſophie, and Sophiſticall cauilling, which you feared to find in your anſwere. Such is the ſtuffe of his third page, mingled with the moſt odious compariſons and ſpitefull collections that his heart could deuiſe.
            5 But here if he ſay, I haue then pared the queſtion, & made it more particular then it was propounded. I anſwere, it was moſt expedient, & for your better inſtruction to vnderſtande, and ſo to vſe your queſtion as it might beſt fitte, and be applyed to the particular members of a congregation, and ſo of our Pariſh, whereof by your dwelling you ſhould be a member. Beſides, to haue vnderſtood it of a whole congregation, I had no reaſon, becauſe I could not ſuſpect you doubted my iudgement in that, to witte, whether a Church ought to debarre the knowne wicked from the communion: eſpecially (howſoeuer you might doubt) hee that replied, had no reaſon at all to doubt it, ſeeing what high account I made of the ordinaunce of God in that behalfe. Againe, conſider the buſines is with you, you I ſay, who dwelling in our Pariſh do moſt vnkindly (as we take it) ſeparate your ſelf from vs. On the other ſide you ſuppoſe you haue cauſe ſo to do, till you can be reſolued of ſome thinges, whereat your conſcience ſticketh. You chooſe to declare your greeuances by writing. In your writing you complayne of lacke of order amongſt vs to diſcerne of the communicants,

and there-hence you require to bee anſwered. Whither it bee lawful for Chriſtians to ioyne in the Sacraments with vnreformed ones. Whereby, who ſeeth not, that you propound the caſe for your ſelfe, as though if there can be a courſe ſhewed, whereby a carefull Chriſtian may ſettle his conſcience to communicate, although ſome wicked ones be preſent, and partake in the ſignes with vs, that then you would be content to ioyne with vs, or elſe not. Thus taking the queſtion (whether beſt for your inſtruction or no, I nowe referre it to the iudgement of all men:) I anſwered vnto it (I hope) cleerely, I am ſure ſincerely. Whereunto if this your leader would haue replied with like affection to do you good, he muſt haue done it, taking the queſtion in the ſame ſenſe. Elſe if hee had nothing to ſay to the queſtion ſo taken, what needed this prodigall expence of time? when as hee might in a worde, haue onely admoniſhed, that I miſtooke the queſtion, and ſo an ende. Nowe (to ſtoppe vp theſe ſtarting holes) knowe you, that if in the queſtion, you meane by the worde, Chriſtians, the whole body of a Church or cō
               gregation: I anſwere that they ought to diſcerne of the vnworthy, and ſeparate them to the vttermoſt of their power: and that by howe much the more they are negligent in this duetie, by ſo much the greater is their ſinne. So that herein I ſuppoſe, you and I differ not in iudgement. On the other ſide, if the worde, Chriſtians, be taken (as I vnderſtoode it) for particular members of a congregation, as you one, and I another, in this congregation or Pariſh, then doe I anſwere, as before I did, which was this in effect, That wee may and ought to communicate, and not goe away,
               The playne ſenſe of the queſtion. 
               or with-drawe our ſelues from the Lordes Table, though wee ſee ſome that wee knowe to bee notorious offenders, at the ſame time partake in the ſignes with vs. This was prooued by the argument a little aboue rehearſed, namely, becauſe thoſe wicked can-not hinder the celebrating of the remembrance of Chriſt, nor the communicating of his body and blood to vs that come with faith. My reaſon

for that is this. If the preſence of the wicked ſhould hinder vs, that muſt it doe, either ſimply in it ſelfe, or elſe in reſpect of vs that knowe them to be wicked: but neither of thoſe waies can wee bee hindered by them, and therefore not at all. That the preſence of the wicked in it ſelfe hindereth not, I ſhewed in a worde, as a thing which needed no great proofe. And that it hindereth not in reſpect of vs that knowe them (if wee haue borne our ſelues wiſely and charitably towardes them by proceſſe of admonition which I vnderſtoode to bee ſuch as our Sauiour appoynteth) I proue,
                  Matth. 18.15.16.17. firſt by a perpetuall Cannon out of Ezechiel. Secondly, from the boundes and limittes of a particular members duetie in this behalfe. And heere in deede wee growe to the iſſue of that whole controuerſie. I ſay, a particular member ought to admoniſhe, and at length to tell the Church, but not to with-drawe him-ſelfe, though the Church ſhoulde not ſeparate the ſame vnworthy one. You I perceyue holde the contrary, namely that a particular member ought to with-drawe and go away from the congregation in ſuch a caſe. Howe this poynt is debated, commeth hereafter to bee ſpoken of. Here I will ſtay a litle to take away what hee bringeth of any ſhewe, againſt ſo much of myne as I lately rehearſed.
            
               The preſence of the wicked in it ſelfe doth not hurt vs.6 Touching my diſtribution of preſence ſimply, and in reſpect of our knowledge, by which I proue the vnworthy cannot hinder the effectuall communicating of the worthy, let the godly wiſe iudge, whether I haue altered or ſhifted away the queſtion, or hee rather, (bearing therein a brand of Gods iudgement) vnderſtoode not what hee read.
                  Pag. 4. If you doubt what I meane by the preſence of the wicked. I vnderſtande not their preſence as by-ſtanders or lookers on, but as receiuers at the ſame time of the Sacramental ſignes of the body & blood of Chriſt: and this my example of Iudas coulde not but teach you. Your leader confeſſeth that Iudas

eate the Paſſeouer, but was not at the newe inſtitution of the communion. If it did much concerne the buſineſſe in hande, I woulde nothing feare to haue him my aduerſarie in it, but that part of my diuiſion, as I did not there, ſo I will not here inſiſt vpon, becauſe it is of both ſides confeſſed, that the preſence of the wicked in it ſelf,The preſence of the wicked in reſpect of our knowledge of them hindereth not. hindereth nothing. The other part is, that their preſence hindereth not, in reſpect of our knowledge of them. Your anſwere is, it hindereth in reſpect of our knowing and communicating with them, as though I alſo had not graunted a kinde of outwarde ioyning and communicating.
                  Pag. 5. Your replier ſayth, this is ſinne, but he bringeth not one argument to proue it. In deede if I ſhoulde ſo ioyne with an vnworthy one in the Sacrament, as approuing him thereby to be a liuely and ſound member of the body, I ſhoulde ſinne in calling euill good, otherwiſe it can be no ſinne vnto mee, to mee (I ſay) that haue performed thoſe dueties of reforming or remoouing him, which Chriſt commaundeth, and ſo I woulde haue you vnderſtand mee in all places. Which if you doe (as you had no other cauſe, if you had weyed my whole anſwere together) you ſhall finde a large acquittance for the cauilles at the place of Ezechiel, and many other debtes, which your replier demaundeth at my handes.
                  Pag. 6. Nowe for proofe that this communicating is no ſinne vnto mee at all, I will ſhewe you: firſt, that it is not the ſinne of allowing him for a ſounde member that is vnſound: and ſecondly, that there is no other ſinne in it. For the firſt, I reaſon thus. If I approue him for a ſounde member, neither in the ſight of GOD, nor to his owne conſcience, neither in the knowledge and iudgement of the Church, then can it no waye bee ſayde, I approue him. But I doe it not by any thoſe wayes, and there-fore not at all. That I doe it not in the ſight of God, it is manifeſt, for he beholdeth the heart, & therfore knoweth that I do not ſo allow him. Again,That I do not allowe him for 
                     •
                   worthy member. that I do it not neither to his own conſcience or in the knowledge

and iudgement of the Church, my former proceeding by the commaunded courſe of admonition, hath abundantly cleered it.
                  Pag. 7. If you inferre, that in this ſort alſo I may goe to Maſse, if I will, you are wyde. For the queſtion is of the behauiour of a member in that body, wherof it is a member, and not in a ſtrange body, whereof it is no member. And ſo it followeth not, that becauſe I holde my ſelfe bound to keepe the vnitie of that liuing body, (whereof I am a member) euen with ſome inconuenience of ſickneſſe and vnſound partes, that therefore I may as well ioyne my ſelfe to a ſtrange body, and ſo become a member of Satan. Yet this is your great leaders Sophiſtrie.The reaſon why thus I communicate. If you yet inſiſt, vrging me with the outward action communicating, I anſwere, I doe that, not as a thing of mine owne head, or which I might at my choyſe refraine, but as a duetie neceſſarily enioyned me of God by his prouidence through my being and placing there, and iuſtly required of mee, by the Church or ſpirituall body, through that ſame inforcing lawe of the coherence, and being together of the partes and members, which is the expreſſe ordinance of God, as (amongeſt other places) the fourth of the Epiſtle to the Epheſians from the firſt verſe, to the ende of the ſixteene, and Philippians 2.4. Hebrewes 10.25. Iud. 19. doe notoriouſly proue it. So that vnleſſe I holde the congregation (whereof I am) nowe diſanulled, and become no Church of Chriſt, for the not ſeparating an vnworthy member (which is Anabaptiſticall hereſie) I cannot voluntarily either abſent my ſelfe from their aſſemblies to holy exerciſes,
                  Epheſ. 4.3. Ver. 15.16. 1. Cor. 1.12.13. Heb. 10.25. Iud. 19. or yet depart away being come together, without breach of the bonde of peace, ſundring the cement of loue, empairing the growth of the body of Chriſt, and incurring the guilt of ſchiſme and diuiſion. And thus much for the former of my two poyntes, namely, that my communicating in ſuch ſort as is ſaide, is not the ſinne of calling euill good, or an vn-ſounde member ſounde. Nowe that I ſinne

not at all in it, I proue it as in my former anſwere,That there is no ſinne in this maner communicating. 
               becauſe I haue perfourmed the duties of a priuate man, or particular member, and beyond which I am commanded nothing of the Lord, nothing I ſay, in this courſe of duetie: for I exclude not hereby our prayers, mourning or whatſoeuer tendeth to his recouerie: but I exclude both our priuate excommunicating of him, as you doe in this replie, as alſo our owne ſundering and ſeparating from the congregation for his cauſe, which is the thing in queſtion betweene vs.
            Whereas I ſay that by our proceeding by ſuch courſe, as I preſuppoſe euery wiſe Chriſtian to haue walked in, towards the offending brethren, this (at the leaſt) ſhall come to paſſe by it, that it bee ſufficiently knowne, wee hate their ſinne: an vpright heart muſt needes vnderſtand, by that clauſe, (at leaſt) an implying of ſome better benefite and fruite of our labours, as in refourming or remoouing him, which (being moſt wiſhed of vs if we enioy not, yet the other neuer fayling vs (when we cannot attaine to the chiefeſt) muſt likewiſe content vs. Was there then any reaſon, or came it from the leading of a good ſpirite,
                  Pag. 6. to referre that to the partes of duetie (as graunting thereby ſome further dueties left vndone) which in open euidence pointeth at more excellent effects or fruites of our labours intended by vs. Truely I doubt whether any learned Papiſt, woulde ſo fooliſhly haue cauilled for his credite ſake. The like ſhamleſſe cauilling is alſo in the beginning of his 7. page.
            8 But he ſaith,
                  Pag. 7, 
               If the Church bee eſtabliſhed and refuſe to debarre him, whome they confeſſe to bee ſo wicked and vnrefourmed, all are made wicked by our complaining. Nowe if hee had ſaid: If the Church be eſtabliſhed, and doe not debarre him, &c, I had then good cauſe giuen to haue made here his anſwere, as alſo if in ſtead of theſe words (all are made wicked by our complaining) he had ſaid, that Church or ſpirituall bodie is now thereby diſſolued & ſeparated from their knitting vnto Chriſt. For if he meane not ſo, he can

neuer conclude againſt me, that particular mēbers may depart their aſſemblies: and if he do meane ſo, you ſhall heare what I ſay to it hereafter.
            9 In ſaying the action of communicating is ſpiritual, I exclude not al kind of outward ioyning, but ſhew the eſſentiall ioyning to be ſpiritual by faith, wherein the wicked cannot come neare vs. As for the outward ioyning ſuch as it is, I haue proued it before, both dutiful & voide of the infection of their ſin: yet ſtill he vrgeth, that I warrant him to be a companion or brother in Chriſt, by communicating with him. I denie that as before. If you aske howe then I ſhould bee brought to communicate with him in any ſort.How it cōmeth to paſſe that I thus communicate. I anſwer, the Church requireth my preſence as a member, I by the bond of coherence, participate with the whole, in the holy action. By ſo doing it falleth out in conſequence, that I participate in the ſignes with that vnworthie one, becauſe hee is vnſeparated. Nowe (if you marke) I doe not partake with him at all, by my verie act of communicating, but onely in as much as I communicate with the Church, which being ſimply and abſolutely a duetie (as before proued) cannot bee controlled, neither ought to bee pretermitted for that which hath no true appearance of euill in it (I meane in the eyes of thoſe that haue learned to iudge righteous iudgment) And that it hath not ſo much as iuſt appearance of euill in it, vnto ſuch is ſhewed alreadie by the reaſons giuen to prooue, that there is no ſinne in this manner of communicating.
            10 But he cryeth, that in this wiſe I admitte a diuiſion in the Communion. I heare his crie, wiſhing it had more ſenſe, and leſſe opportunitie. An inwarde diuiſion he denieth not but there may be. Nowe what haue I ſayde, whereby he ſhoulde finde that outward diuiſion he ſpeaketh of, when as I expreſly acknowledge an outwarde ioyning. As for the miniſters part, in deliuering the ſignes to ſuch a one, it doeth not follow, becauſe he deliuereth them vnto him, that he doth it to warrant his damnation,
               
or of ſet purpoſe to further his deſtruction. For neyther the deliuering, nor the things deliuered, but onely his vnworthie receiuing, is cauſe of his owne damnation. Neither is that knowledge if it be granted) that the miniſter hath of his vnworthineſſe, a warrant to withholde the ſignes, if moſt voyces haue helde him in, for that can he not doe of himſelfe: onely therefore it remaineth, that hee thus farre alſo ſuffer him in the Sacrament, and waite for the time when the Lord ſhall either more fullie reueale him, or graciouſly deliuer the Church from the contagion of him.How the mininiſter may deliuer the ſacramēt to one that he knoweth to be vnworthie. In the meane time hee teacheth him the ſigne, not as hee is woorthie or vnwoorthie, but as hee is yet vndiuided from them. Hee that thinketh theſe thinges can neuer fall out, euen where diſcipline is beſt eſtabliſhed, hee hath little experience, and leſſe iudgement.
            11 Whether I haue grieuouly abuſed the place to the Corinthes, in that ſort that I haue alleaged it, let the iudgement be with the godly reader, as alſo whether your leader hath committed that, wherwith he chargeth me vpon the ſame chapter. When he ſaith that Paul proueth it to be no Sacrament at all to the Corinthes,
               Anſvver to maſter C. pag 37. 
               and not as I ſuppoſe it to bee a Sacrament to ſome, and not to other ſome. The ſame ſpirite ſayth likewiſe in another place: Paule condemneth euen the Supper and ſaith: this is not to eate the Lordes Supper. His drift is to denie againſt mee, that any can haue hope to partake and communicate comfortably and profitably with thoſe, amongſt whom any knowne wicked ones are admitted in this action, & therefore alſo he ſaith before in his reply,In his replie. pag. 5. 
               that if there be any open breach of the couenant by any one knowne to the reſt, the ſacrament is of no force. Againe hee hath theſe words. The communion is not a diuiſion that is halfe good to the one part, and halfe bad to the other part,
               In his replie. pag. 4. 
               but eyther wholly good, or wholly bad. Let not the reader beleeue, that I ſay or ſuppoſe it to be a Sacrament to ſome, and not to other ſome. I acknowledge both ſorts to receiue the ſacrament, that is, the conſecrated Elements, one to their comfort,

but the other to their condemnation. And to leaue other pointes that might here be examined, and to keepe to the queſtion, the ſtrength of the two laſt quoted propoſitions, ſtandeth vpon that place to the Corinthes taken in ſuch ſenſe as hee deliuereth it. Let vs therefore come to examine that whether it be gold or ſtubble. He ſaith,The ſacrament not diſanulled for the wickeds ſake. Paul proueth it to be no ſacrament at al to the Corinthians, by theſe two weightie arguments. Firſt, that the forme and inſtitution of the Supper was violated by them all. 2 That ſo was the end and vſe And firſt to anſwere his literall abuſe of Paules wordes in the 20 verſe, which is this. VVhen yee come together in one, this is not to eate the Lordes Supper. Mee thinke a learned diuine ſhoulde not be ignorant, that this is a kinde of exceſsiue negation very vſuall in the ſcriptures, and is therefore here, like as in all other ſuch places, to bee reſtrained within due regards of circumſtances, and conferences of other ſcriptures, as within the naturall intended liſtes, and neceſſarie deſcribed compaſſe of the holy Ghoſt that vttered them. For example,
                  Gen. 32.28. the Lord ſaide vnto Iacob, Thy name shal not from henceforth be called Iacob, but Iſrael. Againe, ſpeaking by his Prophet,
                  Iere. 7.22. he ſayth: For I ſpake not to your fathers, nor commanded them, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings and ſacrifices. And Paule ſayeth likewiſe in another place:1, Cor. 1.17. 
               Chriſt ſent me not to baptiſe, but to preach the Goſpel. Let theſe three ſuffice for the reſt. Now we knowe, that Iacob was called Iacob afterwarde, but not onely by that name. The Iſraelites were commaunded burnt offerings and ſacrifices, but ſo as chiefly to beholde in them the Meſsias to come. Alſo we knowe Paule did baptize,
                  verſ. 14.16. therefore when hee ſayeth, I was not ſent to baptize hee giueth vs to vnderſtande, that the chiefe dutie and charge of his Apoſtleſhip was to preach the Goſpel, in compariſon whereof, the baptiſing hee vſed was not to be ſpoken off. Nowe ſeeing the holy Ghoſt thus in other places, vſeth the like generall negation, which muſt bee ſo limitted as I ſpeake of, maruaile not though

in this place alſo, he denie that to be done by the Corinthians, which was not done as it ſhould be, by many, or (perhaps) by the moſt of them. Now for the arguments which he forceth vpon the Apoſtle, I ſay, he is too bold to ſnatch that which the Apoſtle neuer meant to giue him, and that in two points. For neither doth the Apoſtle affirme, that the eſſentiall fourme of the inſtitution was violated, nor yet that the foule abuſes committed, were done by them all. The firſt I prooue thus: When Paule had ſaid, VVhen you come together in one, this is not to eate the Lords Supper, immediatly he ſheweth them the reaſon why: For (ſaith he) Euerie one in eating, taketh firſt his owne Supper, and ſo one is hungrie, but another druncken. Heere is nothing controlled touching the ſubſtantiall fourme of the inſtitution (which conſiſteth in the conſecration and diſtribution of the bread and wine) but onely the diſorder that was among them in diſpoſing of themſelues and vſing it, againſt which he oppoſeth the repetition of the inſtitution, as he had deliuered the ſame vnto them before, and that being done, in the 23.24.25. verſes, he therehence deducteth that thing in the 26. verſe, which he would afterwards, and doth apply to their reproofe, euen to the verie ende of the cauſe. Now, neither is that ſame thing any whit of the fourme of the inſtitution, but onely touching the vſe and end, wherevnto they ſhould haue prepared and applied themſelues in that action. Like as the moſt cleere ſtroke of that ſentence, plainely, and onely ſoundeth in theſe words: For as often as you ſhall eate this bread, and drinke this cup, you ſhall declare the Lords death vntill he come. The things in them diſagreeable to this, and therefore to be blamed, he declareth to be, that there was of the riche of them,
                  Verſes 21.22.28. which reſpected chiefely to feaſt and feede their bellies in that comming together, and made no difference by their behauiour, betweene the holie Supper of our Lord, and ciuill banquettings. Now ſeeing the Apoſtle thus particularizeth theſe offences of

the Corinthian communicants, and withall, ſpecifieth nothing to be reprooued in the Miniſters, touching the fourme of the inſtitution: who is he that dares beleeue this preſumptuous ſpirit, who careth not what he faceth vpon the word of God, to mainteine whatſoeuer his corrupt braine hath once conceiued?
            The ſecond point which I ſayd he ſnatcheth, is, that he auoucheth theſe abuſes among the Corinthian Communicants, to haue beene committed by them all. Which thus I refell. To retaine all the Apoſtle his traditions, euen as he had deliuered them to the Corinthians: and yet all thoſe ſame Corinth, to tranſgreſſe them in no leſſe matter, then in celebrating the Lords Supper, are two things directly contrary. But the Apoſtle teſtifieth for them in the firſt,
                  Verſe. 1. therefore he chargeth them not with the latter. That he teſtifieth the firſt, appeareth, where he beginneth with this exhortation. Be yee followers of me,
               
                  Verſe. 2. 
               euen as I am of Chriſt, and immediatly ſubioyneth, I praiſe you brethren that you remember all my things, and retaine the traditions as I deliuered them vnto you. Wherby it is manifeſt, that the Apoſtle addreſsing himſelfe to thoſe points, whereof he was informed touching the vnſeemely behauiour that was among them at Praier, and at the Lords Supper, firſt confirmeth the minds, and approueth the iudgemēts of ſuch brethren, as had ſoundly vpheld the truth in thoſe things, and afterwards deliuereth that, which the guilty ſhould find themſelues reproued in. 2. That ſome withſtood that prophane diſorder, & polluted not themſelues with the reſt,That is, by the like euill behauiour. in their behauiour at the Lords Supper, it is neceſſarily inferred vpō that Paule ſaith:
                  Verſe. 18. 
               There were diſſentions among them, euen at their cōming together at the Lords Supper. This is the firſt thing in that matter, whereof he ſheweth his diſlike, but withall, confirmeth ſuch as held the truth, affirming that greater matters then thoſe,
                  Verſe. 19. yea, euen hereſies ſhould grow among thē, by which they ſhould be ſo far frō being damnified, that contrariwiſe, they ſhould become more manifeſt &

famous by thē. And as the Apoſtle in this verſe voydeth theſe of the feare of that concluſion he had ſet down before, to wit, that they came together not with profit, but with hurt, pointing the ſame now directly to be applied to that part which gaue the occaſion of diſſention. So likewiſe doth he therby as manifeſtly declare, that he includeth not all the Corinth. in the reprehēſiōs that follow. 3. If they were all alike in this offence, then were they all a diſordered & wicked cōpany, and ſo (in all mens eyes) ten times worſe in euery point of celebrating the Lords Supper, then the aſſemblies of England are, from which notwithſtāding he laboureth thus with all his ſtrength to draw & hold you. Now, if the Corinthiā church was fallen wholy to be a groſſe diſordered cōpany,Pag. 3. of his reply. and your leader holdeth plainly, that open groſſe wickednes breaketh the couenant, it followeth that they had alſo broken the couenāt, & ſo by flat cōſequence, could not be a Church of God, whē Paul thus wrote vnto thē: which (me think) ſhould be clearer then any candell, to make you ſee your leaders impudēcy: who bluſheth not, by this meanes, to giue the Apoſtle the lye to his teeth.1. Cor. 1.2. Hence (as by the way) this may be deducted, which I aduiſe you well to conſider.The Corinthian Church more diſordred in communicating, then the English aſſemblies. Either the Corinth Church was now no Church of God, nor brotherhood for faithfull men to reſort and keepe thē to, or elſe a Church of far greater diſorder, in cōming together to the Lords Table, then ours of England, & particularly of this congregation is, ought yet to be holden a Church of God, & brotherhod for faithful mē to reſort & keepe vnto. But the firſt is falſe, ſaith the ſame Apoſtle in the place laſt quoted, therefore the latter ſtandeth firme, & cannot be denied of any that with the leaſt indifferency cōpareth our cōmunicating with theirs. For if you wil obiect they had the right order of diſcipline, & ſo haue not we that maketh them the greatlier in fault aboue vs, as hauing more meanes in their hands, yet came ſhorter of a holy profeſsion in outward behauior then we, and ſo ſealeth vp my concluſion more ſurely to

conuince you. But I returne againe to my former purpoſe, I hope I haue made it manifeſt, that neither the forme of the inſtitution was violated by the Corinthians, nor yet the abuſes committed, were done by them all. And now I ſuppoſe it will not be hard to prooue, that the moſt vnworthie among them did alſo eate the outward ſacrament. Firſt, if thoſe had not eaten the ſacrament at all, they could not haue beene charged with eating the bread, and drinking the cup of the Lord vnwoorthelie, without diſcerning his bodie,
               
                  Verſe. 27.29. 
               and ſo to their condemnation: But they are charged ſo: therefore we muſt needes graunt they did eate it. The aſſumption is prooued in the 30. verſe, ſaying: For this cauſe many among you are weake and ſick, and many ſleepe. Wherein the Apoſtle by theſe effectes, leadeth them to acknowledge the cauſe, namely, their ſinne, ſuch and ſo as he had propounded it in the 27. & 29. verſes. Whereby behold, and if you will ſuffer the point of truth to pearce into your heart, caſt out that furious ſpirit that ſaith: The Communion can not be good to one partie, and bad to another, and acknowledge by this caſe of the Corinthians, that manifeſt indignities may be committed by ſome, and apparant vnworthie ones may communicate with others (when they cannot be remoued) and neither diſanull the ſacrament, nor yet infect or make guilty all the Communicants with their ſinne. Neither doth this place alone affoord this inſtruction for you,
                  Iude. 4.7.8.10. but euen that place of Iude alſo, where inueying againſt ſuch filthy profeſſors, as whoſe groſſe ſinnes could not be altogether ſecrete in any Church, whereſoeuer they liued, yet doth he graunt it might come to paſſe,
                  Verſe 12. that they ſhould impudently thruſt themſelues into the Church feaſtes of charitie (wherein alſo the Lords Supper then vſed to be celebrated) though ſo alſo they ſhould be but as ſpots and ſtaines therein. In the which place neither doth the Apoſtle once inſinuate, that the action ſhould thereby be diſanulled vnto them, nor all to be made wicked by their meanes in communicating:

yea contrarywiſe implyeth (to the comfort of the godly) that they might by prayer through the holie Ghoſt, in the circumſpect obſeruing one another,
                  Verſes 20.21.22.23. keepe both themſelues and others from the contagion of all ſuch. Now I woulde wiſhe you (W. F.) and all of your learning, to fixe your eyes heere a little in the meditating of theſe two places, and amongſt other things bethinke you, what was the cauſe, that neither Paule in conſideration of that great diſorder in the Church at Corinth, nor yet Iude in reſpect of thoſe wicked ones, which he calleth ſpots in the Church feaſtes,3. Iohn. 9.10. no nor Iohn (that I may touch you vtterly to the quick) in teſtifying that Church to be ambitiouſly vſurped vpon, ouerweyed, and therefore corrupted in the diſcipline, do yet in the leaſt ſyllable, directly, or indirectly, account thoſe aſſemblies thoroughly leauened, or the couenant broken, or yet perſwade any of them to withdrawe from the reſt, and to gather a part. And after you haue diligently ſought and conſidered, it may be you ſhall finde no cauſe but this, namely, that the Apoſtles were as farre from your leaders minde and iudgement in this matter, as Heauen and Hell are diſtant and deuided aſunder. Now againſt his odious repetitions, and ſenſeleſſe collections, I oppoſe the plainenes and ſimplicitie of mine anſweres: but where I call our dealings by admonition and labouring for the Church cenſures,
                  Pag. 8. a kind of proteſting againſt the ſinne of the vnworthy: he miſtaketh me, as though I meant, an open excepting againſt thē at the Lords table.
            12 I ſay, there is no further power giuen to a particular member in proceeding againſt the vnworthy,
                  Pag. 9. That particular members can proceed no further then admonition. than by proceſſe of admonition. Your replier vrgeth me with diuers Scriptures, which he ſuppoſeth, warrant me ſome further proceeding. The firſt is. Giue not that which is holy vnto dogs. Inaſmuch as this may be brought to Church aſſemblies, it belongeth to the practiſe of the whole ioyntly, not to a particular member ſeuerally, and alone, like as other precepts alſo of Church gouernement.

The ſecond is,
                  Matth. 18.18. 
               Let him be vnto thee as an heathen and publican, that is to ſay, when the Church hath for his ſinne ſeparated him, for ſo his binding by the Church is ſet down in the next verſe, with the efficacy therof, to bridle the obſtinate and ſtiff-necked. The third is, If an Angell from heauen, or Paule preach otherwiſe, hold him accurſed. I hold him for a curſed inſtrument of Sathan, and not a bleſſed ſeruant of God, whoſoeuer bringeth vs another doctrine, then the Lord hath left vs in his word: but what is this to the purpoſe in hand? His fourth and fifth places: Be not thou partaker of other mens ſinne, and follow not a multitude to do euill,
               
                  Sect. 6.9. I haue anſwered before, where I haue ſhewed how far, and in what ſort, we may partake with the vnworthy in the Sacrament, and haue proued it to be without guilt of their ſin. The like I anſwere to his other two places out of Timothy. He quoteth Ierem. 1.17.18. If he meant that euery priuate man ſhould take vpō him, as with Ieremies cōmiſsion, either for the parts of his duty towards the Church, or the manner of carying himſelfe in his place, he ſeduceth you dangerouſly, for ſo euery priuate man may publikely denounce the iudgemēts of God againſt Princes, Miniſters & people, & contend with them all, if they faile in their duty, yea, if they but iudge them to faile in their duty (for I trow he wil not aſcribe to them ſuch ſure reuelations, as had the Prophet) and ſo what ſhould an Elderſhip do in the Church, yea or any other gouernors, whē as if they proceed not according to my expectation in any thing, I, & ſo any priuate man may diſanull their doings. If otherwiſe he cite the place but for the generall doctrine that may therehence be deriued vnto all, namely, whatſoeuer the Lord cōmandeth any of vs to do (be it a matter that ſeeme neuer ſo dangerous & fearefull to vs) that we obſerue to do it to the vttermoſt, without fearing the faces of any: if (I ſay) he quote the place for this, let him know, that whē he ſhall proue particular members of a Church to haue receiued ſuch a commandement frō the Lord, as

is heere in queſtion, then this place of the Prophet Iere. ſhal make for his cauſe, in the meane time, I cannot but iudge the man to talke very idely. Alſo if he do not as impertinētly cite the 11. of the Reuel. v.4.5. it is becauſe I lacked his treatiſe,In the Preface to the booke of the liues of Chriſtians. that might make that ſcripture plaine & eaſy vnto me, & which was promiſed now ſome 4. or 5. yeres ago, in a certaine booke, the title wherof is thus ſtoutly ſubſcribed: By me Robert Browne.
            
            13 An Apoſtle (ſaith he) is but one member,
               VVhether a particular man can caſt off a whole congregation. 
               and yet might any one Apoſtle or meſſenger of Chriſt forſake or caſt off whole Cities or Churches, that refuſed or withstood their meſſage: therefore (I trow) it muſt be concluded, that particular members, or priuate men, may caſt off whole Churches or ſpirituall bodies, if their execution of diſcipline fayle in any part. Alas, alas, that euer you ſhould beare your ſelfe vpon ſuch a rotten prop. Conſider now againe the compariſon, and you will euidently ſee the error. Apoſtles, that is to ſay, publike perſons of an extraordinarie embaſſage, and ſo of giftes, and that were not by any reaſon of theyr calling to ſettle in any one congregation, are compared with priuate men or particular members, of no extraordinarie ſending nor giftes, and ſuch as by all reaſon of their calling, are all theyr lyfe long, (neceſſarie remoue of dwelling conſidered) to abyde members of one congregation: theſe perſons (I ſay) of ſo contrarie condition (which I ſet abroade chiefely to preuent ſome thyngs heereafter) are compared in one action, that is (in forſaking.) But as there is no reſemblance betwixt the ſubiects, or things to be forſaken, ſo there is no reaſonable proportion betweene the cauſes of theyr forſaking. The Apoſtles forſooke Churches or aſſemblyes that were without Chriſt; we muſt forſake Churches and congregations of Chriſt. The Apoſtles forſooke them for refuſing the couenant offered: and wee muſt forſake them for vnperfect obſeruing of the fruites of the couenant receyned. Behold the fraude, and flee from it. So hys inſtances of

the Synagogs of the Iewes in Antioch & Epheſus are powred out like water vpon the groūd, ſince thoſe were not Churches plāted in the new couenāt, & therfore none at al for Chriſtiās to be mēbers of. And heerabouts he trauerſeth much ground, as if he would meete me, but neuer walketh that way, which it was likely I would come.
            14 His demaund concerning the Popiſh Church, whether we be ſchiſmatiques for departing from that, is friuolous,The Popish Church no Church of God. for that is fallen from the foundation, and hath no knitting with Chriſt, hauing denyed the faith. Alſo the decree of God touching his forſaking of her, is now for a good time gone out againſt her,2 King. 17. Ier. 3.3. as cleerely as in times paſt againſt the Iſraelites, and the one is no more within the couenant and protection of the Lord, than the other. Touching that he ſaith, that To denie Christes diſcipline and gouernment, is to denie Chriſt, he ſaith truth. But concerning the queſtion in hand, he beggeth thereby that he ſhall neuer get. For vnleſſe he will ſay, and ſo can proue, that what congregation ſoeuer faileth or is reſtrained, ſo as it doth not execute all eccleſiaſticall cenſures, or cleereth not the ſacraments from all offences to the communicants, the ſame denieth Chriſt, and falleth from the foundation: except (I ſay) he can proue this, he hath nothing againſt vs towards the denying of Chriſt: nor yet to proue, that particular members may ſeparate themſelues from ſuch a Church, which he maketh you beleeue,
                  Pag. 10.15. to be a matter moſt euident. Yet I muſt anſwere him, VVhether if the Church will ioyne in the Sacrament with an vnlawfull Miniſter, a VVolfe, a hireling, a theefe, thoſe amongſt them that knowe and can proue him ſuch a one,
               That the godly may not depart the Communion for the ſinne of the Miniſter. 
               may withdraw themſelues? That the ſinne & corruption of the Miniſter is no cauſe for the godly to withdraw frō the Sacramēt, it followeth in good proportion to be cō
               cluded frō that which hath bin hitherto diſputed of the mēbers of a Church in generall.1. Sam. 2.12.15.16.17.18.19.20.21. And heere moreouer for direct confirmation, the examples of Ely and his Sonnes may ſuffice vs: with whom it was lawful for the people to

ſacrifice and receiue ſpirituall bleſsings by their hande, though their liues were moſt offenſiue, and namely the ſonnes notoriouſly wicked. So I ſay of the Scribes and Phariſees, whome it was lawfull to heare.
                  Matth. 23.2.3. Nowe if hee meane by theeues, ſuch as leade not in by the doore Chriſt, hee doeth iniurie, and dealeth captiouſly: for they that gather not vnto Chriſt,
                  Iohn· 10.4.5. but haue ſtrange voyces, which the ſheepe acknowledge not, thoſe are rather the great antichriſtian deuourers, which bring another foundation beſides Chriſt Ieſus, and are not to be inrolled with ſuch as teach the doctrine of faith truly. But heere yet I muſte inſiſt a little, becauſe I knowe that Browne in a certaine place excepteth two thinges agaynſt this example of Elie his ſonnes: One,Anſvvere to M. C. pag. 66. 
               That the better ſort of the people did withdrawe themſelues from the Sacrifices, becauſe of their ſinne, and the other is, That Elie miniſtred and not his ſonnes, when Elkanah and his wiues came to offer. I anſwere. Whereas the text doeth teſtifie, ſaying Therefore the ſinne of the young men was verie great before the Lorde: for men abhorred the offeringes of the Lorde.
               
                  Sam. 2.17. It giueth not the leaſt ſhewe of arguing, that there was nowe no offering of the Lord, for the faithfull ſort to come vnto (for the flat contrarie is auouched) nor yet that anie as in duetie, did abſtaine from the Sacrifices (for then alſo by the whole courſe of Brownes doctrine, Elkanah, Hannah, and Samuel, in not abſtaining, did partake with the ſinnes of the Prieſtes, and were become wicked with them, yea and ſo conſequently their ſacrifices ſhould haue bene accurſed vnto them, ſo farre ſhould they haue bene from bringing ſuch a bleſsing as they did) but when it is ſayde, The people abhorred the offering of the Lorde, becauſe of the ſinne of the young men: what is it? but to aggrauate the ſinne of the Prieſtes, and ſhewe the extent of their iniquitie, to reache euen to the making of the people thus to ſinne. This is confirmed by Elie his woordes, when rebuking his ſonnes,
                  Cap. 2.24. hee ſayeth thus (according to Tremelius tranſlation) Doe not ſo my ſonnes: for this is no good

report which I heare, that you turne away the people of the Lord. And this is that ſinne,2. Sam. 12.14. Iſai. 52.5. Ezech. 36.20. Rom. 2.24. which the woorde often opbraydeth vnto looſe profeſſours, that they make the name of God euill ſpoken of for their ſakes. Nowe, that he ſaieth, touching Elies offering the ſacrifices, and not his ſonnes, is miſerablie deſtitute of all probabilitie. For firſt the text ſayeth, Elkanah and his wife went vp out of his citie euerie yeere,
               1. Sam. 1.1.2.3. 
               to worſhippe and to ſacrifice vnto the Lorde of hoſtes in Shiloh, where were the two ſonnes of Elie, Hophni, and Phinehas, Priestes of the Lorde. If theſe bee mentioned for Prieſtes of the Lorde in Shiloh, who ſhoulde doubt that they offered the ſacrifices of the people that thither repared for that end, and ſo of Elkanah amongſt the reſt? And that olde Eli laboured not in thoſe dayes, in the buſineſſe of the ſacrifices, it ſeemeth verie probable, in that hee was not able, being about nintie yeeres olde, for the bodily labour thereof, to offer the ſacrifices, and in which regarde, the Prieſtes had leaue to ceaſe at fiftie yeeres of their age. Hee ſate (I graunt) in the Temple, ſawe the ſeruices of the Lorde perfourmed, and bleſſed likewiſe the people, but that he offered the ſacrifices, and eſpecially without his ſonnes, by no lawfull vſe of the text it can be profered.
            16 Hitherto your leader hath added his poore furniture, to helpe you to prooue, that particular members may depart from the bodie of the Congregation for default of ſeparating the vnworthie. Now he cōmeth to bring your proofes in proportion, that he might make you ſtill beleeue, hee doeth not ſeduce you. Wherein though I coulde willinglye forbeare him, in reſpect that his copie hath deceyued him, yet I ſuppoſe it may be good for him, that his inſolent behauiour haue ſome repreſsing. The ſix places of Scripture which you quote, I ſayde doe concerne our priuate conuerſation and behauiour towardes inordinate brethren, and haue not a ſyllable touching our dealings in publike Church meetings and exerciſes. Here he thinking me to lie wide open, runneth violently

vpon me, with the place of the Corinths, to diſpatch mee at a blowe: but therein dooing, the euill ſpirite of malice and reuenge that ſet him on, blinded his iudgement, that hee could not ſee howe ſure a warde I had, till hee ranne his owne hande vpon the poynt thereof. For I ſaid not (as hee telleth you) that none of thoſe places haue anie thing concerning publique Church meetings, and exerciſes: but my ſpeeche was, that they had not anye thing touching our dealinges in publique Church meetings and exerciſes. Wherein, if your iudgement bee ſo weake, that as yet you perceyue no difference, call to minde the queſtion, which is, whether particular members of a Church, may depart or withdrawe themſelues from that bodie, if they knowe any vnworthie ones at the Lordes table. You point mee to Scriptures to prooue they ought. I aunſwere, that thoſe Scriptures giue vs rules concerning our priuate conuerſation, and touch not our dealinges in the Church. Nowe I would aske you, whetherto you referre this worde our? If you referre it to the whole bodie of the Church, then you chaunge the queſtion, and flee your ground: but if it be ſuffered to haue the naturall relation to particular members, then may you ſee, that your leader hath not a little abuſed you. If out of the laſt verſe of the chapter (for it was quoted thus. 1. Cor. 5.9.10.11.12 13.) he ſhall yet ſtriue to ſaue himſelfe in this maner, becauſe this place requireth the church to excommunicate the inceſtuous, which muſt be done by voyces and conſent of the particular members, therefore it ſpeaketh of particular members dealing in the church. Marke the end, and you ſhal ſee his gaine. The queſtion is, whether particular mēbers may depart frō the church, as before, or no. This place (you ſay) inferreth ſome dealing of particular mēbers in the Church. I grāt it, what ſhal you get by that? You wil ſay this, that I thē haue vniuſtly denied this place to haue any thing concerning particular mēbers dealing in the Church. If I haue denied any thing that might hinder you to find the truth, thē haue I delt vniuſtly. But we

ſee that by your gaine. For if by this obtained, your cauſe be neuer the better, he hath fed you then with woordes, and made you neuer the fatter. Thus you muſt applie it to the queſtion, if you will endeuour to make gaine of it: If this place warrant particular members to haue dealing in the Church, then it warranteth them to ſeparate themſelues in the caſe aforeſayde, and ſo doe you not ſee yron and flaxe knitte together of a knotte? Is ſome dealing all dealings? Will your leader neuer vnlearne ſo groſſe a fallation? You ſee nowe if I let you haue this, it doeth you no good, and for my part I will none of it, it can pleaſure mee nothing. If you aske why then I made my negation ſo generall. I aunſwere firſt, that in denying thoſe places to concerne particular members in the Church, I did it not to interuert or hinder the truth, as nowe appeareth. Secondly, it is the lawfull libertie of any man, in reaſoning to vſe chaunge of wordes, ſo that our ſenſe be kept, which ſhall eaſily bee (eſpecially both ſides hauing ſounde hearts to ſeeke the trueth) If the queſtion ſtil be made the line to meaſure them by. and therefore whereas I ſaide thoſe Scriptures touch not our dealings in the Church, what man of honeſt minde, or that had anye ſparke of trueth left in him (conſidering the queſtion) woulde not haue vnderſtoode by that worde (dealings) our tarying or departing from the Lordes Table at the ſight of the vnworthie? Salomon ſayeth,
                  Prou. 14.1. 
               The wiſedome of the wiſe, is to vnderſtande his way, but the fooliſhneſſe of fooles is vnto deceite.
            
            17 The reſt of the places you quoted to proue your purpoſe, are not according to the copie you gaue him,The true ſenſe of thoſe ſcriptures vvhich commonly the Brovvniſts cite to proue their ſeparation from the communion. but theſe. 2. Theſ. 3.14. 2. Tim. 3.1.2.3.4.5. Ro. 16.17.18. Epheſ. 5.7.8. 1. Theſ. 5.21.22. and all theſe (I ſaye, with that to the Corinthians ſpoken off before, (the queſtion beeing rightly conſidered and taken) make nothing for you. For in as much as any of them concerne our behauior in publike, ſo much do they appoint

the dueties of particular mēbers, towards others ioyntly, but nothing of their owne departing or tarying ſeparately. Againe whatſoeuer any of them ſay of ſeparating to bee practiſed of particular members, there can they not bee vnderſtood of Church meetings, but of priuate conuerſatiō. But to iumble theſe things together,A dicto ſecundū quid ad. ſimpl. without diſcerning, and (as it were) to liue in that groſſe ſophiſtication, of taking all reſpects for ſome, is (as it ſeemeth) your leaders ioy.
            18 But hee chargeth mee (by ſo vnderſtanding thoſe places) with ſuch ſeditious doctrine,
                  Pag. 12.13. as may bring in rebellion againſt Magiſtrates, put downe acquaintances of men familiarly in marriage, looſe al bonds of obedience in children and ſeruantes, and cut off all entercourſe of marchandize, and bargaining with profeſſors. Theſe will proue but ſuch l
                  •
               wde ſoundings, as an empty barrell euer yeeldeth. Paul aduertiſeth Timothie,
               2. Tim 3.1.2.3.4.5. 
               that in the laſt dayes ſhould come perillous times, wherein men ſhould bee louers of themſelues, couetous, vainglorious, proud, &c. hauing a forme of godlines, but denying the face of it, and that therefore he ſhould auoyde ſuch. Iohn ſayth to the elect Lady:
                  Ver. 10. 
               If any man come vnto you, and bring not this doctrine, receiue him not to houſe, neither bid him Godſpeede. By which Scriptures you ſee particular perſons by name warranted to auoyde priuate conuerſation with inordinate profeſſours. This place alſo to the Corinthes, though it be written to al the Church,1. Cor. 5.9.10.11.12. yet is it concerning particular mens practiſe, in their ſeparate and priuate places and behauiour. And though your leader will bee loath to looſe his place aboue many others,Title againſt par. prea. and hired lectures. Anſw. to M. C. Pag 13. hecauſe hee hath ſtood ſo much heretofore vpon deniall of this which I affirme thereof, yet hath hee nowe to thinke, that neither the auncientie of his error, nor the inconuenience hee dreameth of, can yeelde him ſtrength inough to keepe it. The inconuenience ſhall bee met withall afterward. Here I will ſhewe the reaſons of my iudgement out of the place.
                  Ver. 9. 
               I wrote vnto you (ſayth Paul) in an Epiſtle, that you ſhoulde not company together with

fornicators.
               Br. great place, in the Epiſt. to the Cor. diſcuſſed This verſe you ſee, is of ſhedding, or ſorting out our company. Then followeth, and not altogether with the fornicators of this worlde, or with the couetous, or with extortioners, or with idolaters, for then you muſt goe out of the world. But nowe I haue written vnto you, that you company not together: If any that is called a brother be a fornicator, or couetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with ſuch a one eate not. In theſe verſes wee are directed both what perſons to ſhunne, and alſo in what conuerſation or company. In appoynting the perſons, hee excepteth for thoſe that were not as yet come to religion,
                  Ver. 10. and ſetteth downe this rule to hold in all thoſe, that are counted brethren in the Church. Of his exception hee rendreth two reaſons, firſt, becauſe the number of thoſe that profeſſed not Chriſt, was then ſo great, as they could not auoyde them and liue in the worlde. Secondly,
                  Ver. 12. becauſe Chriſtians are not charged with their cenſuring, but they are reſerued to Gods iudgement. Why brethren are ſubiect to thoſe priuate cenſures (as I may ſpeake) he giueth this reaſon, becauſe we ought to looke into, and iudge one of another. The conuerſation is ſet out by one kinde named for all, to witte, eating of meate, which is alwayes a very notable marke and fruite of familiaritie. I know your leader would haue you vnderſtand this, of eating bread at the Lordes table onely, but the 10. verſe deliuereth the whole text from this iniury. For if the Apoſtle would haue had them taken his meaning in this place to be directly of their meeting & companying at the Lordes Table (as you take it) what needed hee to haue excepted thoſe that were out of the Church, and no brethren, with whō the Church neither had, nor might haue company at the Lordes Table. Yea how abſurdly had he reaſoned, in ſaying thus (for then you muſt go out of the world) as though he ſhould ſay: if you altogether debar the wicked that are without the Church, from your company at the Lordes table, then may you as well get out of the worlde, for you cannot liue in it.

When your leader is ſo groſſely ouerſhot in ſuch playne points, it lieth you vppon carefully to conſider, whether the hand of God be vpon him in as heauy a iudgment, as fell vpon Elymas the ſorcerer, for peruerting the ſtraight wayes of the Lorde. By this that is ſayd,
                  Act. 13.10.11. I truſt it is cleere ynough, that the doctrine which he calleth ſo ſeditious, is not mine, but the Lords, and therefore if it haue any ſuch dangerous conſequences, as your replier reckoneth you ſee that his accuſation muſt reach higher then mee. But (alas) how doth it grieue me in your behalfe, yours (I meane) with the reſt of your company? I would (if it pleaſed God) that you knewe, or could diſcerne rightly, with what ſorowe I am ſundry times affected for you when I conſider (which I doe often) what numbers (as I heare of you) whereof many haue otherwiſe good partes in them, are ſo intollerably abuſed and ouer caryed by that wretched man. For (euen in this) doth it follow (thinke you) that if wee tye our ſelues to this rule of ſorting our company in priuate conuerſation, that then the knot of marriage ſhould bee looſed, the bondes of obedience broken and outward acquaintances quite ſhaken of &c. Is there no meane betwixt theſe two extremities, but that we muſt be either vnnatural or careleſſe? Surely if we ſhould take this courſe in all the Scriptures, wee ſhould make a ſtrange religion by and by; I meane if we receiue ſome generall ſayings of the Scripture, without their peculiar exceptions and declarations in other places. As for example. Thou ſhalt doe no manner worke on the ſeuenth day, and thou ſhalt not kill: what ſhould the ſeruice and ceremonies doe in the Church, or the Magiſtrate in the common wealth, if theſe bee not limitted and declared by other ſpecial places and exceptions? And if you grant me this, that places are to be compared with places, and generals declared & vnderſtood by ſpecials, why thē ſhal you ſee this knot ſone vntied, or rather that ther was no knot nor difficultie, as your leader hath miſlead you. For that thoſe places of diſſorting our ſelues frō the wicked,

make nothing againſt obedience to Magiſtrates, wee haue Matt. 22.21. Rom. 13.1.2. with diuers others to declare them. Againe, that they debarre no dueties in marriage. 1. Cor. 7.3.4.5.12.13. with many other places that you knowe doe warrant vs.1. Pet. 2.12.13.14.15.16.17.18.19.20.21.22.23.24.25. chap. 3.1.2.3. ad 7. Matth. 5.31.32. Mark. 10.6.7.8. Epheſ. 5.22. &c. col. 3.18 &c. Eph. 6. 1.2 &c. Tit. 2.4.5. 1. cor. 7.21. The like alſo may bee ſayde of children to parents, and in the reſt. So that then, conferring theſe places together, we ſee flatly, that as on the one ſide, we are bound generally to ſhun priuate conuerſation with vngodly ones: ſo on the other ſide, we muſt neceſſarily obſerue withall, whatſoeuer ſpeciall dueties are to bee required at our handes by any one. And thus at length it will fall out, being as from both ſides reſolued, that touching Magiſtrates, parentes, maried folkes, and maſters, the general prohibitions of not eating, nor keeping company, muſt bee vnderſtood of ſhunning the malice of ſinne and ſeducing, yea that our doings muſt be with a kind of mourning, and afflictiō for their ſakes, but not forbidding neceſſary dueties, which other bonds of commandements, doe ſtraitly bind vs to. Touching other acquaintances and dealing with brethren, thoſe prohibitions reach not beyond their inward familiaritie, & delightful accompanying, which is euer ſtained with fowle tolerations and neglect of Chriſtian reprehenſions. And therefore haue we for theſe caſes other golden rules alſo to guide vs by.2. Theſ. 3.14.15. When as Saint Paul ſayth: If any man obey not this our ſaying in this letter, note him & haue no companie with him, that hee may bee aſhamed, yet count him not as an enemy, but admoniſh him as a brother. Wee muſt ſo auoyde his company, as hee may not finde want of loue and brotherly kindnes in vs, but onely a chiefe loue of vertue, that thereby he may take ſhame at his ſinne. To the ſame purpoſe ſayth hee in another place. Let no man deceiue you with vaine woordes, for ſuch thinges commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of diſobedience:
               
                  Etheſ 5.6.7.11. 
               Bee not therefore companions with them. Likewiſe a litle after. And haue no felowſhip with the vnfruitefull woorkes of darkenes, but euen reproue them rather. This conferring and reſoluing of places

together, if your leader had grace to vſe, hauing alſo vngorged himſelfe of that preiudice, whereby now his taſte is made ſo vnſincere in al things, you may ſee that as in theſe poynts, there is no ſuch danger as he talked of, ſo neither in the great queſtion betwixt vs of ioyning with the Church, at the Lords Table where the vnworthy ones are. For the keeping of the bond of vnity in the Church,Epheſ. 4.1.2.3. &c. to the end of the 16. Heb. 10.25. Iud. 19.
                hath an expreſſe lawe and charge, which no generall wordes of other places, much leſſe prepoſterous zeale, can diſpence withall, or take away.
            19 It ſeemeth to mee by a ſpeech in his 7. Page, that he ſecretly giueth you this anſwere for that, namely if the Church at any time ſeparate not the vnworthy, or cannot doe it, it is thereby fallen from the couenant of life,Alſo pag. 3. and ceaſeth to bee a Church of Chriſt, ſo that you may ſafely goe from them I will not yet ſay much of this matter, I had rather the author woulde recant it (if it might pleaſe God,) then that I or any other ſhould ſtand to cō
               fute ſo groſſe an error: for if he hold, that obedience and holy life are cauſes of our iuſtification, and whereby we enioy the couenant of life, and not tokens or fruites only, his caſe is worſe, then that hee can truely enioy the name of a Chriſtian.
            20 The reſt of his 11.12. and 13. pages, ſhall receiue this anſwere: it ſeemeth the author of them was not wel in his wittes, but malice had made him as thoſe in Bedlem, that talke quite out of order and ſenſe. For I pray you, taketh hee not vppon him there to proue out of your quotations, that wee are warranted and commanded to depart from the communion, where the vnworthy is not ſeparated (for I had denied that thoſe Scriptures intended any ſuch thing. Nowe that wherein he occupieth him-ſelfe, in ſtead thereof, is to prooue (not without ſome prophane abuſe of the Scriptures) by a ſort of fooliſh ſyllogiſmes, that haue neuer a true aſſumption, that I am herein an heretique; the queſtion in the meane time, which ſhould bring forth that conſequence,

lying altogether vnprooued: the gaine that hee ſhall get by it, is, that hee loſt the vantage of ſo much time, and hath put himſelfe for a laughing ſtocke to all that ſhall read his writing. I ſpeake not of his inward and higher reckonings. I pray God bee mercifull vnto him in them for his Chriſts ſake. As for me, I will not anſwere a foole according to his fooliſhnes. Yet there is one thing which in the middeſt of his rage againſt me, hee vttereth, whereof I muſt admoniſh you.
                  Pag. 13. 
               The Sacrament of the Lordes Supper (ſaith he) is a Sacrament of order, or orderly communion: and addeth,Orderly communicating is not of the eſſence of the Sacrament. 
               that order or orderly communion is the very fourme, matter, manner or eſſence, and nature thereof. As he lighteth here vppon popiſh phraſes, ſo you are to feare him in ſubſtaunce: his diuinitie is ſicke to the death,
                  Mat. 26.26.27.28. when he thus defineth the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. The outward matter of this Sacrament is bread and wyne, the four me is the bleſſing and ſeparating of them to that vſe, with their diſtributing to the members of the Church. Orderly communicating, is a fruit or effect of gouernement, and a beautifull ornament to the Sacrament, but nothing either of matter or fourme, and therefore not of the eſſence of the Sacrament. Of his learned vſe of logicke termes, I will here ſay nothing for ſhame, I had much rather to couer his nakednes altogether, if the trueth would ſuffer it. Thus much for refutation of his defence of your quotations. Now I will come to his cauilles at the reaſons, where-with I prooue, that particular members ought to deale no further in this caſe, then by proceſse of admonition. Which wordes if you vnderſtand rightly, and as the queſtion in controuerſie will guide you, (like as afore I haue declared) you ſhall ſee his firſt argument full of vaine words, wherein he ſaith, there is more required of particular members then admonition, and reckoneth vp mourning, lamentation, prayers, &c. which thing, are nothing at all in queſtion betwixt vs. For onely this is betwixt you and mee (and which hee bringeth here in the laſt place) you ſay particular members

may depart from the Lordes Table, for the preſence of the wicked thereat, I reaſon againſt you negatiuely, and ſhewe what dueties are required of one toward another by order of diſcipline, and beyond which wee haue no commandement from God,See the 6. Section. whereby I exclude not thoſe thinges which are not at all in queſtion, but that which you hold in queſtion againſt mee. If you had brought mee to a reaſonable aduerſary wee ſhould neuer haue ſpent time in ſuch friuolous cauillings.
            22 Well, at length (I trowe) hee falleth cloſe to the queſtion, and will proue euen out of thoſe places that I alledge for the vnitie and knitting together of this body, that ſame ſeparation of the members, which is here in controuerſie. And thus he diſputeth. What places enforce an outwarde vniting in the Sacrament with the members of Christs body only, the ſame inforce a deuyding or refraining in the Sacraments, from thoſe that outwardly are manifeſt to bee no members of his body: But all theſe places enforce ſuch an outward vniting with members onely: Therefore they inforce a refrayning and diuiding in the Sacrament from open wretches, which are knowne to be: no members. I may graunt you this argument in ſome ſort, and yet you are as neere your purpoſe, as you were at the firſt. For if hee vnderſtand by deuiding and reframing, the action of the whole body of the Church, then is it that, which they ought ioyntly to execute againſt the vnworthy, and that is nothing to the queſtion: but if hee meane, this thoſe places which command an vniting in the Sacrament with the members of Chriſts body only, do by the ſame reaſon command particular mē
               bers to refraine or depart, if any open vnworthy do cō
               municate (which had bene rightly to the purpoſe) then his propoſition is apparantly falſe.
                  Eph. 1.22.23. 1. Cor. 12. eph. 4.1.2.3. &c. to the 17. Col. 2.19. Rom. 12.4.5.6.7.8. And I reaſon againſt him from the ſame places thus. If the members of a Church or ſpirituall body, haue no further promiſe of life and continuaunce in Chriſt, then as they (like the members of a naturall body) continue in the vnitie of the ſame Church or Spirituall body, then it followeth neceſſarylie,

that what members ſo euer, ſeparate themſelues from their ſpirituall body or Church, the ſame doe ſeparate them-ſelues from the life of Christ thereby: But the firſt is true, and infallibly prooued, by thoſe places I quoted (whereas vnitie and holding together of the members, is made the eſsentiall fourme of the body.
               
                  Pag. 15.) Therefore the latter followeth thereof.
            
            23 I ſay, that as corrupt and vnworthy members, can be no cauſe why thoſe that are whole ſhould forſake the body: ſo no open groſſe communicantes, can bee any cauſe, why wee that are faith-full ſhoulde forſake the Church. Your leader makes you beleeue, that you hold not this queſtion. I thinke (in deede) he knoweth not what hee holdeth. But I ſay vnto you, (marke it well, as it lyeth you vppon, for in your ſtanding vppon this poynt, that particular members of a Church may depart or refraine from the Lordes table, if vnworthy ones remaine there vnſeparated, it doeth neceſſarily fall out thereupon, that eyther you holde that particular members may forſake a Church of God, (which now I perceiue your leader renoū
               ceth:) or elſe that the couenant of a Church is broken before God, by the failing of any neceſſary poynt in practiſe: Which implying the couenant to bee helde by woorkes, is the high way to Popery. This thing haue I noted once or twiſe before.
                  Sect. 8. & 19. And here nowe alſo the thirde time, the reader may ſee that I am not ouer haſtie to take him at ſuch aduantage. But withal I truſt there appeareth good hope of victory to this ſide, when as the aduerſary (after much labour to keepe the aduantage thereof) hath nowe flatly forſaken one of his holdes: and that which remaineth for him to flee vnto, is able to kill him with the ſtench thereof, though no man ſhould purſue him any further.
            24 He foloweth the compariſō of mēbers of a natural body, with the members of a Church. And firſt hee ſaith that as euery particular mēber of a body, may ſhake of the rotten,

and yet not forſake the bodie: ſo may euerie particular member of a Church. This is plaine beggerie: for no particular member of a bodie can doe that of it ſelfe, and if it could, his concluſion therby ſhould make but for ſole excommunication, His ſeconde compariſon is thus propounded & applied: As the members of a natural bodie, refuſe to vſe the ſeruice of the rotten ones: ſo ought the members of a ſpirituall bodie, refuſe to communicate in the ſacraments with ſuch. Euery man that conſidereth what I haue ſaid, ſeeth that he fighteth here with his ſhadow, and not with me, for I imploy no ſuch members in any ſeruice. But to cleare his eyes, it may bee, God ſhall make this a medicine, when he ſhal giue him to meditate, that it is quite contrarie to his ordinance in the naturall bodie, for the whole members to forſake their places, or to refuſe to nouriſh themſelues in the vnitie of their bodie, becauſe of ſome rotten ones that doe indaunger them. Neither haue his other comparings, any more worthie thing againſt me, though too much to bewray his owne vnlearnedneſſe. For whereas he eſteemeth that euerie member of a natural bodie withholdeth and keepeth away blood and nouriſhment from the rotten, it is manifeſt that hee is as ignorant in naturall things, as in diuine. For blood commeth plentifully inough to rotten members, ſo long as they are vnſeparated, onely it nouriſheth them not as of olde, but is peruerted by them to the increaſe of their rottenneſſe. Let him follow this veine no longer, if hee haue any wit in his head.
            25 After this, he beareth you in hand, that hee fully ſatisfieth a queſtion, which I ſhould be readie to make in theſe or ſuch like wordes: VVhat if the Church, or the reſt of the bodie, will not withdrawe themſelues from that dead and rotten member neither will caſt it off, what ſhall one member doe? To this he anſwereth, Firſt, That if one member doe caſt it off, the reſt will not be angrie. Which is the ſame begging he vſed euen now. Secondly, that it is a token, the reſt of the members are not ſo liuely, &c. which is a verie colde anſwer.

If he had ſaide, it is a token, the reſt of the members are dead with it, ſo as you may ſafely depart from them, hee had ſatisfied the queſtion. This he would haue you to vnderſtand, but he durſt not vtter it. For it is the faſhion of an heretique, to keepe more poiſon in his heart, than he vttereth with his mouth.
            26 The firſt part of his next point is beggerly. That a member cannot forſake one congregation of Chriſt, & goe to another, without guilt of ſchiſme, and forſaking the bodie of Chriſt, I prooued in my firſt anſwere, which yet remayneth vntouched by him. His obiection that one Congregation is not the whole Church of Chriſt,
               
                  Pag. 16. 
               &c. is an vnlearned cauill. For euery particular Church, touching the knitting together of the members, & partaking with Chriſt the head,1. Cor. 12.27. through that ſame bodily vnitie, is in the ſame ſort to bee conſidered, as the whole Church, and we can no more forſake a particular Church, and yet bee of the whole, than can a finger forſake his hand, and yet be of the bodie. Take heede therefore vnto your ſelfe: braunches broken off doe ſhortly wither, and after that become fit for nothing but for the fire.
            
               
                  Sect. 14.27 His obiection of forſaking the Popiſh Church, I haue anſwered before. The next is a pretie dialogue of woordes, which becauſe hee made it for his owne recreation, I will not hinder him. His oppoſitions are but his owne vnprooued and vnſauerie ſuppoſitions. How truly he chargeth me therein with diuerſe iniquities, let the godlie conſider my writing, and ſo iudge. Whereas he ſoweth the ſeedes of newe queſtions, to drawe in other diſcourſes, I am not one for his toothe, to nouriſhe them.
            28 He would make you beleeue, that hee prooueth our Church a monſtrous and falſe bodie, ſo that you may hold it ſafe to forſake vs, and this he will do out of mine own words, becauſe (forſooth) I confeſſe it may haue vnſound & corrupt members vnſeparated, yea which we are not able to ſeparate. By which reaſon, if you haue a fellō
               
on your finger, which cauſeth mortification therein, if either you wil not, or cannot get it cut off, you are therby a monſtrous & falſe body. But here ought to be no queſtion of deformitie, but of the being of a church. Then he chargeth me to ſay, that it may be a church of God, though it haue the diſcipline and gouernement of Antichriſt, in ſtead of Chriſts, and that I confeſſe, we haue offices, rites orders, &c. after the popiſh inſtitution. I know what I haue ſaid, he is readie to ſnatch before any thing fal to the ground. But nowe vpon good cauſe of the queſtion, this I anſwere freely. It may be a true Church of God,That it may be a true Church of God, though diuerſly corrupted in doctrine and maners. though therein diuerſe rites be corruptly inſtituted, and the cenſures and offices popiſhly caried and ordered. If you doubt that, I will prooue it thus. VVhatſoeuer hath the eſſentiall partes of a Church of God, the ſame muſt needes be confeſſed to be a Church of God: But a Church of ſuch gouernement and orders, may haue the eſſentiall parts of a Church of God. Therefore a Church of ſuch gouernement and orders, may be a true Church of God. The firſt part no man that hath vnderſtanding can doubt of. The ſeconde is alſo manifeſt thus: that whereas there are but two eſſentiall partes of any thing, to witte, matter and fourme: the matter of a Church is Chriſt the heade-corner ſtone, and a people who are as liuing ſtones to bee layde vpon him:
               1. Pet. 2.4.5.6. 
               the fourme, is the comming vnto him, and beeing builded vppon him by faith: It is certaine there may be other wants and deformities, where theſe eſſentiall partes are. Now thoſe deformities and wantes may bee both in pointes of doctrine and practiſe, as may plainely bee prooued by examples of the Churches of God eſtabliſhed in all ages. For the leauen of euill and daungerous pointes of doctrine,1. Cor. 15. ca 6.12.13.14.15.16. &c. Col. 2.11.16.18. let the Churches of the Corinthes about the reſurrection, alſo counting fornication among indifferent thinges, and the Coloſsians, aboute ceremoniall obſeruation of dayes, and abſtinence of meates,
               Gal. ca. 2. ca. 3. ca. 4.
                
               and worſhipping of Angels, teſtifie. Yea let the Churches of Galatia, generallye infected with daungerous doctrine, bee witneſſe. Wantes in pointes of knowledge and

doctrine, appeared manifeſtly to be in the Apoſtles, & the Church at Ieruſalem touching the vocation of the Gentiles.
                  Act. 10.11. cap.
                As for practiſe in gouerning and ordering the Churches, if we ſearch the times, we ſhall eaſily find both deformities, & diſabilities or wantes, yea euen in the holſome cenſures of the Church, which are here in queſtion.1. Cor. 11.20. &c
                The Corinthians vnreuerent and ſcandalous (yea almoſt prophane) comming to the Lordes table, is an example of a foule and corrupt behauiour of a Church. Of wants and diſabilities in the practiſe of Church gouernment, let vs marke whether they may not be found, euen in ſome Church, which that moſt painefull Apoſtle Saint Paule, laboured ſo plentifully to make perfect: conſider (I ſay) diligently, and you ſhall finde that ſame famous Church of Rome (where not long after Paule died for the teſtimonie of Chriſt,
                  Philip. 1.15.16.) ſo weake and defectiue, in duties of gouernment, as that they could not ſeparate from them ſuch as preached Chriſt contentiouſly, and with ſo ſpitefull minds againſt Paule, as tended to the cutting off of ſo good and faithfull a guide from amongeſt them. You will not ſay, they deſerued it not, nor yet that the better ſort woulde not doe it, for then alſo their faulte was worſe. You cannot ſay, they knewe it not, or it was ſecrete, for Paule was in priſon, ſo as the knowledge therof coulde not come to him, but by the information of brethren:
                  Cap. 2.20.21. yea it is manifeſt by the ſame Epiſtle, that the greater number of that Church, did corruptly demeane and carrie themſelues in the ſame. Againe, that peſtilent chaire of ambitious vſurpation ouer the aſſemblies, was crept into the Church, whereof Saint Iohn maketh mention in theſe wordes.3. Iohn. 9.10. 
               I wrote vnto the Church, but Diotrephes, who ſeeketh the preheminēce among them, receyueth vs not, wherefore if I come, I wil declare his deedes which he doeth pratling againſt vs,
               Diſcipline as much depraued in the Church where Diotrephes was, as in the Churches of England. 
               with ambitious wordes, and not therewith content, neither himſelfe receyueth the brethren, but forbiddeth them that would, and caſteth them out of the Church. Firſt here is as much deprauation of diſcipline, as Browne can tell

vs of. Secondly it is plaine, that the ſame Church, remained then vnable to remedie it: which the Apoſtle ſignifieth, by purpoſing a time to come & rebuke him, which needed not (if the Church according to his demerite, could haue chaſtened him.) Thirdly, hee yet intituleth them the Church, whereby all men may ſee, the Apoſtle was farre frō Brownes mind. For he neither inſinuateth, that the Church was now diſanulled by ſuch corruption, nor giueth any caueat for men to withdraw or withhold themſelues from ioyning with the ſame, which certainly had bene neceſſarie, both for that time preſent, and all poſterities enſuing. Conſider likewiſe, what I haue before obſerued vpon the 11. to the Cor. in the 11. ſect. So that turne you which way you will, this ſhall bee ſufficiently proued alwayes, that a Church, that is to ſay, an aſſembly conſiſting of the eſſentiall partes of a Church of God, may bee chargeable of diuerſe other wantes and deformities both in doctrine & gouernment, which being ſo, the other bulwarke alſo which your leader had builded for you, to perſwade you boldly to go from vs, is beaten downe to the ground: namely that the failing of any neceſſarie point in the publique practiſe of gouernement, breaketh the couenant of a Church. Yeld your ſelfe therfore, for here muſt you needes be taken.
            22 But nowe let vs come to applie this ſame generall queſtion to our particular congregation,The Church of England hath the eſſentiall parts of a church of God. which if it bee tried in the eſſentiall parts aforſaid, ſhall vndoubtedly be found a Church of God, howſoeuer in ſome other things impure and defectiue. He excepteth (but againſt his owne knowledge & cōſcience,Pag. 17.) that we haue no power nor order in vſe, to ſeparate the vnworthy. Firſt this is no way of the eſſence of a Church, as I ſhall proue. Alſo I haue ſaide before, that we both may, and doe diſcerne of the Communicants, and debarre the vnworthie. And I brought places of his owne writings that teſtifie the ſame. If hee doubt whether wee doe it, let him inquire. If the reader woulde ſee, where the lawe doeth warrant it, let him

reade at the beginning of the miniſtration of the Communion in the Church bookes,In the defence of the Admonition to the followers of Browne. ſect 7. & there ſhall he ſee it. His ſophiſticall fetch in making this diſcipline all one with Chriſts power & gouernment, is bowlted out in another place. To holde the church of Englande to bee without Chriſts diſcipline, is they vnaduiſednes of him that putteth all vpon the ſpurre, and neuer looketh at his way. To diſcerne the worthy and vnworthy in the aſſemblies: to admoniſh the inordinate, to ſuſpend & finally excommunicate the vnruly ones (which is the diſcipline wherof our queſtion is) all men know the church of England by law profeſſeth and dayly practiſeth: therefore it cannot bee ſaid to be without the very diſcipline of Chriſt: this very diſcipline (I ſay as touching all the parts and duties of cenſuring, although not ordered & adminiſtred by ſuch a courſe as the worde appointeth. Which if he conſider better,The Church of England not without the diſcipline: but doth adminiſter the ſame in a corrupt courſe. hee may more truely hereafter affirme, that the church of England adminiſtreth the diſcipline corruptly, then that it wanteth the ſame: & that the outward forme and ordering of the diſcipline is popiſh, but not the ſubſtāce ſo. How much we labor according to our places, to recouer that libertie the word giueth to euery cōgregation, for executing the diſcipline, as it is vnpoſsible for you to report of it, that come not among vs: ſo it is a ſhame for him to define of it, that otherwiſe knoweth vs not.
            30 But then he woulde haue vs crie out by name againſt thoſe that reſtraine vs, yea though it cost vs our liues. I anſwer. All men in this cannot be tied to one rule for the maner of proceeding, neither in any other caſe of ſuffering for the truth: but euery one is to be left (brotherly ſtirrings vp excepted) to the particular preparations and thruſting forth of the ſpirit. Your leader therefore, hauing ſuch a particular feeling of ſo great a charge and bond of duty, to venture his liuing & life in this caſe (and ſpecially holding the diſcipline ſo deare aboue vs, as he pretendeth) cannot keepe backe himſelfe in this caſe, but with ranke cowardlineſſe, and being guiltie of betraying the good

cauſe: yea who ought to go before all others in ſuffering for this reformation, but hee onely that pretendeth to holde the ſame at a higher price, and to ſeeke for it with a more feruent zeale than all others? But we haue experience ſufficient of him, what great things he hath ſuffred, and how. And this we know, whatſoeuer he diſcourſeth otherwhere of his fugitiue life, that although ſome others haue bene hanged for his hereſies, he hath not only bene contented to let them go without his companie, but comming alſo to ſome triall of his courage before authoritie, there was not onely no ſhew of that Heroical ſpirit, which he woulde haue you ſee in his writings, but contrariwiſe ſhifting anſweres, with ſubtill reſeruations, ſhamefull and diſorder like giuing backe from the trueth it ſelfe, and finally a moſt hypocriticall ſubſcription, leaſt hee ſhoulde haue felt affliction in the leaſt of his fingers.See the defence of my Admonition. Sect. 13. Of any of theſe (if you doubt) I will bee readie to ſhewe you prooues.
            31 In my firſt anſwere, I ſhewed you the right vnderſtanding of that compariſon of the leauen which S. Paule vſeth in the 1. to the Cor. 5. cap. that you might ſee,The compariſon of leauen with the wicked in a congregation diſcuſſed. if that place (ſo commonly obiected of your leader to warrant your ſeparating from our aſſemblies) be but rightly vnderſtoode, it quickeneth our care, and diligent indeuours to remoue corruptions, but teacheth no man to forſake his Church. I gaue you to vnderſtande, that the compariſon is there of qualitie, not of quantitie. I ſpeake not of like force and like nature, without regarde of like woorking. I knowe we conſider of the natures of things by their effects, and therefore I ſaide alſo, that Paule putteth vs in minde of the effect of leauen. The leauen in ſowring the meale wherwith it is mingled, and the vngodly in corrupting thoſe with whom they keepe companie, haue herein both a like nature, yea and their effectes when they doe come to paſſe, are both alike. For it is true, that when the wicked drawe others after them to become alſo of euill conuerſation, that before

were not ſo, the effect is like to the ſowring of the meale, which before was not ſo: but now the meaſure of working of the one, and of the other, is not the ſame in both ſubiects. Which that I may helpe you the better to vnderſtand, conſider that the matter ſubiect to the ſowring of the leauen is meale, a thing altogether and wholy diſpoſed to receiue the impreſsion thereof without reſiſtance. But the matter whereon the wicked doe worke (in this compariſon is a company conſiſting of two ſorts of men, contrarily diſpoſed and tempered, the one apt to be infected, & the other hauing a ſupernatural power to hold out their contagion. So that though the ſowring that the one maketh, & the corrupting that the other worketh, be alike, yet are they not equal. For of the meale, all is infected, but not all of ſuch a cōpanie, and ſo is it in the compariſon that I gaue you. By the ſalt all the liquor is ſeaſoned, but ſo is not alwayes a wicked company by two or three righteous men cōuerted. Againe, the leauen in one night ſo wreth the meal wherwith it is mingled, you dare not ſay, that the caſe is the ſame with a whole cōgregation: and yet you ſay more, if you hold that by warrant of this ſcripture, you muſt depart frō the ſacrament, where you ſee vnworthy ones admitted, for ſo you account the whole congregation to be leauened, that is vnſanctified, in a moment. But I muſt further remēber you, that as in diuers places, the ſcripture ſpeaketh of leauen in the ill part: ſo our Sauiour Chriſt propoundeth a ſimilitude by the ſame in the good part.
                  Matt. 13.33. Which if you applie and vrge, as farre foorth as you haue done this, you muſt ſay, that where faith & regeneration by the goſpel is once begun, there do al become faithful & renued: euen as of 3. pecks of meale, all becommeth leuened. Which if you doe ſay, all the worlde will crie ſhame of you. If you feare ſo to abuſe this place, why feare you not alſo in the other? Moreouer, whereas your leader teacheth you to applie theſe woordes of Saint Paule: A little leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe, as though the Apoſtle had

giuen you to vnderſtande thereby, that one knowne, and ſo proued a wicked man, remayning vnſeparated in a Church, vnſanctifieth the whole, and bringeth a nullity vpon it, hee doeth too groſſely and ſhamefully abuſe, miſcary and ſeduce you. For by leauening Paul meant corrupting them with euill manners.
                  Chap. 5.
                     •
                  . Like as to the Galathians, hee meaneth by the ſame ſpeech, the corrupting of that Church with falſe doctrine, and not the diſanulling of either. So that if God haue yet left you the vnderſtanding to make difference betweene ſicke and dead, and that which is vnpure, and that which is not nowe at all, your leader can no longer miſleade you in this poynt. For if hee dare auouch it, that whatſoeuer congregation is corrupt either in manners or doctrine, the ſame is not to bee reputed, or ioyned with, as a Church of God, we can ſoundly, and ſo may ſafely proue and denounce him for a Donatiſt, and not worthy to liue in any land of Chriſtian gouernement. His vnſatiſfied dalyance with my comparing of ſalt with the righteous, argueth the man, either ſo purſued by the hande of God, that whileſt hee controlleth all men, himſelfe is vtterly ſpoyled of vnderſtanding, or elſe of ſo reprobate a mynde, that hee wilfully cloſeth his eyes, and ſtoppeth his eares at thoſe thinges that haue ſpeciall force to affect the ſenſes to the reformation of his iudgement. And after that hee hath altogether thus abuſed you in the ſcope of my compariſon, leaſt hee ſhould leaue you any light at all in it, hee takes it to his owne ſtithie, and hammers it a newe, for ſo hee preſumeth it ſhalbe fit for the ſchollers of his learning. The Lorde giue you eyes to ſee, and a heart to abhorre his moſt dangerous and peſtilent concluſion: for thus hee teacheth you, (euen the ſame doctrine,Browne in 
                     •
                  lat Donatiſme. which right nowe I called Donatiſme) that like as ſweete water intermingled with poyſon, is poyſoned and turned into the nature of poyſon: ſo the notorious wicked openly mingled in one outward Church with the righteous, or the righteous with them, they become one wicked crewe together, euen all

of them poyſoned and infected together. As touching the author of this ſentence, I haue litle hope, as in all the reſt to preuaile ought by my anſwering, onely for your ſakes my deare brethren) that haue not as yet ſounded the deepenes of Satan in him, I will herein alſo lende my labour to weigh out this matter, by the waightes of the Sanctuary. And although my 11. & 28. Sections, do ſufficiently couer him with ſhame and confuſion for this poynt, yet ſhall this bee further alſo euen as the nayle of Iahel, to pearce through the temples of Siſara downe into the earth. Firſt, this his bold compariſon ſeemeth to haue craued at his handes (at the leaſt) ſome one example out of the Scriptures, ſhewing vs when or where the ſpirite of God diſauoweth any Church for the cauſe of ſome notorious wicked ones among them. If I therefore in exemplifying againſt him, ſhall bring a cloud of witneſſes, all of them teſtifiyng, as with one mouth, the flat contrary, I hope I ſhall encloſe the trueth of this cauſe more ſtrongly, then that any wylie or vndermining foxes ſhall bee able to enter in hereafter to violate the ſame.Wicked members of a Church vnſeperated doe not vnſactifie the whole. And to beginne with the Churches, of which, wee haue the life and liuely voyce of our Sauiour Chriſt to teſtifie, and after that, to enquire of the Apoſtles, it may not bee denied me, but that in the Church of Ieruſalem, the Lorde did dwell, and that there were offered the Sacrifices, and performed the rites of his holy worſhippe which he accepted at the handes of his ſeruantes, in the dayes of our Sauiour his comming in the fleſh. Nowe in the outward body of this Church, were corrupt Scribes, ſuperſtitious Phariſes,
               
                  Mat. 3.20. ca. 15.3.4 Luk. 11.4.6. and epicuriſh Sadduces: this laſt ſort denied the reſurrection, and the two former alſo corrupted many thinges in the doctrine, and ſur-charged the Iewiſh Church with importable burdens of traditions, being indeed the ordinary teachers of the people,
                  Mat. 7.29. mar. 1 21.22. ma
                        •
                     . 21.15.33. &c. to the 45 cap. 22.34 35. cap. 23.2.3. &c. Luk. 1.8. Cap. 2 22.37.41. but ſo yet the peſtilent and notorious corrupters of true religion: theſe are in your leaders compariſon to be reſembled by the poyſon: on the other ſide there were, though of ſmaller nūber, that in the middeſt of the ſame congregations,

paid their vowes vnto the Lord in the ſimplicitie of their heart, being in the meane time openly mingled in one outward Church with ſuch vnrighteous ones. Of this ſort we may reckon diuers by name, as Symeon, Zacharias, Marie, Anna, & Elizabeth &c. Here therefore we ſhould conclude, by your leaders rule, that thoſe being the ſweete water and not reſeruing their worſhipping of God & religious ſeruices to ſeparate meetings, but performing them in the congregations of notorious wicked teachers, & very falſely inſtructed people, were now alſo impoyſoned & become one wicked crewe together with the reſt. But I truſt you will confeſſe, that the ſcriptures are contrary, & ſo conſequently, therfore that your leader doth ſeduce you. Again, to be as briefe likewiſe as I may in the reſt.
                  Reue. 2.20. Our ſauiour in his own words deliuered vnto Iohn, that the Church at Thyatira had ſo that wicked Iezabel amongeſt them, as that they were guilty of permitting her to teach & ſeduce the ſeruantes of God, making thē to cōmit fornication, & to eate meats ſacrificed vnto idoles. The Church at Pergamus,
                  Reue. 2.14.15. was charged to haue amongſt thē thoſe that mainteined the doctrine of Baalam, & of the Nicolaitans. Nowe, by your leaders rule, theſe had alſo ſo impoyſoned the reſt, that not one amongſt thē could be ſaid to hold faſt the faith, nor keep the name of Chriſt, nor ſerue him purely, ſo as to be exempted frō the puniſhmēt that ſhould light vpō the reſt,
                  Ver. 13.16.19.24. in the day that the Lord ſhould viſite: but the word of the Lord ſaith directly to the contrary: therefore your leader is found a blaſphemous ſeducer in his cōpariſō. And that wee may touch likewiſe the Apoſtles teſtimonies. When Iude acknowledgeth ſpots in the Church feaſtes,Iude ver. 12.
                are not thoſe ſpots the wicked ones, which he there inueigheth againſt? If then he had approued your leaders doctrine, hee would not haue written them preſeruatiue inſtructions to keepe out their contagion (for ſuch mingling had nowe by his rule impoyſoned all) but it laye vpon his fidelitie to haue told them, that whenſoeuer it ſhould come to paſſe, that they ſo mingled, they ſhoulde

count themſelues no longer Churches of God, but infected and wicked companies euen all the ſort of them. The ſame doe I ſay of the Church, wherein Diotrephes was.3. Iob. 9.10. But thoſe Apoſtles writings are farre contrary hereunto. Therefore your leaders compariſon is abhominable.
                  Iam. 1.2.3.4. chapters.
                I omit to ſpeake of the Churches which Saint Iames, not condemneth, but expoſtulateth with, concerning proud diſpiſers of the poore, vnbrideled pratlers, lippe Chriſtians, enuious men, contentious, prouokers, vncleane liuers &c. which were among them. As alſo the Theſſalonians, who had their inordinate walkers, buſy bodies,1. Theſ. 3.10.11. and ſuch as laboured not duely in their callings. Yea herein their blame being much the greater, that they permitted ſuch amongſt them, hauing bene admoniſhed of that matter once before.
                  Ver. 10. And nowe I come to the Coloſſian, Galathian and Corinthian Churches: theſe had in the middeſt of them ſuch as ſeduced mightily,
                  Col. 2.16.18. Gal. 3.4.5. 1. Cor. 15.12. and preuailed dangerouſly, yea ſome in the fundamental points of religion, and articles of our faith. The Corinthians (touching practiſe,2. Cor. 12.20. chap. 13.2.) had ſuch as ſtirred vp ſtrifes, emulations, anger, contentions, commotions and tumults, ſuch as maried with infidels,2. Cor. 6.14.15.16. Chap. 10.2.7.10.11.12. Chap. 11.3.4.19.20. chap. 11.15. ſuch as with open ſpeaches, depraued Pauls writings: the ſounder ſort being guilty of harkening vnto, and tollerating ſuch, as thus in their vanity and iniquity wrought his diſgrace, and in his, the truths: yea, ſhall I ſay further (not as delighting to blaze the ſinnes and corruptions of theſe Churches, but iuſtly indeuouring to extinguiſh this Church-firebrand, which Satan, in the throng of all our heapes of woes hath hurled amongſt vs.) Beſides, that I haue deliuered in the 11. Section,1. Cor 12.13.14. cap. 6.12.13.14.15.16. &c. ca. 8. it is certaine, the Corinthian Church was outwardly mixt with ſuch as by carnal eloquēce prophaned the temple of God, vſed indifferent thinges with manifeſt offence to the weake, eſteemed fornication amongſt indifferent thinges,1. Cor cap. 10.7.14 15.16.17.18.19 20 21. and committed no obſcure kinde of idolatry in eating at the tables of Idoles meates ſacrificed to the deuill. Nowe then if theſe Churches by al this

mixing, were not become impoiſoned and wicked crewes, but remayned ſtill of reuerend account among the Churches of God, for the righteous ſake, which were not heerein impeached by the wicked, then is your leaders compariſon framed to the great fall of truth, and himſelfe prooued to be a pernitious ſchiſmatike by it. But the Apoſtle cleereth the firſt in many places of thoſe his Epiſtles, ſo as (I hope) no man will aske me particular proofes thereof: therefore the latter muſt neceſſarily be graunted of all ſides. And then by the way, let me obſerue thys one thing: If a few holding the true worſhip of God in ſynceritie, mixed with many,That no man ought to depart from the church of England for the wants or corruptions therein. bearing an outward profeſsion with them, but otherwiſe of verie offenſiue life, yea ſome notoriouſly wicked, and not ſeparated from amongſt them, haue beene notwithſtanding rightly accounted Churches of God for faithfull men comfortably to ioyne vnto, and no man exhorted to withdraw from their aſſemblyes, then is there vtterly no cauſe for you and the reſt, to diſclaime the Churches of England as you do, and to ſeparate your ſelues from vs, for thoſe impurities that are amongſt vs: therefore the fyrſt being true, by moſt of the examples aforeſayd, it remayneth by the latter, that you labour to the Lord for mercy, and ſo returne. Laſtly, in my firſt anſwere touching the ſimilitude of leauen, I inferred this abſurditie, vpon your leaders interpretation thereof, namely, that ſo the Corinthians were vnſanctified, and become no Church of God, becauſe they had not remoued the inceſtuous perſon. Your leader ſalueth that ſore with fyue excuſes in the behalfe of the Corinthians,
                  Pag. 18. but indeede all will not make a plaſter of a haire breadth to couer ſo mortall a wound. Firſt he ſayth, The wickedman remayned not among them, which is apparantly falſe, elſe why did Paule appoynt hys remoue? And touching the ſpace of time, it will be found reaſonable long, if you conſider how long it muſt be, ere Paule being at Philippi, in Macedonia, could heare out of Corinth in Achaia,
               
the vndoubted truth of theyr diſorder. His ſecond excuſe is, They communicated not with him in the Sacraments being knowne. But it is certayne they dyd; elſe why dyd Paule rebuke them for miſcarying themſelues in the matter?
                  
                     •
                  . Cor. 5.2.
            
            And that they knewe of him, there is no reaſon to doubt, firſt, becauſe if the matter had beene vnknowne, and vnconuinced to them, they had beene ſtill free from blame, and (as I ſayd before) Paule had no reaſon to checke their ſecurity. 2. I would aske him, how Paule came to the knowledge of it? by reuelation? no, for he ſayth▪
               
                  Verſe. 1. 
               It is heard for truth, or for certaine. Well, had he it by reports? they muſt come from Corinth, and then muſt you eyther ſay, they were ſome pike-thanke ſpyes, that without cauſe ſo accuſed the Church (which is great reproch to the Apoſtle, in that he ſhould without cauſe, and yet ſo peremptorily, accuſe them of neglect of duty) or elſe confeſſe, that they were of the faithfulleſt brethren, who being not able by themſelues to preuayle with the Church, ſought by this meanes of telling Paule to do it: and then you ſee, the caſe as cleere as may be. 3. Your leader ſayth, He was not conuinced: belike, he had vowed the number of fiue, and ſo this muſt fill vp tale. His 4. excuſe is, That they wanted not Chriſtes power and diſcipline to ſeuer him being in bondage to popiſh diſcipline. I perceiue he is almoſt drawne dry: for what is this to the purpoſe? The Corinthians ſtill communicated with him in the Word and Sacraments, in conſideration whereof (by your leaders iudgement) it had beene lawfull for as many as made conſcience of the matter, to haue forſaken the aſſemblyes, and then it followeth, that eyther you may forſake a true Church of God, (which hold you haue alreadie renounced) or elſe that the Church at Corinth was now diſanulled, become a leauened lumpe, and ſo fallen from Chriſt, which is blaſphemie too abhominable, ſo that (whether you looke forward or backward) heere that foxe,

I meane that Heretick is taken. Fifthly, he ſayth, They refuſed not to ſeuer him, but onely neglected it. Yes, it muſt be ſayd (except when we ſpeake fauourably) that they, in effect, refuſed to ſeuer him, elſe could there haue beene no iuſt complaynt made agaynſt them to the Apoſtle. They refuſed perhaps not in playne words, but in lending the deafe eare to the complaynings, and ſecurely neglecting the meanes of theyr healthie ſtate. Howſoeuer it was, in ſuch ſort it ſeemes to be, as that they that infourmed it to Paule, had no hope elſe to get remedie. But if one ſhould graunt it onely a negligence, in the meane tyme, the forwardeſt, and ſoundeſt brethren, muſt eyther ſtill communicate with him, whome they would remoue, or elſe forſake the aſſemblyes: and ſo I haue you agayne at the ſame poynt you were at before. Thus you ſee, what extremities error bringeth you into, when it is traced out to the end. If you take the comparing of the wicked, with leauen to be in quantitie, that is, that the Apoſtle ſhould vnderſtand the wicked to haue as thorow power and force, to make wicked a whole Church, being ſuffered amongſt them, as hath leauen to make ſowre a whole maſſe of meale, in which it lyeth: then was the Corinthian Church now leauened throughout, and conſequently, become no Church of God, when Paule wrote his firſt Epiſtle.
            32 Of all the other cauils of your leader, at my anſwere to the compariſon of leauen, becauſe (as it ſeemeth) you are little capable of them, and they are eaſily iudged by all that haue ſome giftes of learning (both as concerning my ſpeeche, wherein he hunteth for contrarietie, and alſo my Logick, which he told you would not fadge.) I aunſwere heere no further, but freely giue it vp to the verdict of the godly learned. If your leader haue any thing empaired it, or gotten therein at my handes by his worthy Reply, let hym enioy it for hys gayne, onely this I may tell you in ſecrete, if hys teeth would ſerue hym no better for

to eate his meate, then his Logicke doth to diſcuſſe a queſtion rightly, you muſt feede him with ſpoone-meate, or that which is minced, if you meant to keepe him long aliue: he may freely bid fye of all Logitians, and no reproch to himſelfe therein. The reſt of my anſwere (he ſayth) is nothing but a tedious repetition of former matters. But if you looke vpon it agayne, you ſhall ſee among other things, a playne demonſtration of your ſchiſmaticall, and therefore very dangerous eſtate. Wherein for aſmuch as he hath forſaken to defend you, let it ſtirre you vp to the better and earlyer conſideration of all his other dealings: which if you ſhall do, with humble calling vpon the name of the Lord, I truſt it will pleaſe him in mercie, to reach you his hand of conduct, to bring you out of that vaſt wilderneſſe, wherein you haue loſt your ſelues, and make you to ſee thoſe good things that concerne your ſtable peace, euen in this Church, though poore, diſeaſed, and piteouſly neglected, yet ſuch as the Lord vouchſafeth to beget and nouriſh to himſelfe many children by.
            Depart from the fooliſh man, when thou perceaueſt not in him the lips of knowledge.

                  Prouerbs 14, 7.
               
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Defence of the Admonition to the followers of Browne: made in reply to a raging Libell of Brovvnes, ſent abroade, in ſundrie written copies, againſt the ſame.
            
               WHen I came to the knitting vp of my Confutation of Glouer, (Chriſtian Reader) I iudged it a labour much tending to the benefit of many, to write ſome ſhort admonition to his followers: whereby his vnſoundnes being vrged againe vnto them by rehearſall, and iuſtly aggreeued by the dangerous conſequences, their hearts might be pricked (if it were poſsible) to ſeeke and to embrace the way of truth againe. In the entrie whereof, I conſidered the originall of their euill eſtate to be deriued from a former fountaine, vnto which alſo my labour of cleanſing muſt deſcend, if I would obtaine my deſired fruites thereof. It is not any new thing, but of old obſerued, and witneſſed vnto by the written word, that the Lord,
                  Eccleſ. 7.28.6. petition. Rom. 1.23.24. 2. Theſſ. 2.11. 2. Tim. 3.13. in his righteous iudgement, payeth ſinne with ſinne, and euery degree of declining from his truth, with ſome other deeper downefall vnto Apoſtacie. Therefore, when I beheld and perceiued, all that I could learne, of the fierceſt followers of Glouer, yea and Glouer hymſelfe, to agree with Browne, in that generall of ſchiſme, for the diſcipline of the Church, I ſawe there other hereſies,Browne the fountaine of Glouers hereſies. as plagues of that tranſgreſsion, which might not be remoued, till he as the Genus, or captayne cauſe of them

could happily be auoided. For this cauſe do I ſo direct and proſecute my admonition to the followers of Glouer, as that the firſt place conteineth their errours in proper from Glouer, and the ſecond, ſuch as they haue in common from Browne. In which laſt part, as I make their caſe all alike, ſo by the firſt, I do manifeſtly diſſort them. Alike is their condition in this, that they both haue forſaken the brotherhood of the Church of England for the matter of diſcipline, and therein hold of Browne; and againe vnlike in this, that ſome of them onely, in their wilde wandring, meete with the heauie iudgement of God vnto Apoſtacie. Which hard eſtate of theirs, beeing ſhewed in the firſt part of the admonition (leaſt they ſhould thinke themſelues ſafe, hauing gotten out of Glouers briars, to lye out ſtill wandring with the diſperſed companies of Browne) the other part therefore declareth the euils that haue come vnto them by him, and that in the eares of all his followers alſo, if ſo be the Lord would vouchſafe vnto any of them likewiſe the grace of a happy conuerſion. Neither is the handling heereof ſo obſcurely caried, but that any of wiſedome might eaſily perceiue it: firſt, let the tranſition from the former to the latter part be conſidered, which is in theſe words, immediatly after Glouers hereſies were committed to their conſideration. But now to come vnto the man that firſt led you out into the wilde feeld of errour, are you made wiſer by him, &c. This (I ſay) doth ſhew, that now only I went about to remember them of ſuch things as they were directly abuſed in by Browne, the firſt author or beginner of their danger. And therfore it alſo argueth, by the proportionable law of contraries, that Brownes cauſe, & the venome they had receiued by him, was not touched at all in the firſt part. Secondly, drawing to a cōcluſion, after I had proued the iſſues of both their waies to be euil, I gathered the ſumme in this ſort. Now therefore beloued in Chriſt Ieſu, ſith your going out with this man hath had ſo hard euent in many of you, as to bring you

to the vnrecouerable rocks of E. G. and leadeth euen the better ſort (whom Gods iudgemēt hath not as yet hunted foorth ſo far) to a manifeſt decay of true iudgement and vnderſtanding, ioyning thereto the fearefull companion of vncertaintie, and reſtleſſe courſe of life, forſake, &c. What can be cleerer than theſe words, are to ſhew, that Browne in this admonition, is vnderſtood as the ſtocke,Browne the father of a twofold ſchiſme. from whence already hath flowed two families, both walking towards deſtruction, but yet the one much faſter then the other, ſo as, though a man may ſay truely, euery follower of Glouer, is a follower of Browne, yet cannot thereof be concluded on the contrarie, that euery one of Brownes followers is Glouers in like ſort. Becauſe ſome men haue frenſies through extremitie of feuers, doth he that ſayth ſuch frantick men are feueriſh, conclude on the contrarie that all feueriſh men are franticke? let no man therefore whome God hath kept cleere from ſpirituall frenſies (which corrupt the true vſe of reaſon, no leſſe than the bodely) yeeld captiue theyr ſenſes and vnderſtanding to ſo immodeſt a man as Browne, that he in this tempeſt of his diſturbed and ſtormie affections, ſhould by ſo lewd a libell, transforme them (as it were) into his iudgement. And this I meane, not onely touching the iniquitie that he chargeth me withall, for ioyning in ſome ſort, his company with Glouers, but for the other points of my admonition alſo, which he maketh his ſeduced ones beleeue, to be falſe & ſlanderous. In defence whereof (I truſt) thoſe that haue their iudgemēts ſeaſoned with the cōmon anointing of Gods childrē, will ſee & teſtify, that though I haue beene by his Libell, all to bitten & torne, as it were with a mad dog, yet the Lord, by the ſoueraigne antidote of his ſpirit, hath preſerued me, that I am not become mad alſo with him. And I beſeech the faithful Reader, that he wil not require at my hands, replies to all that Brownes furious pen taketh occaſion to deſcant vpon, nor to anſwere a foole according to his fooliſhnes: but to be cōtent, that I extend

my defence onely to the matters of ſome weight, committing the reſt to his prudent eſtimation and iudgement.
            His fyrſt 29. poynts (according to his numbring) I referre to the Reader.
            
               To the 30.
               
               
                  Browne dangerouſly corrupt in matter of iuſtification.I Charged Glouer of holding this hereſie: That thoſe that haue put on Chriſt, haue power and ſtrength to abſteine from ſinne, and keepe the commandements, and that a man is not yet iustified, but condemned, all the while he is ſubiect to ſinne againſt his will. Heerein (ſaith Browne) I condemne as well the truth as the falſhood. Becauſe (ſayth he) I could not distinguiſh betwixt the regenerate part of a man, (which though the man ſinne, yet that part ſinneth not) and the vnregenerate part, which (though the man be iuſtified in Chriſt yet it is condemned.) A man would thinke by their vtterance, that theſe things were ſound Diuinitie, and of the learned vniuerſally acknowledged; ſo as they neede no proofe, but ſerue heere onely to notifie my ignorance. Howbeit, there is nothing leſſe (in deede) then Catholike doctrine in them. Firſt, where he ſayth, The regenerate part ſinneth not, though the man ſinne, he parteth the ſoule, which is a ſimple ſubſtance, and therefore not partible. No man ſpeaking properly, but onely in a borrowed ſpeach, can ſay. The regenerate part, or vnregenerate part of a man: neither when any ſound writer ſayth ſo, doth he otherwiſe vnderſtand thereby then thus: In aſmuch as a man is regenerate: or the regenerate and vnregenerate condition: The inner man, The outward man: The new man, The old man: which are notes or names of qualities, not of ſubſtance, nor partes. But this man quite exempting ſome part of a regenerate man from ſinning, and making another part alwayes to lye vnder condemnation, ſpeaketh more improperly, then that any modeſt metaphor can couer his fault. Neyther can his beſt fauorites,

ſeeing this inconuenience, runne to theſe other termes to interprete his phraſe by, the blame that hee hath layd vppon me, will not ſuffer them. For if they ſay, he meant no otherwiſe then as Paul ſpeaketh in theſe wordes. I thanke my God through Ieſus Christ our Lord Nowe therefore euen I in my mind do ſerue the lawe of God, but in my fleſh the lawe of ſinne. If (I ſay) he vnderſtand nothing elſe by it, then hath he ſaid vniuſtly (that I condemne aſwell the truth as the falſehode) whereas I haue ſet downe this ſame doctrine in my booke, & cited the very ſame place of Paul, to that purpoſe. Secondly, where hee ſayth. The vnregenerate part is condemned, though the man bee iustified in Chriſt, it is all a like abſurde, but much more dangerous. The abſurdity that it hath equall with the former, is in this, that if his phraſe of ſpeech bee graunted ſound, yet the diſtinction he offreth thereby, is in deed no diſtinction, but a playne axiomaticall contradiction. The whole is good, a part is euil. Browne is ſound, his braine is ſicke. Are not not here ſpeciall contradictions? and of the ſame force, as if one ſhould ſay, a part of the whole is not good: or Brownes brayne is not ſound: which if any mā ſhould ſpeake, would not euery one of ſenſe anſwere, that if the latter be true, the former is falſe, and ſo on the contrary? the like conſideration receiueth his ſaying: for if part of the man be condemned, it cannot be ſaid the man is iuſtified. And contrarywiſe, if the man be iuſtified it cannot bee ſaid, part of him is condemned, but if any ſuch thing were truely to be pronounced, it muſt thus be deliuered: part of a regenerate man is condemned, and part is iuſtified. Againe, in that hee eſteemeth a regenerate man to haue ſome part of him vniuſtified, hee holdeth him no further iuſtified, then ſo farre, as his inward renouation,A regenerate man hath no part of him vnder condemnation. or inhaerent holynes hath proceeded: which neuer being perfect in this life, maketh that no man is wholly iuſtified in this life, and ſo conſequently no man to bee ſaued in the life to come. For after death commeth iudgement. Here except the man can fetch fire out of Popiſh

purgatorie. I knowe not howe hee will diſſolue theſe bandes,B. holdeth a Chriſtian iuſtified but by his renouation. beſides if a man bee iuſtified no further then hee is renewed, and ſo his iuſtification conſiſt in the tranſmutation of inhaerent qualities, then is that falſe which the Church of Chriſt hath euer holden,
                     Rom. 3.22.24. ca. 4.23.24.25. ga. 1.4. ca. 3 11.12.13.22.2. cor. 5.19.21. eph. 1.3.4.5: 6. Heb. 1.3. &c.
                   that our iuſtification ſtandeth onely in the free remiſſion of ſinnes, and not imputing our iniquities, through Chriſt: but on the contrary his righteouſneſſe being imputed vnto vs, as ours: this imputation (belike) ſerueth nowe to the vſe,B. holdeth that there is ſome part in a Chriſtian that ſinneth not. after wee are once regenerate. Further, if there bee any part in vs that ſinneth not, then is there ſome part in the regenerate man that fulfilleth the law in it ſelfe. For that which in it ſelfe fulfilleth not the lawe, cannot in it ſelfe bee exempt from ſinne, and if it bee not in it ſelfe exempt from ſinne, it cannot bee abſolutely ſayde, not to ſinne. Beyond all this, if wee be iuſtified but in reſpect that wee are regenerate, and regeneration conſiſteth in good woorkes, it followeth that wee are iuſtified,B. gaue Glouer his hold. but in reſpect of workes. Nowe in this what difference is betwixt him and Glouer, (whom hee ſayth hee confuted) let the godly learned iudge: as alſo whether I haue iniuriouſly inferred theſe concluſions vppon his aſſertions. Let this alſo anſwere his 43. number. To the reſt, from the 30. to the 47. thus much onely ſay I, it is a wonder and aſtoniſhment that any ſhould bee found ſo ſottiſh, as to admire, and addict themſelues to the teaching and leading of ſuch a ſenceleſſe guide and vngodly liuer.
            
            
               To that which is from the 47. to the 57.
               
               
                  The firſt corruption wherewith the admonition charged B. proued.3 I charge him to haue ſet down this doctrine: we muſt neuer forgiue our brother hauing offended vs, except hee firſt repent thereof, and ſeeke reconciliation. Againſt it I oppoſe places of Scriptures which conteine ſome ſpeciall contradictions thereunto, which I vnderſtoode in theſe two poynts, firſt, in that his deniall of forgiueneſſe is vniuerſall,

without all exception of inward or outwarde. Secondly, it is extended vnto all kindes of offences without exception. The firſt is reſiſted by all the Scriptures I oppoſe, the ſecond by thoſe which require a franke and abſolute forgiuenes, after the example of Gods gratious pardon to vs, like as loue couereth a multitude of ſins: which things, when hee ſawe I ment (as appeareth by his 31. Section) yet he cauilleth as though I did as vniuerſally contradict him, and ſo diſanull the doctrine of proceeding (by reprehenſions) to the cenſures of the church in matters neceſſary. His anſwere to the purpoſe is, that the worde, Neuer, was not in his booke: nor inwardly was not meant: whereby hee would make you beleeue, his propoſition was not vniuerſall. Such ſhiftes ſerueth him to keepe many ſimple ones in his ſnare. But the godly wiſe ſuſpect him ſo much the more. His wordes are theſe,Anſw. to M.C. Pag. 38. 
                  Chriſt hath giuen power to euery Chriſtian to retaine the ſinnes of euery brother, whom he knoweth to treſpaſſe against him, & not to forgiue him except hee ſee him repent. The firſt contradiction to trueth is plaine in theſe latter woordes. Not to forgiue him except hee repent, hee confeſſeth the trueth is, wee ſhould inwardly forgiue him. Nowe, to forgiue, not to forgiue, or no forgiueneſſe, ſome forgiueneſſe, euery man ſeeth to bee contrary, and his propoſition alſo to haue bene generall. Secondly, the former part put downe in theſe woordes, indefinitely to reteine the ſinnes of euery brother is neuertheleſſe too vniuerſall, eſpecially being put downe by a diſtribution of publique and priuate ſinnes, in the next lines following, and ſtill without any exception.
                     Pro. 10.12. 1. Pet. 4.8. Pag. 39. Read his declar. of the ioyning together of certaine perſons toward the latter end. Circumſtance alſo doth further inforce it, for whereas in the ſame place he vrgeth this practiſe of reprouing with ſo hard a penaltie, as the loſſe of our intereſt in Chriſt, if wee ſuffer our ſelues to be ſtraited in the matter, what place leaueth hee for ſuffering, couering, paſſing ouer, any our brothers treſpaſſes? I would their owne practiſe did not too much confirme, their iudgement in this to bee corrupt.
            
            
               
               To that which is from the 57. to the 60.
               
               
                  The ſecond corruption wherewith the admon. chargeth B. proued.4 The admonition ſayth, Browne teacheth, that any one of a Church may excommunicate, if the reſt will not ioyne with him. For proofe, ſome quotations are ſet downe, the moſt were miſſed. His anſwere bringeth ſome faire ſhewes to the contrary. Indeede hee hath two notable trickes of an heretike, one is, ambiguitie of ſpeech, and deliueraunce of his minde. The other is tergiuerſation, and colourable ſhrinking, when hee is preſſed with his falſhode, what reaſons I had to iudge him a teacher of ſuch doctrine, I commit the viewe of them here to the conſideration of the godly: to whom, in this and all the reſt, I ſubmit my ſelfe. In his booke of vnlearned and witleſſe definitions,
                     Num. 55. againſt the lawe of veritie hee defineth the kingdome of Chriſtians to bee their office of guyding and ruling with Christ, to ſubdue the wicked, and make one another obedient to Chriſt. Nowe marke whereunto this tendeth, hee ſayth in another place (anſwering this obiection, that the ſinne is the miniſters in diſordered adminiſtration of the Sacraments, not ours) wee aske them,
                  Title againſt pariſh prea. and hyred lect. &c. 
                  doeth not the Church partake with the miniſter? and is not euery Chriſtian a King and a Prieſt, to rule with Chriſt by open rebuke, if no other doe in ſeaſon rebuke, and by with-holding thoſe from their communion and felowſhippe which are without the couenaunt? and yet more clearely ſpeaking againſt the Biſhoppes authoritie, and rule in the Church, with diſauowing their ſuſpendings, and callinges of miniſters.Anſw. to M.C. Pag. 17. 
                  Nay ſurely (ſayth hee) the least in the kingdome of God ſhall bee able by the woorde of God in their mouth is to plucke vp, and roote out ſuch plants, if none other will ioyne with them. I meane they ſhall pronounce them by the worde of God, to be abhominable, and haue no fellowſhippe with them in the Church: and ſo to them, they are vtterly plucked out of the Church. For they are kings and prieſts vnder Chriſt, to execute the Lords gouernement againſt ſuch, and

therefore ought not to looſe their right, which is euen their heritage and gl
                        •
                     rie. Now weigh theſe places, with his propoſition, as I haue put it downe, in theſe wordes. Any one of a Church may excommunicate, if the reſt will not ioine with him. The antecedent part hee giueth in theſe cleare tearmes. Euerie Christian is a King and Prieſt to rule, &c. and The leaſt in the kingdome of God ſhall bee able, &c. if none other will ioyne with them. The conſequent is prooued in that euery ſuch are abled to execute the Lords gouernment againſt the wicked. Of which gouernement excommunication is a part, as himſelfe in his diuiſions declareth, number. 48. Nowe in his defence hee hath but one place of ſpeciall harbour, and that ſame alſo will fall about his eares, if it be touched. For where he hath thoſe words. Yet we ſay not, that euerie one of a Church may excommunicate,
                  Anſwere to M. C. pag. 28. 
                  for we ought to tell the Church, &c. Immediately foloweth, But what if the reſt of the Church will not ioyne with vs therein? Surely then as we prooued before, wee muſt ſet our ſelues agaynſt them all, we muſt not be afrayde of their faces, as the Lord commaundeth, leaſt he deſtroy vs before them. Nowe wherein ſeemeth this ſetting of our faces agaynſt them to be, but (according to the nature, and original of that obiection) in our ſole ſeparation of the vnworthie? As though hee ſhould ſay, If they will not doe it, then we muſt doe it: and ſo his deniall of the ſame before, to be expounded to holde, till time that wee haue laboured in vaine for the Churches conſent. But when I vnderſtood him ſo, I perceiue I did him too much fauour. For he will haue it vnderſtoode, not of ſeparating ſome one member, but of ſeparating the whole Congregation from the Church of God. For he ſayth. We muſt ſet our ſelues agaynſt them all by rebuke denouncing iudgement, and forſaking felowſhip. In the practiſe whereof it followeth,See my ſecond anſwere to the queſtion of cō
                     municating with the vnworthie. that either wee our ſelues forſake a Church of Chriſt, (which he denieth in another place) or elſe doe ſeparate the ſame congregation from the Church of Chriſt. In all which, it may truely bee attributed to him, in a plaine ſenſe, that was aſcribed to Ieremie,

in a myſticall ſenſe: namely to bee a fitte man, to plucke vp, and roote out, deſtroy, and throwe downe, euen kingdomes and nations, according as in thoſe onely wordes he vrgeth the place of Ieremie, in his anſwere to Maſter Cartwright. pag. 26.
            
            
               To that which is from the 60. to the 67.
               
               
                  The third corruption wherewith the Adm. chargeth Br. prooued. 5 The Admonition chargeth him with this concluſion: that one default of a congregation in ſeparating the vnworthy, may diſanull it for being a Church. I neede not goe farre for proofe of this, if the handling of the laſt point be remembred. For if one may caſt off a whole congregation, when hee cannot obtaine their voyces to the ſeparating of ſome offendour, (and hee will not ſay, that a man may caſt off a congregation of Chriſt) it is manifeſt, hee holdeth, that one default of ſeparating the vnwoorthie diſanulleth a Church. His anſwere hath not the ſtrength of a ruſhe in it. His owne woordes are. If any one ſuch open and manifeſt offence, as is open murther, idolatrie, adulterie bee founde amongſt anie, and they are become ſo negligent or wilfull, or are brought into ſuch ſpirituall bondage, that they will not, or can not cure ſuch offendours, but that offences remaine and reigne ſtill among them incurable: Then the couenant is broken with them all. And this is but to feede his diſciples with winde. For hee will againe at his pleaſure interprete this negligence, wilfulneſſe, and bondage, to bee, whenſoeuer a Congregation conſenteth not to the motion of ſeparating the vnworthie, as beſides the places alreadie cited, theſe may further teſtifiie. In the 18. pag. agaynſt Maiſter Cartwright, hee ſayeth, Thoſe that holde the couenant to day, may breake it to morrowe. This is but a ſhort time to prooue either bondage, wilfulneſſe, or negligence. Againe, hee ſayeth, Any groſſe wickedneſſe committed by all, is the breaking of the couenant by all. Nowe hee will interprete it groſſe wickedneſſe, when anie Congregation conſenteth not, to the motion of one, or ſome fewe, for the caſting

out of any wicked one. Let theſe woordes bee witneſſe. And is not this a meſsage from Chriſt,
                  Anſwere to M. C. pag. 30. 
                  when one or a fewe perſons doe iuſtly rebuke a Congregation, for ouerthrowing the Lordes diſcipline, and treading his ſcepter vnder foote? And is not his ſcepter caſt downe, and his kingdome polluted, when hee which is manifeſtly knowne, and prooued to deſerue ſeparation, cannot bee caſt out? This one defaulte of ſeparating the vnwoorthie, hee accounteth the treading vnder foote of the ſcepter of Chriſt (yea compareth it in the ſame place to bee equall with Apoſtacie) therefore groſſe wickedneſſe, and therefore alſo by his doctrine, of force to diſanull a Church. Wherevpon it followeth, as the Admonition truely inferreth, that ſeeing Saint Paule calleth the Corinthian Church, a Church of God (notwithſtanding their groſſeſt kinde of negligence, and vile continuance in ſecuritie, touching the ſeparating of the inceſtuous perſon) either Saint Paule was to bee blamed for ſo dooing, or elſe Browne is a daungerous ſchiſmatike in teaching ſuch doctrine contrarie to him. The myſtes which hee caſteth before his diſciples eyes, to extenuate this ſinne of the Corinthians, are ſcattered and brought to nought in my ſecond anſwere to the queſtion of communicating.
                     Sect. 21i What hee can make of this worde incurable, or any other tearmes of vauntage hee can deuiſe, the reſt of his writings here cited being conſidered, let the godly reader iudge. The manifolde concluſions of hereſies, which hee woulde make the reader beleeue to bee in my aſſertion, declare but the full ſwarme that lurketh in his waſpiſh breaſt. My anſwere is, either they are no hereſies, or none of mine.
            
            
               To that which is from the 67. to the 72.
               
               6 It maye plaine ynough appeare to the wiſe reader,The fourth corruption wherewith the Adm. chargeth Br. prooued. that the Admonition taketh ſuch a courſe in ſetting downe the ſixe corrupt opinions of Browne:

as that the former (for the moſt part) openeth the way, and giueth light to that which followeth. So here, conſidering what hath bene proued in the laſt point afore going, to witte, that one breach of dutie in the practiſe of gouernement, breaketh the couenant and diſanulleth a Church, it followeth hereof neceſſarily that he iudgeth, the couenant betwixt God and his Church, to bee holden and kept by workes. His onely anſwere to the purpoſe for this is,Browne holdeth the keping of diſcipline, the keeping of our couenant with God. 
                  That hee calleth not diſcipline the couenant, but ſayth, that the couenant is kept by diſcipline. Which is altogether as much as I lay to his charge, howſouer hee catcheth at a feather to mainteine ſome quarelling, as appeareth by my maner of ſetting downe the trueth oppoſed to his falſhoode, within fiue lines following. For there I ſay, Not by workes, but by faith is the couenant kept on our part. Nowe ſince he confeſſeth, as much as I meant to charge him with, and that which I charge him with is popiſh hereſie, it followeth that Browne teacheth popiſh hereſie: yet hee contendeth earneſtly, Num. 69. That hee ſpeaketh in no place, of keeping the couenāt by faith, or by works. But if he be ſo mad, that he vnderſtandeth not practiſe to be workes, then is he too mad to bee talked withall. And is not (I pray you) the keeping or executing of diſcipline, the practiſe and workes of the Church?And B. is not much behind him in other places, as shall be shewed. From this maner iuſtifying or condemning the Churche by workes, Glouer turned it to the iuſtification of particular Chriſtians by woorkes. Howe thinne the ſheeres were that wente betweene theſe two, let all ſounde Chriſtians iudge.
            
            
               To the 72. & 73.
               
               
                  He accounteth diſcipline the groundworke of the Church, (ſayth the Admonition.The 5 corruption wherewith the Ad chargeth B. proued. Harriſon calleth it the chiefe corner ſtone, vpon the 122, Pſalme.) Browne ſayth, He vſeth no ſuch worde as groundworke. Let the reader iudge. Theſe bee his wordes, in the place that I quoted. Hauing diſcourſed after his wilde maner, againſt all ſorts of the ordinarie miniſterie in England, ſayth hee, The Popes olde houſe was deſtroyed

in England, and they are called to builde it anewe.
                  Tit. againſt Parish Prieſts, hired lect. &c. laſt leafe. And by and by after: Let vs welcome wiſe gentlemen: they tooke in hand to build the Lords houſe, and now mo then twentie yeeres are paſt, in ſtudying for the groundworke. If his hand had not bene ſo haſtie to write, but his head more conſiderate to reade the leafe that was quoted, perhaps he woulde not haue denied the word, for feare of the reproch of impudencie: yet ſuſpecting ſuch a thing might bee founde in him, he addeth, Neuertheleſſe, whoſoeuer denieth, that the diſcipline, that is, the power and authoritie of Chriſt, is eſſentiall to the Church, and auoucheth that it is but an accident or hangby, the ſame is an heretike and blaſphemer of Chriſt Scilice
                        •
                     , ſi ſanum haberes ſinciput. A Church which conſiſteth of beleeuing 1. Pet. 2.4.5.7.9. people, builded ſo by fayth, vppon Ieſus Chriſt the heade corner ſtone, is in a two folde condition to be conſidered: the firſt is the verie knitting vnto Chriſt, wherein alone ſtandeth the life and beeing of a Church, and in nothing elſe. For it is hee (ſaith the Apoſtle)
                     Epheſ. 5.23. that giueth ſaluation to the bodie: he maketh it through his paied raunſome 
                     Epheſ. 5.24.26.27. 1. Cor. 1.30. Pſal. 36 7.8. Cant. 2.3. Iſai. 4.3 4. and imputed righteouſneſſe, iuſtified, holy, and vnblameable, without ſpot or wrinkle. The ſecond is, in that by this vnion with Chriſt, all things of his mediation (& ſo of his kingly office) are in a meaſure, cō
                  municated 
                     Epheſ. 4.16, Col. 2.19. 1. Ioh. 1.3. Rom. 8.32. Apoc. 3.20.21. Pſal. 36.8.9.10. therunto, ſo as it now practiſeth obedience, & holy behauior vnto the Lord, & theſe cōditions are no other then ſuch as wee may beholde in euery particular chriſtian. For firſt, apprehending Chriſt by faith, he becō
                  meth one 1. Cor. 6.17. with him. Next is begun (by cōmunication) a change of the inherent qualities, to a practiſe of 1. Pet. 2.4.5.7.9. Ephe. 5.1. 2. Col. 3.0.10. 1. Theſ. 1.6. Pſal. 17.15. holy life. Now I would knowe of that great diuine, whether a man be iuſtified, and ſo a Chriſtian, in the apprehending of Chriſt, or elſe in the renuing of his inherent qualities,The Archpapiſts, and counſell of Trent hold ſo. If he ſay, By renuing, he knoweth his companions. If hee graunt it by apprehending, then his groundwoorke hath fayled him. And like as euerie one particularly is iuſtifyed for a Chriſtian, through their onely vniting with Chriſt by fayth, euen ſo are manie together iuſtified for

a Church of Chriſt, through ſuch vnion with him onely. And then, if this vnion giue it the forme of a Church, it muſte neceſſarilie bee a Church, before it practiſe diſcipline, becauſe our diſcipline in queſtion hath no place, but in an vnited bodie, or congregation. Nowe nothing can bee, but in reſpect that it hath all the eſſentiall partes of beeing.Diſcipline is not of the eſſence of a Church. Whence muſt needes followe, that the Church hauing firſt a beeing, before it exerciſe diſcipline, conſiſteth of all the eſſentiall partes, before it exerciſe diſcipline, and ſo diſcipline muſte bee founde no eſſentiall part at all. Plentifull confirmation hereof haue wee in the Scriptures, from the practiſe of the Lordes chiefe inſtrumentes, in the planting and refourming of his Churches. Thoſe three thouſand ſoules, that were gayned at one proſperous preaching of Peter,
                     Act. 2.41.42.44.45.46.47. may not bee denyed the name of a Church of GOD, ſith of thoſe things, that are there recorded to bee done of them, ſome are onely proper to a Church, and haue no place at all in other meetings. For theſe being nowe baptized, are ſaide to haue continued in the dayly exerciſe of the worde, prayer, thankeſgiuing, breaking of breade, and communicating of their ſubstance. Nowe if the cenſuring diſcipline in queſtion, had bene eſſentiall to their beeing of a Church, ſo as without it they coulde not haue done thoſe thinges which onely perteyned to a Church, as the Apoſtle woulde firſt haue bene mindfull to eſtabliſh the ſame, ſo the holy Ghoſt would not haue failed the ſetting downe thereof, eſpecially addreſsing himſelfe in that ſtorie, to deſcribe the memorable beginnings and framings of the Churches, as a patterne in ſuch caſes vnto all ages enſuing. Therefore whereas the holie Ghoſt, voucheth it a Church, apt to exerciſe the word and Sacraments, whoſe very being it defineth by the onely ioynt and willing receiuing of Chriſt Ieſus,
                  
                     Act. 2.38.41. preached vnto them for the remiſsion of ſinnes, without any mention making of the diſcipline we ſpeake of, it is plaine inough, that he

accounteth not of diſcipline as a thing without which, thoſe conuerts could not be made a viſible Church. The like is of the congregation in Samaria, Act. 8.5.6. and 12. called a Church of God. cap. 9.31. The maner of Paule, Barnabas, and others in the planting of the Churches at Antioch, Iconium, and Lyſtra,
                     Act. 11.20.21.26 Act. 13·43.48. Cap. 14.1.21.22.23. doe yet further enlighten this that I haue ſaid in the other. For, firſt they gathered congregations vnto Chriſt by the preaching of the Goſpel in thoſe cities, after that as they found them growne to a fitneſſe, at other returnes vnto them, they furniſhed thē with Elders orderly elected among them. This their order (I ſay) declareth, that the erecting of diſcipline and ordeyning of Elders therefore, doth not make a Church of Chriſt: for that if the Apoſtles had ſo iudged, they would neuer haue deferred the eſtabliſhing of it, to times after the gathering and planting of them. Yet further to confirme this thing, Paule writing thus to Titus: for this cauſe left I thee in Creta,
                  
                     Tit. 1.5. 
                  that thou ſhouldeſt redreſſe the things remayning, and appoynt Elders in euerie Citie, as I commaunded thee, teacheth vs, both that the Apoſtles gathered Churches without this diſcipline, and alſo helde them in the accounte of the Churches, before that was added to them. Which thinges prooue diſcipline, not to bee of the eſſence of a Church, as clearly as can bee wiſhed. Nowe touching reformation of declined Churches, let vs ſee what ſome examples, in that courſe doe afoord vs. When Aſa the firſt renowmed reformer of the declining Churches of Iudea began to ſet in hand ſo glorious an enterpriſe, he that conſidereth the hyſtorie ſhall ſee, that among other things, the diſcipline of the Church, lay as a thing caſt downe, and neglected, as appeareth by the reformation thereof, which immediately I ſhall ſpeake of. If then diſcipline had bene of the eſſence of the Church, there had not beene at that time, nor in the dayes of Abija his father, anie Church of GOD remayning at Ieruſalem: but

the latter is falſe, and is prooued by the proteſtation of Abija, alittle before he ioyned battell with Ieroboam, and the teſtimony of the ſpirit of God in deliuering that hyſtorie,2. Chro. 3.4.18. who ſayth. That the Iſraelites were depreſſed the ſame time, and the children of Iuda ſtrengthened, becauſe they ſtayed vpon the Lorde the God of their fathers. Therefore the former alſo is falſe, namely that diſcipline is of the eſſence of a Church. Alſo if diſcipline ſhoulde make it a Church, or bee neceſſarie to the beeing thereof, it appeareth that notwithſtanding all Aſaes reformation, yet, was it as then no Church for the godly to reſorte vnto, ſith the reedification of diſcipline is aſcribed, not to Aſa, but to his ſonne Iehoſaphat,2. Chro. 19.8.11. after him. Neither may any with probabilitie coniecture, that Aſa ſet vp diſcipline,2. Chro. 15.17. and let it fall againe. For, to haue an vpright heart all the dayes of his life (which thing the holie Ghoſt teſtifieth of him) and to ſuffer that which the Lorde had made him ſee to bee woorthie reformation, to goe downe againe, are two thinges contrarie, and cannot bee verifyed of one and the ſame ſubiect. But nowe all men that ſauoure the woorde of the Lorde, muſt needes acknowledge, that the Church of Iudea in Aſaes dayes, was a glorious habitation of the Lorde, and the Temple at Ieruſalem, a place then for his faithfull ſeruantes, to doe their ſacrifices and ſeruices vnto him:2. Chro. 15.8.9. &c.
                   inſomuch as that many of the Iſraelites fledde from their owne coastes, to dwell in Iudea, ſeeing thus the Lorde to bee amongeſt them: So muſt they of like neceſsitie confeſſe that which therehence firmely is concluded, to witte, diſcipline not to bee of the eſſence of a Church. Laſtly, to come to the woorthie Iehoſaphat, who feared no ſlaunderous imputation of arrogancie, or ſingularitie to himſelfe, neither accompted it anye impeachment to the dignitie of his father Aſa, though in repayring and beautifying the houſe of GOD, hee ſhoulde exceede him in ſome poyntes: conſidering

(I ſay) his courſe of proceeding, if diſcipline were neceſſary to the being of a Church, then all that he did in the beginning of his raigne, was worthy no commendation.2. Chro. 17.5.6.7.8.9. For what good could hee bee ſaid to haue done to the Church, when as all that he had done, could not (by this mans ſaying) gaine it the worthy name of a viſible Church? for as touching the reformation of the diſcipline, it appeareth to haue bene about the latter end of his raigne, after the Lord had by his Prophet,2. Chr. 19.5.11. rebuked him for yelding wicked Ahab aſſiſtance in his enterpriſe. Wherfore, as I hope to heare of no man ſo impudent as to ſay, that the Church of Iudea was then no apparant Church of God (I meane in his time before the reuiuing of the diſcipline) ſo am I ſure, that none but ſuch as are growne to that impudency, will hereafter affirme diſcipline to be of the eſſence of a Church. Let all the likers of Brownes writings nowe conſider, whetherto his reproches reach, when hee ſaith, that by denying diſcipline to bee of the eſſence of a Church, wee ſeclude Chriſt, and the Church of Chriſt, from the power, authoritie and diſcipline of Chriſt, and (as he ſaith other-where, that ſo wee make Chriſt a dead Chriſt, yea an Idoll or counterfaite Chriſt,
                  Anſw. to M.C. Pag. 33.34.25.36. 
                  and the Church an Idol or counterfait Church: If we haue committed this thing, then theſe Kinges, and thoſe Apoſtles are guilty thereof. But becauſe hee ſeemeth to haue fortified himſelfe in this as in a Caſtle, let vs alſo euen heere make proofe of the ſtrength of his walles. And firſt what meaneth hee to ſay, wee faine a counterfaite Chriſt, and a counterfait Church? Is it becauſe wee remooue diſcipline from the being of a Church? Why then thus hee diſputeth.
               
                  They that holde the power, authoritie,
                  In the place laſt quoted and his 72. ſection againſt my admonition. Brownes greateſt argument to proue diſc. to be of the eſſence of a Church. 
                  and gouernement of Chriſt not to bee of the eſsence of a Church, doe faine a counterfaite Chriſt, and a counterfaite Church: But they that ſay, diſcipline is not of the eſſence of a Church, hold the power, authority and gouernement of Chriſt, not to be of the eſſence.
               
               
                  Therefore they that ſay diſcipline is not of the eſſence of a

Church, feigne a counterfaite Chriſt, and a counterfaite Church.
               
               
                  Here is Hariſon alſo vppon 122. Pſal. anſwered for this matter.This (beloued) is indeed the maine piller, whereuppon all Brownes and Browniſts ſchiſmaticall building ſtandeth: and thus (by the grace of God) I will ouerthrowe it. Firſt to lay the way open and auoyde ambiguitie. The woorde, gouernement, that it may beare the ſame ſence with the worde, authoritie, where-with it is coupled as a ſynonymie, muſt be taken for the office of gouernement, and not as it is vſed ſometime for the action of gouernement. For example: When one ſayth, Dauid had the gouernement of the children of Iſrael, there hee meaneth the office of gouernement. But if hee ſay: Dauids gouernement repleniſhed the Iſraelites with the knowledge of God, then he meaneth by gouernmēt, not the office, but the action or adminiſtration of gouernment. Again, the word, power, may be vſed in a double ſence: one whē it is vnderſtood for might, ſtrength, or efficacious force,1. Cor. 5.4. ca. 4.18.19. 2. cor. 10.4.8. cap. 13.4. Pſal. 110.2. which is that the greeke word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   expreſſeth. In this ſenſe cannot power, in this place bee taken, becauſe that kinde of power of Chriſt, is no other then his diuine eſſence, which he hath from the father by an eternall generation, in as much as hee is begotten of the ſubſtance of the father, & ſo is coeſſentiall with him. For this is a farre differing thing from his auth oritie, or office of gouernement, and therefore may not, as one thing, ſtand ranged with thoſe wordes. The other is, whē the word, power, meaneth nothing elſe, but authoritie, iuriſdiction,
                  
                     Mat. 28.18. or gouernment. As where he ſaith, All power is giuen me in heauen and in earth, here the worde is not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   And therefore ſignifieth not the force & might of Chriſt, whereby he executeth all things in his gouernment, but his authoritie or office of gouernement. And in this ſenſe we admit and receiue it here, as of the ſame ſort with thoſe wordes wherewith it is coupled. The entrance thus paued, I anſwere to his ſyllogiſme, denying

both propoſition and aſſumption. His propoſition carrying the force of a conuexiue, falſely inferreth the feyning of a counterfait Chriſt, and a counterfaite Church, vpon the deniall of his power and authoritie to be of the eſſence of a Church. For they do not thereby, as hee beareth men in hand, ſeparate Chriſt and his Church from his power and gouernement. Men of meane vnderſtanding knowe, that there are propper accidents to thinges which cannot be ſeparated from them, and yet are not of their eſſence. For example, heate cannot bee ſeparated from the fire, nor mouing from the ſunne, yet are neither of thoſe properties any part of their eſſence, nor doeth hee that ſaith, heate is not of the eſſence of fire, nor motion of the eſſence of the ſunne, deny therefore the fire to be hote, or the ſunne to haue his motion. And concerning theſe offices in queſtion, touching which Browne ſo arrogantly challengeth M.C. to anſwere whether they be of the eſſence of the Church: I would the reader ſhould aſke of him,
                     Pag. 35. or his friends (if he thinke it good) whether the kingdome & Prieſthood of the ſonne of God and man, the word incarnate, be partes of his eſſence, or accidentes vnto him rather: and ſo whether hee that ſhall ſay, they are not of his eſſence, doeth thereby diſpoyle him of his offices? I feare not (vnleſſe you take him in ſome deſperate fit) hee will anſwere, no. Why then, if a thing may truely be remoued from the eſſence, and neuertheleſſe neceſſarily admitted in the Subiect, howe followeth it, that they that deny the kingly power or authoritie of Christ, to bee of the eſſence of a Church, doe there-fore make or feyne a Church that is without it. This being voyded, let vs nowe trye, whether Chriſts power authoritie and office of gouerning, bee of the very eſſence of a Church, as hee woulde haue it.
               This ſhall we ſoundly try out,This hath bene done once or twiſe before. Yet I muſt craue the readers patience thus farre. by examining by the word of God, what are the eſſentiall cauſes of that which is, & truly may be called the Church of God. And firſt for the

matter of a Church,The matter of a Church. I ſuppoſe it will-be readily yeelded vnto, to bee Chriſt the head corner ſtone, and Chriſtians who are as liuely ſtones to bee builded vppon him to a ſpirituall houſe.1. Pet. 2.4 5. Eph. 2.20.21.22. For ſo the Apoſtles Peter & Paul playnely declared, according to which proportion, hee is likewiſe called the head, and we that beleeue in him, the members, as Saint Paul ſayth, that vnder the feete of Chriſt God hath ſubiected all thinges, and hath appoynted him ouer all thinges to bee the head to the Church which is his body,
                  
                     Eph. 1.22.23. cap. 4.15.16. Col. 1.18.22.23. ca. 2.19. Ioh. 15.5. Rom. 11. 
                  euen the fulneſſe of him that filleth all in all thinges. To the ſame end Chriſt compared him-ſelfe to a vine, and thoſe that beleeue in him to the braunches of the vine. Like whereunto is that of the Oliue, and the braunches grafted therein, as Saint Paul deliuereth it. The matter of a Church wee haue. Let vs nowe ſee what may be the fourme.The fourme of a Church. Neither will it bee hard to find that, if wee conſider that the ſetting together of prepared ſtones maketh the building, the vniting of the head with the members fourmeth the body, and the continuance together of the ſtocke with the braunches, giueth the being of a tree. For ſo is it likewiſe agreeable to all reaſon, that the vniting and knitting together of Chriſt and Chriſtians, bee graunted the formall cauſe of a Church. Nowe this vnition is by two meanes, the one eternall, the other ſeruing but for this life. The eternall vnition is by the holy Ghoſt, whereby we are fleſh of his fleſh, & bone of his bones,
                     Eph. 5.30.31.32. Gal. 5.2.5. Ioh. 17.21.23. and made finally complete and perfect in one God through that one and only mediator betweene God and man Ieſus Chriſt. This is peculiar and proper to the Catholique Church (which is the whole company of the elect of God) and doth not pertaine to the members of a particular Church, as they are only conſidered members of any particular Church, but as they are alſo in that regard, members of the Catholique. The tē
                  poral vnition, which (as I ſayd) ſerueth for this life, is by faith: which ſhall ceaſe in the day of the reuelation of the

Saincts of God, when we ſhall be poſſeſſed,
                     Rom. 8.23.24. 1. Cor. 13.8.12.13. Hebr 11.1. 1. Cor. 15.53. Iohn. 17.23. 2. Cor. 5.4. of the full fruition of all thoſe things we hoped for, as the holie word doth teſtifie, for mortalitie ſhall be ſwallowed vp of life, perſwaſion of poſſeſſion, and faith of the fulneſſe of the ſpirit, and perfect being in God through Chriſt. Meane time, 
                     Rom. 11.20.21 faith is as the engrafting of the braunches into the ſtock, whereby they are vpholden, whileſt that by the ſappe and ſpirit of life proceeding therefrom, they be growne and eſtabliſhed. And as the braunch to be ingrafted, needeth thoſe his enwrappings and bindings, to ſupport and defend it againſt ſundrie inconueniences, till it be able to be without them, and afterward they are of no vſe vnto it: ſo doth faith ſupport and deſend the tender conſcience, againſt all the ſtormes of temptations, till there be that perfect growth in Chriſt, that is vtterly freed from them, at which time, in like ſort, faith doth ceaſe. But heere withall, thys faith muſt be vnderſtood to admit a twofold conſideration: the one in reſpect of Gods, the other in reſpect of mans beholding and iudging thereof. In regard of God, that onely is acknowledged, which is vnfeigned and ſealed vp with his holie ſpirit of promiſe. But in regard of man, a feigned faith may alſo ſtand in the reckoning, ſith man cannot iudge of the heart, but muſt therfore accept & reſt in the ſound confeſsion of the mouth, and ſo according to this latter conſideration, hath the Reader the right vnderſtanding of faith in this queſtion concerning the fourming of viſible Churches, for man to diſcerne of & ioyne with them. Now that faith doth engraffe and vnite vs vnto Chriſt, and ſo is the proper fourme of particular & viſible Churches, I needed not at all ſtand heere to prooue, if there were not in this man againſt whom I deale, a iuſt ſuſpition of fundamentall Apoſtacie heerein. For if he had beene indeede perſwaded thereof, to this day, we ſhould neuer by him haue beene thus brought to the proofe of the being of our Church, as now he hath prouoked vs. Therefore although this

cauſe hath beene alreadie ſo handled by the worthie ſeruants of God againſt the common Aduerſarye, as that he whoſoeuer at this day ſhall call it into queſtion, is more worthie the ſharpeſt diſcipline, then any diſputation.
               Yet for to ſtop importunate mouthes whatſoeuer, and to make cleere to the world the confutation of Brownes falſe concluſion heere in hand, it is requiſite, that after the large labour of others, I alſo point at ſome profes for this purpoſe, ſhewing that viſible Churches, in as much as they ſtand in the accompt of viſible Churches,Viſible Churches are vnited vnto Chriſt by faith only. are vnited vnto Chriſt by faith only. Firſt, let all the planting of Churches, thoroughout the ſtory of the Actes be conſidered, and ſee if the holy Ghoſt do not euery where teſtify this vniting vnto Chriſt by faith, and nothing elſe. The firſt three thouſand ſoules that Peter gayned at one Sermon, are ſayd to haue receyued the word,
                     Act. 2.41. and therevpon to haue beene added vnto the Church by Baptiſme. The whych receyuing of the word wherevpon they were baptiſed,
                     Act. 8.36.37. cannot be otherwyſe vnderſtood (for the Lords wayes are one) then the ſame whych Phillip demaunded as the thyng by whych alone the Eunuche could obteyne the ſeale of a Chriſtian, namely fayth, and ſo is it alſo expounded within two verſes in the ſame former places of the ſecond of the Actes, when the ſtory ſayth of the ſame aſſembly theſe wordes:
                     Act. 2.44. 
                  And they that beleeued were in one place, and had all things common. But nothyng can more explayne and confirme that example, then another lyke vnto it, of the gathering of a Church by Phillip, in a Citie of Samaria,
                  
                     Act. 8.12.13. See alſo Act. 3.15.16.20.25.26 cap. 4.4.10.11.12 cap. 10.38.42.43. cap. 11.20.21.23.24.26. ca. 13.39 where the Text expreſſely ſayth, That aſſoone as they beleeued Phillip which preached the things that concerned the Kingdome of God, and the name of Ieſus Chriſt, they were Baptized both men and women. Then Symon himſelfe beleeued alſo, and was baptized, &c. The ſame lykewiſe is the flat doctrine of the Apoſtles euery where. Let the louers of

truth behold and beare witneſſe. Chriſt (ſayth the Apoſtle) hath redeemed vs from the curſſe of the Lawe,
                  
                     Galath. 3.13. 
                  when he was made a curſſe for vs: for it is written,
                  
                     Verſe 14. 
                  Curſſed is euery one that hangeth on tree; that the bleſsing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Chriſt Ieſus, that we might receiue the promiſe of the ſpirit through faith.
                  
                     Verſe 22. 
                  But the ſcripture hath concluded all vnder ſinne, that the promiſe by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt, ſhould be giuen to them that beleeue. VVherefore the lawe was our ſchoolemaiſter to bring vs to Chriſt, that we might be made righteous by faith, for yee are all the ſonnes of God by faith in Ieſus Chriſt. The ſame Apoſtle ſayth,
                     Verſe 24. Verſe 26. 
                  
                     Eph. 3.12.1
                        •
                     . 
                  VVe haue boldneſſe, entrance, and confidence by faith in Chriſt. And expreſſely, That Chriſt dwelleth in vs by faith. Now iudge whether the ſunne can giue thee clearer light to reade, then the playne tearmes of the Apoſtle, doo teach thee to acknowledge our vniting vnto Chriſt by faith. If any man deſire to ſee more varietie of places, let him looke theſe 
                     Ro. 3.21.22.24.25. ca. 5.1.2.10.11. Epheſ. 4.12.13.15. Coloſſ 1.21.22.23. cap. 2.5.6.7.12.13.14.15. 1. Theſſ. 1.2.3.7.8. 1. Tim. 1.4 Hebr. 3.6. cap. 4.2.6. cap. 11.1. Rom. 11.20.23. Iohn. 1.12. quotations, where he ſhall ſee, by the abundant teſtimonie of the ſpirit, that we are all reconciled vnto God by faith, accepted for our faith, vnited vnto a bodie, and engrafted into Chriſt the liuing ſtock, by faith. Thus then, if matter and fourme be the eſſentiall cauſes, whereof any thing conſiſteth, and whereby the being of any thing is acknowledged, I hope we haue heere with Ma. C. found out and proued the eſſentiall cauſes of a Church, ſo as no man needeth to be perplexed in diſcerning the beeing thereof, if he haue atteyned ſuch a minde, as can reſt in the wiſedome of God.
               Heere we meete with that fooliſhe and vayne exception of Browne agaynſt Ma. C. namely, That Chriſt is the life and eſſence of the Church, and not faith, which is,
                     Pag. 35. as though faith had not direct relation to Chriſt, and Chriſt to faith in this conſideration of a Church, wherein neyther can fayth bee conſidered without Chriſt, nor yet Chriſt as theyr head without faith. And if

Ma. C. hauing ſet downe, that Chriſt is the foundation of the Church, and that the aſſemblies are laid vpon him by faith, ſhould haue added in ſuch expreſſe words, that faith is the life of the Church, were faith to be taken heere without reſpect of the foundation named before? Or were it a harder ſpeech, then that which S. Paule vttereth,
                     Rom. 11.20. when he ſayth: VVe ſtand by faith. What difference is there betweene, VVe liue by faith; and we ſtand by faith? But Habacuck the Prophet miſſed not the very words,
                     Habac. 2.4. 
                  The iuſt ſhall liue by faith. But yet cannot Browne abyde this, that by faith only the Church is vnited vnto Chriſt. Wherefore becauſe Ma. C. ſayth, that nothing beſides faith in the Sonne of God is neceſſary to the very being of a Church;
                     Pag. 34. he replyeth, ſaying, That then belike children, which yet through want of diſcretion cannot haue faith, ſhall be without the eſſence and life of the Church. O deepe Diuinitie, worthy a Cambridge degree (if I ſhould requite him with his owne tearmes.) Chriſt hath theſe words,
                     Iohn. 3.18. H
                           •
                        br. 11.6. 
                  He that beleeueth not, is condemned. And the writer to the Hebrewes, VVithout faith it is impoſsible to pleaſe God. What cauſe had Browne more to obiect this of childrens faith againſt Ma. C. his diſcourſe of the beeing of a Church, then againſt theſe generall axiomes of Scripture touching the being of a Chriſtian, or in ſtate of ſaluation? for it lyeth as indifferently againſt the one as the other. And if he had whereby to be reconciled with thoſe Scriptures, ſo as his obiection ſhould not lye agaynſt them, a little equitie would haue lead hym to haue applyed the ſame to Ma. C. his concluſion likewiſe. If his knowledge be no better then he ſayth,All infants are not without faith as Browne ſuppoſeth. he muſt learne, that infants of parents that be within the couenant, are not to be accounted without all fayth, as his writing ſuppoſeth: for if they be elect, then haue they the 
                     Luke. 1.15. Iere. 1.5. ſpirit, and ſo faith in power, habilitie and inclination, though not in outward profeſſion and action. Lyke as alſo at the ſame time, they can not be denied to haue reaſon (for as much as they haue

a reaſonable ſoule) although it be but potentially, and not in acte or outward geſture. If they be not elect, and ſo haue not the annoynting of the ſpirit, nor therefore any faith in the ſight of God, yet receiue they ſo much from the faith of their parents, as to be by it accepted of the viſible Church for a holie ſeede, and partakers of the promiſes, becauſe they, iudging but as men, haue no cauſe at all to doubt thereof.
               This man vrgeth out of Habacuck,
                  
                     Habac. 2. that The iuſt ſhall liue by his owne faith, but there was no cauſe: for it is not ſayd, that infants ſhall be ſaued, or liue in the ſight of God by their parents faith, but onely, that by it, they are of men to be reputed within the couenant, and of the viſible Church. Yet he ſtandeth to it, that Not by the faith of the parents, but by the promiſe made to the righteous and their ſeede, the children are reckoned in the Church. O trifeler: how are the parents within couenant, and partakers of the promiſes, but by faith? And how doo the promiſed bleſsings deſcend vnto the children, but in regard that their parents beleeued? Wherefore, this foundation will ſtand vnmoued againſt all Papiſts and Apoſtates, that particular viſible Churches are vnited vnto their head Chriſt by faith, and by faith do they ſtand. And certainely it is ſtrange, how this ſhould be doubted of by any that eſteeme themſelues iuſtified by faith, ſith one member hath not a ſeuerall lawe of life by it ſelfe: but looke by what lawe and tenure one by himſelfe enioyeth the ſtate of being in Chriſt, by the ſame alſo doth another, and conſequently many together, euen till you haue reckoned the whole number of the Church militant.
               Now for the kingly authoritie and gouernement of Chriſt, ſith no corner of the world, no not the vttermoſt borders of his enemies are without it: how can his Church (whereof himſelfe is the head) be imagined to be without it? And yet it followeth not,Anſwer to M. C. Pag. 35. becauſe the Church, nor no action therein cannot be exempted

from hys rule and gouernment, that therefore hys rule, authoritie, or gouernment, ſhould be of the eſſence thereof. I haue ſhewed before, that though proper accidents, be perpetually in theyr ſubiects, yet are they not of theyr eſſence. And heere I ſay furthermore, that if Chriſtes power and authoritye be of the eſſence of all aſſemblyes whych are ſubiect vnto it, then is it of the eſſence of Popiſh and Heatheniſh Synagogues, for hys throne is alſo pight in the middeſt of hys 
                     Pſalm. 45. and 68.19. Luke. 3.17. Pſalme 110. Prou. 15.3. Matth. 28.18. Ioh. 17.2. 1. Cor. 15.24.25. Rom. 9.17.18.19.20.21.22.23 Philip. 1.28.29. 2 Theſſ. 1.9.7. cap 2.10.11.12. The bounds of Chriſtes power and gouernment not conſidered of Browne. enemies. Agayne, if it followe, that where Chriſtes gouernment and authoritie is not made thus eſſentiall, there it may be concluded, Chriſt is not made eſſentiall: it followeth equally on the contrarie, that where hys authoritye is ſo made eſſentiall, there he is graunted to be eſſentiall alſo: and then ſeeing Browne will haue it to be of the eſſence of the aſſemblyes where it is admitted, he moſt vnwarely maketh Chriſt of the eſſence of Popiſh and Heatheniſh companyes, as I ſayd before: for as much as they are all vnder hys kingly authoritye and gouernment: and as well ſitteth he to direct the courſe of hys enemies in all poynts of theyr rage and malice to theyr owne deſtruction, as hys elect in the waye of righteouſneſſe to theyr ſaluation: euen ſo the Scriptures in all places, and namely, the laſt quotations, do apparantly teſtifye.
               By thys that is ſayd, I hope, it is cleerely proued, that Ma. C. vpon good groundes hath delyuered, that Chriſt is the head or foundation, and the aſſemblyes or particular Churches, are vnited vnto, or builded vpon hym by faith, and that nothing beſides faith in the Sonne of God, is neceſſarye to the very being of a Church.
               Alſo, hauing found the eſſence of a Church, it followeth, that all thyngs elſe attributed therevnto (and namely Chriſtes gouernment as occupyed in that ſubiect) are referred by the learned to the place of accidents, and ſo was it well ynough gathered by Browne
                  
him ſelfe, ſaue that where he interpreteth the word accident, by the word hang by, he rather poynteth at the deſert of an Heretick, then noteth out the nature of ſuch an accident. Thus much to hys propoſition.
               His aſſumption beguileth with a groſſer kinde of ſophiſme: as from the denyall of any thyng in part,Harriſon alſo beguileth with the ſame fallation. Pſal. 122. and is heere therefore aunſwered. to conclude the denyall of the ſame thing in the whole. For vpon the denyall of diſcipline, followeth not the denyall of all Chriſtes power, authoritye, and gouernment, except Chriſt haue no further authoritye and gouernment, then is to be executed by the Elderſhips of Churches.
               But I haue proued before, that Chriſtes gouernment is abſolute ouer both freends and enemies profeſſours, and not profeſſours of his name.
               And heere further concerning his Church, I ſay, the adminiſtration of hys gouernment is twofold, proper,
                     Ieſa. 11.2. Pſal. 45.8. Ioh. 3.34. cap. 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.30 Coloſſ. 2.3. Epheſ. 4.7. 1. Pet. 2.5.9. Reuel. 1.6. ca. 5.10 Chriſt executeth his gouernment in his Church partly by the ſecret hand of his power, partly by the outward hand of his members. and communicated. By hys proper gouernment, I meane that which he hath reſerued onely to himſelfe, as not being limitted or ſhut vp within any boundes of lawes or orders reuealed vnto the creature, but is executed, according to his infinite wiſedome, by the ſecret hand of his diuine power, and that both extraordinarily, and ordinarily, and both wayes to the calling and fauing of his elect, which are the true beleeuers, and to the hardening and condemning of the reprobate, which are the counterfeite Chriſtians. The extraordinary wayes are ſeene in hys immediat iudgements, to the confounding of the wicked, and ſuccouring the godly. The ordinarie, by making the word of exhortation and reprofe, and euery thing of ordinary edifying, the 2. Cor. 2.15.16. ſauour of life vnto life to thoſe that are ſaued, and the ſauour of death vnto death, to thoſe that are damned. Hence flowe calling, comfort, reioyſing, and 2. Tim. 3.16.17. growing vp to perfection to the former: but reiecting horror, continuall hardening, and 2. Cor. 2.15.16. finall perdition to the latter. His communicated gouernment,

is that which being limitted within the compaſſe of certayne Lawes and Cannons of hys holy word, he hath committed to be outwardly executed by the hand of the members of particular Churches accordingly. This conſiſteth in their outward vſing the Word, Sacraments, &c. and in their politicall guiding, concerning both the manners and neceſsities of all and euery of them. This latter part onely of the communicated gouernment, which is the politicall guiding of the Church,VVhat muſt be vnderſtood by the word Diſcipline, in all the controuerſie betweene the Browniſts and vs. is that ſame diſcipline, which generally all Eccleſiaſticall Writers ſpeake of, and which is now with vs in queſtion, whether it be of the eſſence of a Church. Let therefore the godly Reader conſider, what an odious iangler Browne is, who vpon any denyall of the laſt and moſt inferiour (though yet no baſe but a worthy) part of Chriſtes gouernment in his Church, concludeth a denyall of all and euery whit of his power, authoritie and gouernment therein.Browne greatly abuſeth his diſciples with this ſophiſm. So likewiſe Harriſon vpon the 122. Pſalm. And therefore where the Reader findeth in Brownes writings, Diſcipline and Christes gouernment matched together, as though they were ſynonymies, that is, dyuers wordes, but of one ſignification, there let hym ſmell thys hys Sophiſtry, and reiect the lewd ſeducer ſo offering it. And though he pretend the place to the Corinths,1. Cor. 5.4. to approue hys phraſe, ſaying: Paule calleth this Diſcipline the power of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, beleeue hym not. For the Apoſtle ſpeaketh not there of Christes power as it is taken for hys authoritye and office of gouernment, but for hys diuine might, ſtrength, and efficacious power, by which he is with hys Church to the end of the world,
                     Math. 28.19.20. Luke 24.49. Acts 1.5.8. and promiſed to be in the middeſt of two or three that ſhould be ſo gathered together in hys name. Heerevpon,
                     Math. 18.19.20. 
                  Paule doth not call (as he ſayeth) Diſcipline, the power of Christ, but encourageth the Corinthians to miniſter the diſcipline of Excommunication vppon the inceſtuous perſon, arming them therevnto with the mighty preſence of Chriſt, by which it ſhould

bee made effectuall. This double vſe of the word, power, I preuented before. And nowe let Browne knowe, that whereas by alleadging the Scriptures, he ſhifteth, I may ſay, coggeth in a diuers ſenſe, the pitfall of Homonymie, which he prepared for his reader, is diſcouered, and ſo become a ſnare vnto himſelfe. Next, from two or three places, that ſet forth the efficacie of the worde, by magnificent and worthy titles: as 1. Corinth. 4.20. The kingdome of God is not in worde, but in power. Pſalm. 110.2. The Lorde ſhall ſende the rodde of his power out of Syon. And 1. Corinthians. 10.4. The weapons of our warre-fare are mightie through God: from theſe places (I ſay) he concludeth thus. So then, if the power of the woorde, to binde and looſe, to remitte,
                  Anſw. to M.C. Pag. 34. 
                  or retaine mens ſinnes, to promiſe life, and to rebuke and giue ouer to execration, bee taken from Chriſt or the Church of Chriſt, what remaineth but an Idoll or counterfait Christ, an Idol or counterfait Church. Here both he proceedeth in his double faced fallation laſt noted, conueying him-ſelfe by the word, power, from Chriſtes office, to his deuine eſſence, whereby he accompliſheth all thinges in his gouernement, whether by the meane and miniſterie of men or otherwiſe, as I obſerued before in the diſtribution of his gouernement: and alſo heapeth vppon it, an impudent petition of the principle, as if the diſcipline being remooued from the Church, foorth-with the woorde ſhoulde bee without Chriſtes power to bind and looſe, to remitte or retaine mens ſinnes: which is not ſo much to extoll the worthy diſcipline (as he pretended) as it is eyther to clogge and chaine vp Chriſtes diuine power thereunto: or elſe to make diſcipline the diuine force, and efficacious power of Chriſt himſelfe which is his eſſence. Whether ſoeuer of which (as one muſt needes) bee graunted, not Maſter Cart-wright, but Browne ſhall bee found the abſurd blaſphemer in this caſe.
               The bulwarke of his cauſe is beaten downe, & there is not a weapon left him of any ſtrength vnbroken, if this

be well weyed, which is by me deliuered. And if the reader conſider, that although the diſcipline bee a kind of the authoritie of Chriſt, yet is it not all, nor the principall of his authoritie: and that although hee vſe it, many times, as a chariot, for his holy worde to ride vppon, to ſubdue rebellious ſpirites: yet hee vſeth it neither moſt chiefely,2. Cor. 1.21. 2. cor. 10.4. Heb. 1.3. cap. 4.12. Eſa. 11.4. nor moſt ordinarily: but the ſimple preaching of the worde, is his continuall ſcepter and ſword, wherby hee ſaueth his people, and conquereth his enemies: beateth downe euery ſtrong holde: pearſeth to the diuiſion of the ſoule and Spirite, and of the ioyntes and marrowe, and iudgeth the very cogitations and conceiptes of the heart. This, I ſay, if the reader conſider, ſeeing there are no greater effectes in the whole kingdome of Chriſt,
                     Iohnas. 3.5.6. 2. Sam. 12.7.13. Act. 24.25. ca. 26.
                        •
                     8. ca. 2.3.8. then theſe which hee executeth by his worde, yea when it is not aſſiſted by the diſcipline (for the woorde may ſtande without the diſcipline, ſo cannot the diſcipline without the woorde) hee will not only ſtay him-ſelfe, as in a refreſhing ſhadowe of Chriſtes gracious gouernement, where hee ſeeth the worde deliuered and taught: but alſo acknowledge and teſtifie, that it is a moſt malicious deuiſe of Satan, practiſed by ſuch inſtruments as Browne, vnder a quarell for the holy diſcipline to drawe thouſandes of ſoules from the moſt ordinary and mighty meanes of Chriſtes gouernment, and adminiſtration of his kingdome, that ſo lying ſcattered from the folde, they might bee out of all hope of ordinary reſcue, when the deuourer ſhoulde find them.
               
                  Anſw. to M.C. Pag 36 38.Let not Browne nowe hence-foorth aſke what part of diſcipline may bee wanting, and the Church notwithstanding haue the eſſence, and name of a Church. For although Maſt. Cart. not framing him-ſelfe to Brownes ſenſe and writings, as with whome hee medled not in his letter, vſeth the woorde, diſcipline, in a larger ſenſe, as comprehending all the behauiour concerning a Church in outward dueties, and ſo (amongeſt the reſt) the dayly

planting and building, by the calling and offering of the woorde by the miniſters, and the hearing, receiuing and obeying of a people: yet Browne can-not thinke to vſe the worde in that ſenſe, ſith his owne writings haue bounded him and ſet him in a ſcanter compaſſe, namely within the politicall guiding of a Church, which I haue lately before ſpoken of, as generally all his writinges, and namely his moſt vnlearned definitions and diuiſions Numb. 48. doe teſtifie. Where defining the kingdome of Chriſt, to bee his office of gouernement, whereby hee vſeth the obedience of his people to keepe his lawes and commaundementes, to their ſaluation and well-fare: hee deuideth the ſame in ouerſeeing and trying out of wickedneſſe, rebuke and ſuparation. By which place, (vnleſſe we will imagine of a diſcipline that hath larger limittes then the kingdome of Chriſt) wee ſee what Browne vnderſtandeth by diſcipline. Within the polliticall guiding of a Church, therefore, muſt he bee contented to bee reſtrained, in all this diſputation of diſcipline. And as for his buſie hunting after Contradiction in M.C. his woordes, in ſaying, diſcipline is not of the eſsence of a Church, and yet for want of all diſcipline,
                  Pag. 35·36. 
                  to take away the eſſence and name of a Church: his labour is vtterly loſt, as I haue prooued before, in ſpeaking of proper accidents. And though in wordes, hee vrge the ſhewe of a contradiction, without diſcipline there may bee a Church, and without diſcipline there can bee no Church. Yet is it an empty barrell without liquour. For when the reader ſhall haue added the word, ſome, to the former, and the worde, all, to the latter, that the firſt may bee read thus: without ſome diſcipline there may bee a Church: and the other thus: without al diſcipline there can be no Church, he ſhal plainly diſcerne, that Browne did but dreame of a contradictiō. After thoſe his ſhiftings & turnings to auoid the euidence of M C. reaſons, & to hoodewinke his reader from the ſight of thē: hee ſetteth on as though hee would proue the contrary

of M.C. concluſion: namely that diſcipline is of the eſſence of a Church. Wherein when he hath ſpent three or foure pages,
                     Pag. 37.38.39.40. Other fourmes of Brownes reaſoning, to proue diſc. of the eſſence of a Church. with many vaine and abuſed quotations of ſcripture: after his wonted manner, the whole courſe of his arguing comes all to this, that the woorde of God giues the Church authoritie, to obſerue the behauiours of the ſeuerall members, and to binde and looſe, remitte, and retaine ſinnes by eccleſiasticall cenſures, and ſo exerciſe the keyes of the kingdome of heauen: Therefore ſuch iuriſdiction is of the eſſence of a Church. A worthy Captaine of ſo vnworthy a ſchiſme. Set this in a due fourme, and I thinke him-ſelfe (if it were poſſible) woulde bluſh for ſhame to ſee it. It is thus.

                     
                        Whatſoeuer the worde of God commandeth to bee vſed of the Church, that ſame is of the eſſence of the Church:
                     
                     
                        But the woord commandeth the diſcipline to bee vſed of the Church:
                     
                     
                        Therefore is the diſcipline of the eſſence of the Church.
                     
                  
If this bee the good reaſoning, let vs ſee whither it will bring vs.
               Whatſoeuer the word of God cōmandeth to be vſed of the Church: the ſame is of the eſſence of the Church:
               But the word commandeth good works to bee vſed of the Church:
               Therfore good works are of the eſſence of the Church. Likewiſe.
               Whatſoeuer the word of God commandeth faith to bring forth, the ſame is of the eſſence of faith:
               But the word of God commaundeth that faith bring forth good workes.
               Therfore good works are all of the eſſence of faith.
               And thus it will come to paſſe, that euery commaundement being made of the eſſence of a Church, and of a particular Chriſtian as a member: euery tranſgreſſion likewiſe ſhall ouerthrowe the Church, and the ſtate of a Chriſtian. His ſcope being ſeene, let vs take alſo a ſhort viewe of the handling of his matter. Setting

downe diſcipline, firſt in two points,
                     Pag. 37. as if he woulde begin at the two maine heades thereof: he maketh the gathering of a Church one, and the guiding of it, the other: as though you might vnderſtande, howe the light of the fire can be before there be fire: the vſe of an inſtrument, before the inſtrument be fourmed, and the action of a liuing thing, before the ſame liuing thing be engendered. But in theſe diſputes of diſcipline, the man muſt bee remembred, that wee ſpeake not of diſcipline at randon, but ſtrictly of the diſcipline of a church. Which therfore, hauing continuall relation to a Church, as haue the actions of a man to a man, can no more be preſuppoſed to be the diſcipline of a church, before the ſame church be: then can, the actiōs of any man be aſcribed vnto him or reported of him, before the man himſelfe that ſhould do them, be begotten. But if he will needes haue the gathering of a Church to bee a part of the diſcipline,Brownes writings hold not together. what part will he referre it vnto? For hereby we ſhall find him as farre at oddes with himſelfe, as hee is with the trueth: His diuiſion of the kingdome of Chriſt, (which hee taketh to differ nothing from the diſcipline, as I haue declared) you haue heard before. What part thereof is the gathering of a Church to bee referred vnto? Perhaps hee will anſwere the laſt part, namely ſeparation. But alas poore man, hee forgot that his owne definitions haue quite debarred him all ſuch eſcape. For,
                     Num. 48. 
                  ſeparation (ſayth he) of the wilfull or grieuous offender, is a duetifulneſſe of the Church, in withholding from them the Chriſtian Communion and felowſhip, by pronouncing and ſhewing the christian Communion to be broken by their grieuous wickedneſſe, and that with mourning, faſting and prayer for them, and denouncing Gods iudgements againſt them. And this he calleth not ſeparation from the prophane world, but ſeparation from the Church. The ſame hee ſayth of the other two partes: trying out wickedneſse and rebuke, they be duties of the church (ſayth he:) therefore the Church is preſuppoſed firſt to be (ſay I) and ſo he in this diſſenting both from truth, and from himſelfe, ſheweth

that nothing but the ſpirit of lies doeth lead him.B. ſubtil phraſe worthie to be obſerued. And why doeth hee ſay, The Church must bee gathered of the worthie, and not rather of beleeuers, according to the vſuall ſpeach of the Scriptures? Forſooth he knewe, that if hee granted the Church to bee gathered of beleeuers, there needed no more to bee ſaide to his confutation. He was ſo wiſe therefore for himſelfe, as to chooſe rather a worde more impertinent, and leſſe perſpicuous, both to reſerue a vauntage of cauilling, and to darken the light vnto his reader. In the tenth of Matthew whence he fetcheth his phraſe, Chriſt giueth no commaundement to the twelue to gather Churches, as lthough for that ende they ſhoulde enquire who was woorthie: but onely that they ſhould carie thorow the cities of Iudea, the ſound of the cōming of Meſsiah, for the wakening of the people, & preparing their minds to receiue their ſaluation, now comming ſo neare towardes them: and there inquiring out of the worthy is not enioyned them for gathering of congregatious in townes and cities, but for their direction touching the places, where they ſhould looke for intertainment, whileſt they taried in any towne or citie. And therefore (ſayeth our Sauiour) In whatſoeuer citie or towne ye ſhal come, inquire who is worthie in it, and then hee ſaith not, gather all ſuch together to bee a Church, but there abide ye, till ye go thence: as appointing them in euery towne where they come, to take vp their lodging in the houſe of him, whom they heard moſt ſpecially to be ſpoken of, for an honeſt and religious life. The reſt of his quotations here are from his purpoſe: they concerne not gathering of Churches, but partly the behauiour in Churches, and partly euery ſeuerall Chriſtians diſcerning of contemners.
                     Mala 1.13. And Malachie among the reſt is fowly forced, when as becauſe he ſayeth The Lorde reiected their offerings, becauſe they offered the ſcrobled, and the lame, and theſicke, and the blinde. Browne ſayth, It figureth the reiecting of our Sacraments, when dogs and ſwine do cōmunicate therein: when papiſts & Atheiſts, drunkards, Maygamſters, blaſphemers, raylers,

fighters, and ſuch like, are preſented as ſweete bread at the table of the Lord. Where he ſhould compare the blind and lame ſacrifices, with the defect and defilement that may bee in the Sacraments and ſeruices of the Church: hee to ſerue his owne turne, compareth them with the vnworthie receyuers and diſordered members of a Church, which was very clenly cogging. Beſides that it is vntrue, that euerie vnworthy receiuer, by and by is a dog or a ſwine:
                     Matth. 7.6. for the deſcription Chriſt giueth of them by their properties, is ſuch as rightly agreeth with thoſe only, who with open malice and wilfull ſtubborneſſe tread vnderfoot & blaſpheme godlineſſe, and ragingly perſecute the profeſſors of the ſame:
                     Act. 13.45.46. Such found Paule and Barnabas of the Iewes at Antioch. But ſuch therefore is not euery vnwoorthie Communicant, or that doth deſerue excommunication. His heaping vp of Papiſts & Atheiſts with the reſt, ſheweth that his pen was in running, and he muſt needs fill vp the nūber. Finally, it is falſe, that they were no ſacrifices, becauſe the Lorde reproueth the bringing of ſuch by the people, and the accepting of them by the Prieſt. For they keeping them to the kind of cattel that God had ordeyned for his ſacrifices, as ſheepe, oxen, &c. it ceaſed not to be a ſacrifice, although a faultie one, when they offered the lame, and the blind of thoſe, becauſe the fault was in the qualitie, and not in the ſubſtance. Whereas if they ſhould haue killed a dogge, or an hogge, or an aſſe, then it had beene vtterly no ſacrifice.
                     Pag: 38, His corrupt opinion in vrging the retayning of euery treſpaſſe of our brothers till wee ſee him repent, I haue diſcouered before. Nowe when hee ſayeth, This libertie and power euery Christian muſt holde, or elſe hee is the ſeruant of men, and not of Chriſt: And therehence argueth from the more to the leſſe?Browne maketh good workes, the eſſence of a Chriſtian. 
                  If a particular Chriſtian cannot want it, how ſhall the whole Church be without it, and yet be named the Church of Christ? It is manifeſt that hee maketh the reproouing of offending brethren to be of the eſſence of a Chriſtian, and ſo reaſoneth from the deniall of the more probable, to the deniall of

the leſſe probable. But his reaſoning is ſophiſticall, and the conſequence popiſh hereſie. His reaſon is ſophiſtical, in that he maketh it leſſe probable for a church to faile in matters of diſcipline, than for a chriſtian, in his own particular of moniſhing his brother: when as contrariwiſe it is more probable, becauſe to the diſcipline of a Church is required a conſent: and conſent is neuer free from the clogges & croſsings of cōtradictorie iudgements, which a particular Chriſtian being leſſe ſubiect vnto, it is therefore leſſe likelie, equall or probable, that hee ſhould faile. And for more proofe, experience teacheth this euerie where. For in Churches where the diſcipline of Chriſt is either not wholy, or not ſoundly eſtabliſhed, you ſhal alwayes find ſome particular members diligent and ſound in their duties this way. And I referre to the reader the conſideration of many particular members of the Engliſh aſſemblies in this behalfe. I ſaid there was popiſh hereſie in the conſequence, and the reader ſhall teſtifie no leſſe, when he conſidereth, that if the reproouing offending brethren bee of the eſſence of a Chriſtian, and no man can denie the doing thereof to be a worke, it foloweth that works are of the eſſence of a Chriſtian, and conſequently of a church, as I haue iuſtly charged him other where. Behold ſtil, whitherto his incōſiderate courſe doth carie him? If his diſciples abhorre this, and graunt that a particular man ceaſeth not to be a Chriſtian for his default in this dutie: euen ſo muſt he grant by the ſame neceſsitie, that a Church ceaſeth not to be a Church for her defaults in diſcipline. It is true, that ſuch a chriſtian, is a weake chriſtiā, according to the proportion of his wants and errours, and ſuch a Church is a diſeaſed Church, and that according to the meaſure of her imperfections, but yet ſtill a Chriſtian, and yet ſtill a Church, for the eſſentiall cauſes aforeſaid.
                     Pag. 39. He ſayth, Euery particular chriſtian is a king and Priest vnto God. This is true. But to what ende are we kings (ſayth he) forſooth to holde the ſcepter of Gods worde, to iudge the offenders,
                  
                     Numb. 55. 
                  and for nothing elſe? No. For ſo it is in

his wiſe definitions alſo. Well if this be all, when his diſciples and he haue beſt learned to be this kinde of kings, (as they haue too well learned this leſſon alredie,) what can they be found, but thoſe hypocrits,
                     Matth. 7.3.5. which ſpy motes in other mens eyes, but marke not the beames in their owne: and by that name, ſhalbe commanded of the iuſt iudge (with ſhame) at length to looke into themſelues, which before were wholy occupied in the beholding others. But whoſoeuer will not wilfully cloſe their eyes, if they ſhall ſuffer themſelues to be remembred, that the moſt immediate neere and principall end, (except Gods glory which is the principall end of al ends) of chriſtians being kings vnto God, is, to mortifie our own affections and euill luſts, and to ſubdue ſinne in our ſelues, they will leaue with worthie deteſtation ſo looſe a teacher, and be skilfull to eſpie this groſſe ſophiſme, which almoſt euerie where he committeth, vnder colour of ſome part of a thing, denying the ſame thing wholy. And thus it fareth with him almoſt in euerie ſentence of the page we haue in hande, If a particular Chriſtian doe not vpholde his libertie and power in iudging and rebuking particular offenders, he is vtterly without the Kingdome and Prieſthoode of Chriſt. In like maner (ſayth he) if the Church doe not openlie rebuke and excommunicate: it hath no intereſt in the Prieſthood and Kingdome of Chriſt, and ſo is none of his Church. Againe, If it cannot excommunicate, it hath not the Keyes of the kingdome of heauen to binde and looſe, reteyne, or remitte ſinnes,
                  By the keies, B. vnderſtandeth nothing but the cenſures of the Church, ſo do Har
                        •
                      ſo
                        •…
                     ereth is their anſwere 
                  and to ſhut the gates of heauen against anie. Which is as much to ſay, as a Chriſtian muſt ſhewe the effectes of Chriſtes Kingdome in all thinges, or elſe in none. And a Church if it hath it not in all reſpectes, it hath it in no reſpect. And thus (belike) becauſe Browne is not yet ſo madde, as that hee will ſuffer no clothes vpon him, wee ſhoulde not beleeue diuerſe of his great friendes, who ſay, he is madde, or out of his wittes, whereby they ſeeke to excuſe his dealings. The Church hath (as I ſayde before) the woorde of God, which becauſe it openeth comfort

in Chriſt to the penitent, and ſhutteth it vp from the obſtinate,
                     Matth. 16.19. is therefore called the Keyes of the kingdome of heauen: as alſo the power of God vnto ſaluation to euery one that beleeueth:
                  
                     Rom. 1.16. 1. Cor. 1.18. called alſo in another place, the ſauour of life to life in thoſe that are ſaued: and the ſauour of death vnto death in thoſe that periſh.
                  2. Cor. 2.15.16. Theſe Keyes are diuerſly adminiſtred, or diſpenſed: as generally, particularly, openly, priuately, by the ſeuerall members, or by a ioynt number of the Church: and ſo either ſimplie, or elſe ioyned with ſome perſonall reſtraint, as ſuſpenſion or excommunication. Nowe where the Keyes are not all manner of wayes thus diſpenſed, doeth it followe, that there they are not diſpenſed at all? Hee needeth not tell vs, that the Church hath libertie and right by the woorde to vſe them all, and ſo ſtande harping vpon this ill tuned ſtring, that it hath power to iudge thoſe that are within: when as this in the meane time which ſhoulde haue gained his cauſe, lieth vnprooued: namely, if the Church vſe not all her right, ſhee vſeth none: and if ſhee exerciſe not her power of iudging euerie way, then doeth ſhee not exerciſe it any way: This (I ſay) beeing prooued, had put life into his cauſe, which nowe remayning vnprooued, maketh his impudent concluſion, wherein he boaſted to haue prooued this, ridiculous.
                     Pag. 40. That which hee calleth a fonde anſwere of M. Cartwright, was becauſe it was fondly vnderſtood of him. The point is explained by me before. The reſt of his 37. page, being chiefly of the Corinthians diſcipline and abuſes in the Sacrament, I haue made breathleſſe in my diſcourſe of Communicating.
               
               Thou haſt heard (beloued) what this great maiſter can ſay, to prooue diſcipline of the eſſence of a Church. Let vs nowe heare him, returning to the reſt of his obiections and cauils at M. Cartwright his letter touching this point. M. Cartwright hauing truly ſaid, that Church aſſemblies are builded by faith onely vpon Chriſt the foundation, the which faith ſo being, whatſoeuer (ſayeth hee) is wanting of that which is commaunded, or remayning of that which is

forbidden, is not able to put that aſſemblie from the right and title of ſo being the Church of Chriſt. For that, fayth can admit no ſuch thing, as giueth an vtter ouerthrowe, and turning vpſide downe of the trueth. Hereunto hee addeth. By this title of the faithfull, the Apoſtle in his Epiſtles noteth out the Churches of God: beeing all one with him to ſay: To the faithfull, or to the Saintes, as to the Churches of ſuch a place. VVhat ſoeuer wanteth vnto this, or is more than ynough, it wanteth or aboundeth, to the diſgrace and vncomelineſſe, or to the hazarde of the continuance, and not to the preſent ouerthrowe of the Church. And although, beſides fayth in the ſonne of God, there may be manie thinges neceſſarie for euerie aſſemblie: yet bee they neceſſarie to the comely and ſtable beeing, and not ſimplie to the being of the Church. This ſounde and ſober doctrine of prudent diſtinguiſhing & diſcerning things differing in their proper kindes, thus layde downe by this reuerende man, beeing wrangled at in other things (as you haue heard) there remayneth that which Browne ſayeth, agaynſt his reaſon of entituling the Church with thoſe tearmes, the faithfull, and of the Saints.
               
               The Apoſtle indeede,The wordes Saints and faithfull ſynonymies in Pauls epiſtles. almoſte in all his writings to the churches, ſaluteth them by the title of Saints or faithfull: as namely at Corinth, Epheſus, Philippi, and Coloſſe, in the ſteade of calling them Churches of thoſe places, as putting them in remembrance of that whereby they ſtoode, and had their being of a Church. Like as alſo writing to Timothie and Titus,
                  1. Tim. 1.2. Tit. 1.4. hee calleth them his naturall ſonnes in the fayth, and according to the fayth, as noting by that (without anie addition of other woordes (though Browne ſayeth, it coulde not bee ſhewed) their ſtate and beeing in Chriſt. Whereas, if diſcipline, and iudging offendours, had beene of the eſſence of a Church, and of a Chriſtian, Saint Paule woulde rather, haue vſed theſe or ſuch like titles. To the Saintes and diſplinate ones at Corinth, Epheſus, Philippi, and Coloſſe: and to Timothie and Titus my naturall ſonnes in the Diſcipline, or according to the Diſcipline

and iudging offenders.
                  
                     Act. 8.36 37. So when the Eunuch comming by the water, ſaid, See here is water, what doth let me to be baptized? Philip ſhould not haue anſwered him: If thou beleeueſt with all thine heart, thou mayeſt, but rather, If I may ſee thee diſciplinate or indued with the power of Chriſt, to iudge and rebuke particular offenders, then mayeſt thou bee baptized. That the woorde Saintes and faithfull, are Synonyma, and ſignifie all one, and no differing thing in thoſe places, it is eaſily proued, by that, the Apoſtle ſaluting the faithfull at Philippi,
                  
                     Philip. 1.1. doeth it by the title of Saintes onely. without the addition of the woorde faythfull. In like ſort, directing his ſecond Epiſtle, not onely to the church at Corinth, but to the reſt of beleeuers alſo in all that prouince, hee vſeth the woorde Saintes alone, to ſignifie them. Whereas if Saint Paul had meant any higher thing by the woorde Saintes, then hee doeth by faythfull in other places, the Corinthians ſhould not haue tolde, to whom his direction ſhould haue perteined, ſince they being men coulde iudge no further, than of the outwarde profeſsion. This is made yet more then manifeſt, by comparing the direction of the firſt Epiſtle herewith: for there placing his titles iuſt oppoſitely, and calling the Churche at Corinth, Saintes, and the reſt of profeſſours, by the title of thoſe that call on the name of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, hee ſheweth his flat iudgement to ſtande for the indifferent vſe of thoſe woordes: which confuteth the errour of Browne,
                     Pag. 41. imagining the woorde Saintes to implie actuall holineſſe, and not the profeſsion of fayth, whereby (and that onely) euery one that holdeth it, are (in all humane iudgement) eſteemed to ſtande vnder the ſweete harbour of Chriſtes imputation. And when I thus ſpeake of eſteeming Chriſtians, onely by their profeſsion of the true fayth, I woulde not bee ſo vnderſtoode, as this gariſh fellowe taketh maiſter Cartwright, pages 6. and 7. but of ſuch a profeſsion as ſheweth at leaſte ſome good notes of gladneſſe and willingneſſe to the woorde and meanes of fayth, though they

be not atteined, neither to ſo high a pitch of knowledge, nor ſo ſet a courſe of holy practiſe, as either to ſubdue thē
                  ſelues in all outward actions, or cenſure offending brethren in their particular treſpaſſes. Therefore, when hee demaundeth, howe they that ſhewe forth a wicked and vnholy profeſſion, ſhall ſtill bee called the Saintes and Church of God?
                  1. Cor. ca. 11. & ca. 5 largely ſet downe in the latter diſcourſe of communicating. His anſwere is ready. The Apoſtle called the Church at Corinth, Saints (notwithſtanding their manifold vnholy practiſes, wherewith the ioynt aſſemblies were to bee charged, generally, and alſo the particular members ſeuerally) in regarde of their preſent ſtanding in the faith of Chriſt, who not onely taketh away the imputation of our ſinnes (our ſinnes, I meane, of the elect onely, in the ſight of God, and of all ſuch profeſſours as I haue ſpoken of, as touching the iudgement and eſtimation of man:) but alſo by dayly degrees, carieth vs finally to the toppe of inherent perfection. For the hope whereof, and this preſent profeſſion, whence that probably ſo ariſeth, vntill apparant appoſtacy breake forth, all the members of a Church are to bee reckoned Saintes and ſanctified ones in Chriſt, like as Paul entituleth the Church of Corinth. This man ſaith: though Paul wrote his Epiſtle to the Church & Saints at Corinth, yet doth he not thereby call the inceſtuous perſon, or other groſſe ſinners, mēbers or parts of that Church. In all poynts of the queſtion of a Church, I ſee, that a ſtrange blindnes hath poſſeſſed him, in the ſteede of more then an ordinary knowledge, which hee pretendeth. For if the inceſtuous perſon were not a member of the church at Corinth, why did they ſeparate him? Doth not ſeparation, or ſundring, neceſſarily argue a vnion or being together?1. Iob. 2.29. The diſtinction of Saint Iohn ſerueth not in this caſe: for hee ſpeaketh of Apoſttaes from the catholique faith, not of moral offenders that are to be reconciled to their places. And when he ſaith: they went out from vs, but they were not of vs, hee ſignifieth, that they were not of the catholique Church, which is the number of the elect: which diſtinction of catholique & particular Churches,

if Browne would obſerue in any meaſure, it woulde no leſſe auaile to the comfort of his owne confuſed conſcience, then to the wel regarded peace of our Church. For a particular Church, being a conuenient number of ſuch,The Definition of a particular Church. Act. 2.38.41. ca. 8.5.6.8.12.13. comp. with cap. 9.31. Rom. 1.17. cap. 3.21.22. Philip. 3.9. Math. 13.4. as doe in one vniforme agreed, courſe of the outward ioynt worſhip of God, profeſſe that righteouſneſſe, which is by the faith of Ieſus Chriſt: conſiſteth both of the elect and reprobate, vnfeigned & counterfeit Chriſtians: being therfore rightly reſembled by that net cast into the ſea, that gathereth all kinds of things. And ſo (as touching the eye of man) all are to be accounted members of that Church, which ioyne together thus in one profeſſion. And if open offences breake out in any, then appeareth diſeaſed or rotting members, but yet members till they be ſeparated: I meane ſtill, as in the eye and iudgement of man, according as it behooueth vs to ſpeake in all this queſtion, of the ſtate and condition of particular Churches. The reſt of his 41. page againſt M.C. was matter of his owne finding, like a bad husband that loues to make long harueſt of a litle corne.
               M. C. to prooue that there may be ſundry thinges neceſſary to the comely and ſtable being, and yet not ſimply to the being of a Church, giueth two inſtances from the people of Iſrael, which neglected for the ſpace of 40. yeeres, the holy Sacrament of circumciſion, and the Paſſeouer, (alſo as it ſeemeth) one onely time excepted, and yet ceaſed not therefore to be the Church of God, and to haue the Sanctuarie amongeſt them. Browne ſaith, this matter is ſhamefully abuſed:
                  
                     Pag. 42. but we ſhall ſee anon where the ſhame reſteth. His maner is to ſpeake loude, and doe little. That there was no negligence in omitting circunciſion, and the celebration of the Paſſeouer, but a neceſſitie and commaundement, he would prooue thus: and firſt for the Paſſeouer, becauſe (ſaith he) It was not to be kept after their comming out of Egypt, ſaue at ſome ſpecial charge of the Lorde, as Numbers 9.2. till they came into the lande of Canaan. Howe prooues he this? Firſt by ſome teſtimonies

of Scripture full ſlenderly vnderſtoode:
                     Exod. 12.25. cap. 13.5. and ſecondly, by a reaſon taken from the ende of the Paſſeouer, which maketh cleare againſt him. His Scriptures teſtifie, that they were more then once remembred to keepe the Paſſeouer, when they came into the lande of Canaan: but he ſheweth vs not, that they were onely then to keepe it, and not ordinarily before.The keeping of the Paſſeouer a long time neglected by the people of Iſrael. To keepe the Paſſeouer in the wilderneſſe, and to keepe it alſo in the lande of Canaan, are in no wiſe contrary: ſo as to argue from the affirmation of the one, to the negation of the other. But although that be ſo beaten vpon, to preuent the ſecuritie, or forgetfulneſſe of them, or their poſteritie, when they ſhoulde come to the lande of reſt, as, leaſt they ſhould imagine that which figured their ſo haſtie going out of Egypt, to ceaſe, when they ſhoulde be at eaſe: yet muſt the whole inſtitution be better conſidered, and thereby we ſhall ſee (as our Sauiour anſwered touching the billes of diuorce) that howſoeuer the Iſraelites practiſed afterwardes, yet in the beginning it was not ſo. For the Lorde ſaide,
                     Exod. 12.14. 
                  This day ſhall be vnto you a remembraunce, and ye ſhall keepe it a holy feast vnto the Lorde throughout your generations: ye ſhall keepe it holy by an ordinance for euer.
                  
                     Verſe 17. Verſe 24. This is repeated agayne, and the thirde tyme, before he maketh mention of the lande of Canaan: and when he commeth to that, he doeth not bring it in expoſitiuely, as with, I meane, To wit, That is to ſay, or any ſuch note of further opening that, which he had ſpoken before: but hauing ſaid in the 24. verſe, Therefore ſhall you obſerue this thing, as an ordinance for thee and thy ſonnes for euer, he addeth:After Tremelius tranſlation. 
                  Be it therefore, when you ſhall come into that lande, which Iehouah, euen as he hath ſayde, ſhall giue vnto you, and ſhall obſerue this worſhippe: Be it, I ſay, that your children asking you what this worſhip meaneth, you ſhall ſay, &c. al which appeareth (as I ſayd) to be no reſtraint of the former generall & thryſe repeated commandement, but partly a further

enforcing of the perpetuitie of the ceremonie, by ſo ſpeciall enioyning euen their land of reſt to be ſubiect vnto it, and partly to teach the deriuing of the vſe thereof, to the generations long after. Alſo when he ſetteth downe that day, to all their poſterity and generations: it is likely, that either they muſt obſerue it in the wilderneſſe, or elſe they that then liued could not keepe the commaundement,
                     Num. 9.1.2.3. in teaching their children the practiſe & inſtruction thereof. Againe, in the 9. of Numb. it is expreſſely noted, that they celebrated it then, in the firſt moneth of the ſecond yere, which was the next in order to the paſſeouer in Aegipt, the Lord (as it were) making him-ſelfe a gratious remembrancer of them for that time: not vpon any ſpeciall cauſe, as Browne would carry it, but onely becauſe the appointed time was returned: for the word of God, in no caſe is ſilent, to giue the reaſons of any ſpeciall exceptions of generall commandements. Alſo if it had bin commaunded in the third or fourth yere, there had bene ſome little colour of that he ſaith. This is yet more euident, ſeeing that in the ſame place, the Lord commaundeth further, that it ſhoulde bee kept in the appointed time, namely the 14. day of the firſt moneth, and calleth that, the due ſeaſon thereof. Which argueth plainly, that the keeping of that feaſt was ſeaſonable, before they came to Canaan.
                     Deut. 16.5.6. And therefore alſo, when they came beyonde Iordan, into the lande of Canaan (although they were not come to their reſt,) yet they celebrated it, euen without any ſpeciall commaundement from the Lorde, becauſe it was the proper time of the Paſſeouer. Nowe whereas Browne reaſoneth, that becauſe it figured the haſtie going out of Aegipt, and through the wildernes, therfore they were not ordinarily to keepe it, before they came to the land of reſt: hee might much more reaſonably haue concluded, therfore they ought to haue kept, &c. becauſe the oftener meditating, and the mo helpes wee vſe in the very action of perfourming our commaunded dueties, the more likely and probable is our better performaunce of the ſame.

And that circumciſion was omitted by negligence,Circumciſion a long time neglected by the people of Iſrael. Ioſh. 5.7. it is euident in Ioſh. 5, where the cauſe of their vncircumciſion is rendered, to be, neither neceſsitie, nor commaundement, (as Browne fableth) but the very negligence of their parents, for ſo the text ſaith: They were vncircumciſed,
                  
                     Ver. 9. 
                  becauſe they circumciſed them not by the way. And therefore after, the Lord calleth this their circumciſing, the taking away the ſhame of Egipt from thē
                  : plainly caſting ſo in their teeth, their vncircūciſion, as nothing elſe but a tricke of Egypt, which they ſauored of, as they did of other their maners of worſhipping their calues &c. Neither is it any thing, that he alleadgeth, of their let of iourneying. For firſt this generation at Gilgal might haue pretended the ſame, being not yet come to their place of reſt: yea better in that, they being men growne, could not iourney after it, & ſhould thereby be in euident danger of all their enemies about thē. Secondly, ſeeing God had cōmanded circunciſion at a certaine day, & not limitted their iournying any certaine day, they were to thinke in all equitie, that the Lord would not diſpoſe ſo of the remouing of the cloud or pillar, as that they ſhould be hurt in the obedience of this cōmandement. Thirdly, if they had circūciſed their children as they ought, at 8. daies old, & not deferred it vntil they were of age, al men may know, that the children caried of their mothers, could not haue bene hurt by their mothers trauaile with thē. Laſt of al we may ſee, that euē in the iourney, which God required of Moſes, & that a iourney of great importāce,
                     Exod. 4.24.25. he required notwithſtanding his childes circumciſion. Which argueth, that God gaue no diſpenſations in this matter for iournying. And therefore it muſt be concluded, as M.C. hath rightly reaſoned, that if this people omitting theſe neceſſary duties, ceaſſed not to be the Church & people of God, it is plaine, that many neceſſary poynts, perteining to a ſound, comely & ſtable being, may bee found wanting, & yet the Church not preſently ouerthrown therby. Nowe I ſuppoſe Browne him ſelfe will not ſay, that the

politicall guiding of a Church, by the cenſuring diſcipline, is greater then theſe twaine. And in this reſpect (ſaith M. C.) the Dutch aſsemblies, whereof the greateſt part in high Germanie, which beſides the mayme of diſcipline which is common to our Churches, are groſſely deceiued in the matter of the Supper, are notwithſtanding holden in the rowle of the Churches of God. In this respect alſo, certaine aſſemblies of our profeſſion, which hauing the vſe of the diſcipline permitted vnto them, and not ſuffered to haue the vſe of the Sacrament of the Lordes ſupper, are not therefore when the Lordes Churches are muſtered, and their names written and enrouled vp, caſt out as vnfit to be in any account of the Lordes hoste. Browne ſaith, the Dutch Churches erre in tranſubſtantiation: but he iudgeth it not an hereſie. If he can vnderſtande any difference betweene tranſubſtantiation and conſubſtantiation, he may acknowledge to the correction of his raſhneſſe, howe well he was ouerſeene when he wrote it. Then in that he accounteth it an error & not an hereſie, he declareth what a crooked rule his affection is to iudge by: calling al things that he eſteemeth amiſſe in my writings, hereſie, (though he knowe not whether I will defende them or no when they are ſhewed me) and yet pleadeth for popiſh tranſubſtantiation, that it ſhould not be condemned for an hereſie.
               As for the Lutheriſh conſubſtantiation, there can not but groſſe abſurdities followe thereof, euen to the ouerthrow of Chriſts humanitie, and that it is ſtoutly mainteined by furious and brawling writings, and followed in the perſons that withſtand them, by priſon & baniſhment: Browne, if he were not a very emptie veſſell of all good learning and reading, woulde neuer haue made doubt of it. That there are ſome Churches of our profeſsion, which hauing diſcipline, are withheld from the vſe of the lordes Supper,
                  If a church may be without a Sacrament, then much more without this diſcipline. 
                  it maketh nothing against him, but againſt vs, as he imagineth: but in deede it is ſuch a wounde to his cauſe, as he can neuer cure. For if a Church maye be without

the vſe of one of the Sacramentes, and yet be a Church, howe much more may it be a Church, if it want the diſcipline in queſtion? Touching M. C. compariſon of the bodye of man, moſt proper to ſet out the ſtate of the Church, and a thing often vſed in the Scriptures to ſuch purpoſe. Browne, being not able to eſcape the euidence of the trueth that appeared in it, paſſeth it ouer with a deepe ſilence in his anſwere, and onely in the margent of M. C. epiſtle ſetteth downe this worde, A fopperie, for a full confutation: wherein (me thinkes) the Reader may well allowe his wit though not his honeſtie. M. C. his laſt illuſtration of the former reaſons,Diſcipline to a Church as a wal to a Citie, or a hedge to a vineyarde. is thus ſet downe. Was not Hieruſalem after the returne from Babylon, the Citie of the great King, vntill ſuch time as Nehemias came and builded vp the walles of the Citie? To ſay therefore it is none of the Church of God, becauſe it hath not receiued this diſcipline, me thinkes it is all one with this, as if a man woulde ſay, It is no Citie, becauſe it hath no wall: or, that it is no vineyarde, becauſe it hath neither hedge nor ditch. It is not, I graunt, ſo ſightly a Citie or vineyarde, nor yet ſo ſafe against the inuaſion of their ſeuerall enemies, which lye in wayte for them: but yet are they truely both Cities and vineyardes. Agaynſt this, Browne trifleth beyonde all meaſure. And firſt, as if M. C. had ſayde,Pag. 43.44.45. that the walles of Hieruſalem, by preciſe teſtimonie out of the Scripture, ſignified Diſcipline, whereas hee draweth the ſimilitude but indifferentlye as from anye Citye, though Hieruſalem bee named as a famous inſtance, in ſteade of all others in lyke caſe: and that hee doeth touching the vſe of a wall, which is moſt apt to ſet foorth the effecte and fruite of the Diſcipline: becauſe, as the one is the defence of a citie whereby it is continued, ſo the other preſerueth a Church in health and ſtable ſtanding. And it is moſt ſottiſh that vpon ſome places of Scripture (and the chiefe of them touching onely the Catholique Church, and ſo

quite from the queſtion of a particular) by which the Church may be ſaid to be builded in the walles of a city, to reaſon as though it may not therefore in any wiſe be compared alſo with the Citizens & Burgeſſes of a Citie, which are compaſſed with diſcipline, as with walles: ſeeing Saint Paul doeth tearme them citizens of the Saintes.
                     Ephe. 2.19. So is it more then childiſh, that he citeth the Pſalmes for the praiſing of the citie by the walles and gates thereof, ſith euery Grammar boy coulde haue tolde him it to be a trope of Synecdoche: a part for the whole. Againe, ſuch is his follie in citing Nehemiah,
                  
                     Nehem. 2.3.5. where he knoweth not, that the maner of ſpeach is, to debaſe the being of a thing, as though it were not, vpon want of ſome chiefe ornament, or ſpeciall point of commoditie that belongeth vnto it, as alſo that the building of part of the citie, is called the building of the citie. The praiſes of Ieruſalem therefore taken from the walles and gates thereof, is (as I haue ſaid) a ſpeach, wherein the leſſe is taken to note the greater, & is more effectuall then if he named the whole, or the greater parts thereof. For ſeeing the Lord loueth the wal ſo much, or the gates more then other cities, how much more the whole citie? and although he thinke it is no Church til the walles be builded, yet the reader ſhal obſerue, that the people of God ſacrificed, as in the temple (which was the place only appointed for the ſacrifice) when only the foundation of the temple was laide,
                     Ezra. 3. and found therein that mercie & comfort from the Lord, for the which they ſolemnly praiſed his holy Name. And accordingly is it meet for Chriſtians in a careful endeuour of further building, to be thankful euen for the foundations: though Browne can find no matter of thanks vnleſſe we had all. whereas if he ſtil withdraw, til he find ſuch a church, yea as that hath the walles of diſcipline made vp in all the parts that he reſpecteth, & as his beſt writings intend, he ſhall neuer ioyne with any Church, if he could liue whileſt the world endureth. But to proceede to the reſt of his cauils, there needeth no great remembrance to

bring forth what a citie may be without a wall, and vineyard without a hedge.Pol. Ariſt. lib. 1.
                   And if he had conceiued of the being & definition of a city, any whit more ſcholerlike than a waterbearer, he would with the learned, & all that be ſkilful in the ſtate of things, haue defined it, by the lawes and policie, and not by the walles thereof. For if it ſhould happen to be diſmantilled, it ceaſeth not therefore to be a citie. When as therefore a number of men may meete together to aſſociate themſelues by certaine lawes, and agreements amongſt themſelues, without hauing a wall, it is euident that a citie may bee without a wall. Likewiſe let al indifferent men iudge, whether a ſpace of ground ſet and furniſhed with plants, or hearbs, hath the ſubſtance of a garden, orchard, or vineyard, and is rightly to be called ſo. I ſpeake not of what courſe we take, in making orchards or vineyards, but of what courſe may be taken in this buſines, in regard of the ſubſtance of the things. And ſo, if a man not fearing, or not foreſeeing ſuch outwarde violences, as a fence might keepe out, doe repleniſh, as is aforeſaide, his ground adioining to his houſe or otherwhere, for the vſes of orchard, garden or vineyarde, ſhall they not in deed be ſuch things, and ſo truely called of him? And if afterward, finding or conceiuing a diſcommoditie of the want, wil he not ſay, I muſt ſenſe in my orchard-garden or vineyard? If Browne ſcorne to be taught theſe things of the learned, or of common ſenſe, yet (at leaſt) let him lay his hand on his mouth, and hearken to the prophet, by whom the Lord ſaid,
                     Zecha. 2.4
                        •
                     
                   
                  Ieruſalem ſhalbe inhabited without a wall. He ſpake ſo after the maner of men, amongſt whō that might come paſſe, for the deepe peace and great ſecuritie they ſhould haue. Now to become of a citie no citie, is no mending but declining caſe, but the Lord ſpeaketh thereby, of their bettering and happier ſtate: and therefore the want of a wall taketh not away the being of a citie. And I pray you, in a citie beſieged, the walles in many breeches, through the batterie, being entred, tell me what it is, that the ſouldiors afterwards are

ſaid to ſacke?
                     Eſay. 5. muſt you not ſay, they ſacke the citie? Alſo Eſay doth manifeſtly declare, that the Lord planted his vineyard, yer euer he hedged it, or did other coſt vnto it. And when he magnifieth his mercy thus towardes his church, in ſaying that by this means, he had left nothing vndone which he could do to his vineyard, he therby declareth, that he had done more to it, than many that haue vineyards vſe to do. And therfore more than was neceſſarie to the very being of it. Again, by the ſame reaſon that they denie it to be a vineyard, becauſe it hath no hedge, they might denie it to bee a vineyarde becauſe it hath no watchtower, winepreſſe, and ſuch other. Moreouer when the Lord tooke away the hedge, as there he threatneth he would, I would knowe, what the enemies of the Church did tread vnderneath their feete, did they not treade the the Lords vineyard? But it may bee thought a ſhame to ſtand ſo long in the proofe of this which Browne is not aſhamed with tedious ſtrife of words to denie.
               When as theſe things, by the grace of God, are thus eſtabliſhed, the contrarie miſtes diſpelled, which the aduerſarie had caſt in, to darken the trueth, and diſcipline founde, not to be of the eſſence of a Church, which is the verie knife, whereby al the ſinewes of the Browniſts contentious arme againſt the Church of Englande (from which they draw their diſciples,) are cut aſūder: yet in the knitting vp of this point, there be two things, which in as fewe wordes as I can, I woulde admoniſh the reader of. Firſt,The Church of Englād by theſe writings not iuſtified in any of her corruptions. that although M. Cartwright in his Epiſtle to M. H. and I, in theſe my defences, doe thus farre ſpeake to the iuſtifying of the Church of Englande, wherein we haue receyued that ſpirituall life and comfort, which doe worthily drawe out of vs theſe duties,Here is alſo Hariſon anſwered, for that he ſayth to this purpoſe vpon the 122. Pſalme. yet haue wee (through the grace of God) nothing leſſe in our minds, than to iuſtifie anie corruption that may bee eſpied in it. So vnworthie a burthē is it therfore that Browne laieth vpō vs, out of the Prophet, charging vs (when we auouch the Church of England, notwithſtanding the defects and

corruptions that it hath, to be yet a Church of GOD,
                     Iere. 7.4. from which no faithfull man is to ſeparate) as though we pleaded for and boulſtred vp iniquitie and corruption by the glorious titles of The Temple of God, The Temple of God. The caſes are too vnlike, for a man that is well in his wittes, to compare together. The Iewes ſo pleaded the prerogatiue of the Temple, to confute the Prophetes threatning of iudgements, for their ſinnes and tranſgreſſions: as though it could not be true, that by any means God ſhould forſake them, to whom hee had made ſuch plenteous promiſes, & that ſo long as they kept the external worſhip which God had appointed, they thought themſelues not ſo far chargeable with their wicked maners. Directly contrary both in iudgement and affection, are wee vnto them (by the grace of God) in all this buſines. We eſteeme the ſtate of our Church in ſome reſpects grieuous and lamentable ynough, full of prouocations of the heauie diſpleaſure and indignation of the Lorde, which as wee acknowledge to bee moſt iuſt, if they had bene powred downe vpon vs now long ago: ſo wee are out of doubt they wil come, if we find not grace to turn and ſeeke the Lorde more dutifully, while the day of his long ſuffering yet endureth. And for this cauſe we earneſtly beſeech thoſe rhat are the Lordes remembrancers, not to keepe ſilence, neither to giue him reſt,
                     Eſay. 66.6.7. Eſay. 58.1. as alſo the Prophets whome the Lorde hath ſent, to lift vp their voyces as a trumpet, to tell the people their ſinnes, and Iſrael their tranſgreſsions. Onely withall wee admoniſh,
                     Matth. 13.6. that whatſoeuer the Lorde hath ioyned together, no man doe ſeparate. Which being a vniuerſall precept of the eternall GOD, bindeth as well euerie particular member, to keepe the vnitie of the Church, which the Lorde hath gathered by the preaching of Chriſt crucified, as it doth the Church it ſelfe, to the ioint vſe of all holie dueties and meanes of her encreaſe. In both of which, wee humblie craue an equall regard and conſideration. Otherwiſe as the miniſterie of him that

crieth to the Churches,
                     Reuel. 2.6. 
                  to repent, and bee mindfull of thoſe things, from whence they are fallen, to ſtrengthen the reſt that are readie to die, that their workes may be full before the Lord. And to buy golde of Chriſt to enrich them,
                  
                     Reuel. 3.2.3.18. 
                  and white garmentes to couer their nakedneſſe, As (I ſay) his miniſterie breaketh not the heade,
                     Pſal. 144.4.5. Prou. 27.6. Luk. 10.33.34. The Church of England should be reprooued, but not forſakē. but is like that wine and oyle of the Samaritane, powred into their woundes, for a gratious recouerie of health: ſo on the contrarie, he that, ſeeing the mournefull eſtate of anie Church, tending to deſolation and ruine, ſhall fall a gathering by himſelfe, or anie way ſhrinke from beſtowing all his ſtrength to the vpholding and rebuilding thereof, he playeth that enuious Onans part,
                     Gen 38.8.9.10. that abhorred the building of his brothers houſe, reſpecting more the ſpread of his own name, than making conſcience of Gods holy ordinance. And as his ſinne is ſo much greater than Onans, by how much the ouerthrow of many Churches, alreadie gathered, is greater, than the refuſall to reuiue the name of one houſe or familie, by ſo much the greater iudgement alſo is to bee feared from the Lorde. Yet was Onans ſinne reuenged by GOD with death. The other thing that I would haue the reader perfect in, is this: that this Troublechurch Browne, not receyuing the loue of the trueth, touching the being of a Church in Chriſt by faith, but ſtriuing for other groundes and eſſentiall cauſes thereof, which the Lorde neuer acknowledged, is (in a heauie, though iuſt iudgement), compaſſed about with a ſtrong deluſion, ſo as hee hath not abſtained from defiling the verie couenant of life, to his owne, and all that follow after him, moſt certaine deſtruction, if the balme of Gods grace bee not ſent in time to heale them. For in the forepart of his anſwere to maiſter Cartwright,
                     Pag. 7.8.9.10.11 he miſerablie confoundeth the couenant of the lawe with the couenant of the Goſpel.
                     Rom. 5.20. Gal. 3. & 4. cap.
                   Whereof the firſt hath the condition of workes a part: the other is made ſimplie without condition of workes, if we beleeue only. He abuſeth to his purpoſe a number of places, all which proue that the eſtabliſhment

of the couenāt of grace hath neceſſarily good works ioyned withall, as effects or fruits,Browne dangerouſly erreth, touching the couenant. but not as cauſes, and ſo any part of the couenant, as he groſſely ſuppoſeth. Some ſentences of his I will ſet downe for thoſe that haue not his bookes. It is written (ſayeth hee,) walke before me and be thou vpright, and I will make my couenant betweene me and thee. As who ſay, one condition and part of the couenant is, our vpright and good profeſsion. And this profeſſion he telleth you, what he meaneth by, in another place:Def. uam. 38. where he ſayth. Our profeſsion and ſubmiſsion to his lawes and gouernement, is the keeping of our couenant by leading a godly and Chriſtian life. Nowe in the ſame place, he defineth the couenant on our behalfe, to be our agreement and partaking of conditions with God. That he ſhall be our God, ſo long as wee keepe vnder his gouernement, and obey his lawes and no longer. As for fayth, the couenant thus beeing corrupted,Brownes faith. howe ſhould it eſcape the defilement of his fingers?In his declararation of the gathering togither of certaine perſons, etc. Therfore in a certaine place he defineth faith to be a conſcience of our redemption and happineſſe in Chriſt, whereby wee wholy yeelde vp our ſelues vnto him in newneſſe of life. And vpon this he addeth, So fayth cannot bee, except wee bee, ſo renued, that no open groſse wickedneſſe bee in vs. Where indeede appeareth to bee the fountaine of all his groſſe reaſoning, when he denieth the profeſsion to bee good, where it is not altogether good, without mixture of corruption. The opening of which things, together, in this place, (the like whereof I haue alſo pointed at otherwher) I doe not for the diſgrace of the man, (though that withal, if he amend not, ſhall iuſtly accompanie it) but directly to diſgrace falſhood, and lay open the way of vnrighteouſneſſe, with the iſſue thereof, vnto his folowers. The cōmoditie of it, I hope, ſhall be great in two principall reſpects. One, that the ſame path of death, which he hath beaten vnto them, may be ſhunned of of al that loue the way of life. And the other that no man hereafter maruell (ſeeing this contrarietie in points of foundation) that Bro. quarelleth with, and ſeparateth from the Church of England, as of which,

he is in no wiſe worthy to be a member. And now to cō
                  clude,By Brownes Faith himſelfe is prooued no Chriſtian. in that he ſaith, Faith cannot be, except we be ſo renued, that no open groſſe wickedneſſe appeare in vs: from his owne mouth this ſentence muſt proceed againſt him, that he is no Chriſtian. Doe you aske howe I can proue it? Let the ſame his aſſertion be the propoſition, therhence I aſſume thus, Browne hath open groſſe wickedneſſe in him, nowe the concluſion followeth, Therefore Browne hath not fayth. You will aske proofe of my aſſumption, I giue it you thus: Rayling, reuiling, and ſlaundering, publikely ſparſed abrode in writings agianſt any, is open groſſe wickedneſſe, but Browne hath committed theſe things: witneſſe this his libell againſt me: (omitting all his other writings at this time) wherein I yeelde the iudgement to all that haue ſeene it, whether they haue found the like vnſcholerlike ſcolding, ſuch baſe reuiling, ſo peremptorie without all proofe, accuſing, and vnchriſtian beyond all charitie, ſlandering (both me and manie) in the writings of any, the vileſt heretikes in our memorie. To thoſe that haue not ſeene it, let theſe few places, in ſtead of his multitude, teſtifie. His reuiling phraſes are ſuch as theſe, but infinitely repeated. num. 53. O blind Phariſee: or rather O froward heretike. num. 54. Thou blind Phariſe. num. 60. O falſe tongued man, ſhall not God plucke thee out of the land of the liuing? num. 78. Nay thine and thy partners hypocriſie, ioyned with enuie, outrage, and crueltie, ſhall be better knowne. Thou teacheſt F. thy fogging Phiſike, and hee teacheth thee his lying diuinitie. num. 79. The wretch careth not what he forgeth againſt vs. And by and by after: O caitife, thou wouldeſt fayne heare of it, that wee were all hanged, num. 103. Thou vnpitifull and graceleſſe writer and falſifier, &c. Theſe may giue a glimpſe of his rayling. Nowe for his ſlandering. num. 34. The hypocriſie of rayling F. and Bredwell with their partners, is hidden in rich mens houſes, ſometimes in deceytful faſtings, as though we ſhould haue preſent reformation, and ſomtimes in delicate feaſtings, in bribes, gifts, ſhew of almes to the poore, when all goeth into their owne bellies or purſes. num. 75. If all were ſuch perſecuting

wretches as Bredwell is, they were not onely infidels, denying the fayth, but alſo woorſe than infidels, becauſe they yet ſuffered the beleeuers to dwell in the ſame houſe with them: but Bredwell and his partners would not ſuffer them to dwell in the ſame Citie with them, no not in the ſame Countrey, no not vpon the face of the earth. num. 77. Nay falſe hypocrite, this word onely is thine owne addition, &c. It is thy maner and thy partners, to force, to threaten, to make ſtirrings and hurlie burlies, and to driue man and wife aſunder. Thine and their outrage cannot be ſatisfied with bloud. Thine and their raylings, ſlaunders and falſe accuſations, haue brought diuerſe of vs to death, ſome by the Gibbet, ſome by long impriſonment, ſome by flight and purſuit, ſome by extreame care, death and ſickeneſſe: ſome by ſeas, ſome by neceſsitie and want, ſome by chaunging aire, dwelling and place. The bloud of all theſe ſhall bee vpon thine and thy partners heades. Three other places, to wit, num. 115.116. 117. Whether they conteyne groſſe blaſphemie, not only agaynſt men, but againſt GOD, and his worde, I referre it to the conſciences of all that haue ſeene them, (for, I thinke it nor good for ſome reſpects, to ſet them downe) and appeale to the ſearcher of the hearts and reines for iudgement. Theſe things conſidered, I truſt I may with the Chriſtian readers conſent, conclude, that there is open groſſe wickedneſſe found in this man, from whence by his owne rule it followeth, that he hath not fayth: and ſo conſequently is no Chriſtian.
               
            
            
               From the 74. to the 78.
               
               8 So farre (ſaith the Admonition) he proceedeth in ſeducing, that he ſaith,The 6. corruption wherewith the Admonchargeth Bro. prooued. the wife ought to go away from her husband, if he will not go with her, in the caſe of want or bondage of this diſcipline. Browne ſayth, I falſifie the caſe. as though he had onely ſpoken of heatheniſh husbands, frō whom it ſhould be lawful for the wiues to go, when they became in danger of perſecuting by thē. The reader ſeeth, the iſſue here betwixt vs to be this: whether Bro. hath taught, that wāt or bōdage of diſcipline, is cauſe ſufficient for

a wife to go away from her husbād. Theſe be my prooues out of his writings. Let the reader iudge. Speaking of a place of Paul to the Corinthes, he hath theſe words: And therefore hee teacheth the woman which beleeueth to abide with the vnbeleeuing man,
                  Tit. againſt par. preach. & hired &c. 
                  and the ſeruant which beleeueth, to keepe with his maſter, except they be froward & perſecute, or the whole Church be helde there in bondage, or they cannot hold the true worſhip, and all Chriſtian duties, with the ſufferance of other and the ſafetie of their liues. For then they may flee, &c. Here his exception being diſiunctiue, putteth three caſes wherein the wife may goe from her husband. 1. For frowardneſſe and perſecuting by him. 2. For the bondage of the Church, where they dwell. 3. (As it ſeemeth to me) if ſhe be in daunger by others. But I intermeddle onely with that, wherewith I haue alreadie charged him. If we will knowe what he meaneth by the bondage of the Church, let other places of his giue the interpretation. In his anſwer to M.C. pag. 37. ſhewing howe he vnderſtandeth the diſcipline of the Church to faile, he ſayth, Though ſome preacher or other perſon offende, yet doeth not therefore the diſcipline of the Church faile, or want, except the Church be negligent, or wilfully refuſe to redreſſe ſuch offences, or is brought into bondage that it cannot redreſſe them. Here he interpreteth bondage to bee when a Church cannot redreſſe faults. In the 15. Pag. of the ſame booke, hee ſheweth what hee eſteemeth the cauſe of that bondage, in theſe words: What is a church without this power we ſpeake of? yea what are thoſe aſſemblies, which in ſtead of it, doe holde that Antichriſtian power of the ſpirituall courtes, or rather are held in bondage by it? Nowe if the wife ought to goe from her husbande, where the Church is in bondage, and that ſame bondage muſt bee vnderſtoode, when as a Church hath not power and free libertie to cenſure and redreſſe offences, without reſtraint of anie ſpirituall Courtes, it followeth to bee his doctrine, as I haue charged him, that a wife ought to goe away from her husbande (if hee will not goe with her) onely for the want or bondage of the outwarde diſcipline

where they dwell. Neither doe I by that word onely adde any thing that is not his. For if the wife may goe from her husbande for this one cauſe amongſt others, it followeth and is neceſſarily intended, that for this only ſhe may goe from him. His cauill at my word enforce is as witleſſe: for whatſoeuer is taught as a thing giuen in charge and commandement from God, that ſame enforceth the conſcience to a practiſe. Whether Browne by a charge and commandement as from God, doe enforce the wife to ſuch dealing with her husband, let theſe ſpeaches of his be called to witneſſe.
                     
                        •
                     itl againſt par. pr. & hyred lect. &c. 
                  It (or the Church) muſt hold the true flocke, and ſeeke the right ſhepheardes, and depart from others. This is commanded to all, and therefore though the husband will not, yet the wife must doe it, or the husband, though the wife be againſt it. And by and by after: For we ſhew, that ſo farre we must be from hearing or receiuing of ſuch pastours & miniſters, and from dwelling in their Pariſhes, that the wife may not tarie for the husband to flee from them if he be vntoward. Alſo in the very place where he accuſeth me for this matter, his owne wordes do againe anſwere for me. Browne (ſaith he) hath not one worde of enforcing, but onely, the husbande or wife in ſuch a caſe haue libertie, and it is their duetie. Nowe, where any thing is laide vpon vs, as a duetie vnto God, what libertie the conſcience hath to chooſe the doing or not doing of it, let all that haue any conſcience iudge. His Number 78. is anſwered.
            
            
               To the 79.
               
               9. The admonition hath theſe wordes, I heare beſides, that there is one among you, who whiſpereth already in corners, that we muſt not beleeue in the holy Ghoſt. This (I proteſt) was no gueſſe, or light coniecture of mine, but a thing teſtified by two ſufficient witneſſes vnto me: the man alſo I can name, if it were conuenient, and he was then in the ſame ſchiſme with Browne for the matter of Diſcipline.
               
               10. To that which is from the 80. to the 97. I anſwere not.
            
            
               
               To that which is from the 97. to the 104.
               
               
                  Browne proued to be a committer of the ſame things he condemneth: and is contrary to him ſelfe in all thoſe poyntes wherewith the admonition chargeth him.11 The reader muſt vnderſtande, that the admonition entreth 2. general accuſations againſt Browne, to prooue him a man not to be followed, but forſaken: one is vnſound and dangerous doctrine, the other, his wauering and changeableneſſe. The firſt and moſt grieuous, I truſt is now made manifeſt, the latter needeth fewer wordes: the proofe of it ſtandeth in theſe iiii. poynts. 1. Whether he haue condemned the arte of lodgicke as vnlawfull for Chriſtians, and yet vſed it him ſelfe. 2. Whether he haue heretofore prouoked all true worſhippers to flee out of England, as to auoyde the diſpleaſure of God: and yet both dwelleth here him ſelfe, & hath counſelled a reſorting to our ſermons. 3. Whether he haue ſubſcribed. 4. VVhether his two aſſertions concerning diſcipline, haue in them that which is contrary, yea, or no. If theſe thinges be found true, then it followeth that the man is mutable alſo, euen as neceſſitie of time & place do draw & ſtraine him. As for the firſt point cōcerning lodgicke, it is a wonder to ſee how the poore man rūneth, frō one corner to another to hide his nakednes, & when he hath all done, the beſt defence he hath, is that which ſerueth him alwaies, euen a face that cā neuer ſhew one token of ſhame or modeſtie in it. O deſperate impudencie: doeth Bro. deny that he hath cōdemned the arte of lodgicke as vnlawful?Brownes firſt contradiction prooued. what can he ſay to induce any of his diſciples to beleeue him? thus he beginneth aſſone as he hath giuen me the lie: In deed vaine lodgicke is named in the margēt, and ſo is vaine philoſophie named by ſundry writers, alſo vaine arts, vaine & falſe ſciences, & that out of the ſcripture: yet are neither thoſe learned writers, nor the ſcriptures cōdemned therefore. He woulde haue the reader beleeue, that there is a vaine lodgicke & a good lodgicke: & that he ſpoke but againſt the vaine lodgicke. This is to pleaſe a child with a plumme, when he hath hurt him before with throwing him downe. But his vaine epethite was in deede no diſtinction of lodgickes, but onely as an ouerfilling of his furious penne, and conceited forme of his malitious vtterance,

for all lodgicke and phyloſophie is by him condemned, as by the grace of God, I will prooue. After that, he ſaith, There is a vaine arte of lodgicke, a falſe deceitful and contentious ſophistrie, and yet a lawful and artificial vſe of reaſon. This is abſurd, to confound an arte and the abuſe of an arte together: and he might aſwell call hereſie, diuinitie, as ſophiſtrie lodgicke. But hee proceedeth thus: wherefore Browne condemneth not reaſon (which they call lodgicke) but the arte of lodgicke, that is, their euill order and falſe manner of vſing or rather abuſing reaſon. Doe we call Lodgicke, reaſon? beware (beloued) his fowling net of many meanings. The worde Lodgicke is deriued from two Greeke wores, which together ſignifie, To vſe reaſon,
                  Lodgicke and the originall thereof briefly poynted out. and ſo the learned vnderſtand by the worde lodgicke, the rule of diſputing or reaſoning: not reaſon it ſelfe, but the regular vſe thereof: not the actual nor habituall knowledge, which is in euery man, according to greater or leſſer aptnes and clearnes, but a ruled courſe of long obſerued precepts, for the helpe of all. And this artificiall rule of reaſonīg, foloweth & expreſſeth (as in a ſenſible image) the vniuerſal force of the naturall, as of the firſt paterne or ſampler, diligētly obſerued according to the motions inſited in humane wits, & expreſſed by the vſe of excellēt men. For the ſame vniuerſal force, & particular formes of natural reaſoning, drawn frō the vſe of al chief wits, & ſtil able to be cōfirmed by the teſtimony of al monumēts of wiſdom, ſacred or prophane, this (I ſay) doth arte, hauing drawen the ſame to certaine ordered heads, propoūd, as the image of nature, to be imitated in diſputing, that ſo a man beholding in this artificial glaſſe, as it were the face of his antient eſtate, before the finful deprauatiō (which brought in, not only that ſame diſorder & corruptīg of our affections, but alſo this confuſe cloudines of our vnderſtāding, which we ſee in euery one, more or leſſe cleared, according as they haue more or leſſe laboured in reforming it, either by the obſeruatiōs of all times, which ſtande in arte, or els by their owne proper obſeruations, which conſiſt

in the rawe experience of their owne ſhort liues) might ſtriue on ſtill, to take away the ſpottes remaining: eche ſucceding generation, enioying herein the benefit of the formers labours. Wherehence we ſee both the common meanes which the Lorde hath vſed to bring this age preſent, the ripenes that it ſheweth this way: as alſo howe it cōmeth to paſſe, that arte, which was at firſt but natures ſcholler, becommeth at length, after a ſort, her ſcholemiſtreſſe. Now then, let not this lodgickebiter beguile you (beloued) with any ſhifting ſophiſtrie (which is indeede all the arte he hath) by confounding reaſon & lodgicke together, which can neuer be taken one for the other, in a proper kind of ſpeaking, no more then the image of a man can in proper ſpeach, be called a man But let vs further marke his words: Browne (ſaith he) condemneth not reaſon (which they cal Lodgicke) but the arte of lodgicke &c. I did neuer charge him to condemne reaſon, but the artificial vſe of reaſon called lodgicke: nowe if his anſwere be any thing to me at al, it muſt needes be that one of theſe two is meant in this his Apollo-like anſwere: namely, that he condēneth not natural reaſoning, but artificial reaſoning: or els, that he condēneth not all lodgicke or artificial reaſoning, but only our lodgicke & artificial frames of reaſoning. Let him chooſe which he wil, and his owne anſwere ouerthroweth him: for if he be thereby vnderſtoode to condemne artificiall reaſoning, he is contrary to himſelfe hauing ſaid a litle before, that there is a lawful and artificial vſe of reaſoning: if he ſay he condēneth but only our frame & arte of reaſoning, he giueth me ynough to prooue my cauſe againſt him:In his booke of L
                        •
                     ef▪ & Diuiſ. Anſ to M.C. pag. 44.56.57. in his couf with M.E. and M.P. in his repl. to the queſt. of communio. and in his Anſw. to my Admonition. for if he auouch our lodgicke, as it ſtandeth in vſe at this day, to be vnlawful, he auoucheth the thing that I charge him withall, & then I ſay, why hath he vſed it him ſelfe? yea why doeth his anſwere afterward deny ſyllogiſticall reaſoning to be ſimply vnlawful? why alſo hath he vſed the very tearms both of our lodgicke & rhetoricke, which otherwhere ſo Momus-like he ſcoffeth at? the example of Paules fighting with beaſtes at Epheſus is by him

abuſed, ſith Paule therein vſed no courſe that was vnlawfull and condemned by the word of God, but Browne vſeth our Lodgicke, which himſelfe hath ſayd to be forbidden in Gods Word, and therefore vnlawfull. His quarrelling at my words ſimply forbidden, ſheweth his vnlearnedneſſe: for that is to be called ſimply forbidden, which, not in regard of circumſtances, but in regard of the thing it ſelfe is ſayd to be forbidden: and therefore, though he haue not the word ſimply, yet he hath the force thereof in his ſpeech, ſo long as he condemneth the arte in ſelfe and euery part thereof. But why (beloued) doth he ſtiffely auouch, that He hath not ſayd Lodgicke is an vnlawfull arte, a heatheniſh foppery, &c? beleeue me, it is not becauſe he truſteth to the goodneſſe of his cauſe (for the places that I quoted are more plaine, then that any doubting can be left) but in that, he hath either gotten ſome Giges ring, to cloake his adulterating of the Scriptures, or elſe a bodie of ſuch cameleoniſh ſubſtance, as hath ſundrie colours at ſundrie beholdings. For let the word Lodgicke be taken, as I haue now ſhewed it ought to be, and the Sunne is not clearer in his full ſhine and light, then that this my accuſation of Brownes condemning Lodgicke, is playne and manifeſt. I wyll poynt a place or two for thoſe that haue not his bookes. Did euer any godly (ſayth he) profeſſe their Lodgicke, before Chriſt came in the fleſh, or ſince his comming, till the comming vp of Antichriſt, was it ſtudied and learned? was it then nothing needfull, and is it now ſo needfull? Doth not Paule ſpeake of Lodgicke in that place where he writeth of ſpoiling by Philoſophie and vayne deceipt? Afterwards, dealing with the obiections made againſt that ſenſe of Paules writing to the Coloſsians, he handleth the reuerend Beza like as a ſcurrilous ieſter, rather then as a modeſt diuine ſhould do, and that becauſe he acknowledgeth not Lodgicke to be forbidden in that place of the Apoſtle: theſe be his owne words, let the Reader iudge.
                     Cap. 2.8. 
                  So doth he in that place to the Coloſsians, not as Beza would interpret it of the three

ſorts of corruptions, the firſt, of ſpeculations, the ſecond, of he himſelfe cannot tell what, ſaue that he ſayth, it ſtandeth vpon custome and fayned inſpirations: the third was of ioyning the Lawe worſhip with the Goſpell. Thus he would poynt at Paules meaning, and doth driue another way. For Paule nameth the vanitie and deceiptfulnes of Philoſophie, and ſheweth, that that is after mans traditions, or the rules and principles of this world, and not after Chriſt: and ſo he doth ſtrike at that ſtrong tree of vanitie, which is Philoſophie, and the roote thereof, which is mans traditions, or the rules and principles of their worldly artes. But Beza for one tree, hath got himſelfe three, namely, ſpeculations, customes, and inspirations, and the ceremoniall worſhip. In ſtead of philoſophy, which Paule calleth vayne deceipt, he nameth curious ſpeculations; as if one ſhould aske a Hatchet, and he ſhould giue him the helue. Paule would roote out all their philoſophie; and Beza but ſome part, &c. A man would thinke there needeth no great labour to prooue out of theſe words, that Browne holdeth both lodgick and all philoſophy to be forbidden in the Scriptures: but heare him further, for ſoone after, he taketh vpon him, out of Timothy and Iob, to reiect euery part of lodgick by name, and therevpon follow theſe words: But what, ſay they, is there no vſe of lodgick? what ſay you then to a thing and the cauſe thereof? for the effect is knowne by the cauſe, and the cauſe by the effect: ſo they giue vs four ſorts of cauſes, but we returne them vpon them as the ſpillings of their drunkennes. Againe, They demaund heere, whether definitions be vnlawfull, we anſwere, that to name the kinds and ſorts of things, and to name their natures, is not vnlawfull, but their idle arte of defining is vnlawfull: and to thruſt their definitions as miſteries into our boſomes, or to tearme the naming of things, or their natures whereby they are called, by the words of their vaine arte is wholly vnlawfull. It is manifeſt that when he wrote theſe things, he diſſembled not (as now he doth) to profeſſe the condemning of lodgick: elſe let euen his next words following the laſt rehearſed (wherein he pretendeth to anſwere an obiection againſt him) be called to

witneſſe. If they aske (ſayth he) why me then vſe the names, and haue laboured alſo ſo much in defining, we tell them, that we returne their owne weapons vpon them, not that we care for ſuch weapons, but becauſe they feare them ſo much, we haue tryed if they may diſmay them in their folly, and turne them to the truth. Heere by the manner of his anſwere, (you ſee) is nothing leſſe, then a denyall of condemning the arte, which is now all the refuge the ſnared Foxe can finde. If he could haue enioyed his ſuppoſed reſt, within the harbour of that anſwere, there ſhould his Ship haue remayned ſtill, but when he perceiued by the admonition, that there was a rocke for his eſtimation to periſh vpon (becauſe this cannot be denyed, that whatſoeuer things are vnlawfull, Chriſtians ought not vſe) he rather choſe this ſhameleſſe denying of that which cannot be denied, then that he would giue glory vnto God, in acknowledging his fault, and forſaking his errour: wherein let all true Iſraelites iudge, whether it appeare, that the loue of himſelfe and prayſe of men, be more pretious in his eyes, then the loue of God, and prayſe of his glorious name.
            
            
               To the 104.105.106.
               
               12 The ſecond point, wherin the admonition proueth his vnconſtancy, is this:Brownes ſecond contradiction proued. that he once held it a tempting of God, for any that followed his courſe, to tarry in England: and ſince againe, both himſelfe is returned, dwelleth heere, heareth our Sermons, and hath by priuate writings counſailed others ſo to doe. Theſe contrarie courſes (I ſay) conſidered with this, that notwithſtanding hys later practiſe, the man remayneth of the ſame iudgement againſt the Engliſh aſſemblyes, which he helde before, when he paſſed the Seas, and called hys chickens after hym: let the godly iudge, whether his footeſteppes may ſauoure of the guiding of Gods ſpirite, and ſo argue that ſame aſſurance in the conſcience,
                     Rom. 14.5.23. which the Apoſtle Paule calleth for in all our actions, yea or no. Hys aunſwere for thys is lyke the

former, euen with a cauterized conſcience, denying that, which he knoweth to be true. The bare quotations in the admonition made him bold: but he ought to haue remembred, that there might come a day, wherein they ſhould be enlarged, and ſet downe to his ſhame. Now, that he prouoked to flee out of England, let theſe his words be firſt conſidered: Therefore thus ſaith the Lord,
                  
                     Titl. againſt diſordred preaching at Paules &c.
                     England by Brownes writings is Aegipt, but by his practiſe Ieruſalem. In the ſame title.
                   
                  I feed not my flocke at Paules Croſſe in London, or S. Maryes in Cambridge, or in your Engliſh pariſhes. O yee my ſheepe, goe yee not thither, as though there were my folde, and there I reſted, and fed my flocke, for there be Shepheards and flocks alſo that follow them, whith are not of Chriſt, for they hold of Antichriſt. Alſo he ſayth, If in all England or in ſome more famous places of England, whether great Cities or Vniuerſities, or the Court it ſelfe, we ſee not the Kingdome of God maintained, but perſecuted, and the true worſhip of God refuſed, a falſe worſhip and idoll ſeruice wilfully ſuffered, and many Popiſh abhominations vpheld and eſtabliſhed, from thence the Lord doth take away his kingdome, as it is written: The kingdome of God ſhall be taken from you, and giuen to a nation which ſhall bring foorth the fruites thereof. Yea, none may continue to preach the truth vnto thoſe, when once they haue boldly teſtified it, and they put it from them, &c. Afterward he ſheweth his meaning more cleerely thus: In Aegipt the whole Church was in bondage, and it wholly departed, yet did Pharao giue leaue there to worſhip God rightly, but anſwere was made, it is not meete ſo to doe in this place: for loe, can we ſacrifice the abhomination of the Aegyptians before their eyes, and they not ſtone vs? ſo alſo in England, though the Magiſtrates ſhould giue vs leaue to worſhip God rightly, yet the true worſhip and reformation of the Church is abhomination to the Biſhops, and other wicked Preachers and people, and what ſtirrings and hurly burlyes would they make? but they ſay, we muſt abide ſuch troubles. In deede, we muſt heare them, when we cannot auoyde them, and in auoyding them, we muſt take heed to hold ſtill a good conſcience: but we tempt God, as did many of the Iewes, if when we may go out of Aegipt, and auoide ſuch troubles, we will not, or

murmure againſt it. Yet if this be not playne ynough,Decl. of gathering and ioyning together of certaine perſons, &c. that he vnderſtandeth England for Aegipt, let him remember where he confeſſeth, He was accuſed of falſe doctrine (by his owne company) becauſe he ſayd, that England was as Aegipt, both for the outward bondage and oppreſſion of the Church, by Popiſh forcing, lawes, and penalties, and for all kinde of wickedneſſe, and becauſe he ſayd they did ſinne, which had a full purpoſe to dwell ſtill in England, when the Lord did call them away, and they had libertie to depart. Now when he accompteth them called away, his owne penne alſo hath inſtructed vs, namely, in theſe his words following. Yea though the Magistrate giue them leaue there to dwell as they liked, yet the lawes and diſorders abiding ſtill the ſame, they could not there tarrie. Alſo in another place:Title againſt diſordred preaching at Paules Croſſe. &c. 
                  but if it be ſayd, what if ſome deſire the truth, muſt they alſo be forſaken? I aunſwere, that if they deſire the Kingdome, and ſell not all they haue to buy it, and the place where it is, and will not come and dwell there (now that was beyond Sea where he was at that time) they are vnworthy thereof. It is come to paſſe vpon thoſe as it is written, that they deſire to ſee one day of the Sonne of man, and cannot ſee it. If the whole Church (which you muſt vnderſtand to be thoſe of his iudgement) be perſecuted, it ought wholly to flee, and if lawes be made againſt all, though as yet they be not executed on ſome, yet the perſecution is generall, and they are called away. Now Browne ſhall doo well to tell vs, what bands of lawes were then ſo ſtraight, and now relaxed, that they ſhould then flee out of England, as out of Aegipt, and now dwell with vs againe, as in Ieruſalem. Till he ſhew vs this, he muſt be contented to haue it written as in great letters vpon his forehead: A wauering minded man is vnconstant in all his wayes.
               
            
            
               To the 107.
               
               This concerneth the third argument, which the admonition  vſeth to proue Brownes leuitie and changeableneſſe. What can be more contrarie,Brownes third contradiction proued. and therefore

abſurd, then to condemne the Church of England for no Church of God, as alſo the officers (that take on them & execute the gouernmēt thereof) for prowd Prelats, Antichriſtiā vſurpers, & ſuch as we may not medle with: and yet himſelfe whē he is brought to the triall, to ſubſcribe, allow & approue all this? doth the Reader think it reaſonable, that this man ſhould beare himſelf vpō the names of Wickliff, Luther, & Caluine, as though they had euer cō
                  mitted ſuch things? I ſpeake not neither as reproching any mā that returneth frō errour to a ſounder mind (for I would if it were Gods wil, that might be ſeen in Brown) but, I ſpeake to the worthy deteſtation of him, that not changing his iudgemēt, only for feare of trouble, practiſeth & ratifieth the ſame things, which he hath ſo bitterly preſcribed againſt vnto all men, in publike writings. Yea & whileſt he doth this, and hath withal his owne hand of ſubſcription extant againſt him, yet ſtill ſeduceth, & carieth away frō the ordinary aſſemblies, as many as he cā. The ſtate of which perſons ſo led out by him, if we conſider but a little, as they exceedingly proue it, ſo we ſhall not a little ſee it to be greeuous & lamentable. For how vtterly vnlike is he to that good Shepheard, that giueth his life for his Sheepe? and (if his doctrine were good) how altogether like is he to that hireling Shepheard that whē he hath led his Sheep out of the fold into the plaines, there chargeth thē to abide all dangers, ſhifting in the meane time any way for his own ſafety? muſt not that wo cleaue faſt vnto him,
                     Math. 23.4. Luke. 11.46. that was denoūced againſt thoſe that laid importable burthens vpō other mens ſhoulders, but thē
                  ſelues touched thē not with the leaſt of their fingers? full many of his poore diſciples lie in priſons, whileſt he laugheth at liberty, and, touching that, for which they ſuffer, addeth aflictiō to their bands, by all his behauior. Browne cōfeſſeth his ſubſcribing, but yet with braſen face demandeth what was amiſſe therin: euen this verely, that his own writings, & daily practiſe are as directly againſt it, as black, to white, hote, to cold, and nay, to yea. And heer his immodeſt daring, & vngratious tearmes enforce

me to lay him open,Browne a ſubſcriber, and yet a deteſter of the Church of England. wheras my adm. had ſomwhat vnneceſſarily ſpared him. The Biſhops ciuil authority (ſaith he) Br. did acknowledge lawfull in his ſubſcription, & their magiſtracie to be obeied. This is ſufficiēt againſt himſelf: yet he hath clipped the cōpaſſe: for the words are, I do humbly ſubmit my ſelf to be at my Lord of Cant. commandemēt, whoſe authority vnder her Ma. I wil neuer reſiſt nor depraue, by the grace of God &c. Heere is not ciuill authority only (as he would helpe it) but the authority that he hath vnder her Ma. which al mē know is as well eccleſiaſticall as ciuil. This Br. promiſed neuer to depraue, but he hath falſified his promiſe & ſubſcriptiō, in that he hath not hitherto by publike writing recāted thoſe bookes, which therfore liue as the expreſſe image of his mind, to teach the contrary. Some places I will rehearſe, that all may ſee how Br. thinketh of the Bi. procedings, & of their authority it ſelfe. In his declaratiō of gathering his ſciſmatical church, telling how he withſtood Hariſons entring into the Miniſtery by the Biſhops meanes, theſe are his words: When he (that is Hariſon) had talked with R. B. and ſhewed him the matter wherabout he went, he receiued this anſwer, that it was vnlawfull to vſe M. Greenhams help or any mans elſe for the Biſh. authoriſing. So he ſhewed him, how he had dealt cōcerning the Biſhop, and was ſo far from ſeeking licence, ordaining, or authoriſing at his hāds, that he abborred ſuch traſh & pollutions, as the marks and poyſon of Antichriſt. And ſpeaking of their fourme of ordaining, O worthy outward calling (ſaith he) Do not the Biſhops pray whē they make miniſters, and ſhall we condemne their praiers? for the foxe is a father in the church whē he praieth for grace: are not our miniſters duly examined? they are poſed by M. Exam.
                  Title againſt parish preachers, and hired lect. &c. 
                  Beware ye prieſts that you cā ſpeake Latin, & in any caſe forget not your Cathechiſme, &c. Then followeth, Breath vpon thē ye Bi. and giue thē your gratious ſpirits, which ye call the holy ghoſt, ſo ſhall they be thoſe good ſpirits like frogs that come out of your mouths to make battaile againſt vs. Kneele downe ye preachers, that the B. may ordaine you ſitting in his chaire: his holy hāds ſhal bleſſe you, they are waſhed frō bloud as was Pilates, & as the noſe of a wolfe which wil rauen no more. Then muſt you take your licenſes

in parchment, and pay well for them: prepare a boxe for your waxe, print your meſſage therein, and keepe touch with the Biſhop, leaſt he open your boxe, and your calling flie away: behold, this is their outward calling. In another place he hath theſe words:Titl. againſt diſordred preaching at Paules Croſſe, &c. 
                  We ſay therefore, O yee Prelates, not by your Lodgicke Oracles, but by the word and doctrine: is Paules Croſſe Ieruſalem, or is the Lords name there? is not your name ſounded there, as by the blaſt of a Trumpet? my Lord Biſhop there controlleth, in his name the Preacher ſtandeth vp, as the VVolfe doth in a viſard, he hath the Biſhops name in parchment, for that is his licence, it is a theeues quittance though he came in by the windowe, it is the ſcourcoasts paſsport, though he roaue out for his pray. My Lords face is in the waxe, a print and marke of holyneſſe, who can preach without it? It is the ſeale of ghostly meſſage. Three ſuch ſeales haue threefold grace, but the money which buyeth them hath that grace ſeuen hundreth fold. Is this now the Lords name, when his Goſpell muſt hang on parchment, or on the name and markes of thoſe Romiſh beaſts? Is this his name, when his glad tidings ceaſſe, except the parchment hold, and his meſſage miſſeth except a waxemarke giueth it? Is this Ieruſalem where ſuch Biſhops raigne, or ſhould we call it the throne of the Lord? is it not rather the ſeate of iniquitie, to which (as the Prophet ſaith) the wicked do approch? &c. And a little after, Now therefore yee Preachers, becauſe yee ſubſcribe that the Lords gouernment is wanting, and yet ſet vp other Lords, or ſuffer them in his place, and becauſe you cannot, neither will you preach, but by their good leaue and licence, therefore you cannot preach my word. VVhat do you at Paules Croſſe, or what ſhould my meſſengers do there? do not there the Biſhops as alſo in your pariſhes, tread downe the Lords Sanctuarie? and are not the people as they ouer whome the Lord did neuer beare rule? yet you ſay the Biſhops gouernment is tollerable, and take the teeth of thoſe VVolfes, for a diſcipline to the Sheepe. Againe, within few lines; This is now the throne of the Biſhops, which in the dioces, pariſhes, and cathedrall Churches, is lift vp againſt Chriſt. From it doth come foorth their lawes and iniunctions, by which all men euen ſmall and

great, rich and poore, free and bonde are made to receiue a marke in their hand, or in their forehead. For all are made thralles and ſlaues to their pollicie, to build the Church, and to worſhippe God after their deuiſings, &c. Nowe yet more apertly (if it were poſſible) to ſhewe how he depraueth their very authoritie, I muſt trouble the reader with mo of his places. In his declaration, telling of his owne authorizing by the Biſhops, among other like he hath theſe words, that he thought it lawful, firſt to be tried of the Biſhops, then alſo to ſuffer their power, though it were vnlawful, if in any thing it did not hinder the truth, but to be authorized by them, to be ſworne, to ſubſcribe, to be ordained, and receiue their licenſing, he vtterly miſliked and kept himſelfe cleare in thoſe matters: howbeit, the Biſhops ſeales were gotten him by his brother, which he both refuſed before the officers, and being written for him would not pay for thē: and alſo being afterward paid for by his brother, he loſt one, and burnt another in the fire: and another being ſent him to Cambridge, he kept it by him, til in his trouble it was deliuered to a Iuſtice of peace, and ſo frō him as is ſuppoſed, to the B. of Norwich. Yet leaſt his dealing in this manner ſhould encourage others to deale in worſe manner, he openly preached againſt the calling and authorizing of preachers by Biſhops, and ſpake it often alſo openly in Cambridge, that he taught among them, not as caring for, or leaning vpon the Bi. authority, but only to ſatiſfie his duty and cōſcience. Alſo in the ſame diſcourſe he hath theſe words, This he (that is himſelf) iudged not only to be againſt the wickednes of the Bi. but alſo againſt their whole power and authority: for if the authority of the Church, and of the forwardeſt brethren or elders therein, be aboue the Bi. how ſhould it not follow, but that the Bi. may be cōmanded, accuſed & charged by the Church, yea alſo diſcharged and ſeparated as is their deſert? but now becauſe of their popiſh power and canon lawes, they haue lift vp their authority more high, then the Church cā take accompts of them: and not only by force do thruſt out and trouble whom they liſt, but alſo raigne as Lords & Dukes in their dioces, their authority muſt needes be vſurped. And a little ſpace after he ſaith thus of them, that They rule by three ſorts of lawes, as by the ciuill, the canon, the common lawe, which

are three kingdoms vnto thē, or as the Popes triple crowne: and by pretēding the fourth law, which is the word of God, they ouerrule too too much.
                  Title againſt diſordr. pr. at Paules Croſſe. &c. Agreeably with this, he ſaith in another place; Behold, cā they be Ieruſalē, which is called the throne of the lord, whē there the Bi. ſit as in the throane of Antichriſt? What throne hath Chriſt, but by his gouernment, which they ſay is wanting? and what is the throne of Antichriſt, but that Lordſhip in their dioces, with ſuch ſway of popiſh officers, & with ſuch romiſh traditiōs? A little after, VVhat ſhal we anſwere? they ſay, they call no preachers to preach, but God, the Church, the Queene, and people agree to receiue them: ſo their pariſhes are churches, and thoſe great aſſemblies are the flocke of Chriſt, for they are faire cages, though the birds are vncleane: knowe you not an honeſt woman? for ſhe doth loue fornicators, ſo may you knowe the true Church, for ſhe loueth ſuch Prelates: O church of price, O the famous church of England. Tell ye the church, that is, tell ye the Bi. of the dioces, the church can giue him authority, to authorize both the church it ſelfe and the Goſpell, as if God ſhould intreate ſuch a Prelate to be good vnto him, &c. And by and by after. Yet is this church of England the piller and ground of truth, for the Bi. ouerride it: they are the truth, and it is the ground, it is the beaſt, and they are the riders: it ſtoupeth as an aſſe for thē to get vp, the whip of their ſpiritual courts, and the ſpurres of their lawes, and the bridle of their power, do make it to carie thē. VVe giue, ſay the Bi. then we take ſay the Preachers: hold, take you authority, but on this condition, that you preach no longer then we liſt. Marke you this (ſay the preachers) for we haue no authority but by the biſhops, and if they giue it vs, why may they not take it away? ſo the theefetaker doth pleaſe the theefegiuer, and the yong wolfe wanteth, whē the old wolfe is angry. Laſtly, thus he writeth in another place of his declaration. Now, wheras they mingle ciuill and church offices, it was anſwered by the word of God, that ſuch mingling was flat Antichriſtianitie: for Chriſt himſelfe refuſed to be a ciuill Iudge and diuider of lands, and forbad his Apoſtles to meddle in ſuch manner.
                  
                     Luke. 12.14. Luke. 22.25. 
                  Againe it is written, No man that goeth on warfare, entangleth himſelf with the affaires of this life:
                  2. Tim. 2.4. 
                  for if once eccleſiaſticall perſons, as they call them, get ciuill offices, they become that ſecond beaſt, which

is Antichriſt: for they get the image of the firſt beaſt, which is,
                  
                     Reu. 13.15. 
                  the power and authority of wicked Magiſtrates, that confirme their authority: ſo they giue a ſpirit to the image, that it ſhould ſpeake, that is, their church lawes and orders, hauing got ciuill power, both to deceiue men by ſhew of Religion, and to force them with threates and penalties: Now would I knowe of the reader, what it is that Browne by theſe places hath ſpared vnto any Biſhop in England, or left vndepraued in their authority. Furthermore, for the vnlawfulnes of medling with, or complaining to their courts & officers, behold how vehemēt he is, as in all his dealings.Anſwer to M.C. Page 16.17. 
                  Alſo becauſe the iudges and officers of the court do wreſt Gods law by their popiſh canon law, and reſpect perſons, & take rewards, which is forbiddē in Deuteronom. (and by their profeſsion they muſt needs do ſo, or elſe they cannot hold their office) how ſhall any make complaynt vnto them for church matters, which can be counted none of the Church? And ſeeing Chriſt hath commanded to complaine to the church againſt the ſinner, how ſhall Chriſtes ordinance be broken, by complaining vnto ſuch wretches? Furthermore, ſeeing the ſcripture ſheweth that the church hath nothing to do to iudge thoſe that are without,
                  1. Cor. 5.2. 
                  how ſhall any complaine of ſuch a number of wicked men, as neuer were worthy to be counted the Church. Againe,
                  1. Cor. 6.1. 
                  ſeeing no godly man may ſeeke iudgemēt vnder the vniuſt, as Paule ſheweth, if he haue a matter againſt a brother, why ſhould we ſeeke to ſuch for iudgemēt? Again, becauſe thoſe canon officers are ſtrāgers, neither knowne to the churches, nor dwelling among thē, no maruaile though Chriſt ſay,
                  
                     Iohn. 10. 
                  that his ſheep will not follow nor ſeeke to ſtrangers, but will flee frō them. Moreouer,
                  2. Cor. 11.20. 
                  becauſe they bring the churches into bondage (as it is written) becauſe they deuoure, becauſe they take their goods, becauſe they exalt thēſelues, and as it were ſmite the people on their face, & caſt thē in priſon, they do all theſe things beſides the church gouernment, and therefore ought to be reiected, & in no caſe to be ſuffered. So he concludeth, Thus it is manifeſt by the word of God, that ſuch prowd Prelates, and Antichriſtiā vſurpers, haue no authority nor power of the church, neither is their ſuſpēdings to be counted ſuſpenſions by the Church, nor their calling of Miniſters, a calling by the Church. Hauing then thus condēned

our Biſhops authority, & diſauowed as vtterly vnlawfull to meddle with their courts and officers. How ſtrange is this, that he ſeeth not his ſubſcription to the B. authority to haue gaineſaid all his writings? yea, how monſtrous is it, that he ſhould thus fetter other men frō any way, vſing, or applying themſelues to their courts & officers, and yet himſelfe, of late, being iuſtly called in queſtion,Called S. Toolies in Southwarke. by the Miniſter of the pariſh where he dwelt, for not communicating according to the order appointed, made his ſpeedy recourſe to a Doctor and iudge of ſuch courts, and by his meanes, cut off and foreſtalled the intended proceeding of the miniſter & congregation there againſt him. O worthy Captain & guide of ſo vnworthy a ſchiſme. But perhaps his Proctors will pleade for him, that his ſubſcription and late practiſe, haue now cancelled all his former writings,Browne ſtripped of all excuſe. ſo as they cannot henceforth in any equity be vrged againſt him. No, no, let thē know that I hold him heere faſter, than that all of them can be able to wring him out of my hands. I anſwer therefore, that ſince the time of his ſubſcription, firſt, he hath written,In his reply to my anſwere to the queſtion of communicating. that which is againſt both the Bi. and their authoritie, as in theſe words: Thus your writing condemneth you of iniquity, that ſpeake not one word in the 
                  He ſuppoſed he had ſpoken it to our miniſter. 
                  pulpit, againſt the reſtraint by popiſh diſcipline, that ye cannot ſeparate. How ſore do you labour, and how much do you ſuffer, that dare not ſpeake a word by name againſt thoſe officers and courts, neither name nor proteſt openly againſt thoſe wicked, againſt whom you would haue vs proteſt particularly and by name. And by and by after. But why labour you not alſo to charge them openly, though it coſt you your life and liuing? Alſo in his Libell againſt my admonition,Numb. 20. he hath theſe words: Thou haſt written it heeretofore, that there is no Aegipt in England, and haſt thou now found vs out to be in Aegipt. Doeſt thou not perceiue, that thou and thy partakers, abuſing your knowledge to perſecute thoſe which are come out of Aegipt, are worſe then Aegipt, yea princes of Sodome, and people of Gomorrha? looke thou to it, that thou remain not in Aegipt. Thou haſt confeſſed that we were once come out of Aegipt, thou canſt not ſay ſo of thy ſelfe, if ſtill thou iustifie thy

Aegiptian doctrine & pollutiōs, as is to be ſeen by thy pamphlet. Let the reader now bethinke him what Bro. calleth Aegiptian doctrine, ſith my booke containeth no doctrine, but the doctrine of the church of England, and ſo it was iudged & alowed by authority. Alſo whether he accompt Englād as Aegipt, which he would deny in another place, & whether he exclude the Biſhops frō the number, whē he calleth me, & all my partakers, that do perſecute him and his followers, Princes of Sodome, and people of Gomorrha. Again, when my admo. demandeth what gaine their departing frō our church heer in England hath gotten thē: he denieth not, that they are departed, but anſwereth thus: We haue gained, by fleeing from perſecuting wolues,
                  Numb. 28. 
                  not wealth, nor bellycheere, nor fauour in the world, but loſſe, impriſonment, all maner euil ſpeaches, and death it ſelfe. Nay, he is ſo far frō recanting his former courſe, as that he thundreth iudgements, and inuocateth vengeance (euen the bloud of all thoſe of his ſect that haue died any way by purſuite of law) vpō the heads of all thoſe, that haue been meanes and partakers to their trouble: theſe are his words:Numb. 77. 
                  It is thy manner, and thy partners, to force, to threaten, to make ſtirrings and hurly burlies, and to driue man & wife aſunder: thine and their outrage cannot be ſatisfied with bloud: thine & their railings, ſlander, & falſe accuſations, haue brought diuers of vs to death, ſome by the Gybbet, ſome by long impriſonmēt, ſome by flight and purſuite, ſome by extreame care, thought, & ſicknes, ſome by Seas, ſome by neceſsity and want, ſome by changing aire, dwelling & place, the bloud of all theſe ſhall be vpō thine & thy partners heads. Theſe places are ſufficiēt, being writtē ſince his ſubſcription, to proue, that he ſtill continueth to oppoſe himſelf againſt the authority & gouernment of our Biſhops, as alſo to the vnity & peace of our Church. Secondly, to thoſe that obiect his ſubſcriptiō, to cut off the allegation of his former writings againſt him, I anſwere, that Brown hath in writing ſince his ſubſcription, iuſtified all his former cauſe & doctrines in euery point, & therefore hath again cancelled his ſubſcription, and reuiued all his bookes. This I lay down by his own euidēt words

in two places of his libell againſt my admo. let the Reader conſider & iudge.Numb. 3. 
                  Glouers popery (ſaith he) or popiſh hereſies, being long ago by many diuines refuted, needed not Bredwells childiſh refutation, wheras the cauſe wherin Bro. hath ſtood as yet is refuted by none. Now the places aboue cited ſhew, that a chiefe part of Bro. cauſe, is touching the authority & proceeding of the Biſhops, which he vtterly deteſteth. And ſeeing then he auoucheth his cauſe, to ſtād as yet vnrefuted, he intendeth not that his ſubſcriptiō ſhould any whit empaire the ſame (for then he could not ſay ſo) but meaneth therfore, that the Bi. authority ſhall ſtill be holden in no better caſe, then his books haue left it. Againe he hath theſe cleere & full words, both for himſelfe, and his followers,Numb. 77. 
                  None of you all can ſhew any fault, falſe doctrine or wickednes in vs. By this time therefore (I beleeue) the reader ſeeth, that I haue left this wauering weathercock, as naked of all defence to couer his ſhame, euen as is my naile, according to the prouerb. But now let vs looke further alſo into his ſubſcrip. He confeſſeth, that ſecondly he ſubſcribed, that where the word of God is duly preached, and the ſacraments accordingly miniſtred, there is the Church of God. But he diſſembleth & keepeth from the reader another fourme of words for that article, which was offered him thus. 3. Do you acknowledge the Church of England to be the church of Chriſt, or the church of God? and wil you promiſe to cō
                     municate with the ſame in praiers, ſacramēts, & hearing of the word? and wil you frequent our Churches according to law or no? to this he ſubſcribed affirmatiuely. Heere againe, let the craftie foxe turne him which way he wil, and he is taken. For howſoeuer he would maintaine quarelling vpō the firſt forme of words, of Preaching the word duly, & miniſtring the ſacramēts accordingly: yet whē as he bound himſelf to frequent our Churches according to lawe, he hath at one gripe choaked all his former writings. Let the congregation of Toolyes Church in Southwarke teſtify,Or, Olaues.
                   whether for almoſt this two yeares ſpace, that he hath bin Schoolemaiſter there, & dwelt amongſt thē, he haue at any time cōmunicated with them in the Sacra. and whether vpon

their late vrging of him thereunto, he hath not (to defeate them) remoued his dwelling into another pariſh, & left a troubleſome ſtinke behind him in their Church. Yet ſome perhaps will obiect, that he doth ſometimes cōmunicate with our aſſemblies in the word. Heare the word (ſometimes) I confeſſe,How Browne ſometimes heareth our Sermons. but communicate with vs therein, I deny that he doth. How doth he heare? as a cenſor to iudge, not as a brother to learne: as the Spider goeth likewiſe to the flower, but not to gather hony, as the Bee: and thus the Deuill alſo may be ſaid to cōmunicate in the word with vs. I confeſſe I ſpeake vehemētly, but I proteſt, the loue of God conſtraineth me: for before his ſubſcrip. Brown being about Stamford, was earneſtly intreated of M. Far. & M. Har. Londoners, that foraſmuch as he had graunted thē, it was not vnlawful to heare the Word in our aſſemblies, that he would by ſome writing, perſwade his followers at London thereunto, ſeeing they did at that time vtterly cōdemne hearing with vs. They obteined his letters, which (as they teſtify) perſwaded indeed to hearing in our aſſemblies, not as children addreſsing thēſelues to the ſincere milke of the word, to grow therby: nor as mē plowing vp the furrowes of their harts, to receiue the ſeed of the holy word to a perfect rooting in thē: but in ſtead of theſe, other cōditiōs of their hearing were put down, as trying, looking into, & iudging of the doctrine & behauiour of the preachers, and that ſo they might come, as by occaſion & in the way of proteſtation for ſuch reſpects. Alſo he gaue them a ſpecial exceptiō of preachers, which ouerthrew the whole matter: for when they were to auoid all that oppoſed themſelues to their courſe, what a doubtfulnes muſt he needs bring vpō thē to heare any? ſith as they haue wickedly condemned our aſſemblies for no Churches of God, ſo we cannot chooſe but hate and purſue them, as enemies of all true peace & ſacred vnity, ſaying with the Prophet Dauid,
                  
                     Pſal. 139.21.22. 
                  Do not I hate them O Lord that hate thee? and do not I earneſtly contend with thoſe that riſe vp againſt thee? &c. Now alſo ſince his ſubſcription, in his Libell againſt me, he putteth downe

his diſtinction of hearing in theſe words: VVhile they raile & reſiſt the truth (for ſo he taketh his way & doctrine only to be) we may heare them as enemies,
                  
                     Numb. 105. 
                  but ioyne with thē as brethren we dare not. And now I ſuppoſe you ſee, how he heareth our Sermons, and will graunt vnto me, that this is not to communicate in the word with vs, although he had giuen his hād & promiſe therunto. But alas, who would iudge otherwiſe of this matter, if he haue but a little looked into Browns bookes? which he ſtoutly iuſtifieth to be without falſe doctrine or fault. Euery where in thē hath he diſclaimed both our praiers, preaching & Sacraments as none of the Lords, and therfore how ſhall he be taken (what ſhew ſo euer he maketh) to cōmunicate with vs in any of them? two or three places of his infinite number wil I ſhortly ſet down, and ſo leaue this point alſo to the readers further conſideration.Title againſt parish preachers, and hired lect. &c. 
                  But indeed (ſaith he) is the Lords meſſage a blind reading of ſeruice? and though they preach, yet is that the Lords gold which they bring? when they take and leaue the flocke as the wicked biſhops appoint them, and neither can nor wil plant or refourme the church? haue I ſent them, ſaith the Lord, or cōmanded them, whē they cauſe my people to erre, by their lyes, & their ſlatteries, ſaying, ye are his people & church, though ye be polluted & abhominable? haue theſe dumme dogs & tollerating preachers my letters & ſeales? I neuer gaue them (ſaith the Lord) they are ſtollen & counterfaite: yea, they haue the ſeales and licenſes of their wicked biſhops, and if they haue my meſſage, why hold they their peace at the wicked B. diſcharging, as if they had his meſſage only? be it therfore, O ye Prelates, that ye put Moſes ſeate for Moſes doctrine, can you preach the Lords word & doctrine, or miniſter his ſacramēts? to preach ſome truth as wicked mē may do, & to preach the Lords word of meſſage is not al one for his meſſage cānot be without his gouernmēt. Then a little after, Ye haue not yet (ſaith he) caſt off the yoke of Antichriſt, and receyued all things concerning my kingdome and gouernment. Therfore becauſe ye haue not planted & builded my church ſaith the Lord, that it may be viſible, nor purged & clenſed it frō open abhominations, both ye & all the works of your hāds with your praiers & ſacra, are vncleane & accurſed.
                  
Within fewe lines after this, yet forſooth, it is made great wickednes not to heare theſe preachers, for they ſit in Moſes ſeat, and are not blinde guydes: Nay, they ſit in the ſeate of Antichrist: and if they were blinde, they ſhoulde not haue had this ſinne, &c. Againe within fewe lines, But yet theſe wicked preachers riſe vp against this, and cry out that they haue the chiefe, they haue the worde and the Sacraments, and as for the gouernement and diſcipline, it is but an acceſſary and hangby, needefull in deede, but yet they may be without it, and be the Church of God notwithſtanding. But for this matter looke the 16. verſe and the meaning thereof. In this place we ſay, that their preaching is not the word of meſſage from God, neither may we partake with them in the Sacraments. But in ſteade of a thouſand other places, heare him as patiētly as you may, this one ſentence, againſt all kinde of communicating with our aſſemblies of Englande, thus blaſphemouſly barking. They hold ſtill the Prieſthoode of Antichriſt,
                  Titl. againſt diſordr. preach. at Paules croſſe, &c. 
                  which is the tollerating and diſpenſing with wickedneſſe, by ſuch wicked preachers to make Chriſt and Belial agree. Therefore thus ſaith the Lord, I feede not my flocke at Paules croſſe in London, or Saint Maries in Cābridge, or in your Engliſh pariſhes, O ye my ſheepe, goe ye not thither, as though there were my folde, and there I reſted and fed my flocke, &c. Sith he ſtill iuſtifieth all his doctrines and dealings to be fautles, let him and his friends nowe ſee, howe they can reconcile theſe things with his ſubſcription.
               His 4. interrogatorie was this, VVill you promiſe alſo quietly to behaue your ſelfe, and to keepe the peace of this church: and that you will not preach nor exerciſe the miniſterie, vnleſſe you be lawfully called thereunto? To this alſo hee anſwered affirmatiuely, and that he would perfourme the ſame accordingly. The latter part of this interrogatorie, Browne confeſſeth in his anſwere to my Admonition: but the former part he hideth in his boſome. His proud chalenge will not ſuffer him nowe, to ſhrowde him ſelfe from ſhame in neither. Firſt therefore, to beginne with the former part, hauing bounde him ſelfe by the thirde

article to frequent our aſsemblies according to lawe, and to acknowledge the ſame Church of Englande, (which doeth conſiſt of theſe aſſemblies) to be the Church of God. Now doth he in the fourth place, tye him ſelfe to the good behauiour towardes this Church, which hath neceſſarie relation to the Church before ſo mentioned. This I ſo lay downe, that the ſlipperie ſhifter ſhould not thinke to eſcape me, by drawing an interpretation from theſe wordes, to his conuenticles at his pleaſure. There be 3. notes of difference, that will not ſuffer theſe wordes, this church, to be vnderſtoode of his conuenticles. 1. That the title of the Church of Englande, can not without great inſolencie, be attributed to any other, then that which is eſtabliſhed by the law of the land: and that, he ſheweth him ſelfe to ſee well ynough in his 62. ſection of his Anſwere to my Admon. where, for the ſame reaſon (though it helped his cauſe neuer a whit) he quarelleth with me, for calling the church at Corinth, The church of Corinth. 2. Their conuenticles can not be ſaid to be frequented according to the lawe, without the like inſolencie of ſpeach, as in the former note. For by this forme of wordes, is alwayes intended the lawe of the land: & whenſoeuer the law of God is ſpoken of, it is euer ſet downe with thoſe or the like plaine wordes of difference? els let them ſhewe one inſtance to the contrary. But the third difference is moſt cleare: for hauing bound him ſelfe to frequent and hold the peace of our Churches, he is taken faſter, then that any ſtruggling can giue him hope of eſcape. Thus hauing voyded the doubtfulnes of his ſubſcription, let vs nowe come and try, how well his heart & his hande haue gone together, & that I may rake no further in his filthie confuſions, (whereof I ſuppoſe the reader would be as wearie as my ſelfe) let the former cited places of his writings, be here likewiſe called to witneſſe, what a friende he is to the church of England, and what peace he entertaineth with our aſſemblies. As for his practiſe euen ſince his ſubſcription (omitting all that was before, and namely

his runnning ouer the ſea, and carying many with him) the pariſh where he dwelt of late, doeth teſtifie, as is ſaide before, that it is farre from a peaceable and quiet behauiour towardes the Church: but much more the pariſh of Olaues in Siluerſtreete, a poore woman in the which, he hath ſo ſtrongly ſeduced, that whereas my ſelfe ſometimes had hope, by ſatiſfying her propounded doubts in writing, to haue wonne her into our aſſemblies, & church exerciſes, which of many in that pariſh was greatly deſired, he hath againe, by ſo large a writing and heape of wordes, ouerwhelmed the ſeelie woman (who belike thinketh v. or vi. ſheetes of paper muſt needes confute one) and confirmed her in her ſottiſh ſeparation, ſo as at this day in reſpect of inferiour meanes, we ſee vtterly no hope of her recouerie. As for excommunication gone out againſt her, ſhe altogether contemned it, before halfe a ſcore of the pariſh: and boaſted of Bro. ſpreading of his writings againſt me, to a hundreth miles diſtance from London. Beſides this, & ſomewhat later, he hath diſturbed the cōgregatiō at Dertford, drawn away ſome, railed opē
                  ly & diſperſed writings, as of chalenge againſt the lecturer there,M. Edmondes. for diſcouering vnto his auditorie the danger of that ſchiſme. Beholde, is not this quiet behauiour, and tending to the peace of this Church? the latter part of his laſt interrogatorie, being this, that he ſhoulde not preach, nor exerciſe the ministerie, vnleſſe he be lawfully called thereunto, is aſwell obſerued and kept by him, I warrant you. I thinke hee dares not (for the euidence of proofe that he knoweth to be againſt him) deny, that he hath ſince his ſubſcribing, preached in priuate houſes: & namely amongſt the reſt, one Lordes day, & not farre from Ludgate: hauing a litle before in the ſame houſe earneſtly contēded againſt, in reaſoning, & diſſwaded frō publique hearing. He was at the ſame time by one M. W. ſoundly reſiſted in the ſame his ſchiſmatical dealing: who rightly iudged it not meete, in a time of the great aſſēblies of the church, to the publike exerciſes of the worde and prayer,

to make priuate meetings for the ſame at our pleaſure. And M. W. after he had ſpoken in this matter, what the Lord then gaue him, departed with ſome others that went with him to the next ſermon, and left Browne with the reſt that liked better to tarrie, to their curſed cōuenticle. Wherin Bro. tooke vpon him to exerciſe the miniſterie of preaching: howbeit (he ſaith) he was earneſtly requeſted vnto it by thoſe that were preſent. Now that poynt therfore wil I leaue to the lerned to decide: namely, whether this was a lawful calling to that miniſtrie, yea or no.
               Beſides the ſubſcribing to theſe interrogatories, hee furthermore wrote his ſubmiſſion: a point or 2. whereof I will likewiſe ſet in the vewe of the Reader. Fiftly (ſaith he) I refuſe not to communicate in the Sacraments. For I haue one childe that is alreadie baptized, according to the order and lawe, and by this time in mine abſence, if God haue giuen my wife a ſafe deliuerance, and the childe doe liue, I ſuppoſe it is alſo baptized in like maner. Further, my ſeruants being three, doe orderly come to their owne Pariſh Church, according to the lawe, and communicate alſo according to the Lawe. Hereupon hee addeth, To all theſe poyntes that they are true, I do ſubſcribe with mine hande and name, this 7. of October, Anno Dom. 1585. Here I obſerue, that he teſtifieth it to be orderly done, to come to our owne pariſh Churches: which is more then his writings can well beare, howſoeuer he thinke to ſhift it. Alſo in that he ſayth, he refuſeth not to communicate in the Sacraments: perhaps he ſtoppeth the crye of his conſcience, (which telleth him, he communicateth not in the Sacraments with our congregation) by this fooliſh and deceitfull perſwaſion: namely, that he ſatisfieth his promiſe by communicating in the Sacraments, though but in his owne conuenticles. But his argument of fact, that he giueth to bring credite withall vnto the ſame aſſertion, as in theſe wordes: For I haue one childe thas is already baptized according to order and Lawe, &c. this (I ſay) ſtoppeth vp that ſtarting hole againſt him. And then it woulde bee ſhewed in what congregation of ours,

hee hath communicated in the Sacraments, ſince the day of his running ouer ſea. Nay if his behauiour bee truely obſerued, when hee commeth into our congregations, I doe not thinke, it can bee proued, that hee hath ſince that day, ſo much as ioyned with them in their prayers.Brown the pattern
                        •
                      of a notorious ill conſcience. To this laſt place of the matter of Brownes ſubſcription, I haue reſerued one thing, which is good for al to know, and ſome to prouide for, and that is this. Anſwering to my Admonition for that point of his ſubſcription, which I had obiected againſt him, as a proofe of a vile conſcience, he graunteth that he had ſubſcribed, but he denieth that he had ſo ſubſcribed, as that he ſhould be prooued againſt himſelfe thereby, in anie thing. Thereupon he ſetteth me downe (though vntruly as you haue heard) certaine fourmes of the pointes whereunto hee did ſubſcribe, and there withall telleth mee, what handſome interpretations of his owne wordes he can make: whereby giuing one hand, to the ſatisfying of the authoritie, that then dealt with him, with the other hee ſtroketh the eyes of his fooliſh followers, that they might ſleepe ſtill in the opinion of his good meaning. As though the dealings of Rob. Browne, had not otherwiſe bene vile ynough, except he had by this means ſhewed, that he hath not one haire of an honeſt man about him. Read (beloued) and then teſtifie. The firſt article of his ſubſcription he reporteth thus. The biſhops ciuill authoritie Browne did acknowledge lawfull in his ſubſcription, and their magiſtracie to bee obeyed. Well, how doe you thinke he maketh this agree with his bookes? euen thus hee telles you, that hee doeth by thoſe wordes, neither iuſtifie thoſe for brethren which doe perſecute, nor allow an idle and Lordly miniſterie in the Church as a part of the brotherhoode. How the reader can conceyue this, that he denieth vpon his ſubſcription, I knowe not: but thus much I am ſure, this his explication certifieth, that the BB. being by the Queene and her lawes, allowed the titles of Lordes, are accounted of Browne not to bee members of the Church. And by this anſwere it appeareth, he

coggeth this imagination into his diſciples, that hee allowed the BB. ciuill authoritie, but therewithall denied them their eccleſiaſticall miniſterie. Howbeit, in plaine wordes he ſubſcribed to their authoritie. To couer himſelfe in the 2. article, hee is faine to hide the trueth, as I haue before diſcouered. For the third, though he vſe the ſame craft, yet in that hee cannot but confeſſe that hee ſubſcribed, that his childe was baptized according to order of lawe, to ſalue his credite with his companions in this, hee ſaith, But yet it was done without his conſent, and contrary to an order he had taken and appointed: for it was baptiſed in England he being beyonde the ſea. If it were contrarie to his purpoſe, howe coulde it argue his not refuſing to communicate in the Sacrament? On the other ſide, if hee tell his diſciples true of his meaning herein, that hee had taken other order for his childs baptizing, but that his being beyond ſea, croſſed his purpoſe: how agreeth that with his neglecting of the ſame order taking, for his later childes baptizing, which euen at the time of his ſubſcription, he alledged (by way of coniecture, as if God had giuen his wife ſafe deliuerance) to be baptized alſo according to lawe. He was nowe in Englande when hee might haue taken better order, if the firſt were ſuch an errour. But becauſe he had no ſuch colourable excuſe for this, he tooke a ſhorter way, though no leſſe ſhamefull, in ſtepping ouer that part of the article, as though there had beene no ſuch thing. Alſo for his alleaging his ſeruants comming to Church according to lawe, whereby he perſwaded vnto the BB. his owne conformitie that way, he excuſeth this to his companions to be, for that he was not to force his ſeruants agaynſt their conſcience and custome, being newly come to him. Adding this beſide, that he neuer came to the ſame Church with them, the parſon beeing a common drunkard, and infamous by ſundrie faults. Againe, confeſsing he promiſed the BB. on the one ſide, that he would come to Church according to order of lawe, On the other ſide, hee perſwadeth his diſciples, that hee might well ynough doe ſo, for that there was no lawe to

force him to take ſuch a parſon for his lawfull miniſter, neither to ioyne with him in the prayers and Sacraments. Thus hath hee firſt manifeſtly mocked authoritie,Iude verſ. 8.
                   ſo as that place of Iude which hee had wrongfully writhen towardes mee, returneth nowe againe with full force vppon his owne heade. And ſecondly, hee apparantly ſheweth that hee continueth his olde courſe of ſeducing the ſeelie ſheepe, euen as heretofore. In ſumme, if all that is here ſayde, touching his ſubſcription, bee melted together as in one lumpe, where ſhall wee find a more perfect image of a peſtilent ſchiſmaticke, and one more voide of all conſcience, than is this Browne, though Rome it ſelfe be raked through to find him? Howe well doe theſe notes (which were long agoe obſerued to be the verie properties of all heretikes) agree with this mans maners:Clemens Stro. lib. 7.
                   namely, to ſhrinke from their doctrines as aſhamed, when they are preſſed with them, and neuertheleſſe ſtill vnderhande to glorie in teaching ſuch things. Againe,Barnar. ſer. 66. in Cant. cantic. as an other teſtifieth, It is not ynough to bee heretikes, vnleſſe they bee alſo hypocrites. Theſe are they that come in ſheepes clothing. Sheepe they are in ſhew, foxes for craft, but wolues in act and crueltie. Neither is it in price with them to followe vertue, but to colour vices as with a certaine painting of vertue.
            
            
               To the 108.
               
               14 No part of Church Diſcipline can bee wanting, but the Church doeth ſtraight way goe to ruine thereby. Againe, there may be a true Church of GOD without the Presbiterie. Theſe two axiomes will not well agree, as the Admonition ſuppoſeth. Browne ſent me glewe, which he ſayde, was ſtrong ynough to holde them together. I haue tryed it, and it will not prooue, vnleſſe ſome vnlawfull Arte be vſed with all. He miſtooke me much in iudging, I vnderſtood no differncee betwixt Diſcipline and Presbiterie.
                  
I knowe the office and the officer is not all one: but where the officer wanteth, there the office alſo wanteth, as touching the execution thereof. And therefore where the Presbiterie wanteth (which himſelfe maketh the onely executors of the cenſuring diſcipline) there that diſcipline alſo by his rule,
                     Def. 51.53. is wanting. For whie elſe doth he ſay, the Church of England is without this diſcipline, if the ſame may bee graunted to be, where the Elderſhippe is not? Nowe his anſwere explicating his ſeconde enunciation, which I vrge agaynſt the firſt, ſayeth, His meaning was, that a Church remayneth ſtill, though all the officers of diſcipline should die at once, becauſe (forſooth) yet ſtill the office and right of gouernement ſhoulde remaine. I replie: that the gouernement which hee ſpeaketh of, in this caſe, cannot bee ſayde to bee actually, but potentially. And if he holde it ſufficient, to auouche the apparancie of a Churche (whereof is and was the queſtion in the conference alleaged) by a potentiall hauing of diſcipline, wee ſhall ſoone ende the controuerſie for the aſſemblies of Englande. But I may not heere omitte to note the dealing of this double faced Ianus. In the conference which the Admonition citeth againſt him: through the occaſion of his writings agaynſt the Church of England, it was obiected to him, that it ſeemed hee had condemned our Churches, in that they were not guided by Preſbiteries. Hee denied his writings to import any ſuch thing. Hereupon they demaunde, whether (then) hee woulde graunt that there may be a true Church of God without the Presbiterie. He anſwered, yea. Nowe in his writing agaynſt mee, hee denieth not that hee anſwered ſo, but declareth his meaning to bee otherwiſe than they tooke it. So that if they had further vrged his writings agaynſt his anſwere, it nowe appeareth, that he could cunningly haue turned the table vpſide downe, as the painter did: who beeing hired to paint a tumbling horſe, made him running: which when hee that ſet him a woorke found fault withall, the painter turned the table

vpſide downe: and then the horſe which before appeared running, ſeemed plainely to lie tumbling. But what dealing was this for a diuine, to a queſtion propounded, of the conſtitution of a church, neceſſarie to the acknowledging of it, (as appeareth by this occaſion of the queſtion before rehearſed) to make anſwere concerning an accidentall caſe of a conſtituted Church? And this anſwere beeing but as the lining of his wordes, the outſide ſeeming altogether correſpondent to their purpoſe. So dealeth hee generally in all his writings and actions for this his ſchiſmaticall courſe: and namely in moſt of the points of his ſubſcription: as that no childe can better repreſent the viſage of his father that begot him, than this man doeth the ſpirit of him that gaue thoſe doubtfull anſweres at Delphos,
               
               15 The reſt I anſwere not, till you come to his concluſion, number 120.
               Whereunto thus much I ſay, let it be (O Lorde) as this man hath deſired, namely, be thou iudge, whether of our wayes be approoued in thine eyes: and whether of vs hath the ſtrength of trueth in his mouth, and bee mercifull vnto our iniquities, for thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſtes ſake.
               
                  
                     Pſalme 8.2.
Out of the mouthes of babes and ſuckelings hast thou ordained ſtrength, becauſe of thine enemies, that thou mightest ſtill the enemie and auenger.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            AT LONDON Printed by Iohn VVindet, and are to be ſolde at the Roſe in Povvles churchyard. 1588.
            
               
                   NON SOLO PANE VIVET HOMO Luke 4.  Verbum Dei manet in aeternum:
               
            
            
            
            
         
      
   