
      
         
            
            
            The Poore mans
Ievvel, that is to ſay,
a Treatiſe of the Peſtilence. Vnto the which is
annexed a declaration
of the vertues of the hearbs
Carduus Benedictus, and
Angelica: which are very
medicinable, both againſt
the Plague, and alſo againſt
many other diſeaſes.
            Gathered out of the Bookes of diuers
learned Phyſitians.
            Imprinted at London
for George Byſhop.
ANNO. 1578.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
Honorable, Sir Thomas
Ramſey, Knight, Lord Maior
of the Citie of Londō, Thomas Brasbrige
vvisheth continuall and godly
proſperitie.
            
               RIght Honorable, as
you being the Head,
and gouernour of the
Cittie, are careful, and
paineful, for the preſeruatiō
of the helth,
and wealth therof: ſo
if euerie member, and inhabitant be readie
to do that he may, and ought to do:

                  •
               our care, and paine, maye take the bet
               
                  ••
               r
effecte. For the heade deuiſeth, and
prouideth for all the bodie: but the hāds,

                  •
               eete, mouth, ſtomacke, and other partes
ſerue it, as God hath ordained: by which
meanes it continueth in liuely eſtate, ſo
long as God hath appointed. So I being
one of the leaſte members of the Citie,

haue taken paines to penne a ſhort treatiſe
of the Peſtilence: wherewith it is oftentimes
annoyed: being perſuaded, that
if it be generallye receyued, it maye doe
much good, for the preſeruation of the
Citizens, and other inhabitauntes, from
the daunger of this diſeaſe. Therefore, I
haue thought good to preſent it to your
Honor: not doubting, but as your office
moueth you to be carefull, and you are
carefull according to your office: ſo you
wil haue care to publiſh this little Boke,
ſo farre forth, as you ſhall vnderſtand by
your owne iudgemente, and by the aduice
of other, both wiſe, and learned, that
it may profite the Citie: vnto the which,
& vnto the whole Realme, I wiſh continuall
health, and godly quietneſſe:
and vnto your Honor, perpetuall
and true
felicitie.
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               FOr as much as the famous Cittie
of London, (wher I am an inhabitant,)
is eftſoones infected with
the dangerous diſeaſe, called the
Pestilence, to the hindraunce as wel of them
that are cleare, as alſo of them that haue the
ſickneſſe in their houſes: I (vnderstāding that
the hearbes Carduus Benedictus, and Angelica,
are preſeruatiues, and medicines for
this, and many other diſeaſes,) haue thoughte
good to gather out of the writings of learned
Phiſicians, a treatiſe of the Pestilence, annexing
thervnto the vertues of the ſayde herbes,
to the vſe and commoditie of Londoners, and
al men elſewhere, that ſhal haue need of thē.
The vſe of the hearbe, and the like treatiſe
hath bene ſet forth before time (I graunt) both

                  〈◊〉
                Latine and Engliſh: but in diuerſe bookes,

                  •••
               arately the one from the other: The one in

                  ••
               arbals, conteyning beſides, the properties of
many other hearbes: the other moſt commonly
in bookes conteyning medicines for a greate

number of diſeaſes: and therefore more coſtly,
than that euery man could buy them. But I
haue ioyned the vertues of theſe hearbes with
the treatiſe of the Pestilence, without the addition
of any further matter: and haue ſet thē
foorth more perfectly than euer they were before
in any one booke, and that in a few leaues
of Paper, not heauie to be carried, nor long to
be read, nor deare to be bought. For beſides the
properties of many hearbes, and medicines for
a great number of diſeaſes, euen in this treatiſe
of the Pestilence, I leaue out many preſeruatiues,
and medicines too coſtly for them that
are of ſmal ability: hauing reſpect to the poore:
who as they can not haue the counſel of the
learned Phiſitian, at al times, when they nede:
ſo are they not able to take thoſe things which
commonly are by him, in wordes, or writing
preſcribed. Therefore (gentle Reader,) whether
thou be rich or poore, take this my labor in good
part, and vſe it to thy cōmeditie, with thankeſgiuing
to God, as the Authour of all things
that are healthful, both to the bodie, & to the
ſoule.
            
               T. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶A Treatiſe of the
Peſtilence.
            
               ¶The firſt Chapter ſheweth the firſt
cauſe of the diſeaſe.
               
                  INtreating of the diſeaſe
called the Plague or
Peſtilence, I minde not
to be ouer long, or curious,
as they that write
exquiſitely and perfectly
of the matter: onely I will ſet downe a
few thinges, neceſſary, and ſufficient for
the commoditie, & profite of them, which
in this cauſe ſhall haue néede of helpe.
               Firſt therfore I wyl ſhew the cauſes
of the diſeaſe: & ſecondly, preſeruatiues
whereby a man may be kepte from the
ſickneſſe: thirdly, the tokens, whereby
he that is diſeaſed maye gather, and vnderſtande,
whether he be infected wyth
the plague or no: fourthly, and laſt of al,
I wyll ſette downe ſome remedies and
medicines to cure the diſeaſes. Some
Phyſitians recite foure principal cauſes
of the Peſtilence. The firſt pertayneth

to Diuinitie, the ſeconde to Aſtronomie,
the third and fourth to Phyſick. As touching
that which pertaynes to diuinitie,
our ſinne and wickedneſſe, (the principal
cauſe of al our miſerie and calamitie,) is
one cauſe of this diſeaſe. As may apeare
by the words of Moſes vnto the Iſraelites:
who among manye other curſes,
and puniſhments for ſinne,Deut. 28. 15. reciteth the
Peſtilence as one, ſaying: If thou wilte
not obey the voice of the Lord the God,
to kéepe, and to doe all his commaundementes
and his ordinaunces, whiche I
commaunde thée this day: then all theſe
curſes ſhal come vppon thée, & ouertake
thée. Curſed ſhalt thou be in the towne,
& curſed in the fielde, &c. The Lord ſhall
make the Peſtilēce cleaue vnto thée, vntill
he haue conſumed thée, from the land
which thou goeſt to poſſeſſe.2. Sam. 24. 15. Moreouer,
we reade that ſeuentie thouſande of the
Iſraelites died of this diſeaſe,2. Chro. 
                        •
                     1. 14. for the
ſinne of Dauid their King. I thinke no
man wil deny, but yt hereby it is euident
that ſinne is a cauſe of the Peſtilence euen
among vs. For whatſoeuer thyngs

are written afore time, are written for
our learning: and the puniſhment of the
Iſraelites,1. Cor. 10. 6. is an example to vs, that we
ſhould auoyd ſinne, leſt their plagues fal
vpon vs. For their God is our God, and
he hateth ſinne in vs, as he did in them,
and there fore puniſheth it in vs, as hée
did in them. Therefore I ſaye ſinne is a
principal cauſe of the Peſtilence: wherby
God puniſheth not ſo muche thoſe,
whom he taketh therby out of this life:
as thoſe that remaine aliue. For they
that liue, féele the ſmarte of the plague,
when as the other, manye of them, dye
Gods ſeruants, and for this tranſitorie
life, enioy that, which neuer ſhal end. If
oure owne experience doe not teache vs
this, we may perceiue it by the foreſayd
puniſhment of King Dauid, to whom it
had not béene ſo gréeuous to haue dyed
himſelfe, as to léeſe his ſubiectes, in the
multitude whereof, he through a worldly
wiſdome truſted more than in the almightye
power of God. Therefore God
diminiſhed the number of them by the
Peſtilence: to teache him, and all other

Princes, not to put their truſt in ye multitude
of menne, (bicauſe it is his owne
worke to preſerue the ſtate of Realmes,
& to giue victorye in battell:) and alſo to
teache vs, and all men, that ſinne is a
cauſe of the plague, aſwel as of other calamities
yt happen vnto men. Although
this cauſe be ſupernaturall, (as ſome
tearme it,) and not properly pertayning
to Phiſicke: yet thoſe Phiſitions are not
to be miſliked, which in reciting ye cauſes
of this ſickneſſe, note this in the firſt
place, as the roote of the reſidue, vppon
the whiche the other do depend, & conſequently
doe followe: the whiche béeing
expelled, the other ſhall not bée perceyued
to our hurte, but ſhall vaniſhe euen
as the ſmoke, when the fire is taken away.
Therfore theſe Phiſitions are like
vnto good & faithfull Chirurgians, whiche
ſéeke the bottome of the wound, and
heale it throughly. But they that preſcribe
preſeruatiues onely againſte the
third and fourth cauſe of the plague, are
like vnto vnſkilfull Chirurgians that
heale the wounde withoute, and leaue

corruption in the fleſhe, whiche ſhortely
after breaketh out to further incōuenience.
For they that are preſerued from
the Peſtilēce, or are healed of it, may be
ſure, if the corruption of ſinne remaine
within them, that a greater plague wil
folow. For God ſendeth this, and diuers
other calamities, for the puniſhment of
ſinne: as oure ſauiour ſignifieth, ſaying
to the man that he hadde healed: Behold,
Iohn. 5. 
                        •
                     4. thou art made whole, ſin no more,
leaſte a worſe thing happen vnto thée.
Howbeit, I graunt that we may learne
by the word of God, that he ſēdeth ſickneſſe,
trouble, and miſerie often tymes
to good men, not for ſinne onely, but for
diuers other cauſes: yet this, that I
haue ſaide, remaineth moſte true, that
Sinne is one, and the principall cauſe
of the Peſtilence.
            
            
               ¶The ſecond Chapter ſheweth the ſecond
cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               THe ſecond cauſe is giuen by Aſtronomers,
and is called an euill conſtellation:

which they know by the placing
of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres,
in the firmament, or circles of Heauen,
and by their coniunctions, oppoſitions,
& other aſpectes of the one to the other.
Of this cauſe I do not thinke it néedfull
here to ſpeake, eſpecially in ſuch maner
as the Aſtronomers doe, who by their
Ethnicall phraſes, and kindes of ſpeach
in their Alminackes and Prognoſtications,
do ſéeme to fauor or foſter the Idolatrie
of the Heathen: who worſhipped
thoſe celeſtiall creatures as Gods.
For they ſpeake of them, either as of
Gods, or (at the leaſt) as of liuing Princes,
indued with reaſon, and béeyng in
great power, and authoritie. Moreouer,
wheras they write their Prognoſtications
to the vſe of the vnlearned, I know
not to what purpoſe they ſet downe the
motions of the planets, with their termes
of Arte, only known to themſelues.
If the Art be profitable for Phiſicke, let
them kéep it to themſelues, and vſe it in
their practiſes: if it bée profitable for
huſbandrie, let them write that onelye

whiche is according to the capacitie of
huſbandmen: Whiche being done, I
thinke huſbandmen ſhall haue little vſe
of their writings.
               For although huſbandrie did (perhaps)
firſt procéede of the knowledge of Aſtronomy,
as diuerſe other trades neceſſary
for the life of man, haue their beginning
of Geometry, and natural Philoſophy,
yet I think huſbandmen, and men of other
faculties, whiche are altogither ignorant
in theſe Artes, are more ſkilfull
and wiſe, through their daily practiſe, in
the vſe therof, than they themſelues that
are profeſſors of the Artes. Thus much
by the way, by occaſion of the ſeconde
cauſe of the Peſtilence.
            
            
               ¶The third Chapter ſheweth the third
cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               THe thirde cauſe, (whiche more properly
belongeth to Phiſicke, (is the
corruption of the ayre: whiche beyng
corrupted, is apte to infect mans body.
For euery man that liueth, draweth the

breath which we haue, of the aire round
about vs. If it be ſtinking, venomous,
and corrupt, the body of man yt is neare
to it, is in danger of corruption, wherof
oft times is ingendered the Peſtilence.
The aire is corrupt, either generally in
diuers Cities, or Countries: or particularly,
in ſome one place.
               Generally (as Aſtronomers write) by
an euil conſtellation, or by ye filthy matter
of a Comete, cauſed by ye conſtellation:
Particularly, in a fewe houſes, or
ſtréetes, through the ſtinche of chanels,
of filthie dung, of carion, of ſtanding
pudles, and ſtincking waters, of ſéeges,
or ſtinking priuies: of ſheding of mans
bloude, and of deade bodies, not déeply
buried, (which happeneth among Souldiors:)
of common piſſing places, and
ſuch like. Finally a gret company dwelling
or lying in a ſmal roome, (eſpecially
if thoſe roomes be not very clenly kept,
& perfumed,) do ingēder a corrupt aire,
apt to infect thoſe that are in it: whiche
infected perſōs and their infectious clothes,
may infect a whole Citie, and the

Citie may infect the country that reſorteth
vnto it, or vnto the which the inhabitants
thereof do reſorte. For a venomous
aire is like vnto fire, whiche burneth
that is nighe vnto it: if the matter
be apt to take fire. Wherby it commeth
to paſſe ſomtimes, that as a litle ſparke
conſumeth a whole Town: ſo one houſe
or ſtréete, infecteth the whole Citie and
Country rounde about it: the perſons
I meane of the Citie and Country, that
come within the compaſſe of the infectious
aire: if their bodies be apt to be infected.
I ſpeake of the ordinarie vvorking of God, vvhich I vvold alvvaies haue ſo to be vnderſtoode, that it is nothing preiudiciall to his miraculous operation. I ſay a venemous aire infecteth
not all, but thoſe only, whoſe bodies are
apte to be infected. For if the ayre were
of power to infect all that come wythin
the compaſſe of it, then in a generall
corruption of ye aire, none ſhould eſcape
infection, whiche commeth not to paſſe.
For, as fire burneth, but not Iron and
ſtone, as it dothe ſtrawe, cole, and wood:
ſo a corrupte aire hath power to infect,
but thoſe bodies onelye, that are apte to
receiue the venomous operation thereof.
Therefore, vnleſſe vnto this thirde

cauſe of the Peſtilēce, the fourth be added,
it is of no force.
            
            
               ¶The fourth Chapter ſheweth the
fourth cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               THE fourth cauſe is the aptneſſe of
mans body, through euill humors
to receiue ye effecte of a venomous aire,
putrifying and corrupting the bodie:
whereof the diſeaſe is ingendered. The
bodie is made apte to be infected by the
abuſe of things not naturall, (as Phiſitions
tearme them,) that is to ſaye, by
taking of meate and drinke out of meaſure,
ſpecially by féeding of many diſhes
at one meale, or by toomuch lack of good
nouriſhing meate, by too much ſléepe, or
watching, by too much laboure or eaſe:
Finally, by too muche anger, griefe of
minde, and feare of the diſeaſe. As all
theſe things are dangerous: ſo the laſte
is ſufficient of it ſelfe to infect the body,
and conſequently to bring deathe, as I
haue heard it declared by dyuerſe examples.
               
                  
Hitherto, I haue ſhewed of what
things chiefly the Plague doth procéede,
to the end, that euery man may the better
eſcape it, from the whiche there is
no better preſeruatiue, than to auoide
the cauſes.
               For, as it is an olde ſaying, ſo euerye
man maye eaſily perceiue it to be true:
Sublata cauſa, t
                        •
                     llitur effectus, when the
cauſe is remoued, the effecte followeth
not. If the cauſe of warre bée taken away,
wée ſhall haue peace: ſo if wée auoide
the cauſe of ſickneſſe, wée ſhall
haue healthe. If fire bée not laide to the
woodde, it cannot burne: ſo, if there bée
nothing that bringeth or cauſeth the
Plague, we cannot be infected. Therefore
it ſerueth our tourne very much, to
know the cauſes therof.
               For it is a very true ſaying, Foelix qui
potuit rerum cognoſcere cauſas, he is happy
that can vnderſtande the cauſes of thinges.
By vnderſtanding the cauſes of
good thinges, we may the more eaſilye
obtaine that which is profitable for vs:
and by vnderſtanding the cauſes of euill

thynges, wée maye the more eaſily auoyde
that whych is hurtefull vnto vs.
               Therefore I haue ſette downe the
cauſes of the Plague. Nowe, it foloweth,
that I write of the preſeruatiues,
whereby a man may be kept from this
diſeaſe.
            
            
               ¶The fift Chapter, wherein is mentioned
a preſeruatiue againſt the firſt
cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               IN this part we muſt haue an eie to
the cauſes. For except the preſeruatiues
be of force, and alſo contrary, or
(as I may ſaye) enimies to the cauſes:
they cannot preuaile againſt them. For
preſeruatiues are to the cauſes of diſeaſes,
as watchmen are to théeues. If the
watchmen be ſtrong ynoughe, and alſo
haue a minde to reſiſt the théeues, they
will kéepe the houſe from robbing: but
if they lack of ſtrēgth, or if they conſent
vnto the robbers, and let thē haue their
purpoſe: they rather doe harme than
good to him yt appointed them to watch.

So the preſeruatiues muſt be ſuche, as
are contrarie to the cauſes of diſeaſes,
and able to reſiſt them, or elſe they can
not kéepe a man from ſickneſſe. The
firſt cauſe of the plague is Sin. Therefore
it is requiſite if poſſibly it might be,
that we did in all points abſtaine from
it. But foraſmuch as the corruption of
our fleſh is ſuche, that we ſinne often
times, and there is no man liuing, that
without Phariſaicall, Papiſticall, and
Phantaſticall arrogancie can ſay, hée is
voide of wickedneſſe: it remaineth, that
with al ſpéed, before the ripeneſſe of our
ſinne ſtir vp Gods wrath againſte vs to
plague vs: it remaineth (I ſay) that we
purge, and cleanſe oure ſelues from all
ſinne and wickedneſſe. Sinnes are eyther
Publique or Priuate. Publique
offences, or (to ſpeake more properly,)
offences that are committed by a multitude
openly, ſo that they are manifeſt
to the eies of al men, muſt be purged by
Publique aucthoritie: and Priuate, or
ſecret offences, euery priuate man muſt
ſéeke to purge of hymſelfe
                     •
                   Although

I knowe, that of the twoo, publique
offences are more daungerous, as the
which are cauſe of warre, famine, and
peſtilence, of captiuitie, of the ſpoyle of
mens goods, of deſtruction of the people,
and of the ſubuerſion of kingdomes.
Yet, foraſmuche as it perteineth not to
my purpoſe, in this treatiſe, to ſpeake of
theſe offences, I let them paſſe. For as
in many things perteining to Phiſicke,
I referre the richer ſorte to the counſell
of the lerned Phiſitions: ſo in this matter,
I referre them that are in authoritie,
to the ſermons, and writings of the
lerned diuines. But as it doth little good
to cut off the toppes of wéedes in a garden,
and not to dig vp the roote, bycauſe
moſt commonly they wil come vp thicker
than they did before: ſo it is almoſte
a laboure in vaine, to ſhew means how
to purge the wickednes of priuate mē,
vnleſſe publique offences bée firſte cured.
For as from the root commeth nouriſhment
to herbs both good and badde,
whereby they grow and flouriſhe: ſo by
publique offences, the wickedneſſe of

priuate men is encreaſed, & maintained,
or (at the leaſt) ſo hid and couered, that
it cannot be perceyued. Theſe offences,
whiche I call publique, doe annoye the
whole bodie, not without ſome griefe of
the principall members of the common
weale: which being vncured, I perſuade
my ſelfe, that the operation of my poore
medicines, preſcribed vnto the inferior
partes, wil be very ſmall. Therefore, I
wiſhe all them that are in authoritie, to
aſke counſell of God, who ſpeaketh vnto
vs in his word. If they be not ſtudents
of Diuinitie, and therfore miſtruſt their
own iudgement, let them reſort to Sermons,
and to the writings of the learned
Diuines. Let thē aſk of them whether
theſe dayly cuſtomes of running to
playes, and enterludes, and to bearebaitings,
aſwell vppon the Sabboth daye,
ordeined for the ſeruice of God, as vpon
other daies, appointed for mē to worke:
whether daily haunting of Tauerns, &
Alehouſes, both early in the morning, &
in the after noone, whereof proceedeth
drunkennes, the cauſe of much miſchéef:

whether common dicing, and other idle
and hurtful paſtimes: whither reſorting
to harlots company: do diſpleaſe God,
and prouoke hym to plague vs, or no?
               Let them aſke of them, whether that
playes vpon the Sundayes be godly exerciſes,
fitte for the ſanctification of the
Saboth day or no: vnto the which, light
perſons for the moſt part reſorte: where
(throughe lighte communication of one
with another,) occaſion is miniſtred of
further inconuenience: which is not ſo
ſecrete, nor ſo ſmall, but that honeſt mē
do both perceiue it, and ſpeake of it. Finally,
let the Magiſtrats aſk of the godly
Preachers, whether they that reſorte
daily to Bearebaitings, are not aſwell
worthie to be whipped oute of a Common
weale, as thoſe vagarant perſons,
whiche wil not worke, & yet ſéeke
to liue vpon other mens labours. For if
ſearch were made, it wold be foūd, that
no ſmall nūber of them that haunte the
Beare gardens, are not of anye greate
wealth, and yet they ſpend their money,
and léeſe their time, whiche ſhoulde rather

bée beſtowed in labouring for the
maintenaunce of themſelues, and theyr
familie. But (as I ſaide) referring them
that are in authoritie, to the counſell of
the learned Diuines, for the redreſſe of
theſe and ſuche like matters, I let them
paſſe, and wil ſpeake of priuate wickedneſſe.
            
            
               ¶The ſixte Chapter ſheweth briefly,
how priuate wickednes may
be purged.
               HAd I not ſaid, that I mind not to be
ouer long or curious, ſome woulde
looke here, that I ſhoulde ſet downe all
kinde of priuate or ſecrete offences. For
in Phiſicke, they that are learned in the
Art, do firſt ſhew the diſeaſe, what it is,
and after the preſeruatiues, and medicines
for the ſame. The like order in other
Artes is commendable. But if I
followe it, I ſhall make a large volume
contrarie to my promiſe. Therefore, as
in other places, I omitte many things:
ſo in this, I will referre the godly Reader
to the writings of the Euangeliſts,

Prophets, and Apoſtles, and to the ſermons
of learned men, and will onely ſet
down that whiche is written in Eccleſiaſticus,
Eccleſ. 38. 9. in the whiche booke Ieſus the
ſonne of Sirach hath theſe wordes: My
ſonne, faile not in thy ſickeneſſe, but
pray vnto the Lorde, and hée will make
thee whole: Leaue off from ſinne, and order
thine hands aright, and clenſe thy
hearte from all wickedneſſe.
               Here the wiſe man teacheth vs twoo
thynges, whiche are medicines in time
of the Peſtilence & preſeruatiues before
it commeth, that is to ſaye, Prayer, and
Repentaunce. Repentaunce, (whiche
chiefly cōſiſteth in forſaking of wickedneſſe
and amendment of life,) muſt goe
before: them our Prayer that followeth,
ſhall be acceptable vnto GOD.
               For hys eies are vppon the righteous,
Pſal. 34. 
                        •
                     5▪
                   and his eares are open vnto their
prayers:1. Pet. 3. 12. but ſinners he will not heare.Pſal. 66. 18.
Althoughe all menne are ſinners,Eſai. 55. 7. yet
when we repent, GOD putteth away
oure ſynne, and we are accompted as
righteous in his ſight. In this caſe, if

wée praye vnto him, he will graunt vs
thoſe things that are conuenient for vs.
What are the partes of Repentaunce,
howe we ought to praye, and other circumſtances
belonging to theſe things,
the ignorant reader hath to learne, as is
aforeſayde.
               This may be ſufficient in this ſhorte
treatiſe, for the preſeruatiues againſte
the firſt cauſe of the Peſtilence.
            
            
               The ſeuenth Chapter ſheweth the preſeruatiues
againſt the ſecond cauſe
of the Peſtilence.
               THe ſecond is linked to the firſt, and
laſt cauſes, as the effect of the one,
and cauſe of the other. For the euyll
conſtellation cauſeth an infectious aire,
and an aptneſſe of mannes bodie to receiue
the effect thereof, whiche conſtellation
is not ſo muche euill of it ſelfe,
as per Accidens, bycauſe wée are ſinners.
But if the Aſtronomers dare
ſaye, that the Starres, or the motion
of them, (created of GOD from the

beginning,) whiche maketh the conſtellation,
is euill of it ſelfe, (the trueth
therof I referre to the Diuines to dyſcuſſe:)
yet I dare ſay, that the operation
thereof, coulde haue no force to the
hurte of man, if we were his faithfull
ſeruauntes, and did continuallye walke
in his commaundementes. For vnto
the children of GOD it is ſayd: Feare
not the ſignes of Heauen.Iere. 10. 1. So little cauſe
haue they to feare the ſignes of Heauen,
that for their ſakes GOD altereth
the courſe of the ſtarres,Ioſu. 10. 1
                        •
                     . whych he
hymſelfe created.Eccleſi. 46. 4. For the commoditie of
the Iſraelites,2. King. 20. 11. he ſtaied the courſe of the
Sunne,Eſay 38. 8. ſo that one daye was as long as
two.The vvonderful miracle, vvroughte for a ſigne of helth vnto Hezechias, vvas noted at the ſame time (as may be thought) of the Aſtronomers at Babylō, a thouſand miles from Ieruſalem, 
                        〈…〉
                      dvvelled, and therfore the King of Babylō 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . For Ezechias ſake he brought the
Sunne tenne degrées back. In that text
where this is written, if a degrée be taken
as Aſtronomers take it, and as I do
take it, for the thirtith part of a ſigne in
the firmament, it may be thought, that
that moneth was ten dayes longer than
other monthes are. If it were ſo, it is no
more wōderful thā other miracles, whiche
God hath wrought for his children.
               
                  
For where as the Egyptians were
plagued with tenne gréeuous plagues,2. Chro. 32. 31.
the Iſraelites,Exod. 7. 8. 9. 10. 12. and. 14. Gods choſen people, whiche
dwelled hard by them, were not touched
therewith. And for theyr ſakes
he made the bitter waters ſwéete,Exod. 15. 16. and 17. and
gaue them drinke out of a rocke, and
foode from heauen.Ioſua. 3. 16. For their ſakes, he
made the waters of the riuer Iordan go
backe: yea, and the waters of the great
ſea. He made the ſea drie ground,Exod. 14. 21. ſo that
his people went ſafely through the middeſt
therof. For their ſakes he ſent haileſtones
from heauen,Ioſua 10. 1
                        •
                     . and ſlue their enymies.
For the thrée yong mens ſakes,
that woulde not bowe downe to the Image
that the idolatrous king had commaunded
to be worſhipped, God turned
the heate of the fire from them, vppon
their enimies, that put them into the
hote burnyng ouen.Dan. 3. 25. For Daniels ſake,
who woulde not worſhippe the idoll
Bell, nor the Dragon: God ſtopped ſeuē
Lions mouthes, into whoſe den he was
put: which Liōs, though they were kept
without meale ſeuen dayes, yet they neuer

opened their mouth againſt Daniel:
in the meane time, God prouided ſuſtenaunce
for him. Theſe and many other
like wonderfull woorkes of Almightie
God, are written for our learning, that
we worſhipping him aright, might haue
confidence in him without fear, what ſo
euer the ſignes of the heauens do threaten
againſt vs.
               For if God, for the commoditye of his
children, after the courſe of the ſtarres, &
of the waters: if for their commoditie, he
quench the heate of the fire, and ſtay the
rage of the fierce and hungrie Lions,
if he wonderfullye preſerue them from
plagues, and ſlaye their enimies: wée
maye be ſure, if we forſake our wickedneſſe,
and kéepe his lawes, the operation
of the ſtarres ſhall haue no force to hurt
vs. Therfore it followeth, that the ſame
preſeruatiues, which ſerue againſt the
firſt cauſe of the Peſtilence, that is to ſay
Repentance, and Prayer, are very good,
and auailable againſt an euill conſtellation:
the which béeing well vſed, the other
that are to be taken againſte the

third, and fourth cauſes, will take the
better effect.
               This that I haue ſayde, the Aſtronomers
will not deny. And if they giue
anye other preſeruatiue againſte the ſeconde
cauſe, than this which I haue ſet
downe, I thinke it ſuperfluous & vaine:
as I doe all the publiſhing of their practiſes
Aſtronomical, ouer & aboue that,
whiche it teacheth vs, to diſcerne one
time of the yeare from another, and to
direct men from place to place, from ſea
to ſea, from land to land, and from countrie
to countrie. Some reaſon of my opinion
I haue alreadye giuen: vnto the
whiche I adde, that in diuerſe points, it
draweth mens mindes from depending
vppon Gods prouidence, & moueth them
to directe their actions by the motions
of the Starres. Therefore I doe not
thinke their Arte neceſſarie, or profytable
in a Chriſtian common weale, further
than is aforeſayde. I thynke rather,
that the burning of their bookes
woulde be as acceptable a ſacrifice to
GOD,Actes. 19. 1
                        •
                     . as that of the Epheſians:

whoſe bookes of curious Artes conſumed
with fire, were valued at fiftye
thouſande péeces of ſiluer. For theyr
Arte is vnlawfull, and forbidden by
GOD his lawe, in theſe wordes following.
If a man, or woman, haue a
ſpirite of diuination,Leuit. 20. 27. or ſouthſaying in
them, they ſhall dye the death, they ſhal
ſtone them to death, their bloud ſhall be
vpon them.
               Let none of them be found amōg you,

                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 18. 20. that maketh his ſonne, or his daughter
go through the fire, or that vſeth witchcrafte,
or is a regarder of times, or a
marker of the flying of foules, or a ſorcerer,
or a charmer, or that counſelleth
with ſpirites, or a ſouthſayer or yt aſketh
counſel at the dead.
               If they ſay that no clauſe, in theſe ſentences,
maketh againſt their Arte, (I
meane diuination, or iudiciall Aſtronomie,)
I doubt not, but that the Hebrue
Grammarians wil eaſily proue the contrarie,
by y• ſignification of the Hebrue
wordes, out of the whiche language,
theſe lawes of God are tranſlated. If

this queſtion did pertain to my purpoſe,
I would ſtande longer vppon it: but I
let it paſſe, and will returne to my preſeruatiues.
            
            
               ¶The eighth Chapter ſheweth the
preſeruatiues againſt the third
cauſe of the Peſtilence.
               THe third cauſe was ſayde to be the
corruption of the ayre. The preſeruatiue
is, to auoyde, as much as may be,
thoſe things aforeſayde, that cauſe corruption.
In the which, good héede muſte
be taken of clothes, and alſo of dogges, &
cattes, that haunt infected places. Syr
Thomas Eliot, in his caſtle of healthe,
ſayth, It hath béene ſéene, that infected
ſtuffe lying in a coſer faſt ſhutte for the
ſpace of two yeares, and then being opened,
hath infected thoſe that ſtood nigh it,
who ſoone after died. And he that willeth
to kill al the dogs, (vnleſſe they be tied
vp,) in time of infection, giueth not the
worſt counſel. Not many yeares ſince,
I knew a Glouer in Oxforde, who with
his familie, to the number of ten or eleuen

perſons, died of the Plague: whiche
was ſayde to be brought into the houſe
by a dogge ſkinne that his wife bought,
when the diſeaſe was in the Citie. It is
good therefore, when it is in anye houſe,
well to aire in the Sunne, or at the fire,
the clothes that the infected perſons do
weare, that they lye in, or that are néere
vnto them. For the fire is a good purger
of euill ayre: it is of force to drawe
the venome thereof vnto it, and to conſume
it. So that if the fire be betwéene a
man, and the infected perſon, or place,
it taketh awaye the force of the euyll
ayre.
               Therefore the counſell of Phyſitians
is, to make a fire at all times, eſpecially
in the morning, and euening, in the
houſes, and alſo without in the ſtréetes,
where the diſeaſe reigneth. It is writtē
that ye famous Phiſitian Hippocrates,
was a meane to preſerue the citie, and
countrie of Athens, from the daunger of
the Peſtilence, by making greate fiers
in the ſtréetes, and all aboute the towne
by night: at whiche time (bicauſe of the

abſence of the Sunne,) the ayre was
moſt contagious: whereby the inhabitants
were deliuered frō certain death,
whych they were perſuaded ſhould haue
come among them. I ſay not as ſome ignorantly
do▪ nor as the Atheniens (whiche
knewe not GOD) thoughte: that
Hippocrates preſerued the Cittie: but
that he was a meane to preſerue it, by ye
ordinaunce of God: who as many times
miraculouſly, ſo for the moſt part, worketh
by ordinarie meanes: who hath giuen
to herbes, and other his creatures,
vertue to expell diſeaſes: and alſo hathe
giuen vnto men knowledge and vnderſtanding
thereof: whyche he vſeth as
his inſtrumentes, wherewith he worketh,
when, and vppon whome, it pleaſeth
him.
               This I write by the way, that when
the vertues of hearbes, and other Gods
creatures are mentioned, we depende
chiefly vpon his prouidence, & alwayes
with the eyes of our faith looke vppon
him, as the chiefe worker of al good thinges,
without whome nothing can take

effect to our commoditie. Wyth thys
minde we maye be bolde to ſéeke to the
Phyſitian, and to vſe ſuche things as
God hath created for our health. Cōtrariwiſe,
if a man refuſe them in time of
neceſſitie, when the Phiſitian is readye
to miniſter them after this ſort: I take
him to be a tempter of God, or as one
acceſſarie to his owne death. After thys
ſort I counſell al men againſt the thirde
cauſe of the peſtilence, to vſe the fire, vnto
the which it is good to adde perfumes
of Iuniper, Intenſe, & ſuch like: & as the
time of the yere ſerueth, gréen boughes,
ſwéete floures, and hearbes, are to be ſet
and ſtrewed in the houſes, and ſtréetes:
as well where the diſeaſe reigneth not,
as in places infected.
               Finally, it is good to hold in the mouth
and to bite of the Orenge péele, or of the
roote of the herbe called Angelica. Here
note by the way, that where I ſaye, or
ſignifie that perſons, or places infected
muſt be auoyded: I counſell not any mā
whoſe vocation requireth, or the neceſſity
of the diſeaſed, or charitie bindeth to

be preſent with the infected: I counſell
them not (I ſaye) to abſent themſelues
from them: but rather to preferre the
commaundement of God before theyr
owne ſafegarde, vſing ſuche things as
GOD hath ordeined for the preſeruation
of mans helth. For in ſo doing their
life ſhall be nothing the ſhorter.
            
            
               ¶The ninth Chapter ſpeaketh of the
preſeruatiues againſt the fourth
cauſe of the Plague.
               I Sayd ye fourth cauſe of this diſeaſe
is, the aptneſſe of mans body to receiue
the effect of a corrupt aire: for preſeruation
wherof, thoſe things aforeſaid
muſt be auoyded, which ingender euyll
humours, or otherwiſe make the bodie
vnable to expel euill aire.
               The firſte of theſe, is the taking of
meate, and drinke out of meaſure, and
too much lacke of it. Of the former the
riche are in daunger: by the latter the
poore are pinched. But the riche can
finde meanes by purgations to expel the

ſuperfluitie of euill humours: whyche
in time of neceſſitie is verye requiſite.
Howbeit it is a cōmon ſaying, that many
purgations, and other ſuch euacuations,
doe weaken the body, diminiſh the
naturall moyſture that prolongeth life,
and therfore haſten death.
               For auoyding of the which inconuenience,
I would ſhew them a better remedie,
if they coulde learne it: and that
is this: That they diminiſhe ſome parte
of their exceſſe, and giue it to their honeſt
neyghbours that can not worke: and alſo
to them that labour, whoſe charge is
ſuch, that they are not able to maintayn
their familie.
               This is more healthfull for themſelues,
better for a Common weale, and
more acceptable to GOD. Further
of this matter I néede not to write: For
the meaner ſorte, that laboure truely in
that trade, whiche God hath appointed
them, haue not muche to feare the corruption
of their bodies: who muſt eate,
and drinke: ſléepe, and watche: laboure,
and reſt, as they may: and take ſuch medicines

as they are able. I knowe that
againſt this cauſe, and the former, the
learned Phyſitians preſcribe many preſeruatiues,
curious, and coſtly: as choice
of meates, and drinkes, perfumes, ſauours,
things to be eaten, and dronke:
things to waſhe the téethe, hands, face,
and head: letting of bloud, purgations by
pouders, pilles, and electuaries, and
ſuch like. They that are able, and wylling
to take theſe things, (if they haue
not a Phiſitian at hand,) may vnderſtād
them by the bookes of theſe learned mē,
that haue already written of this matter:
namely, ſir Thomas Eliot, D. Faire,
and diuerſe other.
               Therefore commending vnto the reader,
for this purpoſe, onelye the hearbe
Carduus Benedictus (the vertues wherof
are hereafter ſette downe,) I make
an end of this part of my treatiſe.
            
            
               ¶The tenth Chapter ſheweth the tokens,
wherby a ſicke mā may vnderſtād,
whether he be infected with
the Plague, or no.
               
                  
IN ye next part is to be declared, what
are ye tokens, which ſhew that a mā
is infected with the Plague. Firſte, for
the moſt part, there appeareth about the
eare or necke, or vnder the arme holes,
or about ye flanke of the infected perſon,
an Apoſthume, or ſwelling, with a Feuer,
or Ague: or in ſome other part of the
body, a gréene, blacke, or euill coloured
ſore. This (I ſay) appeareth for the moſt
part, but not alwayes. Therfore, for the
more certainty, the other tokens folowing
muſt be conſidered. An other token
is, a greate pricking and ſhooting in the
body, eſpecially in thoſe foreſayd places,
the necke, armeholes, and flankes. The
third is an outragious heate within the
bodie, as if a man were in the fire: & yet
oftentimes ye  outward parts are ſo cold,
that it maketh a man to ſhake, as if he
were in a Feuer. This inward heate is
ioyned with much heauineſſe of ye head:
drineſſe of the mouth, & extreme thirſt.
Wherevpon, in ſome followeth a maruellous
deſire to léepe, ſo that they can
not be kepte waking: otherſome can

not ſléepe, but are out of quiet, & raue as
though they were falne into a Phrenſy,
or are like them that dote. Other ſignes
are, hardneſſe to drawe the breathe, or
muche labour to take winde: whiche in
ſome is ſo ſtraight, that they can ſcarſe
ſpeake. Alſo the breath ſtinking: greate
pain of the head: faintneſſe, ſluggiſhneſſe,
weakeneſſe of the lims: the bodye verye
heauie, & dul: the ſweat ſtinking: the pulſies
beating thicke, ſmall, and déepe: anguiſhe,
& penſiueneſſe of minde: pſain in ye
mouth, of ye ſtomack: no apetite to meat:
often vomitting, the vomit being bitter
and of diuerſe colours: bitterneſſe, and
blackneſſe, or yellowneſſe, and dryneſſe
of the tongue: the vrine much like vnto
beaſtes ſtale, troubled, thicke, and ſtinking,
or at the firſte like cleane water,
then blackiſhe, and at the laſt troubled,
and for the moſte parte, without any
reſidence: chaunging of ſight, ſo that
there commeth ſometimes to the patientes
eyes, as it were a yellow coloure,
and ſometimes all that be beholdeth he
thinketh to be gréen: paine of the mouth

or an vnaturall taſte, bitter, ſower, or
ſtinking. Theſe are the principal ſignes
of infection: and yet not certaine tokens
of the Plague. For it may be ſometimes
in a man without any of them: and alſo
ſome of theſe tokens are in manye, that
are not infected with this diſeaſe. Here
it is not impertinent to note, that where
ye Plague raigneth, there are ſcarſly any
other diſeaſes beſides, or if there be, they
wil ſhortly after be turned into it. This
is the opinion of learned Phyſitians,
and ſéemeth to agrée with reaſon. For if
euil humors, make a man apt to receiue
infection: it is no maruell that they whiche
are diſeaſed (bycauſe their ſickneſſe
procéedeth of corruption in the bodie,) be
infected with the Peſtilēce, if they come
within the compaſſe of the venomous
aire. Therfore D. Faire in his treatiſe of
the Peſtilence, ſayeth for a certaintie:
What childe ſo euer is vexed wyth the
wormes in time of the Plague, is infected
with it. For it is a matter (ſayth he)
ſo diſpoſed to the Peſtilence, as Brimſtone
is to be kindled of the fire. Thys

may ſuffiſe: as touching the ſignes and
tokens of the diſeaſe.
            
            
               ¶The eleauenth Chapter ſpeaketh of
the cure of the Peſtilence, and ſheweth
the vertues of Carduus
Benedictus.
               LIke as for preſeruatiues, ſo for the
cure of this diſeaſe, mani things are
preſcribed of Phiſitians: as choice of
meats, perfumes, letting of bloud, cupping,
vomiting, electuaries, pilles, potions,
pouders and plaſters: al which, (as
ouer coſtly) I omit: which, they that are
diſpoſed, may vnderſtand in other mens
writings. I mind onely to ſet downe the
vertues of two hearbes, vz. Carduus
Benedictus, and Angelica: which being
known, as they may help againſt many
infirmities, ſo they are much commended,
both as preſeruatiues, & medicines
againſt this diſeaſe. Howbeit, it ſéemeth
they were knowne but of late yeares.
For Doctour Turner writeth of them,
among thoſe wherof there is no mention

made of Dioſcorides, Galene, Plinie,
and other old Authors. Alſo that which
he writeth expreſſely of Carduus Benedictus,
doth ſignifie the ſame. Although
(ſaith he) dyuers of the later writers,
haue gone aboute to make Carduus Benedictus,
a kind of Atractilis: yet for al
that, the deſcription is found not perfectly
to agrée vnto it. It is written that
it was ſet out of India,
                  Of this name there vvere fiue Emperours, the firſt of them began his raigne vvithin theſe▪430. yeares that vvas aboue. 
                        •
                     100. yeares after the creation of the vvorlde. vnto the Emperoure
Fredericke, as a pretious medicine
againſt many diſeaſes, and griefs.
It is called in Engliſh moſt cōmonly,
Cardo Benedictus: and in Italian, Herba
Turcha. Thus he writeth of the
Hearbe, and after ſheweth the
vertues thereof out of the
later writers.
            
         
         
            
            The vertues of Carduus
Benedictus, that is to ſaye in Engliſhe,
The bleſſed Thiſtle: which for the operation
and greate efficacie, that GOD
hath giuen vnto it, may wel be ſo called:
the properties wherof are diligently gathered
oute of D. Turners Herball,
and other vvriters, and partly
proued by the
Gatherer.
            
               ¶Firſt it helpeth the heade and
the partes thereof.
               
                  THe hearbe eaten, or the
Pouder or iuyce of the
hearb drunke kéepeth a
man from the head ach,
and migram, and alſo
dryueth it away, when
it is gotten. Being taken in meate or
drinke, it is good againſte diſineſſe, and
the ſwimming giddineſſe of the heade:
it comforteth the brayne, ſharpeneth
the witte, ſtrengthneth memorie, it is
a ſingular remedye agaynſte deafeneſſe:
for it amendeth thicke hearing.
It prouoketh ſléepe. The iuyce of it
layde vnto the eyes, quickeneth the

ſight: Alſo the water in the whiche the
pouder, or hearbe dryed is ſtéeped, hathe
the ſame effecte, if the eies be waſhed
therewith. The hearbe eaten, is good for
the ſame purpoſe. The water or iuyce
dropped into the eies, cureth the reddeneſſe,
bloudſhotten, and itching of them.
               And ſome write, that it doth ſtrengthen
the téeth, they being waſhed & rubbed
with a cloth dipped in the water or
iuyce thereof. The pouder ſtauncheth
bloude, that floweth out of the noſe, being
applied to the place.
            
            
               ¶Secondly, it helpeth the ſtomacke.
               THe brothe of the hearbe, otherwyſe
called the decoction, drunk in wine,
is good for an euill ſtomack it helpeth a
weake ſtomack, & cauſeth an appetite to
meate. Alſo the wine wherin it hath bin
boiled, doth cleanſe, and mundifie the infected
ſtomacke. The pouder therof eaten
with Hony, or drunk in wine, dothe
ripe, and digeſt colde flegme, purgeth, &
bringeth vp that which is in the breaſt,

ſcouring the ſame of groſſe humors, and
cauſeth to fetch breath more eaſily. The
hearb chewed in the mouth, healeth the
ſtinche of the breath.
            
            
               ¶Thirdly, it helpeth the heart.
               THe pouder being takē before a mā
be infected, preſerueth him from ye
Peſtilence. And a dram of it, or a Walnutte
ſhell full, taken immediatly after
a man feeleth himſelfe infected, expelleth
the venome of the peſtilent infection frō
the heart: ſo that if a man ſweate afterwarde,
he ſhal be deliuered incontinent.
The ſame effect hath the herb, boiled in
wine, or in the vrine of a healthful man
child, & drunke. I mean the decoction, or
licour, from the which the herb is ſtrained,
after that it hath bin boiled therin.
               The leaues, pouder, iuyce, or water
of the herbe drunk, and the patient well
couered with clothes, and ſweting thrée
houres, expelleth all poyſon taken in at
the mouth, and other corruption, that
doth hurt and annoy the heart.
            
            
               
               ¶Finally, it helpeth the Liuer, Lungs,
and other partes of the body.
               THe hearb boyled in wine, and drūk
hote aboute a quarter of an houre
before the fit, and the patient afterward
wel couered in the bed, driueth away al
agues. The pouder & water of the herb
drunk with wine, hath the ſame effecte.
The iuyce drunke with wine, is good againſte
ſhorte wind, & the diſeaſes of the
Lungs. Alſo it is good againſt ye ach of ye
body: it ſtrengthneth the mēbers of ye
whole body. The herb boiled in ye vrine
of a helthful manchild, and drunke, doeth
help againſt the Dropſie: breaketh
all Apoſthumes: maiſtereth the falling
ſickneſſe. The pouder eaten or drunke,
helpeth againſte the ſtitches in the ſide.
It is alſo good for them, that beginne to
haue the Conſumption, called the Ptiſicke.
The herbe eaten, doth ſtrengthen
the trembling and palſy members. The
pouder miniſtred in a Cliſter, helpeth againſt
the Collick,
                     Colicke.
                   & other diſeaſes of ye
guts. The water drunke, hath the ſame

effect. The iuice drunk with wine, or the
hearbe boiled in wine, and drunke hote,
breaketh the ſtone, and driueth out grauell:
being ſodden in water, and the patient
ſitting ouer it, ſo that the hote vapoure
may come vnto the diſeaſed place,
it helpeth againſte the ſame infirmitie.
After the ſame maner being vſed, it is
good againſt the gréene ſickneſſe. Alſo it
healeth the griping paines of the belly:
it openeth the ſtopping of the mēbers,
pearceth and cauſeth vrine. The leaues
boyled in wine, and drunke as is aforeſaide,
prouoke ſweate: conſume the euill
bloude, and ingender the good. Alſo the
wine or water, in the which the hearbe
is boiled, being drunke, conſumeth the
euill humors, and preſerueth the good.
It is good for one that is bruſed wyth a
fall, or otherwiſe. The leaues, iuyce,
broth, pouder, and water of the herbe, is
very good to heale the canker, & olde rotten
feſtered ſores. The leaues bruſed, or
punnd, and laid to, are good againſt burnings,
hote ſwellings, carbuncles, and
ſores that be hard to be cured, eſpecia
                     •
                  ly

for them of the peſtilence: and alſo they
are good to heale the bitings of venomous
worms, and ſerpents, or créeping
beaſts. Finally, the downe, comming
of the floures thereof, when the ſéede is
ripe, doth heale cuts and newe wounds,
without paine.
               Thus much of Carduus Benedictus
gathered oute of the Herbals of diuers
learned men, which although it may be
ſufficient, yet I haue thoughte good here
to ſette downe that, which two painfull
and ſkilfull Phyſitions, Matthiolus, and
Fuchſius, haue written hereof in Latin:
whoſe words, as (perhappes) they may
bring ſome credite to that whiche is alreadye
written: ſo in them ſomething
more may be learned, or at the leſt ſomthing
is vttered for the better vnderſtā
                  ding
of that aforeſaide. Their wordes
in Engliſh are as followeth.
            
            
               ¶The properties of Carduus Benedictus,
out of Matthiolus.
               
                  CArduus Benedictus, is a plante of
gret name and fame, ſpecially againſt

the Peſtilence, and alſo againſte deadly
poyſons: aſwell taken inwardly, as laid
outwardly to the ſtingings, and bitings
of venomous beaſts. They are healed
with this herbe, that are ſicke of a quartane,
or other Agues that come with a
colde: and that by the drinking of the
decoction, or ſtilled water, or a dramme
of the pouder: in like maner being drōk,
it helpeth infāts that are troubled with
the falling ſickneſſe. The decoctiō taken
in Wine, doth mitigate the paine of the
guttes, and reines, and other griefes of
the belly. It prouoketh ſweat. It killeth
the wormes, and helpeth againſte other
diſeaſes of the wombe. The hearbe it
ſelfe, aſwell gréene, as dried, both drunk
& laid outwardly to the grief, doth heale
ye gréeuous, & ſwelling ſoares called Alcers:
(that is, ſuch as bréede in the fleſhe,
without any outward cauſe, as a ſtripe
with a weapon, or biting of a beaſt) & couereth
the fleſh with ſkin. Therefore, it
is mingled with ye drinke made of Guacum,
wine, and water, for thē that haue
ye Frēch pocks. Thus much Mathiolus.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The properties of Carduus Benedictus,
out of Fuchſius.
               
                  CArduus Benedictus taketh awaie ye
ſtoppings of the inward bowels: it
prouoketh vrine: breaketh the ſtone: and
helpeth them that are ſeung of venomous
beaſtes. They ſaye alſo, that they
are not infected, that take it in theyr
meate, or drinke, before they come into
the euill aire: and manye doe perſuade
themſelues, that it muche helpeth them
that are alreadie infected. Moreouer, all
men agrée vpon this: that it is a remedy
againſt the bitings of Serpēts & Scorpions.
Finally, the later writers ſaye,
that it cureth very greate paines of the
head, taketh away giddineſſe, recouereth
the memorie, being taken in meate, or
drink: alſo yt it healeth feſtering ſoares,
eſpecially of the Pappes, and Teats, if
the pouder thereof be laid vpon it. Thus
muche Fuchſius.
               
               By this we may vnderſtād, with how
great vertue, God hath indued, & (as I
may ſay) hath bleſſed this herbe. It helpeth

the body within and without. It
helpeth almoſt all the principall members
of the body, as the braine, the hart,
the ſtomack, the liuer, lungs, & kidneys,
I may ſay it is a preſeruatiue againſt al
diſeaſes: for it prouoketh ſweat, wherby
the body is purged of much corruption,
which doth bréede diſeaſes. Alſo it expelleth
all venome and infection. It conſumeth
euill bloud, and all naughtie humors,
whereof all diſeaſes are ingendred.
Therfore giuing God thankes for
his goodneſſe, which hath giuen vs thys
hearb, and all other things for our commoditie,
lette vs vſe it as néede ſhall require.
            
            
               ¶The twelfth Chapter ſheweth, howe
Carduus Benedictus may be taken.
               HEre is to be noted, that we may vſe
this herb, & enioy the vertues therof
foure maner waies. Firſt in the gréene
leafe: ſecondly in the pouder: thirdly, in
the iuyce: and fourthly, in the diſtilled
water. Vnto theſe may be added the licour,

in the whiche the hearbe is boiled.
For the moſt part, the vertue that is in
Sinne, is in them all: ſo that in dyuers
diſeaſes, for the which the hearb is medicinable,
for lack of the one, a man may
vſe the other. The gréene leafe may be
taken with bread and butter, as we vſe
to take Sage and Parcely in a morning
to breakefaſt. And if it ſéeme too bitter
in the taſte, it may be takē with hony in
ſteade of butter. It may be alſo taken in
potage boiled among other hearbs. Finally,
being ſhred ſmall, it may be very
well drunke with Ale, Béere, or Wine:
ſpecially poſſet ale, or burnt wine. It is
giuen ſomtimes in Béere with ſome Aqua
Compoſita put to it, & that without
any harme, when the ſtomack of the patient
is weake, & he not trobled with any
hote diſeaſe. The iuice of it is either
outwardely applied to the bodie, (as is
alſo the leafe, pouder, and water ſometymes:)
or elſe it is receyued by the
mouth into the body.
               Being receiued into the body, it may
be taken in Potage, euen as the gréene

leafe: or with Wine▪ which if it be burned
and drunke hote, it is the better. If
you liſt, you may boile it with Wine, &
Hony, or Sugar to make it ſweete, and
then drinke it warme.
               The pouder may be taken with hony
vpon a kniues point, or with bread and
Hony if you liſt, or elſe it may be drunk
with Ale, Béere, or Wine, The diſtilled
water may be drunk by it ſelfe alone, or
elſe with white Wine before meate, or
with Sack after meate, ſpecially if the
ſtomack be weake and colde.
               The licour or brothe in the whiche
the hearb is boiled, maye be made thus.
Take a quart of running water, ſéeth it
& ſkim it, thē put into it a good handfull
of the hearbe, and let it boile vntill the
better parte of the licour be conſumed:
then drinke it with wine, or if you liſte
with Honie, or Sugare, to make it the
more pleaſāt in the taſt. Or elſe make a
potion on this wiſe: Take a good handfull
of the leaues, wyth an handfull of
raiſons of the Sun, waſhed and ſtoned,
and ſome ſugar Candie, & Licoriſe ſlyced

ſmall, boyle them all togither in a
quarte of water, ale, or wine: if it be too
bitter it maye be made ſwéete, as is afore
ſaide.
               Moreouer, it is to be noted, that the
pouder and water of the hearb is moſte
to be regarded, and ſpecially the water:
for they may be long preſerued, ſo that a
man may haue them alwayes in a readineſſe
to vſe, as néed ſhall require, whē
as he cannot haue ye iuice, nor the grene
leafe. And the water (which only is void
of bitterneſſe) may be drunke by it ſelfe
alone: for the ſtomacke and taſte wyll
beare it, and like of it aſwel as of Roſewater.
Notwithſtanding, if the ſéede bée
ſowne as ſoone as it is ripe, a man maye
haue the hearb both winter and ſōmer,
frō the time that it beginneth to grow,
vntill the ſéede waxe ripe againe. Therfore
I councell all them that haue Gardens,
to nouriſh it, that they may haue it
always for their owne vſe, and the vſe
of their neighbors that lacke it.
            
            
               
               ¶The thirteenth Chapiter ſpeaketh of
the time, and quantity, to be obſerued
in taking of Carduus Benedictus.
               HEre (perhaps) ſome man will aſke a
queſtion of ye time, & quātity: which
things are to be conſidered in taking of
medicines. As touching the time, if it be
taken for a preſeruatiue, it is good to
take it in the morning, or in the euening
before a man go to bed, bicauſe that is a
conuenient time to ſweat, for him, yt féeleth
not himſelfe greatly diſeaſed. But
if a mā take it to expel any diſeaſe, it is
good to take it whēſoeuer he féeleth any
gréefe in his body, and immediatly to go
to bedde and ſweate. Howbeit it is
not neceſſarie vppon euerye griefe to
ſweat, after the taking of the medicine.
               As touching the quan
                     ••
                  e, a man néede
not be ſo carefull in taking this hearbe,
as in taking thoſe medicines, that doe
purge vehemētly, by eg
                     ••••
                  on, (as ſome
terme it,) or by vomite. For in taking
them, if great diſcretion be not vſed, in
conſidering the time, the quantitie, and

the ſtate of a mās body, they may cauſe
preſente deathe: or otherwiſe they maye
muche trouble a man. But in miniſtring
this hearb, it is not ſo: in taking
wherof a man may vſe his owne diſcretion,
and the iudgement of his ſtomack.
               This I counſell all men that minde
to vſe it, yt when they or anye of theirs,
are diſeaſed, they deferre not the time,
but take it preſently, as ſoone as it may
be gotten: and that they do not think it
ſufficient to take it once: but that they
take it thrée or foure times at the leaſt.
            
            
               ¶The fourteenth Chapter ſheweth
the properties of Angelica.
               NOw I haue written that I thinke
ſufficiēt of Carduus Benedictus, bicauſe
(perhaps) ynough of it cannot bée
gotten for them that haue néede: I will
adde vnto it an other herb of much like
vertue, called Angelica, that if the one
be lacking▪ the other may be taken. As
touching the name, the lateſt writers, in
my iudgemēt moſt to be credited in this

matter, find no other name for it, neither
in Engliſhe nor in Latine. Howbeit, I
knowe that ſome, much to be commended
for their learning, & alſo for the publiſhing
of the ſame, to ye benefite of their
countrie, haue giuen it other names:
but I thinke by errour. If we Engliſh
it as the Latine word ſoundeth, we may
call it, Hearbe Angel: or, The Angelical
or Angelike Hearbe. Vppon what occaſion
this excellent name was firſt giuen
vnto it, I know not: vnleſſe it were
for the excellent vertues thereof, or for
that God made it knowē to man, by the
miniſterie of an Angel. I ſuppoſe the
former cauſe rather to be true. Howbeit,
as I am not able to proue the other:
ſo I thinke no mā can giue any good reaſon
to the contrarie. For this we know,
that GOD hath made his Angels miniſtring
ſpirites, to ſerue vs, for the ſafegarde
of our ſoules, and alſo of our bodies.
But vppon what occaſion ſo euer
the name was giuen, it is excellent, and
ſo are the properties: which be theſe that
follow.
            
            
               
               ¶The Vertues of Angelica, out of
D. Turners Herball.
               
                  ANgelica is hote, and drye, at the
leaſte in the third degrée. All the latter
writers agrée vppon this, and experience
proueth the ſame: that it is good
againſt poyſon, peſtilent aires, and the
Peſtilence it ſelfe. The Practicioners of
Germanie write thus of it: If any man
be ſodenly taken, eyther with any Peſtilence,
or with any ſodaine peſtilente Ague,
or with too much ſodayn ſweatting:
let him drinke of the pouder of the root,
halfe a dramme, mingled with a dram
of Triacle, in thrée or foure ſponefulles
of the water of Angelica, diſtilled out
of the rootes, and after go to bed, and couer
himſelfe well, and faſt (at the leaſte)
thrée houres after: which if he doe, he
ſhall beginne to ſweate, and by the
helpe of GOD, he ſhall be deliuered
from his diſeaſe. For lackeof Triacle, a
man may take a whole dramme of the
root of Angelica in pouder, with ſo much
of the diſtilled water as is aforeſayde, &

it will haue the ſame effect. The roote
of Angelica wel ſtéeped in Vinegre, and
ſmelled vpon in time of the Peſtilence:
and the ſame Vineger, being ſometime
dronke faſting, ſaueth a mās body from
ye Peſtilence. But in my iudgement, it is
better to take an Orenge, or Lemmon,
cutte off the toppe, picke out the meate,
pricke it fall of ſmall holes, put into it a
piece of a Sponge, Wool, Cotten, or fine
linnen Cloth, dipped in the foreſayd Vineger,
and diuerſe times ſmell vnto it.
               For the better keping in of the ſponge
or cotten, &c. you maye faſten the toppe
vnto it againe, with a thréed, as they do
a cappe vnto a paire of kniues. With
this you may be bolder to venter where
the Peſtilence is, than if you had a great
ſort of other medicines.
               The water diſtilled out of the rootes
of Angelica, or the pouder of the ſame, is
good againſte gnawing and paine of the
bellie, that commeth with colde, if the
bodie be not bounde withall. And it is
good againſt all inwarde diſeaſes: as the
Pleuriſie, in the beginning, before the

heate of the inflamation be come into
the bodie. For it diſolueth and ſcattereth
abroade ſuch humours, as vſeth to giue
matter to the Pleuriſie. Moreouer, it
is good for the diſeaſes of the Lunges, if
they come of a colde cauſe: and for the
Stranguriā of a cold cauſe, or of a ſtopping.
It is good for a woman that is
in trauell with childe. It is good alſo to
driue winde away that is in the bodye,
and to eaſe the paine that commeth of
the ſame. The roote may be ſodden in
water, or in wine, as the nature of him
that is ſicke doth require. The iuyce of
the roote, put into an hollowe tooth, taketh
away the ache, and ſo likewiſe doth
the diſtilled water put in at the eare.
               Moreouer, the iuyce, and the water alſo
of Angelica, quicken the eye ſight, and
breake the little filmes that go ouer the
eyes: wherof darkneſſe doth riſe. Of the
rootes of Angelica, and Pitche, maye be
made a good Emplaſter, againſt the bytings
of madde beaſtes. The water,
the iuyce, or the pouder of the root, ſprinkled
vpon the diſeaſed place, is a verye

good remedie againſt old, and déep ſores.
For they do ſcoure, and clenſe them, and
couer the bones with fleſhe. The water
of the ſame, in a colde cauſe, is good to be
layd on places diſeaſed with the Goute,
and Sciatica. For it ſtancheth the pain,
and melteth awaye the tough humours
that are gathered togither. The ſéede is
of like vertue with ye root. The wild Angelica,
that groweth here, in the lowe
woods, and by the water ſides, is not of
ſuche vertue, as the other is: Howbeit,
the Surgions vſe to ſéeth ye roote of it in
Wine, to heale gréene woundes. Theſe
Properties, I haue gathered out of the
Practicioners of the Germanes: I haue
not as yet proued them all my ſelfe, but
diuerſe of them I haue proued, and haue
founde them to be true. Al theſe are D.
Turners woordes, ſauing that inſtead of
a coſtly hollowe ball of Siluer, Tinne,
or Iuniper wood, I haue ſet downe the
péele of an Orenge, or Lēmon: the meat
whereof is alſo commended by Phyſitians,
to be both a preſeruatiue, and a medicine,
agaynſt poyſon, and the infection

of the Peſtilence.
            
            
               ¶The vertues of Angelica out of an
other learned man.
               THe late writers ſay, yt the rootes of
Angelica are cōtrarie to al poiſon,
the Peſtilence, and all naughtie corruptiō,
or euil, or infected aire. If any bodie
be infected with ye Peſtilēce or Plague,
or els is poiſoned they giue him ſtreight
way to drinke a dramme of the pouder
of this roote, with Wine, in the winter:
and in Summer, with the diſtilled water
of Carduus Benedictus: then they
bring him to bedde, and couer him, vntil
he haue ſwette well. The ſame roote
being taken faſting in the morning, or
but onely holden in the mouthe, doeth
kéepe, and preſerue the bodie, from the
infection of the Peſtilence, and from all
euil aire, and poiſon. They ſay alſo, that
the leaues of Angelica, yownd with the
leaues of Rue, and Honie, are verie good
to be layde vnto the bitinges of madde
Dogges, Serpentes, and Vipers: if 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
him to bedde, and couer him, vntill
he haue ſwett well. The ſame roote
being taken faſting in the morning, or
but onely holden in the mouthe, doeth
kéepe, and preſerue the bodie, from the
infection of the Peſtilence, and from all
euill aire, and poyſon. They ſay alſo, that
the leaue of Angelica, pound with the
leaues of Rue, and Honie, are verie good
to be laide vnto the bitinges of madde
Dogges, Serpents, and Vipers: if incontinent
after the hurte, the Wine be
dronk, wherein the roote, or leaues of
Angelica haue boyled.
            
            
               The Concluſion of the Booke.
               THus muche I haue thought good to
write of the Plague, & of theſe hearbs
Carduus Benedictus, & Angelica: whiche
(as ſome men vſe to ſpeake,) is called a
great ſecret: either bicauſe it is not knowen
to many men, or elſe bycauſe they
would haue it kept cloſe, and knowne
but to a few. But I do not thinke méete,
that any thing ſhould be ſecrete, which
may be profitable for man. For GOD
hath not made any thing for the vſe of a

fewe, but for the commoditie of all me
                     •
                  
And we yt are the children of God, oug
                     ••
                  
to frame our ſelues ſo, that we may b
                     •
                  
like affectioned vnto our father, who 
                     〈◊〉
                  
beneficiall to all men: who hath mad
                     •
                  
his Sunne to ſhine, & his raine to raine
vpon the wicked, as well as vpon th
                     •
                  
good, that is to ſaye who feedeth all me
                     •
                  
both good and bad. For by heat and mo
                     •
                  
                  ſture,
which proceede from the Sunn
                     •
                  
and the raine, all things growe vpon th
                     •
                  
earth, whereby mans life is mainteined.
Hereof I conclude, that for as much as
Almightie God is good vnto all men, we
ought to be like minded, and not to kéepe
any thing ſecrete, nor to hide any thing
from man that may profite him. Thus I
make an end, willing all men rightly to
vſe the good creatures of God, and to
giue him heartie thankes for
all his benefites.
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   