
      
         
            
            
            A DIRECTION for the weaker sort of Christians, shewing in what manner they ought to fit and prepare themselues to the worthy receiuing of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: with a short forme of Triall or Examination annexed. Grounded vpon 1. Cor. 11. 23.—30. By W.B.
            Whereunto is adioined a verie profitable treatise of the same argument, by way of question and answer, written by another.
            
               MATTH. 22.12.
               Friend, how camest thou in hither, and hast not on a wedding garment?
            
            London, Printed by W. Hall for Samuel Macham, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church-yard at the signe of the Bul-head. 1609.
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE VERtuous and worthie Ladie, GRACE DARCY.
                  
                     Madam,
                  
                  
                     THose notes which were lately writ foorth for your priuate vse, I am now emboldened to make more common; not for any conceited worth in them, but to auoid the trouble of yeelding satisfaction to other good friends that desire and expect the like office from me. I am sure heerein I shall hurt none, except my selfe; nor so much as offend any, excepting

those for whose vse I neuer intended the publishing heereof.
                  Your Ladiships fauourable acceptance of them in priuate, hath made them thus bold to come foorth in publike, and to grace themselues with the profession of your fauour, which is their greatest ornament.
                  I hope that you which haue giuen them some entertainment in your closet, wil not passe by them as vnknowen, now they present themselues vnto you in the street: and the rather for that they come not alone, but accompanied and assisted with a most profitable Treatise of the same Argument, written long since by one whom your Ladiship reuerenceth, and whose person and labours in the worke of Christ Iesus are much esteemed of the people of God.

I shall not need to admonish you of the vse of either of these Treatises: Themselues, how little soeuer, are in that pointable to speak for themselues. Onely take heed (good Madam) lest in their withdrawing of you from the damnable sinne of profaning this holie Sacrament, you be not by misconstruction brought vnto the wicked and superstitious adoration thereof.
                  Thus in haste, vnfainedly praying the Lord more and more to blesse the worthy Knight your husband, and your selfe, and from heauen to reward those many fauours receiued from you both, I humbly take leaue. Ian. 2. 1608.
                  
                     Your Ladiships much bounden, W.B.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  THE CONTENTS of the Direction following: framed according to the Apostles owne method.
                  
                     THe first part declareth what a dangerous sin it is to profane the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
                  
                     1. By laying downe the principal doctrine of the Sacrament.
                  
                     2. By inferring and concluding from the said doctrine, the greatnesse and grieuousnesse of the sin aforesaid.
                  The doctrine of the Sacrament consists in six points.
                  
                     The first concerneth the authority by which it was broght into the Church.
                     page 6
                     
                     
                        The second concerneth the first Instituto
                           •
                         and Administer of it.
                     pa. 14.
                     
                     The third concerneth the circumstance of time wherein it was instituted.
                     page 17
                     
                     The fourth concerneth the parts of the Sacraments.
                     page 21
                     
                     The fifth concerneth the consecration thereof.
                     page 35
                     
                     The sixth concerneth the maine and generall end thereof.
                     page 38
                     
                  
                  The inference and conclusion from the aforesaid doctrine, is; That those which shal receiue such a mystery vnworthily, are guiltie of the bodie and blood of Christ.
                  
                     Wherein is shewed, First, what it is to receiue vnworthily,
                     page 50
                     
                     Secondly▪ what it is to be guiltie of the body and blood of Christ,
                     page 54
                     
                     Thirdly, why such as receiue vnworthily, are guiltie of the body and blood of Christ.
                     page 56
                     
                  
                  
                     THe second part sheweth, By what means the danger of the former sinne may be auoided.
                  The meanes is a due triall and examination of our selues before we receiue.
                  For the better vnderstanding whereof, fiue points are handled in order, so farre foorth only all of them (excepting the second) as the Apostle giueth occasion.
                  
                     
                        1. What manner of triall it is which is heere required.
                     page 71
                     
                     
                        2. Wherein particularly this triall consisteth.
                     page 75
                     
                     
                        3 The duties in and after this triall.
                     page 109
                     
                     
                        4. The persons that are to make this triall.
                     page 115
                     
                     
                        5. The speciall motiue vnto this triall.
                     page 126
                     
                  
                  
                     THE forme of triall explaineth these three things:

                        
                           1. The excellencie of the person and merits of Iesus Christ, who hath ordained the receiuing of this Sacrament.
                        page 133
                        
                        
                           2 The speciall end why Christ Iesus did ordaine the same.
                        page 136
                        
                        
                           3 The special benefit that comes to the worthy receiuer thereby.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Faults escaped.
                  PAg. 9. lin. 16. For Ordinance, read Ordinances. p. 16. l. 2. for once, read only. p 72. l. 4. adde, For the word heere v
                        •
                     ed implies as much. p. 86. l. 16. That there is an heauen. p. 87. l. 8. for might, read may.
               
            
            
               
                  A direction for the weaker sort of Christians, shewing how they may fit and prepare themselues to the worthy receiuing of the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ.
               Grounded vpon 1. Cor. 11.23.33.
               
                  The first part of preparation. 1. Cor. 11.
                  
                     
                        
                           23 For I haue receiued of the Lord, that which I also haue deliuered vnto you, to wit, that the Lord Iesus, in the night that hee was betraied, tooke bread.
                        
                           
                           24 And when hee had giuen thankes, hee brake it, and sayd, Take yee, eat yee, this is my Body, which is broken for you: this doe yee in remembrance of mee.
                        
                           25 After the same manner also he tooke the Cuppe when he had supped, saying, This Cuppe is the New Testament in my Blood: this doe, as oft as yee drinke it in remembrance of me.
                        
                           26 For as often as ye shall eat this Bread, and drinke this Cup, yee shew the Lords death till hee come.
                        
                           27 Wherfore whosoeuer shall eat this Bread, and drinke the Cuppe of the Lord vnworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
                     
                  
                  
                  The first part of Preparation.
                  
                     THe Church of Corinth, by reason of some disorders crept into their assemblies, had often times prophaned the holy Supper of the Lord. The Apostle Paul in this Scripture indeuours to reforme this sinne in them. And this he doth,The mai
                           •
                         parts of the Text 1. By declaring vnto them what a dangerous sinne it is to prophane this Sacrament, ver. 23. 2. By teaching them the speciall means by which the sinne aforesaid may be auoided, verse 28.33.

Vnto these two heads may be reduced whatsoeuer is necessarie for the due preparing of a Christian to the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament.
                  For the better manifesting of the first point,The first point, cō
                        sisting of two branches. the Apostle first laies downe the principall Doctrine of the Sacrament, verse 23.27. Secondly, from the doctrine he infers and concludes what a great and grieuous sinne all they doe commit which prophane this Sacrament.The first branch containes six points of doctrin concerning the Sacrament. And in the first place he laieth downe six points of doctrine concerning this Sacrament, euery one of them seuerally, and all of them iointlie, tending to discouer the great and fearefull sinne that all such run into, which pollute these high and holy mysteries; therin inci
                        •
                     ing and prouoking all

true hearted Christians to a holy and reuerend regard, and due vse of them, whensoeuer they be called thereunto.
                  In this order and course which the Apostle heere obserueth, we may learne by the way these short instructions:
                  1. That the ignorance or want of due consideration of the doctrine concerning this Sacrament is one maine and principall cause, that so many doe contemne and prophane the same.
                  2. That there is no hope or possibilitie, that grosse ignorant persons, who know not the doctrine of this Sacrament, (so long as they continue ignorant thereof) should euer with due reuerence receiue the same. And therefore so oft as in their ignorance they goe about

to bee made partaker thereof, they runne themselues and their soules vpon a most dangerous rocke: So that the first meanes for a Christian to become a worthy and reuerend partaker of this Sacrament, is to bee grounded in the doctrine and knowledge thereof. Ignorance indeed well may be the mother of Popish deuotion, but it is the very stepdame of all true Christian pietie, and (as it appeares by the Apostles proceedings in this present matter) the very mother of all prophanenesse, and irreligious impieties in the Church of God.
                  
                     The first point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.The first point of doctrine is concerning the authority and commission by which Paul brought this Sacrament into the Church: the summe

and effect wherof is this: That this Sacrament is no humane Tradition, brought into the Church vpon his owne head, and by his owne meere will and pleasure, but an ordinance of Christ, receiued by Tradition from him. For so hee saith: I haue receiued of the Lord that which I also haue deliuered vnto you. As though hee should more fully and plainly haue said, If this Sacrament had beene a deuise of mine owne braine, or a Tradition hauing no other ground than mine owne will and pleasure, then might you haue had some colorable excuse for your light account and profanation of it: but I deliuering this ordinance vnto you by expresse warrant and commission from Christ Iesus himselfe, the sole soueraign head of the Church,

you ought with more reuerence and regard to haue receiued the same, than lately you haue done.
                  The lessons from hence to further our preparation to the due receiuing of this Sacrament, are these:
                  1 That it is no small sinne to vse any ordinance of Jesus Christ, whatsoeuer, prophanely or irreuerently: such cannot bee freed from sinne, as shall shew contempt but vnto the ordinances of men, though they require but things indifferent: much lesse can they which shall shew contempt to the ordinances of Christ Iesus himselfe, who neuer instituted any thing which is not exceeding good, and necessary to to be done; yea, whose very ordaining of a thing makes it

good, necessary, and profitable, though before it was indifferent, and vnprofitable, yea euill and hurtfull. For this cannot but argue a wonderfull base and light estimation of Christ, and of his wisdome, to debase, by rude and vnreuerent behauiour, any order or constitution of his: And yet how ordinary a thing is it for most men that are professed Christians, to make most base and vile account, euen no better than a may-game, of the main and principall ordinance of Christ? What palpable contempt of the word read and preached, of praier, of the Sacraments, of the Sabboth, &c. doe most men shew? How rudely, carelesly, and vnreuerently, doe they vse to behaue themselues, euen in the solemnest

and most publike worship and seruice of God; yea often times not without apparent scorne & disdaine of the same? What should we iudge of this? but that such either think that Christ himselfe is a mockerie, or at the least, that hee hath shewed great want of wisedome, in requiring so base and contemptible a seruice, such as is not fit for wise men to performe, but in iest or scorne, or (at the best) but as if they were playing some counterfet part vpon a stage.
                  2 A speciall meanes to preuent this sinne, in the receiuing of this Sacrament, is to learne and to beleeue, that in receiuing the same, we do not conforme to the priuate humors, conceits, and pleasures of men, no not of Peter or

                     Paul, of Magistrates or Ministers, of Churches or Fathers; but to the expresse Will and Commandement of our Lord and Sauiour Jesus Christ. This is in the nature of man, that if hee bee imperiously commanded any thing by an inferiour and one that hath no authoritie to command, though the thing commanded bee in it selfe commodious, praise worthy, or honourable, yet he either will refuse to doe it, or if he doe it, it shall be not without some scorn and contempt, and in a kinde of mockerie: But if one in authoritie, whom he reuerenceth and honoureth, and whom hee knoweth hath power to command, doe require any thing, he will be ready (except hee bee very leaud and impious) to yeeld obedience

in feare and reuerence, albeit the action in it selfe bee light and vnprofitable, yea base and seruile, yea troublesome and hurtfull vnto him. Except therefore wee should be so impious, as to hold, that Christ Jesus hath either no power to require this dutie at our hand, or so impudent, as to defend, that he doth nowhere require it of vs, or so blasphemous, as to say he wanted wisdome in requiring it of vs, it must needs bee yeelded vnto, that this sacrament ought with all due reuerence to bee receiued, which is inioined by so awfull and soueraigne a power, bee the action it selfe in it selfe neuer so meane. When therefore men come so rudely and vnreuerently to these holy Rites, it is a signe, that they

neuer thinke of that high and sacred authority that hath ordained them. This then is and ought to be the maine foundation of all true reuerence, not only toward this, but al other parts of Gods worship and seruice, That Christ Iesus requireth this Seruice at our hands. Would then the Ministers and seruaunts of Iesus Christ, that are by their speciall office to dispense the ordinances of Christ, haue their ministery truly reuerenced of the saints and people of God, and not contemned and despised? Let them make it appeare, as Paul doth heere, that they minister no other word or Sacraments, prescribe no other worship, preach no other Gospell, binde mens consciences with no other lawes, allure them

with no other promises, feare them with no other threatnings, than such as they haue receiued from Christ himselfe.
                  
                     The second point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament.The second point of doctrine propounded by the Apostle, is concerning the first Institutor and Administer of this Sacrament. The effect whereof is this; That Christ Iesus in his owne person did institute, yea and first of all with his owne hand administer this Sacrament. For it followeth in these words, That the Lord Iesus, the night that he was betraied, tooke bread, &c. As though hee should say, If but my selfe, or any other Apostle, or any person inferiour to an Apostle, had instituted this Sacrament, by warrant and commission from Christ, there had beene therein cause enough to

mooue any Christian heart to a reuerent receiuing and vsing thereof: but when Christ Iesus himselfe, in his owne person, hath immediately instituted it, yea and was himselfe a Minister of it, yea the first Administer of it, what a fearefull iudgement are they guilty of, that shall prophane and disgrace that which Christ himselfe, in his owne person, so exceedingly graced and honoured?
                  This doctrine also serueth as a singular motiue to stirre vp all the faithfull to a most carefull respect and regard of this mysterie. For first those ordinances which Christ himselfe hath expresly and in a speciall manner instituted, ought with speciall reuerence to bee conformed vnto. The seruices

which are required by the lawes of man, framed once by consequence from the word, or but according to the generall rules thereof, are in a holy and religious manner to bee performed. But such a seruice as Christ himselfe shall immediately and so expresly institute, not trusting to the discourse and wit of man to appoint the same, and which himselfe did most religiously in his owne person performe, must needs deserue the highest respect and reuerence, and must needs argue great impietie in them that shal contemptuously, or but carelesly performe the same. 2. In that himselfe did first not only institute, but administer it; it teacheth vs, that wee should alwaies receiue it from the hands

of Christs Ministers, euen as it were from the hands of Christ himselfe, who, though not bodily, yet is as spiritually and effectually present now, as at the first administration thereof.
                  The third point of doctrine concerneth the circumstance of time,The third point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament. that Christ in his speciall wisdome made choise of to institute this Sacrament in, which was the night in which he was betraied. This also serueth to mooue and perswade to a due and reuerent respect of this ordinance.
                  For first, that could not but proceed from the infinite loue of Christ, which at this time he instituted for his Church, when hee was preparing himselfe to the greatest worke of loue that euer was shewed, euen to lay downe his life for it. The legacies

bequeathed by friends vpon their death beds, vse much to be esteemed, & where they are contemned, there the loue of the giuer is despised and disgraced. If therefore the loue of Christ Iesus, when he was ready to lay downe his life for vs, bee deare and pretious vnto vs, this Sacrament, which at that very time was instituted by him, and, as a legacie, bequeathed vnto vs must needs be deare and pretious vnto vs.
                  2. This was no time for Christ to spend in instituting needlesse and vnnecessary matters. The vainest men that are, or euer were, except they bee desperately wicked, or through some disease distempered in their braine, doe not vse at such a time to busie

themselues about vanities and needlesse matters, but their thoughts vse to bee taken vp with the most serious and weightiest affaires, such as most necessarily concerne themselues and their friends: Farre bee it therefore from vs, that wee should thinke, that our Sauiour at this time should finde nothing else to doe, but to trouble his Church with idle and friuolous obseruances. Yea, if men at such times as this is, how miserable soeuer, doe vse to bestow the best things they haue vpon them they most loue, we must either thinke that our Sauiour was very poore, or very miserable, or else we must hold, that this Sacrament, which at this time hee bequeathed vnto all his Churches, is of some speciall

price, value, and vse vnto the same, if it bee receiued as it ought to be.
                  Thirdly, seeing that Christ at this time was entring vpon the greatest, most painfull and difficult worke that euer was or shall bee performed, euen the saluation of sinners, the zeale whereof had now, more than euer, eaten him vp, and had captiuated al the thoughts and affections of his soule, so that it 
                        〈◊〉
                      not possible for him (at this time) to thinke of any thing else, but what might further the worke of our redemption, and the saluation of our soules; we must needs conclude, that this Sacrament beeing duely (according to Christs intent) administred & receiued, must needs tend, after a very speciall manner, to

the furtherance of our saluation, and to make the worke of his redemption effectuall vnto vs; so that to set light by this Sacrament, is to despise the worke of redemption, and the saluation of our soules.
                  The fourth point of doctrine is concerning the parts of this Sacrament,The 4. point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament. which before wee can well vnderstand, something is to be premised of a Sacrament in generall, wherof briefly:
                  This word [Sacrament] was wont to signifie that solemne oath which the souldiers of Rome vsed to take, whereby they bound themselues to performe faithfull seruice to their Emperour in his warres, from whence the Latine Diuines haue borrowed it, and now, by long custome, it is become

in these Westerne Churches, a proper name, whereby those outward badges and ensignes of Christianitie, (vz. Baptisme and the Lords Supper) are called; because that Christians, in the due receiuing of them, doe after a speciall manner binde themselues, euen as it were by a solemne vow and oath, to serue their Lord and Master Iesus Christ, euen as the souldiers of Rome did, by solemne oath, bind themselues to serue their Emperours and Commanders in the warre.
                  More particularly, wee vnderstand by Sacraments those mysticall Rites and Ceremonies of the Church, which Christ hath ordained for the setting foorth and confirming of the Couenant of grace.
                  Mysticall Rites and Ceremonies

are certaine outward and bodily signes, which, after a secret and artificiall manner, shadow and represent things spirituall and internall: so that in euery Sacrament there are these two things to bee considered. 1. The outward bodily signe. 2. The spirituall matter, that is mystically shadowed by the signe, and yet, after a sort, hidden and locked vp in the same.
                  The Apostle, in setting downe the parts of this Sacrament, expresseth both these points.
                  1. The outward signes which Christ hath instituted, are in themselues very common, ordinary, and vsuall matters, as breaking and eating of Bread, and drinking of Wine. Wine is not expressed heere:

but in Mat. 26. and Mar. 14. the fruit of the Vine is expresly mentioned by our Sauiour Christ, immediately after the institution.
                  These signes may bee reduced to two heads: as 1. Vnto certaine outward elements: 2. Vnto certaine mysticall actions in and about the elements.
                  The elements are Bread and Wine: the actions are breaking and eating of the bread, and drinking of the Wine. These are all the mysticall signes which are expresly mentioned in this place of Scripture, and in the Euangelists that write of the institution of this Sacrament; and therefore I wil not stand vpon any other, though I doe not deny but there are other particular

actions performed in & about these elements, which of the soundest Diuines are, and rightly may, in some sense, by analogie, be counted Sacramentall.
                  These signes considered nakedly in and by themselues, are not of any great force to stirre vp any great reuerence to the receiuing of them, because there is no one thing in the world more ordinary than eating and drinking; and yet there is no iust cause why, in regard of them, we should despise and contemne the Sacrament, they being in themselues things both necessary, and pleasant, and no waies base and contemptible. If Christ Iesus should haue required of vs any light and senselesse action, or which

should haue beene bitter and loathsome, or burdensome vnto vs, yet wee ought, for his sake that requires it, to yeeld reuerent respect vnto it: much more when hee requires that which in it selfe is both necessarie, profitable, and pleasant, as eating of bread and drinking of wine are. It had beecommed vs in all humilitie, (if so it had pleased him to ordaine) euen to haue eaten Acornes, and husks, and swines meat, such as the prodigall son was forced to eat of; and to haue drunke vineger mingled with gall, such as Christ himselfe, for our sakes, tasted of: much more will it beseeme vs, with all due reuerence and honour, to eat bread, and drinke wine, vpon Christs will and pleasure, which is euer most

holy and blessed. But to let passe the outward signes in themselues, and to come to the mysterie in them, and to consider the one with the other, wee shall then see great force in the parts of the Sacrament, to stirre vp in vs a speciall reuerence in the receiuing of it. There are many things of no honour in themselues, that in regard of some speciall vse that they are applied vnto, are honourable; as the white wand carried before Iudges, the Cap of Maintenance worn before the Lord Maior, the Sword borne before the King, &c. which in regard of some speciall mysterie and meaning that is hidden in them, are matters of speciall grace and honour; so though these outward signes bee not in themselues

honourable, yet in regard of the mysterie that is in them, they both bring honour to Christ, and are honourable to the vser.
                  The very circumstance of time wherein our Sauiour did administer it, sheweth vs, that this bread and wine, this eating and drinking, hath in this place a more than ordinarie vse or end. Wee eat bread commonly to satisfie hunger, and to feed and nourish our bodies; and wee drinke wine to quench our thirst, and to reuiue and refresh our heauy spirits: but this is not the proper end of the eating of this bread, or of the drinking of this wine. For then Christ would neuer haue administred it immediatly after supper, and that a festiu
                        •
                     ll supper, when they that

were to receiue it, were full of bread and wine before. And therefore in the receiuing of this Sacrament, wee must not so much looke (as wee doe in other eatings and drinkings) to satisfie our hunger, to fill our bellies, and to quench our thirsts; but in this eating and drinking, wee must looke to satisfie and fill our 
                        〈◊〉
                      with some heauenly and spirituall matters, shadowed in these outward signes, and conueied vnto our soules in the due receiuing of them.
                  The mysteries then contained vnder these signes, and expressed by them, are the greatest that can be imagined, euen the great and high mysterie of our redemption and saluation by Iesus Christ; our faith and beleefe whereof, we doe professe

in the vse of them, and the fruit whereof is sealed and confirmed vnto vs in the due receiuing of them.
                  The breaking of the bread signifieth, in a mysterie, the breaking of Christs body, that is, all the vnspeakable torments that hee suffered in his own p
                        ••
                     son for our sins, which were greater than if his liuing body had beene rent and torn into a thousand peeces, and all his bones broken and beaten to dust and powder, Heb. 5.7. Esai 53.16.11. Matth. 27.46.
                  The eating of the bread thus broken, and the drinking of this wine, signifieth the speciall fruit that commeth vnto all beleeuers, by the passion and sufferings of Iesus Christ. For Christ saith;

                     This Bread is my Body which was broken for you: And this Cuppe is the New Testament in my Blood. Or as hee speakes more plainly, Matt. 26.28. is my Blood in the New Testament that was shed for many for the remission of their sinnes. And therefore hee bids them take and eat the one, and drinke the other; as though hee should more plainly say vnto them: This bread, so broken as you see, shall bee a signe vnto you, and vnto all them that beleeue in my name, of that which I haue suffered in my flesh for you. The wine in this Cuppe shall bee a signe euen of the blood that in my Sacrifice vpon the crosse was shed for you, to procure the pardon and remission of your sinnes, and of all their sinnes that shall beeleeue

in me, which is not the blood of Oxen and sheepe, such as were offred in the Old Testament, but is in very deed the blood of God and man, whereby the new Testament is sealed and ratified, which offreth saluation vnto al which shall beleeue in mee, and in the merits of this my blood: Therefore take ye and eat yee this mysticall bread, and drink this holy wine; and therein let it be a pledge vnto you and to all the faithfull that shall in like manner receiue the same, that the fruit of that which is shadowed thereby, belongs vnto you; so that as verily as you eat this bread, and drinke this wine with your bodilie mouths, so verily shall your soules taste of, and, as it were, eat and drinke of the fruits of

my death and passion, euen the remission of sinnes, and life euerlasting.
                  Is not this Sacrament then a mysterie to bee trembled at and adored? Is it not a great indignitie, that men should brutishly, without all preparation, come vnto the same, as an horse to the manger, or a swine to the trough? If it were but a bare and simple eating of bread and drinking of wine for bodily necessitie or pleasure, we ought not like beasts, without any shew of reuerence, seaze vpon them; but ought in the receiuing of them, in some degree, lift vp our hearts to God for them: Much more when there is such an heauenly vse of these creatures, ouer and besides that naturall and common vse, which

cannot bee separated from them. It were a great indignitie offered to the worke of our redemption, but occasionally to speake or thinke of it without due reuerence: but to deny reuerence and honour vnto it then when vnder such a speciall mysterie it is presented vnto vs, and when we are therby called to a speciall consideration of it; yea wherein it is of purpose represented to our senses, that we might the better behold it, and be stirred vp to praise and magnifie God for it: and which is more, when in a reuerend vse of this mysterie wee may spiritually partake euen of all heauenly things that are shadowed by it, what a sinne must this needs be, vnreuerently to rush vpon these holy Ri
                        •
                     es? And what a

forcible argument must it bee, to stirre vs vp to a worthy receiuing of this Sacrament?
                  The fifth point of doctrine is concerning the consecration of this Sacrament,The fifth point of doctrine concerning the Sacrament. set downe in these words: And when he had giuen thankes, hee brake it. This consecration was a speciall dedication of the elements in this Sacrament vnto this mysticall and holy vse, by praier, and inuocation vpon the name of God, and specially by thanksgiuing: wherin this thanksgiuing specially consisted, is not reuealed; most probable it is, that it was principally for our sake, to wit, for the great fruit of this Sacrament, that should redound vnto all the worthie receiuers thereof.
                  This sheweth, that speciall

thankes are due vnto GOD from vs for this Sacrament: For if Christ found cause to thanke God for it, much more cause haue wee, who reape all the fruit and benefit of it. And if the worthinesse of this Sacrament did draw thanks from Christ, it may challenge a worthy and reuerend acceptance of vs; yea it much more concernes vs to administer and receiue the same with praier and thanksgiuing. And it is great prophanenesse for vs to presse vnreuerently vpon that which Christ himselfe would not enter vpon, without speciall praier; whereby hee sufficiently declareth, that this Sacrament is a speciall holy Ordinance, and therefore to bee vsed holily, and not in a prophane and vnreuerent maner.

Jf Christ had but simply ordained it without any such speciall thanksgiuing or praier, it had beene our dutie notwithstanding, to receiue it with all due reuerence: But when he shall in this manner, by speciall praier, institute and administer it, it must needs be great impietie for vs to despise and contemne it, and not to make an high account and reckoning of it.
                  The Euangelist Matthew saith, Hee blessed the bread: i. By praier and thanksgiuing obtained a speciall blessing from God vpon it. For that which Balac said of Balaam may bee more truely said of Christ,Num. 22.6. 
                     That which he blesseth, is blessed; and that which hee curseth, is cursed: So that this is a blessed Sacrament, which

Christ Iesus, with his owne mouth, hath after such a speciall manner blessed: And the more hee hath blessed it, the more it will bee a meanes of blessing to the worthy receiuer of it; and the more blessed it is of it selfe, the greater curse wil it bring vpon the prophane and vnreuerent abuser thereof.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         sixth 
                           〈◊〉
                         of 
                           ••
                        ctrine 
                           〈◊〉
                         the 
                           〈◊〉
                        .The sixth and last point of doctrine is concerning the maine and most generall ends of this Sacrament, which are two; the first, respecting our selues: the second, others. That respecting our selues, is in these words; This doe ye in remembrance of mee: So that wee are to receiue this Sacrament to this end and purpose, that in and by it we might be stirred vp in a speciall manner

to remember, and in remembring to meditate of Christ, and of his infinite loue and mercy towards vs, in the great worke of our Redemption, which is shadowed and set foorth by this Sacrament: When our speciall friends, vpon their departure 
                        ••
                     om vs, bestow vpon vs a token of remembrance, they do it to this end, that so often as we looke vpon the same, or vse it, wee should call to minde the many loues they haue shewed vnto vs: And this is written in our nature, that when an occasion onely is offered vnto vs of remembring a friend departed from vs, we vse to shew a speciall affection. Hence it is, that ignorant and superstitious persons will so heartily, vpon euery occasion of remembrance,

pray the Lord to haue mercy of their soules that are departed this life, whom they loue and haue been beholding vnto. But when they behold a speciall memoriall of them in some token of their loue, which brings to their minde some ex
                        ••
                     aordinarie fauours, then they vse to be extraordinarily affected with the remembrance thereof; yea, and they vse to shew part of that loue, affection, and honour, to the token and memoriall it selfe, which they beare to the person. They will carefully lay it vp in their de
                        •
                     kes and cabinets: They wil (it may be) sometimes kisse it, and doe a kinde of honour vnto it: So much do we vse to be affected with any thing that brings into our minde the loues and fauors

of a deceased friend. And therfore seeing this Sacrament that was not onely left vnto vs by the greatest friend that euer we had, but left of purpose to be a remembrance & a pledge vnto vs, of the greatest loue that euer was shewed to mortall creatures, and which hath the very effects and fruits of the loue written vpon it, nay ingrauen in it, yea in some sort contained in it; is it a thing credible, that any that loue and beleeue in Christ Iesus, should prophane and lightly regard this Sacrament? But heere by the way we may obserue how strangely forgetfull euen those that are faithful, be of the great & vnspeakable loue of Christ, that they stand in need of such a remembrance: for vnto them is this Sacrament giuen, as a

helpe to bring to their mindes the consideration of this loue. Is it possible that a man should forget the loue of such a Lord and Master, that hath with a great price of mony redeemed him from being a perpetuall Gally-slaue, yea who for to redeeme him, hath made himselfe a slaue, yea hath purchased his seruants libertie with his owne death, and hath bestowed vpon him all the honours and dignities that himselfe had, and euen all that himselfe possessed? Were it not wonderfull that he should need a speciall remembrance when hee can no waies cast his eies, but hee shall behold the effects of his Lords loue? Would not one thinke that hee should rather need some meanes to make him forget

this loue, and to put it out of his head, rather than to bring it vnto his remembrance? This is the state and condition of all Christians; thogh Christ Iesus hath done a thousand times more for vs than is possible for one man to doe for an other, though whatsoeuer wee haue, we haue it by his mercie and loue, our soules, our bodies, our senses, our wit, our beautie, our wealth, our life; so that wee are compassed about with memorials of his kindnesse: and we cannot see, feele, heare, taste, or smell any thing, but it may put vs in minde of his loue, yea of his death and passion, by which the free vse of these things haue been purchased vnto vs: yet for all this, wee stand in need, you see, of speciall remembrances;

yea and yet (O sinfull wretches that we are!) wee are ready to prophane these speciall remembrances; yea, and which exceedeth all wonder, are prone, euen in the midst of them, most of all to forget the loue of Christ, and to dishonour him.
                  The end that respecteth others, is The shewing foorth of Christs death vntill hee come: i. By eating this bread, and drinking this wine, men shall testifie and professe, yea after a sort preach vnto others, euen vnto the worlds end, the mysterie of the Gospell, the summe and substance whereof consists in the death of Christ, and the fruits that flow therefrom, shadowed and represented in this Sacrament; so that by our due receiuing of

this Sacrament, wee doe, as it were, lead others by the hand into the garden in Gethsemane, and shew them Christ Iesus sweating water & blood; Iudas traiterously kissing and betraying him, and the souldiers thereupon binding and leading him to iudgement; wee lead them to Caiaphas Hall, and Pilates Throne, to shew them Christ most wickedly and vniustly condemned, buffeted and spit vpon, scourged and crowned with thornes; wee lead them to Mount Caluarie, and shew them how he was nailed on the Crosse, how he was forced to drinke vinegar mingled with gall, how he was pierced with a speare, how with most bitter cries he said, My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? And all this for

our sakes, that he might procure the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, and euerlasting saluation. Can wee in this mysterie see and behold al this with the eies of faith? Can wee, after a sort, shew them & point them vnto others? And shall wee therewith be no whit affected in our owne soules? Shall wee come vnto this Sacrament as blocks and stocks, without any affection, as vnto a vaine, idle, and friuolous matter?
                  By this which hath beene said, you may see how forcible this doctrine of the Apostle, concerning the Sacrament, is, to stirre vp al Christians to the worthy receiuing of the same: But it may bee obiected, that the Apostles labour heerein seemes needlesse, and to no purpose, seeing the Church of

                     Corinth could not be ignorant of any of these points, which the Apostle hath taught concerning this Sacrament: It is true indeed, they could not be ignorant of any of these matters: But what then? Was Pauls doctrine therfore needlesse and in vaine? No verily; but in this practise of Paul we are taught what a perpetuall vse there is of teaching in the Church of Christ, when the Ministers must bee faine to instruct the people of God not only in that which they are ignorant of, but often call vnto their minde and consideration that which they know already,2. Pet. 1.12.13. vpon such particular occasions as they are to make special vse thereof: And verily, though men could say all the Scriptures by heart, though they

could vnderstand euery hard and difficult place of Scripture, though they knew all the grounds and principles of the Christian faith, though they were able to answer all oppositions against any diuine truth in the word; yet for all this, there would bee a vse of reading and preaching of the word of God in the Church. For if our knowledge be not stirred vp in vs, if wee bee not often put in minde of it, if we be not taught how to apply it vnto these and these particular cases, it will bee as it were dead in vs, and most out of our head when wee should most vse it: For so was the knowledge of this Sacrament in the Church of Corinth, vntill the Apostle indeuoured to reuiue it by this Epistle; and so it will bee with

any part of diuine knowledge whatsoeuer, if there shall be no meanes in the Church often to stirre vp the same in vs, and to call vs to the true vse and practise of it.
                  
                     Wherefore, whosoeuer shall eat]
                  
                  Hitherto the Apostle hath laid downe the doctrine of the Sacrament: now from the said doctrine he inferreth and concludeth, what a fearfull sinne all these are guilty of, that doe not receiue this Sacrament in that holy manner which they ought to doe. Whosoeuer therfore (saith the Apostle, ver. 27.) shall eat this Bread, and drinke the Cup of the Lord vnworthily, shall bee guilty of the Bodie and Blood of the Lord. For the better vnderstanding of this conclusion, wee must consider in order these three points:

                        
                        1. What it is in this place to eat and drinke vnworthily.
                        2. What it is to be guiltie of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
                        3. Why such as eat and drink vnworthily, are guiltie of the Body and Blood of the Lord.
                     
                  
                  1. For the first, we must know, that to receiue this Sacrament vnworthily,
                     What it is to eat & drinke vnworthily. is to receiue the outward elementes thereof, without due reuerence and respect, either of the mysterie that is contained in them, or of the end why they were ordained, or of the person by whose authoritie they were appointed. The ordinary and most common causes of this vnworthy receiuing, are these:
                  1. Ignorance, when men will presume to partake of these mysteries, before they vnderstand

stand and haue learned, in any reasonable sort, the true meaning and vse of them; such must needs receiue▪ hand ouer head, they know not and care not what.
                  2. Want of special faith, when a man partakes of the outward elements of this Sacrament, and yet is not perswaded, nor doth beleeue, or expect, that any such special fruit or benefit, as is promised in the word, shall redound vnto him by the same.
                  3. Superstition, when one commeth vnto this Sacrament in a fond conceit and imagination, that hee shall receiue other manner of blessings and benefits by it, than is reuealed or promised by the word, or intended by Christ.
                  4. Prophanenesse or sensualitie,

which is when a man doth so satiate and pamper his soule and body with the delights and pleasures of the world and the flesh, that he cannot, nor cares not to taste and relish the spirituall fruit that commeth by this Sacrament, or any other diuine ordinance; and therefore brings vnto it no other hart nor affections, than vnto ordinarie meat & drink, yea often times worse.
                  5. Carelesnesse and securitie, which is when a man commeth with an affection and disposition vnto this Sacrament, as vnto a matter that he neither looke; to receiue good by, nor feares to receiue hurt by; and therefore will neuer trouble his minde about the matter.
                  6. Presumption, which is,

when men neuer care in what manner they receiue, and yet presume to receiue as much fruit and benefit by the Sacrament, as those which are most carefull to fit & prepare themselues thereunto.
                  7. Vncharitablenesse, when a mans soule is so full of bitternesse, hatred, and malice of his neighbour, and by meanes thereof, so vexed and disquieted, that it cannot consider and meditate (as it ought to doe) of the loue of Christ figured in this Sacrament.
                  Many other causes of vnworthy receiuing might bee alleged; but these are the vsuall and most ordinarie. Let vs then euery one take heed, that no one of them bee found in vs; for then we shall certainly prophane this Sacrament, and

become vnworthy receiuers thereof, and so bee guiltie of that sinne which is heere mentioned by the Apostle. There is not the least of one of these, but they will make a man an vnworthy receiuer of this Sacrament. What then is the estate of such persons, as are knowen to haue all these corruptions abounding in them, and yet will (at the least once in the yeere) presume to come to the Table of the Lord? Thus much for the vnderstanding of the first point of the conclusion, vz. What is meant by vnworthy eating and drinking.
                  
                  For the second point in the conclusion,What it is to bee guiltie of the body & Blood of Christ. 
                     To be guiltie of the Body and Blood of Christ, is, to offer a speciall wrong, disgrace, and indignitie vnto the Body and Blood of Christ;

i. vnto the person and suffrings of Christ, and in a speciall maner to sinne against the great worke of our redemption; yea it is in some sort to commit a sinne of the very same nature and qualitie, which they did, that had their hands in putting Christ Iesus to death. For euery one that may truly bee said to be guilty of blood, is in some sense or other a shedder of blood. Euery vnworthy receiuer then of this Sacrament, according to the degrees of his vnworthy receiuing, either more or lesse, doth in some sort communicate euen in the sinne of Iudas that betraied Christ; of the wicked Iewes, that cried, Crucifie him; of Annas, Caiaphas, and Pilate, that condemned him; of the souldiers, that whipt and

scourged him, that spet in his face, crownd him with thorns, nailed him on the Crosse, and pierced him with a speare. The worst of vs (I assure my selfe) doe abhorre these persons, euen for these sins which they committed against the person of Christ. Let vs then in like manner learne to abhorre the vnworthy receiuing of this Sacrament, which will pull vpon our heads the guilt of the same sinne, euen the blood of Iesus Christ, of which all vnwoorthy receiuers are heere said to be guiltie.
                  But in the third place it is to bee considered,Why vnworthy receiuers are guilty of ye Body & Blood of Christ. 
                     why vnworthy receiuers are guiltie of the Body and Blood of Christ. The answer vnto this question may easily bee gathered from the former doctrine of the Sacrament,

which is laid downe by the Apostle; for from that doth the Apostle inferre & conclude the same.
                  First, because such persons, in so doing, doe despise the sacred authoritie of Christ Iesus, who first instituted and administred this Sacrament, and ordained it to be administred and receiued in all his Churches, vntill the end of the world. Now they that despise the authoritie of Christ, must needs in some sort despise the person of Christ, and his suffrings, and by consequent, his Body and Blood, by which principally his authoritie is ratified and confirmed: And to despise the person & suffrings of Christ, the Body and Blood of Christ, what is it, but in some manner to assent vnto

them that nailed the Bodie of Christ vpon the Crosse, and shed the Blood of Christ?
                  Secondly, they despise and set light by a speciall token of his loue and fauour, yea and memoriall of it, which he bequeathed vnto vs, euen when he was laying downe his life for vs, euen when he was going to be nailed on the crosse, and to shed his blood for vs. Now who can contemne and set light by this token, but hee must needs despise & set light by the loue of Christ, & therein of the body of Christ, which he gaue for vs, and the Blood of Christ, which hee shed for vs, wherein the speciall fruit of his loue appeared. Rom. 5.7.8. And is not this in some sort to be guiltie of it?
                  Thirdly, they offer contempt

to the principall badges, cognizances, and ensignes of Christianitie, and, as it were, to the speciall coine & picture of Christ, yea to a consecrated type, shadow, and representation of his body & blood. Now that wilfull contempt and wrong which is offered vnto the cognizances, ensignes, coines, pictures, or representations of a Prince, is supposed to be offered to the person it selfe of the Prince: And therefore the wrong that is offered, the carelesnesse, neglect, and contempt that is shewed to this Sacrament, must needs redound to the Body and Blood of Christ, yea vnto the whole mysterie of redemption shadowed and represented by the same;Rom. 4.11. yea forasmuch as in this Sacrament

the very Body and Blood of Christ,Gen. 17.10.11. Luc. 22.18. Tit. 3.9. and all the benefits thereof are spiritually offered vnto the receiuer, euen as lands are offered vnto men by the sealing and deliuerie of Deeds and Jndentures; to make no account of, but to despise this Sacrament, is as much as to despise the Body and Blood of Christ, and all the benefits thereof; as he may be said to despise the lease or gift of lands, which despiseth the Writings, Seales, and Jndentures, whereby they are secured and confirmed vnto him.
                  Thus you see how the Apostle hath shewed what a fearefull and dangerous sinne it is to prophane this Sacrament: And hee hath not barely affirmed it, but prooued it by most

euident and apparant reasons. Let vs from this conclusion of the Apostle, thus explaned and laid open, obserue these points:
                  First, that Christ Iesus receiueth strange indignity and wrong in his very person, not from Iewes and Infidels only, but often times from Christians, euen from such as looke to bee saued by the merits of his blood; and that euen then, when they are pe
                        •
                     forming speciall seruice and worship vnto him. For what greater wrong can there bee, than to be guiltie of that blood, which is the price of our redemption? which was the sinne of this Church of Corinth, and is the sinne of all such pe
                        •
                     sons as are vnworthy receiuers of this Sacrament.
                  
                     Secondly, this shewes that the bare conformitie vnto the outward exercises of Religion, whether the word or Sacraments, is not enough to make vs good Christians, but men may be the worse Christians for this, Rom. 2.28. 1. Cor. 10.1.2.3.4.5.6. Many simple ignorant soules doe thinke that they haue Religion and Christianitie enough in them, if their foreheads haue beene sprinkled with the water of Baptisme, & if they sometimes heare the word and receiue the outward elements of this Sacrament; whereas in very deed they may be further from Christianitie, for their outward conformitie vnto these things, than if they did not conforme vnto them at all: They may by eating t
                        •
                     is Bread, and drinking

this Cup, euen as it were, crucifie Christ Iesus, and trample his blood vnder their feet. Christians therefore must not only striue to worship God, to heare the word, to pray, to receiue the Sacraments, but to doe it in that reuerend forme and maner that God requires; otherwise they may doe it in such a manner, that they shall more offend God in doing of it, than if they did it not at all. It were better a thousand times for vs neuer to receiue this Sacrament, than to receiue it in such a manner, as shall for the very act of receiuing, pull vpon our heads the guilt of that blood.
                  Thirdly, by this it appeares, that this sinne of vnworthy receiuing (if wee doe not seeke atonement and reconciliation

betime for the same, at the hands of God) will be a heauy sinne vpon our consciences. For to bee guilty of blood, though of sinfull and wicked blood, hath beene a burden that hath made the stoutest heart to ake. But who is able, when his conscience shall bee awakened, to beare the guilt of innocent blood? And if the blood of innocent Abel was so heauy to Cain. Gen 4.13. how heauy shall the blood of the innocent lambe of God lie vpon all them that are any way guilty of it? We may see how heauy it was vpon the heart of Iudas, Matt. 27.3▪ 4 5. yea and how heauy it is, euen to this day, vpon the heads of the whole Nation of the Iewes, according to their own cursed wish, Mat. 27.25. This sin

therefore beeing a kinde of bloody sinne, and by consequent, a most heauy and insupportable sinne, can wee be too carefull to auoid it? It is not our ignorance or good meaning, in this case, that will excuse vs, and free vs from the guilt of it. Many of the Iewes did in their ignorance, crucifie Christ, Luc. 23.34. Act. 3.17. And the Church of Corinth had (no doubt) a good meaning in receiuing this Sacrament, euen then when they receiued it most vnworthily; yet this could not free them from the guilt of Christs blood: This may lessen the guilt; it cannot take it away. If this will not mooue vs to a carefull preparation before wee presume to be made partakers of this Sacrament, nothing will.
                  
                     Fourthly, note the different effect of this Sacrament in the worthy and vnworthy receiuers thereof. It is the sauour of death vnto death to some, to other some the sauour of life vnto life, 2. Cor. 2.16. The soule of the worthy receiuer is fed and refreshed, washed, purified, and cleansed from sinne by the body & blood of Christ receiued therein. On the contrarie side, the soule of the vnworthy receiuer is polluted and defiled, and made accursed and miserable thereby; and the oftener hee receiueth the same, the more abominable he is in the sight of God and man. And such as do in such a manner receiue the bodie and blood of Christ, and looke for grace thereby, are as if they that whipt Christ, and that

nailed him on the Crosse, and by meanes thereof, had their faces, hands, and garments all to be sprinkled with his gore blood, should thinke themselues thereby purged from their sinnes; or as if hee which pierced Christ with a speare, should haue held a Challice at the wound, and haue filled it with the blood that issued therefrom, and so haue carouzed it off, and should think thereby to haue drunken to his owne eternall health, the blood of Christ.
               
               
                  
                  The second part of Preparation.
                  
                     
                        
                           1. COR. 11.
                        
                        
                           28 Let a man therefore trie himselfe, and so let him eat of this Bread, and drinke of this Cuppe.
                        
                           29 For hee that eateth and drinketh vnworthily, &c.
                     
                  
                  
                     THe Apostle proceedeth to the seconde part of Preparation, declaring vnto the Corinthians, by what meanes the danger of this former sinne

may bee auoided, and so wee may become worthy receiuers of these mysteries.
                  The meanes are, A due triall and examination of our selues, which he leaues not to our libertie, to doe, or not to doe, but requires it at our hands, as a necessarie dutie: The former danger then of committing so grieuous a sin, must not withold vs from receiuing the Sacrament, but it must make vs so much the more studious to vse the means of worthy receiuing of the same. For the Apostle doth not say: Let a man therefore forbeare to receiue this Sacrament, but let a man trie and examine himselfe, and so let him eat this bread and drinke this Cup; So that the more dangerous it is to receiue vnwoorthily,

the more wee must try and examine our selues, that we may receiue worthily; And hence it is that the Apostle infers this duty from the daunger aforesaid, as if hee should say; Euery Christian stands bound to receiue this Sacrament, and yet seeing therein, the danger of vnworthy receiuing thereof is so great, it stands them all vpon most carefully to trie and examine themselues before they presume to partake the same.
                  For the better and more cleare handling of this duety, wee are to consider according to the ground laid downe in the text.
                  1 What manner of Triall it is, which is heere required.
                  2 Wherein particularly this Triall consisteth.
                  
                     3 Our speciall duties in and after this Triall.
                  4 What Persons are to make this Triall.
                  5 The motiues inducing to the making of this Triall.
                  
                     1 The manner of Triall.
                     The Triall and examination here required, is a most carefull and diligent search and inquisition to bee made within our owne Soules and consciences, whether there bee in vs, those gifts and graces that are necessary to the worthy and reuerent receiuing of this Sacrament yea or no; i. Whether we be such Persons as haue an interest in this Sacrament or no? And for the finding out of this, we must try our selues after that manner that Goldsmiths

by touch and fire and hammer, do vse to try whether Gold or Siluer be pure, yea or no.
                     1 This sheweth, that the principall gifts and graces of God that are in a man, are not alwaies euident and apparant vnto him, but doe sometimes lie hid within the secret of the soule, vntill by some speciall triall, they bee discouered and discerned; for if the said graces did alwaies manifest themselues, then there should neuer neede any such triall of our selues. This should encourage vs to search our selues, so much the more narrowly; for if by our searching, wee shall finde but one grace, yea or one degree of a grace in our soule, more than we did perceiue in our selues before, it will

bring more sound comfort and ioy vnto our soules, than if we had found the most pretious iewell in the world.
                     2 By this it appeares, that a man may (if hee will carefully vse the meanes) come to some knowledge and sight of that grace and goodnesse which is in his owne soule: and therefore it must needs bee a great fault in them that doe not carefully vse the meanes. It is a signe they set no price of Gods grace, that make no inquirie whether they haue it or no in their possession. Men make diligent inquirie after concealed land and treasures; much more should they make enquirie after the concealed graces of God, that lie hid in their owne soules, and which they cannot imploy as they

ought to doe, because they know not whether they be in them, or no.
                     3 It is exceeding profitable and beneficiall for vs to know the gifts and graces of God, that are in vs: for it is a means not onely (as appeares by this place) to preuent fearfull and dangerous sinnes, but also to fit and prepare vs to the receiuing of greater graces and fauours, which otherwise shalbe with-held and detained from vs.
                     4 Let vs neuer thinke to receiue any new grace or blessing in any ordinance of God, vntill by a diligent search of our selues, we haue first found some former grace in our selues, that may make vs fit and worthy receiuers thereof. For to him that hath saith our

Sauiour) shall be giuen, and from him that hath not, shalbe taken away, euen those shews which he hath, Luc. 19.26. The vse of one grace is to fit and prepare vs, and to make vs worthy receiuers of another grace.
                  
                  
                     2. Wherein particularly this triall consisteth.
                     The particular gifts & graces which make vs fit & worthy receiuers of this Sacrament, and which giue vs an interest therein, which also in this triall we must finde in our selues, before we can be worthy partakers thereof, are such graces and gifts, as are necessarie to the making and being of a true Christian. For none can worthily receiue this Sacrament,

or haue an interest therein, but a true Christian; and whosoeuer is a true Christian, (if he stirre vp the grace of God that is in him) he may bee a worthy and fruitfull receiuer thereof. For hee who hath already receiued the thing signified, hath a priuilege and interest to receiue the signe, Act. 10.47. But 
                           •
                        uerie true Christian hath receiued already, in some measure, the thing signified by this Sacrament, euen Christ Iesus and his merits, who liueth and raigneth in them by his spirit; and therefore they that are so graced, may worthily (if they will) partake of this Sacrament, which is nothing else, but a signe of that which they haue already interest and possession in. Againe, this Sacrament

being one of the outward badges and cognizances of Christ Iesus, which he hath appointed for his seruants to weare, it must needs bee, that hee whom Christ Iesus hath graced so much, as to entertaine into his seruice, may be, in some degree, worthy to weare this badge and cognizance.
                     That grace which makes vs indeed true Christians,Act. 8.3 37. Rom. 4.22. is a true and liuely faith in Iesus Christ. By a true and liuely faith, I meane such a faith as is fruitfull in good workes; For that which is without workes, is a dead faith, as Iames speaketh, Iam. 2.17. and indeed no better than a mocke-faith: From this faith doe all other Christian graces flow, and vpon it doe they all depend, and

according to the growth of it, doe they grow and increase; and they that haue but the least degree thereof, are true Christians, though but weake and imperfect, Mat. 17.20. Esai 42.3. and haue an interest in Christ and his merits, & therein a right into this Sacrament; so that in this triall and examination of our selues, it shall suffice, that we can finde this true and liuely faith in vs, though in neuer so small a degree. For when we haue once found this grace in our soules, and stirred it vp, it will supply vnto vs all such other graces as shall make vs in some measure worthy receiuers. For whatsoeuer is done in faith, (how simple and base soeuer the action may seeme to bee) is pleasing & acceptable to God:

and on the contrarie side, whatsoeuer is done, and is not of faith, is not pleasing or acceptable vnto him, Rom. 14.23. So that all the worth of a Christian lies in his faith, and in those fruites which spring from faith.
                     The meanes then to try our faith, whether it be true, liuely, and sauing, no or yea, is,

                           1 By the ground and foundation thereof.
                           2 By the obiect and matter.
                           3 By the fruits and effects.
                        
                     
                     The ground of this faith is the word of God,The triall of our faith by ye ground and foundation thereof. reuealed vnto our conscience, by the spirit of God, to bee the word of God, Eph. 1.13. 1. Cor. 2.12. The faith with resteth vpon any other ground-worke, is no true sauing faith. The speciall meanes to trie whether our

faith bee grounded vpon the word of God, is, to examine our consciences in these particulars:
                     First, whether wee doe beleeue indeed and in truth, that the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, in the Old and New Testament, are the very word of God. For the whole word of God, so far as is needfull to be beleeued vnto saluation, is contained therein▪ 
                        Ioh. 5.39. Or at the least, whether wee bee exceedingly troubled and grieued in our soules, and from our very hearts, when, through any temptation, wee are mooued to doubt of the same: And whether wee vse all the meanes we can to come to a perswasion thereof. For God accepts the will and endeuour for the deed, Marke
                        
9.24. Rom. 7.18. Matth. 5.6.
                     Secondly, whether we doe vnfainedly desire to be taught and instructed in the word of God, and to come to the true knowledge and vnderstanding thereof; and whether wee doe loue and affect those meanes which are most powerfull and effectuall to that end and purpose. For hee whose faith is grounded vpon the word▪ hath his hope grounded vpon the same word, euen all the hope he hath of euerlasting life, and therefore hee must needs desire to bee acquainted therewith by all possible meanes.
                     Thirdly, whether our ignorance and dulnesse in vnderstanding of the word, and our forgetfulnesse thereof, be grieuous and troublesome vnto

vs. For how can it chuse but grieue & trouble a man, when hee knowes not, nor vnderstands not, or cannot remember, the euidence of his owne euerlasting estate?
                     Fourthly, whether our reading, or hearing the word read or preached; our meditating, conference and studie of it, doe increase or nourish our loue, and delight, and beleefe in it, Psal. 119.92.97.98. 103.
                     Fifthly, whether wee giue credit and authoritie vnto it aboue all humane traditions & customes whatsoeuer, Psal. 119.113. And whether wee doe not denie credit and beleefe vnto whatsoeuer wee know is repugnant vnto the same word.
                     Sixthly, whether wee finde

a lightnesse and cheerefulnesse in our consciences when wee haue done any thing agreeable vnto the word of God, Psal. 119.92. And whether wee finde a trouble and a heauinesse in the same, when wee haue done any thing which we know to be repugnant vnto the same word.
                     Seuenthly, whether wee hope in the promises, feare the threatnings, desire the blessings, and endeuour to auoid the curses contained in this word: And whether wee equally beleeue the one as well as the other.
                     Eighthly, whether wee doe iudge it a singular blessing of the Lord, that he hath in this manner reuealed his will in the written word, and that hee vouchsafeth vs libertie and

meanes to come to the knowledge, vnderstanding, and beleefe of it; and whether wee iudge it to bee a great iudgement and curse vpon them, from whom this word is hid, and who want this liberty and meanes that we enioy.
                     Ninthly, whether wee can prooue those points of religion and faith, which wee doe hold and beleeue, by the written word of God; and whether we doe therefore beleeue them, because we know they are affirmed in the word of God; and whether doe wee misdoubt and suspect all those points of Religion that wee cannot see warranted by the word of God.
                     If wee can finde these properties in our soules, then haue we found in vs so many infallible

signes and tokens, that our faith hath a true and sound ground.
                     Secondly we are to trie and examine our faith in Christ,The triall of our faith by ye obiect or matter thereof. whether it be true and liuely, no or yea, by the obiect and matter thereof.
                     The obiect & matter of true faith, is that diuine truth which God in his word hath reueled vnto vs. For if the testimony of God in his word, bee the ground of our faith; then that truth which is reuealed in the word, must needs be the obiect and matter thereof. Now forasmuch as, there was neuer any one man, that could euer attaine vnto the knowledge of all and euery particular truth reuealed in the word of God, the meanes heerein to t
                           •
                        ie our faith, is by the maine

fundamentall truths therein contained, vpon which all other truths doe in some sort depend, and vnto which they are to be reduced; And therefore let vs examine our consciences in these points:
                     1 Whether we do beleeue the mystery of the Trinity, the Creation of the world, the fall of Adam, the incarnation, death, resurrection and ascention of Jesus Christ, that there shall bee a rising againe of all flesh, a generall day of iudgement, an heauen and hell, an euerlasting life for some, and an eternall death for othersome after this life: and such other grounds of religion, euidently contained in the word of God, and proued by the same in our ordinary confessions of faith and catechisms.
                     
                        2 Whether we doe beleeue that the Lawe of God,Mat. 22.4. (the summe whereof is contained in the ten Commandements) is a holy, perfect and iust law, Rom. 7.12. and 9.14.15.16. Psal. 19.7. Such a law as God might iustly binde euery man to the obedience of euery Commandement therein contained, Deut. 6.2.4.5. And whether we beleeue, that hee that perfectly keepeth this Law, is a most blessed and happy man, Deut. 28.15.
                     3 Whether we do beleeue, that the breach of this law deserueth euerlasting death and condemnation, Gal. 3.10. Rom. 6.23. 2. Thes. 1.9. And that God in his iustice may punish euerlastingly, in hell fire, the breakers thereof, Rom. 9.13, 14.21.
                     
                        4 Whether wee beleeue, that all men liuing vpon earth, since the fall of Adam, haue broken this Law, Rom. 3.10.11.12, 20.23. and 5.12. Prouer. 20.8. and so are guiltie of an euerlasting death, and that no man by reason of the corruption of his will, is able now since the said fall to keepe this law, Gen. 8.21. Rom. 7.7.27.
                     5 Whether wee beleeue that our selues in particular, are gree
                           •
                        ous sinners, and haue deserued by our sinnes, euerlasting death and condemnation, and that it is a great misery, to be a sinner, and a happinesse to be free from sinne, Psal. 51.3 4.5. Neh. 1.7. Dan. 9.5.12. Psal. 40.12. and 32. 4. Ezra. 9.6.
                     6 Whether wee beleeue,

that God will punish euerlastingly, in hell fire, the greatest part of the world for their sin, to the praise of his glorious iustice, Luk. 19.23. and 12.34. Mat. 7.13. Rom. 9.27. Pro. 16.4.
                     7 Whether we do beleeue, that neither our selues, nor any man else, by his owne power, strength, or merit, is able to free himselfe from this condemnation, and therefore if there be no meanes out of our selues to saue vs, that wee also shall be in the number of those that shall be euerlastingly condemned, Rom. 3.23. and 5. 6 12. and 7.18.19.20.
                     8 Whether wee beleeue, that God will shew grace, mercy, and fauour to some sinners, freely sauing, pardoning, and forgiuing them, without the

least merit and desert on their part, Ioh. 17.9. Dan. 9.7. Rom. 15.14. and 9.22.23. Heb. 46.
                     9 Whether wee beleeue, that all that are saued, and pardoned of their sinnes, are partakers of this mercy, onely through the merits of Iesus Christ, God and man, & that hee merited the same by his death and bloodshedding vpon the Crosse, Rom. 8.1. and 7.24.25. and 5.1.2. Mat. 1.21. Rom. 3.28.
                     10 Whether wee beleeue, that the merits of Christ are sufficient for the pardon and forgiuenesse of our owne sins in particular, Ioh. 1.12. and 6.35. Mat. 9.2. Rom. 7.24.25. Esa. 1.18. Heb. 9.14.
                     11 Whether wee beleeue, that all that are saued by Iesus

Christ, shall in this life (if they liue vntill they come to yeeres of discretion) haue the mystery of redemption reuealed vnto them in the preaching of the Gospell, by means whereof, they shall bee effectually called out of the world, to faith and repentance; and that they shall testifie the same by sorrow vnfained for their sins past, and endeuour carefully to lead a new life euer after, and in a readinesse to doe Iesus Christ faithfull seruice in his Church, according to his will reuealed in the word, Rom. 8.30.31. 1. Cor. 1.30. Iob. 15.19. and 17.6.20.21. Eph. 5.30. Iohn 15.1. Ezech. 11.19. Act. 16.14. Iohn 1.12.2. Pet. 7.5. And whether we beleeue that after this life they shall raigne with Christ Iesus in all

blisse and glory in heauen for euer and euer, Matth. 29.34. Reu. 22.1.2.3. 2. Tim. 4.8.
                     12 Whether wee beleeue, that all such as doe beleeue, and do vnfainedly repent them of their sinnes, and haue a constant purpose to lead a new life according to the will & word of God, are in the number of them that shall be saued euerlastingly, Iohn 3.36.1. Iohn 5.10. And whether wee iudge and beleeue, that it is a sinne for any such person to despaire of the mercy of God, and not to repose trust and confidence therein. Ioh. 3.18.36.
                     13 Whether wee beleeue, that all those persons are most vile and miserable, that are not called to faith and repentance: and that they, most of al other, are most vile and wicked

persons that contemne and despise, or care not to vse those meanes that God hath ordained, to bring them thereunto, Matt. 11.21.25. Heb. 2.3.
                     14 Whether wee beleeue▪ that wee are bound to vse all meanes we can, for attaining faith & repentance. And whether we beleeue, that in vsing the meanes, we shall attaine them. Mat. 7.7.8. and 21.22, Mar. 11.24. And lastly, whether when wee feele that wee haue in some measure obtained these graces, whether we do not beleeue, that our selues in particular, are of that number that shall be saued, 2. Tim. 4.7.8. Luk. 2.29. Iob. 19.25▪ or whether we do vse al indeauour at the least, & vnfainedly desire to beleeue the same, Marke 9.24. Luke 17.5.

                        Matth. 5.6. Reuela. 21 6.
                     In these seuerall points consists the substance and matter of the true christian faith, euery one of which are most euidentlie reuealed in the word of God; so that those which are conuersant in the same, if they doe not wilfully shut their eies against the light, cannot but see them plainely set downe therein; & vpon these grounds and principles, doe all other truths in the word of God in some sort depend, tending to the confirmation and illustration of them: so that if in the triall of our selues, we can find assuredly, that wee beleeue all and euery of these points, or do our vttermost endeauour to beleeue them; then verily our faith is sound in regard of the matter & substance thereof.
                     
                        The third and last triall of faith,The triall of our Faith by ye fruits thereof. is by the fruits thereof: For a true and liuely faith is no barren faith, but it bings forth fruit, and such fruit whereby it may be knowen and discerned to be a true faith, Iam. 
                        
                           •
                        .14. 17.18.20.26.2. Pet. 1, 5, 6.7.
                     The speciall fruit of faith is newnesse of life, Mat. 3.8.10. 2. Pet. 1.5 and 1 Pet. 4.3.6. A new life is a life reformed according to the worde of God, Luk. 16.29.31. And it consists in Repentance & New Obedience.
                     
                     
                        Repentance is an vnfained sorrow for sinne, arising from the speciall apprehension of Gods loue and mercy towards a man in Iesus Christ.
                     The meanes to try whether this Repentance be in thee, is to enquire,
                     
                        1. Whether thou dost see that thou art a grecuous sinner, Psal. 51.3.4. and hatest thy sinne: yea and accusest & condemnest thy self from thy heart, for thy sinne, and acknowledgest the iust merit & desert of thy sinne, Dan. 9.7.8. 1. Cor. 11.31. Mat. 11. 38.
                     2 Whether thou didst come to the sight of thy sinne by the law of God, Rom. 3.20. and 4.15. and 7.7. And whether thou dost loue the same law the more, by how much the more it discouereth thy sinnes, Psal. 119.18.143.176. And whether also thou lo
                           •
                        est those meanes best, that are most powerfull and effectuall, to bring thee into the knowledge, sence, and feeling of thy sinne.
                     
                        3 Whether the more that thou hearest and beleeuest the Gospell, and in it the loue and mercy of Jesus Christ towards sinners, the more thou hatest and forsakest thy sinne, Gal. 5.24.1. Iohn 3.9. Rom. 6.2.3.4.5.
                     4 Whether thou hatest a sinne as much or more in thy selfe, than in another; and whether thou louest another, because hee maketh a conscience of sinne.
                     5 Whether thou hatest and striuest against that sinne that thy nature is most bent vnto, and that loueth and haunteth thee most.
                     6 Whether the more that thou hast formerly sinned against God, and by thy sinnes dishonoured God, the more thou now desirest and indeuourest

to please God, Luke 7.47.
                     7 Whether thou dost striue against not only great sinnes, such as are punished at Assises and Sessions, but also small sinnes, such as are not punished, nor euer called into question in the Courts and Consistories of men, Gal. 5.9.1. Thes. 5.22.
                     8 Whether thou hate and abhorre in thy selfe, not onely those sinnes that are hatefull and detestable in the eies of men, but euen those sinnes also which men will account a grace and honour vnto thee for to commit, and for which they will recompence and reward thee, Gen. 36.9.
                     9 Whether thou hate sinne principally, because God hates it, and forbids it, and not in

respect of the curse & punishment only or specially.
                     10 Whether thou doest not repent, that thou didst no sooner repent.
                     11 Whether thou wouldst for any worldly good, bee in that estate that thou wast in before thy repentance, Phil. 3.7.8.
                     12 Whether thou canst instance in any speciall or particular sinnes, which formerly thou louedst and delightedst in, which now thou hatest, and striuest against.
                     13 Whether thou doest so much the more study and embrace the contrary vertues vnto such sinnes as thou now repentest of, by how much the more thou hast been formerly giuen vnto them.
                     14 Whether thou art not

afraid, that something that thou louest & affectest, should by the word of God be discouered to be a sinne: And whether thou doest not desire and pray, that God would discouer vnto thee all thy sinnes, to the end that thou maist striue against them, and forsake them.
                     15 Whether thou doest reioice, and vnfainedly thanke God, when any thing that thou takest pleasure & delight in, is discouered to be a sinne.
                     16 Whether thou esteemest it a singular blessing of God, that thou hast beene and art crossed of God in those sinnes which thy nature thirsteth after, and that thou hast not had that opportunity and meanes of committing them, which thy flesh hath desired.
                     17 Whether thou doest not

hate, but rather loue him, that dutifully, louingly, and brotherly doth admonish thee of a manifest sinne, especially if he be a Minister of God.
                     There be many other signes of true repentance, by which thou maist try thy selfe, as may appeare by that which I haue taught you elsewhere vpon the 51 Psalme; but these may suffice, vpon this occasion, to discouer a true and sound repentance: And these are such properties, as must of necessity in some degree, bee in euerie person that is truely penitent. It is against common sense & reason, to imagine that there can bee any true repentance, where these signes are wanting; and where these signes are, there, without doubt, a man shall finde all other signes

whatsoeuer, in some degree or other.
                     
                        New Obedience, which is the second part of newnesse of life, is a constant purpose and endeuour to obey and please God in all things, for Christs sake, 1. Pet. 4.2.3. and Chap. 1.21.22. Rom. 6.15.16.17. Act. 13.1. Dan. 3.18.
                     In whomsoeuer there is a true and liuely faith, in him there must of necessitie be such a purpose and endeuour. Euery Article of our faith (as might be easily shewed, if it were fitting to stand vpon it) is an vnresistable argument, to prooue that we owe this duty to God; and if we beleeue them as wee ought to doe, they will mooue vs and stirre vs vp, yea force and constraine vs vnto the same; so that it is not possible

there should be any true faith in that man, in whom this constant purpose and endeuour cannot be found: And on the contrary side, in whomsoeuer it is found, out of all question, in that man there is a true and a liuely faith.
                     But howe art thou to trie whether this fruit of faith bee in thee? Surely by examining thy conscience in these points:
                     1 Whether thou doe desire and endeuour to knowe the will, pleasure, and commandement of God, that thou mightest thereby frame thy selfe to please him, 1. Thes. 5.21. Act. 17.11. Psal. 119.15. And whether thou doest, to this end, vse the most likely and approued meanes to come to the knowledge thereof; and whether thou reioicest in the

knowledge thereof, after thou hast attained vnto it.
                     2 Whether thou art content to subiect thine own will, reason, and affections, vnto Gods reuealed will, and doest not exalt thine owne wisdome and will aboue his, Gal. 5.24. 1. Cor. 1.18.19.20. Matth. 26.39. Num. 22.19.
                     3 Whether thou labourest to perswade thy selfe, that thou shalt lose nothing by yeelding obedience to Gods will, 1. Pet. 4.12.13.14.16. Mat. 19.28.29. And that it shall bee worse for thee for crossing his will in any thing whatsoeuer, 1. Pet. 4.17.18.19. Yea that the more thou losest by thy obedience to God, the more thou shalt gaine, Phil. 1.29. Psal. 119.71. 2. Cor. 1.4. Rom. 5.3.1. Pet. 4.13
                     
                        4 Whether thou art not greeued when thou meetest with any lets and hinderances, by meanes whereof, thou canst not doe his will as thou oughtest and wouldest doe it; And whether thou art vnfainedly sorrie, that thou wantest strength and abilitie to doe it as thou wouldest & shouldest doe it, Rom. 7.24. 2. Cor. 12.8. Pro. 30.8.9.
                     5 Whether thou count it a grace, honour, and fauour vnto thee, that God will vouchsafe to command thee any seruice. And whether thou thinkest nothing too base for thee to doe, that hee requires at thy hands, Mat. 16.24.
                     6 Whether it bee greeuous vnto thee, that others do not obey God, Psal. 119.136. Or whether at the least, it bee

hatefull vnto thee, that another man should displease God to pleasure thee:
                     7 Whether thou thinkest all the seruice and duties that God requires of thee to bee performed, either to himselfe, or to thy neighbour, to be lesse by many degrees, than he hath deserued at thy hands: And whether if hee should desire greater matters at thy hand, thou thinke thy selfe bound to yeeld obedience vnto them, Rom. 9.3. Gen. 22.1.2.
                     8 Whether thou account meanly and basely of thy actuall obedience, and of the best seruice thou canst performe, or at any time hast performed to God, as that which is of no value to merit the least grace and fauour of him, Luc. 18.13. Psal. 51.17. Esa. 66.2.
                     
                        9 Whether it be a tediousnesse and vexation vnto thy soule, to liue in those places, where thou canst not haue opportunitie to serue and please God as thou wouldest and oughte
                           ••
                         to doe, Psal. 120.5. And whether thou louest those places most, where thou hast most meanes and opportunitie to serue and honour God in, Psal. 84.1.2.3.4. and 27.4.
                     10 Whether thou louest those persons most, from whence thou hast most helpes and encouragements to serue and please God, 1. Thes. 5.12. And whether, of all other persons, thou mislikest them most, that crosse and hinder thy obedience vnto God, and will not suffer thee to performe those duties vnto him, which thou are able to doe, and willingly

wouldest doe, and which lay snares and stumbling blockes in thy way, that thou maist not so freely serue him as thou wouldest.
                     11 Whether thou desire to liue no longer, than that thou maiest be able to do God some honour and seruice; and whether euery day more than other, the longer thou liuest, thou thinkest thy selfe bound, and endeuourest to doe better and better seruice vnto God, and to make him amends for thy negligence past al the daies of thy life before, Phil. 1.9.10.11.
                     Thus much for thy direction and helpe, how to trie and examine thy selfe, whether there bee true faith in thee or no, and so by consequent, whether there bee in thee any

such graces as may make thee a worthy receiuer of these mysteries.
                  
                  
                     3 Of the duties in this Trial, and after this Trial.
                     The speciall dutie in this triall, is, neuer to giue ouer searching & trying our selues, vntill wee finde these graces in vs.
                     For the Apostle requires him that examineth himselfe, To eat of this Bread, and to drinke of this Cuppe. What? is he to doe this, whether in this search and triall he shall finde any grace in himselfe or no? To what end then should a man make any such trial? This then is certaine, that a man is not to receiue this Sacrament, except after triall, hee finde in

himselfe some degree & measure of that grace which may make him a worthy receiuer. But why doth not the Apostle put in this caution and exception? First, because he would therein teach all Christians, so long to continue the examination and triall of themselues, vntil they haue found the grace aboue specified in themselues. Secondly, to shew that a man hath not tried and examined himselfe in that manner which the Holy Ghost intendeth and meaneth, vntill hee haue found in himselfe some degrees of that true sauing faith, of which wee haue formerly intreated: And thirdly, to teach that hee that hath this grace, but to search and trie earnestly and seriously, whether hee haue faith, shall bee sure, in good

time, to finde faith in himselfe, if he haue an vnfained desire to finde it. And if this seeme scant probable by this place, let the precise promise of Christ, Luc. 11.5.14. who saith, Seeke and yee shall finde, confirme the same vnto you.
                     What an encouragement then ought this to be vnto euery one of vs, to rifle and ransacke our owne soules, and to search narrowly euery corner of them for this faith, euen as one would search for a mine of gold, seeing wee haue such a hope and firme promise, that if wee search with a desire to finde, we shall be sure to finde it; and if we finde it, we shall not finde it alone, but with it, and in it, a sealed pardon of the forgiuenesse of all our sins, yea and sure Euidences and

Indentures of a firme title to the kingdome of Heauen. If a poore condemned man were credibly certified of this, that if he did but carefully search about, he should finde the kings pardon; or if a needy begger were certainely informed of this, that if hee would make a diligent search, hee should bee sure to finde such treasures of gold and siluer, as would make him a great rich man as long as euer hee shall liue afterward; would any man pitty either the pouertie of the one, or the death of the other, if they should refuse in those cases to take pains to make a diligent search and triall? Much lesse are any such to be pitied, that may finde the sauing grace aforesaid for the seeking of it, and yet will not bestow the

paines to seeke it, or to make any serious inquitie after it; verily there cannot bee a greater signe, that a man despiseth the grace of God, than in such a case as this, not to seeke after it, especially seeing a man may bee sure to haue it for the seeking for.
                     The dutie after examination followeth, which is, Then when wee haue examined our selues in manner aforesaid (and not before then) to eat this Bread, and to drinke this Cup: wherein the Apostle plainely ties the duty of examination vnto the receiuing of this Sacrament, and the receiuing of this Sacrament vnto the dutie of examination, wherein wee are taught briefly these lessons:
                     First, that all Christians,

that are bound to receiue, are bound to make this triall beefore they receiue; and that it is a sin for any to eat this bread and to drinke this Cup, that haue not tried and examined themselues.
                     Secondly, that it is a sinne, not to eat this bread, and to drinke this Cuppe, after wee haue made a due triall of our selues.
                     Thirdly, that they which after the triall and examination of themselues, doe vnworthily eat this Bread, and drinke this Cuppe, did neuer diligently and seriously trie themselues.
                     Fourthly, that such as cannot trie and examine themselues, can neuer worthily partake of this mysterie.
                  
                  
                     
                     4 Of the persons that are to make this triall.
                     The person that is to make this triall, is a mans selfe, in and vpon himselfe. Let a man therefore, (saith the Apostle) examine himselfe, and so let him eat, &c. And the reason thereof is euident; for it is not possible, that another man should be able to trie the soundnes of our faith, which is known only to God and our owne consciences. For though a man should vse never so many experiments, and trie neuer so many conclusions vpon vs, yet may wee through our hypocrisie and cunning dissimulation, cozen and delude the wisest men and the most cunning Inquisitors in the world; yea,

our owne hearts are so full of fraud and guile, that if in this triall and examination of our selues, wee doe not proceed by a sound and sincere rule, our selues shall exceedingly cosen and deceiue our selues, and wee shall conceit that grace to be in our hearts, which was neuer in them in deed and truth. Doth not experience teach vs that some persons haue made great shew of pietie and faith, and haue made a more than ordinary profession thereof, insomuch as they haue seemed, not onely to others, but no doubt, euen vnto themselues to burne in zeale and loue, vnto the truth of Iesus Christ; which yet haue afterward proued vile Apostataes, and wicked and malitious persecutors of that grace

in others, which themselues haue formerly professed? Verily the Lord seldome leaues his Church without some such notorious example or other of this kinde, that Christians might the more narrowly trie and examine themselues, and that they might take heed that their corrupt hearts doe not deceiue them with semblances and shewes of grace, in stead of substances.
                     Let vs learne hence, first that this examination and triall of our selues doth not exclude the triall and examination which others (as farre as they are able) are to make of vs, especially our Gouernors, Teachers, and Instructers, such as haue the cure and charge of our soules; but it rather strengtheneth and confirmeth the

same. For they which shall in singlenesse of heart once set themselues vnto this worke, to sift and winnow their owne soules, and to search and trie them, whether the grace of God be firmly rooted in them or no, shall find it a worke of that difficultie, that they will be glad of any furtherance and direction that they can get: For these trials and examinations that others vse to take of vs, are but helpes and directions, how wee may in the best manner trie and examine our selues. Those therefore which are so ready to conclude from hence, that others haue nothing to doe to examine them before they receiue, because they are commanded to examine themselues, they might as well conclude, that no body

else is to care or prouide for them, or to looke vnto them, or to doe them good, because themselues are to care for, to looke vnto, to prouide and doe good for themselues. But this is the very truth of the matter; Such persons as are not willing that others should examine and trie them, doe neuer intend and purpose to examine themselues; and they shewe themselues to bee guilty to themselues of ignorance and gracelesnesse, yea and to affect the same, in which they had rather liue and rot, than discouer to others, though they might haue helpe thereby.
                     Indeed if this were the end of our trials & examinations, to find out the defects, and wants & infirmities of our brethren, to the end that they might

be punished for them, or to the end that we might contemne & deride them for the same, there were some colour to except against it. But when the intent of this examination, is to know what spiritual grace the examinant wanteth, to this end that his want might bee supplied; is it not strange, that any should be found so vnwilling to submit vnto the same, and should count it as a great iniurie and wrong? If a rich man should come vnto a poore man, and in pittie and loue should examine him of his estate, desiring him to tell him what he wants, whether mony or corne, or any other victuals for his wife and children, and should offer to assure him, that if hee would discouer his want, hee would doe his best,

according to his power, to releeue him, were hee not a strange poore man, if hauing not one penny in the world to releeue his want, and if himselfe, his wife, and children, were ready to starue for hunger, hee should murmur and grudge at this rich man, and aske him what hee had to doe to examine him? Verily thus it is with many poore ignorant soules amongst vs; the more they stand in need of spirituall helpe, the lesse they can endure to be examined of those which offer in loue to help them, and to doe their best to supply their spirituall wants, if they might know them.
                     Secondly, this is not sufficient to make a man a worthy receiuer of this Sacrament, that vpon triall and examination,

made by others, he is found worthy; but a man is bound to approoue himselfe vnto himselfe. A man may by wise and politicke carriage so demeane himselfe, that all men, euen the best and holiest, after that they haue sifted and tried him to the vttermost, shall find no iust matter of reproofe in him: And many beare this minde, that if they can behaue themselues so as no man else can accuse them of any iniquitie, though they bee guiltie to themselues and their own consciences of neuer so many secret corruptions, that then they are worthy enough of Christ, and of this Sacrament, and of all the prerogatiues of Christians. But heere wee are taught, in this precept of the Apostle, neuer to iudge our

selues tried and approoued enough, but when wee are approoued vnto our owne soules and consciences. For the strictest Inquisitors in the world may free and acquit vs, when our owne consciences haue a thousand capitall crimes to arraigne, conuict, and condemn vs of. Let vs not therefore in the matter of our owne worthines, so much relie vpon the iudgment of any man or al the mē in the world, as of our own soules & cōsciences, which are better able to iudge of our inward state, than are all the men in the world besides. But most men iudge themselues Christians worthy inough, if no man be able to lay any vnworthines vnto their charge; but if this had been true, the Apostle would haue sent vs to others,

to trie and examine vs, and not vnto our selues.
                     3 This shewes that the principall graces, required in a worthy receiuer of this Sacrament, are such as may bee in a christian, and yet not onely lie hidden from the eies of others, but also of a mans own soule. For otherwise a man should not need in this manner to be commanded, to trie and examine himselfe, if so be hee could alwaies see what is in his owne soule and heart; or if so be that the sauing graces of God whensoeuer they are in the soule, should presently shew themselues to the eie of our soule; do we not by daily experience see, that the worthiest christians do vse to iudge themselues of all other the most vnworthie; and are manie

times most deiected with the sense and feeling of their own defects & wants, & that euen of such graces, wherewith their soules aboue others are richly adorned? The best then haue need to performe this duty to themselues. and surely it is an infallible signe that that man wants that which should make him a worthy receiuer, which is not carefull by diligent triall and examination, to assure himselfe, that that grace is in him, which may in some measure make him a worthy receiuer.
                     By this also it appeares, that it is not inough for a man to be a worthy receiuer, but he must also know that he is one: and that he that knowes not himselfe to be one in some degree or other, cannot be such

a one as hee ought to bee.
                  
                  
                     5 Of the motiues whereby wee ought to be prouoked vnto this Triall.
                     The motiues vnto this duty of triall and examination follow, taken from the dangers that come by the neglect therof, which are threefold, one depending vpon another.
                     The first danger is; that such as neglect this duty, doe not discerne the body of Christ; that is, they do not or cannot, as they ought to do, discerne and make a difference between this bread & wine, and that which at ordinary feasts we eat and drinke: They do not meditate of, and consider, the great mystery that is shaddowed and represented by them, that is, the mystery of redemption consisting in the sacrifice of

the body, and shedding of the blood of Christ.
                     The second danger arising from the former is this: That they, not discerning of that which is mystically shadowed & represented in this Bread and Wine, do eat and drinke the same vnworthily. That is, vnreuerently, carnally, profanely, not as becommeth men that partake of such high and heauenly mysteries.
                     The third danger arising from the other two, is this: That by this meanes, they eating and drinking vnworthily, doe therein, eat and drinke their owne iudgement or damnation. That is, in stead of receiuing by this action of theirs, any spirituall food tending to their saluation, they do by this action, pull downe the iudgement

of God vpon them, and bring themselues in danger of destruction and condemnation, because they do profane, and irreligiously abuse, through the want of due consideration and preparation, this heauenly Sacrament, in comming vnto it after an vnreuerent and vnholie manner, without all due regard for what intent and purpose it was instituted of Christ. Of these points we haue sufficiently intreated before. To conclude this matter; what more effectuall argument could the Apostle vse, to stir vs vp to this triall than this? If God should turne these elements of Bread and Wine, into a bodily bane and poison, vnto all such of vs as should vnworthily receiue them, would it not then make vs come in

feare & trembling with all due preparation vnto the same? Would it not make vs againe and againe, to trie & examine our selues, and to be sure that we be in some measure worthy to receiue this Sacrament, before we presumed to partake thereof? How much more ought the consideration of the danger heere specified, to moue vs thereunto? It were safer and better for vs a thousand times, that the Sacrament should bee turned vnto a bodily poison vnto vs, and that vpon our vnworthy receiuing of it, our bowels and intrales should rot, after wee haue beene made partakers of it, than that in eating & drinking thereof, wee should eat and drinke our owne damnation & euerlasting iudgement,

which euery soule is in danger to do, that neglecteth the performance of this duty.
                     For the preuention heereof therefore, let vs carefully remoue the two former causes of this iudgement.
                     First, Let vs indeuour with all holy reuerence and feare, to come worthily, and as it becommeth holy Christians, vnto this Sacrament.
                     Secondly, that wee may come worthily thereunto, let vs labour to discerne the Body of Christ therein, not comming to this Table, as to an ordinary or common drinking, but comming thereto with a soule hungring and thirsting after that blessed Body and Blood of Christ, which vnder this bread and wine is figured and shadowed vnto vs, and, in a

spirituall manner, offered in the same vnto euery worthy Receiuer and Communicant: Which if wee shall carefully performe, then shall our soules and spirits bee truely satisfied with the body and blood of Christ; so that as verily as wee with our bodily mouthes, doe eat and drinke the outward figures and signes, and are recreated & refreshed by them, so verily doe our soules, after a spirituall manner, by faith, as it were, eat and drinke the thing signified, to the euerlasting comfort and saluation both of our bodies and soules.
                     The Lord, for his mercie sake, forgiue our former want of Preparation, and moue our hearts to the carefull performance of these duties, that so wee may not onely auoid the

iudgements which vnworthy Receiuers are in danger to fall into, but that wee receiuing worthily these holy mysteries, may in them, and by them, receiue the assurance of that grace and mercy that is shadowed and represented by them, euen the full and perfect redemption of our bodies and soules, through the Sacrifice of Christs body, and his most pretious blood shed vpon the Crosse. Amen.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  A BRIEFE FORME OF TRIALL; Whether one bee in any measure fit to receiue the Sacrament of the Lord
                        •
                      SVPPER.
                  
                     I
                     Question.
                     
                        
                           WHy doe you desire to receiue the sacrament of the Lords Supper?
                     
                     
                        Answer.
                     
                     Because it is one of the special

ordinances of Iesus Christ, 1. Cor. 11.23.
                     Q. Who is Iesus Christ?
                     
                     
                        A. The only begotten son of God, & Redeemer of mankinde, Mat. 3.17.
                     Q. From what hath Christ redeemed mankinde?
                     
                     
                        A. From euerlasting death and condemnation.
                     Q. How came mankinde subiect thereunto?
                     
                     
                        A. By sinning against God in breaking of his Commandements.
                     Q. What are those Commandements?
                     
                     
                        A. God spake these words, and said, &c.
                     Q. Haue all mankinde broken those Commandements?
                     
                     
                        A. Yea, all, without exception, Rom. 3.10.11.12.23.
                     Q. Doe you beleeue, that the

breach of these Commandements doe deserue euer
                              •
                           asting death and condemnation?
                     
                     
                        A. Yea verily, Gal. 3.10. Rom. 9.13.14.
                     Q. By what meanes did Christ redeeme mankinde?
                     
                     
                        A. By his death & bloodshedding vpon the Crosse, Rom. 5.6.
                     Q. How could Christ, being the sonne of God, die?
                     
                     
                        A. He tooke vnto himselfe the nature of man in the wombe of a Virgin, & so died for man, Mat. 1.18. &c.
                     
                     Q. Was there no other means to saue a sinner?
                     
                     
                        A. No verily, Act. 4.12.
                     Q. Shall all mankinde be saued by Christ?
                     
                     
                        A. No, but those only who are true beleeuers, Ioh. 3.18.
                     Q. Who are true beleeuers?
                     
                     
                        
                        A. Those which rely and depend vpon Christ Iesus only for the pardon of their sinnes, and for the euerlasting saluation of their soules, Ioh. 3.16.
                     Q. What shall bee the estate and condition of those that are saued by Christ?
                     
                     
                        A. They shall raigne with Christ in all ioy and glory for euer & euer in the kingdome of heauen, Mat. 25.34.
                     Q. What shall be the estate of the rest of mankinde?
                     
                     
                        A. They shalbe tormented in hell for euer and euer, with the Deuill and his Angels, Mat. 25.41.
                  
                  
                     2
                     Q. But why hath Christ ordained the receiuing of this Sacrament?
                     
                     
                        
                        A. For a perpetuall remembrance and shewing foorth of his death and passion in his Church, Luc. 22.19.
                     Q. How is this done?
                     
                     
                        A. By applying the things signified to the outwarde signes.
                     Q. What are the outward signes?
                     
                     
                        A. Breaking and eating of Bread, and drinking of Wine.
                     Q. What doth the bread and wine signifie?
                     
                     
                        A. The Body and Blood of Christ.
                     Q. What doth the breaking and eating of the bread, and the drinking of the wine signifie?
                     
                     
                        A. The suffrings of Christ in his Body vpon the Crosse, and the benefit that euery true beleeuer receiueth thereby.
                     
                        Q. For whom hath Christ ordained this Sacrament?
                     
                     
                        A. For all true Christians, that are of yeeres of discretion.
                     Q. Who are true Christians?
                     
                     
                        A. All those who being baptized, doe vnfainedly professe their beleefe in Christ.
                     Q. Where is this Sacrament to be receiued?
                     
                     
                        A. In the Church, 1. Cor. 11.22.
                     Q. What is a Church?
                     
                     
                        A. An holy Assembly ioining together in the worship and seruice of Iesus Christ, 1. Cor. 11.20.
                     Q. VVherein consistes the woorship and seruice of Iesus Christ?
                     
                     
                        A. In hearing his word, receiuing his Sacraments, and calling vpon his name.
                  
                  
                     
                     3
                     Q. What is the benefit that comes by the receiuing of this Sacrament?
                     
                     
                        A. A further certainty and assurance of saluation by the death of Christ.
                     Q. What reason is there for that?
                     
                     
                        A. Because Christ hath instituted it to bee a seale of the couenant of grace, Rom. 4.11.
                     Q. What is the Couenant of grace?
                     
                     
                        A. A free offer and promise of saluation to all them that shall truly beleeue in Christ, Ioh. 3.16.
                     Q. Are all that receiue this Sacrament, partakers of this benefit?
                     
                     
                        
                        A. No, but such onely as are worthy receiuers thereof, 1. Cor. 11.28.
                     Q. Who are worthy receiuers thereof?
                     
                     
                        A. Onely those, who, vpon due triall, doe find themselues to be true beleeuers.
                     Q. By what meanes shall they finde that?
                     
                     
                        A. By the special fruits and effects of faith.
                     Q. What are they?
                     
                     
                        A. An vnfained hatred of sinne, and an endeuour to obey God in all things for Christs sake, Ioh. 3.36.
                     Q. What if one that is vnworthy doe receiue this Sacrament?
                     
                     
                        A. He eateth and drinketh his owne iudgement, 1. Cor. 11.29.
                     Q. What if a man doe contemne

to receiue this Sacrament?
                     
                     
                        A. He therein contemneth the grace of Christ represented thereby?
                     Q. Doe you vnfainedly hate sinne, and purpose heereafter to liue in obedience vnto Gods Commandements for Christs sake?
                     
                     
                        A. Yea by the grace of God through Christ.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  THE DOCTRINE of communicating worthily in the LORDS SVPPER. Deliuered by way of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple.
                  LONDON Printed by William Hall for Samuel Macham, and are to bee sold at his shop in Pauls Church yard at the signe of the Bull-head. 1609.
               
               
                  
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     GOOD Reader, after that I had yeelded to the publishing of mine owne poore meditations vpon 1. COR. 11.23. there came to my hands in writing, this ensuing treatise, written some yeeres since by a godly & faithfull Pastor, for the direction of his owne people,

in the worthie receiuing of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, at what time hee was first called vnto them. In the perusall whereof, I being in my selfe well perswaded of the fulnesse and perspicuitie of that doctrine of Preparation, which it propoundeth to intreat of, the orderlie method of euerie part thereof, the plaine and familiar handling of the matter, and that it did supplie many

needfull points of instruction that are wanting in mine owne Treatise, I was earnest with the Author to giue mee leaue to publish the same, and to adioin it as an ornament and helpe vnto mine; which with much importunitie at length I haue obtained; though in the hard and vniust conceit he intertaineth of it, hee suffers, it in this sort as you see to, come abroad as a Childe of the Earth,

without any mention of his name from whom it is descended.
                  For the spirituall good that thou shalt receiue thereby, blesse the Lord; and pray for the Author, that God would restore him again to that former libertie in his Church, which heeretofore, to the glorie of God, and the comfort of many a Christian soule, hee hath enioied.
                  
                     
                        Thine in the Lord, W. B.
                  
               
               
                  
                  THE SVMME and Contents of the Doctrine following.
                  The first part.
                  
                     
                        OF preparation before receiuing.
                     page 2.
                     Of the examination of a mans selfe
                     page 2.
                     Three reasons for the necessitie of examination.
                     page 3.
                     The danger of vnworthy receiuing
                     page 5.
                     Whether the Minister be bound to examine the communicants.
                     pa. 9
                     That the people ought willingly to yeeld to be examined, and the reasons why.
                     page 9.
                     Whether those which are worthy receiuers, are depriued of the benefit of the Sacrament, in cō
                        municating

with them which are vnworthy.
                     page. 11.
                     That it maketh to the comfort of the worthy receiuer to communicate with the godly.
                     page 12
                     The graces that by examination we are to find in our selues.
                     pa. 16
                     The 1. grace, a desire to receiue this Sacrament.
                     ibid.
                     By what meanes this desire may be discerned.
                     page 17.
                     The necessity of this Sacrament.
                     page 17.
                     The benefits of this Sacrament.
                     page 18.
                     The helpes in this Sacrament to apply the promise of grace.
                     p. 23.
                     How Christ in this Sacrament is most clearely represented.
                     pa. 25.
                     The helps in this Sacrament wherby we are put in minde of Christs passion.
                     page 26
                     How the benefites of Christ are more particularly offered vnto vs in this Sacrament, then by any other meanes.
                     page. 33
                     Whether Christ be indeed in this Sacrament, and how.
                     page 35.
                     
                        That Christ is not corporally present.
                     page 36.
                     Why the bread and wine is called the body and blood of Christ.
                     p. 39
                     How our Communion with the faithfull is hereby represented and confirmed.
                     page 41.
                     That this Sacrament is to bee administred publiklie.
                     page 42.
                     Reasons against priuate communions.
                     page 46
                     Of the consecration of this Sacrament.
                     page 49.
                     At whose hands wee are to receiue this Sacrament.
                     page 52.
                     Whether the worthynes and efficacy of this Sacrament doe depend vpon the minister.
                     pa. 56.
                     Whether it bee needfull that the word bee preached at the administration of the Sacrament.
                     page 56.
                     Whether after consecration the elements be not changed.
                     page 59
                     Whether that part of the bread & wine, which remaineth after the administration, doth differ from common bread or wine.
                     p. 61.
                     
                        That all are bound to receiue this Sacrament as o
                           •
                        t as it is administred, except there be some necessary impediment.
                     page 63.
                     That it is a dangerous sinne to neglect the receiuing of this Sacrament.
                     page 64.
                     That want of charity, or other worldly distractions, is no sufficiēt excuse for not receiuing.
                     pag. 67
                     The great fault of them which receiue this Sacrement without any desire or sincere appetite.
                     69
                     Whether Magistrates may not command & compell their subiects to receiue this Sacrament.
                     page 70.
                     Of that knowledge which by examination we ought to finde in our selues, before wee can bee worthy receiuers. And the parts thereof.
                     page 74.
                     Faith the third grace necessary for preparation.
                     page. 77.
                     How a Christian may bee assured that hee is one of Christs little flocke
                     page 79.
                     What motiues ther are in the word

to perswade a Christian that hee shall be saued.
                     page 80
                     Repentance the fourth grace necessary for preparation.
                     page 85.
                     What Repentance is.
                     page 85.
                     Reasons why repentance is necessarie hereunto.
                     page 85.
                     The vse concerning the necessitie of Repentance.
                     page 86.
                     Motiues to repentance.
                     page 87.
                     Newnesse of life, the fith grace necessarie for preparation.
                     pag. 91.
                     Reasons why it is necessary.
                     p. 92.
                     The vse of the doctrin concerning the necessity of newnesse of life.
                     page 93.
                     Charity the sixth grace necessary for preparation.
                     pag. 94.
                     Reasons of the necessitie thereof
                     page 95
                     The vse of the former doctrin.
                     p. 97.
                     Motiues to perswade to forgiue wrongs.
                     page 98
                     Whether a Christian is to loue and thinke well of all men.
                     page 102
                     How farre foorth we are bound to forgiue iniuries.
                     page. 104
                     Cautions and rules to be obserued

in going to law.
                     page 107.
                     How our faith is to be renewed ere we come to the Lords Table.
                     101
                     How repentance is to be renewed before we come there.
                     p. 111.
                     That weake Christians are not to forbeare communicating in the Lords Supper.
                     page. 113.
                     Praier to bee vsed both before and at the time of communication.
                     page 117.
                     That it is not necessarily required to receiue the Sacrament fasting.
                     page 118.
                     What things bee further required at the time of communication.
                     page 119.
                     Outward things concerning the body.
                     page 119
                     Ioy and cheerefulnesse required in communicating at the Lords table.
                     page 128.
                     What things to be performed by vs after communicating.
                     p. 130.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Doctrine of communicating worthily in the Lords Supper, deliuered by way of Question and Answer, for the more familiar instruction of the simple.
                  The First Part: Concerning the preparation of a mans selfe, before he come to receiue this Sacrament.
                  Question.
                  
                     
                        HOw many things are required of them that would receiue the Sacramēt of the Lords supper to their comfort?
                     Things required in worthy receiuing.
                  
                  
                     
                     Answer.
                  
                  Three, first, a diligent and carefull preparation of themselues, before th
                        •
                     y come to receiue it.
                  Secondly, a reuerent and attentiue disposition of body and mind in the receiuing of it.
                  Thirdly, an vnfained indeuor to feele, and find in themselues the fruit of it, after they haue receiued it.
                  
                     Prepara
                           •
                        ion before.Q. What is that preparation that is required of euery one, that would receiue this Sacrament to his Comfort?
                  
                  
                     Consisting in examation of a mans selfe.
                     A. Euery one (euen such as haue made best proceedings in religion) before he presume to come to the Lords Supper, must sequester himselfe from all other businesse, that might any way distract him, and carefullie

set his whole mind and heart vpon this worke that he is to goe about, taking some time to examine himselfe, whether those things bee in him, that may make him a worthy receiuer of this holy Sacrament.
                  Q. What reasons may bee giuen to shew the necessitie of this so carefull an examination and preparation of our selues before this Sacrament?
                     Reason for the necessitie of examination.
                  
                  
                     A. First,Our v
                           •
                        
                        s
                           •
                        nesse to serue God. such is the vntowardnesse and corruption of our hearts, 
                        Exod. 19.10. 1. Sam. 6.5. Ioel. 2.15.16. Ioh 11.13. Psal. 108 1. Eccl. 4.17. Exod. 
                        
                           •
                        0.8. 2. Chro. 12.14. that we are vnfit to do any speciall seruice to God,Gods strict commanding thereof. till wee haue taken some paines to prepare our selues thereunto.
                  Secondly, there is no part

of his seruice before which the Lord hath so straitly inioyned this preparation, as before the receiu
                        •
                     ng of this Sacrament. Before the Passeouer (which was in substance the same with this Sacrament, and in the place whereof this was ordained by Christ) the Lord did not only 
                        Exod. 12.56. command that the Lambe should bee taken out of the flocke three daies before it was to be sacrificed (that his people might thereby bee admonished to imploy themselues during that time in the sitting of themselues vnto that seruice)2. Chron. 35.61. but also he inioyned them a speciall preparation before they came vnto And it the Apostle affirmes of this Sacrament, that euen they that are beleeuers, 1. Cor. 11.27.3
                           •
                        .may & shal certainly receiue it vnworthily

if they do not examine & iudge themselue
                        •
                      before they come.The da
                           ••
                        ge
                           •
                         or vnworthy receauing.
                  
                  Thirdly, the extreame danger, that he casteth himselfe into that receiueth it vnworthily, should make euery man afraid to come rashly, vnreuerētly, or vnpreparedly vnto it.The danger manifested in the iudgements vpon vnworthy receiuers
                  
                  Q. How may their danger appeare to be so great, that receiue this Sacrament vnworthily?
                  
                  
                     A. In eating of this bread, and drinking of this wine, 
                        Cor. 11.29 34. they shall eat and drinke the iudgement and curse of God.
                  Q. By what iudgements hath God beene wont to punish such as haue prophaned or vnreuerently vsed any of his Sacraments?
                  
                  
                     A. Sometimes by corporall and outward plagues; 1. Sam. 5 6.7.9.11.12. & 4 3. 4, 10. & 6.19. as he did them that in the daies of Samuel, vsed the Arke without due reuerence; and

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
them, 2. Chro. 30.20. in the daies of Hezechia, that went to the passeouer, not being sanctified and prepared therunto according to the law; and them 1. Cor. 11.30. among the Corinthians, that went to the Lords table before they had examined and iudged themselues.
                  2 Sometimes he punisheth them as he 
                        Ioh. 13.27. did Iudas (who with an euill and vnpenitent heart presumed to receiue the Passeouer) by stripping them of those beginnings of grace, they had receiued, hardning them, and making them vnable to repent, so as after they haue receiued, they become two fold more the children of hell, then they were before.
                  
                     The caus
                           •
                        es of the iudgments aforesaid.Q. What is the cause why the Lord is wont to be so seuere in punishing the vnreuerent and

vnworthy receiuing of this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. Because the vnworthy receiuer, 1. Cor. 11.27. is guiltie of the body and bloud of Christ.
                  Q. How can that be, seeing he receiueth it not, but the outward signes onely?
                  
                  
                     A. Because 1. Cor. 11.29. he discerneth not the Lords body, nor iudgeth and esteemeth so highly and reuerently of this his holy ordinance (whereby the same is represented and offered vnto vs) as he ought; but accounteth it as common bread and wine, which the wicked aswel as the godly haue title vnto: which is far greater dishonour and contempt done to God, then could bee done to any King, if his picture or armes, that hang vp in some publike place, should be spet vpon, or

pulled downe, or broken and trampled on by any of his subiects.
                  
                     The first vse of the aforesaid necess
                           •
                        tie of Preparation.Q. What vse are we to make of this that hath beene said, touching the necessity of preparing our selues aright before we come to the Lords table?
                  
                  
                     A. First, that therefore 2. Chro. 23.19. & 3 5 6. Ier. 15.19. Mat. 7.6. 1. Cor. 5.2.7.13. the minister & Church must doe that which in them lieth to keepe from this Sacrament all such as are vnworthy and vnprepared.
                  Q. VVhy so?
                  
                  
                     A. Because else, 1. Sam. 2.29. they consent to the great dishonour that the vnworthy receiuer doth vnto God; and 
                        Leu. 19.17. Iud. 23. vnto the certaine perill that he casteth his owne soule into; and so make themselues liable to that plague whereby God 1. Cor. 11.30. & 5.2.6 hath beene wont to punish

whole congregations, that haue willingly tolerated so great an abuse.
                  Q. Is then the minister also bound to examine such as he admitteth vnto this Sacrament,
                     Whether the Minister bee bound to examine the communicants. 
                     and not to receiue indefferently all that shall offer themselues?
                  
                  
                     A. He is, for if at all other times 
                        Prou. 27.23. Ier. 6.27. Act. 20.28. Phil. 2.19. 1. Thes. 3.5. he must be diligent to know the estate of his flocke, that he may accordingly be able 2. Tim. 2.15. to diuide the word of truth aright vnto them, and 
                        Luk. 12.42. giue them their portion of meat in due season; then much more must he bee carefull to know them at that time, when he is to admit them to this holy Sacrament.
                  Q.That the people ought to be willing to yeeld to be examined, & the reasons why. 
                     Then the people must also be willing to haue ther liues looked into and their knowledge

examined by their Pastor, and to make knowne vnto him their spirituall estate, that so with comfort and boldnesse, hee may admit them.
                  
                  
                     A. Yes verily: for first if God required
                        Mat. 3.6 Acts 8.37. of them that (being at the yeares of discretion) were to bee baptised, that they should first make known vnto the congregation and Minister, their faith and repentance; then doth h
                        •
                      much more require this of them that come to the Lords Supper.
                  Secondly, as euery Christian is bound to acknowledge his Pastor, 1. Tim. 2.12. Heb. 7.7.his superiour in al matters that belong to Gods worship and to his own soule, and therein 
                        Deut. 17.11.12. 1. Thes. 5.12 13. Heb. 13.17 to obey him and submit himselfe to his direction in the Lord: so is he then especially

to shew his obediēce to this ordinance of God, when he intendeth to be partaker of this Sacrament, became 
                        Mat. 
                        
                           •
                        .14.15 there is no one act
                        •
                     on of the ministry, wherein the necess
                        ••
                     y and dignity of that function is more set forth and commēded by the Lord vnto his church, then in the administration of the Sacraments, that is committed vnto them.Whether the worthy receiuers, are depriued of the benefit of this Sacrament, by cōmunicating with the vnworthy.
                  
                  Q. But if they that are notoriously vnworthy, be (through the negligence of the Church and Pastor) admitted to the Sacrament; can that depriue the faithfull that receiue with them, of the benefit and comfort of the Sacrament; or ought they for that cause to keepe themselues from it?
                  
                  
                     A. No: for first, no mans sinne 
                        Eze. 18.20 Gal. 6.5. can defile an other, or

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
make Gods promise or Sacrament of none effect vnto him, that is neither any way accessary vnto it, nor hath power and authority to keepe him from the Sacrament.
                  Secondly, 
                        Luc. 2.22.41. & 24.53. Act 2.1.26. the holy Apostles and our Sauiour himselfe, did communicate in the seruice of God with those assemblies, wherin there were many notoriously wicked.
                  Thirdly, if it had beene so, 1 
                           
                              •
                           or. 11 28. the Apostle would haue required euery man, not only to examine himselfe, but al those also with whom he is to receiue.That it maketh to the comfort of the worthy receiuer, to com
                           •
                        unicate with the godly.
                  
                  Q. Maketh it then nothing to our comfort, what they are with whom we do communicate?
                  
                  
                     A. Yes: we should desire to receiue with them of whose holy profession and godly

life wee are well perswaded.
                  Q. Why so?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because in this Sacrament, we professe our selus to be fellow members (as with the whole Church of Christ, so) 1 Cor. 10 17. especially with those Christians with whom we do receiue; and that we seeke also and desire to be confirmed in that communion, and to become more and more like vnto them both in faith and conuersation.
                  Secondly, because both our loue and zeale may bee better kindled and stirred vp by 
                        Mat. 18.19.20. Phil. 3.17. Rom. 1.11.12.the praiers and example of such as we know to be godly, then either by the wicked or such as we know not at all.
                  Q.A secōd vse of the necessity of this preparation. 
                     What other vse is to bee made of this doctrine touching the necessity of preparing our

selues aright, before we come to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. That euery one should be 1 Cor. 11.28. Gal. 6.4. carefull to examine himselfe, and not rest in the approbation of the Minister or Church.
                  Q. Why so?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because a man 
                        Iohn 13 24.28. may haue a most wicked hart, and yet seeme a good man to the Church, and be guilty also of many grosse crimes that are vnknowne to his Pastor.
                  Secondly, though a man liue so, as his Pastor may discerne iust cause to doubt that hee is not worthy (and consequently can not admit him without griefe) 
                        Deut. 13.14 & 17.4 yet may not he refuse him till he bee euidently able to conuict him of some such thing as may prooue him vnworthy.
                  
                     Thirdly, it may so fall out, that though a ma
                        •
                     e crime bee publike and apparant, 
                        Mat. 18 17. yet his Pastor may want power to keepe him from the Sacrament.
                  Q. As you haue shewed the necessity of preparation, and the dāger of such as receiue vnworthily: so tell me who may be accounted worthy to come to the Lords table.
                  
                  
                     A. As no man can deserue to receiue Christ and all his merits: so can none deserue to bee admitted to the Lords table, wherein the same are represented and offered vnto him; but al that throgh Gods free grace are made 
                        Luke 3.8 1 Thes. 2.12. Col. 1.12.meet and fit to receiue it, and come with such hearts as it beseemeth men to bring to so holy & heauenly a banquet, 
                        Reue. 3.4. Luc. 20.35 are (in Gods

gratious acceptation) accounted worthy to come vnto it.
                  Q. Tell me then, which be those speciall grac
                           •
                        s which are necessarily required for the making of vs fit to come to the Lords table, and which by diligent examination wee must labour to find in our selues?
                  
                  
                     The graces that by examination we are to find in our selues: in number 6.
                     A. They are six in number: First a sincere and right desire of it: 2. Knowledge: 3. Faith: 4. Repentance: 5. newnesse of life: 6. Loue.
                  Q. To handle these in order; tell me first,
                     A desire to receiue the Sacrament. 
                     what meane you by this sincere and right desire of the Sacrament, without which you say none can come worthily vnto it?
                  
                  
                     1 Chr. 
                        
                           •
                        8.9. Psa. 110.3 2 Cor. 8.10.12. & 9.7. Luc. 22.15
                     A. Wee must find in our selues an vnfained and earnest desire vnto it, & come vnto it with a holy appetit & delight.
                  
                     Q. How may this sincere and right desire of this Sacrament be discerned?
                     How this desire may be discerned, viz.
                     
                  
                  
                     A. When it riseth from the serious consideration of these three things (which are the only reasons that should moue vs to come to the Lords Supper) namely,

                        First,By the necessity of the Sacrament. the necessity of the Sacrament.
                        Secondly, the great benefits that are to bee receiued by it.
                        Thirdly, the present need that our selues doe stand in of all those helps that the Lord in this Sacrament hath prouided for vs.
                     
                  
                  Q. How may the conscience of a man bee perswaded of the necessity of this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. By considering that this is a part of Gods 1 Cor. 11.24.25. worship

which was ordained by Christ himselfe euen 1 Cor. 11.24.25. in the same night that he was betraied; and that he did not onely ordaine it, and first administer it himselfe, but also gaue command
                        •
                     ment to his disciples (who did represent the whole Church, of which they were to bee the master-builders) to take, to eat and drink it, yea to doe that oft, which was done in the first institution thereof, in remembrance of him. So that though there were no benefit or comfort to be found in it; yet were wee bound in obedience to this ordinance and commandement of Christ to come vnto it.
                  
                     By the benefits therof, which are three.Q. But seeing you haue said that the consideration of the benefits that are to bee receiued by it is an other reason whereby

we should be mooued to desire it, tell me, what benefits are those which a Christian may receiue by this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. First, whereas euery Christian is bound, not onely to beleeue, 
                        Esa. 44.5 Psal. 40.9.10. Mat. 10.32. Ioh. 12.42.44. Rom. 10.10. but also to take all good occasions of professing openly his saith and religion, and gladly to weare the liuery & badge of his heauenly Lord and master; 
                        Exod. 13.9. Gen. 17.11. 1. Cor. 10.16.21. For this cause Ezekia so earnestly exhorts all Gods people to come to the Passeouer. 2. Chro. 30.1.5. and calles this a turning to the Lord, and renuing their couenant with him. 2 Chro. 30.6.8. For this cause it is said they kept it vnto the Lord. 2. Chro. 30.1. & 35.1. This one cause, why Christ receiued the Sacraments. Mat. 3.15. Mar. 14.12. the receiuing of the Sacrament is one speciall mean ordained of God whereby we are to make publicke profession that wee are true beleeuers and seruants of God.
                  
                     Secondly, whereas euery Christian (out of the sense and experience he hath of his own pronenes to apostasie)
                        Deut. 29 10.12. 2. Chro. 15.12.14. Neh. 9.38. & 10.28.29. Psal. 119.1
                           •
                        6. should by all good meanes bind himselfe to continue in the faith and obedience of Christ, 
                        Exod. 13 9 Mat. 28.19. Gal. 5.3. 1. Cor. 10.2. the receiuing of this Sacrament is ordained of God to be as a solemne seale and vow, whereby we binde our selues (as strongly as by an oth) to continue in the faith and obedience of Christ, and vnitie of his Church.
                  Thirdly, whereas euery Christian 1. Cor. 16.13. 1. Thes. 5.19.20. 2. Pet. 3.18. is bound to vse all good meanes whereby his faith may be confirmed, quickened, and increased in him, the receiuing of this Sacrament is a principall meanes that God hath ordained for the strengthning, reuiuing

and increase of our faith.
                  Q. How may that appeare?
                  
                  
                     A. Because a singular promise of grace, and part of that couenant which God hath made with vs in Christ, is in a most comfortable manner taught and applied and confirmed to vs by this Sacrament.
                  Q. What is that promise of grace which is thus taught, applied and confirmed to vs by this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. As by Baptisme wee were taught and assured, that through the merit of Christs passion, and of it onely, wee were first receiued into Gods couenant and fauour, vnited to him and his Church, and so obtained remission of all our sinnes, and the grace of regenesiatio
                        •
                     ; so by this Sacrament

we are taught and assured, that through the merit of Christs passion, and of it onely, we are and shall be kept in this blessed estate, nourished and confirmed in it, reuiued and comforted in all tentations.
                  Q. Declare this more particularly and fully: and first tell me why it was necessary that we should not onel
                           •
                         haue a Sacrament of our first entrance into Gods fauor, and of our regeneration, but also another Sacrament of our nourishment & perseuerance in the state of grace?
                  
                  
                     A. First, 1. Pet. 1.23. 1. Ioh. 39. though the graces receiued by baptisme can neuer totally be lost, 
                        Psal. 51.10.12. 1. Thes. 5.19. Reu. 3.2. yet (through our naturall corruption and dayly tentations) the assurance, strength and feeling of them will decay, vnlesse they be nourished.
                  
                     Secondly the onely thing that causeth vs to perseuere in faith and obedience, and giueth vs strength and comfort against al tentations, 
                        Gal. 6.14 1. Ioh. 5.4. is the remembrance & faith we haue in the merit of Christs passion,
                        Heb. 7.25 & 12.24. whereby he maketh continual intercession vnto his father for vs; which it was needefull we should be taught and assured of by this sacrament.
                  Q. What meanes and helps ha
                           ••
                         wee in this Sacrament to teach,
                     The helps in this Sacrament to apply the promise of Grace. 
                     apply and confirme to vs this promise of grace, in so comfortable a maner as you haue said?
                  
                  
                     A. First, Christ and his passion, and this nourishment and grace of perseuerance which we receiue by the merit therof, are more cleerly and sensibly represented to vs in

this Sacrament, then in any other meanes whatsoeuer.
                  Secondly, Christ & this benefit and merit of his passion, is more particularly off
                        •
                     red and applied to vs in this Sacrament, then in any other meanes.
                  Thirdly, Christ and this benefit of his passion, is by this Sacrament exhibited, giuen and confirmed to vs more fully and effectually, then by any other meanes.
                  Fourthly, the communion that wee haue with the true Church of Christ and the mutuall loue that should be in all Christians one toward another, is more cleerely and fully represented and confirmed to vs by this Sacrament, then by any other meanes.
                  Q. How may Christ be said

to bee represented to vs in this Sacrament more cleerely & sensibly then in any other meanes?
                     How Christ in this Sacrament is most clearely represented.
                  
                  
                     A. First, 
                        Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.25. this is one end that this Sacrament was ordained for, to put vs in remembrance of Christ.
                  Secondly, by earthly creatures and outward actions ordained by God, whereof all our senses can iudge and discerne, and by that fit and neer proportion that is betweene them, and that which is represented by them; the Lord doth in this Sacrament teach Christ vnto vs by all our senses, and 
                        Gen. 9.13. Esa. 7.11. Ier. 19 10.11 Act. 21.11 Ioh. 3.12. Rom. 4.11. consequently more plainely and familiarly then by the word alone.
                  Q. But why did you say, that in this Sacrament the passion of Christ is more clearely and sensibly represented to vs

then in any other meanes?
                  
                  
                     A. Because Christ in this Sacrament is represented vnto vs in 
                        Mat. 26.28. 1 Cor. 11.24.25. no other estate then that hee was in when hee was crucified, & the Apostle saith 1 Cor. 12.26 that so oft as wee celebrate this Sacrament, we shew forth the Lords death till he come.
                  
                     The helps in this Sacrament to put vs in minde of Christs passion.Q. What helps haue we heere to represent and put vs in mind of the passion of Christ?
                  
                  
                     A. First, wee haue in this Sacrament, not onely bread, which signifieth his body; but wine, which signifieth his blood: whereby it is euident that Christ is heere represented, offered and giuen vnto vs, as hee was at that time when his blood was separated from his body.
                  Q. But if the Bread were dipped in the Wine (as in some

ancient Churches it was wont to be, and is yet vsed to be in some places) were it not euery whit as sufficient to represent Christ vnto vs, as if they were giuen and receiued seuerally and apart?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily: for first our faith in this Sacrament 1 Cor. 11.26. is specially directed to the passion of Christ, as wee haue already shewed.
                  Secondly, 
                        Act 20.28 Eph. 1.7. Heb. 13.
                           •
                        0 1. Pet. 1.19. the death of Christ was not naturall but violent and bloody, 
                        Luk. 22.44 Psal. 22.16 Ioh. 20.25. & 19.34. and in his passion his blood was separated from his body, & powred out and shed abundantly.
                  Thirdly, it was necessary for our saluation that Christ should not onely die, but in his passion shed his blood for vs, 
                        Exo. 12.21. Heb. 11.28 Leu. 16.14.15. Nu. 19 3-5 Heb. 9.22. that so hee might shew himselfe the onely true meane

of the redemption of his Church, that was shadowed and figured in all the sacrifices vnder the Law.
                  Q. What other helpe haue we in this Sacrament, to represent and put vs in minde of the passion of Christ?
                  
                  
                     A. The bread is solemnly and in the sight of the congregation broken in sunder, and the wine powred forth, and that by the ordinance & commandement of Christ.
                  Q. May not then whole cakes (as among the Papists) bee deliuered and receiued in this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily.
                  Q. How may that bee proued?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because 
                        Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22 Luk 22.19. in all those places of holy Scripture where mention is made of this

Sacrament, this rite of the breaking of the bread is named: 
                        Act 2.42. & 20.7 yea the whole action in this Sacrament is called breaking of bread: and 1 Cor. 11.26. the Apostle repeating the words of institution, mentioneth this rite twice.
                  Secondly, because the inward action that is represented to vs thereby is most necessary for vs to bee put in minde of.
                  Q. What is that?
                  
                  
                     A. The 
                        Esa. 53.5.6. breaking of the body of Christ, and shedding of his blood; yea all those infinite torments that he did indure both in body and soule for vs.
                  Q. As you haue shewed how Christ and his bloody passion is represented to vs in this Sacrament; so tell me what helps wee

haue heere, to represent to our souls the nourishmēt & strength to perseuere in the state of grace, which we receiue by the merit of his passion?
                  
                  
                     A. First, there is not one element giuen and receiued heere, but two; 
                        Ioh. 6.54 55 35. to teach, that both meat and drinke, that is, sufficient nourishment for our soules, is to be found in Christ.
                  Q. But if bread alone were giuen to Gods people in this Sacrament (as in the Church of Rome) were not that sufficient, seeing the blood of Christ (as of all other liuing men) was, and is, contained in his body?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily: that cannot be done without manifest sacriledge: for:
                  First, Christ in the institution of this Sacrament, 
                        Mat. 26.28. Mar. 14.23 Luk. 22, 20 ordained and 
                        Mat. 26.27. 1. Cor. 11.25 commanded all his Disciples

(and in them the whole Church, which was, as J haue before said, represented by them) that they should aswell take and drinke of the cup, as eat the bread. And 1. Cor. 11 26-29, the Apostle by vertue of this ordinance and institution inioined to all the Corinthians the vse of the cup aswell as of the bread. Yea the Lord (as foreseeing this sacriledge of the Papists) hath 
                        Mat. 7 2.28. Mar. 14.23.24. more expressly commanded the vse of the cup to all, then he hath done the vse of the bread.
                  Secondly, it was necessary that we should in this Sacrament haue two elements, that might represent the full and sufficient nourishment and refection that we haue in Christ: 1 Cor. 10.34. for else our state had beene worse, then of the people of

God vnder the law, & our Sacraments lesse cleer thē theirs.
                  Thirdly, in that state wherin Christ is represented and offred to vs in this Sacrament (namely in his passion) 
                        Luk. 22.44. Ioh. 19.34. his blood was separated from his body.
                  Q. What other helps haue we in this Sacrament to represent to our soules the nourishment and strength to perseuere in the state of grace, which wee receiue by the merit of Christs passion?
                  
                  
                     A. First, bread & wine are giuen & receiued here, which are most generally vsed thorowout the world; 
                        Psal. 104 14 5. Gen. 39.6 Mat. 6.11. the one for the strengthning and nourishment of the body: 
                        Psal. 104.15. & 4.7. P
                              •
                           o. 31.6.7 1. Tim. 5.23 the other for the quēching of the thirst, refreshing them that faint and cheering the hart of them,

that are in heauinesse, and are therefore most fit to represent to the soule, the 
                        Ioh. 6.35. strength and 
                        Pro.. 92.5 Cant. 1.2.4. & 5.1. & 7.9. Ioh. 15.1. Mat. 11.28 refreshing it receiueth by Christ.
                  Secondly, this bread and wine is not onely receiued in this Sacrament, but 
                        Mat. 26.26.27. Mat. 1
                           •
                        .22 1 Cor. 14.24 euery commmunicant doth eat and drinke it, and that by the commandement of Christ. Which action as it is of all other the chiefe meane of nourishment, and maketh our food of the same substance with vs, so is it most fit to represent the 
                        Ioh. 6.35.40.51.56. Eph. 5.30. sound nourishment & comfort that we haue by Christ, and that wee are by faith made all one with him.
                  Q. As you haue shewed how Christ and his passion and this benefit we receiue by the merit thereof is represented vnto vs,
                     How the benefits of Christ are more particularly offred vnto vs in this Sacrament, then by any other meanes.
                     
                     so tel me now how al this is more particularly offered and applied vnto vs in this Sacrament then by any other meanes.
                  
                  
                     A. The bread and wine is 
                        Mat. 26.26.27. Ma
                              •
                           . 14.22 Luk. 22.17.19. 1 Cor. 11.24▪ 25. particularly offred, and euerie communicant (according to the commandement that is giuen in the name of Christ) doth receiue, eat and drinke the same, 
                        Ioh. 6.32 Rom. 8.30. which is most effectuall to teach and perswade vs, that the Lord doth offer and giue vs the body & blood of his sonne, and that it is the will of God 1 Ioh. 3.23 that euery one of vs should, and that euery one that commeth worthily to this Sacrament doth receiue & apply Christ to himselfe for the nourishment and comfort of his soule.
                  Q. Why was it said that Christ, and this benefit of his

passion, is not onely represented and offred, but verily exhibited and giuen vnto vs in this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. Because this Sacrament is not ordained to bee a bare and naked signe, or as a picture that puts vs in minde of one that is absent, 
                        Rom. 4.1
                           •
                         1. Cor. 10.16 but to bee a seale also, with and by which the Lord doth verily conuey and bestowe Christ vpon vs, and confirme and make sure to vs this benefit of his passion.
                  Q. Is Christ then indeed present in this Sacrament?
                     Whether Christ bee indeed present in this Sacrament, and how.
                  
                  
                     A. Yes verily: Christ himselfe is not onely signified and represented, but truly present, giuen and receiued in this Sacrament; yet not corporally, 
                        Ioh. 6.63. but spiritually and sacramentally present: nor offred by the

minister vnto the body, but by the Lord to the faith of the worthy receiuer.
                  
                     That Christ is not corporally present.Q. How may it appeare that Christ is not corporally present in this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. First, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. because the Sacraments which Gods people enioied vnder the Law, were in substance the same with our Sacraments; and in them Christ was not corporally present, but onely spiritually and sacramentally.
                  Secondly, wee receiue no other thing, nor in any other manner in the Sacrament, then the Disciples did in the first institution thereof; and we are sure that Christs body and blood were not corporally receiued by them, but onely spiritually and sacramentally.
                  
                     Thirdly, 
                        Ioh. 13.1. & 14.2.19.25.28. & 16.4.5.7.16.28. as our Sauiour did oft fore-tell his disciples that (in respect of his bodily presence) he should leaue the world and goe vnto his Father, 
                        Luc. 24.51. Act. 1.9.10.11. so he was indeede in the sight of them all taken vp into heauen, & God (that cannot lie) hath 
                        Act. 3.21 told vs that the heauens must containe him vntill the end of the world. 
                        Mat. 24.23. So that if any shall say vnto vs now, since the time of his ascension, here is Christ; or there hee is, wee are straitly charged not to beleeue it.
                  Fourthly, we are sure 
                        Heb. 10.5. that Christ hath but one body, and that his body euen since his resurrection is a true body, and 
                        Mat. 28.6.7. Mar. 16.6.7. such as cannot bee in many places at once, and 
                        Mar. 16.7. Luc. 24.39. Ioh. 
                        
                           ••
                        .20.27 that it filleth a place wheresoeuer it is, and may be both

seene and felt, and therefore it is not possible that he should be corporally present, whersoeuer this Sacrament is administred, nor corporally receiued by euery one that receiueth this Sacrament; and if it bee impossible that his glorified body should be in many places at once, or in any place where it can neither be seene or felt, then much lesse can his crucified body (whereunto yet our faith is directed in this Sacrament, and not vnto his glorified body) be so.
                  Lastly, as it is not possible that he should be corporally present or corporally receiued in the Sacrament, so if it might be, yet were it no way needfull or profitable for vs that it should be so. For as 
                        Ioh. 7.39 & 16.7. & 20.17. all the benefits that the Church receiueth

by Christ, haue beene farre more plentifullie communicated vnto her since his ascension into heauen, then when he was corporally present with her vpon earth, in which respect it was profitable for her to lose his bodily presence: so 
                        Ioh. 6.62.63. the spirituall presence of Christ, and our feeding on him by faith, is farre more effectuall to the comfort and saluation of our foules, then any bodily presence and feeding could possible be.Why the bread and wine is called the body and blood of Christ.
                  
                  Q. Why then is the bread called the body of Christ, and the wine the blood of Christ?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because the Lord hath 
                        Gen. 17.10.11. Exod. 12.11. & 24.8. 1 Cor. 10.4 euer bin wont in speaking of his Sacraments, to giue vnto the outward signe, the name of the thing signified thereby.
                  
                     Secondly, the reason why the Lord so speakes of Sacraments, is to shew how certaine and neere that spirituall presence & vnion is, that by the power of his spirit is made betweene the signe and the thing signified (how farre soeuer they be distant in place, the one from the other) and that as verily, as the one is offered and giuen to the body, so certainly is the other offered and giuen to the soule of the faithfull receiuer.
                  Thirdly, this manner of speech is more plaine and effectuall to lift vp our hearts from the earthly elemēts vnto the consideration of the heauenly matter represented by them, then if he should haue called them onely the signes of his body and blood.
                  
                     Q. As you haue shewed mee how Christ and his passion,
                     How our Communion with the faithful is therby represented & confirmed. 
                     and the benefit we receiue thereby, is not onely sensibly represented, but particularly offered and applied, and verily exhibited also vnto vs; so tell me now how that Communion which wee haue with all the fait
                           •
                        full & the mutuall loue that should be in all Christians, one toward another, is represented and confirmed to vs in this Sacrament.
                  
                  
                     A. First, we are partakers of no other elements here, 1. Cor. 10.17. then all the rest (not onely of the same congregation where we receiue without respect of persons, but all the faithful thorowout the world) are partakers of: which was one cause why our Sauiour made choice of bread & wine, which of all other creatures

are most vniuersally vsed thorowout the world, for the nourishment & cōfort of the body.
                  Secondly, this Sacrament by the ordinance of Christ is to bee administred in the most publike congregation; and 
                        
                           Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22. Luc. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.
                        That this Sacrament is to be administred publikely.
                     the sacramental actions to be performed by the minister (as neere as conueniently they may be) but once for all that receiue together.
                  Q. How may it appeare that the Lord ha
                           •
                        h ordained this Sacrament should be administred publikely,
                     
                        Gen. 17.26.27. Luc. 59. 2. Chro. 30.35.13. & 35.18. Mat. 3.5.6.13. Luc. 5.21. Act. 2.42. & 20.7. 1. Cor. 11.18.10. 
                     and not in priuate?
                  
                  A. First, it hath beene the practise of Gods church, commended in the word, to celebrate the Sacraments in solemne assemblies.
                  Secondly, 
                        Exod. 12.6.47. Deut. 12.5.6 Leu. 17.3.4 the Lord hath commanded his Sacraments should bee so celebrated,

and 1. Cor. 11.22.33.34. not otherwise.
                  Thirdly, the sacraments are 
                        Rom. 4.11. seales of the couenant of grace; which is not appropriated to any few, but 
                        Pro. 8.23. & 9.3. Mar. 16.15. Act. 2.39. 1. Iob. 2.2. Mat. 26.28. is offered in common to the whole Church; and 1. Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.27.28. Ephe. 4.5. wherein all (how farre so
                        •
                     uer they differ one from another in worldly respects) haue equall interest; and therefore as they doe concerne the publike priuiledges of all, they must needes bee actions of a publike nature, and should bee publikelie administred.
                  Fourthly, in the vse of the Sacraments, we 
                        Gen. 17.11. Exod. 13.9. make profession of our faith, and 
                        Exod. 12.14. 1. Cor. 11.26. celebrate with praise and thanksgiuing, the remembrance of the great benefit of our redemption; both which duties are then performed 
                        Psal. 22.22. & 40.9.10. & 149.1. in most

acceptable maner vnto God, when they are done in the most publike and solemne assemblies of his people.
                  Fifthly, the dignity and reuerence due to the Sacraments requireth that they should bee administred publikely in the assembly of all Gods people, and with the praiers of all.
                  Lastly, it may appeare that in this Sacrament the Lord requireth this solemnitie more then in any other hee hath giuen at any time to his Church; because in it he hath instituted such elements, as might bee common to the whole Church; and 
                        Mat. 26.26.27. Luc. 22.19. 1 Cor. 11.24.25. brake the bread, and powred foorth the wine but once in the sight of all, and spake the words of institution but once to them all together;

and ordained it for this end (among others) to testifie and confirme the mutuall loue that should be in all the faithfull one towards another.
                  Q. Doe you then condemne all such, as being vnable to come to the congregation, doe desire this Sacrament to bee administred to them in priuate?
                  
                  
                     A. No, but first al Christians are to be taught, that they may not put off the receiuing of this Sacrament till their sicknesse, but receiue it when they may with the rest of Gods people in the publike congregation; and that it is their ignorance and infirmitie to desire it in priuate.
                  Secondly, if at any time (vpon extraordinary occasion) the Sacrament be administred in a priuate house, yet ought a sufficient

company of the faithfull to be present, and to communicate in it, and that not without the ministery and preaching of the word.
                  
                     Reasons against priuate Communions.Q. How are Christians to be disswaded from the desire of the Sacrament in priuate?
                  
                  
                     A. First, by the consideration  of that I haue already said, to prooue that it is the will of God the Sacrament should be administred in the publike assemblies.
                  
                      Secondly, because as they shall swerue therein from the example of the best instructed and reformed Churches and Christians, so they shall fashion themselues to such as are ignorant, popish and profane, with whom these priuate communions euer haue beene and still are most in vse.
                  
                     Thirdly, because they shall  not heereby depriue themselues of the comfort and benefit of the Sacrament in their sicknesse, or in the houre of their death, if they doe not receiue it at that time; seeing the efficacy and fruit of this Sacrament which they receiued in the publik congregation when they were in health, is not to be restrained to the time of receiuing, but extends it selfe to the whole time of their life afterward.
                  Lastly, because it is 1. Sam. 4.3.10. 2. Sam. 15.25. folly  and superstition to giue that honor or ascribe that necessitie to the Sacrament, as to thinke it can doe vs good being receiued or vsed otherwise then according to Gods ordinance; whereas on 
                        Exod. 11.16. the other side wee are to assure

our selues, that the Lord both can and will helpe and comfort vs without the outward meanes, when we cannot haue them in such sort as hee hath ordained, but are depriued of them, not by our owne negligence, but by the hand of God.
                  Q. As you haue shewed at large how our communion with Christ and his Church is both represented and confirmed to vs by the bread and wine, the breaking and powring forth, the giuing and receiuing of the same in this Sacrament; so tell mee now whether all bread and wine that is broken and powred forth, giuen and receiued, may not aswell serue to represent and confirme these things vnto vs as these elements & actions that are vsed in this Sacrament.
                  
                  
                     
                     A. No: for bread and wine hy nature serue only for the nourishment and comfort of the body; neither are they at all effectuall to yeeld any strength or comfort to the soule, being vsed any where else but onely in this Sacrament.
                  M. How are these elements and actions in the Sacraments made more effectuall to represent and confirme these spirituall and heauenly things,
                     Of the consecration of this Sacrament. 
                     then the same elements and actions vsed any where else?
                  
                  
                     A. By beeing consecrated and put apart from that vse they serued to by nature, vnto this holy and spirituall vse.
                  Q. How are the elements and actions in this Sacrament thus consecrated and put apart from that vse they serued to by

nature, vnto this holy and spirituall vse?
                  
                  
                     A. Partly by that which Christ himselfe did in the first institution of this Sacrament,
                        Mat. 26.26. Mar. 14.22 and partly by that which the Minister of the word of God and the congregation doe,1 Cor. 10.16 whensoeuer this Sacrament is administred according to the institution of Christ.
                  Q. How did Christ himselfe consecrate these elements and actions vnto this holy and spirituall vse?
                  
                  
                     A. First by 
                        Mat. 26.27. Luk. 22.19 1 Cor. 11.24.the thanksgiuing and praier hee made vnto his father, at that time when hee first instituted this Sacrament.
                  Secondly, by instituting and ordaining these elements and actions in this Sacrament to serue vnto this end, not onely

                     
                        Mat. 26.26.27. vsing them so himselfe, 
                        Luk. 22.19. 1. Cor. 11.24.25.but commanding his Church to doe so also, and 
                        Mat. 26.26. this is my body. Mat. 26.28. this is my blood. promising vnto vs his gracious and effectuall presence in the vse of these elements according to his ordinance.
                  Q. How do the Minister of the word of God and the congregatiō consecrate these elements and sacramentall actions.
                  
                  
                     A. First, 1. Tim. 4.5by declaring the institution of this Sacrament, and how Christ did consecrate and put apart these elements and actions to this end and vse, and vsing 1. Tim. 4.4. them according to this his institution.
                  Secondly, by giuing publike thanks vnto God, both for the worke of our redemption by the blood of his sonne, and also for making it known;

offring and assuring it vnto vs not only by his word, but most plainely and sensibly by this Sacrament.
                  Thirdly, 1. Tim. 4.5.by earnest praier vnto the Lord, that hee would be present with, and blesse this his owne ordinance, making it effectuall to those ends that himselfe appointed it for.
                  
                     At whose hands wee are to receiue this Sacramēt.Q. But why doe you mention the minister of Christ when you speake of the consecrating of this Sacrament? Is it any matter who doth consecrate it, or deliuer it, or at whose hands wee doe receiue it?
                  
                  
                     A. Yes verily: for first, as it is not lawfull for any person without commission and authority from the King, to vse and applie the Kings seale to conuey any assurāce in worldly

matters: so it must needs be a great sinne, for any (hauing no calling and commission thereunto from Christ) to take vpon him to administer this Sacrament, 
                        Rom. 4.11.being the publike seale of the King of Kings, and of the common, wealth of Israel.
                  
                  Secondly, God 1. Chr. 13.10.11. & 15.12.13 2. Chro. 26 16-20. hath been wont seuerly to punish such as haue taken vpon them to deliuer his Sacraments without his calling and commission; and 2. Ch. 13 9.12.15.hath also been much offended with the people amongst whom this fault hath been committed.
                  Q. How may this appeare, that onely the Ministers and Preachers of the word of God, haue a calling and authority from Christ to administer this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     
                     A. First, because wee find 
                        Gen. 6 14 compared with 2. Pet. 2.5. Gen. 17.23. compared with Gen. 20.7. Deut. 33.10. 2. Chro. 35.3.6. Mar. 1.4. Mat. 28.19that al the sacraments which God hath at any time instituted in his Church, haue beene committed by him vnto such as were Ministers and Preachers of the word, that by them they might be deliuered vnto the Church. Insomuch as we read, the people of God 2. Chr. 30 3. & 35.3.6. Ezr. 6.19.20.could not celebrate the Passeouer till such time as the Priests and Leuits (who were appointed of God both to teach the people and to sacrifice, and minister the other Sacraments) were sanctified and prepared vnto that seruice.
                  Secondly, onely the Ministers and Preachers of the word, are by reason of their speciall office and function, 1. Cor. 4.1.2. called in the Scriptures the

Lords stewards, and disposers of his mysteries vnto his Church.
                  Thirdly, they onely are said 2. Cor. 5.20. Exo. 4.16.to represent the Lord and to beare his person and be in his stead vnto vs in the matters of his worship; as the Magistrate doth in the ciuil gouernment and affaires of this life: and so are both his mouth vnto vs to deliuer vs his word, & his hand vnto vs to deliuer vs his Sacraments. And 
                        Ioh. 4.1.2 Eph. 2.17. Luk. 10.16. that which is done by them in these matters according to his word, is said to bee done by the Lord himselfe, because y he hath promised to bee present with them and to worke with them, ratifying from heauen his owne ordinances in their ministrie.
                  Q. Doth then the worthinesse

and efficacie of the Sacrament,
                     Whether the worthines and efficacy of the Sacrament doe depend vpon the goodnesse of the Minister. 
                     depend vpon the goodnesse of the Minister that deliuereth it vnto vs?
                  
                  
                     A. No: but it dependeth wholly vpon the ordinance of God, and vpon the truth and power of Christ that did institute it. Yet must it needs make much for the security and comfort of a Christian to receiue it from such a one as hee knoweth hath authoritie and commission from Christ to deliuer it vnto him.
                  
                     Whether it be needfull that the word be preached at the administration of the Sacrament.Q. As you haue shewed the necessity of a Minister & Preacher of the word in the administration of this Sacrament; so tell me whether it bee needfull that the word should be alwaies preached at the same time when this Sacrament is to bee administred.
                  
                  
                     
                     A. Yes verily: for though to them that haue already beleeued through the preaching of the Gospell, it may be a true Sacrament and seale of Gods couenant, though the word be not preached immediatly before it, being administred by a true minister of God; yet is the ordinance of God in some degree transgressed, and the comfort that Gods people should receiue by this Sacrament greatly hindred, if at any time the Sacrament bee administred and that duty neglected.
                  Q. How may that bee proued?
                  
                  
                     A. First, 
                        Mar. 1.4. Act. 19.4 & 10.37. Act. 8.12.35.37.38. & 10.34.47. & 16.14 15.32.33. & 2.41. Act. 2.42. & 20.7. because wee finde that it hath alwaies been the practise of Gods Church, commended to vs in the holy Scriptures to haue the

word preached at all times when they haue beene assembled to receiue the Sacramēts of the new testament.
                  Secondly, seeing this Sacrament can neuer doe vs good till wee haue attained vnto a true faith, which ordinarily is wrought by preaching; it must needs bee most fit and profitable, that whensoeuer the people of God are to receiue this seale of the couenant of grace, they may haue the couenant it selfe (whereupon the force and efficacy of the seale dependeth) published, opened and applied vnto them; considering the great need wee all stand in (at that time especially) to haue our faith quickned and stirred vp in vs; and that no meanes can be so effectuall to quicken

it, as that whereby it was first begotten.
                  Q. After that the bread and wine haue been thus consecrated by the minister of Christ, are they not then by vertue of this consecration changed from that which they were beefore?
                     Whether after consecration the elements bee not chauged.
                  
                  
                     A. Yes: but they are changed onely in their vse, not in their nature; because here they are not vsed to that end, that other bread and wine are vsed for; namely, to the nourishment and comfort of the body, but to a holy and spirituall end; but the substance of the bread and wine remaineth the very same after the consecration that it was before.
                  Q. How may that bee proued?
                  
                  
                     
                     A. First, because the Scripture 1. Cor. 10.16. & 11.27.23. Mat. 26.29 calleth them bread and wine euen after they were consecrated.
                  Secondly, it can be no Sacrament vnlesse such an outward signe remaine as i
                        •
                      by good proportion fit to represent the nourishment and refreshing wee haue by Christ; which the substance onely of the bread and wine (and not the accidents thereof) is able to doe.
                  Thirdly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the body and blood of Christ, 
                        A
                              •
                           t. 2.31 it were not possible that by long keeping they should putrifie and corrupt.
                  Fourthly, if the substance of the bread and wine were changed into the very body

and blood of Christ, then the reprobate which receiue this Sacrament, should also eat the flesh and drinke the blood of Christ, 
                        Io
                              •
                           . 6.54 56. 1. Io
                              •
                           . 
                        
                           •
                        .12 which is impossible, and contrary to the holy Scriptures.
                  Q. If any of that bread & wine that stood on the Lords table when the elements & the whole action was in this sort consecrated as you haue said,
                     That that part of the bread, and wine which remaineth after the administration, doth not differ from co amon bre
                           •
                        d and wine. 
                     do remaine after the administration of the Sacrament is ended, doth it thē differ from common bread 
                           •
                        nd wine, or is it more holy by vertue of this consecration?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily: for seeing the consecration (as we haue heard) changeth them not in nature but in vse onely; and one part of the consecration standeth in vsing them according to Chrsts institution;

no more of the bread and wine can be holy, then is giuen and receiued in the Sacrament.
                  
                     The vse of this first Grace which by due examination is to be found in euery communicant.Q. As you haue shewed at large that none can receiue this Sacrament worthily but such as find in themselues an vnfained and earnest desire to it; and declared also the reasons that should moue vs thus to desire it: so tell me now what vse is to bee made of all this doctrine.
                  
                  
                     A. Jt serueth principally for reproofe of two sorts of people.
                  First, them that (not being withheld by sicknesse or like necessary impediments) doe either out of too base an estimation they haue of this Sacrament, or out of a carelesse neglect to prepare themselues vnto it, absent themselues

from it, when it is administred in the congregation whereof they are members.
                  Secondly, such as receiue it some times, yet without a sincere and right desire of it or any appetite vnto it at all; but either for that they would thereby escape the danger of lawes; or because they would conforme themselues to the custome of the place where they liue; or vpon a superstitious perswasion that it will purge them from all their sins and infuse grace and holinesse into their soules.Whether we be not bound to receiue this Sacrament, as oft as it is administred.
                  
                  Q. Is euery Christian then bound to receiue this Sacrament euery time that it is administred in that congregation whereof he is a member, vnlesse he be by sickenesse or some such

like necessary impediment kept from it?
                  
                  
                     A. Yes surely: for it is no lesse necessary to receiue this Sacrament when wee may, then it is 1. Thes. 5.19.20. Heb 2.3. to heare the word preached when we may; or then, 
                        Act. 2.41 & 8.12.36 & 16.33. & 22.16. it is necessary for them that are conuerted to the faith, for themselues, and for Christian parents for their children, to seeke and desire the Sacrament of baptisme vpon the first opportunitie that God shall offer vnto them.That it is a dangerous sinne to neglect the receiuing of this Sacament.
                  
                  Q. How may it appeare to be a sinne of such danger to neglect thus the receiuing of this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. First, the 
                        Num. 9.7 2. Chro. 30.1.5.21.26. & 35.7.18 Luk. 2.41. zeale and desire that Gods people vnder the Law shewed vnto their Sacraments, the paines & cost they were at to enioy them

being by the holy Ghost commended to vs in the word for our imitation, should make vs ashamed of our coldnesse and carelesse neglect of this Sacrament; which in respect 
                        Mat. 11 11. both of the cleerenes of it, and 
                        Heb. 3.5.6. compared with Heb. 11.28. of the person that did first institute it, is farre more great and excellent then they were.
                  Secondly, the 
                        Gen. 17.14. Exod. 4.24.26. Numb. 9.13 great seueritie of God in threatning and punishing the neglect of his Sacraments vnder the Law, is recorded in the Scriptures to admonish vs, and may assure vs, that hee will much lesse beare with the neglect of this Sacrament.
                  Thirdly, this neglect of comming to this Sacrament when we may, argueth our shameful vnthankfulnesse for the great benefit of our redemption by

the death of Christ, which in this 1. Cor. 11.26.Sacrament (which is therfore called the Eucharist) wee are appointed to celebrate the remembrance of, with solemne praise and thankesgiuing.
                  Lastly, it argueth a prophane and open contempt both of the commandement of our Sauiour Christ, who hath charged vs to come, and to come oft to this Sacrament; and of those inestimable benefits which he offereth vs in it; and of the Church and people of God, from whose fellowship we doe thus diuide and excommunicate our selues. 
                        Esa. 7.12 13. Mat. 22 7. Luc. 14.24. Heb. 2.3. Which sinne we may be wel
                        •
                      assured the Lord must needs be highly offended with.
                  
                     Whether want of Charitie, or other worldly distractions be a sufficient excuse for not receiuing.Q. But if a man finde himselfe through vncharitablenesse

or worldly distractions vnfit and vnprepared, is it not much better for him to abstaine than to come to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. Indeed, no man ought to come that finds himselfe vnprepared: But this is no excuse for them that doe not so much the more carefully endeauour to prepare themselues: For,
                  First, they that chuse rather to depriue themselues of the benefit of this Sacrament then they wil freely forgiue such as haue wronged them, or seeke reconciliation, or take paines to prepare their hearts vnto it; do shew manifest contempt of Gods mercy, and 
                        Acts 13.46. iudge thēselues vnworthy of Christ and all his merits, and shall one day bee iudged despisers of their owne saluation.
                  
                     Secondly, while by vncharitablenesse and carelesnesse to prepare themselues, they refuse this Sacrament, they can haue no hope that either 
                        Iam. 1.20.21. 1. Pet. 2.1.2 the word or 
                        Ma
                              •
                           . 11.25, 26. praier should doe them good: and therefore by this reason they may aswell abstaine from heating or reading the word and praiing, as from this Sacrament.
                  Thirdly, they that feele that they are not onely void of malice themselues, but also vnfainedly willing to vse all meanes of reconciliation with such as doe malice them, 2. Cor. 8.12. ought not to suffer the hatred of others to keepe them from this Sacrament; but 1. Sam. 30.6. rather the more they are iniured by men, the more need they haue to seeke comfort in the Lord by this his holy ordinance.
                  
                     Q. As you haue sh
                           •
                        wed the sinne of those that willingly absent themselues from this Sacrament when they may receiue it,
                     The great fault of thē which receiue this Sacrament with out any desire or sincere appetite. 
                     so tell me how they may also appeare to be in great fault that vse to receiue it, but yet either without any desire and appetite vnto it, or without a sincere and right desire.
                  
                  
                     A. First, because as 
                        Deut. 28.47. 1. Chro. 28.9. Psal. 2.11. 2. Cor. 8.12. and 9.7. Acts. 2.41. Rom. 12.11 in all the seruice we doe to God, it is required that we doe it not grudgingly, or as of necessitie, but with cheerefulnesse and 
                        •
                     eruencie of spirit; so is 
                        Deut. 12.12. & 16.15. 1. Sam. 1.7 it especially required that wee come to this heauenly banquet with appetite and delight because of the great benefits that we celebrate the remembrance of, and which are offered and confirmed to vs in it.
                  Secondly, if our desire doe

rise from any other ground then from the consideration of those reasons we haue already mentioned, as either from the Commandement of our superiours, or the desire wee haue to be neighbour-like, or from this cōceit, that the deed done will purge vs from our sinnes, we doe not serue the Lord in comming to this Sacrament, but men, and our owne selues:Whether Magistrats may not command and compell their subiects to receiue this Sacrament. and so make our selues guiltie of an heinous prophanation of this Sacrament.
                  Q. May not then magistrats and other superiours command and compell such as liue vnder their gouernment, to receiue this Sacrament, if they shall discerne them to be carelesse of it?
                  
                  
                     A. Euery one that is in authority may and must also 
                        Exod. 12.26.27. 2. Chro. 17.7. vse all meanes to perswade

all such as are vnder him to a a desire of this Sacarment, and 
                        Gen. 18.19. 2. King. 23.21. 2. Chro. 14.4. & 33.16 & 34.33. command & compell them also to receiue. Yea hee must 2. Chro. 15 13. iudge them vnworthy to liue in any Christian family or common-wealth that will not receiue it: but hee may not compell any to receiue, whom he knoweth to bee altogether vninstructed and vnwilling, because (besides the profanation of the Lords holy ordinance that is caused thereby) the man that receiueth vnwillingly, shall vndoubtedly receiue his owne condemnation.The secōd grace that by examination we are to find in our selues, is knowledge.
                  
                  Q. Hitherto you haue declared, how all that would come worthily to this Sacrament, must finde in themselues a sincere and right desire vnto it, which (as you haue said) is the first grace

required in our preparatiō therunto; tell me now, what is that knowledge which you mentiond as the second grace that euery man must finde in himselfe that would come worthily to this Sacrament.
                  
                  
                     The first part of that knowledge.
                     A. First, euery one must haue that measure of knowledge in the Law of God (the summe whereof is conteined in the ten commandements) as may serue to discouer vnto him not onely in generall the corruption of his nature, whereby hee is quite fallen from that holines and righteousnesse which God requireth of him, and become prone to all euill; but also some speciall and particular sinnes hee hath committed, and the intolerable curse of God due to him for the same.
                  
                     Secondly,The second part thereof. euery one must haue that measure of knowledge in the Gospell, as may serue to make knowen vnto him, and certainly to assure him of the sufficiencie both of that remedie that is to bee found in Christ against all his sinnes and the curse of God; & also of the meanes whereby that remedy is to be made his owne, namely, a liuely faith.
                  Thirdly,The third part therof. euery one must haue that measure of knowledge in the doctrine of this Sacrament, as may serue to make knowen to him those helpes which God hath ordained in it, both for the representing and making knowen of Christ and his merits to all that receiue it, and also for the applying and confirming of them vnto himselfe.
                  
                     
                     That the knowledge aforesaid is necessarie to the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament.Q. How may it appeare that this measure of knowledge is necessarily required of al that come worthily to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because 
                        Pro. 19.2 1. Tim. 2.4. Act. 26.18 knowledge is the foundation & beginning of all sauing graces: neither can any man receiue any comfort by Christ or any of his ordinances, vnlesse hee bee first inlightned with the knowledge of the trueth.
                  Secondly, because til a man 
                        Rom. 3.20. Mat. 9.12. Gal. 3.24. by the knowledge of the Law haue his sinne, and the curse of God due to him for sinne, effectually discouered to him, and 
                        Ioh. 4.10 by the knowledge of the Gospel the sufficiencie of that remedie that is to bee found in Christ against all his sinnes and the curse of God, he can neuer desire nor esteem

of Christ. And til a man by the knowledge of this Sacrament can discerne the helps he may haue in it for the quickening and increase of his faith, hee can neuer desire it, nor come with appetite vnto it.
                  Thirdly, seeing 1. Cor. 1.1 28.29. none can receiue worthily but hee that is able to examine himselfe, and 
                        Iam. 1.23 24. and 2.12. Iohn 12.48. the onely rule whereby a man is to examine himself is the word of God, which consisteth of these two parts, the Law and the Gospel; it must needes follow that he which wanteth that competency of knowledge which I haue spoken of, can not choose but be an vnworthy receiuer of the Lords Supper if hee presume to come vnto it.
                  Q. What vse is to bee made of this doctrine concerning the

necessitie of knowledge in them that desire to come to the Lords table?
                  
                  
                     A. First, to teach vs that before the Communion bee administred to any people, or they vrged to receiue it, 
                        Mat. 28.19.there should be care had, that they be first cathechised and instructed; as we neuer read that either Iohn the Baptist or any of the Apostles did minister the Sacraments to any people whom they had not first preached vnto and instructed.
                  Secondly, to discouer the sinne and fearefull estate of the greatest part of communicant, in this land, who though they be vtterly ignorant in the principles of Religion, and want the meanes of knowledge, and bee void of all

loue and desire of knowledge or the meanes thereof: 
                        Eccl. 4.17. yet will by no meanes bee kept from receiuing this Sacrament, at Easter especially. Which one sin, in so generall a prophanation of this Sacrament, 1▪ 
                        Cor. 11.30.31. were sufficient to bring vpon the land all those grieuous iudgements that haue beene, and are still vpon it; though it were guiltie of no other sinne besides.
                  Q. As you haue shewed the necessitie of a desire to this Sacrament,Faith, the third grace necessarie for preparation. and of knowledge also, in euery one that would come worthily vnto it; so tell me now what that faith is, which you said was the third grace that is necessarily required to the preparing of vs vnto this Sacrament.
                  
                  
                     A. No man can receiue

this Sacrament worthily vnlesse he haue a true iustifying faith, and be vndoubtedly assured that Christ with all his merits doe belong vnto himselfe.
                  Q. How may it appeare that none can be worthy or fit to receiue but they that haue this faith?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because this was necessarily required 
                        Mar. 16.16. Act. 8.37. and 16.31-34. of all such as did desire to be baptised.
                  Secondly, this and all other the Sacraments are appointed of God, 
                        Rom. 10.14.17. not to begin, but to confirme faith where it is already begun, and 
                        Rom. 4.11. are therefore called seales of the righteousnesse that is by faith.
                  Thirdly, as 
                        Heb. 4.2. the word of God which we heare can not profit vs at all, vnlesse it bee

mixed with faith, so much lesse can any profit by this visible word that wanteth faith which 
                        Ioh. 3.14 15. & 8.56. is both the onely eye whereby we may discerne the Lords bodie, and the 
                        Ioh. 1.12. and 6.35.36. Ephe. 3.17. hand and mouth whereby wee receiue it, and feed vpon it.
                  Lastly, it is not possible that any should haue that right desire to this Sacrament which we haue already shewed to bee so necessarie to our worthy receiuing of it, that is not by a liuely faith assured that Christ with all his merits doe belong to him.How a Christian may be assured that hee is one of Christs litle flock.
                  
                  Q. But seeing it is euident by the Scriptures that 
                     
                        Iohn 17.9. 
                     Christ with his merits doe not belong to all men, but to 
                     
                        Luc. 12.32. 
                     a little flock, & that 
                     
                        Mat. 7.14. 
                     the greatest part of the world & 
                     
                        Mat. 2.214. 
                     euen of those that liue

in the profession of the true Religion shall receiue no benefit by him, how can anie poore sinner (that knoweth himselfe to be as vnworthy to receiue so great a gift frō God as any other man) attaine to this vndoubted assurance, that he is one of that litle flocke that Christ died for?
                  
                  
                     A. The faith of Gods elect is no vaine fancy nor vncertaine hope, but a certaine assurance, because it is 
                        Rom. 10.8. groū
                     ded vpon the word of God, which is 
                        Psal. 19.7.9. infallible, & wrought in the heart 
                        Gal. 5.22. Rom. 8.16. by the spirit of God,
                        Tit. 1.2. Heb. 6.18. that can not lie.What motiues there are in the word to perswade a Christian that hee shall bee saued.
                  
                  Q. But how is any particular man able to ground this assurance of his own saluation vpon the word of God? Or, what motiues may a man finde in the word to perswade him vndoubtedly that he shall be saued, and

that Christ with all his merits doe belong to him?
                  
                  First, that Christ Iesus hath by his death & obedience
                        Esa. 53.5.6. & 40.2. Mat. 17.5. fullie satisfied the iustice of God and purchased eternall life for all that can beleeue in him.
                  Secondly, that Christ with all his merits 
                        Mar. 16.15. Act. 2.39. are by Gods ordinance in the ministerie of the word offered indefinitely to euery one that heareth the Gospel, and 
                        Esa. 61.1-3. Mat. 9.12.13. specially to euerie one that (out of the feeling of the burden and danger of his sins) can thirst after him.
                  Thirdly, that 
                        Mar. 1.15. Mat. 22.9. Luc. 14.21.23. Mar. 11.24. compared with Mat. 6.12. 1. Pet. 1.13 1. Ioh. 3.23 euery one that heareth the Gospell (specially euery one that feeling the burden and danger of his sinne can thirst after Christ) is straitly charged and commanded by the Lord in his word to beleeue that
                        Mat. 11.28.
                     
Christ and all his merits doe belong to himselfe.
                  Lastly, that 
                        Ioh. 16.9. Mar. 16.16. no sinne or rebellion that a man can possibly commit against God, is accounted so hainous in his sight, as infidelity, when a man will not beleeue that Christ belongeth to him, 1. Iohn 5.10. because in this he maketh God a liar, as if offring his sonne to him in his Gospel, & commā
                     ding him to belieue, he should not meane as hee speaketh.
                  Q. What vse is to bee made of this doctrine touching the necessitie of a liuely faith for the receiuing of this Sacrament vvorthilie?
                  
                  
                     A. First, to perswade euery one that professeth himself to be a Christian, to labour for a liuely faith: which, 
                        Ier. 9.24. Act. 16.34. Rom. 5.1.3. Luc. 2.29.30.as it is the root and foūdation of al

true comfort both in life and in death, so without it 
                        Heb. 11.6 Iohn 15.4. Acts 15.9. Tit. 1.15. it is impossible that either this or any other seruice we do vnto God (seeme it otherwise neuer so good) should bee acceptable vnto him, or profitable to our selues.
                  Secondly, to teach vs, that (because this 
                        Ephe. 2.8. Iohn 6.44. Ephe. 1.19.20. faith is the mightie & supernatural work of God, and wee are of our selues by nature euery whit) as if not more vnable to beleeue in Christ aright than to keepe all Gods commandements, it stands vs vpon to make high account of the ministery of the word preached, which is 
                        Ro. 1.16. & 10.14. 1. Pet. 1.23. the meanes that God hath chosen and appointed to shew his mightie power in, for the begetting of faith in the hearts of his elect, and in the

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
vse of that holy ordinance of God to cry earnestly vnto him for his blessing vpon it.
                  Thirdly, to discouer the fearefull condition of them, that liuing altogether without the ministry of the word preached, and wanting it willingly, or hauing neuer profited by it at all; doe yet ordinarily receiue this Sacrament: whereas no man (without an extraordinary and miraculous worke of God, and such as 
                        Iosh. 5 12 hee hath neuer beene wont to worke, when the ordinary meanes might be had) can be worthy and fit to receiue the Lords Supper, till he haue first enioied the ministrie of the word, and beene an ordinarie & fruitfull hearer of the same.
                  Q. You haue shewed the necessitie of the three first graces,

which you said were required to make a man worthie and fit to come vnto the Lords table;
                     Repentance the fourth grace necessary for preparation. 
                     tell me now what that repentance is, without which, you said, no man can receiue worthilie.
                  
                  
                     A. No man can come worthily vnto this Sacrament,What repentance is. vnlesse hee haue first vnfainedly repented: that is, 
                        Pro. 28.13. Esa. 55.56 Iona. 3.10. both cast off all his knowne sinnes (vpon 2. Cor. 7.10. a harty sorrow that hee offended God by them, and an 
                        Eze. 18.31. Rom. 12.9. vnfeined detestation hee beareth to them) and 2. Cor. 7.11. Psal. 18.23also fully purposed and resolued with himselfe neuer to returne to them againe.
                  Q. How may it appeare that none can bee worthie or fit to come to the Lords table,
                     Reasons why repentance is necessarie hereunto. 
                     till hee haue thus repented?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because we finde that vnder the law none

might bee admitted to the Passe-ouer, that had 
                        Ezr. 6.21. not separated themselues from the filthinesse of the heathen, and 
                        Num. 9.6 2. Chro. 23.19 & 35.15 cleansed themselues from al legall pollutions.
                  Secondly, because 
                        Hag. 2.13.14. Tit. 1.15. Heb. 10.22 the conscience defiled with any knowne sinne, corrupteth all the holy things of God vnto vs.
                  Thirdly, because 
                        Mar. 1.15 Mat. 21.32 Act. 3.26. & 5.31.it is not possible that any man should haue a true and liuely faith and assurance of the forgiuenesse of his sinnes, that hath not thus vnfainedly repented.
                  
                     The vse cōcerning the necessitie of repentance.Q. What vse is to be made of this doctrine concerning the necessitie of repentance?
                  
                  
                     A. To perswade euery man to labour and take pains with his owne heart, both to

find out and know his speciall sins, and to bring his heart to this vnfained repentance for them, especially at that time when he prepareth himself to come to the Lors table. Because as without this repentance it is not possible that we should come worthily vnto it;
                        Iam. 4.8. Ge. 35.2.5. Iud. 10.16 1. Sā. 7.3.4 Iona. 3.8.
                           •
                        0 so it will make whatsoeuer seruice wee doe vnto God far more acceptable to him and fruitfull to our selues, when before such time as wee draw neere vnto God therein, wee doe first (out of that child-like feare and loue we beare vnto him) cast away such sinnes as we know by our selues.
                  Q. What principall points are there in Gods word,
                     Motiues to repentance. 
                     by the meditation whereof our senselesse and prophane hearts may be moued vnto this repentance?
                  
                  
                     
                     A. It will be profitable for vs to consider of these points following:
                  First, that for the transgressing of Gods commandement, euen in a small thing, not only 
                        Rom. 5.14.19. our first parents and all the race of mankinde were depriued of eternall happinesse, and of all grace to doe well, and became subiect to euerlasting damnation in the life to come, and infinite miseries in this life, and vnto such a corruption of nature as wherby they are made prone to all manner of sinne; but 2. Pet. 2.4 also an infinite number of Angels (the excellentest creatures that euer God made) did not only lose their happinesse, but became the most miserable and accursed creatures of all the rest.
                  
                     Secondly, 
                        Rom. 1.18 1. Cor. 10 5-5. 2. Pet. 2.6. the fearefull plagues that for sinne God hath brought both vpon sundry persons, and parts of the world in old time, and 
                        Psal. 7.11 2. Eph. 3.5. doth still euery day; and also 2. Pet. 2.5 vpon the whole world in the generall floud; vpon 
                        Rom. 11.21.22. 1. The. 2.16 the Iewes, whom of all other people hee once loued best; and vpon 2. Sam. 12 10-12 Psal. 51.8. Iob. 13.26. many of his most deare children: which all are 1. Cor. 11.10. recorded in the word & executed in our sight and hearing, for vs to consider and profit by.
                  Thirdly, the 
                        Zach. 12.10. Esa. 53.3-5 Mat. 26.37.38. Luk. 22.43 44. Mat. 27.46 Heb. 5.7. vnspeakable and infinite torments which the sonne of God in his passion indured for vs, as well in his soule as in his body, 1. Pet. 1.18.19. Gal. 3.13. 1. Ioh. 1.7. without which wee could neuer haue beene redeemed from the least of all our sinnes, nor

from the intolerable wrath of God due to vs for the same.
                  
                     Newnesse of life the fifth grace necessary for preparation.Q. What meane you by that newnesse of life, which you said was the fifth grace that is required of them that would come worthily to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. No man can bee fit to receiue this Sacrament that doth not vnfainedly loue the Lord and his holy word; and that is not onely willing, but able also in some measure to obey him in all things, being fruitfull in all good works, especially in the duties of his speciall calling.
                  
                     Reasons why it is necessary.Q. How may it appeare that there is such necessity of this newnesse of life which you haue spoken of?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because we finde that vnder the law none might

be admitted vnto the Passe-ouer 
                        Ex. 12.48 vnlesse he were not onely circumcised himselfe, but did circumcise also all the males that did belong vnto him.
                  Secondly, because no man is within the couenant of grace (and consequently, this Sacrament which is the seale thereof, can belong to none) but 
                        Ier. 31.31. Eze. 36.26 27. such onely as to whom God hath giuen a new heart and a new spirit; and in whose hearts hee hath written his Law, and put his spirit within them, to cause them to walk in his statutes, and to keepe his iudgements and doe them.
                  Thirdly, because no man can say hee hath a true faith (without which, as wee haue heard before, this Sacrament can do vs no good) vnlesse he

feele it 
                        Gal. 5.6. working in him by loue 
                        Luk. 1.6. Act. 24.16a conscience of all Gods holy commandements; and not onely a desire, but 
                        M
                              ••
                           . 3.10 2. Tim. 1.7 2. Cor. 5.17 some ability also and strength to do his will, 
                        Psal. 1.3. especially in the duties of his speciall calling.
                  
                     The vse of the doctrine concerning the necessity of newnesse of life.Q. What vse is to bee made of this doctrine, concerning the necessitie of newnesse of life in them that would come worthily to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. To shew that the desire that most men haue to this Sacramēt, as also their knowledge, faith, and repentance, is counterfait and hypocriticall, and consequently their comming to this Sacrament dangerous and damnable, because that howsoeuer they professe these things, yet are they altogether void of the practise of piety and righteousnesse,

and performe not any duty constantly and holily, either vnto God in the exercises of his religion publike or priuate, or vnto mā in the particular duties of their calling, or in the generall duties of iustice and mercy.
                  Q. What is that charity,
                     Charity the sixth grace necessarie for preparation. 
                     which is the sixth and last of all those graces, which you said were necessarie for the preparing and making of vs fit and worthy to come to the Lords table?
                  
                  
                     A. No man can be worthy and fit to come vnto the Lords table, that doth not vnfainedly 
                        Col. 3.13 Mat. 18.35. forgiue all that haue any way offended him, 
                        Rom. 12.19. 1. Thes. 5.15 and cast off al purpose and desire of reuenge: 2. that is not willing (in loue and obedience to God, and desire to winne his neighbour vnto peace) to

                     
                        Psal. 34.14. & 120.7 Mat. 5.23.24. seeke reconciliation with all such as hee hath beene at variance with, yea 
                        Gen. 13.8 1. Pet. 5.5. though they be his inferiours, and 
                        Mat. 18.15. though the offence began on their part: that 3. doth not 1. Th. 3.12 loue all men (euen 
                        Mat. 5.44. his enemies) and that 1. Ioh. 3.18 Ephe. 4.32. Rom. 12.9. not in word onely but in deed and truth, being ready by all meanes to doe them good: 4. that doth not beare an 
                        Mat. 12.50. 1. Ioh. 3.14 intire and brotherly affection to all the godly, 
                        Psal. 16.3 abounding so much the more in loue to them as hee seeth the graces of God to abound in them.Reasons of the necessity thereof.
                  
                  Q. How may it appeare that this charity you speak of, is so necessary as that without it none can receiue this Sacramēt worthilie?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because it is 
                        Mat. 5.23.24. 1. Tim. 2.8. 1. Pet. 3.7. 1. Pet. 2.1. Iam. 1.20. of
                        •
                      said in the holy Scriptures, tha
                        •
                      no seruice we doe to God can

bee acceptable vnto him or profitable to our selues, while we be out of charity with our neighbours.
                  Secondly, aboue all the parts of Gods seruice, Charitie is principally required in the receiuing of this Sacrament, because as 1 Cor. 10.16.17. wee doe heerein make open profession of our vnion with Christ and with his Church: so one principall end for which it was instituted, was to confirme and increase our loue one towards an other. Yea what benefit soeuer is offered therein vnto vs 
                        Eph. 3.6. & 4.16. we can no other way be capable of, then as we are vnited and knit together as liuely and feeling members to the whole body of Gods Church. Which also was the cause why our Sauiour

in the institution of this Sacram
                        •
                     nt and administring it to his Disciples, 
                        Iohn 13.14.34.35. laboured with thē in nothing so much, as to confirme them in loue and charitie one with another.
                  Thirdly, it is not possible that any man should 1. Cor. 13.2. haue true faith that wanteth charitie, or 
                        Mat. 6.12.14.15. and 18.35. bee assured that God hath pardoned his sinnes, that is not able to forgiue them that haue offended him.
                  
                     The vse of the former Doctrine.Q. What vse is to bee made of this doctrine, concerning the necessitie of charitie in all them that desire this Sacrament to their comfort?
                  
                  
                     A. To perswade euery Christian (as at al other times, so) specially then when hee prepareth himselfe to come to the Lords table, to striue against

his vncharitablenesse, and seriously to labour to bring his heart vnto this loue that 
                        •
                     ath beene described.
                  Q. But seeing we are all by nature void of hearty loue euen towards them that neuer wronged vs,
                     Motiues to perswade to forgiue wrongs. 
                     and maruailouslie prone to suspect, backbite and malice all men▪ yea, we are vnnatural, vnkinde, and vnthankefull euen towards them to whom wee are most neerely bound, tell mee by what meanes wee may bee perswaded to forgiue, and beare this heartie loue to them that are our enemies?
                  
                  
                     A. It shall bee profitable for vs to consider of these things following.
                  First, that that which wee haue to forgiue the greatest enemie we can possibly haue, is 
                        Mat. 18.24.28. nothing in comparison to

that which we desire and hope the Lord will forgiue vs. And that the Lord 
                        Mat. 6.15 & 18.35. will neuer remit to vs that were his enemies the ten thousand talents we owe to him, if we bee not able to remit to our brother the hundred pence that hee oweth vs: and that if wee did rightly beleeue and consider how mercifull and kinde the Lord hath beene to vs, and how much hee hath forgiuen vs, 
                        Mat. 18 33. 1. Ioh. 4.11 we could not choose but readily & cheerefully forgiue, & loue our greatest enemies.
                  Secondlie, that the man whom we so hate, 
                        Gen. 50.17. Mat. 18.33 & 24.49. is our fellow seruant, professor of the same Religion with vs; yea, 
                        Gen. 13.8 Act. 7.26. Mal. 2.10. 1. Pet. 3.7. our brother that hath the Lord to his father, and the true Church for his mother as well as wee; and is fellow

heire with vs of the grace of life. And (admit he be yet a
                        •
                      most wicked man, and vncalled) yet he is one whō we see the Lord our God 
                        Mat. 5 45 Rom. 2.4. vouchsafeth many fauours vnto, and whose conuersion hee seeketh by all meanes; yea 
                        Ioh. 3.16. 1. Ioh. 2.2. whom hee hath so dearely and tenderly loued, that hee spared not his owne sonne but sent him to endure infinite torments in soule and body euen for him: and that there is no grace in vs, nor loue vnto God, 1. Ioh. 5.1if we cannot loue them that wee see are so deare vnto him.
                  Thirdly, that our enemy 
                        Esa. 10.5 & 45.7. Lam. 3 37. Ioh. 1.21. 2. Sam. 16.10. is but the Lords instrument: and the wrongs he hath done vs are not permitted only, but sent from God; and that though our enemy hath no

iust cause giuen him to deale so with vs, 
                        Psal. 39.9 & 119.75.yet the Lord hath: and that therefore when wee can discerne the Lords iust hand in the wrongs are done vs, and receiue that spirituall profit which Gods children haue alwaies receiued by his corrections, 2. Sam. 16.10. Iob. 1.20.21 wee shall haue no iust cause to rage against him whom the Lord vseth as his instrument to humble and reforme vs by.
                  Fourthly, that 
                        Eccle. 7.23.24. Gal. 6.1. wee our selues haue either wronged others as much as our enemie hath done vs, or at least we haue been prone to doe it; and 2. Chr. 28.10. how can wee so much abhorre an other for that fault which wee our selues are so subiect vnto?
                  Lastly, that the hurt wee haue receiued from our enemy,

or that we can doe to him by priuate reuenge, is not comparable to that which we shall doe to our selues if wee continue in malice. For, besides that wee doe thereby make God our enemy, and 
                        Pro. 24.17.18. & 25.21.22. & 20.22. Num. 12.3.9.10. 2. Sam. 16 12. cut our selues from all hope that he should take our part, and reuenge our quarell, wee doe also depriue our selues of all benefit by the word & Sacraments and praier (as I haue aboue shewed) yea wee cause them all to turne into poison vnto vs. And what desperate folly were this in vs,Whether a christian is to loue and think well of all men. to kill our selues that we might hurt our enemies?
                  Q. Is it then the duty of a Christian to loue and thinke well of all men?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily: for 2. Chron. 19.2. Psal. 139.21 Pro. 29.27 he may and ought to hate the enemies

of God; and 
                        Mat. 7.16.20. 1. Cor. 5.12 Pro. 17.15 Psal 15.4 to censure & iudge the tree by his fruit, disliking and thinking euill of all such as by their deeds declare themselues to be wicked men. Yea, 
                        Psal. 26.4.5. Rom. 16.17 2. Thes. 3.14 15. hee may not onely shun all voluntarie familiarity with them, but 2. Chro. 19 2. Pro. 25.23. 3. Ioh 10. Iob 8.20. Mar. 3.5. also by countenace and other meanes witnesse his dislike, and shew himselfe strange vnto them: so that hee bee priuy to himselfe in the vprightnes of his heart, that he misliketh them for 
                        Psal. 69.9. & 139.21. their sinnes against God, not for the wrongs they haue done to himselfe; that 1. Cor. 13.6he taketh no pleasure to heare or speake of their sinnes; 
                        Psal. 119 136.139.158. but can mourne for them: and that he 
                        Pro. 17.5 & 24.17.18 Ioh. 31.29. reioiceth no
                        •
                      in, nor desireth their hurt, but is 
                        Psal. 35.13.14. 
                           
                              •
                           er. 18.20. able hartily to pray for them; and both ready and desirous

to shew 
                        Mat. 5.44. Gal. 6.10. 1. Thes. 4.15 them kindnes whē he can see any cause to hope that it may doe them good and winne them vnto God.
                  Q. But (because in describing that Charity that is required in all that would receiue this Sacrament to their comfort,
                     How farre foorth we are bound to forgiue iniu
                           •
                        ies. 
                     you said we must vnfainedly forgiue all that haue any way offended vs, and cast off all purpose and desire of reuenge) tell mee how farre forth we are bound to forgiue them that haue wronged vs, and whether it be vtterly vnlawfull for vs to seeke our remedy against such as haue done vs iniury in our person, or goods, or good name?
                  
                  
                     A. First, as it is vnlawfull for a Christian 
                        Pro. 16.33. & 19 11 1. Cor 13.4.5 7. Gal. 5.22 23. to bee easily prouoked vnto wrath or dislike of his neighbour; so after that he is iustly prouoked,

                     
                        Iam. 3.17. Rom. 1.30. he must be easie to bee appeased, and 
                        Rom. 12.18. desirous of reconciliation, 
                        Mat. 18.15. Luc. 17.3. willing to vse all good meanes whereby we may win him; yea, he is bound in whatsoeuer wrong he hath receiued from any, so to forgiue it, as he can loue the partie, and thinke aswell of him as he did before, 
                        Luc. 17.3.4. so soone as he shall shew himselfe sorowfull and penitent for the wrong he hath done.
                  Secondly, in case the partie that hath wronged him, will not be brought to see his fault and shew himselfe penitent, though hee may iustly dislike him, yet 
                        Mat. 5.43 44. Rom. 12.17 may he not hate or recompense euill for euill vnto him, but 
                        Mat. 5.39. Iob 31.30. rather endure this or more iniurie at his hands, than to doe, or speake, or desire ought against him in priuate reuenge.
                  
                     Thirdly, in case the wrong haue beene such as whereby hee is not only offended, but hurt and endamaged also in his person, or goods, or good name, it may bee lawfull for him to seeke his remedie against him that hath done the wrong, at the hands of the lawfull magistrate. For as the magistracy and law 2. Chron. 19.6. Rom. 13.14. are the ordinance of God, so it may bee lawfull for a Christian (in the necessarie defence or repaire of his person, goods, or good name, which God 
                        Eph 5.29 1. Tim. 5.23 23. Prou. 6.6.11. & 10 4. 1. Tim. 5.8. Iob 27.56. Pro. 22.1.hath bound euery man to maintain and haue care of) 
                        Exod. 22 1.15. Act 16 37. & 22 25. & 2
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        7.24. & 25.10.11. to take the benefit of it: prouided that he obserue those cautions and rules which God hath giuen in his word to direct vs in this case.
                  Q. Which be those?
                  
                  
                     
                     Cautions & rules to be obserued in going to law.
                     A. First, that we must not goe to law with any, but in case of necessitie: that is, not 1. Cor. 6.2. for t
                        •
                     ifles (but only when the wrong is so great as if we bee not righted by law, wee can not conueniently serue God in our calling
                        •
                     ) 1. Cor. 6.5 7. Mat. 5.25. nor till such time as we haue first assaied all other good meanes of peace and agreement: for a Christian 
                        Pro. 20.3 & 19.11. Phil. 4.5. may not loue contention, but account it his wisedome & glorie to passe by offences.
                  Secondly, that before wee seeke remedy of our wrongs by the ordinary meanes, wee 2. Chro. 16.12. by proportion. seeke first to the Lord, and 
                        Deut. 28.29. Lam 3.39.40. so acknowledge his righteous hand in the wrong that is done vs by our enemie, as wee may bee moued to make peace with God, and to profit thereby.
                  
                     Thirdly, that the end wee aime at in going to law, be not the hurt of our enemie, but the glorie of God which shineth in the execution & manifestation of iustice by this his ordinance: and when we thus acknowledge him 
                        Psal. 3.3. the onely maintainer of our persons, goods and credit, and 
                        Psal. 94.1.2. auenger of all wrongs, and dare 1. Sam. 35 31 33. not reuenge our selues; and 2 the necessarie defence and maintenance of our selues 
                        Rom. 13.8 1. Tim. 5, 8. 2. Cor. 12.14 Ephe. 4 28. and such as God hath charged vs to haue care of; and 3. the 
                        Eccle. 8 11 reformation of the partie himselfe and of 
                        Deut. 13.11. & 17.13 others by his example.
                  Fourthly, that we both begin and follow our suits in law 
                        Heb. 13.5 without couetousnesse, 
                        Eph. 4.31 or vsing no bitternesse 
                        Chro. 22.26.27. Deut. 24.6. Esa. 58.3. Mat. 18.28 and extremitie against the person of our

aduersarie: and labour neither 
                        Deut. 24.17. Pro. 17.23. by briberie nor by any other means to corrupt or hinder iustice, but so seeke our owne right as it may appeare wee are not void of loue and compassion and desire of reconciliation with our aduersarie.
                  Lastly, that when we haue vsed this ordinarie meanes that the Lord hath giuen vs for the righting of our selues, and find no redresse, we must rest 
                        Phil. 4.5. Iam. 5.7▪9 with quietnesse & meeknesse therein without fretting, or desire to right our selues by priuate reuenge, knowing assuredly 
                        Psal. 39.9 2. Sam. 16.10. that the Lord hath thus ordered the whole matter either for our correction, or for the exercise of our patience and charitie, and that 
                        Psal. 94.20-23. & 37.5.6. 1. Pet. 4 19he will bee reuenged of such an enemie,

and deale farre better for vs (if wee can commit our cause to him) then either our selues or any magistrate could haue done.
                  Q. You haue shewed that none can bee fit to receiue this Sacrament, vnlesse he can finde in himselfe those sixe graces that are mentioned by you: tell me now, is this all that is required for our preparation to this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. No: for those that are regenerated, and haue both saith, and repentance, and true charitie, 1. Cor. 11 30.32. may receiue this Sacrament vnworthily if they bee not carefull to renew and stirre vp these graces in themselues at such times as they intend to come vnto the Lords table.
                  Q.How our faith is to be renewed, ere we come to the Lords table. 
                     How must we renew our

faith when we prepare our selues to come to the Lords table?
                  
                  
                     A. Wee must take paines to bring our hearts,
                  First, to a 
                        Mat. 9.24 sight and sense of our infidelity, and weaknesse of faith.
                  Secondly, to 
                        Luk. 17.5.a true care and desire to bee confirmed in it by receiuing this Sacrament.
                  Thirdly, to an vnfeined resolution to vse all other good meanes whereby it may bee strengthened, and 
                        Ro. 16.17 to shun the meanes that may weaken it.
                  
                     How repentance is to be renewed before we come there. 
                     How must we renue our repentance when we prepare our selues to come to the Lords table?
                  
                  
                     A. Wee must labour to bring our hearts, first to 
                        Ier. 3.13. a sight and sense of our particular sinnes, specially those

which wee haue fallen into, since we last renued our couenant with God in this Sacrament.
                  Secondly, 2. Cor. 7.1. to a true care to cleanse our selues from them by sincere repentance, and desire to obtaine both further assurance of the pardon of them, and strength against them by receiuing this Sacrament.
                  Thirdly, to 
                        Psal. 119 10
                           •
                        . & 85.8. an vnfained resolution not to fall into them againe, but to shun all the shewes and occasions of them, and to serue God with more conscience and care then heretofore.
                  Q. How must we renue our charitie when wee prepare our selues to come vnto the Lords Table?
                     How our charity is to bee renewed.
                  
                  
                     A. We must endeuour to

bring our hearts, first, to a sight and sense 
                        Iam. 4.5. of our great want of true loue, and pronenesse vnto malice and contention.
                  Secondly, to 
                        Rom. 12.18. a true care of reconciliation with al men, and willingnesse to seeke it, and desire to receiue strength by this Sacrament against our vncharitablenesse, and to be confirmed and increased by it in our vnfained loue to all men, specially to the children of God.
                  Thirdly, to 
                        Psal. 119.57.112. an vnfained resolution to continue in that vnitie and loue that we make shew of at our comming to this Sacrament.
                  
                     That weake Christians are not to forbeare communicating in the Lords Supper.Q. You haue shewed what those graces be which euerie must find in himselfe that 
                           •
                        h desire to receiue this Sacrament

with comfort, and that it is not sufficient to haue them, but that a man that hath them, must also labour to stirre them vp and renue them in himselfe at euerie time when he prepareth himselfe to come to this Sacrament: tell me now, what doe you thinke of them, that (though they do find those graces you haue mentioned to be in them in some measure, yet) doe feele them to bee so weake and imperfect, and the contrarie corruptions so strong, that they are much troubled with the sight and sense thereof, may such presume to come to the Lords Supper, with any assurance that they shall receiue it worthily?
                  
                  
                     A. They may, if they can finde that those weake graces that are in them are ioined 1. with a desire to growe in

grace: and 2. the imperfections that they finde in themselues be such as they can vnfainedly grieue for, and striue against: and 3. that the flesh and the corruptions thereof are in them 
                        Ephe. 4.22 as the old man, dying and decaying continually, and the spirit with the fruits thereof like 
                        Ephe. 4.24 the new man, alwaies growing and waxing stronger in them. Yea such as these (notwithstanding their wants and corruptions) are of all others the fittest to come vnto this Sacrament.
                        Mat. 25.31 24.
                  
                  Q. How may that appeare?
                  
                  
                     A. First, because the disciples whom our Sauiour himselfe admitted to this Sacrament in the first institution thereof, 
                        Mat. 26 40. Mar. 14.40 Luk. 22 49 Luk. 24 11 Mar. 16.13.14. Luk. 24.45 Iohn 20.9. were at that time farre from perfection, and

full of infirmities.
                  Secondly, the Lords Supper is ordained 
                        Rom. 4.11. to confirme our faith, and all the fruits of it, (which wee should haue no need of, it any grace were perfect in vs) and to be the Sacrament of our spirituall nourishment, which none can bee so fit to receiue as they that (out of the sense of their weaknesse and readinesse to faint) doe most feele the need they haue of it.
                  Thirdly, if none might receiue it that feele corruption and want of grace in themselues, then had it beene instituted altogether in vaine, seeing 1. Cor. 13.9.12. Gal. 5.17. the best of Gods children while they liue in the flesh, are regenerated but in part. And this doth infallibly argue a man to be in the state of grace

                     
                        Mat. 5.3.4.6. Rom. 7.15-25. when he so feeles his corruptions and wants, th
                        •
                     t hee can grieue for them, and striue against them, and vnfainedlie desire to grow in grace.
                  
                     Praier to be vsed both before and at the time of communication.Q. You haue shewed what the points bee wherein wee must examine our selues before wee come to the Lords table: but is this all that we must doe in the preparing of our hearts vnto this Sacrament?
                  
                  
                     A. No: but wee must also both in secret, before wee come vnto the publike assemblie, and when wee come there, ioining with the congregation, make humble, faithfull, and earnest praier vnto God, as for the pardon of all our sinnes, speciallie our comming so oft heeretofore to his holy table with vnprepared hearts; so for his blessing

vpon that indeuor which we haue now vsed for our preparation, and for his gracious supplie of whatsoeuer hath beene wanting therein, and assistance in this holy action that we are to take in hand.
                  Q. Is it also necessarie to our preparation,
                     That it is not necessarily required to rec
                           •
                        iue the Sacrament 
                           •
                        asting. 
                     that we come fasting to this Sacrament? or do
                           •
                         they sinne, and make themselues vnworthy receiuers of it, that doe eat or drinke any thing before they come vnto it?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily: for though it be fit for such as may conueniently doe it, without hurt or danger to their health, to come fasting to this Sacrament, yet seeing there is no commandement of God that doth in
                        •
                     oin
                        •
                      it, and both at the first institution, and long after in the Primitiue Church

it was wont to be receiued after other meat; and the kingdome of God stands not in meat and drinke, (for neither if we eat, haue wee the more, neither if we eat not, haue we the lesse) therefore to put holinesse in this, or to esteeme it necessarie to the worthy receiuing of this Sacrament, is meere ignorance and superstition.
                  
                     What things be further required at the time of communication.Q. Hitherto you haue declared how we must prepare our selues before we come vnto it, if we desire to receiue this Sacrament to our comfort: tell mee now what is required of vs during the time of the administration thereof?
                  
                  
                     Outward things cōcerning the body.
                     A. Some things, that concerne the outward behauiour and actions of the body, and some things, that concern the

inward affection and disposition of the heart and minde.
                  Q. What be those outward things that you say are required of vs during the time that this holy action is in hand?
                  
                  
                     A. First, (as 
                        Eze. 46.10 at all other times when wee are to ioine with the congregation in Gods seruice, so specially) when wee are to receiue this Sacrament, which is 1. Cor. 10 16.17.appointed of God to bee a signe and seale of that most neere communion and fellowship that wee haue with all Gods people, wee must be carefull 1. Cor 11.17.18.20.33. Act. 20.7. to come all together to the beginning of Gods publike worship, and to tarry all together till the whole action bee finished.
                  Secondly, as in all other the parts of Gods publike worship

the congregation 
                        Act. 1.14. & 2.1.46. must ioine together as one man, and none may either by priuate deuotion, or any other way, withdraw themselues from that which is publikelie done; so in this part of Gods worship specially, euery one must giue diligent attention to that that is done, not onely when he himselfe is ready to receiue, but during the whole action, and euen behold and look vpon both the elements themselues, and all the sacramentall actions which are by Christ, ordinance vsed in the administration of this Sacrament, because 
                        Exo. 24.8 God hath appointed that to be a meane to stirre vp and help our faith in this action.
                  Thirdly, as in all the publike worship of God 
                        Mat. 18.
                           •
                        0. where

the Lord is in a speciall sort present, much 
                        Leu. 19.30. Psal. 5.7. 1. Cor. 11.10. & 14.40. outward reuerence and seemely cariage of our selues is required; so in this whole action, and then specially when our selues are to receiue those holy signes of the body, & blood of Christ wee must vse such behauiour and gesture of our body, as may be free from superstition, and yet fit to stirre vp and expresse that inward faith and thankfulnesse which is required in the receiuing of that which God then doth offer vnto vs.
                  Fourthly, as the workes of mercy 
                        Neh. 8.10.12. 1. Cor. 16.2.should alwaies be ioined to the workes of pietie, because they do much further the fruit and comfort of al the parts of Gods worship; so especially

ought euery one when hee hath receiued from God such pledges of his loue in this Sacrament, according to his abilitie, and in testimonie of his thankfulnesse vnto God, and loue to men, 
                        Heb. 13.16 to offer vnto God with cheerefulnes the Sacrifice of almes, for the releefe of the poore members of Jesus Christ.
                  
                     Inward things conserning the soule.Q. As you haue shewed what is required of vs during the time of this holy action, as touching the outward duty and behauiour of our bodies, so tell me now what should be the meditation and disposition of our hearts at that time?
                  
                  
                     A. First, when we see both bread and wine standing vpon the Lords table, which the Minister of Christ hath consecrated

and put apart to this holy vse, then must wee with ioy of heart call to minde and consider, that Iesus Christ was 
                        Ioh. 6.27 & 10.36. & 17.
                           •
                        9.sanctified and put apart to bee the only and all-sufficient meanes of nourishing and preseruing vs in the state of grace, strengthening and refreshing our soules in al temptations.
                  Secondly, when we see this bread broken and this wine powred foorth by the Minister of Christ; then must wee thinke 
                        Zach. 12 10. seriously with griefe and indignation of heart, of our owne sinnes that pierced Christ, and imposed such necessitie vpon him to suffer so infinite and vnspeakable torments; and withall of the infinite iustice of God and his

anger against sinne that could neuer haue been appeased but by this meanes.
                  Thirdly, when wee see the bread thus broaken, and the wine thus powred forth to be offered by the Minister of Christ vnto vs, and heare him in Christs name command vs to take, eat and drinke it; then must wee with ioy and thankfulnes of heart meditate of 
                        Ioh. 3.16. Rom. 8.32. the wonderfull loue of God towards vs, not onely in not sparing his owne sonne and giuing him for vs, but also 1. Ioh. 3.23. in offering him vnto vs & commanding vs to beleeue in him.
                  Fourthly, when wee take the bread and the wine at the Ministers hand, and doe eat and drinke the same; then

                     
                        Esa. 64 7. Psal. 42.11. must we stir vp our soules by faith to lay hold vpon, and apply to our selues all the merits of Christs passion; fully assuring our selues that by those vnspeakable torments of his owne sonne, the anger of God is fully appeased, & his iustice satisfied for all our sinnes: and so io
                        •
                     fully feed thereupon, that wee may feele our soules not onely fully 
                        Ioh. 6.35 satisfied thereby, and 
                        Mat. 11.28 Ioh. 6.33.48.51. strengthned and refreshed against all tentations; but also 
                        Ioh. 15.4.5. quickned and enabled to walke in all holy obedience vnto God.
                  Fifthly, when wee behold all the rest of Gods people in the same congregation communicating with vs in the same elements and Sacramentall actions without all difference

or respect of persons; then must wee call to minde and consider how great a corruption it hath been in vs 1. Co. 11.22. Mat. 18.10 to despise the Church of God or the least member thereof, and to haue beene so vnkind vnto them, so prone to malice them, and hard to be reconciled vnto them 
                        Rom. 14.15. 1. Cor. 8.11 whom God our heauenly father, & Christ our blessed Sauiour haue so dearely loued and done so much for; yea, we must stir vp our hearts to beare a louing and kind affection, as to all the people of God, so specially to them that wee doe now communicate withall.
                  Lastly, when after we haue receiued, wee giue somewhat according to our ability for the reliefe of the poore; and

ioine with the whole congregation in praier and singing of Psalmes: then must we stir vp our selues to doe all this with feeling and ioy, and thankfulnesse of heart, as vnto God that 2 Cor. 9.7. loueth a cheerfull giuer, and 
                        Ioh. 4.23.24. is a a spirit, & will accept of no seruice but that which is done in spirit and truth: so offering vnto him the sacrifice not 
                        Heb. 13.16 of almes onelie and 
                        Hos. 14.3. of the calues of our lips, 
                        Rom. 12.1 but of our owne bodies and soules, in thanksgiuing for this inestimable benefit of our redemption, and for his fatherly care (by ordaining this sacrament) to apply it vnto vs, and to confirme our faith in the same.
                  Q. What is the cause why
                     Ioy and cheerefulnesse. required in communicating at the Lords table. 
                     in all the parts (almost) of

that inward disposition that is required of vs in this holy action you make mention of ioy? Can wee not rightlie celebrate this heauenlie banquet without inward ioie and gladnesse of heart?
                  
                  
                     A. No verily, for as in the 
                        
                           •
                        . Cro. 30.21.
                           •
                        6. celebration of the Passeouer, and 
                        Deu. 12.12 & 16.15. Neh. 8.10. 1. Sam. 1.7. of al those solemn 
                        •
                     easts that were kept vnder the Law the people of God were commanded to reioice and to stir vp themselues thereunto by al good meanes, 
                        Psa. 27.6 & 126.2.3. & 92.1.4 because no man can indeed bee rightly thankfull vnto God for that blessing wherein hee doth not reioice; so in this Sacrament especially wherein 1. Cor. 11.24.25. wee are to celebrate with thanksgiuing the memory of a benefit that is incomparably greater

then euer the Church receiued vnder the law, this ioy and gladnesse of heart is necessarily required at our hands.
                  Q. You haue shewed how we must prepare our selues before we come to the Lords table;
                     What things to be performed by vs after communicating. 
                     and also what disposition of body and minde is required of vs at that time when this holy action is in hand; tell mee now what must wee doe after we haue receiued, to confirme and increase the comfort and fruit of it in our selues.
                  
                  
                     A. First, so soone as wee are come home from the publike assemblie, wee ought in secret to consider and bethink our selues seriously what wee haue done, and how we haue sped; what ioy and comfort wee haue felt in this Sacrament,

what increase of faith, and resolution to lead a holy life, we haue receiued thereby: because wee may be sure that no man hath receiued this Sacrament worthily, nor fed vpon Christ in it (
                        Ioh. 6.55 whose flesh is meat indeed, and whose blood is drinke indeed, and 
                        Mar. 5.28 30. whom none euer touched with a true faith, but they receiued vertue from him) that hath receiued no refreshing nor strength by it.
                  Secondly, if wee can finde no such comfort and fruit that wee haue receiued by it, then must wee examine diligently whether wee may not iustly charge our selues to bee the cause thereof, because we came not vnto it with that preparation of heart as hath

beene described. And if wee finde the cause wholly in our selues, then 
                        Lam. 3.39.40. 1. Cor. 11.3
                           •
                        
                      must wee presently humble our soules before God in feruent praier and vnfained repentance for this our grieuous sinne, that so iudging our selues for it, wee may not be iudged of the Lord.
                  Thirdly, if (vpon diligent examination of our hearts) we can finde, that this our want of comfort and fruit, which we are vnfainedly grieued for, ariseth not thus from our own sinne, but that wee brought with vs vnto the Sacrament (in truth and sincerity, though in much weaknesse) that preparation of heart that hath beene described; then haue wee no iust cause to 2. Chr. 30.18.19. bee dismaied

in our selues, but (after that wee haue humbled our soules before God in praier, for the sanctifying and remouing of this his correction, which for our triall, and other causes, best knowen to himselfe, hee seeth good to exercise vs by) wee may comfort our selues in this, that such 
                        Esa. 63.27 hardnesse and senslesnesse of heart, which wee thus feele and bewaile in our selues, is a certaine signe that wee are in the state of grace, and (our conscience bearing witnesse with vs, that we came rightly prepared vnto it) we haue vndoubtedly receiued comfort and fruit by it, 
                        Psa. 97.11 which wee shall also feele heereafter, though we doe not see for the present.
                  
                     Fourthly, if (vpon this examination of our owne hearts) we can finde, that wee haue sped wel at this feast, and that the Lord hath so welcommed and entertained vs at it, that we are come from it well refreshed and strengthened in our faith and loue, and in our resolution to lead a holy life; then must wee presently in heartie praier giue thanks vnto God for this his vnspeakable gift, 1. Cro. 29 18. and craue of him the continuance and perfecting of his owne worke which he hath wrought in vs.
                  Lastly, the benefit we haue receiued by this Sacrament, and comfort in the sense of Gods loue and fauour to vs in Christ, as it must prouoke vs to come oft to this banket,

so must it make vs careful 
                        Psal. 116.14.18. Eccl. 5.3 4. to performe our vowes we haue now made vnto God in the presence of all his people, by laboring to expresse the 
                        Eze. 10.11. Psal. 5.23. Psal. 106.2.3.truth of our thankfulnesse, both in taking heed that wee returne not againe (as the dogge to his vomit) vnto any of our sinnes which we haue professed repentance of, as also in indeuouring to honour God by a holy obedience to his will, in our whole conuersation, all the daies of our life.
                  Soli Deo gloria.
                  
               
            
         
      
   