
      
         
            
            
            ESSAIES VPON THE FIVE SENSES, with a pithie one vpon DETRACTION. Continued VVith sundry Christian Resolues, full of passion and deuotion, purposely composed for the zealously-disposed.
            By RICH: BRATHWAYT Esquire.
            
               Mallem me esse quàm viuere mortuum.
            
            LONDON, Printed by E: G: for Richard Whittaker, and are to be sold at his shop at the Kings head in Paules Church-yard. 1620.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT EMINENT FAVOVRER and furtherer of all noble and free-borne studies, Sr HENRY YELUERTON Atturney Generall, accomplished happinesse.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               
                  I
                Haue long sought the expressiō of my thoughts, which haue euer with all sinceritie tendred them yours: but how infirme is conceit without further demonstration? Loue is a deepe effect of the soule, which vndiscouer'd,

struggles, yea strangles herselfe till shee be deliuer'd. I haue many times purposed to offer some vowes next to him, whose diurnall prouidence (if nought else should induce) and his Maiestie, whose Halcyon-raigne makes vs happy, vnto your Selfe, to giue argument of my loue, the exquisite Idea of humane life; and now haue I seconded what I intended, though not in that perfection as my intirest wishes aymed. It is a great defect (and I haue noted it) not in will but worke, nor in purpose but power, to see so many extended desires limit their issue to leane effects: which fareth vsually to best-affected dispositions, where affectionatest thoughts are buried in silence for want of a tongue to discouer them. I will say nothing, for much speech rather argues affectation, than intimacie of affection: here be certaine Essaies or

               Obseruations, or what you will, dilating vpon the fiue Senses, whereto, as to their proper Obiects and Subiects they are limited: where you shall finde (as questionlesse you haue found in your selfe) the eares choicest harmonie to be Gods glory, the eyes cleerest vision his contemplation, the noses sweetest posie, the odours of his mercy; the tastes delightfull'st fullnes, meditation of his goodnesse; the Touches mouingst action, the feeling of his Passion. Many subiects I confesse excellently composed, whose Title deriues their essence from Essaies; but few restrained to these Obiects, which the devout Father termes those windowes which open to all vnbounded libertie; organs of weale or woe, happy if rightly tempered, sinister, if without limit. For in what erre wee and take not the occasion (as primitiue source) from one of these? The

fable of the Syrens had allusion to the eare, of Ixion to the eye, of Atalanta to the taste, of Mirrha to the smell, of Semele to the touch: where the eare not temperately restrained was soone inchanted, the eye lightly affected was to misery exposed, the taste for want of due relishing foyled her that was vanquishing, the smell too rankly breathing brought it selfe to perishing, the touch too highly aspiring, through her ambition fell to ruine. These were excellent types, and not vnbeseeming the purest and piercingst eye: now it rests, that I draw in my sailes, least my gate be too great for my worke, onely thus much I may confidently say,

                  If my Presumption err, my thoughts replie,
                  It is my loue that errs, it is not I.
               
may I euer so direct my subiect as to render you content, whose deseruing

parts make me honour you, more then that title of honour which is conferred on you, vowing to rest
            
               
                  Yours in duest obseruance, Rich: Brathwaite.
            
         
         
            
            An aduertisement to the devout Reader, vpon the vse of the fiue SENSES.
            LEnd here thine eare of zealous atten
                  •
               ion, fixe here thine eye of inward contemplation, that following the sauour of thy Sauiours oyntments, and tasting how sweet he is in goodnes, thou may vnfainedly be touched with remorse of conscience. Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            THESES, OR Generall rules drawne by Art, from the line of Nature, tried by the touchstone of infallible experience, and applied as obseruances to these present times; hauing reference to the fiue Sences (proper subiects) to which they are restrained.
            
               
                  Of Seeing. 1. ESSAY.
               
                  THough the eye of my bodie allude to the eye of my soule,
                     Sence. Of Seeing.
                   yet is the eye of my soule darkned by the eye of my bodie; where sence inclines to concupiscence, affection

to affectation: and that part (the curious modell of the eye) which ought of it selfe to be a directrice to all other Sences, becomes the principall organ of error to the affections: there is a motiue of thankfulnes in the eye of man, more than in the eye of any other creature; a muscle which lifteth the eye vpward, whereas others be more depressed, bending downeward. Why should man then fix the eye of his delight on the creature, hauing his eye made to looke vp to his Creator? The eye of our bodie, is like the orbe of the world; it moueth in the head, as the Sunne in the firmament; take away the Sunne, and there is darknes; by the depriuation of the eye, there ensueth blindnes. Conceits by nature ripest, are euer wandringst: and the eye of all parts most eminent, is to obiects of all kindes most extended: though

I gaze, till mine eye be dazled, yet is the desire of mine eye neuer satisfied: as the eye of all other Sences is most needfull, so of all others it is most hurtfull: it findes an obiect of affection pretending Loue, when her ayme is cleane contrary, peruerted by lust; there is no passage more easie for the entry of vice than by the cranie of the eye: there shee hath first acceptance, facilest entrance, and assuredst continuance. She hath first acceptance, because by the eye first entertained: facilest entrance, because of all others easiest to be induced: and assuredst continuance, because once perswaded, not to be by any motiue afterwards restrained. There is nothing so litle, that hath such diuersitie of operations attending it; being moued by the obiect that it lookes vpon, to loue or hate. Passions of the minde receiue their greatest

impression by the eye of the bodie; and soonest are they allayed, when the eye is most temperate. If the eye chance to be restrained, and want an obiect outwardly, it makes it self a mirror represented inwardly, and sometimes Narcissus-like doates for want of a substance, on an imaginarie shadow: it is iealous, and that is the cause, it is euer prying into others secrets. He is a wise man, that carries his eyes in his head, making them his Sentinels: but he is foolish, that sends them out like spies, to betray his soule to the obiects of vanitie. I haue heard some wish, that some space before their death, they might be depriued of their sight, inferring that the motions of the Soule were aptest for inward contemplation, when the eye of the bodie was least conuersant in outward delectations. It is true; but why should the principallst motiue

and organ of thanks-giuing be an occasion to the minde of erring? I haue eyes to direct me by obiects outwardly mouing, to the affections of the soule inwardly working. It is against reason, that the greater light should be extinguished by the lesser; the eye of the soule, by the eye of the bodie. A candle burnes the darkest, when the Sun beames shut out the brightest: so should the eye of the bodie subiect her light to the soules beauty; that as the Sunne cheeres and renewes by his milde aspect, cleeres and purifies by his more piercing reflex; so the eye of the soule might cheere the bodie (if deiected) renew her (if decayed) and purifie her maleuolent affections (if corrupted.) Lastly, as the eye is the bodies guide, it should not be made a blinde guide; it should lead vs, and not in our straitings, leaue vs: as it chalkes vs

out our way here vpon earth, so it should cheere vs in our convoy vnto heauen.
            
            
               
                  Of Hearing. 2. ESSAY.
               
                  
                     Sence. Of Hearing.
                  
                  HEARING is the organ of vnderstanding; by it we conceiue, by the memorie we conserue, and by our iudgement wee revolue; as maine riuers haue their confluence, by small streames, so knowledg her essence by the accent of the eare. As our eare can best iudge of sounds, so hath it a distinct power to sound into the centre of the heart. It is open to receiue, ministring matter sufficient for the minde to digest; some things it relisheth pleasantly, apprehending them with a kinde of enforced delight:

some things it distastes, and those it either egesteth, as friuolous, or as a subiect of merriment meerly ridiculous. In affaires conferring delight, the voluptuous man hath an excellent eare; in matters of profit, the worldly-minded man is attentiue; and in state-deportments the Politician is retentiue. The eare is best delighted, when any thing is treated on, which the minde fancieth: and it is as soone cloyed, when the minde is not satisfied with the subiect whereof it treateth. As a salue faithfully applied, oportunately ministred, and successiuely continued, affords comfort to the Patient; so good instructions deliuered by the mouth, receiued by the eare, and applyed to the heart, will in time proue motiues to the most impoenitent. They say, the obiect of the eare, to wit, Melodie, is the soueraing'st preseruatiue against Melancholy;

which opinion is true, if grounded on the melodie of the heart: for externally sounding accents, though they allay the passion for an instant, the note leaues such an impression, as the succeeding discontent takes away the mirth that was conceiued for the present. The eare is an edifying sence, conveying the fruit of either morall or diuine discourse to the imagination, and conferring with iudgment, whether that which it hath heard, seeme to deserue approbation. A judicious and impartiall eare obserues not so much who speakes, as what is spoken; it admires not the externall habit with the garish vulgar, but the force of reasons, with what likelyhood produced. If Herod speake, hauing a garment glittering like the sunne, the light-headed multitude will reuerence Herod, and make him a deitie, not so much for his

                  speech, for that is common, as for his apparell, to them an especiall motiue of admiration. Such as these (the common sort I meane) haue their eares in their eyes: whatsoeuer they heare spoken, if they approue not of the person, it skils not; such a neere affinitie haue the eare and the eye in the vulgar. A discreet eare seasons the vnderstanding, marshals the rest of the sences wandring, renewes the minde, preparing her to all difficulties, cheeres the affections, fortifying them against all oppositions▪ those be the best Forts, and impregnablest, whose seats, most opposed to danger, stand in resistance against all hostile incursions, brauely bearing themselues with honour, in the imminencie of danger. Such be the eares, they are planted in the high-rode-street, and exposed to a world of incursions; Scandall, than which nothing more

swift, nothing more frequent shoots her arrowes, detracting by aspersion from the excellentest modell of perfection: yet a resolued eare (like an other Antomedon) tempers the heat of her passion, by recourse had to herselfe and the sinceritie of her owne reputation. There is no discord so harsh to a good eare, as the discord of the affections; when they mutine one against another; for shee heares how a kingdome diuided cannot stand. I heare many things I would not heare, yet being enforced to heare them, I meane to make this vse of them; that hearing what moueth detestation to me in an other, I may be cautioned not to represent that to an other in my selfe. As the Martin will not build but in faire houses: so a good eare will not entertaine any thing with an approued iudgment, but what is faire in it selfe, and confers an equall

benefit vnto others. As of all vertues none more eminent than Iustice; so no sence of all others more accommodate than Hearing vnto Iustice. It is an excellent commendation, which the Historian giueth to that princely Monarch and father to the worlds sole Monarch, Philip of Macedon; that after hearing of the Plaintffe, he would euer keepe one eare open for the Defendant; a prerogatiue princely and worthy the management of her affaires, that is princesse of all vertues. But as best things peruerted, proue the worst; so fares it in Attention; many haue eares, who Mydas-like are depressed to earths obiects: erect them how can they, hauing their attention fixed on the basest of subiects? with how prepared an eare come these to the prediction of a scarce Summer? how apt these be to heare report of a

young scape-thrift, ready to vnstrip himselfe of a faire inheritance vpon any termes? how vnworthy tidings these be for so diuine an Herald? The Eare is one of the actiuest & laborioust faculties of the soule: pitty then it is that the soule should be by her intangled, or by her meanes to such base subiects enthralled, being for the succour of the soule principally ordained. I haue thought long time with my selfe, how I should imploy this Sence best for my soules aduantage: wherein I tooke a suruey of all those subiects, to which this peculiar sence of Hearing was especiallest extended; and I found the Eare much delighted with Musicke; but finding it but an aërie accent, breathed and expired in one instant, I thought there was no abiding for my attentiue Sence; fitter to be employed in a delight more permanent. Presently I made recourse

to the acts of Princes, and gaue my Eare to the discourse of fore-past exploits: Subiects I found well deseruing my attention, mouing me to imitation, and eying my own weaknesse with their puissance, forcing me to admiration. But retyring to my selfe with this expostulatorie discourse; Where be those eminent and memorable Heroës, whose acts I haue heard recounted? where those victorious Princes, whose names yet remaine to posteritie recorded? and hearing no other answer, saue that they once were, and now are not, I wayned my eare from such a subiect, as onely had power to giue vnto the memorable a name, but no essentiall being. From hence trauersing my ground, I descended (a descent I may terme it, being a studie of lesse height, though of more profit) to the discourse of the Lawes: where

I found many things in their owne nature worthily approued, by the Prescription of time, and Proscription of conscience to be strangely depraued: here me thought, I saw the Poets Arachne, spinning webs of so different a warpe, that great Flies might easily breake out, while litle ones suffered, strange vnctions able to cast Iustice on an Euphuus slumber; motions made to moue commotions twixt party and party. Here was no employment for my Sence, desiring rather a direction in her way to eternitie, than to haue partiall-guilt corruption her best Solicitor in this vale of misery. Whilest I was thus roving, seeking for a Pylot to giue free and safe waftage to my vnharbored Sence, at last after many tempestuous occurrences, my afflicted mindes perturbations, I fixt anchor, and by the direction of Reason, got what I sought

for, a quiet harbour. And where may I limit or how confine the straying circle, of many perplexed and confused thoughts wherewith I am surprized, within so blest a period? Not by the appetite, for that slaues the best of man to vnworthiest ends: nor by the obedience of my owne proper will, for that I found perverted by ayming at indirect obiects: nor by ambition, which alwaies (as Pindarus defined her, was accompanied with danger in assaying, impatience in prosecuting, and an opposition of expectance in atchieuing: nor by the Vsurers Calender, for there is Auarice, that decrepit infirmitie of old age haling, many a poore-prodigall Wittall cursing, and an inward corasiue, worse than any outward affliction, tormenting: Nor by the Courtiers fawning, where times be obserued, fashions imitated, good-cloths admired,

and the onely-generous qualitie is to be phantasticall-idle: Nor by the country-Farmers engrossing, where many a poore Orphans teare accusing, many a desolate widowes complaint contesting, and the hunger staru'd soule witnessing, make him of all others most wretched, in that his Nabal-securitie makes him obdurate. These are not guides to lead my directing Sence to her harbour; she is not for earth; her Musicke is mixt with too many discords. The worlds harmonie to a good Christian eare, may be compared to that of Archabius the trumpeter, who had more giuen him to cease than to sound: so harsh is the sound of this world in the eare of a diuinely-affected soule. A good eare will not say, as the powerfull auditor, or incorrigible sinner, saith to his Preacher; Speake to vs pleasing things,
                  
                     Esay 30. 
                  speake to vs pleasing things:

for these must haue Orphuus melodie, whom the Cyconian women tore in peeces, because with his musicke he corrupted and effeminated their men. These are not like those Deuils, whereof Guydo reporteth, that cannot abide Musicke: these are contrary Deuils, for they delight in nothing but the musicke of Flatterie. These obiects are not made to harbour me; my pitch is higher, my thoughts more vnbounded, my eare more arrected, and the consideration of mine owne imbecillitie more apparent: it is heauen she aymes at; the Angels, with which shee would consort, and that melodie of the superior powers, which yeeldeth to her eare the absolutest concord; shee shall sound forth therefore (tuning her voyce by her eare) the vnworthinesse of earths affections, compared to that excellencie

of reall delights planted aboue. First, shall be that delight, which depriued the first Angell of his eternall delight, to wit, Pride; whereby we become like Cinnamon-tree, whose rinde is better than all the bodie. Hence is it we desire to reforme the workmanship of God, becomming polishers of nature, garnishers of corruption, and proud of our shame. And how should we thinke, that God will respect vs, who haue disfigured his owne similitude, and so disguised our selues as he can hardly know vs? There is no workman, that regardeth or esteemeth his owne workmanship after it is translated and transposed by others; and wee becomming creatures of our owne making, shadowing natiue modestie with a dissembling blush, seeme to translate that amiable forme and proportion, which was giuen vs by our Creator,

to an vgly and promiscuous habit, extracted like Flaccus crow, from the phantasticke invention of all countries. The ancient law obserued, that such as had a yellow locke vpon their leprous parts, were not to consort with other people; though we want that yellow locke, the apparent token of leprosie, yet we haue a yellow band, and other running sores of vanitie. Far be this vice from the mansion of my soule, lest her speedy surprisall, depriue me of all: and euer may the consideration of my owne weaknesse, restraine me from the least conceit of aspiring arrogance. Next of pleasure, shall be sensuall delights, the vaine obeying of our owne affections, the soules bane, the bodies vlcer, and the Deuils watch bell. We are rocked asleepe, and sit dandled on the knee of an impudent strumpet; as Babels subversion proceeded from the

height of her sinne; so this linke of impietie, by which death and ruine is haled along to vs, promiseth subuersion to the possessor, the best reward her serpentine embraces, adulterate affections, and obsequious delights can propose to her attendants. Shall my eare be intangled with her soules staine? or prostitute her attention to so odious a subiect? shall my Sence of Direction tend to my subversion? or the bodies instructresse (like a blinde guide) throw her headlong to confusion? No, I will not engage so excellent an hostage as my soule, for the bitter-sweet of a repenting pleasure. Reason tells me, that pleasure merits onely that title, when it is relished with vertue; nor can sensualitie satiate the delight of the intellectuall part, when it is confined to immerited respects. This I will make my position, in the bent of my resolution;

I meane onely so far to obey my delights, as the after-hope of my soule may not be abridged, the future ioy in the expectance of soueraigne happinesse, impayred: but that my Sence to reason subiected, may in the sweet concord of an inward contemplation drawne from her creator, apprehend an exceeding pleasure, to haue done any thing pleasing to her maker. Can I finde in rich coffers (the misers idols) any true obiect to plant this excellent organ? ô no, the corruption of coine is the generation of an vsurer, or a lowsie begger. For the first, I loue my soule too wel, for so meane & base a traffick to hazard a gem so incomparable: heau'n is the Tabernacle I desire to dwell in, but so far is that Mansion from the conceit of our English Iew, or oppressing Vsurer, as he chuseth rather to liue in the tents of Kedar with the depraued

issue of Dathan, than by hauing Lazarus scrip, to be carried after to Abrahams bosome. Rightly was his experience grounded, who said; that the multitude of Physicians and Lawyers are the signes of a distempered state; but the number of Vsurers and their factors, is the argument of a fatall disease raigning: For the second, to wit, Beggery; I know not what to thinke on't: It is a beneficiall trade, where impudence marshals it: but a shamefast beggar (saith Homer) neuer yet could liue on his profession. I could wish a more temperate harbour; neither too rich, lest the fulnes of my estate make me insolent; nor too poore, lest the consideration of my want, force me to some course exorbitant. Pauperis est (saith the Poet) numerare pecus: but boni est (saith Dauid) numerare dies: it shall be my arithmeticke, my golden number.

But stay, let me reduce my thoghts, and in the consideration of my distempred and indisposed affections, propound to my selfe a forme which I may obserue, a line by which I may direct my course, and a centre, where I may end my distance; than a Caueat which may restraine me, an obseruance to conduct me, and a reason drawne from an inconvenience to divert me. and thus I expostulate; why would I not be rich? why no extortioner? why no oppressor? why no biting vsurer? Rich I would not be, lest I should admire my owne fortunes, and after admiration fall to idolatrize, and then where should I plant my future expectance? it is hard for a Cammell to goe through the eye of a needle, and more difficult for a gold-adoring Mammonist to enter heauen. Extort I would not, for I know there be vialls of wrath ready

to be powred downe on the Extortioner: and though the wicked for a while flourish like the greene Bay-tree, time will come, when his place is not to be found. Oppresse I cannot, when I heare the Orphans teare, the widdowes curse, the poore mans prayer, the hunger-strau'd soule: for I know the orphans teares will be botled, the widdowes curse effected, the poore mans praier receiued, & the hunger-staru'd soule reuenged. Vse my money, but vsure it I will not: ten at hundred shall not depriue mee of ten hundred times more glory, to purchase here a litle treasure subiect to corruption, and transitorie. Quòd foenorari, est hominē occidere, to play Vsurer, is to play the murtherer, saith the Orator Cicero:
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Ossic.
                   which may appeare (if euer) euen in the ruines of this time; where Hospitalitie, which was the glory of

                  England is vanished, and Seruing-men, who by reason of their education and number, were the strength of the Ile, to suppresse the barbarous tumults of all turbulent heads, are turned to a few garded pages, coloured like so many Butter-flies. Our Ancestors established by their lawes,
                     Ibid: proper finem.
                   that the Theefe should be censured to make restitution two-fold, but the Vsurer foure-fold; so odious was this trade to ancient times, when onely the light of nature shone vpon them. Yea an Vsurer by an old Canon, was denied christian buriall; and more prophane, than allowed was his opinion, who concluded in his owne behalfe, that no profession merited more exemption than Vsurie: his reason was; it was impartiall, and respected no degrees: his conclusion was true, but his inference erroneous: for it taketh fast hold of

Cities, Villages, Ports, and obscure Hamlets, and laies vnhallowed fist on persons of all qualitie, euen from the Pere to the poore oyster-crying-wife. Hence must I draw my caution, not to touch pitch, lest I be defiled; their conversation is infectious, their conscience a very gulph or charuell-house, to swallow and consume, devoure and exhaust all at once. The Indian Anthrophagoi are not halfe so rauenous: I will walke in a more modest path, both to cheere my affections, with a satisfying desire of competence, and to blesse my selfe from such cankerwormes, as prune the vertuous blossoms of others, to feede a posteritie of prodigall rake-hels; my eare must be tuned to another note, that my edifying Sence may discharge her peculiar office, not to affect nouelties, or chuse varieties, but to dedicate her inward operation to the

mindes comfort (to wit) the Melodie of heauen.
               
            
            
               
                  Of Touching. 3. ESSAY.
               
                  THis facultie of all others is most indiuiduate;
                     Sense. Of Touching
                   it inheres in the subsistence of man, and cannot be separated or taken away without the detriment or vtter decay rather, of the subiect wherein it is: it may therefore be called the liuing Sence, though in diuers diseases & occurrences also oft-times befalling, the subiect wherin it is, may be depriued of it; as we read of Athenagoras of Argus, who neuer felt any paine, when stung by a Scorpion. This Sence hath a certaine affinitie with the essence of man, and therefore should be employed in such things, as confer to the glory of that Essence:

many abuse it, who belulled with the lethargie of sin and securitie, neuer turne their eye to a serious contemplation of the supreme glory, or a consideration of their owne frailtie; they know not how Gods deferring is the more to infer; how hells torments were no torments, if invention might conceit them. These are they that are depriued of the spirituall vse of this Sence; crying with the sluggard, yet a litle, and yet a litle; turning in their bed like a dore on her hinges; their Delay like a pulley draweth on them vengance, like a mighty engine, razeth downe the fortresse of their soule, and like a consuming winde, or violent tempest, breaketh downe that faire Cedar which was planted for the heauenly Libanon. When neither the white flagg, nor the red, which Tamberlaine aduanced at the siege of any Citie, would be accepted of, the

                  blacke flagg was set vp, which signified there was no mercy to be looked for. It is strange that man endewed with reason, the ornament of the minde, should become so blinded with a terrestriall rest (which indeed is no rest, but a torment) as to forget his owne composition; being made of no better temper than clay, and as a vessell in the hand of the Potter. Far more wisely did Agathocles that prince of Sicilie, who commanded his Image to be made with the head, armes, and bodie of brasse, but the leggs of earth, to intimate of how weake and infirme a ground, his imperiall person subsisted. Weake indeed, and of as weake accomplishment: for what can man doe, wherein he may glory? or attribute the least of so exquisite a worke to his cunning? if we glory in any thing, it is our shame, which is no glory, but a reproch; for who,

but such as haue a fore-head glazed with impudencie, will triumph in their owne defects, or boast of their owne imperfections? doth the Peacocke glory in his foule feete? doth he not hang downe the taile when he lookes vpon them? doth the Bucke, hauing befiltht himselfe with the female, lift vp his horns, & walke proudly to the lawnes? ô no; he so hateth himselfe, by reason of the stench of his commixture, that all drooping and languishing into some solitary ditch, he with drawes himselfe and takes soile, and batheth till such time, as there fall a great shower of raine, when, being throughly washed and cleansed, he posteth backe to his foode. If such apprehension of shame appeare in brute beasts, what should his be, that is made Lord and gouernour of all beasts? is this liuinge sence, this vitall faculty, this indiuiduate

propertie made a rubb in our way to immortality? Doth that by which we liue, cut from vs all means of liuing hereafter? miserable then is our Sence, when without all sence of sinne, we become depriued of the sence of glory. This Sence of Touch may be reduced to those three obiects, wherein our vnderstanding is summarily emploied: the Intelligible, the Irascible, and the Concupiscible. The Intelligible, whereby we apprehend the end of our creation, whereby we iudge of causes and events, touching with the apprehensiue hand of iudgement, what may concerne vs, and the state wherein we are interested. The Irascible, when stirred vp with ire or indignation, we prosecute reuenge, not suffering the least disgrace without an intended requitall. The Concupiscible, when in an ambitious desire of honour or estate, or lustfull satisfaction

of our owne illimited affections, we couet this or that, ardent in pursuing, and least contented, when obteining that we haue pursued the vnderstanding if rightly seated, like a wise Pylot steres the ship, saues her from splitting, mannaging all things with a prouident respect had, of what may come after. No Syren can tempt this wise and subtile Vlisses: though the sea looke neuer so faire, this wise and temperate mariner is suspicious of it, knowing, Where the Sea lookes the whitest, oftimes the periloust rocks, and ineuitablest shelfs are seated. She sinks, plumms, and tryes the shaldes, whether apt for nauigation or noe: in briefe she doth nought without serious premeditation, & fore-thinks of the meane, ere she attaine the end. She affects not curiosity either in words, habit, or manners; yet vertuously curious how to expresse

herselfe truely honourable in all deportments, without aspersion of scandall. She will not disguise herselfe in an vnhonest couer, but affecting Plainenesse, teacheth the same rule and precept to her followers, which Iesu the sonne of Syrach taught: Ne accipias faciem aduersus faciem tuam: not to be dooble faced, but with sincere plainenesse, such as thou art, such do thou seeme. A rule far more accomodate to the course of vertue, and more directly leading to the seate of glory, then all the pollicies which euer Machauell yet inuented, or the dissembling appearances of all obseruing Timists. Though Numa Pompilius in Rome kept the people in awe, and subiected them to what tirannous lawes he pleased, vnder pretence of conference with Aegeria; Minos in Athens, vnder colour he was inspired in a certaine hollow caue by Iupiter;

and Pallas in a counterfeite habit, deceaued Claudius, in the adoption of Nero. This deuine essence of the soule, (the vnderstanding part) will assume no other forme then as she is: knowing her perfection cannot be made more accomplished by anie borrowed colours. She vnderstands her selfe to be composed of a more deuine element, then to subiect her will to vnworthy ends; for she knowes, that as the Sence is conuersant in outward things, she is seated in inward things, not directed by the eye of the Body, which is many times deceued, but by the eie of the Soule, which alwaies aimeth at one certaine scope, to wit, immortality, She considereth the ends, which mortality aimes at; honour, ample territories, great possessions, popular respect, and long life, to enioy these without disturbance, and she makes vse of these with a penetrating

iudgment, apprehending wherto the ends of these externallie-seeming goods confer. Honour (saith she) is quickly fading, and an aspiring spirit, like the loftie Cedar, is euer subiect to most danger; when like iacks in a virginall, or nailes in a wheele, the fall of one is the rising of another. ample teritories and great possessions (saith she) are more then nature requireth; she is content with a competent; and that competency reduced to a very narrow scantling, when of all our drosse, estate, tresure and possessions, going downe into the earth, nothing shall you take with you: you shall carrie no more hence, Nisi parua quod vrna capit, but a coffin, and a winding sheete. When Saladine that puissant emperor of Persia, with many victorious and successiue battails, had extended the limits of his Empire, and through the happinesse of his warrs

being neuer in any one pitcht field vanquished, become the sole terror of the Easterne part, at last fell mortally sicke, and perceiuing how there was no way but one with him, called his Chiefetaine, and commanded him (hauing bin chiefe Leader in all those prosperous warres, which the Emperor had atchieued) to take his shrowding-sheet, and to hang it vpon a staffe in manner of a banneret, and with it, to proclaime in the streets of Damascus, This is all that Saladine, the Emperor of Persia, hath left of his many conquests, this is all he hath left of all his victories. Long life (saith shee) is not worth desiring, since it giues but increase to a multitude of sorrowes; she prefers a good life, before a long life, and esteemes that life best beyond all comparison, which is exercised in the vse of her creation. Shee concludes

with the Philosopher, Optimum est aut non omnino nasci, aut quàm cito mori; making life the Theatre of shame if abused, but the eminent passage from a pilgrimage to a permanent Citie, if rightly employed. To be briefe, she meditates of nought, affecteth nought, entertaineth nought with a free will, and a pure consecrated desire, but what tastes of the spirit, hauing her eare barracadoed against the insinuating desires of euery seducing appetite; shee is not of the world, though in the world; nor can shee loue any thing within the worlds circumference, in regard, the world hath her limits, but shee not to be confined.
               The Irascible is attended alwaies vpon by Reuenge: for the obiect of the wrathfull facultie is honour and aduantage, and

if this cease, straight-waies courage and stomach decay, so as the least argument of distast, like another Silla stirrs her blood, and makes vp a Centaures banquet. This Facultie is alwaies as ready to apprehend an occasion of punishing (yea before it is offered) as to obserue the meanes of executing, when the occasion is ministred. She will not say with that noble Venetian Duke; It is sufiicient for a discreet Prince, to haue power to reuenge, that his enemies may haue cause to feare him. No, meditation vpon reuenge is the onely prayer-booke, that this vnbounded passion vseth. Yet may this part rightly tempered include in it an excellent good: for Anger is not alwaies vnto sinne: whence it is said, Be angry, but sinne not. Wee may be angry through zeale, and the feruencie we beare to the Gospell: Christ was angry, when

he whipped the buyers and sellers out of the Temple: he was angry, when his Disciples contended for prioritie; he was angry at the incredulitie of the Gentiles, the obduracie of the Iewes; yea he was angry at the barren fig-tree, when it brought out no fruit, and therefore cursed it, shadowing thereby the fruitlesse synagogue. O may my soule, if euer shee be angry, feele this passion in the feruent loue shee beares to her Creator: may her anger be against her selfe, in the wofull remembrance of her sins; that her anger may breed a detestation, detestation a reconciliation to her Sauiour. But for such as with the Beare cannot drinke, but they must bite the water, far may my soule be diuided from their dwelling: I will be angry, but commit no sin, for the God of Sion hath prescribed mee a forme, to be angry for the zeale of

Gods house, wherin is no sin.
               The Concupiscible is as the rest, of it selfe indifferent; and as a line in a circle, equally tending to either part of good or euill: yet so depraued is man become, that Medea-like, he is euer more prompt to take the worse rather than the better: here the couetous miser couets to engrosse an huge estate to himselfe, making his purse the diuels mouth, and with his hydroptick conscience, though euer purchasing, yet euer coueting. Here the ambitious man displaies his own humor to the eye of the world, of whom I may say, as was once said of one puffed vp with the like spirit: Quod habere non vult est valde bonum, quod esse non vult, hoc est bonū: that is good which he desires not to haue, that is good which he would not haue come to passe; so exorbitant is the desire of the ambitious, as what he desires is nothing lesse then

vertuous: here the Merchant aymes at an exceeding gaine in trafficke; he sliceth the seas, opposeth himselfe to all dangers, all distempratures of winde and weather, euer vsing this concupiscible part, desiring a happy fraught for his aduenture. Here the Warriours desire is confined, to gaine by the spoile of an other. euen the basest mechanicke offices be conuersant in this facultie, ayming at some especiall end, whereto their labors be directed. To couet things temporarie, planting our affections on them, is discrepant from the right vse of this excellent facultie: there is a good couetousnes, and it is heauenly; there is a good theft, and it is heauenly; there is a good ambition, and it is heauenly: The good and godly couetous couet not with Demas, nor Magus, nor Demetrius; they couet righteousnes, sobrietie, temperance,

yea all vertues which confer to humane perfection; there is but one pearle of esteeme, and to purchase it, they sell all that they haue; this is a happy couetousnesse, a glorious merchandise: the good and godly thiefe cares not for embezling earthly treasure; for he knowes mothes will corrupt it, rust will consume it, and continuance of time will deface it; it is that immortall treasure which he would steale, for he obserues how it is subiect to no alteration, but continues in the same state euer. Againe, he reads, the kingdom of heauen suffers violence, and rather then he will loose it, with all violence he meanes to pursue it. The good and godly ambitious ayme not at worldly honour, but as a subiect incomparably aboue all externall seeming happinesse: for they consider how it is better to be a doore-keeper in the Lords house, than to

be conversant with Princes. Happy theefe, whose theft is heauen; blessed couetousnesse, to couet heauen; glorious ambition to aspire to heauen; may this Theft be my soules discipline; this Couetousnesse her exercise; this Ambition her prize: so like the good Theefe, may shee be crowned, with the godly-couetous Zacheus rewarded, and with the heauenly-aspiring soule exalted. How happy shall I be in this Sence (the life of humane essence) if by vsing these three faculties of my soule sincerely, I shall at last attaine to the state of glory? yet how much is this Sence, especially conuersant in these three subiects, perverted, and violently wrested from her own nature? where such as desire to touch the Arke, make this Sence the instrument of their fall: others Gehezai-like, whose beating pulse will not forgo the touch of gold, though

they purchase it by a leprosie. O how many fall by this Sence of life, making it their sence of death? Sodoms apples were but touched, and to dust and ashes they were reduced: the fairest of all our vanities be but Sodoms apples, they cannot endure the touch, for they are painted and adulterate. Far be my Sence estranged from so prophane a subiect: Vertue, as it needs no colour to garnish it, so can it endure the Touch, and neere be changed. It is shee that shall attend my Sence, so as touching her intellectually, my soule by so sweet an apprehension, may be incorporate in her indiuidually. Here is my liuing Sence well satisfied, and in this harbour planted, she will neuer desire to be remoued: for affliction is ended, discontent cheered, and a perfect rest, without interruption, by her that is the true essence of delight, proposed.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Tasting. 4. ESSAY.
               
                  THis Sence makes mee weeppe ere I speake of her;
                     Sence. Of Tasting.
                   sith hence came our greefe, hence our miserie: when I represent her before my eyes, my eyes become blinded with weeping, remembring my grandame Eue, how soone she was induced to taste that shee ought not. Hence doe I imagine (imagination is the end of man) how pure I had bin, if this one Sence had not corrupted my pristine innocencie: apples are suspicious to me, being the first that depraued me. I will rather distaste mine owne palate to giue true rellish to my soules appetite, than by satisfying the first, corrupt the puritie of the latter. By the ministerie of this Sence, I apprehend

the vniuersal delights of this world, and as in the Palate, so finde I in them a distinct operation. Many things hot in the mouth, are cold in the stomacke: such are wordly pleasures: hot they are in the first pursuite or assault, and eagerly are they followed: but in the stomacke, that is, when digested and rightly pondered, how cold are those Pleasures, being attended on by remorse, and obserued by repentance. Againe, hence doe I gather the frailty and breuity of all earthly pleasures? Whatsoeuer ministers singular'st content vnto our appetite, is no longer satisfieing then in the palate; for after going into the stomach, that content is done. So delights momentany, and limitarie to an instant, may for the present yeild a satisfaction, but how soone be these ioyes extinguished, how soone forgotten? This Sence cautions me

of two Sects, the Epicure and Pithagorist, the first by too much exceeding, the latter by too much restraining; the Epicure puts his mony in his belly, as the Miser doth his belly in his purse: but the Pithagorist neither cares for belly nor purse, scrupulously abstayning from that which was ordained for his vse. The fiue Sences (saith one) be our greatest sleepers; yet I may affirme that this Sence neuer sleepeth; for there is nothing seemingly-sencelesse, which she apprehends not either with free taste or distaste. Of all others, this Sence produceth the diuerst qualities: whence it is we say, Like lips, like lettice: where this facultie, either by an indisposition of the bodie, or a distinct operation in the subiect, showes this pleasing and acceptable to one, which is noysome and different to an other. This Sence must haue the bodie and

minde prepared, before shee can rightly show her owne power; she admits of no distemper, suffers no restraint: whence it is, that we finde by experience, where the bodie is not equally disposed, this facultie hath much of her operation impaired. The best taste is to distaste sin, and the worst taste is to affect that, which confers to the soulea distaste of all tastes inherent in all subiects, none lesse distinguishing than the hungry-mans taste: which may appeare in those miserable famines of Samaria and Ierusalem; ratts, mice, weasels, and scorpions were no common mens iunkets; where motherly loue renounced her name, and became the ruine of that shee should cherish; as the Matron Myriam, who constrained for her liues supportance (though shee had but one sonne) killed and rosted him. Hence comes it, that necessitie hath

no law, nor hunger needs no sawce. Let my Taste be directed by reason, and not by sence. Reason may enlighten her, and make her distinguish of desires; but Sence perplexeth her, and subiects the better part to a slauish appetite. Many haue exceeded in the vse of this Sence, but few restrained their desires with moderation. More Cleopatra's than Cornelia's, more Vitellij than Vticae, more Sileni than Salustij: ancient and moderne replenish vs with stories of this nature; where violent ends euer attended the immoderation of Princes, but healthfull liues, and ioyfull periods summ'd vp the dayes of the temperate. The Venetians giue vs instance of these in themselues; amongst which there appeares one more memorable: Domenico Syluio his Duchesse, was so delicate a woman, as she would haue dew gathered to make her

                  Baine withall, with many other curious perfumes and tricks; yet before her death her flesh did rot, so as no creature could come neere her. May my Taste be seasoned with no such delicacie: let my affection rather disclaime herselfe, than vndo my soule by intemperate subiects. I will not care so much to taste what I loue, as what I hate; for I know my selfe more subiect to surfet in the one, than in the other. I haue tasted most of inferior delights, yet in a generall suruey of all my pleasures, I cannot chuse but weepe, to remember how those delights which I affected, produce no other fruit but Repentance. The taste of vice to a mortified affection, is like sweet meats to him that is in an ague: shee is distastfull, and becomes more odious, in that shee cloaths delight with an habit of wantonnesse. I will chuse with

holy Hierome, to build me a cell in the desart, to liue out of the heat of concupiscence, rather than by liuing in the eye of the world, enthral my reasonable part to the appetite of Sence. Taste ingenders delight: I will not taste euery thing I like, lest late repentance force me to distaste that which I liked. I will fore-see the end, ere I approue of the means, that grounding on a golden meane, I may attaine a glorious end. No tempting delight shall feede my appetite: for as preuention is the life of policie; so temptation, if consented to, is the passage to miserie. Fowles of the ayre, though neuer so empty-stomackt, flie not for foode into open pit-falls:
               
                  Quae nimis apparent retia, vitat avis. My soule shall imitate the bird, that she may escape (like the bird) out of the hand of the Fowler. How happy were I, if I would taste nothing

but what ministers content to the minde, sustayning nature, but not oppressing her, feeding, but not pampering her, cheering, but not cramming her. I haue tasted many liquors, yet none like the brinie current of mine eyes: teares are best extinguishers of sin, preparatiues to remorce, motiues to true contrition: precious Elixir may thou euer be my drinke in the time of my pilgrimage, and quench my thirst of sin with a desire of an heauenly inheritance. As the Nurse layeth wormwood or aloes on her pap, to waine her childe from sucking, so will I sprinkle some bitter thing vpon such things as I affect, that my delight may be restrained. How full of comfort am I, when my taste is directed to a right end? and how directed, when it is besotted with vanities? How far better were it, to liue temperate, taste all things as indifferent,

and conclude our dayes in quiet, than to haue Diues doom, Nabals doale, or Balthazars fall? how far better were it to liue like the Hermit in the desert, then like the sensuall Libertine in the world so dissolute? what is it to feed lusciously, fare daintely, tast all things with full satiety, when our fare shal be reduced to famine, our luscious feeding to Soule-staruing, and our Satiety here on earth, to our penury for euer in hell? it is better to distribute to those that craue, vse temperance in what we haue, & make our posteritie true heyres of what we leaue, than to cry in midst of an eternall flame, for one small drop to quench our thirst, and not be heard; for one crum, and not be satisfied; for one minutes ease, and not released. Taste may my soule no such dainties as may starue her; delighted be my soule, but with no such

vanities as may corrupt her; reioyce may my soule, but in no other subiect, no other obiect, yea her only maker. Soe in the tast of this life, shall I remember my yeres with bitternesse of heart: that my life which is reckned not by yeres, but Howres, not how many, but how good, may be as the Tast of sweete smelling odors, in the nose-thrills of her Sauiour; there is no odour like it, no perfume to be compared to it; it is a saving sauour; a pretious odour; and the Saints honour. Happy Sence that is thus saincted; comfortable taste that is thus renewed; and blessed soule that is thus invited; Taste and see how sweet the Lord is; sweet in his mercies, sweet in his promises, and sweet in his performance. And such is the spirituall sweetnes, which euery devout soule conceiueth in the contemplation of eternitie, whose ioy is not in the

tents of Kedar, but in the bowels of her Sauiour; not with the inhabitants of Moloc, but the glorious seed of Isaac: these haue their taste in the greene and flourishing pastures of Gods word; distasting the slesh-pots of Aegypt, and relishing onely the manna of heauenly Canaan. Pleasures which are earthly, they neither long for in expecting, nor loue when enioying. They haue found obstruction in the Sences corporall, but free passage in the Sences spirituall. They compare worldly-tasting men to those wilde asses, which snift the winde; their desires extend onely to be thought good, dis-esteeming the excellencie of reall goodnesse, which maketh man truly happy. They obserue foure sorts of men in the world discouered by the eye of wisdome: Some are wise, but seeme not so; some seeme so, but are not so; some neither are nor seeme;

some both are and seeme: the last, these onely partake; for as their essence concurrs with their appearance, so scorne they to expresse more in semblance, than they are in essence; if there were no God, yet these men would be good: and for sin, though they wist (to vse Seneca's words) that neither God nor man knew it, yet would they hate it. O my taste be thus seasoned, my palate thus relished, my affections thus marshalled, my whole pilgrim-course thus managed, that my Taste may distaste earth, rellish heauen, & after her dissolution from earth, enioy her mansion in heauen.
            
            
               
               
                  Of Smelling. 5. ESSAY.
               
                  SO prouident hath that great workeman bin of all his creatures,
                     Sence. Of Smelling.
                   as no delight euen in this Tabernacle of earth, is wanting to make him more accomplished: and though the fiue Sences (as that deuout Barnard obserueth) be those fiue gates, by which the world doth besiege vs, the Deuill doth tempt vs, and the flesh ensnare vs; yet in euery one of these, if rightly employed, is there a peculiar good and benefit redounding to the comfort of the soule, no lesse than to the auaile and vtilitie of the bodie. For euen by the Smell, as by the conduit, by which is conveyed vnto vs the dilated fountaine of Gods mercie,

doe we apprehend all varieties of flowers, sootes, sweetes: which moued the Philosopher to terme this Sence, the Harbinger of the Spring. Some are of opinion, that this peculiar Sence, is an occasion of more danger to the body than benefit, in that it receiues crude and vnholesome vapours, foggie and corrupt exhalations, being subiect to any infection; it is true: but what especiall delights confers it for one of these inconveniences; cheering the whole bodie with the sweetest odours, giuing libertie to the vitall powers, which otherwise would be imprisoned, delight to her fellow-Sences, which else would be dulled, and the sweet breathing ayre, which by her is reciued: all these (as so many arguments of consequence) bring vs to a more exact acknowledgment of this Sences excellencie. The Smelling is termed

the vnnecessariest of all other Sences, yet may it be employed in cases of necessitie; witnesse Democritus, who against the celebration of the feast Buthysia, fasted nine dayes, sustayning nature onely with the smell of hot bread. This Sence of mine shall not be subiected to outward delicacies: Let the Courtier smell of perfumes, the sleeke-fac'd Lady of her paintings, I will follow the smell of my Sauiours oyntments: how should I be induced, following the direction of reason, by such soule-bewitching vanities, which rather peruert the refined lustre of the minde, than adde the least of perfection to so excellent an essence? No, let Pigmalion dote on his owne picture, Narcissus on his shape, Niobe on her numerous progenie; my Taste, shall be to taste how sweet the Lord is; my Touch, the apprehension of his loue; my

                  sight, the contemplation of his glory; my eare, to accent his praise; my smell, to repose in the faire and pleasant pastures of his word. O comfort truly styled one; in that my soule transported aboue herselfe, vnites her selfe to be ioyned to her Redeemer. The Gardens of the Hesperides warded and guarded by those three daughters of Atlas, were pleasant; the Gardens of Lucullus fragrant; the Groue of Ida eminent; yet not comparable to those exquisite pleasures, which the diuine pastures comprehend; there is that hedged Garden, that sealed Well, that Bethesda, that Eden, that Syloe; here may the delight of euery Sence be renewed; the thirstie satisfied, the hungry filled, the sicke cured, the labourer cheered, and the exquisite mirrour of all perfection; torrent of euer-flowing bounties, Iessaes branch, Aarons rod, and that flowrie

garden of Engaddi represented. There is mel in ore, melos in aure, iubilus in corde; honie to the taste, melodie to the eare, and harmonie to the heart; honie which breedes no loathing, melodie which is neuer discording, harmonie euer agreeing. This it is to be ioyned to an heau'nly spouse, sending from Paradice pomgranats, with the fruits of apples; Cypresse, Nard, Nard and Saffron,
                     Cantic. 4. Fistula, and Cinnamon, with all the woods of Libanon, Mirrh and Aloës, with the best oyntments. What excellent delights be here proposed? what exquisite comforts ministred? it is sufficient for me to admire them in this pilgrimage, enioying them by contemplation, which after many pilgrim dayes I shall possesse in fruition. There is no Pomander to smell at, like the oyntment of my Sauiour: he is all sweet, all comfort, all

delight; sweet in his mercy, comfortable in his promise, and delightfull in his presence; in his mercy a father, in his comfort a redeemer, and in his delight a replenisher; from his mercy and compassion is deriued abundantly fulnes of consolation, from his comfort or promise, an assured expectation, and from his delight, of himselfe a plenarie possession. O would to God with happy Ioseph, I had taken downe my Sauiour from the crosse, embalmed him in the spices or graces of my soule, had layen him in the new sepulchre of my heart, that at least attending or following my IESVS, my obedience might haue ministred something to so heauenly obsequies. For how should I think but by the smell of his oyntments, my sin-sicke and soule soiled conscience should be cured, who had power to raise dead Lazarus stinking

in his graue, hauing bene foure dayes buried? O that I might goe to the mountaine of Myrrh,
                     Cant. 4. to the hill of Frankincense, to be ioyned to him, whose oyntments are aboue all spices: how should I want any thing being so enriched? how should I feare any thing being so armed? or how wish any thing, hauing whatsoeuer I desired? Sweet-smelling perfume of selected vertues, pure streame of diuine graces, and amiable beauty neuer blemished; no delight shall withhold me, no affection seduce me, no inordinate pleasure entice me, no sweet smell draw me; I haue tyed my selfe to my spouse in all my Sences; being He, that ministers refreshment to all my Sences. If I eye any thing, it shall be my Sauiours crosse; if I heare any thing, it shall be my Sauiours praise; if I touch any thing, it shall be my Sauiours

wounds; if I taste any thing, it shall be my Sauiours comforts; if I smell any thing, it shall be my Sauiours oyntments: Blessed eye, that hath such an obiect; blessed eare, that heares such a concord; blessed touch, that hath such a subiect; blessed taste, to haue such a rellish; blessed smell, to haue such a sweetnesse. As the Nose is the conduit, by which wee receiue breath, so should it be the conduit, by which we receiue grace: by it we breath; may wee rather not breath, then employ it not in breathing praise to our maker? As the Taste and Smell haue two distinct offices, yet by an affinitie vnited, for the obstruction of the one is the annoyance of the other; so may they be linked in one consort, in the contemplation of their Creator; that as the one is to be employed to taste and

                  see how sweet the Lord is; so the other by following the smell of her Sauiours oyntments, may at last attaine to the mountaine of eternal spices.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               
               ORNATISSIMO ET LECTISSIMO VIRO, I. B. de L: EQVITI AVRATO, PVBLICAE PACIS IVRISQVE STVDIOSISSIMO.
               Pariter
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   
                  H. B. FILIO INTER SVPERSTITES ORTV MAXIMO, TALI PATRE NATO DIGNISSIMO, INDOLIS OPTIMAE, SPEI AMPLISSIMAE, MENTIS TENACISSIMAE.
               RICHARD BRATHWAYT HANC DETRACTIONIS NARRATIVN CVLAM, IN GRATAM ANIMI MEMORIAM (INVITA QUORUNDAM INVIDIA:) candide, condite, intime, integre D. D. D.
            
            
               
               DETRACTION.
               
                  
                     DEtraction is a sin, deriued from him, who first seduced woman to sin: shee is conuersant in extenuating of vertues, detracting from the good, and spying occasion how to derogate from his worth, which is most deseruingly eminent: shee is called by the sententious Lipsius, a priuy guilefull wounding of the name, by these two instruments, Pen and Tongue: she is termed by that diuine Philosopher, a secret vndermining thiefe, that breaketh into the precious cabbinet of all morall vertues, not to possesse them, but corrupt them, not to enioy them, but detract from them: shee is harbored in male-contents, respectiuely

entertained by Nouelists, an inquisitiue obseruer of state-affaires, and a serious agent in ciuill diuisions: she is a great enemie to peace, yet expects small benefit by warre, neuer contented so long as she sees deseruing men honoured: shee is amongst men as pernicious, as to God odious, being a profest foe to none more than such as be zealous of God. Saturne is said to haue predominancie ouer her, Idlenesse is the foster-mother of her, and Enuie claimeth an especiall prerogatiue in her. It is strange to see how her censures be euer grounded on ignorance in matters of knowledge, where publike or priuate imputation vseth to be the maine scope of her invention. Rightly was shee compared to the venemous Tarantula bred in the region of Apulia, whose stinging was not to be cured by ought but Musicke, to wit, the

melodie of a sincere and patient minde, prepared to endure whatsoeuer she shall inflict, yet able to wipe of, whatsoeuer she can asperse. As it is the propertie of a friend to conceiue well, to defend, and speake well of those labours we compose, or actions we performe (saith Lucilius): so is it the vse of a discontented and malignant nature, to depraue the best by misconstruction, euer ayming at the worst: much like the Toade, that may not endure to smell the sweet sauour of the Vine, when it flourisheth. Whence I may iustly assume a particular complaint, hauing got the name of a Detractor, which I neuer merited. But well doe I perceiue whence I gained that title, traduced not deserued, being by malice suggested, or on misconstruction (the indirectest path to probable opinion) grounded. For Construction is the moulder

of Detraction: and impossible is it, that so many different mindes should iumpe in one censure; for particular vices enforce an application to our selues, what was meant in generalitie. So as nothing can be writ in how temperate a style soeuer, but some personall distast may be occasioned contrary to the minde of the Author, yet sorting with their owne vicious humour: whereas it would rellish more of true wisdome, to reforme that in our selues, which giues occasion of reproofe vnto others, then publikely to discouer our owne defects, by applying that to our selues, which perchance, had as neere, if not neerer affinitie to others. And herein was Vespasian commendable, who apprehensiue enough of offence, and powerfull enough to reuenge, could wisely forbeare to be captious in the one, or violent in the other.

As for popular opinions, which haue their foundation on no other ground than erring Repentance, I appeale from them to a firmer and faithfuller testimonie, that is, my owne conscience, which can say thus much for me in lieu of so many obiections: Non habeo in me, quod testetur contra me: so sincere were my purposes from the beginning, as they euer aymed at a more generous and glorious marke, than to stoupe to such basenes, as personall calumniation, the infallible note of an ignoble and vnworthy disposition. Albeit more apparant it is than light: vt Belluae sunt humanae, ita homines belluini; whose depraued actions should be glanced at, whereby shame might reclaime them, seeing themselues brought forth naked to the world, or the examples of others deterre them, whose fearefull ends were occasioned

vpon like meanes. And such as these be as necessarie fautors and supporters of vertue, and her declining soueraigntie, as those cherishers and professors of vice be principall causes of vertues decrease: yea those be they, which that regall patron and patterne of iustice, Aristides, termed the Centinels of his kingdome, because they rowsed and raised his people from the secure sleepe of ryot and excesse, perswading them to imployments more generous and manly, than to expose so precious a treasure as Time to sensuall effeminacie. Amongst these (I confesse it) I may be ranked, nor is this Ranke vnworthy the approbation of the best: for my ayme hath euer bin (so farre as the small portion of my abilitie extended) to propose a way as accommodate, to the course of vertue in a generall obseruance, as particular

practise: endeauouring to instance in my selfe by example, what my Workes proposed by instruction. Wherein, if at any time I failed, (as what man liuing may not at sometimes faile, if not fall) so vnsained and vrgent was my desire of redeeming the time I lost, as I surceased not to labour till I regain'd what I lost. Yea, so farre haue my thoughts euer beene from excusing or extenuating my imperfections (which haue beene euer before mine eyes) as I made that diuinely-morall instruction of Epictetus, my entirest Councellour: who wils mee to denie the sinnes mine enemy taxes me with, but to reproue his ignorance, in that, being vnacquainted with the infinitie of my crimes (which minister no lesse occasion of feares then teares) he layes onely two or three to my charge, whereas, indeed I am guilty of a million. But for that

other ranke, whose oyly tongues can smooth the errours of the vicious, aswell as smother the deseruing parts of the vertuous, I asmuch loath the gaine of their trafficke, as I hate their trade. For the world shall not hire me to vtter one word to their praise, which depraue the world, nor the eminentst rewards force mee to detract, where vertue bids me commend. For so small is the content I reape on earth, as I see nothing in it of that worth, which might moue mee to Flattery: or of that daring command, to force mee to dispraise what is good, hauing a prepared soule within me. Briefly, as I detest these base creepers, so will I seeke to auoide the daungerous company of detractours, since the former, as they imply spirits ignoble and depressed, so the latter inferre troubled minds, and such as are discontented. Long time therefore

haue I resolued to sconce my selfe betwixt these two, for who so obserueth not a meane is in danger of being split by one of these two. But to returne to the nature of these Detractors, which Pindarus calls men of vncurbed mouths, they are euer itching after newes, which by an vncharitable glosse, they labour so to peruert, as they may redound to the imputation of some personall agent interrested in those affaires. They are subtill interpreters to the worst sence: for (Spider-like) they sucke poyson out of the holesomest flowers. As euery age is infected with their poison, so no age from them, can plead exemption. Where nature her selfe shall be reuiled by them, being shee that first produced them. One findes fault with nature, and taxeth her of indiscretion, for setting the Bulls hornes rather on his head then his

backe, being the stronger part. An other, that she should place both the eyes before, whereas prouidence would haue set one behinde, and an other before, to arme man against danger aswell behinde, as before. Yea, euen those Orators, and Pleaders for the prerogatiue of nature, haue beene oftimes seene to detract from her Soueraignty: as the sensuall Epicure, whose absurd opinion was, that there was indeed a Superiour power, which had commaund ouer the inferiour Creatures: Yet was that Power but an idle God, louing his rest and quiet, and retyring himselfe from the care of man or his affaires; giuing him free scope and liberty to doe what he list, and reposing the Supreame happinesse of a Deity in rest. To confirme which palpable opinion, some irreligious Epicures of our time, for the better establishing their doctrine of security,

haue produced, or rather most impiously traduced that portion of sacred Scripture, Requieuit Dominus in septimo die super omnia quae patrarat. So generally pernicious is this poison of the world, as it aymes not onely at inferiour Subiects, but euen at the transcendent power of the Almighty, piercing (that I may vse Homers words) the spheare of Heauen, & wounding Iupiter himselfe. These be those Aspes tongs, which poyson our good names; Those Spiders, which with an art full of secret admiration, bring webs out of their bodies to intangle vs poore Flies in their snares; Those spreading tetters which eate into our reputation; Those Suck-blouds which exhaust the pith and marrow of our Soules; They are those Cankerwormes, which euer browze on the tenderest and sweetest blossomes of our vertues. In briefe, whatsoeuer

is opposed to good, that are they, aspersing the foulest blemishes, on men of approuedst deseruings. True it is, that nothing is more swift than Calumnie, for shee is euer flying; more eager, for she is euer assailing; more cautelous, being euer prying; more tyrannous, being euer raging, or more remorcelesse, being euer deuouring. In a well-gouerned state, this Axiom holds euer impregnable; Eadem est foelicitas vnius hominis & totius ciuitatis: but how far shee is estranged from that felicitie, may appeare by the hate shee beares to euery good man within the Citie; professing for faith, fraud; mixing deceit with fairest pretences of affection; conversing with purpose to traduce, importunate in the pursuit of acquaintance, which she makes as notorious by her report, as if they were Prodigies in nature, by their life. Shee cannot endure to

entertaine such into the lists of her discourse, as affect a reserued silence: for those cannot yeeld her argument of talke, because they are not talkers. Those which Catiline-like, will promise much and doe litle, rellish better in her palate, than such, as Iugurth-like, will speake litle but doe much. Thus far in expression of her nature, I will now touch the place of her abode. For the place of her abode, it is harder to finde where she is not, than where she is; in diuers villages, as obscure, as time could make them, haue I liued, and I haue euer noted one Mother Trattles, newes-carrier to all her neighbor-gossips within the parish: One that had art to tell a tale with winks and nods: yea so excellent were these old-trots in invention, as they could make one and the selfe-same tale, told in disgrace of one neighbour to another, with a

litle alteration, as pleasing to the latter, as the former. It pleased therefore the Spartan Orator, to call them brands, because raisers of ciuill differences and heart-burnes one with another. Brands indeed, as well to publike states as priuate families; whose many ruines will witnesse, that though the wound be healed, the scar remaines still, harboring that Viper within them, that preyed on them; so miserable was their fate to cherish her which occasioned their fall. Rightly did he say, that termed them Antipodes to all good men, because they walke alwaies in a path opposite to the trace of vertue, being as indirect in their courses, as vncharitable in their censures. For iudgment, they as much disclaime it, as those that are profest enemies vnto it; so much for conceit they thinke onely requisite, as may detract from merit, and

adde to disgrace. The Athenian tearmed them Owles, haters of light, Bats, recreants to their owne, Scarabees, euer feeding on vlcerous flesh; aptly displaying their natures, by these borrowed names. But for their place of being, as they euer loue to insinuate into the acquaintance of the eminentst persons, so they make them the vsualst subiects of their discourse: wherein they vse to compare their Actions and parts with their Progenitors, whose vertues they make as transcendent, as they disvalue the commendable qualities of those now present: and which is more remarkeable, though they be altogether ignorant of what their Ancestours did, yet expresse they their actions, in dispraise of their successours, as by ocular experience they knew what they did. Farre bee my thoughts estraunged from conuersing or commercing

with these men; yea, may I rather not speake, then detract from the vertues of the least eminent by speaking. I haue euer wished, that my speeches might tend rather to edification of some, then imputation to any. For so free haue my intentions beene from publike or priuate Calumnie, as my inuention (euer grounded on a probable truth) hath euer seated and setled it selfe, on the serious commending of goodnesse, with a modest improuing of what was vicious. Yea, I may safely auow (out of a sincere confidence within me) that I neare saw the man, who could worthily taxe me in this kinde: indeede Poesie, which one of the Fathers is pleased to terme vinum daemonum, not because it cheeres but charmes Sinne, may seeme sometimes to Satyrize, when it is personall application, not the Authours intention which

makes his Poeme a Satyre: rightly therefore was that resolue of the Greeke Poet grounded:

                     At him my Satyre aimes,
                     Whose application claimes,
                     That it to him was sent
                     Howseuer it was ment.
                  
and that againe of the golden Moralist:

                     Satyres are like to Images in wax,
                     Taxing such men whose guilt themselues doth tax.
                  
for my part, I haue bin euer so religious an obseruant of my friend, as I wish rather not to liue, than by my lines to loose any mans loue: especially when I esteeme (with that diuine Sage) my friends life, my best of humane glory, and his good name the essentiallst part of his life; but wonder I cannot chuse (for else should I

wonder at my owne stupiditie) how any should harbour the least conceit of an intended Detraction by me or by my Labours, vnlesse my title of Deuill imply so much, which may seeme to haue affinitie with that which the Greekes terme 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Detraction: but I hope, the iudicious, whose censures haue not their dependence on titles but essences, types but truths, are resolued of the remotenesse of my thoughts from such an vngenerous condition; meane time, as the intentions of my soule are grounded on a more setled foundation, than the opinion of that monster-multitude, so shall my studies euer be directed for the satisfactorie delight and profit of the generous. I am now drawing from the world, heauens forbid, that I should proue such a seruile obseruer of the world, as to prize her Fauours before my fortunes in an other world. In

briefe, as I am now learning how to number my dayes, so will I take a strict account of the expence of my howres, that my dayes well numbred, may bring me to the length of dayes neuer to be summed; that my howres well expended, may bring me to ioyes in that last howre, neuer to be ended: so shall those vertues which I haue in others admired moue me to imitation, those vices which I haue obserued in others, enforce in me a detestation.
               
                  Male de me loquuntur sed mali, mouerer si de me M. Cato, si Lelius sapiens, si duo Scipiones ista loquerentur, nunc malis displicere laudari est.
                  Seneca ad Galion: de remed: fortuit:
               
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            
            RESOLVES.
            
               I Offered before the sacrifice of my teares; now remaines the prosecution of my Resolues: that as the first were symbols and signalls of my conuersion and contrition, so the latter might be persuasiue motiues of my firmer resolution. Dry be those teares of repentance, which are not seconded by a zealous continuance; sith the perfection of vertue is perseuerance; and fruitlesse is that zeale, which like the seede in the parable, is either by the thornie cares of the world choaked, by the heat of persecution parched, or by stonie impenitencie and obduracie withered: I will therefore by the power of him that

made me, so forme my Resolution, that I may finde a comfortable friend in the day of my dissolution; so shall the howre of my death be my convoy to life, my Exit a conduct to a more glorious intrat, my farewell on earth to my welfare in heauen; reaping for what I sowed in teares, in a plenteous haruest of ioyes. Thus therefore I addresse my Resolues, which I wish may be with like feruor receiued, as they were composed, ministring no lesse matter of consolation to the devout Reader, then they did of mortification to the penitent Author.
            
            I resolue to fix mine eye (more intentiuely) vpon my image, that my forme may put me in minde of my former.
            I haue conversed too long with the world: I will fall from discourse

to contemplation; from talking with the world, to contemplate him that made the world.
            I will no longer put my candle vnder a bushell, shrowding my soules lustre with my bodies couer, but will display the eminence of the one, by the basenes of the other.
            
            Since it is not granted to man to loue and to be wise, willingly will I incurre the opinion of vnwise, to gaine the loue of him, that is solely wise.
            The most precious things haue euer the most pernicious keepers; which I found too true, when I made my bodie my soules guardian: I will henceforth esteeme more highly of such a treasure, than to commit it to the trust of a Traytor.
            
            
               I haue obserued two Solstices in the Sunnes motion, but none in times revolution; I will redeeme therefore my time while opportunitie is offred, for being past shee is not to be recalled.
            I haue seene young mens loue end in lust, old mens in dotage; if ere I plant my affection, I will so waine my selfe from the first, that my chast youth may exempt me from the latter.
            
            Elegantly expressed was that conceit of the Emperor: Fortune hath somewhat of the nature of a woman, that if she be too much wooed, shee is the farther of: I will thinke it therefore the best of fortune, neither to be allured by her fawne, nor deiected by her frowne: for our indifferencie towards fortune makes vs most fortunate.
            
               Excellent was that soueraigntie or regencie of Fortune, attributed by Liuie to Cato Maior: In whom (saith he) there appeared such abilitie both for constancie of minde, and maturitie of wit, as in what place soeuer he bore himselfe, he seemed to be the moulder and maker of his owne fortune: but I desire no such transcendencie; more haue fallen through the height of successe, than for the want of meanes: This is my wish, to enioy no other meanes, than my Sauiour, who makes meanes for me to his Father.
            I haue wondred at the strict accounts betwixt man and man, while Man the image of his Creator, forgets his accounts due to God by man: I resolue therefore to make the Euening the summer vp of the day and morning; that my daily Memorandums may direct me in my

reckning, when I shall come to be accomptant for my dispensing.
            In my childhood I wished time after time to please my waggish fancie; now is my wish extended to the length of time, resoluing to liue to my fathers glory.
            It grieues mee when I call to minde, how those many howres of vanitie, which did once delight me, shall be produced as so many witnesses, to condemne me; yet am I cheered with this Resolue, that He, who moued me to this remorce for my sin, will not suffer me to make relapse into sin, nor will pronounce the iudgment of death on me for my former sin.
            Grieuous sinnes require grieuous sighes; I will passe therefore the remainder of my time, in lamenting,

as I spent the prime of my time in transgressing; so shall my teares witnesse my contrition, my retire from the world my conuersion, that in both, I may adde to my soules glory, by wayning my bodie from the conceit of her beauty.
            Ech thing we see in her kinde and nature; yet man by sin a priuitiue, degenerates from his nature primitiue; opposing himselfe, by transgressing his law that made him for himselfe.
            I haue heard many call this life a Pilgrimage; yet did they liue in it, as if it had bin the sole hope of their inheritance: I resolue therefore to take in hand the actiue part, and leaue the discursiue; doe before I speake, practise mortification before I prattle of it: so shall my discourse be powerfull, subsisting in

the worke not word, not externall or for fashion, but in essence and operation.
            I haue oftentimes entred into discourse with my selfe, making the scope thereof venite & abite: I contemplated withall, the happinesse of those fiue Virgins receiued, the miserie of those fiue reiected: reasoning with my selfe what this should meane; and I found that no entry was admitted, where the oyle of grace was not infused, and that the heauenly Bridegroome will be by vs watchfully attended, ere we be by him gloriously receiued. I resolued therefore, to prepare a Wedding garment to adorne me, a Lampe full of oyle to lighten me, and a trustie friend to direct me; the garment of humilitie, the oyle of charitie, and my friendly conscience within me.
            
               I haue wondred at some mens humors, whose chiefest discourse was euer bent on their owne commendations; for my part, the knowledge of mine owne imperfections inioynes me silence, considering how far I am short of that I should be, how exceeding in that which is not required of me; I haue resolued therefore by the scale of humilitie, to ascend to the throne of glory, making the acknowledgment of my defects, my directest path for the attayning of perfection.
            As the completest follie appeares in too much complement, so the best of wisdome is to be least popularly wise; where opinion makes vs proud, whil'st priuacie in knowledge makes vs onely knowne to our selues, and no otherwise.
            I haue found oft-times the excellentest

parts shrowded in the meanest and vnhansomest couers; which I can instance in nothing better, than in the diuine essence of the soule, couered with the garment of flesh.
            Honour is a faire baite, but a sincere disposition will not assume it before shee deserue it.
            The best of honour is to acknowledge our selues vnworthy of Him, to whom is ascribed all honour; nor can we better expresse our worth, than by confessing our own shame.
            Purposes and Resolues may be compared to Pauls planting and Apollo's watering, but their disposes to the blessing of God.
            I haue resolued in reflexion to my houre-glasse, considering times preciousnes

with his swiftnes, to vie teares with her graines of sand; that my teares might (in some measure) wash away the heap of those sins, which are multiplyed like the sands.
            
            Earth as a globe in the ayre, the soule as a Diamond in lead, reason as a queene in her throne; in the first we moue and are moued; in the second we shine, yet is our splendor by our bodies couer, obscured, by the last we are distinguished from beasts, yet by her abuse we become worse than beasts.
            If Caesar (saith Machauell) had beene ouerthrowne, he would haue beene more odious then euer was Catiline; so strangely doth th'euent make indirectest actions glorious: but successe doth not euer argue a direct cause; for the morning-flourish

of the wicked shuts vp their Euening in a sullen discontent; I will therefore so direct the meane that I may attaine the end: that an equall relation of one to the other, may produce a necessary successe in both.
            I haue wondred why the Thracian being a Pagan should lament his birth like a Christian; when we that are Christians laugh at our birth, but pule at our death, like Pagans.
            As wee enter the world with a shrike, so we leaue it with a sigh; the first implyes what place of miserie wee are entring; the other shewes with what griefe we leaue the world in our departing.
            I haue considered with what tranquillity and peace of conscience, a soule sequestred from the world taketh her farewell of earth; she finds

no obiects to distract her, shee sees no friends that can with-drawe her from her approaching dissolution; all seeme as in a calme sea; whilest a soule plunged in worldly cares, grieues to leaue what shee did so exceedingly loue. O may my soule so contemne the world, as she may addresse her selfe for a future world: so extend her hopes aboue earth, as she may raigne with her Sauiour after Earth.
            
            As the vale best discouereth the hil; so a humble outside best displaieth a glorious soule; Vanity becommeth not a wise-man, much-lesse him that should be only wise to saluation.
            I had neuer the fate to admire titles, nor hope to rise by fauning on greatnesse; Heauen grant I may so follow him that is onely great, that

the choyce of his attendance may purchase mee a place of perpetuall residence.
            Age cannot alter habite, nor aër condition; I doe wish my age may be so well tempered, that I may get that habite of vertue, which cannot be depraued, those internally-beautifying qualities of the minde, which may not be corrupted.
            That is the choycest pleasure, which hath onely relation to vertue; others may haue appearance but no essence: for bitter is the fruite of that pleasure, which is attended on by Repentance.
            
            There is no Bulwarke so impregnable as a spotlesse soule; for shee can oppose all hostilitie inward, where the other is onely for outward: as there is a continuall feast to

               him that enioyeth her, so there is securitie to him that is attended by her.
            Length of daies is not in this vale of teares, for few be they and full of misery; but in the Tabernacle of Syon there is length of time without transition, and accomplished yeares without conclusion.
            I haue collected that there is a Reward for the good, as reuenge for the wicked, after this life; because the Sunne shineth aswell on the wicked as the good in this life. I haue resolued therefore, that as the temporary Sunne cheeres mee with his heate, so to dispose of my Actions, that by his operation which workes in mee, I may bee exalted by the Sunne of righteousnesse, being made pertaker of his glory.
            
               When I behold the Dew fall on the grasse, by which it is nourished; I presently recollect how happy that soule is, which is watered by the Dew of Gods grace, by which it is onely renewed, and in her affliction comforted.
            It is strange that Man in his trauaile, should so often measure his graue, yet be forgetfull of his end; seuen foote is his dimension, yet man liueth in that securitie, as if that small scantling had a perpetuall extension.
            Making ech day an abstract of my life, I finde by bitter experience (yet hopefull repentance) that I haue spent my morning in wantonnesse; now my resolue is, to redeme my morning idling with my middayes labouring, that I may receiue my penny in the euening.
            
               As the Sun shines the brightest at his setting, so should man at his departing; it is the euening crownes the day; happy Soule that shall be crowned, when her Euening is approached.
            Flatterie is not alwaies to praise in presence, for incurre we may that name by praising in absence; that is, when either the vertue is absent, or the occasion; as for vertue, shee can neither be ouer-prizd, nor ouerpraisd: I will hate therefore to insinuate, where Vertue is not resident; nor can he be a Parasite, that is her attendant.
            I finde seuerall perturbations, to which I am exposed, diuers infirmities, to which naturally I am subiected; I would not follow the indiscretion of Empyricks, which minister the same medicines to all Patients:

as my griefes be sundry, proceeding from diuers meanes, so must my receits be sundry, if I meane to cure the effects. I will vse therefore corrasiues to eat away the hard and dead skin of impenitence, Lenitiues to renew and cherish my tender skin, lest I fall to despaire, through too much weaknes.
            I am almost of Copernicus opinion, who in his Theorie supposed, that the Earth did moue; it moues man indeed to moue vnlike himselfe, becomming in his motion forgetfull of his first Mouer: I resolue therefore, as many lines tend to one Centre, so to ayme all my soules motions to the glory of my maker; that earths motion may by no meanes draw me from him, who first gaue me motion to serue him.
            I haue sometimes wished an end

of my miserie, lest miserie should cause my end; but I found how foolish I was to wish for an end of that, which can no way possible, haue an end before my end; for miserie is an inseparable companion to man, so long as he is man, for ceasing to be miserable he becommeth an Angell and no man.
            He that falls from diuine contemplation, to take content in the world, is as he, that after he hath bin fed with meat of Angels, falls afterward to delight in Swines meat: sensuall desires shall not captiuate my reason to the soueraigntie of Sence: I resolue so to liue, that dying I may liue; for this life as it is a death, so death to the good is an aduantage of life.
            True it is, which Democritus saith: Truth lyeth hid in certaine deepe mines

or caues; yet being daughter to time, she will be at last discouered, after she hath bin so long depressed: neuer, neuer; Truth loues to be retired from the world, because shee sees that her fauourites be few in the world; and rather will she liue a stale virgin, than bestow herselfe of such as will but make a stale of her.
            Mans life is a globe of examples, a shadow of imitation, where the latter day is euer scholer to the former: I wish no further knowledge than to be a perfect scholer in Christ-crosse row; for there (as in a mirrour) shall I behold Gods mercie, mans miserie; his miserie in falling, Gods mercy in raising; matter of thanksgiuing in man to God, argument of affection in God to man.
            Long is it since I purposed my

conversion; but yet a litle and then a litle, makes to morrow as far from conversion as was yesterday: I collect hence, how powerfullst Resolues produce oft-times the poorest effects: henceforth therefore I intend not to put off till to morrow by idling to day, lest I neuer liue to repent on to morrow, being call'd on to day.
            I haue run a great part of my race, & am out-stripped by all in the course of vertue; what remaines, but that I should now strip my selfe of this heauy garment with which I am ouer-loaded, that I may put on the heauenly garment, with which those happy runners (the Saints) are adorned.
            He that failes in his course, cannot obtaine the goale; and soone brethlesse am I, vnlesse the Lord infuse

his diuine breath in me: I will therefore run and pray; run that I may obteine, pray that I cease not to run till I obteyne.
            I haue found how soone affliction alters the countenance of adulterate friendship; I haue a litle taste of it, and experience bids me make this vse of it: Though one Swallow make no summer, yet one mans summer makes many Swallowes: I will seeke therfore to gaine friends after time, since most of these worldly friends are but obseruers of time.
            
            Pittie it is, I heare some say, such a braue spirit should want; but what a wittall was he, that through his owne follie should enforce his own want with others pittie? Enuie is better than pitty, in estate not in honour: for the decrease of honor as she is enuied before her fall, yeelds

argument of pitty, so is shee ofttimes restored by being generally pittied, where estate, as she was an obiect of enuie, so piteously complayning shee remaines the same poore, without altering.
            I will not, like another Herodicus, doe nothing all my life long, but intend my health; for why should I bestow more care on the case than on the instrument within the case, on the bodie, than the soule? No, I will reserue that moderate care for the health of my bodie, that like a good instrument, it may euer yeeld cheerfull musick to the eare of my soule; so shall my soule, by the ministerie of my bodie, conforme her-selfe in obedience to him, that made the soule to enlighten the bodie.
            It is strange to know what an impression of loue, absence breeds in

the Louer; I wish the like effect in the absence of my soule from her Creator: she is here diuided by the vaile of her flesh, may shee be more firmely vnited to him in spirit; she is here a prisoner, may her desires pierce through these walls of earth, and expresse their feruencie to the God of heauen: shee is here a pilgrim, may her skrip be humilitie, her weede sanctitie, her staffe charitie, and her foode the nourishing milke of the word: shee is an exile, may shee hasten to her natiue country, cherefully leauing this vale of misery: shee is an Orphan, may she addresse her-selfe thither, where raignes the Widdowes iudge, and Orphans father. Abide here (ô my soule) let this be thy retreit; cheere thy spirit (ô my soule) with this eternall receit; he it is that from perills past hath preserued thee, in perills present hath armed thee, against perills to

come hath fore-warned thee. He it is invites thee fore-slowing, expects thee opposing, recalls thee straying, and embraces thee returning. He it is that protects thee resting, assists thee labouring, exhorts thee fighting, and crownes thee vanquishing: fore-slow not therfore since he invites thee, oppose him not since he expects thee, stray no farther since he recalls thee, but returne with speed, that he may embrace thee. Rest thou mayst with ioy being so protected, labour in hope being so assisted, fight with courage being so excited, and vanquish with comfort being to be crowned.
            
            We must passe through a wildernesse to Canaan; this wildernesse is the wide world: ô may my soule neuer murmur, though hunger should annoy her, thirst afflict her, all perturbations enclose her: yea, let her rather say with Iob; I beleeue

that my Redeemer liueth, and that with these eyes I shall see him: happie eyes that are made contemplators of such exceeding glory; ô may my eyes grow dim with weeping, to be afterwards partakers of so glorious a vision!
            I resolue now to bid farewell to the world, before I leaue it, that being in it, I may not be of it: there is no affinitie betweene the citizens of Mammon and Syon, I will fall by a loathing of the one, to an vnfained louing of the other, that in contempt of this world, I may make my account more free in the world to come.
            I will make the worlds follie my chiefest policie; soule-wise without desire of sole-wise or self-wise: may humilitie henceforth conduct me; for conceit of knowledge through

an opinionate arrogance, hath made me (many times) glory in my owne ignorance.
            I had rather be imprisoned in the flesh, then by the flesh; for so I bee freed in minde I little care though I be imprisoned in body: since restraint of the one, enlargeth the Libertie of the other; whether therefore at freedome or restrained, I resolue so to liue, that my conscience may be a Testimonie how I haue liued; making in Prison better vse of my grace, then the Curtezan of her Glasse: for there will I note the blemishes of my soule, while she the spots and moles in her face; there shall I learne how to liue, how to die for my Creator; while she how to loue, how to dye her colour different, from what was giuen her by her Maker.
            
            
               Hee that seeks to preuent that which cannot be auoyded, flies into Adams groue to sconce himselfe from Gods iudgment: I finde this approued, when I labour to be exempted from the stroke of Death, which can by no meanes be preuented, whose doome as it is certaine, so is his date vncertaine; knocke he will, but at what time I know not: I will therefore so set all things in order before he come, that he may finde me prouided when he comes. I would be loth to be taken napping, I will therefore so addresse my selfe euery houre, that I may cheerfully embrace death in my last houre; receiuing him not with feare, as a guest that will be of necessitie harboured, but with a friendly wellcome, as one, by whom I shall be to a secure harbour conducted. Death, as he is importunate, so is he iminent; fearefull to the rich, but

cheerefull to the poore: for affliction breeds a loathing in liuing, an accomplished content in dying; knowing that there is an end of miserie apportioned by Death, which was not granted to man during life. I wish so to liue, that my life may be an argument that I did liue; sith life without employment (the essence of mans life) hath more affinitie with death than life.
            As my God is Alpha and Omega, being my Alpha begun in the kingdome of grace, so he will be my Omega, accomplished in the kingdom of glory: the last day of my liuing, the first day of my raigning, the houre of my bodies discention into earth, the houre of my soules ascention into heauen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            The heauenly Exercise of the fiue Sences couched in a diuine Poem.
            LEt eye, eare, touch, tast, smell, let euery Sence,
            
            Employ it selfe to praise his prouidence,
            Who gaue an eye to see; but why was't giuen?
            To guide our feet on earth, our soules to heauen.
            An Eare to heare; but what? not iests o'th' time,
            Vaine or prophane, but melodie diuine.
            A touch to feele; but what? griefes of our brother,
            And t'haue a fellow feeling one of other.
            A tast to relish; what? mans soueraigne blisse,
            "Come taste and see the Lord how sweet he is!
            A smell to breath; and what? flowers that afford
            All choice content, the odours of his word.
            " If our 
                  Alluding to that sacred-secret mysterie of his fiue wounds, curing and crowning our fiue Sences. 
               fiue Sences thus employed be,
            " We may our Sauiour smell, tast, touch, heare, see.
            
         
         
            
            Vpon his Resolues.
            MAy I resolue, so my resolues expresse,
            That th'world may see I am what I profess.
            May Earth be my least care, my heart on him,
            
            Whose crosse's my crowne, whose Sonne did salue my sin.
            
         
         
            
            
            THE AVTHORS OPINION OF MARRIAGE: Deliuered in a satisfying Character to his friend.
            SIR,
                  Character
                as I am no Timon, so am I no marriage-affecting Libertine: I will labour therefore to satisfie your demands exactly, making experience my directresse, whose late familiaritie hath instructed me in this positiue Doctrine. As it repenteth me not to

know it now, so it litle repenteth me not to haue knowne it before now: for as the present estate adds to my content, so my former want perhaps kept me from discontent: I perceiue no such thing as bondage in marriage, onely a restraint from Batchler-sensualitie, which merits not the name of seruitude but libertie. Vpon consideration had of two estates, I account mariage concurring neerer with perfection, and I ground my opinion vpon no worse probabilitie, than the Arithmeticians maxime, Numbers haue their beginning but not perfection from vnities; yet exclude I not these two indiuidually vnited, from that incomparable effect of marriage, vnitie. Content I finde more accomplished where mindes are consorting; for singlenesse includes rather the condition of an Anchorite, than of one affecting

societie: This better for procreation, That for contemplation. There is no felicitie (if earth may be said to enioy it) like a fellow-helper, & no fellow-helper equall to a faithfull bosom-friend: I am neither for committing secrets nor concealing them, till I finde an aptnesse to conceale, or faith to reserue. I finde Mysogenes opinion grosse and erroneous, touching the secrecie of a woman, a faithfull wife cannot chuse but be a good Secretarie. Shee makes her husbands reputation her principall subiect, and chuseth rather to dye, than it should dye. Her acquaintance is not popular, nor craues shee rather to be seene what she weares, than to be knowne what shee is. Vertue is her best habit, and her garnish is beholden more to Nature than Art: shee affects no colours, doing well without pretence of glory, affecting

what is good without desire of applause. I haue bin in a strange error, and it much repents me of it, where imagination suggested to me, wedlocke could not be without some aspersion of lust; for I perceiue the sanctitie and puritie of the rite, adds more to content than the outward delight; it relisheth more of the Spirit than the flesh; he that feeles an other effect in marriage, he is more brutish than reasonable. The best purchase is a good wife, and the worst is her contrary: I haue commended Arminius opinion, and haue long embraced it, whose conceit was so much remoued from the affection of marriage, as he censured him dead to earths-comforts, that tooke himselfe to any other bed-fellow, than his owne minde to converse with; but I exclaime now vpon that heresie: I finde my minde strengthned by

conference, and that proceeds with best grace and consonance from a faithfull mate: I will not trust her with my bodie, whom I dare not make partner of my minde? and though the excellencie of the one, surpasse the frailtie of the other, yet will I not commend the one where I dare not commit the other. For frailtie of Sexes, I conceiue how apt man is to iudge sinisterly of the weaker vessell, and I impute it either to a want of Braines, in that they cannot diue into the excellencie of so pure and exquisite a composition, or some hard hap they haue had in making choice of such infirme creatures. I haue found one, though weake by condition, yet firme in her affection; making her resolues so vndoubtedly approued by him she loues, as she hath vowed to engrosse her loue to none saue him she onely loues: her content is

so setled, as she scornes to haue it diuided, for she knowes that a heart diuided cānot liue. She professeth her selfe to be, not where shee liues but where she loues, and the Adamant which drawes her to affection, is the perswaded ground she intertaines of her husbands disposition, which is too choice to be popular, and too relenting not to be wonne; as meere protestations were not of force to winne her, so flatterie was too palpable a suter to woe her. Content is worth a kingdome, and my kingdome is my owne familie, where I make euery day my account, casting vp in the euening what I did in the day: I thinke my day well bestowed, if employed in the seruice of my Creator, and my conclusion is this: I will be none of that familie, which is not carefull of promoting Gods glory. Marriage-melodie should haue no concurrence with diuisions; though Musique

be graced by it, marriage distasts it: I haue wondred how two distinct bodies can be so inseparably vnited, and I perceiue the strange and indeed vnsearchable effects of marriage, which consists not so much in the ioyning hands, as hearts. There is a sympathie equally working, equally mouing in the parties louing; nor is it beauty, or any externall motiue so much enchaineth, as a sacred-secret infusion, conceiued by an holy and heauenly influence induceth. I haue heard how that,
                  Lycosthen: in Apotheg:
                
               When the Hawthorne springs, and the Cuckow sings, Actaeons head with hornets rings: it is true indeed, ielousie is such a self-consuming vermin, as it neuer rests day nor night, from feeding her suspitious head with fruitlesse and friuolous doubts; but I would not haue one subiect to this miserable phrensie, betake himselfe to such fuell of

               Ielousie as a woman: for my part as I was neuer capable of such vaine suspect, so conclude I euer, I had rather be one and thinke me none, than be none and thinke me one, contenting my selfe with a generall fate, rather than incurre disquiet by my owne default: which, that glory of Graece,
               
                  Homer in Telemach: in Odiss.
                the euer-liuing Homer seemes wittily to glance at in the person of Telemachus:
               
                  Babe saith my Dade, but he may say amisse,
                  For ought that I know, I am none of his;
                  Yet I reply with Dade, but that's all one,
                  I may mistake my Syre, and he his Sonne.
               
There is no order so ancient nor more maligned: honour hath many times correspondence with her,
               
and forraine Marchants may be confident, their Pinnace is entitled to many Factors; Stratta Iulia had neuer more Brothels in her, then shee hath clamorous Suters attending on her: yet what cannot resolued patience beare? my Aduice is to him, whose suspition hath already pronounced him horne-mad, to make vse of Ithacus counsell to Andromache, in behalfe of her tender infant Astyanax. Conceale him, that's the best meanes to saue him. Oft-times iealousie publisheth mans shame, more then the occasion of his shame. A wise-man will rather conceaue and conceale, then disclose his conceit to others report: The best of reputation is grounded on opinion free from Suspition, and he is an egregious Wittall, that loues to watch oportunity to adde to his discontent: my eyes are no such Sentinalls: charity bids me iudge the best, and I wil

rather expound my Wiues secret parly some instructiōs of huswifery, then motiues of peruerted Liberty; I haue somtimes wondred at the folly of Hans Caruiles dreame, applying to my selfe the vse, that I might better auoyde the end, where euery fained and imagainarie conceit argues an Apparancie of act, but I doubt not such Bugbeares, they are terrors to Suspicious heads, Scarcrowes to addle Braines: Beautie shall neuer be such an Idoll as to enforce my Adoration, or so bewitching a Hagge as to enthrall me to Suspicion; As a safe conscience is a perpetuall friend to sticke neere vs, a continuall feast to cheare vs, and a Brasen wall to shield vs: so is a faithfull Bosome-friend the Louingst companion, the dearest minion, and the indiuidualst Vnion; a Companion to refresh vs, a Minion to delight vs, and such an Vnion as will inseparably ioyne vs.

I little weigh the Woman-haters of our Age, whose subiect is euer in dispraise of woman, they shew the vnworthinesse of their Nature in Satyrizing vpon the weaker. As chastity is rare and incomparable, Marriage-state hath beene euer deemed honourable. He that will not marrie & will not withdraw his eyes from vanity, let him burne; Such obiects are either Subiects of loue or lust; if of Loue, then happy is the Louer, if of lust, miserable is the beholder. I remember that noble Matrons Motto, Where thou art Caius, I am Caia: and I make no question of the like choyce. I haue read of diuers women, who as they were delightfull to their Husbands in bed & boord, so added they delight to the labouring Inuentions of their braine. Such a one enioyed Cato in his Portia, Seneca in his Paulina, Mar. Antonie in his Octauia: yea, the best labours

haue beene illustrated, if not originally composed by married women, witnesse those diuine Poems reduced to Centons by Theodosia daughter to the Emperour Theodosius, the royall compositions of Lucane, the sententious measures of Ennius, the tragicke odes of Aristobulus, which labours (though they retaine the names of these Authors) were reuised and refined by Women.
            
            I perceiue the wisest may erre, and Salomon himselfe may faile in his iudgement, making this Interrogation, But as for a good women where is she to be found? but his question imported rather a difficulty then an Impossibility: which hee had some cause to speake, seeing women were the cause of his Idolatry; A Goodman must of necessity make his wife of like quality: She is casten in his mould, let him blame himselfe then

if she be not good. Beautie is one of the least motiues to fancy, who more admires a smooth skin than a sound minde, may gaine content in his wiues prime, but shall loose it in her age: I care not how poore her outside be, so her inside be pure. I neuer set my affection on Marriage to strengthen me with friendship, my ayme was the woman, and the grounds of my loue were her minds indowments: I sought not in her what the Gallant seeks in his, a minc'd speech, a ginger pace, or a drawing eye; I found her speech able to deliuer her meaning, her pace quicke enough in her employing, and her eye too modest to loue gadding. A good wife is the best portion; nor consists this her goodnesse onely in proportion: she that is onely outward faire, deserues more to be loathed than loued, despised than preased: A case beautifies

the instrument, but adds nothing to her accent; and goodnesse is more continuate than beauty. I could neuer approue of that shape which deriues her beauty from the shop; there is an innate decencie that better becomes vs, and aboue all comparison doth better grace vs: It is not toyes, tyres, dressings, but a personall comelinesse adds honor to our clothing. I haue much admired at mans follie, whose commendations onely extend to what they weare, not what they are. I will neuer tye my selfe to such impertinences, nor can with iudgement esteeme the rinde for comely, where the pith relisheth corruptly: It is not worth our praise, to say, such an one is faire, that is no qualitie but an adiunct; giue me one good, I much weigh not any other attribute, for Good is a better attribute than Faire. As I haue chosen, so I repent

me not of my choice: I haue planted my resolution thus, nor hope I to alter it: The strange woman shall not allure me, nor the Courts-idol, a painted face inveagle me; I am now for one, and that one is all: me thinks Marriage, as it is a type betwixt Christ & his Church, the state politike & her head; so it is a neerer combining of the bodie to the soule: The Soule hath promised for the bodie, that shee shall not make her selfe a Cage of vncleane birds, nor prostitute her-self to many; and the Bodie hath so tyed her by plighting her faith by her hand, that shee will inviolably performe what her Soule hath promised,
            
               Sr, 
               God send you ioy.
            
         
         
            
            A Shrow
            
               
                  Character.
               IS a continuall dropping, whose actiuitie consists principally in the volubilitie of an infatigable tongue; her father was a common Barretter, and her mothers sole note (being the voice of her vocation) eccoed, New wainflete Oysters; in her sleepe when shee is barr'd from scolding, shee falls to a terrible vaine of snoring, and fomes at mouth, as if she were possessed, or shrudely rid by the Night-mare: shee is most out of her element, when most at quiet, and concludes ioyntly with the Arithmetician, that vnities are to be excluded from numbers: Her progenie is but smal, yet all hopefull to be interested in some clamorous offices; for her

eldest itcheth after Bellman, her next after Cryer, and her daughters scorn to degenerate, vowing to bring the aunciently-erected Cuckstoole into request: shee frets like gum'd Grogram, but for weare she is Sempiternum. Shee goes weekly a catterwauling, where shee spoiles their spice-cup'd gossiping with her tarttongued calletting: she is a Bee in a box, for she is euer buzzing: her eyes, though they be no matches, for she squints hatefully, are more firing than any matches: she is a hot shot, for she goes euer charg'd: she hath an excellent gift for memorie, and can run diuision vpon relation of iniuries. In some thing she is praise-worthy, for shee hates complement, and grins when she heares any one commended, much more flattered: all the phrensies in Bedlam cannot put her downe for humors. If shee be married, she makes her husbands

patience a fit subiect to work vpon, where his miserable eares are deafed with her incessant clamour. she is neuer pleasd, for being pleasd she were not her selfe, whose choysest Musique is euer to be out a tune: a nest of wasps and hornets are not comparable to her for spite, nor may equall her in splene; and in this they principally differ, she hath her sting in her tongue, they in their tayle. she is monstrously vnsociable, and grounds the reason of her distast vpon others approbation. when shee hath none to exercise her furie on, she mumbles ouer some dogg'd Pater-noster to her self, as if she were conjuring: her signe is euer in Cancer, and hates Patience left it should bastardize her blood. shee is euer suspicious of others thoughts, and therefore answers for her selfe before she needs. were she as strong in power as will, she would

commit more insolencies with her tongue, than euer Nero did tyrannies with his sword. Silence shee hates as her sexes scandall, and reprou'd for her distemper, her answer is, The worme will turne againe. Happy were her husband if shee were wormes-meat, but her hope is to out-weare her winding-sheete: when shee comes in companie, all cry God blesse them, as if they heard thunder; she omits no time, spares no person, obserues no state, but wounds with her tongue, terming it her sole defensiue instrument. Great ones she as much disvalues, as shee contemnes inferiors, yet neither shall slip her, for she neuer saw that creature, which might not giue her argument to vent her impatience; her reading is but small, yet when she heares of Stentors tongue, shee would giue her Dowrie for such a cimball. she somtimes counterfeits

grauitie, but her ferret eyes and hooke nose display her for an hypocrite. Her tongue neuer findes vacation but in Church, which time giues her occasion to commence some new brawle. Her tongue is as glibberie as an Eele, all the Posts in the Kings high roade cannot equall her for speed; marie truth is, she enterfears dangerously. shee weares her clothes negligently, of set purpose to moue her husband to taxe her for her sluttishnes, whose reproofe she retorts with haile-shot, and pellets him with words as disgracefull as she is fulsom. By this time she hath formald a paire of high corke shoes to heighten her dwarfish proportion, purposely intended to beard her husband. In her infancie she was tongue-tyed, but by an expert Artist, the string being cut, she euer after vowed neuer to loose the facultie of her vtterance

by discontinuance. she hath seriously protested to make her husband run mad, but he is a foole then. she claimes some priuiledge in his Bretches, and that is th'efficient cause of a breach betwixt them. It may be she is honest, but if her dogd humor would giue her leaue, I am perswaded shee would enter parlie with a knaue in a corner: being (as she is) a very Crab, if shee affect any pleasures, they must be backward. she resembles the Raile, and her name concurrs with her nature. shee condemnes no act so much, as that of Hypemnestra, who procured her husbands safetie, while all the rest practised their deaths. shee approues of no ancient soueraigntie, but that of Amazon, where the gouernment was feminine: and for the Salique law, she hath already repeald it, as expresly preiudiciall to their sex. Her tongue-feuer is quotidian,
               
for it is euer shaking: her nature is so far out of temper, as shee hath vowed to be phrenticke euer. she maintaines this, that fancie is a phrensie, and Loue such a painted Idoll, as she will rather burne, than tye her selfe to such a fopperie. I would see that Saint, which shee would not incense, a man of that temper, whom she will not nettle. There is no bird which she lesse resembles than the Doue, for she is all gall. Saturne hath sole predominance ouer her, dis-affecting nothing more than affabilitie. she can be merry by times, but then especially, when her husband is malecontent. she liues of litle sleepe, and seldome sleeps but dreames, and awakes laughing, relating how in her sleepe she beat her husband. The Crocodyles teares are not by halfe so mortally dangerous, making euer her hatefull teares assured harbingers

of reuenge. she weeps because she may not effect what she would, tuning all the day a hellish discord, best sorting with her serpentine subtiltie. she willingly entertaines her owne dislike, to infer her husbands distast; which she apprehends with ioy, and obserues with a continuate delight. she rewards the Sexton liberally in her husbands presence, onely adding, a day will come. she presseth him to make his will, perswading him he cannot liue long, albeit he finde no such fault with himselfe. she would make an excellent Hawke, for she is euer sharpe. shee vowes Temperance is none of the cardinall vertues; and that too much sufferance may make the bleare-eyed world esteeme such an on a Saint, whose recreant Patience deserues rather the title of Sot. she may seeme to haue some allusion to the Pismire, wheresoeuer she

is, she brings smarting, and in Prouidence too, for the shrow is euer scraping. Her tongue would make a singular Scarcrow, for it is euer ratling: in her discontent (as when is she out of that humor?) her only dolefull song is Lachrimae, which she vsually sings in any consort. Her complexion is sallow, of constitution strong, yet is her bodie incomparably weake to her will, which can finde no period, till death be her Herald, to whose comfortable arrest I bequeath her.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO MY LOVING friends, my Country-Cottoneeres.
            DRoupe not, though dead, you may reviue againe
            By th' cheerefull beams of such a Soueraigne;
            Who can discerne what painfull men deserue,
            And would be loath, your families should starue,
            Or want the staffe of bread, but by command
            Will see your case redressed out a hand;
            Meane time read my Resolues, where you shall finde
            In state-distresse, some solace to your minde:
            Which found, build on this ground, and be as I,
            Who am resolu'd, hows'ere I liue, or die.
            
               Yours, or not his owne. R. B.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  
                     For the Booke I'le say, if there be errors in't,
                     The world had not known them, but for th'Print,
                     
                  
               
            
            Errata.
            PAg. 5. lin: vlt: for strailings, read strayings. Pag. 15. lin: vlt: for passions, read (in some copies) fashions. Pag: 26. lin: 9. for charuell-house, read charnell-house. Pag: 54. lin: 3. for yea, read then. Pag. 58. lin: 20. for reciued, read receaued. Pag: 71. lin: 3. for repentance, read (in some copies) report. Pag. 73. lin: 16. for, to denie, read, not to denie. Pag. 113. lin: 14. for grace, read (in some copies) grate.
            
            
         
      
   