
      
         
            
            
            A PLAINE
CONFVTATION OF
A TREATISE OF BROVVNISME,
Published by some of that Faction,
Entituled:
A description of the visible Church.
            
            In the confutation whereof, is shewed, that
the Author hath neither described a true
gouernment of the Church, nor yet proued,
that outward discipline is the life of
the Church.
            Whereunto is annexed an answere vnto two other
Pamphlets, by the said Factioners latelie dispersed,
of certaine conferences had with some of
them in prison.
            Wherein is made knowen the inconstancie of this Sect,
what the Articles are which they still maintaine: as
also a short confutation of them.
            There is also added a short ansvvere vnto such argumentes as
they haue vsed to proue the Church of England not
to be the Church of God.
            LONDON,
Printed by Thomas Scarlet for
William Wright. 1590.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOrable
Sir Thomas Henedge Knight, Vize
Chamberlaine to her Highnes, Treasurer of her Maiesties
chamber, Chanceller of the Dutchie of Lancaster,
and one of her Highnes most honorable priuie
Councell, the comforts of this life and of
the life to come.
            
               COnsidring that (right
Honorable) the making
of many bookes
doth breeda wearisomnesse
with smal!
profit, the councell of
Salomon is to bee regarded,
who willeth
vs to receiue admonition by his holie writings.
In regard whereof, though hereticall
pamphlets are dailie dispersed, yet the wise are
loth to answer thē: as also lest that in answring
the fole according to his follies, they might seem
like vnto him: yet when silence hath hardned
the factious, and emboldned them to adde new
supplies, we learne that the foole is to be answered
vnto his follies, lest he seeme wise in his own
conceit. This burden I haue taken vpon me, perhaps
presumptuouslie; but finding on the one
side the learned vnwilling to deale with so sottish

a schisme, and on the other side, that small
learning wil be sufficient to ouerthrow so ignorāt
a sect, I haue bin the more bold in this mine
attēpt: for I preiudice not the wise herein, who
refuse this labor, nor yet giue cause of discontētment
to the simple, for whose sake onely I haue
done it: if those with whom I deale find themselues
grieued, I regard it not; onely if I may escape
the censure of rash presumptiō in publishing
this rude treatise vnder your honorable title,
I shall obtaine my desire. I haue presumed
to present it to your H. not for that I am able to
bring forth anie thing worthie your H. acceptation,
but that I might obtain a defence for my
self, & your H. might be moued to go on in furthering
the Lordes building. So shall God by
your meanes be glorified, his church comforted,
and euerie member thereof shall haue iust cause
to continue their heartie praiers vnto God for
your H. prosperitie, with the increase of all heauenlie
giftes & graces of his spirit in this life,
& for the assurance of your euerlasting ioy in
the life to come.
            
               Your Honors most humble in
the Lord to command,
R. Alison.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               HOwsoeuer earthly kingdoms do prosper best, when
peace is had, yet the church of Christ which is his
throne,Cassi. in Psa. 1. receiueth good euen by dissention, Inde
crescit Ecclesia, vnde mundus deficit. Therfore
although a good agreement in al affaires ought to be regarded,
yet a dissent in religion doth sometime profit, inasmuch as therby
the faith of some is exercised, the inconstancie of others is
made manifest, and the diligence of all those whom deep securitie
hath not ouerwhelmed, is much quickned vnto the serching
of the truth. The rent that is made by some, hath confirmed this
vnto vs by experience, whiles that the constancie of such as are
wise hearted, is made manifest; the vanitie of those that are vnstedfastly
minded is laide open; & the godly are made acquainted
with those ancient heresies, whereof in times past they were
both ignorant and carelesse. The disturbances of our Church
are many, proceeding from one fountaine, though they bee not
all of one nature; Satan hath sent them, they are like vnto him,
disagreeing one with another, and at iarre in themselues, and yet
are all opposite vnto the truth. For the Atheists and Papists are
at as great defiance one with another, as euer was Herod and
Pilate.Luk. 23. 12 And the Anabaptists and Donatists condemne each the
other for matters of religion, as much as the Pharesies did the
Saduces; and yet as they could bee reconciled,Math. 22. rather then the
Church should inioy her peace; so these will sooner iustifie one
another, than they will submit themselues vnto the truth. But
the bush which Msoses sawe perished not, though it was compassed
with a flame: and the Church of God through his gracious
prouidence doth stand fast, though the securitie of Atheists, the
Idolatrie of Papists, and the impietie of the rest, haue threatned
an ouerthrow: yea, it is now come to passe, that although no heresie
is without some fauourers, yet the deuises euen of the most
skilfull deceiuers, haue bene so laid vpon, that not one of those is
thought vpon of sober mindes, but with detestation. I grant that
men voide of reason may thinke reuerently of them, because wee
see the Donatist condemning Donatisme, a schisme which hee
himselfe vpholdeth, which is a verie dronkennes, though it bee
without wine;Aug. contra Cresco. lib. 5 but wisedome is iustified of her children.
            The Donatists in the yeere of our Lorde 290. or as some
write 353. by their preposterous dealings disturbed the churches
in all those partes where they remained.August. Bonif. Epist. 50. With vaine impudencie
they condemned all the Churches of God,Aug. ad quod vult deum, de haer. cat. and affirmed that
the Church was in the partes of Donatus onely. Also in vpholding
that the Church of Christ is without spot or wrinkle, or

grosse pollution; they did falsely charge Coecilianus the Bishop
of Carthage with certaine crimes, taking occasion therevpon to
separate themselues from the Church; They did account the
Sacraments to be no Sacraments,Aug. in Psa. 10. Retrac. lib. 1. cap. 21. Victoriano. Epist. 21. Contra Epist. Parmeniani, lib. 1. cap 7 Aug. Donat. Epist. 204 Cont. Epist. Parmi. li. 1. ca. 7 Aug Epist. 152 Daneus de Donat. cap. 67. And by the councell are latine. August. contra Parmi. lib. 1. cap. 6 if they were deliuered by one
that approued not their schisme; And therevpon, though Donatus
did not institute rebaptization, yet his successors rebaptised
those that came vnto them. They taught that it was vnlawfull
to seeke vnto the magistrate for aide in causes of the church,
because they were the Lords free people. To be short, that men
are not to be compelled vnto good duties, that they are to vow a
constancie in their schisme, that they were ready to prouoke
the sword of the magistrate against themselues, that they might
brag of sufferings: these and such like were the fruites of Donatisme.
Now Donatus the first author of this schisme, was condemned
for an heretique, and his doctrine for hereticall, in the
daies of Constantine, by the councel of Carthage; and from time
to time euer since it hath ben so accounted of, not onely of the
Church of God, but also of such as abhorre the name, but maintaine
the doctrine of this schisme.
            This is it that the malcontents of our age do greedilie hunt
after the annoiance of our church; condemne it and all other
Churches that are not partakers of their faction; crie out that
the true church is without spot or wrinkle, or grosse pollution,
take libertie to slaunder those that are in authoritie, so to free
themselues from all submission: affirme that the Sacraments are
no Sacraments. (Whervpon though the renuer of this schisme,
Browne I meane,Some of their owne companie haue confessed it. did not in plaine wordes require a baptising againe,
yet their succossors in their established Church attempted
it) haue taught, that they being the Lordes free people, the magistrate
is not to deale in causes ecclesiasticall: holde that men
are not to be compelled to good duties, binde one another with
a vow to persist in this faction, boast of suffrings, &c. & yet detest
the name of Donatisme, though Donatus was the first deuiser, &
of Brownisme, though Brown was the only restorer of these fansies.
The forerunners it should seeme, were grosse, when their
Disciples are ashamed to be accounted their schollers: yet if anie
grossenesse as yet vnnamed, either in matters of faith, or manner
of dealing be found in them, it will appeare in these also; for it is
no new fansie but an ancient heresie, neither is there hope that
they will be restrained but by an olde remedie: For as the Donanists
when councels were called conference was had, and they
were conuicted, yet gaue it out with great glorie, that they had
put to silence all the learned,August. ret. li. 2 cap. 26. & Bonifacio. epi. 50 and remained wilfull, vntill that by
the sharp laws of Honorius, they were restrained, yea and many
of them by that meanes were brought againe to the Church: so

with our men all gentle meanes haue bene vsed: in conference
hard speeches haue onelie helped them, yet remaine they obstinate,
and brag of victorie: if the lawes of our christian Honorius
doe them no good, they are incurable. No doubt the Phisition is
irke some to a frantique person, and a father to an vnrulie child,
the one in binding, the other in striking, and both in louing. The
dutie of a phisition, and the nature of a father must appeare in
the magistrate, not in satisfieng the desires of the froward to cō
               tent
them, but in restraining their phrensie to profite them. It
may bee to the discontentment of some, that anie punishment
should be inflicted vpon them for their disordered stubburnnes,
I would not be mistaken,In his conference with m. Cooper, pa. 49 I wish it not, howsoeuer m. Greenwood
affirmeth that the magistrate ought to compell vnto the hearing
of the word. Only this I saie, that the lesse these matters are cōsidered
of, the better may the men be conceiued of, but view their
writings, examine their doctrine, and marke their dealings, and
they will appeare the open enemies of Gods truth: for in pretending
to establish a church, they ouerthrowe the church, and
vnder the colour of setting vp the discipline of Christ, they seeke
to plague themselues and others with their owne dreams, which
in this their treatise of discipline, and in their two other treatises,
of certaine conferences lately by them published, shall bee
made manifest to the indifferent reader. In answering of them
al (onelie the calumniations in the conferences excepted, which
concerne some particular persons, whose cause I leaue to themselues,
who best know how farre they are abused, and in regorde
thereof can best answere the same) I haue followed the authors
method, leauing the man, and seeing into the matter, not regarding
who wrote it, but what is the doctrine that is maintained by
him. As for the treatise of the visible Church, it will appeare not
tollerable, inasmuch as it is impious, abusing the Scripture, iniurious
to the Church in describing a false gouernment, and daungerous
to the simple, who are readie to bee deceiued with euerie
blast of vaine doctrine. The other discourses are not onely like
vnto it, but haue in them many bitter speeches & vngodlie slanders
both of Church, Magistracie, Ministerie, and all: wherby it
seemeth that the author hath not learned to rule his pen. In this
mine attempt I haue small hope to satisfie those that are wedded
to their will, when Gaudentius was answered sufficientlie to
his follies, hee would notwithstanding returne his aunswere
though he did the same,Aug. ret. lib. 2 cap. 59. 
               nulla ratione respondens, sed magis
se nec respondere, nec tacere potuisse declarans. If our author
wil replie, let him labour to be vnlike to Gaudentius and his
companie, who with words and bitter speeches sought to vphold
their cause, & if he vse the Scriptures, let him applie them faithfully,

and then if he preuaile the controuersie will be at end. In
the meane while if these poore labours of mine might satisfie
these discontented persons; or failing hereof, might staie the ignorant
from beeing seduced, or else might prouoke them that
are better able to deale more substantially in these matters, I shal
be glad. Finally, I am to intreate the reader both to accept in
good part that which in desire of his good is deliuered. And also
before hee beginne to reade this treatise, to amend such faultes
as by default in the printing were committed.
            
               R. A.
            
         
         
            Faultes escaped in the printing.
            The 2. pag. line 21. This read Thus. pag. 5. li. 5. read the sentence
pag. 9. line 24. reade preaching. pag. 13. in the margent Iudg. 4
reade Iude. 4. pag. 23. line 12. read Veliphnei Iehouah ijshpok. &c.
pag. 30. line 14. dutie reade vnitie. pag. 40. in the margent, reade
Bale in Apoc. 2. Iraeneus, &c. pag. 65. line 25. reade were not in
the primitiue, &c. pag. 99. Tit. 3. is to bee placed, line. 11. and line
19. should be Deut. 13. pag. 108. line 28. reade for instruction onely,
&c. pag. 110. line 23. reade Inst. lib. 4. &c. pag. 117. line 2. reade
ignorantiam.
         
      
      
         
            
            A PLAINE
CONFVTATION
OF A TREATISE OF
Brownisme, published by one of that
Faction; the Title whereof
is this. A true Description out of the word of God
of the visible Church.
            
               The Answere to the Title.
               
                  THE departure out
of the Church is
rightly called the
badge of an heretike,
to whom in
his going out the
Goates do flie for
succour, when the
sheepe of Christ do seeke their foode in
the Church of Christ. But because it is a
lesser burthen to beare the marke, then
to haue the name of an heretike, it falleth
out that men in all ages when they forsake

the fellowshippe of the saintes of
GOD, they doe professe a betaking
themselues vnto the true Church of
God.
               Heerevppon it commeth that such as
haue beene nourished with the milke
of discontentment, strengthened with
the spirite of vnquietnesse, and cloathed
with the profession of a godlie
conscience, do now trouble and molest
vs, refuse to continue with vs, and make
a nullitie of our Church. Their eyes
(they say) are now opened, who liued
vntill nowe in blindnesse, they haue
found out the true Church, whereof
they labour to be members: in seeking
our good, they publish and set sorth vnto
vs a true description thereof; and this
shall bee confirmed out of the word of
God.
               This their knowledge, their loue, and
their faithfull dealings, are warranted
vnto vs in the Title of this their treatise,
which matters if we can finde therein,
we will acquite them from schisme and

heresie: but if the discourse be not answerable
vnto the Title, they must returne
vnto vs, or else wee must acknowledge
them to be, not as they pretend,
but as they are.
            
            
               Brownist.
               As there is butGen. 1. 1. Exod. 20. 3. one God, and father of
all, one Lord ouer all, and one Spirite, so is
there but1. Timoth. 2. 4. Phil. 2. 25. Ephes. 2. 18. Iohn 8. 41. one truth, one faith, one saluation,
one Church, called in one hope, ioyned in
one profession, guided by oneDeut. 6. 25. Romans 10. 8. 2. Timoth. 3. 15. Iohn 8. 51. Iohn. 2. 3. 4. &c. rule, euen the
word of the most high.
            
            
               The answere.
               In this first sentence which heere
is sette dovvne, wee are giuen to vnderstande,
what there is to bee hoped
for in that which followeth, both for the
matter and also for the manner of handling
the matter, if wee do but regarde
the ende and scope thereof, being altogither

false, yet packed vp with euident
truthes, that the certaintie of these might
free the other of suspition. The manner
of dealing is to pester the margent with a
cloud of witnesses to smal purpose, onely
they make the ignorant beleeue, that he
which gain-saith this booke, doth speake
against the word of God. But how vainly
this is done, it will appeare by the examination
of the particulars. Seeing the nature
and gouernment of the church (say
they) is like vnto the Lord thereof, it
must be granted, that as God is euer
one and the same: so is his church which
professeth one truth, holdeth one faith,
and is guided by that order which God
hath reuealed in his word. Our answere
is, that we do acknowledge one God the
father, sonne, & holy ghost, his truth our
faith, and the meanes of our saluation to
be vnchangeable; we confesse likewise
one catholike church, which is the communion
of saints, which iointly and seuerally
do confesse that saluation is obtained
in and through Iesus Christ alone.

This church comprehendeth in it both
angels and men,Col. 1. 18. 19. 20. the one sort continuing
in, the other sort restored vnto that estate
wherein they stand; and all obtaining
this sentence of being perfitly righteous,
in and thorough the head of that
church, whereof they are members, euen
Iesus Christ our Lord. This is the church
which they say must be guided by one
rule, euen the word of the most high. Now
we desire to know in what sence the word
of the most high is taken; for if they meane
thereby the prouidence of God, in which
sence it is sometimes taken, as Deut. 8. 3.
& Heb. 1. 3. we do agree in this clause also.
But the places quoted in the margent,
do shew that it is meant of the reuealed
will of God contained in his word; For
Deut. 6. 25. Moses telleth the Israelites
that the obseruing of all the commandements
of the Lord their God, wil be their
righteousnes. Paul Rom. 10. 8. saith, that
the worde of God was in their mouth, &
in their hart euen the word of faith which
vvas preached. Againe 2. Tim. 3. 15. hee

sheweth Timothie that the scriptures
are able to make him wise vnto saluation,
thorough the faith that is in Christ
Iesus. Christ in the eight Chapter of
Iohn and the one and fiftith verse, affirmeth
that if a man keepe his vvorde,
he shall neuer see death. Lastly Iohn
saith, 1. Iohn. 2. 3. By this vve knovv that
vve know him, if we keepe his commandements.
It is euident that these places
do speake of the word of God, which is
giuen vnto vs to be our guide in this life,
for the gathering togither of the saints
during their abode in this world: but
when life ceaseth, the vse of this word
of God doth cease in the Church of
God, as appeareth in the first to the
Corinthians the thirteenth chapter and
eight verse, Colossians the first chapter
and the three and twentith verse, &c.
Therefore to say that the whole church,
that is, both angels in heauen, the faithfull
departed out of this life, and the godly
remaining vpon the earth are all alike
gouerned by this rule, doth bewray either

a foule ignorance, or a foolish rashnesse.
VVhich rash ignorance if in this
one matter it had shewed it selfe onely,
it had bene more tollerable, then it can
be when it alledgeth manie scriptures
to prooue the truth, so vnseasonablie as
here it doth about the vnitie of the Godhead
&c. For the two first places, the first
chapter of Genisis and the first verse,So they speake in the treatise of the church apparant.
the twentith Chapter of Exodus and
the third verse, do mention God in regard
of his soueraigntie ouer all things,
but they speake of him as the inheritour of
mount Sion his Church: wherefore that of
saint Paul in the first to Timothie, the
second chapter and fourth verse, might
haue bene sufficient both for the proofe
of this, and also that there is but one
truth, one faith, &c: Vnto the knowledge
whereof it is the will of God that
men should come and be saued.In a pamphlet, the question being of the best preachers in England▪
                   (By the
way obserue that this place of Paul doth
crosse that negatiue of theirs, We denie,
say they, that you are able to iustifie
that faith which they beget: their reason is,

because our worshipping of God is not
ioyned with their discipline, for we hold
that faith which Paul approueth.) As for
the testimonie which Paul giueth of Epaphroditus,Phil. 2. 25.
that he is his brother, companion
in labor, and fellow souldier, It is a weake
proofe of that whereunto it is referred,
so is that of the Iewes,Iohn. 8. 41 saying that they
haue all one father, euen God, which
Christ denyeth vnto them in the verse
next following. These things are spoken,
not to call that into question which in it
selfe is true, but to shew what discretion
hath bene vsed in the choise, and alledging
these scriptures. But we will go forward.
            
            
               Brownist.
               This Church as it is vniuersally vnderstood,
containeth in it allGen. 17. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Reue. 7. 9 1. Cor. 10. 3. Iohn. 
                        •
                     7. 20 the elect of God that
haue ben, are, or shall be.
            
            
               The answere.
               Most certaine it is that the inuisible
Church of God extendeth it selfe vnto
all the beloued of God, that haue bene,
are or shall be, men and Angells, beeing

complete in him who is the head of all
principalities and powers, to wit, Iesus
Christ. VVe do agree herein, yet it hath
his warrant, such as it is, for it is here proued
by the couenant made with Abraham,
Gen. 17. and by the vision of Iohn,
Reuel. 7. 9. VVhich places do not proue
the matter, in as much as they speake of
the restoring and preseruation of man
onely, and not of the whole bodie of the
church. The other three places alledged
are lesse to purpose. Peter 1. Pet. 1. 2.
writeth vnto the church, which was scattered
ouer the face of the earth; so that
he speaketh not of the vniuersall church
of God, but of that which was in his age.
Paul saith, 1. Cor. 10. 3. that the fathers did
eate one spirituall meat: But they were not
the vniuersall church of God, he speaketh
only of those that were before him.
Christ prayeth for his Apostles, Ioh. 17.
20. and not for them onely, but for those
which should beleeue in him thorough
their pearching: he prayeth not for the
vniuersall church, viz. all that haue bene,

are, or shalbe, but for those which being
aliue, should inioy the ministery of his
Apostles. But it may be the authors meaning
is not out of euery of these seuerally,
but from them al ioyntly to conclude
this vniuersal church, for as much as Paul
speaketh of those which haue bene, Peter
speaketh of those that are, and Christ
mentioneth those that shalbe. VVhich
though we should grant, yet they all
mention but mankind onely, and thereof
not all the elect of God: for the infants
which are vnder the couenant, and
departing this life before they are capable
of the ministerie of the word, are not
comprehended within the number of
those which Christ in that place prayed
for, Peter did write vnto, &c. so that these
places iointly taken, do not conteine so
much of the vniuersall church as the two
first places: & though they did, yet they
do not comprehend the whole as hath
bene said. Thus a good dish may be marred
by an vnskilfull cooke, and a good
matter spoiled by an vnlearned clearke.
            
            
               
               Brownist.
               But being considered more particularly, as
it is seene in this present world: it consisteth of
a company and felowship ofPsa. 111. 1 & 149. 1. Esa. 62. 12. Eph. 1. 1. 1. Cor. 1. 2. Deut. 14. 2. faithfull andDeut. 12. 5. Ioh. 6. 37. & 3. 14. & 12. 32. Luk. 17. 3. holy
people, gathered togither in the name of
Christ Iesus their onlyGe. 44. 10. Psal. 45. 6. Zac. 9. 9. Heb. 1. 8. king,Rom. 8. 34▪ Iohn. 17. Heb. 5. 9. & 8 1. & 4. 14. priest, &Deut. 18. 15 Matt. 17. 15. Heb. 1. 1. Gen. 14. 18. prophet,
Exo. 20. 7. Leu. 10. 5. Ioh. 4. 23.worshipping him aright, beingMatt. 11. 29 1. Cor. 11. 16. Mar. 13. 34. Reuel. 22. 9. peaceably
gouerned by his officers and lawes,Eph. 4. 3. 1. Cor. 1. 13. Mark. 9. 50. keeping
the vnitie of faith in the bond of peace,
andIoh. 13. 34. 1. Cor. 13. 4. 1. Pet. 1. 22. 1. Ioh. 3. 18. loue vnfeigned.
            
            
               Answere.
               Leauing the inuisible church of God,
we are to keep in remembrance, that this
discourse is of the visible church, as it
is seene in this world: and it setteth before
our eyes the matter whereof it is
framed; the glory wherewith it is crowned,
the discipline whereby it is gouerned,
and the estate which it enioyeth,
euen in this life. All which matters are
here set downe so necessarie vnto the
esse or being of the church, that the want
of these or of anie of these, presentlie
causeth a nullitie thereof: but how substantiallie
these matters are prooued,

the particulars shall make manifest. The
matter whereof this church is framed,Treatise of the church apparant. is
a companie of people which is faithfull, &c.
The Authors meaning is expressed more
plainely in the arguments vsed against
the church of England, Argument. 6. The
church of Christ is sanctified and made glorious,
without spot or wrincle, or grosse pollution.
Againe, Argument. 8. The people shalbe
all righteous. Againe, One wicked man disanulleth
the couenant vnto all. And in the
latter end of this booke it is concluded,
that in this visible church is no vncleane person.
                  Gen. 4. 1.
But was not the house of Adam the
visible church of God, and Cain a member
of it? he was vnfaithfull. Was not
the Arke of Noah the visible church of
God,Gen. 7. 7. and Cham preserued in it? he was
vnfaithfull.Gen. 17. 23. VVas not Ismael being circumcised
in Abrahams house of the visible
church?Gen. 25. 1. Reg. 16. 29. 30. he was vnfaithfull. VVas not
Esau in the family of Isaac, Achab in his
raigne ouer Israel,Matth. 10. 4 and Iudas Ischariot
of the visible church? all these were vnfaithfull.
In the visible church of God

there will be tares, yea vntill the haruest:
chaffe among the wheat,Matth. 13. 30. & 3. 12. & 25. 32. goates among
the sheepe, hypocrites among the true
professors: nay to go further, Antichrist
for a time sitting in the temple of God,
and other monstrous men abiding in the
church,2. Thess. 2. 4. Iudg. 4. Treatise of the church apparant. turning the grace of God into
wantonnesse. But they do confesse that
there may be pollutions in the manners of men
being secret, which they leaue vnto God: but
if they be such spots and wrinkles, as declare
the church not to be glorious, then no apparant
church. VVhat spots they can finde greater
than those before mentioned I know
not: yet this I adde, that the church at
Ierusalem was not greatly glorious in
the dayes of Herods tyrannie, when also
the office of the high Priest was diuided
to two: Nor from the dayes of Malachy
vntill the comming of Christ, during all
which time there was a deepe silence of
the word. Nor in the captiuitie of Babylon,
as appeareth by the prophesie of
Zacharie.Zach. 3. & 5. Esa. 1. 6. Nor in the daies of Hussia, Iothan,
Achaz, and Hezechia, when Esay

complained that there was no whole
part from the sole of the foote to the
head, but wounds & swellings, and sores
full of corruption. Nor in the time of
Dauid,2. Sam. 13. when the incest of one of his
sonnes,2. Sam. 15. the traiterous attempts of another,2. Sam. 11.
yea the sinnes committed by Dauid
himself were most abhominable. And
yet I hope the Author will acknowledge
these to haue bene the apparant church
of God, euen in the midst of grosse pollutions.
Therefore it is not necessary for
the esse or being of the church apparant,
that euerie member therof be faithfull,
&c. How is this therefore proued? here
is quoted Psal. 111. 1. I will praise the Lord
with my whole heart in the secret meetings of
the iust, and in their congregation, that is,
both publikely and priuatly, wheresoeuer
the iust do meete. Also Psal. 149. 1.
where he calleth the said meetings, the
congregation of the godly. But in these places
Dauid neither saith, that it is vnpossible
for a wicked man to ioyne with the
faithfull in outward dueties; nor yet

that the presence of the vngodly mā can
cause the assembly not to be the congregation
of the iust or godly, which is the
matter that should haue bin concluded.
Now wheras the church is called an holy
people, Esa. 62. 12. & Deut. 14. 2. it is in
regard that they were the seed of him,
with whom the couenant was made:Rom. 9. 4, &c. but
howsoeuer in respect hereof the adoption
pertained to them, & the glory, & the
couenant, & the giuing of the Law & the
seruice of God, & the promises, of whom
are the fathers, and of whom concerning
the flesh Christ came, and therfore were
called an holy people: yet neither are all
they Israel that are of Israel,
                  vers. 6. neither yet is
the true Israel cleane vntil the fountaine
be opened to wash away their filthinesse:zacha. 13. 1.
as for the church of Ephesus, Eph. 1. 1. & of
Corinth, Cor. 1. 2. they are indeed called
saints: but can we truly say that there was
no pollution knowne among them? the
matter is plain, that euē at that instant, as
appeareth by both the Epistles, al things
were not so well in these churches as

were to be wished. Therefore, notwithstanding
these churches are called saints,
Israel holy, and the assemblie of such as
worship God, a congregation of the iust:
yet there may be a visible church of God
though some member thereof be not
faithfull. This people, saith our Author,
must be also holy: for proofe whereof
is brought Deut. 12. 5. where the people
are commanded to worship in the
place which the Lord should choose.
But I pray you, when some of them obeyed
not,
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 12. 28. & 1. Reg. 16▪ 32. as Ieroboam, who caused the
people to worship in Bethel and Dan:
Achab,2. Chro. 33. who worshipped in the house of
Baal, Manasses, and others, did the people
of God cease to be the church of
God? in no wise. VVe grant that Gods
ordinances ought to be regarded, especially
in matters concerning his worship:
but this is not the matter in question;
but whether the breaking of them
by some one man, can make the people
of God to be no people vnto him? for
this is it, that should haue bene concluded.

Next to this is alledged Iohn. 6. 37.
which place, that it may the better be vnderstood,
we are to remember, that in
the verse immediatly going before,
Christ had said, Ye haue seene me and beleeue
not: the he addeth, All that my father giueth
me, shall come vnto me: whereby he
sheweth that the gift of faith is the free
election of the father in Christ: so that
faith is a certaine testimonie of election
to the faithfull. The argument standeth
thus. No man can come vnto Christ and
beleeue in him, except it be giuen him of
the father: therefore euerie member of
the visible church is holy.In a treatise which they haue scattered abroad. Surely it is no
maruell that the knowledge of the liberal
sciences is condemned as an exercise
of curious arts; but if they knew these
Arts, no doubt they would be ashamed
to abuse themselues & others with such
sencelesse kinde of reasoning. Besides,
what meaneth this, that to prooue the
people of God faithfull, are alledged
scriptures that speake of holines? as Esa.
62. 12. & Deut. 14. 2. And now to proue

their holinesse, faith is mentioned? If
faith and holinesse be all one, why are
they noted as diuers with e & f? if they be
not all one, why is the handling of them
thus confounded? in one of these must
be acknowledged a foule ouersight.
Then followeth to proue the holinesse of
the church aforesaid, Iohn. 3. 14. & 12.
32. both which places doe shew, that
Christ will draw his elect vnto him: the
first doth shew the meanes whereby this
shalbe done, namely, by the ministerie
of his word, which is signified by his lifting
vp; the other place noting the time,
viz. after his death. Now this is the force
of this argument: Christ bringeth men
to beleeue in him, therefore euery member
of the visible church is holie. I neede
not stay in shewing how well this proofe
is made; we wil come to the last place for
this matter cited, which is that of Christ,
Luk. 17. 3. Looke to your selues, and so proceedeth
in shewing how reprehensions
are to be vsed; I cannot perceiue what
moued the Author to alledge this place

which pertaineth not to the matter; except
it were to make a shew in the margent
amongst his other friuolous & vain
quotacions. To proceede, This faithfull
and holy people is gathered in the name of
Christ Iesus, their onely king, priest, and prophet,
&c. That Christ Iesus is our onely
king, priest, and prophet, and that the seruants
of God in all their assemblies, both
publike and priuate, do meete in his
name, is confessed: but the manner of
dealing with the scripture, is not here
greatly to be commended. For how is
the kingdome of Christ prooued? for it
is cited, Gen. 44. and the tenth verse,
where Ioseph speaking to his brethren
of the cuppe, saith thus. Now then, let it
be according to your words, he with whom
it is found shall be my seruant, and yee shall
be blamelesse. Truely, if a written coppie
of this treatise, being more ancient then
the printed booke had not come vnto
my handes, wherein I see the same place
quoted, I should haue laide this fault
vppon the Printer, for I should neuer

haue suspected a church builder to haue
bene such a sencelesse prophaner of the
word of God. The other testimonies, viz.
Psal. 45. 6. Zac. 9. 9. Heb. 1. 8. are more
plaine. So for his priesthood, the making
intercession for his, Rom. 8. 34. & Ioh. 17.
which is a part of that function; and Heb.
5. 9. & 8. 1. & 4. 14. speaking of the whole
office, are to be accepted. Now to come
to his propheticall function, for which is
alledged Deut. 18. 15. which is not to be
restrained vnto Christ; for it promiseth
vnto the church a continuall succession
of teachers in all ages. It is more to purpose,
which is alledged out of Matth. 17.
5. & Heb. 1. 1. but as touching Gen. 14.
18. though it speaketh of Melchisedek,
who was king of Salem, and a Priest, and
was a figure of Christ, Heb. 7. 1. yet the
place that is quoted hath small force in
it selfe, to proue that, for the which it is
brought.In his pamphlet against read prayers, and Treatise of the church apparant.
               
               This church also worshippeth him aright;
that is, neither in a set forme of praier, nor
yet in that place where discipline is not

established; for we gather the Authors
minde out of his owne writings. So
that he alloweth that for true worship,
which is by the direction of Gods
spirit, our onely helpe, and vnder the
established gouernement of Pastors,
&c. Indeed,Iohn. 4. God is a spirite, and is to be
worshipped in spirite and truth, which
cannot be done without his direction:
yet are there certaine outward helpes
which God hath sanctified for the furthering
of the weake, in their special seruing
of God, as reading, &c. And if true worship
cannot be performed without this
gouernment, then may not we iustifie, euen
their owne seruing of God, for they
thēselues do want this discipline. Three
places of scripture are here abused,Exod. 20. 7. Leuit. 10. 5. Exo.
20. 7. 8. Leuit. 10. 5. Ioh. 4. 23. for not one of
them condemneth read prayers in any
mā, much lesse whol churches, either for
them, or for want of this discipline. True
it is, that the name of God must not be abused,
neither must his worship be prophaned,
as is euident to be seene in Nadab

and Abihu, who for their strange fire
were consumed of the Lord; not that he
regardeth so much a cole of fire, only he
warneth men to take heede, that they
worship God according to his owne appointment.
But to the matter. Did the sin
of Nadab and Abihu cause Moses & his
people to be no church vnto God? we
may not so thinke. The offenders receiued
iust recompence for their sin, the rest
continued the seruants & worshippers of
God. These proofs therfore faile in these
points: First they proue not that the false
worship of one maketh a nullity before
God of the whole cōgregation, but shew
the contrarie; secondly, they proue not a
set forme of praier to be a taking of Gods
name in vaine, a prophanation of the sabaoth,
or a carnal worship: but we say that
this kind of worship is vnlike to that of
Nadab & Abihu, because it is warranted
in the word of God, wherin I wil not vrge
Nu. 6. 23. or Matth. 6. 9. which hauing bin
aledged heretofore, are turned aside with
expounding the Hebrue coh, & the greek

                  houtos, after this manner, or thus: as if the
place in Numery were the sum of al blessings,
& the other in Matth. were only giuē
for a direction in our praiers; the vanity
of which cauil, togither with the whole
discourse hereof, I leaue to him who hath
alredy dealt with this matter: & yet in the
meane season, we may note that the 102.
Ps. was not giuen for a patterne of prayer,
but to be vsed for a prayer, as appeareth
by the title therof. Tepillah legnanei kiiagne
toph beliphne Iehouah jishpek shicho. A praier
for the poore when he is distressed, powring
out his meditation before the Lord.
Also Psa. 9. Mizmor shir leiom hashabath;
A Psalme & song for the sabaoth day. So
that as the former was a set praier for the
afflicted, so this latter was a thanksgiuing
for the blessings of God, & both of them
vsed in his holy worship. Of the like sort
are Psal. 42. 44. 22. 80. 39. and many other
Psalmes which were not helpes onely to
meditation, but set praiers in the church
of God. Thirdly, these places proue not
the want of this discipline to make a false

worship, but we say that God cannot be
truly serued, where the discipline described
in this treatise is established, which
shall appeare by that which followeth.
Being peaceably gouerned by his officers and
lawes. The Author expresseth what his
meaning is, in the other part of this
booke: for he describeth these officers
and these lawes, what they are: Concerning
all which, this I say in generall, that
here is nothing but palpable ignorance
to be found, for first these gouerning officers,Officers.
pastors, doctors, Elders, Deacons
and relieuers, being fiue in number, are
so necessarily required, that the want of
these or any of these in a congregation,
causeth it to be no Church apparant. Against
the which assertion, for to make
their madnes more manifest, we do here
by the way of supposition grant vnto thē,
that there are such functions, & yet these
exceptions may be taken: first, if the author
hath described the relieuer and the
Deacon faithfully, then are they no gouerning
officers, but seruants vnto the

church. Secondly, that the want of Elders
taketh not away the esse or being of the
church, considering that Christ and his
disciples which ioined with him were the
apparant church, and yet during the time
of his humiliation these officers were not
erected. And when many reuolted, as is
to be seene Iohn. 6. Christ asking the
twelue if they also would go away, Peter
answered in the name of the rest, Master
to whom shall we go, thou hast the words
of eternal life? so that Peter accounteth the
word a sufficient warrant for his continuing
with Christ, howsoeuer these men
though they confesse that the worde
of God is to be heard, yet denie the
hearing of it at their mouthes, which
haue not ordained Elders among them.
But this may seeme no sufficient proofe,
which is taken from Christ and his disciples,
forasmuch as this discipline was not
then commanded, I answere, that if there
were a time when the church of Christ
was without this gouernment, and forasmuch
as it receiued not the gouernment

of the Iewes, it is not a perpetuall rule,
that outward gouernment should be the
life of the Church, but I will not holde
them in this straight: they aske where we
can finde a church without this gouernement,
after that Christ had sent his spirite
vpon the disciples. I answere, that as Timothie
was left at Ephesus, so was Titus
in Crete, I meane in the house of God, which
is the church of the liuing God. And yet at
that time Elders were not appointed in
that church before Titus had ordained
them, not to speake of the church of Ierusalem,
which made choise of Deacons,
but not of Elders. Also it is plaine that
the Elders which were appointed in the
churches by the Apostles, were for the
most part such as dealt in the worde, and
not in gouerment onely, as heereafter
shall be made more manifest in his due
place. Thirdly, that the Doctor is not necessary
in euery congregation, nor yet to
execute his office in the publike assemblies.
For wheras they themselues affirme
that the word & sacramentes must go together,

for which they alledge that saying
of Christ,Math. 28. 19. 
                  Go preach, haptising: by which saying
wee are drawen to the mislike of vnpreaching
ministers: so by the same wee
may conclude against an vnministering
Doctorship, the worde and Sacraments,
the mysteries of God are not to be diuorced,
yet do we acknowledge the office of
a Doctor, a distinct matter frō the pastors
function, who is to feed his sheep with the
mysteries of God, both worde and Sacraments
in the assēblies, which are for Gods
worship; the Doctor attending vpon his
dutie in a place by the church appointed,
instructing men in the true sense of the
scriptures, whereby the church may haue
able men alwaies in readines, to supplie
such romes as shalbee void in the church
by death or otherwise, Pastor in ecclesijs,
Doctor in scholis.
                  In annota. Bez. Eph. 4. Lastly, I saie, that though
it were grāted, that this platform drawen
out in this treatise, were warranted by the
word, yet cānot they ascribe to it an abilitie
to make the church of God perfect
therby in this life, for thē shuld that praier

be needlesse,Matth. 6. 12. 
                  forgiue vs our sinnes. Neither
will they say, that these offices can
at al times be had, especially when there
are not men sufficiently qualified for
them: for they confesse that Gods ordinances
are not to be prophaned, and to
haue no Elders is better then to haue
ignorant and insufficient Elders, and in
this respect do they cleare the church in
the dayes of Christs humiliation, and acquit
it from sinne in the want of this established
gouernement; nor yet will they
grant, that if there were men meete for
these offices, that yet they should be set
in these roomes before the church doth
elect them,In this treatise. 
                  for here is no intrusion, &c. So
that the most that by their owne doctrine
is to be yeelded vnto, is this; that when
men are able, in respect of their gifts, to
vndertake this burthen, if it be thought a
matter expedient by euery member of
the church, then is this gouernement necessary,In the treatise of the apparant church
but this is farre wide from that
conclusion which is made against the
church of England, that it should not be a

church, bicause it did not receiue this gouernement.
I omit to speake any further
of the particular offices, vntil we come to
the seuerall handling of them. And as touching
the lawes which here are required,
either they are not at all described in this
booke, which were grosse, or else we must
confesse that the lawes of Christ are vnperfect,
which is impious. For the lawes
that in the end of this boke are set down,
are such as may seeme to be sufficient for
the ordering of the common sort, but if
the Elder be disordered, here is no lawe
for his reformatiō, or if the whole seignory
do faile either in iudgement or in proceeding
(as generall councels, much
more a priuat eldership may feele their
wants) there is no manner of proceeding
declared in this euill. VVell the church
of Christ must be guided by his officers
and lawes. How is this proued? Heere is
alleaged Matth. 11. 29. where Christ willeth
vs to take his yoke on vs. Mark. 13.
34. where is shewed that he hath committed
to euerie man his worke: in both

these, he speaketh not of discipline, onely
he willeth men in all meeknes to walke
in their callings. VVhereunto is fitly ioyned
that of Paul, 1. Cor. 11. 16. If any man
lust to be contentious, we haue no such custom
nor the churches of God. And I wish with all
my heart that he which quoted these places,
had the grace to practise that doctrine
which in them is contained. That
of Iohn, Reue. 22. 9. where the Angel doth
forbid Iohn to worship him. I acknowledge
my ignorance in not conceiuing
how it is applied to the matter in hande,
Keeping the dutie of faith. This keeping of
faith in the bond of peace & loue, beeing
required in the foresaide officers (as the
wordes seeme to import) cannot be concluded
by the places of Scripture, which
are cited for that purpose, Eph. 4. 3. 1. Cor.
1. 13. Mark. 9. 50. Iohn. 13. 34. 1. Cor. 13. 4.
1. Pet. 1. 22. 1. Iohn. 3. 18. for all these (one
of them onely excepted, viz. 1. Co. 13. 4.
which describeth the properties of loue)
are generall exhortations vnto all men,
not particular to these officers, to keep

the vnitie of the spirit in the bōd of peace
and loue. Thus farre of the matter wherof
this visible church is framed. Now followeth
the dignity and glorie thereof.
            
            
               Brownist.
               MostPs. 87. 2 ioyfull, excellent and glorious things
are euerywhere in the Scriptures spoken of this
church, it is called thePs. 87. 2 citie,1. Ti. 3. 15 Heb. 3. 6 house,1. Co. 3. 17 temple,
andEsa. 2. 2 Micha. 4. 1 mountaine of the eternall God, the chosen
generation, thezach. 8. 3 1. Pet. 2. 9. holy nation, the peculiar people,
theIsa. 51 and 27. 11. vineyard, theCan. 4. 12. Isa. 51. 3 garden enclosed, the
spring shut vp, the sealed fountain, the orchard
of pomgranads with sweete fruites, theIsa. 9. 25 heritage,
theMic. 3. 2 Iohn. 3. 3 kingdome of Christ: yea hisCant. 5. 2 sister, his
loue, his spouse, hisPsa. 45. 9 queene, and his1. Cor. 12. 17 Ephe. 1. 23 bodie, the
ioy of the whole earth. To this societie is the
Gal. 4. 28couenant, and all the promises made ofPs. 147. 14 2. Thes. 3. 16 peace,
of loue, & ofIsa. 46. 13. Zac. 14. 17 saluation, of theEsa. 60 Ezec. 47 Zach. 4. 12 presence of God,
of his graces, of his power, & of his protection.
            
            
               Answere.
               The excellency of the visible church of
God is cōmended vnto vs by the names
& titles giuen vnto it, & also by this, that
the couenant and promises of peace are
made vnto it,Ez. 48. 35 Math. 8. 20 Esa. 62 both which we acknoledge

with them, both iointly, and in euery particular
title and promise. Onely I would
haue obferued that some of these quotations
are not made in the wisest sort: for
Heb. 3. 6. and 1. Cor. 3. 17. do not speake
of the whole visible church, which is a
companie of both good and bad, which
ioyne in one profession, but of the faithfull
only, which are members of the same.
VVheras the church is called, a holy people
Zach. 8. 3. 1. Pet. 2. 9. (as vpon the like
allegation hath bin said) it is partly in regard
of Gods couenant, and partly to put
them in remembrance of that holinesse,
whereunto they are called, and wherein
they ought to walke, and not as if they
were void of pollution, as our author fantastically
dreameth. This church is called
a vineyard Esay. 5. 1. but not in the place
cited for this purpose. It is compared vnto
a garden inclosed, but not so called
Cant. 4. 12. and Esa. 51. 3. It is called the
kingdom of heauen Matth. 11. 12. but in
the thirde of Michah alleaged is no such
thing. In deede in a written copie I finde

Math. 3. 2. quoted, where the kingdome
of God is mentioned, not for the visible
Church, but for that happinesse which is
assured in newnesse of life. In which sense
that of Christ is to be vnderstood Iohn.
3. 3. whereas the Church is called the
body of Christ. Ephes. 1. 23. It is not
meant by the visible, but the vniuersall
church of God. Thus vnder hope to get
credit by folding vp a multitude of scriptures
in a narrowe roome, ignorance
hath vnfolded and laide it selfe open to
the broad world. But why are these titles
of the church broght into this treatise?
Surely that from the excellencie of
them might be enforced a perfection. But
who knoweth not wherefore these titles
were giuen, and those promises were
made vnto the Church, viz. that it and euerie
member there of might bee assured
of Gods loue, whereby they might bee
comforted in the middest of the reproches
of men, knowing that the temporal
miseries which they endure, and the despightfull
dealings wherevnto they are

subiect, shall not be able to ouerwhelme
them seeing they are so precious in the
eies of God. Also that the remebrance of
this excellēcy, might stir thē vp to looke
vnto their cōuersation, that as God hath
begū to deal graciously with thē, so they
shuld labor for the cōtinuāce of his loue
in a daily mortifieng of their corrupt affections,
& putting on the Lord Iesus, in
whō only standeth the glorie, comfort, &
saftie of the church.
               And surely if this Church be considered in
her partes,Brownist it shall appeare most beautifull, yea
most wonderfull, andCan. 6. 4. 9. rauishing the senses to
conceiue, much more to beholde, what then to
inioy so blessed a communion? For behold herIsa. 62. 11. Io. 12. 15 Heb. 7. 8
king and Lord is the king of peace, and Lorde
himselfe of all glorie. She enioyeth most holie
and heauenlyMat. 11. 30 1. Iohn. 5. 3. lawes, most faithfull and vigilant
Act. 20pastors, most sincere & pureRom. 12. 7 teachers,
most carefull and vprightRom. 12. 8 gouernours, most
diligent andAct. 6 trustie deacons, most louing and
soberRom. 12. 8 Iohn. 13. 17 Deut. 13. 17 releeuers, & a mostMath. 5. 5. Deut. 18. 10 Eze. 36. 38. Esa. 60. 8 humble, meek, obedient,
faithful & louing people, euerie1. Reg. 7. 9. Zach. 14. 
                        •
                     1. 1 Pet. 2. 5 stone liuing,
elect & precious, euery stone hath his beutie,
hisGal. 6. 2 burden & his1. Co. 12 Rom. 12. 3 order, al bound toHeb. 10. 24 edifie

one another, exhort, reproue & comfort one
anotherLeui. 15. 17 1. Thes. 4. 9 louingly, as to their owne members,Col. 3. 23 1. Ioh. 3. 20
faithfully as in the eies of God.
               No2. Col. 2. 17 3. Iohn. 9 office here is ambitiously affected, no
1. Ti. 4. 2. 3 Gal. 6. 12law wrongfully wrested, or1. Cor. 5 wilfully neglected,
noIere. 23. 28 1. Tim. 3. 15 truth hid or peruerted,1. Cor. 6. and 14. 30. euery one here
hath fredom & power not disturbīg the peaceable
order of the church, to vtter his cōplaints
& griefes, & freely to reproue the trāsgressiōs
& errors of any, without exceptiō of persons.
               Here is noIohn. 10. 1. intrusiō or climbing vp another
waie into the sheepfold, thē
                  Act. 1. 23. & 6. 3. & 14. 23 by the holy & free
electiō of the Lords holy & free people, & that
according to the Lords ordinance, hūbling thē
                  selues
by fasting and praier before the Lorde,
crauing the direction of his holy spirite for the
trial and approuing of his gifts.
               Here is a third matter set down to commend
the church vnto vs,Answere. viz. the glorie,
excellēcy & sincerity of euery part therof
being seuerally considered. VVhich matter
if it could be as soundly proued, as it
is cōfidently spokē, thē were this church
in itself without Christ most beutiful, yea
most wonderfull, and euen rauishing the

senses to conceiue, much more to beholde:
what then to enioy so blessed a
communion? But to begin withall, the
place of Salomon,Cant. 5. Can. 6. 4. 9. is much abused
by the author, whilest that it is applied
to cōmēd the beutie of the church,
which is nothing else but blacknesse, as
the church her selfe acknowledgeth. For
wheras in the former chapter the church
hath accused her selfe of negligence, in
not perfourming her dueties vnto her
spouse. And (the daughters of Ierusalem
comforting her) she declared his nature
and disposition, the place of his abode,
&c. whereby shee doeth aggreuate her
former fault. For (quem beneficia accepta
meliorem non reddunt,
                  Chrisost. de sacerd. li. 4. 
                  is certe etiam grauius
suppliuum commeretur. Hee whome benefites
receiued make not better, doth deserue
the more grieuous punishment.
And surely the greater the loue of Christ
is to the church, the greater is the sinne
of the church in not performing dutie.)
Novv in the former parte of this sixth
chapter, her beloued doth comfort her,

& doth assure hir that she is as dere vnto
him novv, as euer before she had beene.
So then it is not the excellencie of the
church that commendeth her, but her
spouse through his gracious fauor doth
accept of her, notvvithstanding her defects,
which she acknowledgeth.The seueral parts of the church. To let
this passe, let vs consider the seuerall
parts of this visible church.Her king. 
                  Her King and
Lord is the king of peace, and Lord himself of al
glory, the sauior of Sion. Esa. 62. 11. a king,
Iohn. 12. 15. and one, whose soueraigntie
was figured in Melchizedek, Heb. 7. 8.
So that in regard of this hir king, we also
do confesse the church to be glorious;
She enioyeth most holy and heauenly lawes.
                  Her lawes.
Most true it is, that the commandements
of Christ are such, that it cannot iustly
be counted a seruitude to be obedient
vnto them; yrksome they are no doubt
to a carnall man, but not to him that loueth
God: this is it that is witnessed in
the places alledged, viz. Matt. 11. 30. and
1. Iohn. 5. 3. but what are these Lawes and
commandements? Our Sauiour Christ, say

they, was fortie daies after his resurrection
conuersant with his Apostles, teaching them
those things which concerne the building of the
church and kingdome, and the Apostles according
as they haue receiued instruction of him,
so they builded, and lefte vs a patterne nowe.
So that these most holie lawes were giuen
by Christ to his Apostles, betvveene
the times of his resurrection and ascention.
               VVhereunto I saie, that although
the discipline of Christ beeing his owne
ordinance is most holy, yet this is to put
it in the number of vnwritten verities,
when men would proue it by such arguments
as this is. And as for the saying
of Christ by them produced, it doth not
speake of discipline, for hee onelie willeth
his Disciples to take his yoake vpon
them.
               I knowe that they take this Yoake
for discipline, but the circumstaunces of
the place do bewraie their ignorance in
so thinking. For in bearing this yoake,
CHRIST willeth that his example

bee followed, Learne of me, saith Christ.
Nowe I woulde vnderstande of these
men, what was that Church, wherein
Christ founde this discipline established,
and submitted himselfe vnto the same,
leauing this his deede for an example to
bee followed: if they cannot tel me this,
as it is harde to shewe that which neuer
was, I wonder what hath moued them to
wring out discipline from hence, seeing
that Christ onely exhorteth to submission,
meeknes, &c. by his example. The
Philosopher was not so grosse in his
Panspermia, as they are in making quidlibet
ex quolibet so commonly. Yet I saie
againe, the lawes of Christ are most holy,
and that discipline which he approueth
most necessarie, which is not the
gouernment which heere is decyphered,
for it shall appeare to bee the deuice
of man, without the approbation
of the vvord of God, but the rule of his
worde, wherein vvee are taught to emploie
our selues in our seuerall callings,
to performe those dueties which in our

callings God requireth at our handes.
As for the vigilancie of Pastors,Her members. the sinceritie
of Doctors, the carefulnesse of
Gouernors, the trustinesse of those vnto
whom the care of the poore is committed,
the sobrietie of relieuers, the humilitie,
obedience and meekenesse of the
people; these are required in the word of
God, and all the testimonies in this cause
cited (one or two excepted) are admonitions,
& exhortations, that men wold be
carefull of these things, as they do concerne
them in their callings. But do these
proofes here vsed iustifie that the visible
church enioyeth such a people, qualified
in this sort? Nay, those that come neerest
the matter, as Rom. 12. 7. 8. Act. 20.
28. Matth. 5. 5. Deut. 18. 10. are but exhortations
vnto this fidelitie, vigilancy, &c.
but no promises that the church shal enioy
such men alwayes.Bulling. & Ioh. Bale in Act. 2. Freneus contra valent. li. 1. cap. 27. Tertul. in prescrip. Heret. Some of these
scriptures do flatly shew the contrarie.
Read Act. 20. vers. 29. 30. I know, saith
Paul, there shall enter in among you grieuous
wolues, not sparing the flocke, &c. It is also

the iudgement of some, that one of the
deacons spoken of Act. 6. was the first of
the Nicholaitans mentioned Reuel. 2. 6.
Other places alleaged are nothing to the
purpose as Ioh. 13. 7. which is not spoken
of the widowes, that here are called releuers,
but to the disciples of their duties in
helping one an other. Likewise Esay. 60.
which is a prophesie of the calling of the
Gentiles, and & Eze. 36. 38. which promiseth
a blessing vpon Israell, are farre from
prouing that euerie member of the visible
church is meeke, obedient, &c. thus
hath our author tolde vs of many good
things, without due proofe of any one.
               VVhen this describer of the church,
had shewed vs the sinceritie of euerie
member particularly, he giueth his iudge
ment of them all iointly, saying: Euerie
stone is liuing elect & pretious, which is confirmed
with three testimonies: the first is,
1. Reg. 7. 9. where the building of Solomon
being shewed in order, that he built
one house to dwell in, an other called the
forrest of Libanon, a porch for the throne

where he iudged, and a house also for
Pharaos daughter, it is said, All these were
of costlie stones. And how then? did euerie
of these buildinges to what vse soeuer
they were appointed, represent the visible
church of God? The onely sight of
this place is sufficient to shew what force
it hath to prooue the matter in question.
The second place is Zach. 14. 21. Euerie pot
in Ierusalem and Iuda shall be holie vnto the
Lord of hostes, and all they that sacrfice shall
come, and take of them, and seeth therein: by
this ceremonie the people were put in
minde, that euerie of them doe worship
the Lorde with holy affections, but this
doeth not prooue that all the people did
thus behaue thēselues in Gods worship;
the contrary is plaine. Agg. 2. 11. 12. &c.
The last place which is 1. Pet. 2. 5. cōmeth
more neere the marke: for the Apostle
saith that as liuely stones they were made
a spirituall house; yet he saith not that euery
one among them was so, and those
that were, he declareth from whence it
came: to wit, Iesus Christ. In which matter

(if no further purity be ment by the author)
we do agree: as also that euerie one
hath his burthen & his order, being boūd
to edifie one an other, exhort, reproue,
and comfort one an other louingly as being
members of one bodie, and faithfully,
as in Gods sight. The neglect of these
duties hath bred, nourished, & continued
this late & pestilent schisme amongst vs.
               That the affecting of offices, the wresting
or neglecting of laws, & peruerting
of truth are not incident to the church, is
newes too good to be true, as shal appere
euen by the selfe same places of scripture
which here are set in the margent as good
proofes of the authors follies, whiles that
they do so flatly gainesay that which they
should iustifie. For manie make merchandize
of the word. 2. Cor. 2. 17. And Diotrephes loueth
to haue the preheminence 3. Iohn. 9. then
is there affecting of offices. In the latter
times some shall speake lies through hipocrisie,
and haue their consciences burned with an
hot iron 1. Timoth. 4. 2. And some desiring to
make a faire shew in the flesh constraine men

to be circumcised Galat. 6. 12. then is there
peruerting of trueth. The Corinthians
were negligent in proceeding against the
incestuous person 1. Cor. 5. then is there
neglecting of lawes. VVhat shall we then
say to this man, who woulde make the
world beleue, that the scriptures do confirme
that, which they do so directly and
plainely deny? Let him pronounce the
sentence vpon him selfe. He saith, The prophet
that hath a dreame let him tell a dreame,
and he that hath Gods word let him speake
Gods word faithfully. Ier. 23. 28. and so say
I: for it is a vile abuse, that is offered to
God and man, when a dreame or fancie
is countenaunced with the scriptures,
which doe ouerthrow it. What is the chaffe
to the wheat. Timothie durst not thus behaue
himselfe in Gods house 1. timoth. 3. 15. Euerie
member of the church (say they) ought to haue
freedome to vtter his complaintes and griefes,
yea and not disturbing the peaceable order of
the church (by passing the boundes of his
calling) to reproue transgressions and errors:
this we grant of our owne accord, not being

vrged hereunto by any thing mentioned.
1. Corinth. 6. or 14. 30. which proue
it not; but that the estate of the visible
church is such, that euerie member hath
alwaies this freedome, we deny it. Also,
we say, that as there may be intrusion or
climing vp an other way into the sheepefold
through mens corruptions, then by
the election of those to whome election
doth belong: so woulde it be a horrible
cōfusion if the election of offices were left
in the hands of the people, as in this platforme
of discipline they doe teach vs, but
that the people should haue their interest
in ordination, also is more then grosse.
For proofe whereof, I will not stand vppon
those places of Paule 1. Tim. 5. 22. lay
not thy hand rashlie on anie man, and Tit 15.
for this cause left I thee at Creete, that thou
mightest appoint Elders in euerie citie, because
that although they flatly gainesay
the ordination of Elders by the people;
yet they seeme not sufficient vnto some,
to infringe the libertie of the people in election
also;Caluin Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3 Sect. 15. because that Luke shewing

howe Paule and Barnabas appointed Elders
in the churches,Act. 14. 23. saith that they did it
by consent. And it is not to be thought
saith Caluin that Paule did grant a greater
liberty to Timothie and Titus then he
tooke vnto himselfe: for which purpose is
also alleged Ciprian who would,Cipr. lib. 1. 
                  vt sacerdos
plebe presente sub omnium oculis deligatur
atque dignus atque idoneus publico iudicio cō
                     probetur;
                  Epist. 3.
that the priest, when the people
are present, be chosen in the sight of all &
be approued to be sufficient & meete by
common consent. Vnto all which I say,
that euen these authorities of Luke, Caluin,
and Ciprian do flatly deny that election
should be made by the people: for
Praeesse electioni debere alios pastores nequid
vel per leuitatē,
                  Calu. Ibid. 
                  vel per mala studia, vel per tumultū
à multitudine peccetur. Other pastors
ought to rule the election, lest the multitude
faile either through lightnes or by euill
practises, or tumult: so that howsoeuer
it be granted by these places cited, that a
wise people ought to haue their cōsent in
election, yet if they be tumultuous, ill cō
                  ditioned,

or void of grauity (as generally
the cōmon sort are fautie in one of these)
then ought other pastors to rule, yea and
ouerrule thē. Those churches also which
by the iudgement of our author himselfe
are most reformed, who admit not any
thing of weight to be don, inscia vel inuita
ecclesia, yet whatsoeuer pertaineth to the
state of the church, they haue the same disposed
by the cōmon counsel of the Elder
ship, so that election is in their power, the
people consenting vnto them. And therfore
(not to presse the authority of Chrisostom,
writing about the yere of our lord
500. saith flatly that neither people nor
Elders were to elect a bishop,Chrisost. in Phil. hom. 2. or a minister
but the bishop only) neither election,
much lesse ordination ought to be at any
time in the hands of the multitude, furder
then in giuing cosent vnto the pastors,
nor at all to be regarded if they be such
as before haue bin mentioned; and therfore
as these men are vaine in arrogating
more then this, so are they vaine
in censuring the churche of Englande,

for that it leaueth not this election vnto
the people, whose ignorance is generally
great for want of instruction, & whose
heads are generally very tumultuous by
the meanes of such as this our author is.
VVhy are not they a holie and free people?
                  Num. 16. 3.
Indeede when Corah and his companie
had gathered them selues togither against
Moses and Aaron, they said, Ye
take too much vpon you seeing all the congregation
is holie euerie one of them and the Lord
is among them. But I doubt I should iniurie
Corah by comparing these men vnto
him; for he vnder the pretense of holinesse
and freedome, sought onely to be
priuiledged from submission; but these
our men vnder the same vaile, content
not thēselues herewith, but in their aspiring
minds do seeke to bring not the gouernement
of the church onely, but of
the weale publike also into their handes;
for obtaining where of they lay this platforme:
first that priuatmen are to erect
and establish this gouernment of theirs,
and then it being erected that all matters

both ciuill and ecclesiastical are to be ordered
by the same. The later of these two
pointes wil be manifest hereafter in their
description of an Elder, who (as they say)
must discerne betweene plea and plea,
&c. And as touching the former point, although
in one of their writings which
they haue dispersed they haue made this
protestatiō; We purpose not to medle with the
reformation of the state, otherwise then by our
prayers vnto God; yet as forgetting them
selues, immediately after in the same discourse
they affirme, that Christ hath left
but one forme of gouernement in his last will
and Testament vnto his church, which he hath
sealed with his bloud: and therefore not left it
arbitrable at the plesures of princes, or policies
of times to be done or vndone, but made it by a
double right inuiolable, both by his vvord and
his Testamēt: so that the church of God can
neither be gouerned by any other lawes
or gouernement, neither ought it to be
without this; for God holdeth them all in
the state of enemies, which haue not his
sonne to raigne ouer them. Now then the

faithfull are cōmāded to gather togither
in Christs name, with promise of directiō
& protection, & authoritie not only to establish
his lawes & ordinances amōg thē
but faithfully to gouern his church therby;
for the kingdom of God cōsisteth not
in word but in power. Now this assembly
of the faithfull before they be planted &
established in this order, cōsisteth hitherto
but of priuate persons, none as yet being
called vnto office, & function. Therefore
we may well conclude that God cō
                  mādeth
his faithful seruants being as yet
priuat men, togither to build his church,
according to the true patterne of Christs
Testament: thus farre they. But here is no
word of God to proue any of these assertions:
we read of Asa, Iehosaphat, Iehoiada
the priest, Hezekia, Iosia & others, some of
them pulling downe the abominations of
Iuda, others setting vp the priests & Leuits
in their places in the house of God disposing
thē as in the feere of God, semed
good in their eies; but in the whole book
of God is not to be found either precept

or exāple to warrant a priuat man in purging,
much lesse in erecting the church of
God. Who then required these things at the
hands of these men? will they tell vs of extraordinary
procedings in matters of extremity?
Let them shew herein some extraordinary
testimony from God to warrant
vs in regarding them, otherwise here is in
trusion. For howsoeuer Zerubbabel & Iehosuah,
Ezra & Nehemia did daily pray
for the restoring of the people out of captiuity,
& were most willing & ready to go
before thē, & to bring them to Ierusalem,
yet vntill they had authority cōmitted to
thē so to do by the kings of Persia, Cirus,
Darius & others,Ezra. 1. they neuer durst attēpt
the matter;Ezra. 7. and yet we may truly say that
these were no common persons,Neh. 1. 4. & 2. 5. Iehosua
being the high priest, Zerubbabel a chief
mā of the people, Ezra a scribe of the law,
& Nehemia a great man, yea in the court
of Artashast: but they al knew ful wel that
Moses & Aaron the prince and the priest
must ioine together in all such actions.
               Likewise in this church they haue holieBrownist
                  
                  Math. 5. 17 1. Tim. 1. 18lavves as limites and boundes, vvhich it is
lavvfull at no hand to transgresse, they haue
lavves to direct them in the choise of euerie officer,
vvhat kiude of them the Lord vvill haue.
            
            
               Brownist.
               This tautologie of the holy lawes of
the church, it is not so vnwisely iterated &
repeated, but it is as foolishly also and
fondly proued. For Christ Matth. 5. 17.
saying, that he came not to destroy the lavve
and the prophets but to fulfill them; and Paul
1. Tim. 1. 18. giuing a commandement to
Timothie, which commandement is expressed
what it is in the third, fourth, and
fift verses of the same chapter, doe not
once speke of the churches lawes for outward
direction▪ as may appeare euidently
to euery one that hath but a meane
iudgement in the scriptures.
            
            
               Ansvver.
               Their pastor must be apt toLeu. 21. 17 Matth. 2. 6. 1. Tim. 3. 2. teach, no yong
scholler2. Tim. 2. 15. able to diuide the word aright,Tit. 1. 9. 2. Tim. 4. holding
fast the faithfull word according to doctrine,
that he may be able also to exhort, rebuke
improue with wholesome doctrine, and to conuince

them that say against it: he must be a
man that loueth goodnes, he must be wise, righteoue,
holy, temperate: he must be of lifeTit. 1. 7. 8 vnreproueable
as Gods steward: he must be generally
wel reported of, and one that ruleth his owne
householde vnder obedience with all honestie:
he must be modest, humble, meeke, gentle and louing:
he must be a man ofNum. 12. 3 Esa. 50. 4 Iere. 3. 15 Eze. 34. 18. Zach. 7. 11 Act. 20 1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. 4 1. Tim. 2. 20 great patience, compassion,
labour and diligence: he must alwaies
be carefull and watchfull ouer the flocke, wherof
the Lord hath made him ouerseer, with all
willingnes and cheerefulnes, not holding his office
in respect of persons, but doing his duetie to
euerie soule, as he will answere before the chiefe
shepheard, &c.
            
            
               Ansvvere.
               In this descriptiō of the pastors office,
as the author hath set down some things
therein required, so hath he lefte other
matters pertaining (by his own doctrine)
thereunto, altogether vntouched: for
whereas he telleth vs of an Eldershippe,
wherein the pastor is the chiefe, here is
nothing mentioned of this matter, as if
the ecclesiasticall censure remained as

peculiar vnto the Elders. Againe, forasmuch
as he requireth in a pastor, that hee
exhort, rebuke, and conuince the gayne-sayers
of wholesome doctrine: hee doth
confirme herein that which hath ben said
concerning the Doctor, for either this
functiō is not in the publik place of Gods
worship, or else it doeth intrude into the
pastorall charge, & so these offices would
not be seuered and diuerse. Thirdly, seeing
modestie, humilitie, meeknes, &c. are
necessarie in a Pastor, Doctor, Elder, aud
all, we seee howe vnfitte these men are to
beare anie office in the Church of God,
considering how farre they are from modestie,
meeknes, or ciuill honestie, when
they call the ministerie of England traitors
to Christ,
                  In the treatise of the church apparant. 
                  the Popes bastardes, wicked
guides, Antichrists, &c. VVhen the booke
of common praier is tearmed a peece of
swines flesh,In another pamphlet of theirs. and the people of Englande
generally are accounted persecutors of
the church of God, & no Christians. Lastly,
we may obserue, that some of these testimonies
of Scripture in the margent are

not so fit as might bee to proue the office
of a pastor. For Nu. 12. 3. doth speake of
the meeknes of Moses, but his was not a
pastorall charge. Esa. 50. 4. setteth foorth
the Prophets diligence, Zach. 7. 11. complaineth
of the peoples obstinacie: but
what are these to proue the office of a pastor?
The place that is quoted 1. Tim. 2.
20. because it is somewhat after the end
of the chapter, it shall be answered when
that verse is found.
            
            
               Brownist.
               Their Doctor or teacher must bee a man apt
to teach,1. Tim. 3 Tit. 1. able to diuide the word of God aright,
and to deliuer sound and wholsome doctrine frō
the same,1. Tim. 1. 15. still bulding vpon the same grounde
worke,1. Cor. 1. 17 & 2. 4 he must be mightie in the Scriptures, able
to conuince the gainsaiers, and carefully to
deliuer his doctrine pure, sound and plaine, not
vvith curiositie or affection, but so that it may
edifie the most simple, approuing it to euerie
mans conscience, he must be of life vnreproueable,
one that can gouerne his owne household, he
must be of manners sober, temperate, modest,
gentle and louing, &c.
            
            
               
               Answere.
               In this description of a doctor here
is nothing differing from that which hath
bin in the description of a pastor. For as
there, no mētion was made of any ecclesiastical
iurisdiction, so here it is also passed
ouer in silence, as if he had neuer said
that the pastor and doctor were gouerning
officers. And as there he requireth
of a pastor the diuiding of the worde of
God aright, and the approuing of it to euerie
mans conscience, so doth he heere
require the same in a doctor: and both alike
in the iudgement of our author are
to execute their office without any difference
either of the place or of the matter,
or of the manner of dealing, then the
which what can be more fond, if he speaketh
the truth in saying that these offices
are limited, seuered and diuers. And lastlie,
as in the description of a pastor, the scriptures
were abused, so in this of a doctor
they are not friendly handled. For these-places,
1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1. & 2. Tim. 2. 15. haue
bene alleaged before for the pastor, who

being an ouerseer of Christs flocke, hath
not bene denied the vse of the Scriptures
to decypher out his calling, but in bringing
the same in again for a Doctor, it appeareth
that the store is now spent, wherof
there was no spare in the beginning of
this Treatise. Also these 1. Cor. 1. 17. &
2. 4. doe shew what Paul did in his Apostleship:
but the office of a Doctor is a
distinct matter from the office of an Apostle,Ephe. 4. 11
& therefore altogether impertinent
vnto this matter, are these testimonies vsed
by the author.
            
            
               Their Elders must be of wisdome and iudgement,Brownist
endued with the spirite of God,Num. 11. 24 able to discerne
betweene cause and cause,2. Chr. 19. 8 betweene plea
and plea,Act. 15 and accordingly to preuent and redresse
euils,1. Tim. 5 alwaies vigilant, and intending to
see the statutes, ordinances and lawes of God
kept in the church, & that not only by the people
in obedience, but to see the officers do their
duties. These men must be of life likewise vnreproueable,
gouerning their own families orderly,
they must be also of maners sober, gentle, modest,
louing, temperate, &c.
            
            
               
               Ansvvere.
               The third sorte of gouerning officers
in the Church, are by our author called
Elders, concerning which name, howsoeuer
Caluine reporteth,Cal. Inst. lib 4. cap. 4. se. 1 that in churches
of former times some had this title giuen
vnto them, who onely were conuersant
in the censure of the church, yet is it generally
in the Scriptures ascribed vnto
them that laboured in the worde and sacraments;
as appeareth Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14.
12. & 20. 17. & in other places. And therupon
Caluin saith,Cal. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 3. sect. 8. 
                  Quod Episcopos & presbyteros,
& pastores, & ministros promiscue vocaui,
qui ecclesias regunt, idfeciex scripturae
vsu, quae vocabulaista cōfundit. In that I haue
without making difference named Bishops
and Elders, and Pastors and Ministers,
I haue done it according to the practise
of the Scripture which confoundeth
these wordes.Ier. in tit. & Euagrio. Epist. 58 And Ierome sayth, Veteribus
eos omnino fuisse presbyteros, quos Episcopos.
VVith those of ancient times the
same men were Elders which were Bishops.
Therfore it is not so directly from

the word of God, (as in the title of this
booke is promised) but from the practise
of some churches that he hath taken this
name Elder, to giue it vnto those which
beare office without anie further dealing
in the ministerie of the word. As the
name Elder in this place is not vsuall in
the word, so the office of an Elder, as it is
here described, hath neither warrant of
the worde, nor yet of any church, whether
ancient or of latter daies. I graunt
that certain churches haue made choice
of men which shoulde deale onely in the
censures of the church, whom they haue
called Presbyteros, Elders. But the most
that they haue euer required in such an
Elder was, that he should be sound in
faith, in life vnreproueable, able to discerne
of the dealings of euerie calling in
the church, careful to see rightly into the
same, and readie to ioyne in correcting
with ecclesiastical censure, those that are
vndutifull, beeing helpfull vnto the rest.
But that it shoulde belong vnto them to
discerne betweene cause and cause, betweene

plea and plea, &c. It is a plaine
pulling of the svvorde out of the magistrates
hand. They meane no such matter
(they saie) for they graunt the magistrate
his authoritie ouer the persons,
though not ouer the causes of men. This
it is, whereas her Maiesty hath appointed
Iudges in the land to end causes, decide
controuersies, & to giue sentence vpon
malefactors, and shirifes to see the execution
of that vvhich the Iudges haue
determined: the seat of iudgement must
be brought into the consistorie of these
Elders, and the office of the Shirife must
be onely lefte in the hande of the magistrate,
to see the decrees of these auncients
put in execution. Now tell mee
if these men do not goe beyond Corah
& his companie,Num. 26. 3. as before vvas said? yet
I will leaue the further consideration
of these matters vnto those whom they
doe concerne, onely let vs see vvhat
warrants they haue out of the worde
of God for the largenesse of this their
commission. Num. 11. 24. maketh mention

of three score and tenne men which
were chosen by the appointment of God
to bee assistants vnto Moses, but these
were temporall magistrates, and not ecclesiasticall.
Againe, it sayth not that Moses
was discharged, and the authoritie of
iudging betweene plea and plea, remayned
in the power of these men onely. As
like to purpose is Act. 15. where there is
neither anie such authoritie mentioned
as aforesayd, nor yet such an office as an
vnministering Elder spoken of. For the
worde Elders in that place, doeth signifie
those that labour in vvord and doctrine,
as hath beene noted before. As touching
that of Paul, 1. Tim. 5. 17. An Elder
is worthie of double honour, especially such as
labour in the worde and doctrine. From
whence is collected that there were
some Elders, which did not labour in the
word and doctrine. I answere, that there
was a time (as before was saide) when
such Elders were in the church, but when
they had their beginning, how long they
cōtinued, & how far their office extēded:

The author hath neither in this place nor
els where shewed. At the first they were
not, as by that hath bene shewed may appeare.
Afterward it should seeme that
some such were appointed for the secret
meetings of the faithful, whiles they were
vnder persecution, but when the church
increased and was dispersed into nations,
as now it is in England, we reade not
that such were continued in the Church,
nay the contrarie is flatly testified. For
as Ierome sayeth, Idem est Presbyter qui
est Episcopus: & antequam diaboli instinctu,
studia in religione fieret, & diceretur in populis,
ego sum Pauli, ego Appollo, ego autem Cephae,
communi Presbyterorum concilio, ecclesiae
gubernabantur. Postquam vero vnusquis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
eos quos baptizauerat, suos putabat esse non
Christi, in toto orbe decretumest, vt vnus de
Praesbyteris electus supponeretur ceteris, ad
quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret. An Elder
is the same that a Bishoppe is, and before
that through the instigation of the
deuill affection bare swaie in matters of
religion, and that it was said amongst the

people, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I
am of Cephas, the churches were gouerned
by the common councell of the elders,
but after that euerie one thought,
that those whome hee baptized were his
owne, and not Christes, it was deereed
throughout the world, that one of the elders
should be set in the place of the rest,
to whome might pertaine the whole
state of the Church. If there be any help,
it must be had from the 2. Chro. 19. 8. for
there it is thus writen. Moreouer in Ierusalem
Iehosaphat did appoint of the Leuites &
of the priests and of the chiefe of the families of
Israel for the iudgements of the Lord, and for
strifes, when they returned to Ierusalem. By
the iudgementes of the Lord are vnderstood
those holy causes, the knowledge
whereof was committed to the priests &
Leuites; by strifes are noted ciuil contentions:
the ending whereof pertained to
the chiefe of the families of Israell. This
selfe same matter is expressed also Deut.
17. 9. If there arise a matter too hard for thee
in iudgement betweene blood and blood, plea

and plea, betweene plague and plague in the
matters of controuersie within thy gates, thou
shalt then arise and go vp vnto the place which
Iehoua thy God shall choose; and thou shalt
come vnto the priestes of the Leuites, or vnto
the iudge that shall be in those daies, &c. So
that this disiunctiue (or) doth expresse a
plaine difference betweene the office of
the priest, and the matters belonging to
the iudge. For althogh ve al hashpat be red
in some translations & to the iudge, yet the
twelft verse of this chapter doth end this
controuersie, where the disiunctiue (or) is
set downe by an other worde; That man
that wil do presumptuously not harkning vnto
the priest (that stādeth before the Lord thy God
to minister there) o al hashpat, or to the iudge
shall dye. For it is euident that bloud-shed
pertained to the iudge, the descrying of
plagues vnto the priest. Likewise contentions
being about diuerse matters, those
that concerned ciuil affaires pertained to
the tēporall iudge, other matters of faith,
were to be decided by the ecclesiasticall
cēsure: so that althogh we shuld grant thē
                  
a seignorie, yet all causes are not to bee
brought into their consistorie. In the
meane time we see that these men being
at defiance with popery, haue here shewed
vs a reason of it, because the both of
them would iudge all, and would be iudged
by none, both wold priuiledge their
owne deedes, and haue the handling of
the causes of all others: and therefore as
in the Papist, so in these we may see, a sottish
ignorance with an arrogant and presumptuous
spirit.
            
            
               Brownist.
               Their Deacont must be men of honest report,Act. 6. 2̄
                  
hauing the mysterie of the faith in a pure
conscience,1. Tim. 3. 8. 9 endued with the holie Ghost, they
must be graue, temperate, not giuen to excesse,
nor to filthie lucre.
            
            
               Answere.
               VVhereas the office of a Deacon is
here mentioned, as distinct from the former,
it had beene requisite for the author
more fully to haue expressed his minde:
for as touching Deacons, it is generallie
graunted of all writers, that they were in

the primitiue Church, such as our author
doth here speake of. One saith, that Presbyteri,
Episcopi, & Diaconi, hoc est ministri
Christi, Elders, Bishops and deacons, that
is to saie, the ministers of Christ: were
names giuen generally to those that had
to instruct the people. And for proofe
thereof he alleadgeth that of Paul to Timothie,Chri. hom. 2 in Philip.
                  Ten diaconian sou plerophoreson,
Fulfilling thy ministerie: & yet he was the disposer
of Gods mysteries at Ephesus. Annother
saith, Primum omnes docebant, &
omnes baptizabant,
                  Ambros. in Ephe. cap. 4 
                  quibuscun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      diebus vel
temporibus fuisset occasio, nec enim Philippus
tempus quaesiuit, aut diem quo Eunuchum baptizaret.
At the first all taught and al baptized,
when & wheresoeuer occasion was
offered, neither did Philip staie for a time
nor a daie wherein to baptize the Eunuch.De decret. Nice. sinod. contra Eus.
Athanasius expoundeth that of
Paul, 1. Tim. 3. 8. where the Deacon is willed
not to be double tongued, as if the deacon
were a teacher in the word: and he
himself in describing how he fled for̄ the
Arrians, sayth thus: Monui Diaconum vt

recitaret Psalmum, populum item vt auscultaret,
&c. I willed the Deacon to reade
a Psalme, and the people also to giue
eare.
               Therefore although master Caluine
saieth, that Diaconi sub Episcopo
pauperum essent oeconumi:
                  Cal. Inst. lib. 4. cap. 4. sect. 5. Deacons
shoulde vnder the Bishoppes be prouiders
for the poore. Yet seeing
they dealte in other matters also, and
were called Diaconi, because they were
ministers of the worde also; our author
should haue shewed vs when it was that
these Deacons ceased to deale in other
matters then in prouision for the poore
onely, or else hee shoulde haue tolde vs
that there are two sortes of Deacons,
Diaconoi tou logou, minister of the vvord,
and ministers or disposers of the goods
of the poore. And these thinges hee
must haue prooued by Gods worde,
and then in this pointe hee had perfourmed
his promise made in the Title
of his booke, and shevved himselfe
to be so good as his owne worde,

but nowe by what authoritie hee hath affirmed,
by the same authority may be denied
such an office as is here spoken of, to
be that Deacon which is mētioned in the
places cited. Act. 6. For Philip who was
one of the Deacons, did both teach and
baptize, Act. 8. which matter although we
should graunt that he did it, not as a deacon,
but being an Euangelist, as some
with this distinction would shifte off the
matter, yet must it bee confessed, that the
Deacons mentioned in the Actes, were
not discharged from dealing in the word,
onely to take vpon them the care of the
poore. Neither doeth Paul 1. Tit. 3. 8.
speake anie thing to gainesaie this. Yet
I grant that in the Church of God a care
of the poore must bee had, and that there
be faithfull men appointed for the same,
of whom the Apostle speaketh, Rom. 12.
8. which place cannot bee referred vnto
the liberalitie of al Christians in general,
as some haue taught. For this is handled
in the thirtenth verse of the same chapter,
which shoulde haue beene done if there

were not a difference betweene the matter
required in the eight verse, which speketh
of the publike officer, and the thirteenth
verse, which extendeth it selfe to
all Christians: for vaine repetitions are
not vsed by the Apostle. But to go forward.
            
            
               Brownist.
               Their releeuers or widowes must bee women
of sixtie yeeres of age at the least,1. Tim. 9. 10 for auoiding
of inconueniences; they must be wel reported
of for good workes: such as haue nourished
their children, such as haue bene harberous to
strangers, diligēt & seruiceable to the saincts,
compassionate and helpfull to them in aduersitie,
giuen to euerie good worke, continuing in
praiers and supplications night and day.
               These must first be truelie proued, then if
they be found blamelesse, administer, &c.
            
            
               Answere.
               As concerning widowes, we grant that
they may be helpfull to the sicke, but yet
so burdensome vnto the rest, that the reliefe
of the poore whiles they are to bce
maintained thereby, shall be diminished,

so that they may more truly be called the
relieued, then relieuers. Now for the necessitie
of such in the church, it is not proued
out of Tim. 3. 10. nor yet out of anie
place of Scripture else; & why? For the L.
knoweth the impossibility in hauing such
in euery congregation, & in maintaining
them, the most that can be granted is, that
were the church possessed of such, & therwithall
able to maintaine both them and
these whome they were to attend vpon,
then would it be a great comfort to them
all. I spare to speake further of these, only
it may be obserued that the place cited to
proue such an office in the church, 1. Tim.
5. maketh nothing for it. For Paule as the
circumstanstances of the place doe shew
speaketh of such as are to be succored by
the church▪ 
                  Honor widdows, which are widdowes
indeed, that is, which haue nede of
helpe, and so procedeth in shewing what
they are which especially are to haue the
relief of the church, vz. such as by reson of
their age and want of frends are not able
to help themselues, althogh in a godly affection

they hate idlenesse: but as for the
yonger widdowes they are not to liue by
the maintenance of the church, least that
idlenesse be maintained, the mouthes of
the enemies be opened against the truth
& the church be abused, whiles the goods
of the church be spent vppon those who
make protestation, that they haue no other
comfort (for to such only is the relief
of the church to be giuen) & yet through
the lust of youth do betake themselues to
mariage again; which thogh it be a matter
lawfull in it self, yet is it vnlawful to those
that before God & his church haue vowed
the contrary: and thus is this place expounded
by Theophilact, Ambrose, Bullinger,
Claudius Guilliaud and others.
Thus haue we at the last the offices & officers
of a reformed church described, so
wel as our autor could, of whom togither
with his cōplices we may truly say (as Adrianus
spake on his death bed of his phisitions,
that they brought him to his end)
these reformers in their platforme here
prescribed haue offred vs such a medicin

that if the Church shoulde bee voide of
sense and receiue it, shee might in short
time complaine, that these her Phisitions
had brought her to her end: yet we must
beleeue vpon paine of damnation, that it
is a good receit: wherein they deale like
vnskilful and vnconscionable Phisitions,
who promise a wonderfull cure, rauishing
the senses to conceiue, much more to beholde,
what then to inioy so blessed a comfort? and
yet will minister that which will bee the
bane of the patient. Christ indeede hath
shewed an outwarde gouernment vnto
his church, whereof although we are not
capable, partly by reason of mens insufficiencie
to order it, & partly by meanes of
the crookednes of the common sort, who
will not abide to be ordered by it, but especially
for that a whole nation cannot
so easily be brought to that vniforme order,
as some one priuate congregation,
yet assuredly the neerer we come to this
his ordinance, the more heauenly is that
harmonie and consent of ours. And herein
I will not staie in shewing how the laws

of our Church of Englande haue prouided,
that in the congregations we should
haue Pastors: In the Vniuersities such as
execute the office of doctors in bringing
vp those in the knoledge of Gods word,
which may supplie the places that are
void of teachers in the Churches: & in all
places, some to obserue the behauiors of
men, others to collect the reliefe of the
poore, &c. because that I write not an Apologie
for the Church of England, onely
I woulde haue men to see the gouernment
of Brownisme, what it is, viz so far
disagreing from the discipline of Christ,
that neither the frame of their building,
nor the builders themselues haue the approbation
of Gods worde, whereof they
spake; but in this their dealing are like
vnto the Cuthits & the rest, who inhabiting
Samaria, falsely bragged that they
were the children of Iacob, and blindly
deceiued thēselues with a false worship,
as may appeare by one of them, I meane
the woman of Samaria, Iohn. 4. For as the
Lord had established his worship vppon

mount Sion: so one Manasses to aduance
himselfe, erected a temple vppon mount
Gerazin, the Iewes according to Gods
appointment worshipped at Sion, the Samaritans
at Gerazin. A cōtrouersie rose
between them which of these people did
best.Iohn. 42. 2. Christ sayth to the Samaritanes, Yee
worship ye wot not what; yet they had a tē
                  ple,
a Priesthood, and other ordinances,
which were kept at Ierusalem. But who
gaue Manasses authoritie to erect a temple,
assemble a people, ordain, &c. These
men came not so neere the discipline of
Christ, as the Samaritans did resemble
the discipline at Ierusalem: and Manasses
being the sonne of the high Priest had
as good a warrant for his proceedings,
as a priuate man might haue, and yet his
dealings were accursed. Nowe when
these mē faile both in this, that they haue
not authoritie to erect discipline, and also
if this were graunted, in that they
haue described a false gouernement, we
may not pronounce a blessing vppon
them.
            
            
               
               Brownist.
               Now as the persons giftes,1. Co. 12. 12. 8 conditions,
manners, life and proofe of these officers, is set
downe by the holie Ghost, so are their offices limited,
seuered and diuerse.
            
            
               Answere.
               VVee haue alreadie hearde both of
the giftes and of the offices also of these
seuerall callings, for so our author doth
confesse afterwardes. Concerning
which it is apparant, that the Pastor and
Doctor are so described, as if there were
no difference betweene them. The Elder
indeede is seuered from them both, as if
gouernment were peculiar vnto him alone,
and his commission is sette downe
so large, as if it were not limited. The
Deacons office may be diuerse from the
rest, but as yet we cannot finde it in that
which he hath hetherto set downe. VVe
will therefore consider that which followeth.
For either to make his volume
greater, or to amende that which hath
bene sayde, hee fetcheth the matter about
againe, and notwithstanding hee

hath told vs (as he acknowledgeth) what
these offices are, yet a good lesson cannot
be tolde too often, we must bee content
to heare it againe. Therefore it followeth.
            
            
               Brownist.
               The pastors office is to feede the sheepe of
Christ in greene and wholesome pastors of his
word,Leu. 10. 10. 11 and leade them to the still waters, euen to
the pure fountain & riuer of life,Num. 18. 2. he must guide
and keepe those sheepe by that heauenly shephooke
and pastor all staffe of the worde,Ezec. 44. 23. & 34. 33. thereby
drawing them to him,Psal. 23 therby looking into their
soules,Iohn. 21. 15 euen into their most secrete thoughtes,
thereby discerning their diseases,Act. 20. and thereby
euring them,1. Pet. 5. 12 applying to euerie disease a fit and
conuenient medicine,Zach. 11. 7 according to the qualitie
and maladie of the disease,Reue. 22. 2 and giue warning to
the church,Luk. 12. 42 that they may orderly proccede to
excommunication.2. Co. 10. 4. 5 Further, he must by this his
sheephooke watch ouer & defend his flock from
rauenous beasts,Heb. 8. 12 and the wolfe, and take the litle
foxes, &c.
            
            
               Ansvvere.
               It belongeth to the Pastor to fede the

shepe, to draw thē frō euil by the power of
the word, both in matters of faith & manners
of life, to preserue them frō schismes
& heresies, schismatikes & heretiks, and
to giue notice of the wilful and obstinate
persons, that ecclesiasticall censure may
proceede against them. For proofe
whereof the places alleaged must haue a
gentle construction before they may be
accounted indifferent. For though Leuit
10. Num. 18. and Ezech. 44. do speak
of the Priest: Likewise Psalme 23. and
Zach. 11. of Christ: yet can they not properly
be applied vnto the Pastor, except
we adde this, that the Pastor must walke
in the steps of the Priest, and in the matters
aforesayd bee a follower of Christe.
And that also Reue. 22. 2. forasmuch as it
speaketh of the Church triumphant (as
the whole discourse doeth shewe) it can
hardly be brought to pertaine vnto the
Pastor, except wee saie that it is in regard
that the ende of his ministerie is
to bring the people of God vnto the assurance
of this estate. So that to fill the

quotations vnto the matter, wee haue
great need of a friendly expositor. Now
in the office of a pastor heere is an addition,
to that which in the former place
was mentioned, that hee is to looke into
the most secret thoughtes, thereby discerning
the diseases of his people; which
should seeme a heauy burthen, for a man
woulde thinke that the heart of man is a
bottomlesse deepe: and that no man could
know the heart of man, but the spirite that is
in man, and that God onely trieth the heart
and the raines;
                  Iere. 17. 9. yet this is not so vnpossible
as it doth appeare at the first sight. For
there are diuerse meanes which may bee
be vsed for the readie attaining vnto the
matter: as the Papists for the same purpose
had their auricular confession. And
yet there is a surer waie, namelie, to perswade
the people (as some haue beene
taught it publikelie for sound doctrine)
that they may not come vnto the table
of the Lord, before they haue examined
ned themselues of their secrete sinnes,
and also doe declare the same vnto the

church, that is, not to the Priest, as it was
in poperie, but to the Elders and people
also, and this is not a secrete butcherie
of mennes soules as that was,
but an open tyrannising ouer the conscience.
            
            
               Brownist.
               The Doctors office is alreadie set downe
in this description,Eze. 33. 1. his especiall care must bee to
build vpon the onely true ground-worke,1. Cor. 11. 19 gold,
siluer and precious stones,Ioh. 10. 11. 12 that his worke may
endure the triall of the fire,Leui. 10. 10 and by the light of
the same fire reueale the timber,Eze. 44. 24. haie and stubble
of false teachers:Mal. 2. 6. hee must take diligent
heede to keepe the church from errours.1. Cor. 3. 11 And
further,2. Cor. 1. 7. and. 24. hee must aeliuer his doctrine so plainly,1. Tim. 4. 16 and 6. 20
simplie and purelie,Ephe. 2. 20 that the church may
increase with the increasing of God,Heb. 6. 1 and
growe vp into him which is the head Christ
Iesus.1. Pet. 2. 2
               
            
            
               Answere.
               Our authors meaning is, that the doctor
do teach the truth, and conuince the
gainsayer. All this we heard of before in
the description of a doctor, here then is

no addition to supplie the wants of that
discourse, onely it is countenanced with
a greater number of Scriptures then it
had at the first, and therein bewraieth a
greater folly, for the margent is pestered
to no purpose: For what doe these places
cited tell vs? Ezech. 33. 1. setteth out
the dutie of a watchman. 1. Cor. 11. 19.
sheweth the necessitie of heresies. Ioh. 10
11. speaketh of the shepheard Christ, Leuit.
10. 11. (which also was alleadged for
the pastor) was spoken of the Priest, as
was Eze. 44. 24. and Mal. 2. 6. Paul. 1. Cor.
1. 7. saith that the Corinths were not destitute
of anie giftes. Also in the 1. Cor. 2.
4. he speaketh of himselfe being an Apostle.
The two places of his Epistle to Timothie,
do shew his dutie in the Church
of Ephesus, where (as these men saie) hee
had the function of an Euanglist. Paul Ephe.
2. 20. telleth them that they are built
vppon the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Heb. 6. and 1. Peter. 2. 2.
doe declare howe Gods people ought
to growe vp more and more in the

knowledge of Gods mysteries. I see not
how anie one of these places can directly
prooue the office of a Doctor in the
Church: for either they do testifie the dutie
of other callinges, or else they shewe
what matters are effected in the people
by the ministerie of the pastor. Now that
place of Paul the first Epistle to the Corinthians,
the third Chapter and the eleuenth
vearse, I haue kepte it vntill
the last place, for that I finde it most of
all abused, not so much because it is restrained
here to a Doctor, and yet the Apostle
spake it generally of all sortes of
builders: but for that the latter part of
this Scripture is here expounded of false
Prophets, which is to bee vnderstoode of
such teachers as alwaies keepe the foundation,
and builde in Christ, howsoeuer
thorough their frailtie and weakenesse
they bee farre from that exacte puritie
which is required in handling the worde
of God.
            
            
               Brownist.
               The office of the ancients is expressed

in their description:Num. 11. 16 their especiall care must be
to see the ordinances of God truly taught and
practised as well by the officers in doing their
dutie vprightly,Deut. 16. 18 as to see that the people obey
willingly and readily.Deut. 10. 16 It is their dutie to see the
congregation holilie and quietlie ordered,2. Chr. 19. 8 and
no man disturbed,Exod. 39. 42 by the contentious and disobedient,1. Tim. 3. 15
froward and obstinate,2. Tim. 1. 13. not taking away
the libertie of the least,1. Cor. 11. 16. & 14. 33. but vpholding the
right of all,Gal. 2. 4. 5. wiselie iudging of times and circumstances:Col. 1. 16.
they must be readie assistantes to
the pastor and teachers,Act. 20. helping to beare their
burthen,1. Pet. 5. 1. but not intruding into their office.Rom. 12. 8.
               
            
            
               Ansvver.
               It should seeme that the drawer of this
gouernement would haue the ecclesiastical
censures onely to proceed frō the ancients
(or else he would in one place or
other haue shewed that they without the
rest were not to determine) and also that
supreame authority should be in them to
controll both teacher and people, being
themselues priuiledged from the cēsures
of other. The office of the Ancients (saith
he) is expressed in the description: and in

deede the matters heere spoken if, and
some of the quotations, as Numb. 11. &
2. Chron. 19. are but repeated againe: I
wil therefore passe them ouer now. Meat
twife sodden hath little sweetenes in it.
And as for the other places of Scripture
I will not seuerally handle them, because
they haue so small force in them to proue
the matter whereunto they are applied.
That in the twētith of the Acts, & 1. Pet. 5
haue serued for the pastor once or twise;
wherein as I woulde haue him consider,
that a man may weary his frends by vsing
them too often, so he is to remember,
that therein he maketh no difference betweene
a pastor and an elder. The residue
of the Scriptures are these, Deut. 16. 18.
where the appointing of Iudges, Deut.
10. 16. where the circumcision of the hart
is commanded. The Apostle sheweth Timothie
his dutie 1. Tim. 3. 15. and 2. Tim.
1. 13. he reproueth contention 1. Cor. 11. 16.
& 14. 33. sheweth his affection to the Galathians,
Gal. 2. 4. and the creation of all
things to be by Iesus Christ Colos 1. 16.

but what are all these for an Elder? If it
were not that Rom. 12. 8. were a frende at
all assaies, we should haue had iust occasion
to complaine that all these places
were abused: whereas now we say, that
one among a dossen is reasonably wel applied,
although it can not be proued that
euen this place speaketh of such rulers as
now are in question.
            
            
               Brownist.
               The Deacons office is faithfullie to gather
and collect by the ordinance of the church,Act. 6. the
goodes and boneuolence of the faithfull, and by
the same direction diligentlie and trustilie to
distribute them according to the necessitie of
the Saincts. Further they must enquire and
consider of the proportion of the wantes both of
the officers,Rom. 12. 8. and other poore, and accordinglie
relate vnto the church, that prouision may be
made.
               The releuers and widdowes office is to minister
vnto the sicke,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 5. 9. lame, wearie and diseased
such helpfull comfortes as they neede, by watching,Rom. 12. 8.
tending and helping them. Further, they
must shew good example to the younger women

in sober, modest & godlie cōuersation, auoiding
idlenes, vaine talke and light behauiour.
            
            
               Answere.
               These offices with their marginal quotations
haue bene already considered of,
& therefore auoiding so manie vaine rehearsals,
I referre the reader to that which
had bin said of them before.
            
            
               Brownist.
               These officers though they be diuerse and
seuerall,Luk. 9. 46. yet are they not seuered,Iohn. 13. 12. least there
shoulde be a diuision in the bodie,1. Co. 12. 12. 25. 28. but they are
as members of the bodie,Ephes. 4. 11. 12. 13. 16. hauing the same care
one of an other iointly doing their seuerall duties
to the seruice of the Saincts, and to the edification
of the bodie of Christ, till we all meete
together in the perfect measure of the fulnesse
of Christ, by whome all the bodie being in the
meane while thus coupled and knit together
by euerie ioint for the furniture thereof, according
to the effectuall power, which is in
the measure of euerie parte, receaueth increase
of the bodie vnto the edifyinge of
it selfe in loue. Neyther canne anie of
these Offices bee wanting, without grieuous

lamenesse, and apparant deformitie of the bodie,
yea violent iniurie to the heade, Christ
Iesus.
            
            
               Ansvvere.
               In these wordes are set downe these
principal points, first that in Gods church
euerie member is to seeke the good one
of an other, and also to further the good
of the whole bodie, Secondly, that a iarre
in the members, causeth a confusion of
the bodie. In both these we agree and do
allowe the ninth of Luke vers. 46. &c. and
Ioh 13. 12. &c. as good proofs for them;
although it is to be obserued that neither
of these places doe speake of these officers,
for such there were not among the
disciples. Thirdly we are told that as euerie
member is to performe the duties of
his calling, so is he not to intrude into the
function of others, vnto this I also condescend,
not for that our author saith it, inasmuch
as he will not frame his actions
according vnto it;Chrysost, in Act. hom. 1. for doctore nihil frigidius,
                  Rom. 12. 6.
                  qui verbis tantum philosophatur.
                  1. Cor. 7. 20 He
which teacheth in word onely is a simple

instructer:1. Thes. 5. 14. but therefore we beleeue it,
bicause we are willed to walke in our callings,
and to admonish those that are vnruly,
such as will not abide in that place
wherein the Lord hath set them.
               Fourthly he saith that the necessitie of
these officers is such, that whereas one of
them is wāting, there is a grieuous lamenesse,
and apparant deformity of the bobodie,
&c. and this is proued by 1. Cor. 12
and Ephesians 4. In both which places as
other giftes and offices are set downe to
haue bene in the church, as 1. Cor. 12. Apostles,
prophets, gifts of healing, diuersities
of tongues, &c. And Ephes. 4. Apostles,
prophets and euangelists, so are not
all these officers required by our author
in those places spoken of, but in the place
to the Ephesians, the pastor and doctor
onely, and in the Corinthes, though hee
would indeuour to wring out elders and
deacons from thense, yet must hee acknowledge
that his widdowes are not
mentioned. Our author therefore may
as well say that the want of the Apostles,

Euangelists, gifts of healing and the rest
doe cause deformitie of the bodie (and
that by these places by himself alleaged)
as doth the want of Elders, Deacons &
releeuers. Nay it hath bene alreadie proued
that this gouernement was neuer to
be imposed vppon all sortes of people alike,
and that the want of some of these
offices haue neither bene deformitie in
the bodie, nor iniurie vnto the head. This
rather is an iniurie offered vnto Christ
Iesus, if either a priuat man should thrust
himselfe into a publike calling of the magistracie
or ministerie, without his warrant
(as these Brownists doe both) or if a
publike magistrate shoulde prophane
Gods ordinances, by placing insufficient
men in so high a roome, as is the gouernment
of the church; which must be done,
if this bee true which these men speake.
And thus much of the discipline whereby
the visible Churche (as they say)
shoulde bee gouerned; for we are now
once againe come to the conclusion of
this part.
            
            
               
               Brownist.
               Thus this holie armie of Saints is marshalled
here in earth by those officers,Re. 19. 11. &c vnder the
conduct of their glorious Emperour Christ,Reu. 14. 12
that victorious Michael.Cant. 6. 3 Thus it marcheth
in that most heauenly and gratious araie,Reue. 12. 11 against
all enemies both bodilie and ghostlie.Luke. 10. 18. 19.
Peaceable in it selfe as Ierusalem,Math. 16. 18 terrible vnto
them as an army with banners,Ro. 8. 38. 39 triumphing
ouer their tyrannie with patience, and ouer
death it selfe with dying. Thus thorough the
bloud of that spotlesse lambe, and that worde
of their testimonie, they are more then conquerours,
brusing the head of the serpent: yea thorough
the power of his word, they haue power
to cast downe sathan like lightning, to tread
vpon serpents and scorpions, to cast downe
strong holdes, and euerie thing that exalteth
it selfe against God. The gates of hell and all
the principalities & powers of the world shall
not preuaile against it.
            
            
               Brownist.
               The muster maister hath viewed the
world, chosen his soldiers, appointed the
victuallers, selected out the sergeants

of the bands, hath brought them to their
captaine, and they are readie to march
on vnder his conduct in the face of their
enemies bodily and ghostly to the confusion
of sathan, sinne, hell and all. VVhat
wages he exspected for this his peece of
seruice is best knowne vnto him selfe; but
what faithfulnes he hath vsed in his dealing
it is apparant vnto all: for in these
three things his packing is notorious.
First,Matt. 16. 18. that the victory of the church, which
she is assured of in and through the power
of Christ, is here restrained & limited:
for our author doeth acknowledge it so
farre only as it enioyeth this foresaid gouernement
of Pastors, Doctors, Elders,
&c. Secondly, that the power of the word
of God,Luk. 10. 18. & the ministerie thereof (which
is the sanctified meanes for sathans ouerthrow,
and the building vp of Christ his
church, is here granted no otherwise, then
this word is preached vnder this outward
gouernement.Rom. 8. 38. 39. Lastly that the certainetie
of victorie which is by faith, is heere applied
to the whole visible church▪ as if all

the members thereof were truly faithful.
By this his practise he woulde conclude
that which as yet remaineth vnproued,
viz. that the necessitie of this gouernmēt
is such, that the enioyning of it is sufficient
to make the church without spot or
wrinckle, and that where this is wanting
there is no fight against fathan, no strife
against sinne, no victorie, no church apparant.
The testimonies of Scripture that
should helpe him herein (and are for the
same cause noted in the margent) do cut
the throat of these his follies. For thogh
he telleth vs that this armie of Sainctes
is martialled here on earth by these officers,Reu. 19. 11. 14.
yet the holy ghost describeth the
warrior and his traine, to be the warriors
which were in heauen. Though this man
saith that triumph is made by vertue of
this gouernment, yet the holy ghost saith
it is in pacience and constancie of faith,Reue. 14. 12
and obedience. And in a word though he
affirmeth that discipline is all in all, yet
the places noted by him speaking of the
power of Christ in his sernants ouercomming

satan, doe not once mention anie
outward gouernment, much lesse this discipline
here prescribed.
            
            
               Brownist.
               Further,Math. 16. 19 he hath giuen them the keies of
the kingdome of heauen,Iohn. 20. 23 that whatsoeuer they
binde on the earth by his word,Math. 18. 18 shall bee bound
in heauen,Iohn. 20. 23 and whatsoeuer they loose on earth
shall be loosed in heauen.Math. 16. 19 & 18. 18
               
               Now this power which Christ hath giuen
vnto his Church, and to euerie member of
his church, to keepe it in order, he hath not lefte
it to their discretions and lustes to bee vsed or
neglected as they will, but in his last will and
testament he hath set downe both an order of
proceeding, and an end to which it is vsed.
            
            
               Answere.
               God hath in deede committed authoritie
vnto his church of binding and
loosing, and hath also shewed an order
of proceeding: which assertions are to
be collected out of these three places of
Scriptures, which are twice noted in the
margent, that the number of testimonies
which they vsed might seeme greater

then it is. But here we haue to marke, that
Christ is said to haue giuen this power aforesaid
to euery member of the church,
so that heere is no difference made betwene
the people, & the gouernors; or at
the lest, i
                     •
                   he supposeth a difference to be
betweene them: he hath not set downe
how farre the authoritie of the people is
extended. Againe, if the people be granted
so greate an interest in the matters of
the church, we must thinke that the officers
themselues, I meane the Deacons &
releeuers were not to be secluded: which
being graunted, and seemeth here to be
concluded, not only women haue to dele
in the censures of the Church, but also
the description of euerie office, (the Elder
onely excepted) hath ben vnperfect,
seeing no such matter hath beene mentioned
in any of them. Secondly, we are
to note, that he saith, that this order is not
left to the descretion of the church, for
if his meaning bee, that the censures of
the church ought to bee vsed with all fidelitie,
wee doe not gainesaie him,

but if hee meane that when they are not
duely executed, there the church doeth
cease to be the church apparant (according
to that doctrine which in another
place they haue set downe) then do they
agree with the Anabaptists & Donatists
herein,In the treatise of the church apparant. Aduersus Anabapt. lib. 6. cap. 10 Cōtra Parmenianum. lib. 3. cap. 2. who being sufficientlie answered
the one by Bullinger, the other by Augustine,
I maruell that these men shoulde
not be satisfied and contented to reuoke
this error. The summe of whose answers
tend to this, that the end of excommunication
(for the question is not of the officers,
but of the church censures in
this place) is, that the partie punished
might bee amended, that the credite of
the church might bee furthered, that others
be not offended and made worse,
and that the church might be preserued
in peace. Therefore edification and the
welfare of the Church are especially to
be regarded: for better it were that wicked
men should goe vnpunished, if the
punishing of them shoulde damnify the
Church.1. Cor. 5. Againe, the church of Corinth

was the church of God, when they neglected
to proceede against the incestuous
person. Also the last supper of the
Lord was rightly administred, yet Iudas
was not excommunicate: the Prophets
complained of the sinnes of the church
in their times, yet contemned they not
the sacrifices, sacraments, and worship of
God. Christ and his Apostles blamed the
Church for grosse corruptions, yet was
he circumcised therein &c. By which reasons
as by others by thē produced, we are
vrged to acknowledge that it may be the
Church of God, which doth not alwaies
proceede against the wicked according
to their deserts. Thirdly, we are to marke
that hee ascribeth the keies of the kingdom
of heauen to the officers before named,
whereas Christ committed this power,
not to the Elders, for none were established,
but vnto the ministers of the
word, for in Peter they all are represented,
as by considering the places alleged
out of Mathew and Iohn, will plainly appeare.
            
            
               
               Brownist.
               And if the fault be priuate,Leuit. 19 17. 18. priuat, holy &
louing admonition and reproofe,Math. 18. 15 with an inward
desire and earnest care to win their brother,Deut. 19. 15
but if he wil not heare thee,Math. 18. 16. yet to take two
or three other brethren with him, whome hee
knoweth most meet to that purpose, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses, euerie worde
may bee confirmed. And if hee refuse to heare
them, then to declare the matter vnto the
church, which ought seuerelie and sharplie to
reprehend, grauelie to admonish, and louinglie
to perswade the partie offending, shewing him
the hainousnesse of his offence, and the danger
of his obstinacie, and the feareful iudgements of
the Lord.
               If this preuaile not to drawe him to repentance,Matth. 18. 16
then are they in the name of the Lord
Iesus, with the whole congregation, reuerentlie
in praier to proceed to excommunication, casting
him out of their congregation and fellowship,
that is, out of the couenant and protection
of the Lorde,2. The. 5. 15 for his disobedience and obstinacie,
and committing him to sathan for
the destruction of the flesh, that the spirite

may be saued in the daie of the Lorde Iesus, if
such be his goodwill and pleasure.
               Further,2. Cor. 10. 8 & 13. 10. they are to warne the whole congregation,
and all other faithfull,1. Tim. 5. 20 to hold him as
a heathen and a publican,Gal. 2. 14. and to abstaine them
selues from his societie, as not to eate or drinke
with him, &c. vnlesse it be such as of necessitie
must needs, as his wife, his children and family,
yet these if they be members of the church, are
not to ioyne with him in anie spirituall exercise.
               All this notwithstanding, the church is
not to holde him as an enemie, but to admonish
and pray for him as a brother, prouing if at any
time the Lord will giue him repentance: for this
power is not giuen them to the destruction of anie,
but to the edification and preseruation of
all.
               If the offence bee publike, the partie is publikely
to be reproued and admonished, if he then
repent not to proceede to excommunication.Ios. 7. 19. Vt
supra.2. Co. 7. 9.
               
               The repentance of the partie must bee proportionable
to the offence,Leuit. 19. 18. viz. if the offence be
publike,Prou. 10. 12 publike,Rom. 12. 19. & 13. 10. & 14. 1. if priuate, priuate, humbled,

submissiue, sorrowfull, vnfeined, giuing glorie to
the Lord.Gal. 6. 1. 2.
               
               There must great care be had of admonitions,1. Tim. 2. 24
that they be not captious or curious,Mark. 9. 50. finding
fault where none is,Ephes. 4. 25 neither yet in bitternesse
or reproch,Iam. 5. 5. 19. 20. for they were to destroy, and
not to saue our brother, but they must be carefully
done, with prayer going before; they must
be seasoned with truth, grauitie, loue, & peace.
               Moreouer in this church is an especiall care
had by euerie member thereof,Luk. 17. 1. of offences,Pro. 10. 12. the
strong ought not to offend the weake,Rom. 14. 13 19. nor the
weake to iudge the strong,Gal. 6. 2. but all graces here
are giuen to the seruice and edification of ech
other in loue, and long suffring.
            
            
               Answere.
               I thought it conuenient to ioyne al this
togither, being but one matter, viz. the
proceeding of the church, and of euerie
member thereof: Concerning the which
I say, with them that God hath not onely
giuen a charge to euerie member of the
church to looke vnto his steppes, that he
refraine from offending his fellow members,
least thorough his owne default

the church be prouoked to proceed against
him, but also hath prescribed vnto
the Church her order of proceeding;
which order I grant to be here set downe
in part; namely, so long as the conuersations
of men are in question; but in
matters of faith these rules will faile: for
although it be the nature of man to erre,
& in his errors we may not depriue him
of admonitions, yet if his error do proue
an heresie, after once or twice admonitiō
at the vtmost he is to be reiected. For a
simple error may be healed, but peruersnesse
is incurable: and the manner of
his reiection is not in a bare forsaking of
him, but in restraining him, least that by
his false doctrine the simple sort be seduced.
I speake not now of the Magistrates
authoritie,Tit. 3. i0. who was commanded by the
Lord to cut off the false prophet; but I
speake of the ecclesiasticall power, which
hath his warāt for the suppressing of such:
the order of whose proceeding is first admonition,
then excommunication, afterwards
to make the magistrate acquainted

both with this euill, and with his duety in
proceeding against it, (for I will not vrge
that of master Bullinger, who seemeth
to go farther in asking this question) viz.
if the church had onely authoritie to flie
from, and not to chastice an heretike,
how came it to passe that the Apostle Paul
by the power of God depriued Elimas of
his sight,Act. 13. 8. 9. bicause he did stubbernly maintaine
falshood, and withstand the truth?
But this point of discipline hath in wisedome
bene passed ouer, least that our author
shuld therin haue blamed both our
teachers and our Magistrates for their
to much lenitie in this schisme and heresie.
Now as touching the florish that is
made with a great shew of scriptures in
the margent, it is more then childish; not
in regard of applying them, though one
or two of them might be amended, but in
respect of the vaine alledging of one
scripture often, as Matth. 18. 15. 16.
Leuiticus 19. 17. 18. Prou. 10. 12. &c.
but he would haue vs to thinke that he
is read in the scriptures, and therefore

busieth himselfe with iterating so manie
quotations.Gen. 17.
               
            
            
               Brownist.Leui. 16▪ 11
               
               In this church is the truth purely taught,Esa. 44. 3. &
surely kept,Gal. 4. 24. & 6. 16. here is the couenant of the sacraments
and promises,Isa. 60. 15. the graces,Deut. 4. 12. the glorie, the
presence,Esa. 56. 7. the worship of God.1. Tim. 3. 15.
               
               Into this Temple entreth no vncleane thing,Esa. 52. 8.
neither whatsoeuer worketh abhominations,Esa. 52. 1. or
lies,Eze. 44. 9. but they which are written in the Lambes
booke of life.Esa. 35. 8.
               
               But without this church shal be dogges and
enchanters, and whoremongers,Zac. 14. 21. and murtherers,Reu. 21. 27.
and Idolaters,Rom. 2. 9. and whosoeuer loueth and
maketh lies.Reu. 22. 27.
               
            
            
               Answere.
               Here we haue described vnto vs the
state wherein this visible church doth
stand, both in regard of the conenant betweene
God and it; and also in respect of
the sanctimonie thereof in the sight of
men. As for the former of these, it is to be
granted: but howsoeuer the promises are
made vnto the church, and the worship
approoued of God, is kept and retained

therein, yet may it fall out that some one
member thereof may haue no interest in
the promises, as Matth. 22. 13. nor yet be
a true worshipper of God, as Eccles. 4. 17▪
And although the church hath this dignitie
giuen vnto it thorow an especiall
grace, yet some one man, who is not of
the visible church may be partaker of
the promises, and a true worshipper of
God; as Naaman the Syrian, and Iob
in the land of Hus; the visible church
then being among the people of Israel.
As touching the other matter; viz. that
this church apparant is commended vnto
vs both for the puritie thereof in it selfe,
and also for the vncleannesse of all those
which are not members of the same. It is a
palpable grosnes to conceiue, & a sottish
follie to publish such a dreame. For, are al
they cleane which enter into the visible
church? these men themselues haue confessed
the contrarie.Gen. 4. 21. Are all the members
of the visible church written in the lambs
booke of life?Heb. 12. 16. who then blotted out
Cain,Num. 16. 33▪
                   Esau,Rom. 9. 30. &c. Corah, yea and Israel it selfe?

Againe, is it true that all those which are
not vnder this gouernement are dogs,
&c. I will not aske what shall become of
these men themselues, but what is become
of Peter and the rest that remained
with Christ; and of all the churches of Ierusalem,
Ephesus, Corinth, and the rest,
which had not this gouernement and all
these offices at any time among them?
for some wanted Deacons, some widows,
some vnministring Elders, some Doctors.
To draw to an end. The scriptures that
are alledged to proue these matters are
either promises of that full redemption,
which is obtained and shall be perfited
vnto the church in the day of Christs appearing,
as Esa. 52. 1. and 35. 8. and Reuelation
28. 27. or else are they types
thereof, as Eze. 44. and the ninth verse,
and Zacharie 14. 21. VVherefore they
cannot proue the truth hereof in the visible
church of God. Also Reuel. 22.
15. sheweth the estate of the vngodly,
which in the day of that generall search
shall be thrust out of the presence of

God. VVhich matter Paul doth plainly
shew. Rom. 2. 9. for hee threatneth oppression
and anguishe vnto euerie soule
that doth euill, whether Iew or Greeke,
that is, whether of the visible Church or
not. In this one thing these men may be
commended, that seeing their assertions
cannot bee warranted by the woorde of
of God, they will doe the best they can
to make their sayings true in themselues.
For surely they coulde not possiblie giue
ouer themselues vnto a doggish disposition,
as they do, if they were not perswaded,
that in so dooing the conditions of
men which haue cast off gouernement
should in thē be made manifest vnto the
world. VVee are therefore to desire for
them, that discipline may be put in practise,
if happely they may bee brought to
some good order.
               Thus haue we seene how the Author of
this Treatise hath failed in the perfourmance
of his promise made in the title
thereof.
            
         
         
            
            A MANIFESTATION
OF THE INCONSTANCIE
of Brownisme; grathered out of two
Treatises lately dispersed throughout
the land.
            
               AThanasius speaking of the Eusebian
hereticke saith that if once he
tast the Arrian schisme,
               Adserap. Epist. 2. de spirit. san. 
               he will neuer
refraine his tongue from vngodlinesse:
He noteth it also as a common
disease in all heretikes, that
they will be constant in a peeuish wilfulnesse, least
they should be condemned of those whom they haue
seduced;De decretis Nic. sincci. yet in all other things inconstant. Nunc probantes
quod dicunt, mox vero vituperātes quod dixerunt
ac rursum approbantes, quod paulo ante calumniabantur.
It is no maruell therfore though the factioners of our
age hauing auouched their owne dreames to be the
truth of God, do now cry out, yt they are blasphemed,
abused, & slādered, if the same be laid to their charge;
& yet in discoursing vpon the self-same matters, they
wil not stick to iustifie their first conceipts▪ al which
may appeare to him that readeth the two pamphlets
lately by them published; the one intituled A collection
of certaine slanderous Articles, and the other, A collection
of certaine articles and conferences, &c. For in
these bookes we shall finde the certaintie of doctrine
what it is amongst conceited diuines. And that the
truth may be more euident, I wil set downe first their
Articles, which sometimes they did hold, and now
are charged with. Secondly, the sore complaints that
they make of being slandered with them by our Bishops.
Thirdly, what small cause they haue to complaine,

considering that they are now resolute to defend
the same Articles vnto the death. And lastly the
fondnesse of their assertions; which (for the auoiding
of tediousnes) shalbe done either by referring the
Reader vnto those places, where these matters are
handled elsewhere, or else by plaine and euident
proofes.
            The Articles which are so iniuriously imputed vnto them (as
they themselues haue published) are these.
            1 THat it is not lavvfull to vse the Lords praier publikelie
in the church,The Articles of Brownisme. for a set forme of praier.
            2 Secondlie that all set and stinted praiers are meere
babling in the sight of the Lord, not to be vsed in publike
Christian assemblies.
            3 Thirdly, that the publique praiers and vvorship of
God in England, as it is by lavv in the church of England
established, is false, superstitious, popish, and not to be vsed
in anie Christian congregation.
            4 That the Church of England as it is novv established
is no entire member of the church of Christ.
            5 That the gouernment of the church of England, as it
is novv established, is no lavvfull gouernement, nor christian,
but antichristian and popish.
            6 That the Sacraments of baptisme & the Lords supper,
as they are administred in the church of England, be
not true sacraments.
            7 That infants ought not to be baptised, according to
the forme of baptisme ministred novv in the church of
England, but are rather to be kept vnbaptised.
            8 Manie of them make scruple to affirme, that the
Queenes maiestie hath supreame authoritie to gouerne
the church of England in cases ecclesiasticall and to make
lavves ecclesiasticall, not contrarie to Christs lavves.
            9 That the lavves ecclesiasticall alreadie established
by the authoritie of the queene & realme, be not lavvfull
            
               
10 That if the Prince, or magistrate vnder her, do refuse
or defer to reforme such faults as are amisse in the
church, the people maie take the reforming of them into
their ovvne hands, before or vvithout her authoritie.
            11 That the presbiterie, or eldership, maie for some causes
after admonition, if there ensue not reformation excommunicate
the Queene.
            12 That the Church of England, as it novv standeth by
lavv established, professeth not a true Christ, nor true religion,
that it hath no ministers in deed, nor Sacraments
in deed.Their complaints of being slandred.
            
            Now they complaine that they are much abused in
being charged with these matters, for the title of one
of the Treatises is, A collection of certaine slanderous articles
giuen out by the bishops, against such faithful Christians,
as they now vniustly detaine in their prisons, &c.
The Epistle saith, that there are spersed abroad throughout
the land, certaine articles of the bishops owne deuising
against these men to bring them into hatred vvith the
vvhole land. The Author in answering the said Articles
termeth them forged positions. Again, God forbid (saith
he) that our Magistrates should be guiltie of our innocent
blood by such slanderous reports. To be short, master
Barrow (as he himselfe reporteth) complained to
Doctor Androwes, that he hath bene greeuouslie slandred,
blasphemed, and accused by spearsed articles, &c.
therefore a great fault there is in those, which offer
these persecuted Christians (for so they terme themselues)
this great iniurie; or else in them who, if the
Black-amore could change his hue, would deny their
owne opinions: but if they giue the lie vnto vs without
iust cause, as it shall appeare that they do, by that
which followeth, and maintaine these things, which
thus confidētly they haue denied, in crying out, they
are slandered▪ then wil it also be cōfessed, that they are
not persecuted Christians, but vnbridled factioners.

For these are no slanderous positions, as they say, forged
against them by the bishops; but phantasticall
assertions first deuised, and now againe confirmed by
themselues, as by their seuerall handling of the seuerall
Articles they do shew.
            To the first Article therefore they say,That they are not slandered. that neither
the Lords Prayer, nor any other praier in the scriptures
may be vsed but by explication; Also, that they
serue onely for instruction. Againe, That the verie forme
of words as they are in these petitions was giuen and instituted
as a set and stinted prayer () we finde not in
the scriptures. Also, to vse it for a set prayer, is (say they)
a stinting of the holy Ghost. Now if these assertions do
not agree with the Article, and testifie that they
do hold it, they haue the greater cause to complaine;
but I see no difference betwene the one & the other.
            Now the folly of this Article is manifest in this; that
the Lords prayer was giuen for the same end, ye other
prayers were in the canonicall scripture; but other
prayers were not for instruction, as hath bin shewed
before, pag. 23. I need not make the conclusion.
            And as touching their denying the forme of praier
which Christ gaue to his disciples to be his praier, because
we reade not that he euer vsed it: And their accusing
vs to be falsifiers of the text, when we call it
the Lords Prayer, If it were not a strife about words,
I would say more; whereas now I wil onely put them
in minde, that we haue learned this phrase of the holy
Ghost, who calleth the prayers which God hath
taught, and doth approue his prayers, as Esa. 56. 7.
I vvil make them glad (bebeth tepillati) in the house of my
prayer, for there it is called the Lords prayer, not for
that he vsed it, but because he prescribed it. And why
then may not we in like sort cal this the Lords praier,
in as much as he hath taught it:Porphirius. but of this enough, lest
it be said of vs, para men gar hemin esti logoma chia, &c
            
            
               
To the 2. article they say, that the canonicall praiers
commended to vs by Gods spirite, haue this onely
vse, that they serue for instruction. And that our morning
and euening praiers are not onely a babling, but
apocriphall and idolatrous, &c. So that neither canonicall
nor other praiers that are prescribed, are deemed
lawfull to be vsed for praiers in the sight of the
Lord. Whereby it is made manifest, that they are not
vniustly charged with this Article. Which notwithstanding
is but a false assertion, considering that sette
praiers were vsed vnder the lawe, are not forbidden
in the gospell, and are also vsed in all reformed churches
vntil this daie.
            To the 3. article they saie, that our liturgie is drawen
out of the Popes portuise, is not onely idolatrous, superstious,
and a deuised worship, but a bundle of infinite, grosse,
& blasphemous errours, a Pseudodiathesis, a counterfet
gospell, an idoll, and huge Chaos of long, gathered, and
patched absurdities, a new gospel, a masse booke, and what
not? How then are they slandered, when it is sayde
that they account our worship of God, as it is now established,
to be false, superstitious, and popish? But
the best is, these calumniations are not greatly to be
regarded: for if they need not to be ashamed of learning
the truth of Donatus, who was a schismatical heretique,
wee haue as small cause to cast awaie good
things, though it could be proued, as it is not, that we
had taken them from an heretike. And though no
worke of man, and so not our booke of publike praier
can be free from all blemishes, the Lord reseruing
this glorie to himselfe, that hee will bee acknowledged
perfectly wise, and his workes onely voide of
imperfection: yet so farre is this booke from deseruing
these great reproches, that it beeing compared
with the best treatise that these disturbers haue
brought forth, the most grosse and blasphemous error

which they cā proue therin, may be iustified in cō
               parison
of many that are deliuered for sound doctrine
in their pamphlets, if both of thē be right vnderstood.
            To the 4. they say, that it being subiect to the vvorship
aforesaid, & cōsisting of al sorts of vnclen spirits, atheists,
papists, heretikes, &c. it is not a true mēber of the bodie of
Christ. It is not thē blasphemy to charge thē with this
4. article. And whether they haue cause to hold it vppon
this ground or not, shal be euident hereafter.
            To the fifth article, It is euident to al men (saie they)
and confessed of our enimies, that the ministers, laws,
and other ordinances, whereby the parish assemblies
are gouerned, are not such as Christ appointed to his
church, of pastor, &c. but by such officers, courts, and
canons as are hatched from Rome. Do they not then
iustifie this article, wherin, as in others, they cōplaine
they are slandered? yet in as much as they are constāt
in it, let thē proue by the word of God both their discipline
to be good, & also our gouernmēt to be Antichristian,
which they will hardlie afford, considering
that before the time of papacy there were these offices
in the church which these men terme Antichrististian,
as M. Caluin testifieth▪ Inst. li. 5. ca. 4. se. 4. whose
authoritie I vse with these men, because I finde that
they themselues haue alleaged the same.
            To the 6. article they saie, that vve neither hauing a
lavvfull ministerie, nor faithfull holie free people, &c. the
sacraments in our assemblies deliuered, are no true sacraments,
nor seales vvith promise. How thē can these men
without blushing, put this article in the nūber of forged
positiōs, for cōsidering that they make their iudgments
knowen concerning this point, I maruell more
they are not ashamed to denie it, then I do that some
of them Donatist like, haue desired to be baptised again.
The answer to this wilbe easie by that which foloweth
in the answer to the 3 brāch of the 5. argumēt.
            
               
To the seauenth, they say that no godlie Christians
separate from the false church, ought to bring their infants
to these parish assemblies, to bee baptised into that
fellovvship and profession, &c. These wordes do iustifie
our Bishops in charging these men with this article.
The substance whereof seeing it doth depend vpon
the former article, the follies of it being perceaued
the want of wisedom in this will soone be descried.
            To the eight they say that all true christians vvithin
her maiestie dominions, acknovvledge her Maiestie to
be the supreame magistrate and gouernes ouer all persons,
within the church and without the church, yea,
ouer all causes ecclesiasticall and ciuill. Which assertion
if it had bene receiued of the whole sect, then
it had bene a slander in deed, but in as much as in an
assembly of aboue twentie persons, it was concluded,
that her Maiestie is not supreame head of the church,
neither hath authoritie to make lawes ecclesiastical in
the church: they must acknowledge a dissent of iudgment
amongst themselues, or else confesse that there
was a time when they were of another opinion, but
now they haue learned to be more wise, yet the caueat
that is giuen hath a secret meaning, viz. a granting
of the latter part of this article, that her maiestie
hath no authoritie to make anie lawes ecclesiasticall.
But this being so closely couered, I minde not to
see it, I conceiue the best, namely, that as they yeelde
more to her maiestie then of former times they haue
done, so will they in time grant her that right which
is due vnto her roiall authoritie.
            Of the ninth article they saie, that the lavves ecclesiasticall
vvherevvith our assemblies are guided, are not
deriued from the booke of God, but culled out from
that great Antichrists canons, orders, & deuillish pollicies,
&c. that they are the execrable wares of Antichrist
statuts of Omry, & not to be receiued or obeied

of anie that loue the Lord Iesus. This article then is
maintained by these men, and not vniustly imputed
to them. But as touching this grieuous accusation, we
are here also to call to minde, that the lawes of God
are onely perfect, the decrees and statutes of men,
though holy, yet haue their wants. In regard wherof
I doe acknowledge a want of perfection, but the
deformitie of these laws doth seeme greater, partly by
the meanes of such as shoulde dispose them more vprightly,
and partly by reason of others, who haue a
malitious eie in beholding, and an enuious tongue in
reproching them.
            Vnto the tenth article, they answere, that they neither
looke for the reformation of Babel, our false Church,
for so they tearme it, nor take vpon them to intermeddle
with the magistrates swoord: but all that will bee saued,
must forsake the false church, and by repentance
come vnder Christs obedience to serue God aright
in his true church, &c. Neither may they neglect
the seruice of GOD, nor the practise of any parte
thereof, &c. Though the Prince shoulde inhibite,
&c. So that they affirme, that of their owne authority
they are not only to separate themselues from
vs, but also to prctaise the discipline which they haue
fansied, though her maiestie shoulde inhibite the one
or commaunde the other: so that this article is not
wrongfully fathered vpon them. But before this article
be granted vnto them as a true position, they
must not onelie conuince our church, as out of the
which there ought to be a departure, but also they
must proue that a priuate man may attempt reformation
in the church, contrarie to that which hath bene
spoken.
            To the eleuenth article they saie, first that the presbyterie
may not excommunicate any person by their
sole power, seeing Christ hath giuen this power to

the whole church. This is made more plaine in an other
place, where one of them saith, that the least
member of the church that is a communicant hath as
much interest in all the censures of the church, as the
pastor. Secondly, they affirme that the prince if he
will be a member of the church, must be subiect to
the censure in the church. The which two positions
being considered, it shall be needlesse to open what
these men would haue: but of the authoritie of a priuat
man hath ben spoken sufficiently heretofore.
            To the twelfth they answer roundly in this sort, as
for your religion, church, sacramentes, &c. vve haue before
shevved the forgerie of them, vnto the vvhich former
articles I referre the reader. Euen so do I, for I purpose
not palinodiam can
                     •
                  re: onely I say that amongst
these twelue articles there is not one, wherewith they
are abused or vniustly charged, and therefore are
their exclamations before mentioned vaine.
            
               There are in the ende of the foresaid pamphlet
other twelue articles, not vnlike to the former,
which they tearme slanderous articles also
forged against them, as if they did not
hold them, which are these.
               1 THey hold that the Lords praier or anie set praier is
blasphemie, and they neuer vse anie praier for the
Queene, as supreame head vnder Christ of the church of
England.
               2 That all set praiers or stinted praies, or read seruice
are but meere babling in Gods sight, and plaine Idolatrie.
               3 They teach there is no head or supreame gouernor of
the church of Christ: and that the Queene hath none authoritie
in the church to make lavves ecclesiasticall.
               
                  
4 They teach that a laie man may beget faith; and that
vve haue no need of publike administration.
               5 They condemne all comming to Church, al preaching
all institution of Sacraments, and saie that all the ministers
vvere sent by God in his anger to deceiue the people.
               6 They affirme that the people must reforme the church
and not tarie for the magistrate, and that the Primitiue
church sued not to courts and parliaments, nor vvaited
vpon princes pleasures: but vve make Christ to attend vppō
princes, & to be subiect to their lavvs & gouernment.
               7 That the booke of common praier is a pregnant Idol &
full of abhominations, a peece of svvines flesh, and abhomination
to the Lord.
               8 They saie it is a greater sinne to go to the church to
publik praiers, then for a mā to lie vvith his fathers vvife
               9 Those that vvil not refrain from our churches, preaching
or seruice, they giue vnto the deuil & excōmunicat.
               10 They hold it not lavvfull to baptise children among
vs: they neuer haue anie sacrament among them.
               11 They refuse to take an oath to be examined.
               12 They vvill not marrie amongst vs in our churches,
but resort to the Fleet & to other places to bee married by
one Greenwood and Barrow.
               
               All which, whether these men are vniustly blamed
with them, or do hold them as firme as they do the
former Articles, I leaue vnto the consideration of all
men. Their iudgemēt cōcerning the two first articles
hath bene set downe alredie; for they do little differ
from those two positions set downe in the former
place: Likewise concerning the third article, we haue
had their minde in the eight article, so that it shall be
needlesse either to shew again that those are by their
desert imputed vnto them, or that in maintaining thē
their warrants be of smal force. And the fourth article
is so far from being an vngodly calumniation against
thē, yt they hold it not only a possible thing for a priuate

man to beget faith, but also lawfull for him to
preach the word & interpret the scriptures in publike
assemblies. Wherin a question might be moued, what
is the differēce betwene him yt is Leitourgos, a minister
of Christ in their publike functiō; & euery priuate
man in the congregation, both hauing equall authoritie,
as well in preaching, as in the censures of the
church? Also, what these priuate men are to be esteemed
in preaching, whether ministers, or no ministers
vnto the people whom they teach? mutuall exhortations
I grant to be necessarie amongst the people
of God, wherby the faith of the godly may be encreased;
whereof is mention made, Act. 18. 26. 1. Pet.
4. 10. 1. Thess. 5. 11. And the euils in others might be
restrained; wherof Iames speaketh, Cap. 5. 19. 20. And
Paul 1. Cor. 7. 16. For as I yeeld vnto the author of this
discourse, that these fiue places of scripture do proue
one and the same matter, so I hope he will call home
his wits, & grant vnto me that they proue not a preaching
in the publike assemblie, considering that the
woman, of whom this dutie of exhorting is required,
1. Cor. 7. 16. is not allowed to speake in the congregation.
The other places of scriptures alledged, viz.
Luk. 10. and 1. Cor. 14. do mention a publike dealing
with the word, but neither were the 70. (when Christ
sent forth priuate men) nor yet the others spoken of
in the Corinthes, where he speaketh not of all the
faithfull, but of all the Prophets; as master Caluin also
noteth vpon that place, that in Luk. 8. 39. Act. 8. 4.
and 11. 19. can make nothing for this matter vntill it
be proued that the men there mentioned, first were
priuate men, 2. executed a ministery in the publike assemblie,
and lastly had no extraordinarie sending
forth. The place of Paul Philip. 2. verse 15. and 16.
speaketh not of preaching, but of the conuersation
which should be such in the middest of a froward

people, as might be a meanes to winne them without
the word, who had no care of the word. The other
place, 1. Pet. 3. 2. pertaineth nothing to the matter in
question; so that as yet it remaineth vnprooued, that
a priuate man may preach in the congregation. Of
which matter Master Caluin speaketh, Instit. lib. 4.
cap. 3. sect. 10. and if they may not preach, then can
they not beget faith; for none can be called to the
true faith without the preaching of the gospel, as they
themselues haue affirmed in their last conference
with Doctor Andrewes. Therefore this is not a slanderous
article to bring them into hatred vniustlie,
but a blind deuise to bring confusion into the church.
               The fift article here set downe and the seuenth, are
the same with that, which was set in the third place
in the beginning.
               The sixt article, being all one with the tenth of the
former sort, hath also bene considered of.
               To the 8. article they saie, that to go to the church
to publike praiers, is a high sinne against the first table;
which being but a begging of the question, they
must first proue our worship to be idolatrie, before
their calumniation is to be harkened vnto.
               To the ninth they say, that they iudge not them
that are without, but those that hauing left all false
assemblies, &c. haue ioyned with them, &c. And if
among them any fall into error, them do they excommunicate.
As here is no slander, so may we see the
confusion of their doctrine, and their practises to be
accordingly. First, the priuate man hath as much authoritie
in the censures of their church, as Pastor, Elder,
or any other. Secondly, that their church hath authoritie
ouer those that haue ioyned with them: from
these sweete positions haue sprong this excellent harmonie,
that euerie man presumeth amongst them to
excommunicate one another, as hath bin seene, and is

dayly manifest, both in the Clinke and other prisons;
for as Theodoret saith▪
                  De fide. 
                  ex ipsa ignorātiam pestem superbie
contraxerunt. Ignorance hath brought them to pride:
which he compareth vnto the plague, because as it
infecteth the bodie, so pride peruerteth the mind; for
from it do spring a stubborne disobedience towards
others, hypocrisie seeking glorie in outward apparance,
wilfulnesse in defending the euill, least their error
should appeare, discord, ech man labouring to
be singular, deuise of nouelties, &c. And therefore it
is no wonder, to behold the readinesse of euerie of
them in casting off submission; boasting of godlines,
and maintaining falshood: yet whiles euerie man affecteth
glorie by new deuises; the dissention is such,
that one sort excommunicateth another, and the excommunicated
do the like for the other, that euen the
Papists who behold the same in their prisons, laugh
at such confusion.
               The tenth article is all one with the sixt in the former
number.
               To the 11▪ they say, that they refuse not an oath by
the holy name of God, 2. before a lawful Magistrate,
3. vpon iust occasion, according to the word: but our
oathes they say, are rash and vngodly. First, by or with
a booke. Secondly offred & enforced by the Bishops.
Thirdly at their pleasure vpon euery occasion, contrary
to the word of God, the lawes of the land, & derogatorie
to her Maiesties prerogatiue royall: so that if
we say that these men refuse to take an oath according
to the laws of our land, it wil appere no slander.
               Now cōcerning their iudgmēt, we agree with them
that the Lord condemneth all false, rash, and vngodly
oathes: that is, such oathes as are in matters of vntruth,
in things of small importance; and by taking
any other to witnesse, but God onely: for the
which may be alledged, Deut. 6. 13. Ierem. 4. 2.

Heb. 6. 16. and many others. Herein we dissent, first
that they seeme to allow an oath before a magistrate
onely, wherein they condemne the deede of Iacob
and Laban, Gen. 31. 53. and of 
                     •
                  oos to Ruth, Ruth.
3. 13. and of Obadia to Eliah, 1. Reg. 18. 10. who being
all but priuat persons, yet doe confirme with an oath
the matters in question betwene them. Secondly, that
they will not acknowledge those to haue authoritie
to take an oath, to whom her maiestie hath committed
the same. Thirdly, that they condemne the forme
of swearing before the magistrate, which by the laws
of Englang is vsed; for as Abraham in vrging his seruant
Eleazar to sweare Gen. 24. 2. and Iacob taking
an oath of Ioseph Gen. 47. 29. said. Put thine hand vnder
my thigh (a ceremonie vsed among the Ethiopians
and Indians vntill this day) can not be charged to
haue vsed an idolatrous rite, inasmuch as the oath
was not taken by the thigh, but by the God of heauen
and the creator of the earth: so likewise the hand
is laid vpon the booke, the oath is not vrged to be taken
by the booke, but by him, whom the doctrine of
that booke maketh knowne vnto vs; of both which
rites we neede not feare to say: Prophanos ritus non
esse, qui Dei gloriae quicquam detraherent; quia interponitur
Dei nomen, &c. Neither do the places of Scripture
cited infringe this: for Amo. 5. 4. is not at all spoken
of an oath, but generally that men shoulde seeke
out that which is good and not euill. The other three
places, viz. Zoph. 1. 5. Matth. 5. 34. and 23. 16. disproue
not an outward ceremony in an oath; onely Zephanie
telleth that God condemneth those which doe outwardly
worshippe Idols though they keepe the heart
vnto God; and Christ sheweth that God is onely to
be our witnes in al our asseuerations: our maner of taking
an oth is not against it. The other calumniations
are not worth the answering.
               
                  
To the twelfth they say, that the action of matrimonie
is 
                     ••
                  erely ciuill, therefore lawfull in all places
and at all times to marrie in the Lorde by the consent
of parents; denying that they haue married anie, but
together with other faithfull, haue beene witnesses of
the same. It is plaine therefore that some haue bene
contracted in the prison, and married, and they haue
had their part in the action. But I woulde haue these
men to consider: First, that euerie soule inciuill
and indifferent matters is to submit himselfe vnto
the higher powers; for this lesson we learne of Sainct
Paule vnto the Romanes the thirteenth chapter and
the first verse. Secondly, that marriage is a matter altogether
ciuill: for this these men acknowledge.
Thirdly, that her maiestie for the auoiding of inconueniences,
hath commanded that matrimonie should
not be celebrated but in the publike assemblies; as
by the lawes of our lande is manifest.
               And then let them speake, and shewe vs what
warrant they haue from God, or comforte to their
consciences in these vngodlie and disordered marriages.
               Nowe therefore we may conclude that neither the
twelue positions in the beginning, nor the twelue articles
in the ende of this first treatise, are forged positions,
slanderous articles and vngodly calumniations
considering that these men do maintaine them: but so
wicked assertions, that it may bee truely said of the
teachers of them. Thou doest loue euill more then good,
lies more then to speake the trueth, &c. the two and fiftith
Psalme and the third verse.
               There is a thirteenth article, whereof they greatly
glorie, that it hath bene passed ouer with silence, that
neither tithes, nor set liuings are a matter warrantable
in the word of God; the one being Leuiticall & therfore
abrogated, the other without stay to leane vpon

in the Scriptures, and therefore to be taken away,
and that Christ and his apostles perswaded 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  fficiencie,
but did not condition for anie certaintie. To
whom I answere, that if a sufficient maintenance is to
be had for the ministerie, it is requisite some order be
taken for them how they may come by it: for if it be
left to the discretion of men, it will be short enough,
in regard whereof the Lorde ordained a set liuing for
the Leuites, not in the example of Michah his Leuit,
with whom these men do sport themselues, but in his
ordinance of tithes, &c. which as they were ceremoniall
to them that paid them, being instructed therby
that the increase of al thing is of God to whom praise
is due for the same: so to them that receaued the same
it was a meanes, wherby the certainty of their maintenance
might be had. And this was not left to the
discretion of the people, but euery man was appointed
what to pay.1. Cor. 9. 13. 
                  Do ye not know (saith Paule) that they
which minister about the holie things, eat of the things of
the temple, & they which waite at the altar are partakers
of the altar? He proceedeth in applying this vnto the
ministerie of the Gospell:ver. 14. 
                  So also hath the Lord ordeined,
that they vvhich preach the Gospell should liue of the
Gospell. Therefore as vnder the law there was a sette
maintenance for the priest: so vnder the Gospel there
may be the like for the ministers thereof, except we
coulde finde the people better affected nowe, then
they were at that time vnto the ministerie. They
are to rest vpon the good vvill of the breethren, say they.
But how is this proued? For to speake without warrant
of the worde in teaching innouation is fondnesse.
But I know that it will be sooner granted to
the minister to haue a certaine stay of liuing, then that
he shoulde haue the same in tithes, for that was ceremoniall,
and therefore to continue it, is to deny Christ
to be come in the flesh. I answer that the paying of tiths

was ceremoniall, but there was an other vse of them
also: so was the temple ceremoniall, wherein the people
assembled together vnto the worshippe of God.
Now if any man should vse the temples (I meane the
places of praier) or the paying of tithes as ceremoniall,
it were a deniall of the abrogation of the ceremoniall
lawe, but the temple hauing an other vse,
namely, that it might be a conuenient place for the
people to meete in for the exercise of the worde, &c.
which is not ceremoniall, it is no denying that Christ
is come in the flesh, though in this respect we do continue
this vse of them, so the tithes being not onely
ceremoniall, but hauing this vse also that the ministerie
might be maintained, no such iniurie is offred vnto
Christ in the retaining of them for this ende onely.
And thus this glorious article may goe together with
his fellowes, all of them deseruing glorie alike.
            
            
               A SHORT ANSVVERE VNTO
CERTAINE ARGVMENTS WHICH
are vsed by the Brownists, to proue the Church of
England not to be the true Church
of God.
               IN the end of the second booke of their conferences,
there is added a short treatise, as the summe of
those matters, which in the conferences are said to
haue bene handled: the manner of which discourse
is this. In the toppe of the page this scripture is prefixed.
               
                  Brownist.
                  The righteous men they shall iudge thē after the maner
of harlots, & after the maner of murtherers, for that they
are harlots, and blood is in their hands. Ezec. 23. 45.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  For as much as it not expressed wherfore this place

of Scripture is heere placed, I will adde this vnto it:
leauing the application of it vnto them, that vnderstande
the meaning of the former.
                  Thus saith the Lorde God, because that Moab and
Seir doe say, beholde the house of Iuda is like vnto all
the heathen, therefore beholde I will open the side of Moab,
euen of the cities of his cities; I say, in his frontiers,
with the pleasaunt countrie Beth-ieshimoth Baalmeòn
and Kariathaim. I will call the men of the East against
the Ammonites, and will giue them in possession,
so that the Ammonites shall no more bee remembred among
the nations, and vvill execute iudgementes vpon
Moab, and they shall knovv that I am the Lorde. Ezech.
25. vers. 8. 9. 10. 11.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Before we can iudge of the false church, it is expedient,
that we discerne the true church, &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  Here is confirmed that which was spoken pag. 11.
viz. that the matters mentioned in that treatise are
so necessarily required, that the want of anie of them
taketh away the esse of the church: for here in a fewe
lines is knit vp, that which more at large was then deliuered:
yet some things at the first not thought vppon,
are here added. And both the old and new matters
iointly and seuerally are propounded, as hauing
strength sufficient to ouerthrow not our church only,
but all others also that are not framed, according
to their rule. I will answere them therefore in that
order, which the author hath vsed in drawing these
matters into arguments. The first argument of theirs
is this.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Their church consisteth not of a companie of faithfull
people,Ier. 31. 34. but of multitude of prophane people,Act. 10 43. & 15. 9. therefore they
are not the true church.
               
               
                  
                  Ansvvere.
                  Seeing the propositions both of this and the arguments
following are set downe before it should seme
that of purpose they are nowe omitted; yet to make
the matter plaine, the argument is after this manner.
                  The true planted and right established church of
Christ is a company of faithful people, but the church
of Englande is not a companie of faithfull people.
Therefore not a true planted and rightly established
church.
                  Whereunto I answere, that the assumption is with
great insolency set downe, as if magistrates, ministers
& people were without exception of any, a flocke of
goates, a companie of hell hounds. Likewise the proposition
sauoreth of Anabaptistry, whiles it admitteth
none to be members of the visible church, but faithfull
people onely. But concerning the assumption, I
grant, that some of Cain his brood, of Cham his conditions
and of Esau his qualities, are in our church, euen
as there are amongst these persecuted Christians
some of the schollers of Shimei, some of Corah his
company, some Ismaels, &c. Herein is the difference
betweene their church and ours, that we account of
such beastes as they are, though wee labour by the
worde and other meanes to bring them vnto repentance;
but if their Atheists can but say that discipline
is good (though they knowe not what it meaneth) if
they wil heaue at magistracy, & raile vpō the established
gouernement, they must be presently canonized
& registred in the booke of the faithfull, whatsoeuer
their conditions are otherwise. In the proposition I
see nothing which hath not beene answered pag. 12.
&c. only here are certaine scriptures cited in the margent,
so farre from proouing the matter in question,
that if they be vnderstoode of euery member of the
visible church, to prooue them faithfull, we may
with as good reason from the same places conclude,

that neither the publike ministerie, nor priuat admonitions
are to be vsed in the visible church, for these
are the wordes of Ieremie: And they shall teach no more
euerie man his neighbour, and euerie man his brother saying,
knowe the Lorde, for they shall all knowe me from the
least of them to the greatest of them, saith the Lord, for I
vvill forgiue their iniquitie, &c.
                  
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  They haue made no separation from the heathen of the
lande, but all are receaued and retained in the bosome of
their churches, therefore, &c.
               
               
                  Ansvver.
                  This is the argument. The true church is a company
of people separated from the vnbeleeuers, & heathen
of the lande, but the church of Englande hath
made no separatlon, &c. therefore, &c.
                  The proposition is denied, if such a separation be
vnderstoode as is spoken of Matth. 25. 32. as hath bin
proued pag. 11. 12. &c. but if they take it, as it is in
the place by them selues alleaged, Leuit. 20. 24. we do
grant it: for Israell is there said to be separated from
that heathen, yet was it not separated from all vnbeleeuers,
onely it was in respect of their outward profession.
The assumption in the former sence is granted,
but otherwise it is euident to be a meere slander,
for neither are any receaued into our church, except
they ioyne with vs in outward profession, neither
are their children baptized, except the parents,
or some for the parents do promise to see thē brought
vppe in the knowledge of God, and faith in Christ
Iesus.
                  
                     But they proue this assumption after this sort: They
vvere all (say they) by the blovving of her maiesties trumpet
at her coronation,In their first & third conference with M. Hutchinson. in one day receiued vvithout conuersion
of life by faith and repentance, and they and their
seede euer since generallie receaued to your sacramentes,

without any separation from the world.
                  
                     Before I make answere vnto this assertion, I would
learne (if I might) how these men would haue the
people to come vnto an established church at the
first. For they tel vs, 1. That there can be no true church,
vntill euerie member therof hath by faith and repentance
separated himselfe from the vnbeleeuers.In their first conference with master Hutchinson. 
                     But how shall
they come vnto this faith? for they tell vs also, 2. That
none can haue true faith and repentance, but such as are
called thereunto by the preaching of the gospel. And how
shall they haue this Gospel preached vnto them?
3. There must be sheepe before there can be a flocke; there
must be a flocke before there can be a shepheard, because
the people must choose their Pastor:Ibidem. 
                     so that they affirme
that the people must be brought to the faith, before they
can haue a Pastor, and yet they cannot haue faith vvithout
preaching. Which way then shall this preaching
be had, for the attaining vnto faith?
                  
                  
                     The Magistrate (say they) ought to compel the Infidels
to heare the doctrine of the church,
                     Conference with master Cooper. pa. 59. 
                     and also vvith the approbation
of the church to send forth meete men, vvith
gifts and graces to instruct the Infidels, being yet no ministers,
or officers vnto them: but in the time of Poperie,
they affirme that the people could not be the church;
& therefore I would be resolued in these two points:
First where the magistrate in such a case shuld haue a
church to giue consent vnto his sending forth of such
teachers to instruct infidels? And thus haue they led
vs about, & haue brought vs to the same place where
we were at the first. And secondly what they are,
which thus are sent by the magistrate and the church,
if not ministers of the word vnto those infidels whom
they teach? and herein we require an answere by the
word.
                  Now to our assertion, concerning our turning from
Poperie at the blowing of her maiesties trumpet. I

doubt not but this will be graunted, that some of Q.
Maries subiects beleeued, and made a bold confession
of their faith, who to the ioye of all christian
hearts in the lande, remaine in our church vntill this
daie. Others there were like vnto Nichodemus in his
comming to Christ by night, and in his faint defending
of the truth (who if the Lord should for our vnthankfulnes
send a scourge) wold with Nichodemus
make a bolde confession of their loue to Christ Iesus.
So that all were not Pagans that embraced the Gospell
at the sounding of her maiesties trumpet,Ioh. 32. & 7. 50. & beeing
faithfull,Ioh. 19. 39. the seales of the couenant did pertaine
vnto their seed. But some (it may be) ioyned for feare
in the outward profession (who these were, the searcher
of mans heart doth know:)Ios. 5. 3. So did Ismael in Abrahams
house, Caine in Adams house, and these vnfaithfull
Israelites vnder Iosua, when at his only commandement
they were all circumcised. There was
therefore such a separation at her maiesties entrance
vnto the Crowne, as the visible Church in all ages
from the beginning hath afforded.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  They are not gathered in the name of Christ, but in the
name of Antichrist vvhom they obey, as shall aftervvard
appeare, Therefore, &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  The true church is gathered in the name of Christ, but
the church of England is not, &c.
                  Therefore not the true church.
                  The proposition is granted; the Assumption is denied,
in asmuch as we do renounce the doctrine, gouernment,
& worship of Antichrist; as shalbe shewed
in the places where they labor to proue the contrary.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  They vvorship not God truely, but after a false and

idolatrus manner, as vvitnesseth their Popish liturgie,
their stinted booke of common praiers, Therefore, &c.
               
               
                  The Argument standeth this.
                  The true church worshipeth God truely,Ansvvere. but
the church of England doth not,
                  Therefore it is no true church.
                  I grant the proposition, & yet with this caueat, that
not euery mēber of the visible church performeth this
dutie, and that the true worship of God, offered vnto
him by man, thorough the frailtie of man is not without
great wants. The matter of the assumption hath
bene dealt in,Brownist. pag. 21.
               
               
                  And they receiue not, nor obey
not Christ as their king, priest, and prophet, Therefore,
&c.
                  
               
               
                  This argument is diuided into three seuerall parts
in this manner.
                  Not as their king, reiecting his gouernement, and receiuing
and standing vnder the antichristian yoke of their
Popish gruernment, Therefore, &c.
                  The force of the reason is this.Ansvvere.
                  
                  The true church obeyeth Christ as her king, and
reteineth his gouernement; but the church of
England doth not, Therefore no true church.
                  We are to remember that the question is of outward
gouernment, which hath bene shewed pag. 25. not to
be the life of the church, but the word onely: Herevnto
we ad their own confession, that the true church
may be vvithout sacraments, which we hold as necessarie
as outward gouernment. But we are here charged
with a double crime, viz. with the casting of Christs
gouernment, and with the receiuing the yoke of Antichrist.
To the first whereof, I answere, that if pastors,
Doctors and Elders, and Deacons be the gouernement
of Christ, we haue it; in as much as the matter
required in all these offices is retained with vs;
if these be abused by men, it is not sufficient to

proue that we haue them not at all, if strife be about
the changing of the names, wise men will condemne
it for follie. To the second I answere, that her maiestie
is supreame gouernesse ouer vs in all causes both
ecclesiasticall and ciuill; and therefore hath authoritie
to appoint such gouernors, to confirme that gouernment,
which (being not contrarie vnto Gods word)
shall seeme meete vnto hir. Nowe this gouernement
which we haue, else where is shewed to haue bene
for the preseruation of discipline and auoiding confusion,
before the time that Antichrist bare sway in
the church. I grant that afterward he abused it, so did
he many other matters: and yet they are not to be
counted Antichristian (hauing not their beginning of
him) when they are restored vnto their first vse. But
this one calumniation bringeth foorth these fruites:
First, in teaching that euery priuat man hath authority
in the election of ecclesiasticall gouernors, or else
the gouernement is Antichristian, the priuat man is
taught to intrude into her highnesse right, to whome
this matter was granted by Act of Parlement, 1. Eliz.
1. Againe, in disswading from the obedience of this
authority, the cōmandement of God is made no commandement.
Ro. 13. 1. which willeth that euery soule
be subiect vnto the higher powers. And as Absolon
with Dauid, so do these men deale with her maiesty,
in seeking to alienate the harts of good subiects from
her, by crying out against her gouernment, promising
better things if they be harkned vnto, that mē might
be brought to ioyne in their rebellions. We shun the
Iesuites, who from house to house do labour to draw
the people into a loathing of their present estate,
this natiue schisme is so muche the more to bee looked
vnto, as it commeth with a greater shew of godlinesse,
and yet indeuoreth to worke confusion, by
these Iesuiticall proceedings.
               
               
                  
                  Brownist.
                  Not as their Priest, sacrilegiously prophaning his name
vvith their idolatrie, prostituting his blood, and making
him a Priest and sacrifice to infidels, and the most vvicked
offenders.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is thus.
                  The true church receiueth Christ as their Priest,
but the church of England doth not, because it prophaneth
his name, &c. Therefore no true church.
                  The assumtion is false, for the doctrin of our church
is, that Christ is the onely Priest, who by his owne
blood entred in once into the holy place, and obtained
eternall redemption for vs? and therefore that
men should walke worthy of so holy a calling as
Christ hath vouchsafed to set them in; neither in their
worshipping of God, prophaning his name; not by
their vngodlinesse abusing his sacraments, wherein
the practise by our church commanded is, that prophane
& vngodly men be repelled from the same. It
is not therfore a matter to be generally laid vnto the
charge of the whole church, that they prophane his
name, &c. I grant indeed that the Pastor may thorow
ignorance, negligence, or some other euill occasion
deliuer the sactament to an vnworthy man, which as
it is a sinne in the receiuer, so may it be as great a sinne
in the deliuerer, yet will this be a weake reason to
conuince the whole church of prostituting the blood
of Christ, denying his priesthood, prophaning his
name, &c. seing that Iudas was partaker of the supper
of the Lord, and yet the whole companie were not
polluted thereby.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Not as their prophet, giuing no obedience to his vvord,
vsing it as a mantell to couer their sinne, rather then as a
rule vvherby to direct their liues, not seeking a true ministerie,

but maintaining a false; of vvhich sort the vvhole
ministererie of the land is, vvhich are permitted to teach
in their publike places, to vvhom they giue eare.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  The true church receiueth Christ as her prophet,
but the church of England doth not, &c.
                  Therefore, &c.
                  The assumption of which argument they proue
thus. First, because the church of England giueth no
obedience to his word. Secondly, because they vse it
as a mantle to couer their sinne: and thirdlie because
they seeke not a true ministerie but maintaine a false.
                  It hath heretofore bene granted, that the best churches
haue had some bad members in them, whereof
some in Athiesme despised the word, & others in hipocrisie
made it a cloake to couer their vngodlinesse,
wherein the church of England goeth not scotfree;
but for the wickednes of some to condeme the whole
were verie hard; and so sharpely to censure all, were
intollerable. Yet these men do it, when they affirme
that no obedience is giuen to the word: as if all from
the highest to the lowest were infidels and pagans,
without God, without the knowledge of his word,
without conscience in any thing, without the feare of
God. This is the meeknesse of an arrogant spirit. The
bull sent by Pope Pius the fift to cursse her Maieiestie
& the land, was not vnlike vnto it; the calumniation
is the same in both, and therefore master Iewell
hath framed an answere meete for both.
                  Now as touching our ministery which is set as the
third argument of our disobedience; the defects therof
are noted to be either in their election, or in their
subiection to a false gouernement. Their election and
ordination (say they) are not by the Lords holy and free

people. This hath bene answered pag. 45. Also they are
made in nubibus (say they) but if these factioners had
not made their owne ministers in tenebris, they might
with lesse impudencie haue blamed the making of
ours.Confer. with Spering. Besides they say, that at her maiesties entrance
vnto the crowne our ministers were set ouer the people
without an outvvard calling. Wherein I will not oppose
the ministerie of Luther and Caluin, whose ministerie
they cannot deny to be warrantable, pag. 53.
of their booke, and yet they had not a better calling
then our men had; but I dare auouch the calling of
our men vnto the ministerie at the entring in of her
maiestie vnto the crowne, to be the selfe same that
euen our aduersaries haue warranted, pag. 59. of the
aforesaid treatise, viz. the magistrate did send them
to instruct the vnbeleeuers: but (say they) they vvere
no ministers vnto them. Then let them tell vs what
other ministerie this might be, and what warrant
they haue for it in the word, or else they giue vs iust
cause to complaine that they are filled with conceites.
                  Now the gouernement vnder the which they execute
their ministerie is such,Instit. lib. 4. sect. 4. that master Caluin acknowledgeth
the antiquitie thereof to be great, and
saith that it was in vse before the time of Papacie,
and the vse thereof to be good, viz. ad disciplinae conseruationem,
for the vpholding of discipline, and for
the auoyding of confusion.Conf. with Sper. pag. 10. But master Barrow saith,
that the Queene and Parliament do vvickedly in giuing
this authoritie vnto the Bishops, vvhich they haue
committed vnto them: the same is published by his
owne procurement vnto the view of all men, who
reading it, and considering of it, may see the dealings
of master Barrow, I say no more. But to make
an end with this Argument, notwithstanding all
the exceptions afore said, the Church of England

acknowledgeth Christ as their Prophet, and for conscience
sake doth reuerence gods word taught by the
ministerie thereof, from the which who so turneth away
his eare, euen his prayers are abhominable, Pro.
28. 9. And also the sacraments deliuered by them,
considering that God hath ioyned them as seales vnto
his word; whereof hath bene spoken, pag. 27.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Their people are not knit togither as members ech of
other in one congregation, but both roue, and goe, assemble
& depart at their pleasure when they will, vvhether they
vvill, and as they vvil themselues, as also liue in continual
disorder.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  The true church is ioyned togither as members
of one bodie, but the church of England is not,
but doth roue and go, &c. Therefore, &c.
                  In the proposition I finde these absurdlties, first
that the visible church is tyed to be all of one assemblie
or congregation, in which respect the diuision of
our church into seuerall parishes, is an eye-sore vnto
them. Secondly, that the inordinate proceedings of
some in the church, should proue a nullitie of the
church; as if the losse or vnsoundnesse of a member
could take away the esse from the bodie. Thirdly, that
the spiritual vnion of the mēber in the whole church
is so required in euerie seuerall assemblie, as if it were
as great a sin for a man to depart from one assemblie
vnto another, as to dismember himselfe altogither
from the whole bodie, which is the church. Al which
are so grosse, that a censurer doth better become
them, then a confuter.
                  As for our church the disorders therein are too many,
yet were they exceeding and intollerable if they
were so generall, as this accuser thereof hath auouched,

viz. amongst all men, at all times and in all
their actions: but an Orator can doe much in perswading,
and a slanderer will do more in abusing.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Their parishes are not ordered & gouerned by such officers
as Christ hath appointed to his church, haue no true
pastors, teachers, elders, deacons, releeuers, but in stead of
these they remaine most seruilely subiect to the Antichristian
gouernement of their Popishe Archbishops, Bishops,
Chancellors, Archdeacons, Deacons, Commissaries, Doctors,
proctors, aduocats, notaries, registers, pursuiuants,
cursitors, summoners, &c. and from the Apostolicall seat
of the Bishops, they receaue an Antichristian and a false
ministery, as their parsons, vicars, curats, hirelings, lecturers,
mercenary preachers, &c. vvhich together vvith
this people stande bounde and subiect to these bishops, and
their popish courtes, of high commission, of faculties, of
arches, of prerogatiue, of delegates, of their commissaries,
&c. Therefore &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The argument is this.
                  The true church is ordered by such officers and
and lawes, as Christ in his last wil and testament hath
thereunto ordained. But the church of England is not
ordered thus, Therefore &c.
                  The first argument hath beene infringed pag. 25.
where it was proued that outwarde discipline is not
the life of the church, also pag. 26. & 70. where it was
shewed that doctors & widdows were not necessarie
in euery congregation. Wherunto I adde this, that although
a gouernement by elders, &c. was established
in some churches in the Apostles times, yet as pag.
62. hath beene said, it remaineth as yet vnproued,
that this gouernement is to remaine vnchangeable in
all ages: they tell vs that Christ was as faithfull in his
house as Moses was, I grant it, yea and more faithfull.

Therfore (say they) he hath set downe an outward gouernement
as well as Moses did. This also will I grant
thē, yet remaineth a third matter, viz. that the Brownistes
cast their heades together againe, and describe
this gouernement better then as yet they haue done,
and proue out of Gods word not onely what it is, but
that it is necessarily to be had in al ages alike, yea and
that the want of it doth conuince a people to be no
true church vnto God. All which being once performed,
their proposition shall be granted.
                  The second part of this argument is confirmed by
these foure circumstances that wee haue no true pastors,
whereof hath bene spoken very oft.
                  Secondly, that the gouernement by Archbishops
&c. is antichristian. A matter answered pag. 110. but
in affirming our gouernement to be in the power of
proctors, aduocates, notaries, registers, pursuiuants,
summoners, &c. whom these euill tongued men, doe
know to haue no authority in hearing of causes & giuing
sentence, bewraieth the corruptiō of their harts.
                  Thirdly, that our ministery is antichristian a matter
handled, pag. 125. the scurrilitie in calling them hirelings,
mercenary preachers, &c. deserueth no answer;
the names of parson, vicar, &c. doth not make a difference
in the ministery, but in their maintenance.
                  Fourthly, we are subiect to the popish courtes, as
high commission &c. wherunto I answer that al these
courts haue their authority from her maiesty, though
some of thē more directly then the other. In consideration
wherof, to call the lest antichristian is arrogant,
but to ioine thē all in one sentence, & to disswade her
maiesties subiects frō yeelding obedience vnto any of
thē, it will be found an act of no good subiect: yet for
mine owne parte I purpose not to giue iudgement in
the matter, I leaue it to such as are acquainted with
the law, onely I will propound the case, which is this.
                  
                     
The high court of Parlement hath agreed that the
queene, her hignes & successors, kings & queenes of
this realme, shall haue full power by letters pattents
vnder the great seale, to name and authorise when, as
often, and for so long time as her highnes, her heires
or successors shall thinke meete such person or persons
as she or they shal thinke meet to execute vnder
her, &c. all manner iurisdictions, priuileges, and preheminences
in any wise concerning any spirituall iurisdiction
within England and Ireland, &c. 1. Eliz. 1.
                  Now her maiestie by the authoritie aforesaid
hath graunted her letters pattentes vnder the great
seale for the two courts of high commission and delegates.
And by the said authority first from the Parlement,
and then from her maiestie these two courtes
doe stande, and not by any other right or authoritie
whatsoeuer: yet these two courts of high commission
and of delegates are here tearmed popishe and antichristian
courts, and the people are condemned to be
antichristian, which yeelde obedience vnto them.
This therefore is the case.
                  Whether it toucheth her maiesty or not, that libels
railing vpon, and calling her highnes authority
(which is warranted by her broad seale) popish, antichristian,
&c.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  These assemblies are not ruled by the old and new testament,
but by the canons, iniunctions and decrees of those
antichristian and popish courts: therefore &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  The true church is ruled by the old and new testament,
but the church of Englande is not &c. Therefore
&c.
                  If Christ hath in his last will set down a perfect gouernment
for his church (as they say he hath) there is

little vse of the olde Testament for direction of discipline
vnder the Gospell. But this Argument being in
effect the same with the former, needeth no other answere
then it had.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  These people stand not in & for their Christian libertie,
but all of them remaine in bondage to these Aegyptian
and Babylonishe yoakes, yeelding obedience vnto these
courts, and their canons. Therefore, &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  All and euerie of the true Church stand in and for
their christian libertie, to practise whatsoeuer God
hath commanded them, &c. But in the church of
England they stande not for their christian libertie,
Therefore, &c.
               
               
                  Ansvvere.
                  We haue seene pag. 49. & 50. that the priuate man
doth passe the bondes of his calling in presuming to
deale with publike reformation. Againe, it was sayde
pag. 45. that in the visible church it doth not alwaies
fall out, that euerie member hath that freedom which
is requisite in the performance of their christian dueties,
of his calling. The proposition therefore is false.
As for the assumption in differing nothing from the
three former, it doth commend the greate facilitie of
the author, who in resoning in so smal varietie of matter
is able to frame so greate a change of argumentes
which yet being considered of, doe appeare all one in
effect.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  These assemblies haue not the povver vvhich Christ
hath giuen vnto his church vnto the vvorlds end, & al the
povvers of earth and hell cannot take from them, viz. to
binde and loose, and to reforme things that are amisse, but
are driuen to the Commissarie courtes, Therefore, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Ansvvere.
                  The Argument is this.
                  The true church hath power to execute the censures
of the church, but the church of Englande hath
not, Therefore &c.
                  The proposition faileth, for the true church is
sometimes without outward gouernement, whereof
read pag. 25. and so consequently without the power
which this man speaketh off, for I know he will not
restraine this power of binding and loosing though
he might, vnto the ministerie of the word, whereof
notwithstanding Christ speaketh, Ioh. 20. 23. saying
Whose sinnes soeuer ye remit, they are remitted, and whose
sinnes ye retaine they are retained.
                  
                  As for the assumption it is most vntrue; for we
haue not onely the power of Gods word, which he
hath giuen vnto his ministerie to bind and to loose
therby, but also the censures of the church in respect
of outward gouernement. I grant that euerie seuerall
congregation hath not this power: and I dare affirme
that in no age it can be proued that euery seuerall
congregation had this authoritie, but euen in
those churches which had an Eldership, the same was
not in euery assemblie, but diuerse congregations
were ordered by one senyorie, therefore to say that
because euerie priuate congregation hath not this
power, therefore it is not at all in the church, is a childish
kind of reasoning.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  These assemblies cast out sathan by the power of sathan,
namely, by these Imps of Antichrist the Bishops, commissaries
and priests: Therfore they are not, and for all their
reasons seuerall and ioyned, cannot be held in any Christian
iudgement the true church of Christ.
               
               
                  Answere.
                  In this last Argument is granted vnto vs that which

before was denied, viz. that our church hath power
of casting out; but it faileth in the manner; for (if they
say true) this power is not from Christ, but from the
imps of Antichrist, &c. vnto which accusation I answere:
the end wherefore men are cast out from amongst
vs by the doctrine of our church should be,
that the offender by being depriued of the seales of
the couenant, might be brought vnto repentance.
Now for the ordering hereof, the people are not in
the weightie matters of the church to haue their
voice, pag. 47. &c.
                  And a presbyterie in euery congregation cannot be
had, pag. 
                        •
                     8. therfore neither election, ordination, excommunication
nor other censures of the Church are
to be committed to euerie particular congregation.
As for this vnchristian dealing in condemning for
Antichristian whatsoeuer is not according to their
humour, it hath bene often answered. Some defectes
there are in our gouernment, we challenge no perfection;
some corruption there is oftentimes in such as
haue the ordering of it, I defend not all. But in this I
would be resolued, if wee by the power of Satan cast
out Satan, by what power do they cast out Satan, that
are themselues by your children committed to Satan?
For the most corrupt excommunicatiō in our church
shuld be wronged, if it should be compared with the
excommunications that come from thē, who by their
fellowes were before excommunicated in their persons.
Nay, they are to bee iustified in comparison of
the best proceedings that haue beene amongst these
rash censurers.
               
               
                  Brownist.
                  Infinite vvere the reasons which from these seuerall
heads, as likevise from these particular transgressions and
defaults might be dravven: but the best argument to comfort
and cut vp this trumperie at once, is according to the

commandements of God, to preserue our bodies and soules
free from these abhominations, by a speedie separation &
wvithdravving our selues from amongest them, and to
confute their last and onely argument vvhereby they vpholde
their ruinous kingdome, namelie, their penall lavve,
by Christian patience, and an vpright and godly life.
                  The conclusion is, that much more might bee sayde
against our Church: and I beleeue it if the matter had
not failed, for the author was willing vnto it, as may
appere by his making many arguments of that which
with as great credit might haue bene knit vp in one:
and also by his bitternesse from the first to the last.
Well, his modestie is great in that he staieth here, and
his dealing is as commendable in arming himself with
patience against the penall law, which he calleth our
onely argument. But what is the reason that hee so
speaketh? It should seeme, it is because hee had sent
these foresayd arguments to some learned men, who
would not vouchsafe to ansvvere them; but his challenging
of the learned is ridiculous, they are ashamed
to deale with so sottish a schisme as this is. In deede
the ciuill lawe is the fittest argument to be vsed with
these vnreasonable men. Yet other argumentes are
vsed both against the treatise of their Church, and against
their other follies, if they wil perseuer, lest their
disciples do condemne them for seducers, I wish them
to laie aside their former bitternes, & to deal strictlie
with the matter in question. Many that are far inferiour
to those who haue ben challenged, will be found
able (I doubt not) to ouerthrow their buildings, and
to proue them deceitfull workmen.
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   