
      
         
            
            
            A VVATCH-MAN FOR THE PEST. TEACHING The true Rules of Preſervation from the Peſtilent Contagion, at this time fearefully over-flowing this famous Cittie of LONDON.
            
               COLLECTED Out of the beſt Authors, mixed with auncient experience, and moulded into a New and moſt plaine Method; BY STEVEN BRADVVELL of London, Phyſition. 1625.
            
               LONDON Printed by Iohn Dawſon for George Vincent, and are to be ſold at Pauls-gate at the ſigne of the Croſſe-keyes. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Reader.
            
               HIPPOCRATES ſaith,Li. de Probitate Medici boni, ad tempus appoſiti ſunt, ad occaſionem eripiendum accōmodati. 
               That good Phyſitians doe applie themſelues to the preſent Time, and to take hold of the Occaſion. The preſent Time (good Reader) is Woefull, & the Occaſion, Dangerous: I know it was not his meaning that we ſhould onely grieue for the firſt, and flee from the latter; but to lend our aſſiſtance to the neceſſitie of the Times calamitie. I haue but little water to draw, yet would I gladly bring my bucket-full to the quenching of this contagious flame; and if it be but kindly regarded; I am friendly rewarded: for I profeſſe, not affectation, but true affection; not a hope of prayſe, but a heart of pittie, draws me (or rather driues me) to offer my counſell in this caſe. LONDON is my Mother; in her wombe had I both Birth and Breeding. What Sonne can ſee his Mother woefully afflicted, dangerouſly ſicke, and deſperately forſaken; but he muſt needs weepe for her teares, labour her recovery, and lend a hand (at leaſt) to hold her vp? I may not take vpon me to cure the Sicke, becauſe I meddle not with the Sickneſſe (for to practiſe on

the Plague now, would proue a plague to my Practiſe hereafter) but I muſt labour to preſerue the ſound; becauſe by profeſſion I am a Phyſition. Therefore I call this Booke, A Watch-man for the Pest, becauſe it doth onely (as if it were a Warder) ſtand at the dore without, and deliver things neceſſary for preſervation to thoſe within; but neither enters the infected houſe, nor meddles with the Cure of the Contagious. I expect from diverſe conceits diverſe Cenſures of this Booke. It is too long, too ſhort, too ſolid, too idle, too full, too ſlender; and I know not what. Yet I hope the judicious will vouchſafe it the reading; and the wiſe, the obſerving: as for the reſt, I will neither favour the Frivolous, feare the Envious, nor flatter the Curious. I know though Hercules labour his heart out, he ſhall not be able to appeaſe a Iuno, nor pleaſe an Euryſtheus. Therefore if I be not reliſhed, I ſhall thinke the mouth is out of taſte, ſince there is ſcarce a word, but I can proue his worth from good Authoritie. If I be gratefull to thy palate (good Reader) I will not be vngratefull to thy perſon; But if ever thou wilt vſe me, thou ſhalt finde me
            
               From my Study in Mugwell-ſtreet. 
                     Iuly 18. 1625.
               
               
                  Ready to my power to do thee any pleaſure, STEPHEN BRADVVELL.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A VVATCH-MAN FOR THE PEST.
            
               TVLLY (whoſe Method was as pleaſing as his Matter) ſets this downe as a ſavoury Maxime in Method;Proëmium. 
               Omnis quae à ratione ſuſcipitur de aliqua re inſtitutio, debet à Definitione proficiſci, vt intelligatur quid ſit id de quo diſputatur. l. 1. de Officijs. To follow him therefore, though (but as Aſcanius followed his Father Aeneas) non paſſibus aequis; Him, I ſay, whom hardly any hath happened to goe along with foote by foote in fluent ſweetneſſe: I will begin this Diſcourſe with the Definition of the Pest; And while I lay open the ſeverall points of the Definition, I will diſcover the Cauſes, the Kinde and Qualities, and the Signes and Symptomes of it. And withall (in their ſeverall places) I will lay downe the Rules of Preſervation, with good Medicines; whereby the further ſpreading of the peſtilent Infection may (by Gods bleſſing) be prevented.
            
               
               ¶ The Definition.
               
                  
                     The Name.The Plague, is a popular Diſeaſe: ſent immediatly from God;The Cauſes. wrought by the Conſtellations of the Heavens, the Corruption of the Aire, and the Diſorder of Mans Diet: At the firſt ſtriking to the Heart,The Qualities. is Venemous, Deadly, and Infectious: And for the moſt part accompanied with a Feavor;The Symptoms and Signes. As alſo with Spots called Gods-Tokens, or with a Blayne, or Botch, or Carbuncle.
               
               
                  The Name.This word Plague; in Latine Peſtis; in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : ſignifieth a deadly fretting. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   being the ſame with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , à 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quod efficiat defectum hominum; or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Pernicies, ſeu exitium. Hippocrates giues it a ſtile of diſtinction, calling it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Morbus communis: a common or Popular Diſeaſe. That it is a Diſeaſe, needeth no proofe at all, ſince it manifeſtly affecteth the body contrary to nature, and hurteth the actions thereof. That it is Popular is alſo apparent, in this, that when it once entreth into a Countrey, Cittie, or Towne; it over-runneth the ſame like a torrent, and few eſcape at leaſt a ſcratching with it, if they be not deeply bitten by it: yea more are ſtricken and ſlaine by

it, many times (eſpecially in the place where it hath gotten full ſtrength) then of all kindes of diſeaſes elſe what-ſoever. And ſo much for his Title.
               
               
                  Now, That It is immediately ſent from God,
                     The firſt and principall cauſe is God. it is evident by many proofes of holy Scripture. As Deut. 28.21. and in the ſame Chapter at the 22. verſe, he ſaith; The Lord ſhall ſmite thee with a Feavor, and with a Conſumption, with an Inflamation, and with an extreame burning. In which words are expreſſed the painfull Symptoms of the Plague: viz. a Feavor, (which I ſhall proue hereafter) a Conſumption (which being vnderſtood of Calor naturalis, the heat and life of nature, is apparent) an Inflamation, by which the ſwelling called the Botch is ſignified; and by an extreame Burning, the deadly Carbuncle is liuely deſcribed. If we deſire examples; the Botch is plainly ſpecified in the plague of Pharaoh and his ſervants; Exod. 9. Chap. 10. and 11. verſes, and in the Sickneſſe of Hezekiah, Iſaiah 38.21.
                  Seeing then the All-mightie God of Heaven and Earth in wrath & juſtice ſendeth this Plague vpon vs,The way of Cure. let vs know that as the Triacle for our bodies is conſected of the fleſh of earthly Serpents: ſo the Triale for our ſoules muſt be made of the blood of that braſen Serpent, which was lifted vpon the Croſſe for our ſinnes. Let every man be to his owne ſoule and familie an Aaron to take with ſpeed his Cenſor of Repentance; fill it with fire from the Altar (of the exceeding great and precious promiſes of God in Chriſt. 2 Pet. 1.4.) and put the Incenſe of faithfull Prayer thereon; and runne quickly and make an atonement: for there is wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is begun.
               
               
                  Somtimes the Conſtellations of the Heavens are the ſecond cauſe by which God worketh and bringeth theſe Iudgements on men. For Aſtrologers are of opinion,The influence of the Starres, the ſecond cauſe. that if Saturn and Mars haue dominion (eſpecially vnder Aries, Sagittarius, and Capricornus) the Peſtilence is ſhortly to be expected. Or if thoſe two (the moſt maleuolent) be in oppoſition to the gentle Planet Iupiter; the effect of that oppoſition is the Plague. As the Poet ſingeth:

                        
                        Coelitus imbuitur tabo difflatilis aura,
                        Mars quando obij
                              •
                           itur Falcitenenſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Iovi.
                     
                  
                  I know there be many learned men that thinke the ſtarres becauſe they are good and pure creatures, can bring forth no evill, nor impure effects: And amongſt theſe Valeriola (in Append. ad loc. com. cap. 2.) thinks he hath ſo abſolutely ſatisfied the point, that no obiection may ever be made more: yet I am of Mercurialis his opinion, that though of themſelues primarily they doe no evill; yet accidentally, they may and doe.
                  For the Sunne of it ſelfe being the pureſt of them all, by drawing the vapours out of dunghills and other corrupt things, cauſeth a noyſome ſtench by accident. But I intend not this Treatiſe for diſputation.
                  
                     The cure of this Cauſe, is the ſame with the former.If the Starres be peſtilently bent againſt vs; neither Arts, nor Armes; perfumes, nor prayers, can prevaile with them, who haue neither pittie nor ſenſe, nor power to alter their appointed motion. But He that commandeth their courſe, and altereth them at his pleaſure; He that made the Sunne and Moone ſtand ſtill for Ioſuah: yea, drew the Sunne backe ten degrees for Hezekiah, and cauſed the Starres to fight in their courſes againſt Siſera. He is able both to hinder and heale all Infections can ariſe from their Influences. The cure of this cauſe (therefore) is the ſame with the former.
               
               
                  
                     The Corruption of the Aire, the third cauſe.The third cauſe of the Peſtilence, is; The corruption of the Aire. Which corruption ariſeth as well from ſublinarie accidents, as from the Influences of the Starres. For noyſome vapours ariſing from filthy ſincks, ſtincking ſewers, channells, gutters, privies, ſluttiſh corners, dunghils, and vncaſt ditches; as alſo the miſts and fogs that commonly ariſe out of fens, moores, mines, and ſtanding lakes; doe greatly corrupt the Aire: and in like manner the lying of dead rotting carrions in channels, ditches, and dunghills; cauſe a contagious Aire. As the Poet affirmeth:
                  Corpora foeda iacent, vitiantur odoribus aurae.
                  
                     And even without theſe vapours,The Aire is corrupted by the windes and weather. the Aire ſometimes is corrupted by the vnſeaſonableneſſe of the weather, Quum tempeſtiva intempeſtivè redduntur, as ſayth Hippocrates: when the weather is vnſeaſonable for the ſeaſon of the yeare; being hot when it ſhould be cold; moyſt when it ſhould be drie; and contrarily. Theſe prepoſterous orders, or rather diſorders in the conſtitution of the Aire, render it vnholeſome, and infectious. And this is cauſed chiefly by the Aſpects of the Planets, and many times alſo by vnholeſome Windes; as eſpecially the South winde, who (being of temperature moyſt and warme) fills the Aire with ſuch a corrupt qualitie, as is ſoone turned into putrefaction, and many times doth eaſily tranſport a contagion from one coaſt to another.
                  Now for the Temperature of the Aire,
                     What Conſtitutiō of the Aire is moſt Contagious. the whole ſtreame of opinions runneth vpon hot and moyſt, as the fitteſt matter for infection, becauſe moſt apt to putrefaction. So Hippocrates (in the ſecond of his Epidem.) ſaith, that in Cranon a Cittie of Theſſalie, there aroſe putrid Vlcers, Puſtuls, and Carbuncles; through the hot and moyſt conſtitution of the Aire. And the ſame he vrgeth againe in the third Booke of the ſame Treatiſe. And Galen in 1 de Temperam. cap. 4. affirmeth, that the hot and moyſt conſtitution of the aire doth moſt of all breed peſtilent Diſeaſes. And from theſe a multitude of later Writers haue learned to ſpeak the ſame thing. But for all this we know that the hot and dry weather alſo may cauſe a peſtilent Aire. And ſo ſaith Avenzoar in his third booke, third tract. and 1. chap. And Titus Livius in li. primo, decad. 4. recordeth that Rome was once infected with the Plague by a hot and drie diſtemper of the Aire. And wee cannot forget what a hot & dry parching Summer we had this laſt yeare; moſt fit to be the vnfortunate forerunner of this yeares peſtilence: which now being ſeconded with ſuch abundance of moyſt weather all this Spring and Summer hitherto; we may well doubt that a deluge of deſtruction is comming vpon vs.
                  Hence we may ſee the miſery of man,The neceſſitie of the Aire. that (be the Aire
                     
never ſo corrupt) he muſt draw it in with his breath continually, for without it we cannot liue a moment: for as meate and drinke are the nouriſhments of our bodies, ſo is the Aire the nouriſhment of our Spirits: As therefore by corrupt meats our bodies are corrupted and diſeaſed; ſo by corrupt Aire our Spirits are eaſily infected, and ſoone extinguiſhed. Therefore we haue great cauſe to take heed that the Aire we draw be pure and wholeſome.
                  
                     The Cure of this Cauſe.And this may be effected two wayes: either by flying into a good, or by purifying the euill Aire.
                  
                  
                     Flight.The ſureſt way to ſafetie is to flie from the impure into a pure Aire. Thoſe therefore (that haue meanes, and no ſpeciall Calling to hinder them) doe well to take hold of this counſell. Which 1. Nature teacheth in giving Man two legs, as well as two armes, that if his enemy be too fierce for reſiſtance, he may eſcape by running. Now Nature hath no worſe enemy then Death; nor Death a better 
                        〈◊〉
                      then the Plague. Secondly, the holy Scripture teacheth it. 
                        〈…〉
                      verſe. Come my people enter into thy ſecret place, ſhut thy dores about thee, hide thy ſelfe as it were for a ſeaſon, vntill the indignation be over paſt. So Pro. 22.3. The prudent man foreſeeth the plague, and hideth himſelfe. And David was this Prudent man, for (1 Chron. 2
                        •
                     . laſt) he durſt not goe to the Tabernacle to offer at Gibeon, becauſe he feared the ſword of the Angell. And thirdly, Phyſicke adviſeth it. For Hippocrates, the Prince of Phyſitions (in his Booke de Natura humana) counſelleth it in theſe words; Providendum eſt vt quàm pauciſſimus Aeris influxus corpus ingrediatur, et vt ille ipſe quàm peregriniſſimus exiſtat: Regionum etiam locos, in quibus morbus conſiſtit, quantùm eius fieri poteſt permutare oportet. By which he intendeth that a man muſt be carefull to let into his body as little Aire as can be poſſibly; and that that Aire which he doth entertaine, be a ſtranger to the Infected. And this be interpreteth in the clauſe following, where he ſaith, He muſt (as farre as he may) change the place of the Region in which the Sickneſſe raigneth, for ſome other that is free from it. And this is that which is

meant by Citò, Longè, and Tardè. Which Iordanus calleth an Antidote made of three Adverbs: and thus verſifieth vpon them.
                  
                     Haec tria tabificam pellunt Adverbia Peſtem:
                     Mòx, longè, Tardè; cede, recede, redi.
                  
                  I will be bold a little to Comment vpon theſe words, in this wiſe.
                  Fly with ſpeed from the infected place,Citò Cede. leſt by a little lingering, that infection (which you would leaue behinde you) goe along with you. And nothing can be more dangerous then for one to travaile with his humors already corrupted by an infected Aire. For with the motion of his body, thoſe humors are ſtirred, diſturbed, and heat; which cauſeth them to putrefie preſently: by which putrefaction of the humors, the vitall Spirits are inſtantly enflamed and infected, and life it ſelfe ſoone extinguiſhed. Beſides that, in their going forth, before they are gotten beyond the limits of the evill aire; in the labouring of their body, they fetch their breath oftener and deeper then at other times; whereby they draw in a greater quantitie of the corrupt Aire to miniſter more matter to the putrefaction begun. Therefore flie quickly, and in flying goe ſoftly, till you be quite out of the contagious Aire.
                  
                  And flie not a little way, but many miles of,Longè recede. whither there is no probabilitie of common trading, or recourſe of people from the place forſaken: and where there are high hills betwixt you and the infected coaſt; which may breake of thoſe blaſts of wind that would at ſomtimes blow that corrupted Aire from thence vpon you. Moreover, if you be able, chooſe your habitation well and health-fully ſcituated.
                  A houſe is well ſcituated that ſtands on high ground,Choice of habitation. farre from fennes, moores, mariſhes, and mines: having the dores and windows opening to the North and Eaſt; not to the West, for that is not wholſome; nor (by any meanes)

to the South, for that being hot and moyſt, is moſt ſubiect to contagion in ſickly times. Let the houſe be large, and the roomes many and ſpacious.How to let in freſh Aire. In hot weather, open thoſe windows that are toward the North; in cold, thoſe that are to the Eaſt. If there be dores or windows toward the other coaſts, keepe them for the moſt part very cloſe ſhut. In the night, leaue no window open at all. If the weather be moyſt, open your windows toward the good coaſts two houres after Sunne-riſing, and let them not ſtand open aboue two houres ſpace: and ſo againe, for two houres before Sunneſet.
                  
                     Tardè redi.Laſtly, be not haſty to returne, ſo ſoone as you heare that the heat of the Contagion is abated; but keepe away as long as any ſigne of the Sickneſſe remaineth; taking this for a ſure rule, That it is leſſe danger to tarry ſtill in the infected Aire, then to come into it from that which is pure and wholeſome: for a freſh commer is apteſt to catch the leaſt contagion, and the very reliques of infection are ſufficient to kill him. Learne therefore of the Wolues of Thracia, who in Winter, when the rivers are covered with ice, will not venter over for their prey (though they be never ſo hungry) till they haue layd their eare cloſe to the ice; then if they heare no noyſe of water vnder it, they know the ice is thicke enough to beare them, and over they goe; otherwiſe not. Let the ſpace of three moneths paſſe vpon the laſt infected perſon in that quarter whither you deſire to reſort: and let the houſe all that time (and all the ſtuffe therein) be throughly well aired, and perfumed before you returne. For the infection will cleaue to the walles and ſtuffe a long time, and will hardly be purged out of them: eſpecially garments and bedding, if they haue beene vſed by the ſicke of the Plague. Woolen cloaths will retaine the infection three or foure yeares, except they be well and throughly aired. Blankets, Coverlets, and Ruggs muſt haue much airing before they may be truſted. Furres alſo retaine it long, and it is hardly gotten out of them; as appeareth by a ſtory which Fracaſtorius telleth of a Furred Govvne that was the

death of fiue and twentie men in Verona, in the yeare 1511. who one after the other wore it, thinking they had ſtill aired it ſufficiently. Featherbeds will remaine ſeaven yeares infected, if Alexander Benedictus may be beleeved; and theſe are beſt to be purged by opening the Tikes, and ſpreading the feathers abroad very thin, perfuming them very often, and ever as they are airing, let them be turned with ſtaues or ſtickes; and let this be ſo done for many dayes together. As for Mattriſes, Mats, and ſuch like, it is beſt that they be burnt, for that is the ſureſt way to free them from infection.
                  But now, Some men cannot, and ſome muſt not flie.Who muſt not flee. Some through povertie, and want of friends in the Countrey; or by reaſon of the dependance of their living vpon the Towne infected, cannot leaue it. Others whoſe calling and learning hath ſet them apart for the common good, muſt not goe. As Maieſtrates and other officers who are called to ſee the peace and good orders kept. Miniſters that haue paſtorall Charges, and are commanded of GOD to preach in ſeaſon and out of ſeaſon, and to adminiſter the Sacramēts to thoſe which are able to repaire to the church. Alſo Phyſitians, Chyrurgians, Apothecaries, Midwifes, Keepers, and Searchers, whoſe callings are to be helpfull to the ſicke and weake (though not of the Plague, yet of other griefes) they ought (at leaſt a convenient number of them, for the number of people remaining) to tarry and follow thoſe Chriſtian employments which they haue vndertaken, not for their owne benefit only, but for the Commonwealth chiefly.
                  Such therefore as muſt tarry, let them obſerue theſe rules following.
                  Firſt, flie from company,How thoſe that tarrie are to order themſelues. and be contented to liue as ſolitarily as your calling and buiſineſſe will giue leaue. Let thoſe that come to ſpeake with you, come no nearer you then they muſt needs; and if you ſtand to talke with another, be diſtant from him the ſpace of two yards. But if you ſuſpect the party to haue the infection, let the ſpace of foure yards at the leaſt part you. Let the ſound man be carefull

alſo to giue the other the winde; that is, ſo to ſtand that the winde may blow from the ſound to the ſuſpected, and not contrarily: and let the ſound man turne away his face from him, holding and champing alſo ſome fit thing in his mouth, and ſmelling to ſome odour all the while he is in diſcourſe with the other, or neare vnto him: (which things in particular I will preſcribe hereafter.) Shunne all places that are moyſt and wet. In Summer keepe you temperate, but alwayes drie: in Winter keepe warme, and as much as you can, neare the fire. At all times avoyd all cloſe alleys and lanes (eſpecially to lodge in them) or neare common ſewers, ditches, or ſuch like noyſome places. And keepe out of crowds and aſſemblies of people as much as you may. Dwell not in an houſe that is peſtred with much company in little roome. It is good alſo for thoſe that are able, to ſhift beds, and chambers often, airing them every day.
                  When the Aire is cloudy, thicke, moyſt or miſty, goe not forth but vpon neceſſitie; and in ſuch weather, keepe the dores and windows ſhut. Walke not abroad in the morning (if you can chooſe) till two houres after Sunne riſing; nor at all after Sunne-ſet, vnleſſe vrgent occaſion enforce. And in the heat of the Sunne in Summer (eſpecially about noone) tarry not abroad; neither ſit, ſtand, nor walke in the heat of the ſame.For then is the braine more full of excrementitious humors & the whole bodie aboundeth more with moyſture; therfore more apt to entertaine putrefaction. Purging of the impure Aire. In the full of the Moone, goe not forth in the night, and keepe your head ſomthing warmer at that time then at other times. Keepe moderation betweene heate and cold in your lodging and bedding. Laſt of all, whatſoever you receiue from the hands of another (eſpecially if ſuſpected) touch it not before it haue beene cleanſed, by boyling, or at leaſt by waſhing in warme water; if it may not ſpoyle or deface the thing: otherwiſe, aire and perfume it well. And thus much for flying into a pure Aire.
                  
                  Now we are to purifie the purified Aire. And herein firſt I muſt diſtinguiſh Aire into two kindes, viz. Generall and Speciall. By Aire generall, I meane the whole open Aire of the Region. By Speciall, I intend, either that which is incloſed in

houſes; or that which is immediately next the perſon of every one, for the ſpace of ſome few yards compaſſe round about the Body, whether within doores or without, whereſoever it goeth or abideth.
                  
                  And firſt for the generall Aire of the Region.
                     Purging of the Generall Aire. That is to be purged and rectified, firſt by cleane ſweeping and waſhing of the ſtreets, lanes, courts, allyes and other wayes and paſſages of the Cittie; leaving in them no durtie puddles, dunghills, or dead carrions. Alſo by often caſting out the mudde of the Towne ditches, and other ſtanding waters. Every morning and euening ſweep cleane the ſtreets before every mans doore: Waſh downe the channells to keepe them ſweet. But I like not that ſlabbering of the pavement before the houſe, which I ſee many vſe in moyſt wether; for it increaſeth the dampiſhneſſe of the Aire: excpt it be before the ſtalls of Butchers and Cookes: or except the durt can no other-wiſe be purged away; and then let it be ſwept drie againe, except the Sunne doe ſhine ſo cleare and hot, that it is likely to be ſoone dried thereby.
                  But indeed there is no way of purging the Aire like to the making of Fires in the ſtreets:Fire purgeth the Aire beſt. ſo it be done with good diſcretion; that is, In the evenings; when the weather is moyſt; and not ſoultry hot. We read that Hippocrates freed the Cittie of Cranon (before mentioned) and Athens alſo (as Galen teſtifieth li, 1. de Theriaca ad Piſonem cap. 16.) by making great bonefires, & burning ſweet odours and coſtly oyntments in them. Aëtius alſo (li. 5. cap. 94.) reports the like to haue been done by Acro Agrigentinus, whereby he delivered the greateſt part of Greece from the Peſtilence.
                  Some Phyſicians that they may be ſingular, invent ſtrange wayes by themſelues to purifie the Aire.
                     Strang counſels of Some learned Phyſitions. As Cardan perſwades to burne leather, or any thing that ſmells ſtrong though never ſo ſtinking; But for my part I am of opinion with Rodericu à Caſtro, and Laurentius Ioubertus, that ſtinking ſmells cannot make a wholſome purgation of the Aire. Therefore I leaue his conceite to accompany that of Alexander

Benedictus, who would haue the dogs that are killed, to be ſtrewed in the ſtreets, that the vapours of their putrefying carcaſes, might expell the venom of the putrefied Aire. With which may alſo be exploded Averroës his potion of vrine, which he eſteemes an excellent Antidote: I thinke that which is odious to the noſtrills, by which way aliment is conveyed to the Spirits: And that which is noyſome to the ſtomach, by which nouriſhment is brought to the Body; can be no Cordiall. But for the purging of the Aire, Rodericus à Caſtro hath another way, and that eaſy and cheap (if it be as good.) He affirmeth that it was wont to be much vſed in Spayne in peſtilent times: and that is, to drive a great droue of Oxen or Kine through all the ſtreets every day; that their ſweet wholſome breath may cleanſe the impure Aire. It is true, that the breath of thoſe Cattell are very ſweet and wholſome: But it is to be doubted, that the impure Aire being much more in quantity then their breath, will ſooner infect them, then they purifie it; which if it doe, then ſurely all their fleſh will proue but vnholſome meat, and may infect more bodies after they haue bene at the Butchers; then they haue purified ſtreets while they went before the drovers. But the Spainards eate ſo little Beefe, as they needed the leſſe to feare ſuch poyſoning.
                  
                     The Authors opinion.Now for my opinion what way is beſt to purge the Generall Aire of the Region. I muſt needs ſay that of Hippocrates (before mentioned) is the beſt, but too coſtly to be received of our Cittizens. Therefore I would adviſe that Muſkets and ſuch like peeces might be diſcharged in every ſtreet, lane, and corner of the Cittie every morning, and every euening. This way (in hot weather) doth not enflame ſo much as bonefiers doe by their continued heat, but purifie as much, or rather more. For by the blow, the Aire is firſt forcibly moued, ſhaken, devided and attenuated, and ſo prepared for purification; & then immediatly (by the heat of the fire) purified: and that kinde of fire purgeth it better then others, for (by reaſon of the Sulphur and Sault-peeter)

it is exceeding drying; and very wholſome. And that this opinion is not any conceit of mine owne; let thoſe that will, Read Levinus Lemnius de Occultis Naturae Miraculis, or Crato in Conſilio 275.lib. 2. cap. 10.
                      Or Raymundus Mindererus li. de Pestilentia cap. 20. The Heathens could be at great coſt in contagious times; as appeares by the precious odours and ſweet oyntments that Hippocrates conſumed in the fires for thoſe Citties before mentioned. Why may not Wee be at a leſſer coſt, for the ſafety of a greater Cittie. GOD is nearer to vs, then he was to them; we haue his promiſes to keepe vs in all our wayes; and to proſper our handy workes; they had no ſuch comforts to reſt vpon; Yet they endevoured and obtained: wee obtaine not, onely becauſe we endevour not.
                  And now I come to the Fourth Cauſe of the Peſtilence, which is
               
               
                  The Diſorder of Mans Diet.
                  In the name of Diet are included ſix things,
                     Diet in ſix Poynts. wherein a man ought always to be moderate and regular.
                  
                     1. The Aire, and I mean the Speciall Aire.
                     
                     2. Meate, and Drinck.
                     
                     3. Repletion, and Evacuation.
                     
                     4. Exerciſe, and Reſt.
                     
                     5. Seepe, and Watching.
                     
                     6. Paſſions of the Minde.
                     
                  
                  Theſe are the ſix Strings of Apollos Ʋioll, wherein conſiſteth the whole harmonie of health. If theſe be in tune, the Body is ſound; but if any of theſe, be either too high wreſted, or too much ſlackened (that is, immoderately vſed) then is the Body put out of tune, and made ſubiect to any ſickneſſe. As one ſaith well, who hath thus compoſed thoſe ſix points, in theſe two verſes.
                  
                     Aër, Eſca, Quies, Repletio, Gaudia, Somnus:
                     Haec moderata iuuant, immoderata nocent.
                  
                  
                     Let every man (therefore) be carefull in theſe things, and if his owne ſkill be not ſufficient to teach him what is temperance; let him obſerve theſe rules following.
               
               
                  Firſt for the Aire.
                  
                     The Diſorders of Diet in reſpect of Aire, or ill choyce of habitation; walking, running or riding at vnſeaſonable times,The Diſorders in the Point of Aire. as in fogs, miſts, dewe, rayne &c. And in vnholſome places, ſuch as haue bene reckoned already: as alſo in drawing into the Body too much of ſuch Aire as is Peſtilent and contagious.
                  To cure this point of Diet, we muſt proceede in purging the Aire; and hauing done with the generall, let vs now goe to purifie the Speciall,
                     The Cure of the Speciall Aire in Houſes. and firſt of all that which is incloſed within the Houſe.
                  
                  Let every roome be kept continually very cleane; leaue no ſluttiſh corners; let no water ſtand in any veſſell ſo long as to putrifie, which in a corrupt Aire (eſpecially in hot weather) it will ſoone doe. Cleanſe all your veſſels often; waſh thoſe roomes that are in continuall vſe (both floores and wainſcoting) every morning; and (thoſe which are able, waſh the Windowes, Tables, Cupboards, Stooles, Benches, and all wainſcotings, in ſummer with roſe-water, and vineger: and in winter with the Decoction of Rew, Worme wood, Balme, &c. And after theſe are waſhed, wipe them allwayes drie againe: (for as I ſaid before of ſlabbering the ſtreets; ſo, much more vnholſome is it to leaue the roomes of the houſe wet) & hauing wiped them as drie as you can, aire them alſo preſently with fire. A pan of fire ſet on the floore in the midſt of the roome is the beſt & quickeſt way of aireing it. In the meane time let the windows and doores be ſhut.Obſervation. But obſerue this: Enter not into the roome, (at leaſt to tarry) till it be aired, and the fier taken away: becauſe then the heat and moyſture are buiſily working together, which for the time of working (till the heat haue prevailed) is vnholſome. And if you muſt needs goe in, during that time; make haſt out againe; and ſet the doore wide open while you tarrie; for ſuch vapours kept cloſe, haue ſuddenly depriued ſome of

life, before they haue felt themſelues offended: as Skenckius (in his obſerv. li. 2. De Partibus vitalibus:If you muſt needs be in the 
                           •
                        ome, let the fire be in the chimney. 
                     obſerv. xix.) proveth by diuerſe examples. And I could name ſome alſo of mine owne knowledge, if need were. Moreover while theſe roomes are thus aireing, you may caſt into theſe fiers, in Cold weather; Iuniper, both the wood and the berries; Pitch, Turpentine, Franckencenſe, Storax, Beniamin, Oken-leaues,
                     Airing in Cold weather. 
                     Bay leaues, &c. Alſo at ſuch a ſeaſon, you may ſtrew your windows, ſhelues, & ledges; with Balme, Mints, Lavender, Worme-wood, Rew; and ſuch like warming ſmells. And if the heat of them offend, ſteep them in 
                        Ʋineager ſix houres, and then ſtrew them as before.
                  In hot weather. Take a tile, or a fier-ſhovell heated hot,
                     In Hot weather. 
                     and poure into it an equall quantitie of whitewine vineager and Roſewater wherein a little camphor hath been diſſolued, & with this perfume the roomes. At ſuch a time likewiſe, ſtrew the roomes with Primroſes, Roſe-leaues, Ʋiolets, or ſome ſuch coole or temperate ſmelling hearbs, as the ſeaſon will afford.
                  In temperate weather, Roſemary and Bay-leaues, in Roſewater, heated in a perfuming pot is very ſufficient. Or take Pitch,
                     In temperate weather. 
                     Tarre, Turpentine, Roſin, of each a like quantitie, melt them together on the fier, and to every pound put in a pinte of vineager. Boyle them to the conſumption of the vineager. Burne ſome of this daily at all ſeaſons, and in all weathers. And if you adde to it the wood of Iuniper made into powder: It will bee excellent.
                  If any vault or vnſauory ſincke be ſo neere as to offend any roome of the houſe: Aire that roome moſt, and vſe it leaſt.
                  The other kinde of Speciall Aire is ſayd to be that which is immediatly next to the perſon of every one.
                     Cure of Speciall Aire about the Body.
                  
                  
                     This is to be purged Foure wayes.
                     1. By things held in the mouth.
                     2. By odours held to the noſe.
                     3. By Apparell.
                     4. By Amulets.
                  
                  
                     For the firſt. Of things held in the mouth,
                     Things held in the mouth. ſome be Simple, and ſome Compound.
                  
                  
                     Simple, are Cloues, Citron pills, Roots of Tormentill, Angelica, Zedoarie, and ſuch like.
                  
                  
                     
                        Compound, are ſuch as theſe following.
                     
                        Take of London Triacle halfe an ounce; mix it with the muſcilage of Gumm, Dragagant & Roſe water, and a little ſugar. So make it vp into Rowles or Lozenges, hold one in your mouth; and let it diſſolue therein, all the while you are neare any place or perſon ſuſpected to be infected.
                     You may alſo, hold Mithridate in your mouth, if the heat offend you not.
                     But a peece of a Citron pill alone is beſt of all in ſommer; And in winter, a ſlice of Angelica roote.
                     
                     Likewiſe generally at all ſeaſons Iuniper berres ſteeped all night in whit-wine Ʋineager. Or Cloues steeped in Roſe vineager.
                     
                     And in like manner may you ſteep ſlices of the Roots of Angelica, Enulacampane, Zedoarie, Tormentill &c. In Roſewater and vineager; for they are too hot of themſelues.
                     And for thoſe that haue cold ſtomachs, greene Ginger is exceeding good.
                     
                        Odours, Simple.Secondly. Odours that are to be carryed in the hand and held to the noſe, are alſo Simple and Compound.
                     
                     
                        Simple, are Balme, Mints, Rue, Worm-wood, Penniroyall, Myrtles, Lauender, &c.
                     
                     But theſe hot hearbs are not fit for any but cold and flegmaticke complexions to vſe them Simply and alone. And it is a ſtrange thing to ſee how all ſorts of people play the fooles with their owne noſes; all carrying Worm-wood, and thruſting it vp into their noſtrills. Wherein ten doe themſelues iniurie, for one that doth good. For though they perceiue not the danger preſently; yet it muſt needs inflame their braine: which being over heat, will ſend downe ſuch iuices to the heart, as ſhall inflame that alſo, and ſo bring them into a burning Feauor, which is the high way to that Sicknes they moſt deſire to ſhunne. For

the Brayne is the continuall ſpring that cooles the heart; which office if it performe not; the heart will ſoone over heat it ſelfe: how much more will it be over heat then when that which ſhould temper it bringeth diſtemper to it? But people will be ſo ſkilfull, that they thinke they need aske no counſell in theſe matters: but like a flocke of ſheep leap one after another, they neither know whether nor wherefore.
                     It is good therefore to take the iuices of ſuch hearbs as theſe and mix them with Roſe-water and vineager, and ſo carrie a ſponge, or handkercheif dipped therein. And obſerue this.
                     Allwayes mix cold ſmells with hot; and (even for cold conſtitutions alſo.) Let the cold odours be moſt praedominat: for the greateſt danger is in over-heating. For hot things though they purge the Aire, yet they inflame the Bloud and humors. Therefore temper them according to the conſtitution of the body and weather. Let them likewiſe be ſomething Sweet. For vnſauory ſmells doe diſſolue the Spirits, and weaken the faculties. It is a ſure rule, that thoſe things which nature abhoreth, will alwayes hurt her, but neuer help her: except it be to euacuate in ſome caſe of repletion only.
                  
                  
                     Now for Compound Odours.
                        Compound Odours.
                     
                     
                        Take of London Triacle halfe an ounce, Ʋineager an ounce, Roſe-water two ounces. Mixe them together till the Triacle be well diſſolued.
                     
                     Then dip a peece of a Sponge in this liquor; and carry it in ſome little box peirced full of holes, to ſmell through.
                     Or, Take liquid Storax, waſh it well in Wine-vineager and Roſewater, wherein ſome Camphor hath beene diſolued. Then mix with it, of the powder of Cloues, and yellow Sanders, as much as will make it thick like Tarre; carrie it in ſome Sevit or Pomander-box.
                     As for Pomanders; which are the beſt, both for handſome carriage and continuance of ſent. If any will reſort to me, I will fit them at diuers prices.
                     
                     
                        
                        To waſh the face.Furthermore, It is good alſo to waſh the face, mouth, and noſtrills often with ſtrong 
                           Ʋineager, Roſe-water and a little Wine, wherein hath bene steeped (for ſix houres together) ſome thin ſhavings of Zedoarie or Angelica, or Tormentill roots.
                     
                     The poore people may waſh them with Faire water and Ʋineager, and the iuice of Rue.
                     
                     
                        Apparell.Thirdly. Apparell is to be a defence againſt the infectious Aire. Which becommeth ſo, by being well made, and well kept.
                     
                     To the well making of garments in this reſpect, there goe two points; the Stuffe, and the Faſhion. For the Stuffe, all woolen cloth would be avoided, becauſe it retaineth the infection long: Buffe alſo, Shamoys, and ſuch kinds of leather are naught, becauſe they (through their ſpongineſſe) doe draw and keep it much more then other wearings: Feathers likewiſe and Fans; being the moſt needleſſe ornaments, ſhould now be layd aſide, for they are alſo of a nature that retaineth infection long: and ſo are all kinde of Furrs; therefore weare none of theſe if you may chooſe. But if your purſe will ſerue, buy Grograms, Chamlets, &c. Such as may be watred: for the watering of ſtuffes through their gummineſſe, doth beſt exclude the Aire from entring or taking vp any loging in the ſtuffs ſo dreſſed. And let the doublets & hoſe be lined rather with Linnen then Fustian, becauſe the woolineſſe of Fuſtian is of kin to the other allready found fault with-all. As for ſilkes, as Grograms, Taffaties, Sattins, they are alſo very good, but 
                           Ʋeluets, Pluſh, Shag and ſuch like are not ſo good. Let them be alſo fitted with linings according to the weather, that they occaſion not the Body to ſweat through heat, to bee tired with waight, nor to catch cold with thinneſſe. For theſe inconveniences may be occaſions of much harme; But taking of cold is the moſt dangerous of all; for there vpon follow putrid Feauors: and all of them are friends to the Plague. For the Faſhion, avoyd much Quiltings, and stuffing with Bombaſt and Haire, for into ſuch things the infected Aire will eaſily get, and hardly forſake them.
                     
                        Women vſually haue Whale-bone bodies which are as good armour as any other. Let the greateſt care be to guard the vitall parts: But withall there muſt be ſome care of all the body: which to guard the better, it is good to weare long Cloakes of ſuch watered ſtuffes as I haue mentioned; which being outermoſt, excludeth well the outward Aire while one is abroad; and when one is come home, they may be layd by, till they haue beene aired. But for Phyſitians and Chyrurgians, and ſuch as come among the ſicke: it is good for them to haue long Gownes of ſuch ſtuffes; which as ſoone as they come forth of the ſicke Chambers, they may throw off to be aired. And ſo much for the Well-making. Now for the Well keeping of Garments; this is done by keeping them cleane and ſweet. To keepe them cleane, requires varietie and often ſhifting. To keepe them ſweet is required much airing and perfuming. As when you put them on, or lay them by, and that according to the Weather.
                  
                  
                     As in cold Weather.
                     
                     
                        Take Iuniper ſlices, Iuniper berries bruiſed; Roſemarie,
                        Perfumes for Apparell. 
                        Bay-leaues, and Wormwood cut ſmall; and Franckincenſe groſſely powdered.
                     
                     Burne them together on a chafing diſh of coales, and ſo perfume your Cloaths.
                  
                  
                     In hot Weather.
                     
                     
                        Take dried Roſe-leaues ſteeped in Roſe-water, wherein Camphor hath been diſſolved, and adde to it a little vineager.
                     
                     Vpon a hot fire-ſhouell make a fume: and perfume your apparell.
                  
                  
                     In temperate Times.
                     
                     
                        Take Iuniper berries, gum Dragagant, and Franckincenſe, all groſſely powdered; of each a like quantitie. Steepe them in vineager and Roſe-water, ſix houres.
                     
                     Then ſpread the ſame on a hot tile or fire-ſhouell, and perfume your Cloaths therewith.
                  
                  
                     Fourthly, Amulets,
                        Amulets. are things made to hang about the necke, to touch the naked skin next the heart. Theſe are of ſome with a kinde of ſuperſtition eſteemed. But though

                        Carpus the Chirurgian of Bononia perſwaded himſelfe and others, that he was preſerved from the Plague by wearing Arſenicke in a clout vpon the region of the heart; yet many in London haue died of the Plague with thoſe bables about them: and as for Arſenicke and other ſuch poyſonous ſtuffe, I could ſpeake enough againſt them;Dr. Herring.
                         but a learned Dr of Phyſicke hath ſaued me that labour. But for ſome cordiall things; I will for the Readers ſatisfaction giue a taſte of them. They may be of two ſorts, Simple, and Compounded. Simple, as Vnicornes horne, Bezoar ſtone, (which is the beſt of all, if a man can get it) the Hiacinth alſo and Smaragdus, and ſuch like; but how the influence of ſuch ſtones may be conveyed out of their hard bodies to the heart, is hard for me to vnderſtand. The former are more likely; for Galen reports (li. 6. de Simp. Medic. facult.) that he cured a boy of the Falling-ſickneſſe, by hanging a Paeonie roote about his necke. Yet I thinke he could never ſay ſo but that once: Therefore I would wiſh none to put any confidence in ſuch diſputable things. Nevertheleſſe, ſince I haue divided them into Simple and Compounded; I will giue you a Compoſition, which may be vſed in ſtead of an Amulet, and that to good purpoſe.
                     
                        A good Quilt to be vſed in ſtead of an Amulet.
                        
                        Take the leaues of red Roſes dried, two drams, all the Saunders, Lignum, Aloes, Zedoarie roote, Angelica roote, Sage, white Dittanie, Baulme, Citron pills, of each halfe a dram.
                     
                     Make them into powder, and ſew them vp in a peece of red Taffarie or Calico; and make a Quilt thereof. Heat it on a pewter diſh vpon a chaſing diſh of coales; and ſprinckle it with Roſe-vineager: ſo apply it warme to the place, and renew it once in ſix houres.
                     I cannot but let thee know (good Reader) that even now while I was writing vpon this ſubiect, there hath beene a patient with me, who is poyſoned with with a venemous Amulet. Be warned therefore by the harmes of others to take heed of ſuch pernicious things.
                     Thus haue I finiſhed the firſt part of Diet; concerning Aire. The ſecond part followeth.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Which conſiſteth of Meate and Drinke.
                     Meate and Drinke.
                  
                  
                     Diſorder in meate and drinke is chiefly committed either in regard of the Qualitie, or Quantitie of them.
                  In Qualitie, when that meat or drinke which is vſed,Diſorder in their qualitie. is either generally vnwholſome for all men (as venemous Muſhroms; ſtincking or raw meate; muſty, or new, or dead drinkes; theſe breed venom in the humors, and ſo a iuſt occaſion for infection) or els particularly naught for the proper conſtitution of him that eats or drinkes it. As meat of hard digeſtion to a weake ſtomach, (for that denyeth nouriſhment) meate of eaſie concoction to a ſtrong ſtomach, (for that putreſies in the ſtomach, and ſo corrupts the bloud) hot ſpices and inflaming drinkes to a hot conſtitution, &c. theſe breed many diſeaſes in the pureſt aire; and in a contagious, they eaſily make way for the Plague. Therefore we are to be carefull what we eat or drinke.
                  And our Care muſt be two fold; firſt, to refuſe things noyſome; ſecondly, to chooſe things wholſome.
                  
                  
                     In refuſing things noyſome take theſe rules.
                  Beware of piercing and attenuating things;Qualities of meates generally to be refuſed. for they are heating; and by opening the body, they expoſe it to the corruption of the Aire. On the contrary alſo thicke and ſlimie things are ſtopping, breeding crudities and putrefaction; by reaſon of that craſſitude, moyſture, and accidentall heat which is in them. Sweet and fatty things likewiſe are to be avoyded▪ becauſe they eaſily turne to choller, and ſo kindle hot feavors. Very moyſt meates, as wee ſee they are hardly kept ſweet in hot weather, ſo by the heat of the ſtomach, they eaſily turne to putrefaction; eſpecially to hot and chollericke conſtitutions. But of all things thoſe that are both moyſt and hot (eſpecially wherin the moyſt is predominant) are moſt dangerous, becauſe they are as it were the very ſeed of putrefaction. Cold mixed with moyst is not ſo ill, becauſe not ſo apt preſently to putrefie; but whereſoever the moyſt is ſtronger, the blood is made watriſh and weaker; and therefore not ſo nouriſhing as Nature needs it. Alſo meats of hard digeſtion, melancholicke, ſalt, and windie are to

be eſchewed. Beware of all things that are hot and enflaming. Much vſe of very ſharpe things, are very hurtfull. Shunne alſo all things that increaſe much blood, for the body muſt be kept low in contagious times. Alſo all things that are loathſome to the pallat or ſtomach muſt be reiected; for that which nature abhorreth, diſſipateth the Spirits.
                  
                     Particular meats to be forborne.Having thus taught by their Qualitie in generall what meates and drinkes are to be forborne: Now I will more particularly reckon vp ſuch as are moſt commonly known and vſed: being moſt to be avoyded in times of Infection.
                  And firſt for your Bread.
                     Bread. Be carefull that it be not muſtie, nor mouldie: neither eat it hot, nor before it be a day olde. It is beſt for them that can haue Ouens at home, not to ſend their bread to other houſes to be baked: nor to receiue any continually from the hand of common Bakers that ſerue to many ſeverall houſes.
                  
                     Fleſh of beaſts.
                     Very ſalt and long powdered Beefe (though never ſo much watered afterward to get out the ſalt) is not good; yea all that watering and moyſtening makes it worſe. Alſo Bacon, and Porke, eſpecially boyled: the Hare, eſpecially when he is olde. Veniſon both of fallow and red Deere, that liue in a corrupted aire, are vnwholſome: not alone for the reaſon that ſome giue of their liuing alwayes in the open aire; and much running & heating their bodies therein (which makes them apt to be corrupted by the contagion) but alſo in regard of the manner of killing them; which is by hunting them to death: for in that action they poyſon their fleſh very much by tyring their bodies and weakening their ſpirits to the death; and by the infinite working of the paſſion of feare in them: which how apt that is to poyſon any body; I ſhall ſhew in his place.
                  
                     Fowles:
                     Foules that liue in fens or waters, are all naught, as the Gooſe, Ducke, Mallard, Teale, Hearon, &c.
                  
                     Inwards.Meats made of the Inwards of Beaſts, are not good, as Puddings, Tripes, Chitterlings, Kidneys, Livers, Lights, Milts, &c.
                  Of Fiſhes,
                     Fiſh. ſuch as liue in ſtanding Pooles and Ponds, (eſpecially in muddy waters) are very evill; as, Carps, Eeles,

Lampreys, and ſuch like: for they corrupt the humors and breed obſtructions. Salt-fiſh and Sea fiſh, ſharpen the humors. Oyſters, Cockles, Muskles, Peruinckles, are hurtfull. Griſly fiſh (as Mayds, Thornbacke, and ſuch like) are to be avoyded.
                  
                     Egges of Geeſe, Ducks, Pigeons, &c. are to be reiected.Egges.
                  
                  
                     Milke,
                     Milke. (becauſe it is of all meates moſt eaſie of digeſtion) ſoone corrupteth in the ſtomach, and therefore is diſallowed. So is Creame, becauſe it makes groſſe blood. Likewiſe Cheeſe, becauſe it is ſtopping. And alſo Whey, becauſe it is opening, and not nouriſhing.
                  Of Fruits,
                     Fruits. all ſuch as are Worme-eaten, are to be accounted corrupted and naught. All ſweete and luſcious fruits; as Cherries, Plums, greene Figs, ſweete Grapes, Black-berries, &c. Alſo Melons, Pompions, Pomcitrons, &c. Forbeare generally all Summer fruits; becauſe they breed crudities and groſſe humors. Among the reſt alſo Beanes and Peaſe are accounted vnfit meats.
                  
                     Roots,
                     Roots. ſuch as are watriſh, are to be refrained; ſo alſo is Garlicke; (for all it is called, the Poore-mans Triacle) becauſe it openeth and heateth too much; therefore it is ſeldome fit in theſe times.
                  
                     Hearbs that are hot are not to be vſed but with good adviſe, and tempering them with ſuch as are cooling.Hearbs. And beware of Cabages, Coleworts, Lettice, and Rocket; and all moyſt and cold hearbs; for they breed obſtructions and crudities.
                  Let not your Sauces be ſweet; for ſuch increaſe choller;Sauces. nor too full of taſte, for that whets the appetite beyond the deſire of nature, & provokes to too liberall feeding. Among other ſauces, Muſtard is chiefly to be forbidden, becauſe it openeth, and diſcuſſeth.
                  Beware of hot Spices,
                     Spices. vſe them ſparingly; and then well allayed with cooling things.
                  
                     Pottage and Broths,
                     Broths. are no fit food for theſe times: becauſe if they be thicke and ſtrong, they nouriſh too faſt: or if they be thin and not nouriſhing, they fill the body with moyſture

more then needs. For Manardus (li. 5. epiſt. 3.) ſaith, The body ought rather to be dried then moyſtened.
                  
                  
                     Muſhroms.Some haue (from ſtrangers) taken vp a fooliſh tricke of eating Muſhroms or Toadſtooles. But let them now be warned to caſt them away; for the beſt Authors hold the beſt of them at all times in a degree venomous, and therefore in time of Peſtilence much more dangerous.
                  
                     What manner of dreſſing meates are worſt.Now for the manner of dreſſing your meat, briefly obſerue; that baked meats (becauſe their vapours are reſtrained within their coffins) are not ſo well purified by the fire, as meats otherwiſe cooked: therefore they are ſuſpected to haue in them a degree of venom; eſpecially, if the meat haue beene kept any long while in the infected Aire: much more if it be Veniſon, for the reaſons before-named. But if any be earneſtly deſirous of Baked meats, let them firſt take heed they be not too full of taſte and gluttonous: and alſo let the pie or paſtie, be opened as ſoone as it comes out of the Oven, and ſo let it breath it ſelfe till it be cold.
                  Alſo ſowſed and pickled meats are not good; neither are boyled meats ſo good as roſted.
                  
                  
                     What drinkes are vnfit▪
                     Of Drinkes. Beere or Ale that is new, ſtrong, heady, and fuming; alſo bitter, fl
                           •
                        t, dead, or fuſty, are to be avoyded.
                  
                     Compounded drinkes.Likewiſe ſuch as are ſophiſticated with Lemons, Spices, &c.
                  And thoſe that are made with Sage, Worm-wood, Scorby-graſſe; and other ſuch Ingredients: vnto which may be added Metheglin, Mead, Bragget, Vſquebath, Hippocras, Aqua-Vitae, Roſa ſolis, Aqua Compoſita; and all ſtrong and Compounded waters. As theſe are indeed no other then Medicines, ſo neither are they otherwiſe to be vſed; that is, alwayes with good Caution, vpon good cauſe, and with skilfull Counſell
                  
                     Pery and ſweet Cyder,
                     Pery and Cyder. are to be refuſed for their ſweetneſs and coldneſs.
                  
                     Wines,
                     Wines. though they are frequently vſed among ſober people; yet they are not ſo fit for the conſtitution of Engliſh men, as Beere and Ale. And this is evident in that the onely wiſe God (who knoweth beſt what is fitteſt for every

Region) hath forbidden this Soyle to bring forth ſuch things; becauſe they are either needleſſe or not naturall to the Inhabitants. Therefore it were good if all kindes of Wines were vſed of vs, but as ſo many kindes of Medicines alſo; that is, onely to helpe Nature when ſhee is too weake to helpe her ſelfe in Concoction, Retention, and Excretion. And among Wines (in regard of the Sickneſſe) thoſe that are new, ſweet, blacke, and troubled, are forbidden. Piercing Wines; ſuch as White and Rheniſh (for the reaſons already alleaged in Piercing and Attenuating things) I cannot allow of for ordinary vſe: though ſome Phyſitions doe. As for Muskadell and Malego, their ſweet taſte, and that dullneſſe of Spirit which is cauſed by them, betrayes their vnfitneſſe in times of Contagion.
                  And before I leaue this point, let me leaue with you this Caveat.Good Caveats. 
                     Take heed into what houſes you enter to drinke with your friend: leſt in ſtead of a health, you drinke your death. Let euery man drinke in his own cup, and let none truſt the breath of his Brother. Alſo take heed of all drinkes that ſmell or taſte of the Caske.
                  
                  Now me-thinkes I heare one whiſper in mine eare, hee would faine know what I thinke of Tobacco; he takes it to be the onely Antidote againſt the Plague.
                  
                  I cannot ſtand to diſpute the caſe deepely:Tobacco. But I will briefly ſhew my opinion. Tobacco hath theſe manifeſt Qualities: It is Heating and Drying; it evacuateth groſſe Humors; it draweth away Rheums; it provoketh Vrine, and keepeth the belly ſoluble. There may be ſome times, and ſome bodies wherein a Medicine having theſe opening qualities may be vſed; as namely, to a Cold and Flegmaticke complexion, full of groſſe humors; the partie for the time keeping himſelfe warme, and within dores. But for the common faſhion of taking it, by every man, every day (yea almoſt every houre) in ſhops and open places, without conſideration of conſtitution, or iuſt cauſe; I cannot approue of it at all: much leſſe as any Antidote. But let vs examine it a little further, for their ſakes that would vſe it more orderly:

and ſee whither it may be accounted a Preſervatiue Medicine or no. I haue already reckoned the beſt qualities it hath, being taken in the Pipe (for ſo onely I diſcourſe of it) and the firſt of thoſe qualities indeed ſhews a faire countenance to the caſe: But the foure latter talke too much of penetration, and evacuation: wherewith it opens the pores, and makes the body fit to receiue the contagious aire; it alſo diſſolues the braine, and cauſeth the humors thereof to fall downe into all parts of the body diſtempered with a heat contrary to nature; wherupon it enflames the blood, turns it to melancholy, and reſteth not till it haue alſo turned Blacke Choller into Burnt Choller. And in all this doing, his heat carries no cordiall to the ſpirits (which muſt never be abſent from an Antidote) for it is mixed with a nauſeous qualitie, noyſome to the ſtomach, and offenſiue to nature; as appeares by the violence it offers in vomiting, when a little of the iuice is given to that purpoſe. Theſe things conſidered, I thinke Tobacco hath very little good vſe in Peſtilent times. And thus much for noyſome things to be avoided.
                  
                     The Cure of this Cauſe. Qualities of meates and drinkes generally to be choſen.Now we come to reckon vp holſome things to be elected.
                  Let the Qualities of your meats and drinkes be temperate betwixt hot and cold, and rather drie then moyſt. And (if the ſtomach may endure it) let them for the moſt part haue a ſharp or ſower ſmacke with them. Let them be of eaſie digeſtion, breeding good blood, and ſincere humors in the body.
                  
                  
                     Bread.Let your Bread be made of the beſt and pureſt Wheat (which alone maketh the beſt Bread) or mixe it with ſome Rie. Let the Corne be ſuch as harveſt hath houſed before the Aire became infectious. Leauened bread is the moſt holſome, becauſe of the ſowerneſſe. Let thoſe that may, bake their bread at home.
                  
                     Fleſh of beaſts.
                     Roſted Beefe may be eaten with Vineager. A roſting Pigge is not to be denyed, if his belly be ſtuffed with Sage, ſweete Marioram, Spinach, Parſley, and Mints: the ſauce alſo made ſharpe with Vineager and ſpiced with a little Pepper, or Ginger. Veale, Mutton, Lamb, Kid, and Coney are very holſome: but let them not be very fat.
                  
                     Of Fowles,
                     Fowles. ſuch as fly neereſt the Sunne, and build their neſts on high, feeding on ſweet and holſome graine, are beſt approved by the beſt Authors: becauſe they receiue leſſe infection from the lower aire, which is the moſt contagious. But if we examine which are they, we ſhall finde but a few that keepe all theſe conditions. For the Hearon flies high, and builds high; but feeds in fenny and mooriſh places, and on moyſt meates. The Kite, Hawke, Raven, and ſuch like, feed on carrion, and are never counted worthy to be ſerved as a diſh at the Table. The Larke flies high and neare the Sunne, but hath his neſt on the earth. The Rookes in deed flie ſomthing high, build high, and feed on the beſt Corne; and their young ones are eſteemed daintie food: but theſe are not for every ones diſh. Therefore we may not be ſo over-curious in the choice of theſe creatures. Let theſe ſuffice as moſt holſome, viz. Capon, Turkey, Henne, Pullet, Chicken, Partridge, Pheaſant, tame Pigeons, yong wilde Pigeons, Turtles, Larks, Black-birds, Thruſhes, and Finches.
                  
                  Some Inwards of Beaſts and Fowles alſo,Inwards. are very good and holſome: as the Gizards and Livers of Hens, and Capons: the Hearts of Veale, Mutton, and Lambe: alſo Lamb-ſtones, and young Cock-ſtones are excellent meat, and fit for the ſtate of ſome bodies. But whoſoever he be that makes choice of them for the nouriſhment of his luſt, let him remember the Iſraelites Quailes, and tremble; leſt while the meat is in his mouth, the hand of God be at his heart;Numb. 11 33. and in the meſſe of his ſinne, the Plague ſalute him with the meſſage of death.
                  
                     Fiſhes that are of Rivers, and cleare running waters are beſt:Fiſh. as Plaiſe, Flounders, &c. Freſh Salmon, Trouts, Barbels, Shrimps &c. Of Sea-fiſh there are but a few fit to be vſed in theſe times: and thoſe are Gogions, Mullets, Soales, Gurnards, Lobſters, and Cray-fiſhes: But fiſh muſt be ſeldomer vſed then fleſh; and onely for change of diet to weake and longing ſtomachs. For all kindes of fiſh breed but a watriſh kinde of blood.
                  
                     Egges of Hens (if they be eaten new and reare dreſſed) are good, whither they be roſted, boyled, fried, or poached;Egges.
                     
and eaten with Veriuice, or Vineager, and the iuice of a Lemon. Alſo Turkey Egges ſo vſed are good: but eate them ſeldomer, becauſe they afford a little too rancke nouriſhment. In Summer time, eate fleſh and egges more ſparingly then in Winter, leſt you increaſe blood too much, or turne it to choller; which alſo turneth to inflamation, and putrefaction.
                  
                     Butter.
                     Butter is very good, and ſo is Buttermilke: (if moderately vſed) but they doe eaſily inflame a chollericke ſtomacke: and ſend vp hot fumes into the head. The milke alſo purgeth ſome bodies: ſuch therefore are the more to forbeare it.
                  
                     Fruits may be allowed (but ſeldome and in little quantitie to be vſed) the ſower and ſharpe are beſt;Fruits. as ſower Cherries and Plums (but theſe preſerved, or in tarts, or at leaſt ſcalded, rather then raw) the Norwich, and Katherin Peares: the Peppins, Pearmains, & Harvie Apples being growne old; are counted Cordialls. Alſo Peaches, Quinces, Pomgranets, Oranges, Lemons, Medlars, Sarvices, Strawberries, Gooſeberries, Barberies, Raſpes, Mulberries; likewiſe dried fruits, as dried Peares, Plums, Cherries, Figs, Raiſins, Damask proins, &c. Thoſe that haue hot ſtomachs, and deſire Cucumbers, may eat them beaten with an Onion and Salt, and ſauced with Vineager, and a little ſprinckled with Pepper. French Beanes alſo (called à formâ, Kidney Beanes) may now and then be vſed, as the beſt ſort of pulſe for meate. So may Hartichokes with Butter and Vineager, or the iuice of a Lemon. If you earneſtly deſire ſometime to eate of the moyſter fruits: eat after them an Orange with a little Fennell and Salt. And if you feele your ſtomach over-cooled with ſuch kinde of moyſt fruits; drinke alſo a draught of good white Wine: at ſuch a time; that Wine is good to warme the ſtomach, and carrie away the crudities.
                  Of Roots,
                     Roots. theſe are the beſt, Turneps, Carrots, Parſnips, Hartichokes of Ieruſalem. Alſo Onions, and Radiſhes, for they are eſteemed of great vertue againſt venoms. And ſo are Leekes, becauſe they cleanſe the blood.
                  
                     Of Hearbs;Hearbs. the warme and drying are of greateſt vſe, as Rue, Wormwood, Baulm, Mints, Peni royall, Roſemary, and many ſuch like; with which you may ſtuffe and temper moyſt meats. But for Sallets and Sauces: Fennell, ſweet marior
                           •
                        m, Sage, Time, Parſley, Succorie. But of all; ſharpe and ſower hearbs are beſt: and therefore Sorrell is in good requeſt, and Endiue or Succorie mixed therewith; becauſe of themſelues they are opening.
                  Hot Spices may be vſed in moyſt meats,Spices. and to temper cold and ſower fruits. Alſo in Winter time, and to a cold ſtomach, they may be allowed ſimple; or with little qualification: otherwiſe there is no vſe of them, but to mixe with ſauces. What Spices I meane, are eaſily knowne: viz. Pepper, Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs, Ginger; and to theſe I adde Saffron, and the roots of Enula Campane, Zedoarie, Angelica, and Tormentill; which are very vſefull.
                  The fitteſt Sauces are ſharpe and ſower ones.
                     Sauce
                           •
                        
                      As Sorrell and Ʋineager, or 
                        Ʋeriuice, or the iuice of Lemons, or Oranges. Alſo Capers and Vineager, are very good. When the weather is cold & your ſtomach craues it, you may mixe them with Spices to make them warmer; and in theſe caſes if you doubt the weakneſſe of your ſtomach, & the binding in of your ſpirits, by cold ſower Sauces; then temper your meats with Sugar, a little Salt, Cinnamon, Pepper, Safron, and ſome Fennell: or with Egges, Butter, and the iuice of Lemons, and a little Fennell and Saffron.
                  
                  
                     Broths muſt be very thin,
                     Broths. 
                     and ſomething ſharpened with Lemons, or Vineager. In ſtead of them alſo you may ſomtimes vſe Poſſet-ale turned with Vineager, or a Lemon; and after boyled with ſome of theſe hearbs before commended. Or Aleberries for thoſe that cannot away with fleſh. And let thoſe that feed on theſe things, forbeare drinke.
                  
                     Gellyes alſo are good for weake bodies,Gellyes. if they be not intemperately Spiced.
                  As for the manner of dreſſing: Roſt is better then boyled;What manner of Dreſſing Meates is beſt. 
                     Fiſh is beft 
                           ••
                         fried then boyled. But if any deſire boyled meat rather, then let it be fleſh of the drier ſort: or if yet it muſt

needs be of the moyſter, let it be well ſauced with ſharpe and ſower things, with a little Pepper, Cinnamon, prepared Coriander ſeeds and ſalt. Sorrell and Marigold flowers may be added at your pleaſure.
                  
                     Vineager his vertues.I haue ſtill preſcribed Vineager as a thing of generall vſe, becauſe being cooling and drying, it reſiſteth all kinds of poyſon, and repelleth putrefaction. Which is apparent (as Ambroſius Paraeus li. de Peſte. cap. 8. teſtifieth) in the embalming of dead bodies, who are waſhed in Vineager, to keepe them from putrefying.Not ſo good for Women. But here I muſt giue a Caveat to women: for (as Crato in Conſil. 275. ſaith) it hurteth the Mother: therefore they muſt allay it with white Wine and Sugar.
                  
                     Beere and Ale.Now for Drinke. Middling Beere or Ale is generally beſt for common vſe: But the conſtitution of every one muſt fit it ſelfe. Onely take heed of extremities; very ſtrong enflames: and very ſmall makes watriſh blood. Let your drinke be well boyled, and ſtale; but quicke and freſh.
                  
                  
                     Cyder made of ſharpe Apples is not amiſſe to be vſed ſomtimes,Cyder. to refreſh the pallat with varietie.
                  
                     Wine.Thoſe that haue need of Wine to helpe their ſtomachs, let them vſe good Claret, Sherries ſacke, or Canarie: and now and then a draught of White Wine. But if your ſtomach doe not much require them ſimply: allay them with water. Let your wine be cleare, briske, old, and pleaſant.
                  
                  
                     Who are fit to vſe Wine.To a weake ſtomach, and a feeble nature, Wine is an Antidote againſt all poyſons; as Celſus li. 8. de Re Medica. cap. 27. affirmeth. And Senectutis ſumma eſt Medicina: it is the beſt Medicine for Old age, as Aëtius teacheth in Tetr. 1. ſerm. 4. cap. 30. But let not youths, and men of ſtrength thinke they may be ſo bold with Wine in theſe contagious ſeaſons, as they haue bin wont to be at other times. For it muſt needs inflame their bloud, and inflamation is certainly ſeconded with putrefaction; and putrefaction is no leſſe then a degree of poyſon in the humors, which will eaſily turne to the Peſtilence.
                  
                     Quantitie.And ſo much for the Diſorder of Mans Diet in Qualitie of Meat & Drinke. Now we come to Quantitie. And herein;

The diſeaſe is Surfeiting, and the Remedie muſt be Sobrietie. I will therefore lay open, firſt the Danger of the Diſeaſe, and then the Courſe of the Cure.
                  
                  In this Diſorder of Quantitie,
                     Gluttonie. I cannot but admire at my Countrey men: for if Heliogabalus were now among the liuing, he might finde enough companions among Engliſhmen. It was wont to be ſaid, The Drunken-Dutchman: but the Dutch haue playd the God-fathers, & haue too kindly, beſtowd their names vpon our men, ſuch names I meane as Diotemus of Athens had; who was intituled the Tunnell, for his filthy delight in drinking and drinking in a Tunnell. For the liues of many are ſo monſtrous, that a man might ſay of ſome among vs, as Valerius Aurelianus the Emperour was wont to ſay of Bonoſus, a Spaniard: That he was borne; not to liue, but to drinke. Theſe riotous abuſes of Gods good gifts, are a maine cauſe why the Lord at this time ſtriketh this Land with Sickneſſe, and threatneth it with the Famine. And if any of that Luxurious Sect be at this time ſober, let them but liſten to the teſtimonies of learned experience,The dangers of Surfeiting. who will tell them into what bodily dangers they plunge themſelues by this deteſtable diſorder.
                  
                     Hippocrates hath an Aphoriſme to this purpoſe,Li. 2. Aph. 17.
                      that Meat or drinke immoderately taken cauſeth ſickneſſe.
                  
                  
                     Paulus Aegineta goes yet further, ſaying,De Re Medicae▪ li. 1. cap. 32.
                      
                     That the veynes being filled too full; are afflicted, diſtended, or els broken: obſtructed, filled with winde, and over-charged. And of all diſeaſes, he affirmeth, that the over-charging of the veines is the worſt.
                  
                  
                     Galen affirmeth,
                        In Com. 2. Hipp. de Natu. Humana.
                        Li. de Cauſis morborū. cap. 3.
                        
                      that Drunkenneſſe and Crudities (which ariſe from intemperance) doe breed new diſeaſes.
                  
                  And in another place, he ſayth, Whereas wine moderately taken increaſeth naturall heat; as being his proper aliment: by Drunkenneſſe commeth aſtoniſhment of the brayne, the Falling ſickneſſe, or ſome mayme either to Senſe or Motion. And ſo, the beſt Meats, which afford moſt nouriſhment, being immoderately eaten, ingender cold Diſeaſes.
                  
                  But Avicen more particularly layes downe the dangers that follow this over Repletion, in theſe words: Eating

much nouriſheth not;De Removendis Nocumentis in Regimine Sanitatis. Tract. 4. cap. 1.
                      
                     but fills the body with crudities and raw humors ſtops the pores, weakens the powers of nature; cauſes putrefaction, mixed feavors, ſhort breath, Sciatica, and ioynt-Aches.
                  
                  Againe, in another place he ſpeakes of drinking, thus: Much drinking of Wine in ſanguine and chollericke complexions,Ibidem. cap. 19.
                         overheats the bloud, and cauſeth choller to ſuperabound; and by too much Repletion of the veynes and veſſells, there may follow a hot Apoplexie, and ſuddain Death. In cold Complexions it breeds Diſeaſes of the ſinews; and that for two cauſes: The first is the over moyſtening of the ſinews; the other, the turning of the drinke into Vineager before it can paſſe through the body: So the Nerves are by the former relaxed, and by the latter corroded. Whereupon follows the cold Apoplexie, Aſtoniſhment, Senſleſneſſe, Lethargie, Palſey, Trembling of the limbs, and convulſions of the mouth.
                  
                  Theſe are the fearefull miſchiefs that befall their bodies; beſides the miſerable wants that grow like eating Cankers into their Eſtates, and the hideous Hell-torments which attend their Soules.
                  And note this alſo, that what theſe haue ſaid of Wine, the ſame is true likewiſe of all other ſtrong Drinkes.
                  
                     The Cure.Now to Cure this bruitiſh Diſeaſe, there is no better way then Prevention; and Gluttonie is prevented by Sobrietie. Therefore againe hearken to Avicen, who adviſeth alwayes to riſe from meate with ſome remainder of Appetite: for within halfe an houre, or as ſoone as the meate (firſt eaten) beginneth to digeſt, our hunger ceaſeth. li. 1. Fen. 3. Doct. 2. cap. 7.
                  And hence it is, that ſome (greedily following the ſenſe of their appetite) overcharge their ſtomachs even to vomiting, before they feele themſelues ſatisfied; becauſe, though the veſſell be over-full, yet the Appetite is not appeaſed till Concoction haue begun her worke vpon ſome part of that which is already received. Theſe things are eſpecially to be regarded in a contagious time. For Repletion is the originall of all miſchiefs that Crudities can produce, and they can cauſe ſpeedy putrefaction, & that ſpeeds them with the Peſtilence.
                  
                  
                     But as for a ſtrict Quantitie of eating and drinking, I cannot ſtint every mans ſtomach; but muſt conclude with Hippocrates, Aph. 17. li. 1. Concedendum eſt aliquid Tempori, Regioni, Aetatt, et Conſuetudini. The Time, Place, Age, and Cuſtome, muſt beare ſome ſway in theſe things. Onely in theſe times, I would wiſh all men, women, and children to be ſo moderate (as Avicen counſelleth) that they ſtill keepe in the fire of their appetite;Be ſparing in eating. and how ſparing ſo 
                        •
                     ver they are wont (naturally or cuſtomarily) to be; let them be now ſomthing more ſparing. Make ſewer and ſhorter meales. I would wiſh thoſe that haue not very weake and windie ſtomachs, to eat but twice a day: that is, Breakfaſt and Dinner: to goe to bed without a Supper is very holſome; thereby we giue Sleepe leaue to ſupply the evenings nouriſhment, which it will better performe when neither the ſtomach troubles it with vapours; nor it hinders the ſtomach from digeſtion.
                  Let your drinke alſo be leſſe then your meat:Be more ſparing in drinking. And drinke not betweene meales, if you can forbeare.
                  
                     Laertius li. 2. ſaith, that Socrates liued in Athens in divers Plague times, and was never ſicke of it: and the reaſon was, his great temperance in diet.
                  
                  In Winter and cold Weather, eate your meat hot from the fire. In Summer eat it for the moſt part cold. Let the times of eating be; for your breakfaſt two houres after you are vp, and haue taken ſome Antidote. And your dinner fiue houres after that againe. Your Supper alſo (if the weakneſſe of your ſtomach craue it) fiue houres after your dinner.
                  Frame not to your ſelfe an Antidote without skill:Antidotes muſt be firſt taken in the morning. but take advice of the Phyſition: who will conſider what will beſt agree with the particular temper of your body: for Mithridate and Triacle, are generally good for all; but not particularly for every one.
                  But becauſe every one will not be brought to breake their old cuſtomary times of meales; as dinner at twelue, and ſupper at ſeaven: I am content to yeeld to cuſtome in

theſe caſes. Onely let them never goe forth without their breakfaſt: that they may be armed againſt Winde and Emptineſſe. And their Antidote taken two houres before; that they may be armed againſt evill Aires.
                  
                     Breakfaſts.Now for thoſe that muſt therfore make three meales a day; let their breakfaſt (if they be of a cold conſtitution) be ſome bread and butter with Nutmeg grated, and a little Citron pill powdered, and ſtrewed vpon it. Or els bread and ſallet Oyle (for ſuch as loue it) ſpiced with the powder of Enula campane roote. Or els (eſpecially in cold and moyſt weather) eate a few figs with a little Penniroyall and ſalt. But for hot ſtomachs and chollericke complexions; let ſuch dip ſome bread in Beere and Ʋineager, and eat it. Or take good Wine Ʋineager, ſteepe in it (for three dayes together) the powder of Brimſton and a few Fennell-ſeeds, ſoppe your bread in it, and make it your break-faſt And for thoſe that muſt make three meales a day, let their breakfaſt be little in quantitie. At other meales, eat the lighteſt meats firſt, and then thoſe that are more hard of digeſtion: Eat no butter laſt, and drinke not laſt after your meate. Neither is Cheeſe ſo commonly to be eaten at theſe times, for if it be full of Butter, it is fuming; if not, it is binding: and both theſe are faults; except the inclination of the body require it at ſometimes.
                  After dinner alſo, if you haue a cold ſtomach, cloſe it with a bit of bread, and a few Coriander ſeeds prepared. And this likewiſe will doe well for breaſtfaſt, if you be troubled with winde and gripings.
                  
                     Varietie of meats are naught a
                           ••
                         one meale.
                     Eate not of aboue two or three diſhes at Dinner, and at Supper, let one ſuffice you. Quercitavus (in Diaetet: Polyhiſt. Sect. 2. cap. 8.) proues, that the eating of varietie of meates, and drinking of divers kindes of drinkes at one meale, makes ſuch a confuſed heape in the ſtomach, as turneth to infinite tumults in Concoction; while ſome are ſower, and ſome ſpeedier in ſoftening, digeſting, and diſtributing into the parts of the body.
                  To conclude; Let Cuſtome ſomthing prevaile in all points of diet, with thoſe that haue vſed temperance in former

times; and onely pare it ſomthing thinner in reſpect of the preſent peſtilent time. As for thoſe that never knew the rules of order yet: let them learne ſhortly, if they deſire to liue long. And ſo much for the ſecond part of Diet: Meate and Drinke.
                  
               
               
                  The third Poynt of Diet, is Repletion, and Evacuation.
                  
                     Galen (li. 1. de Differ. feb. cap. 4.) ſayth, that the body ought eſpecially to be kept free from ſuperfluities.
                     The Cauſe. And Hippocrates (in the third Aph. of his firſt Booke) proveth that Plethoricke bodies are ſubiect to great dangers: wherefore he counſelleth Evacuation; and yet withall to goe no further therein then Nature will ſafely beare. For as too much Repletion is hurtfull, ſo too long faſting makes the ſtomach languiſh; therefore ſuffer not too much emptineſſe. Hunger ſharpens the humors and weakens the Spirits: And Thirst makes the heart hot, and enflames the Spirits; who therefore deſiring to be cooled, doe draw in more quantitie of the evill Aire by breathing, then they ſhould, and that I haue alreadie proved to be dangerous. Therefore it is better to eate the oftener, ſo it be the leſſe at once.
                  When you riſe in the morning rub your ſides, armes,
                     
                        The way of Cure.
                        What is to be done when one riſeth in the morning.
                      
                     and legges a little: your cloths being on; comb your head, and rub it; hauke and ſpit; and blow your noſe, to evacuate thoſe excrements. Then waſh your hands and face with faire water firſt, in regard of cleanſing; but afterward (in reſpect of preſervation) waſh your face, noſe, mouth, and eye-lids (cloſing your eyes) with Roſe-water and Vineager and white Wine. Or with faire water and a little Ʋineager, wherein Rue hath ſhred and ſteeped all night. Aſſay alſo to make water, and goe to ſtoole. Be carefull to bring your body to a cuſtome of evacuation at that time. And after that eat your Antidote.
                  
                  
                     If you be coſtiue, vſe ſome Suppoſitorie, or Clyſter;Keepe the bodie ſoluble. if ſuch ſlighter meanes (whereof every man can preſcribe one or other) will not prevaile, conſult with the Phyſition: and ſuffer not two whole dayes to paſſe without ſuch evacuations.
                  
                  
                     
                     Be Cleanly.Be carefull likewiſe to keepe your ſelfe neate and cleanly at all times. Waſh your feete once a fortnight in warme water, wherein are boyled Roſe-leaues (either freſh or dried) Vine-leaues, Bay leaues, Roſmarie, Fennell, Camomill, and ſome Bay Salt. Flee all other Bathings, and eſpecially waſhing and ſwimming in Rivers, Ponds, and ſuch open places, (as the Thames, and ſuch like) within the region of the Aire infected: for it is moſt dangerous.
                  
                     Vrine and Menſtrua.If Vrine ſtop, or Menſtrua flow not as they ſhould; ſeeke remedie of the Phyſition ſpeedily.
                  
                     Venus.Fly Venus as much as you may, for ſhee hath an ill report in times of Peſtilence.
                  
                     Prevention of ill Humors.In a Peſtilent Aire, every diſeaſe becommeth ſomthing Peſtilent, and more deadly then ever before: And any kinde of Feavor eaſily turneth to the Plague it ſelfe. Therefore if any perceiue blood, or any other humor to abound, or to be corrupted (what time of the yeare, or what weather ſoever it be) let him begin to abate it by moderate Abſtinence; or els take the adviſe of a Phyſition; for opening a veine, or ſome other courſe, ſuch as the Artiſt ſhall thinke fit. And let them not put it off till they be worſe, in hope of growing better by their owne ſtrength: For Nature for the moſt part ſtruggles in vaine without helpe: and contagious caſes are not to be truſted to.
                  
                     Sweating.Naturall Sweating, that commeth eaſily, and of it ſelfe is good; hinder it not therefore, and yet embrace it not too earneſtly.
                  
                     Iſſues.To conclude; If a man or woman haue an Iſſue, or Fontanell in arme or legge; or haue any running ſoare; heale it not vp, for it is a good meanes to keepe ſafe from infection; becauſe Nature will (lightly) be ſtrong enough to expell any venom by ſuch a common ſewer. But yet make not this thy ſheild of confidence, for though few ſuch haue beene ſtricken; yet I can name ſome that haue died of the Plague, for all that they had iſſues, and thoſe at that time well and plentifully running.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth Poynt of Diet, is Exerciſe and Reſt.
                  Some are ſo lazie as they will not ſtirre their bodies at all;The Cauſe. theſe ſuffer ſuperfluous humors to increaſe, becauſe they doe not breath them out by exerciſe. Ovid. de Ponto, reſembles ſuch to ſtanding Pooles, which corrupt for lacke of purging themſelues by motion.
                  
                     Cernis vt ignavum corrumpunt otia corpus?
                     
                        Ʋt capiunt vitium ni moveantur Aquae?
                  
                  Others againe are ſo violent in their labour and exerciſe, that they prodigally waſte the treaſure of thoſe good humors that ſhould nouriſh them. Of theſe againe the Poet ſingeth;
                  
                     Otia corpus alunt, Animus quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         paſcitur illis.
                     Immodicus contra carpit vtrum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Labor.
                  
                  Such exerciſes as Running, wreſtling, much leaping,
                     What Exerciſes are not good. 
                     violent dancing, hard riding, foot-ball-playing, tenniſe, and the like; which cauſe a man to ſwear in open aire, are very dangerous. For thereby the pores are opened to let in that aire which bringeth poyſon with it. Alſo the lungs fetching ſhort and deepe breathing (as I haue elſe where ſayd already) draw it as faſt into the vitall parts.
                  
                     Moderate exerciſe ſtirreth vp and nouriſheth naturall heat;What Exerciſe is beſt. fills the members thereby with activitie and aptneſſe to motion; alſo it helps concoction and evacuation of excrements. Therefore let your exerciſe be Walking, and gentle ſtirring, ad Ruborem, non ad Sudorem: till you be warme, not till you ſweat.
                  Let the time of Exerciſe be the morning faſting,
                     The beſt time for Exerciſe. two houres after the Sunne is vp; for by that time, his beames will haue diſpelled and diſperſed the night vapours.
                  
                     The fitteſt Place, is ſome large roome,
                     The Place for Exerciſe. encloſed from the common Aire; and where is little or no company, that

their breaths diſtemper not the Aire wherein you are (by motion) to breath ſomthing more largely. And it is good to perfume the roome alſo before hand, that the Aire may be the purer.
                  
                     Beware of taking Cold.At all times, beware you take no cold. For great Colds and Rheums doe eaſily breed Putrid Feavors, and they as eaſily turne to the Plague.
                  
               
               
                  The fifth Poynt of Diet, is Sleepe and Watching.
                  
                     Inconveniences of much ſleepe.If Sleepe be immoderate or vnſeaſonable, it hindereth concoction, it heapeth vp many crude and ſuperfluous humors, it extinguiſheth the vitall Spirits, and taketh away the liuelineſſe of the Animall faculties.
                  
                     Inconveniences of much watching.
                     Overmuch Watching alſo and want of Sleepe, dries vp the good humors, and ſets them in a heat, and (which is moſt dangerous) weakens the Naturall Forces.
                  
                     Times for ſleepe.Therefore obſerue due Times for Sleepe. Goe to bed betimes, and riſe betimes; for that is holſomeſt.
                  
                     Sleepe not vpon meate, or after dinner; eſpecially if you haue fed any thing liberally: and by no meanes giue way to ſleepe at ſuch times lying along: but if you muſt needs take ſuch repoſe, ſit in a Chaire vpright, and doe but take him napping; let not ſuch a ſleepe be aboue halfe an houre long; for a little yeelding ſatisfieth; and by further indulgence the head will grow the more dull and drowſie. I counſell therefore rather to yeeld a little in this aforeſayd manner, then by ſtriving too much againſt it, to make the head ake; But let ſome friend or ſervant (within the time limited) awake you gently, not ſodainly to make you fright or ſtart; for that would diſturbe thoſe ſpirits and humors which your nap had ſetled. The night is the naturall time for Sleepe. But let it be two houres at the ſooneſt after Supper (if you muſt ſup) that the ſtomach may haue made ſome good progreſſe in Concoction, before Sleepe make holiday with the Functions of Nature. And then Sleepe not aboue fiue or ſix houres at the moſt.
                  
                     Let the Chamber wherein you lie, be conveniently warme,The place to ſleepe in. the dores and windows cloſe ſhut, to keepe out the evill aire of the night; and before-hand perfumed to expell the Peſtilent. Sleepe not without dores; neither ſit, nor lie vpon the ground or graſſe in the fields or garden plots; for the nearer the earth, the more deadly is the Aire: and the immediate ſtroke of the cold ground is very dangerous.
               
               
                  The ſixt and laſt Poynt, is the Paſſions of the Minde.
                  
                     All kindes of Paſſions if they be vehement doe offer violence to the Spirits. Yea though they be of the better,The dangers of violent. Paſſions. and more naturall ſort. As, Ioy and Laughter, if they be vnbridled and too profuſe, doe exceedingly enervate and reſolue both the Spirits and Body; in ſo much as the breaſt and ſides are pained, the breath is ſtreightened, and many times the Soule it ſelfe is ready to depart. So alſo Care, Suſpition, Enuie, Iealouſie, and ſuch like vnquietneſſes, doe ouer-heat the Spirits, and drie vp and conſume the good humors.
                  But there be foure Paſſions more violent then the reſt. viz. Immoderate Ioy, Sorrow, Anger, and Feare.
                  
                  
                     Immoderate Ioy,
                     Immoderate Ioy. by ſuddaine and violent dilatation of the heart, lets the Spirits fly forth ſo abundantly, that naturall heat is left naked and ſo is ſodainly extinguiſhed. If it breake forth into laughter, the danger is as I haue alreadie ſaid.
                  It is recorded of Chryſippus,
                     Examples of vnbridled laughter. that onely vpon ſeeing an Aſſe eate figs, he fell into ſuch an vnmeaſurable laughter, that he fell downe and died.
                  And Zeuxis that excellent Paynter (who made a moſt curious beautifull picture of the Spartan Helen) vpon the ſight of a very ill favor'd old woman, burſt out into ſuch an vnmeaſurable laughter, that he laughed himſelfe to death.
                  But ſomtimes this Immoderate Ioy killeth before it venteth it ſelfe in laughter.Examples of immoderate ioy without laughter. For ſo Sophocles the Tragedian receiving a wonderfull applauſe of the people for the laſt Tragedy he writ; was ſo over-ioyed at it, that he fell downe and died preſently. And it is recorded of one Rhodius Diagoras,
                     
who when he ſaw his three ſonnes all at one time crowned with victory at the Olympian games, ranne to meet them; and while he embraced them in his armes, and they ſet their garlands on his head; he was ſo overcome with Ioy, that he fell downe dead in the midſt of them; and ſo turned their Triumphs into a Funerall.
                  
                     Sorrow.
                     Sorrow on the other ſide afflicts the heart, diſturbs the faculties, melts the brayne, vitiates the humors; and ſo weakens all the principall parts; conſumes the nouriſhments of the Spirits and naturall heate; and ſomtimes brings ſodaine death.
                  
                     Examples.As Adraſtus King of the Argiues, being told of the death of his Sonne, was taken with ſo ſodain a Sorrow, that he fell downe and died preſently.
                  And ſo Iulia the daughter of Iulius Caeſar, and wife of Pompey; when ſhe heard the newes of her Husbands death, fell downe alſo ſuddainly and died.
                  
                     Anger.
                     Anger is ſo furious a Paſſion, that it worketh wonderfully vpon the ſpirits and faculties; diſturbing them exceedingly, as appeareth by the ſhaking and toſſing of the body too and fro; the fiery ſparkling of the eyes; the colour comming and going, now red, now pale: ſo that the humors appeare to be inflamed (eſpecially choller) and the ſpirits hurried this way and that way; ſomtime haled outward, and preſently driven inward againe. By which violent motions an vnnaturall heat in the ſpirits, and corruption in the humors are ingendred. Hereupon (many times) follow Burning and cholericke Feavors, Pulſeys, Iaundis, Pleuriſies, and all kinds of Inflamations; violent bleeding at the noſe which can hardly be ſtanched; and ſomtime death it ſelfe.
                  
                  
                     Examples.
                     Nerva the Emperour, being highly diſpleaſed with one Regulus, fell into ſuch a fury againſt him, that he was ſtricken therewith into a Feavor, whereof he died ſhortly after.
                  
                     Wenceſtaus King of Bohemia, in a furious anger conceived againſt his Cup bearer, would needs kill him preſently with his owne hand; but in the endevour he was ſtricken with a Palſey, whereof he died in few dayes after.
                  
                     
                     
                        Ʋalentinianus the Emperour in a great rage would needs deſtroy the whole Countrey of Sarmatia; but he breathed forth his menaces with ſuch vnbridled fury, that he burſt out into bleeding and died.
                  
                  In the yeare of our Lord, 1623. A poore olde Man in the North part of Devonſhire (dwelling in a part of a little Village called Little Poderidge) came to the houſe of Sr 
                     Thomas Monck (where I at that time was) and ſtanding at the Buttery dore to receiue ſome Beere (which, together with other victualls, was every day given very liberally to all the poore thereabouts) becauſe the Butler did not preſently fill his tanckerd; the olde Man fell into ſuch a furious rage againſt her, that with the very Paſſion, he preſently fell downe; was taken vp dead, was with much adoe (by me) recovered to life and ſenſe; but never ſpake more, and died within two dayes after.
                  
                  
                     Feare alſo gathers the Spirits to the heart,Feare. and diſſolues the Brayne, making the humors thereof to ſhed and ſlide downe into the externall parts, cauſing a chilneſſe, and ſhaking over all the body: It abuſeth the Phantaſie and Senſes, brings a Lethargie vpon the organs of motion, and depriues the heart of all ſpirit and vigour: ſomtimes alſo it makes a Mans Will for him, and vnkindly bequeaths his eſtate to Death.
                  As Caſſander the Sonne of Antipater vpon ſight of Alexanders ſtatue, fell into ſuch a terror and trembling,Examples. that he could hardly ſhift himſelfe out of the place, and had much adoe to recover his ſpirits againe.
                  I could relate a ſtory of one who (receiving but a ſlight wound in the arme, in a place of no danger, and with very little loſſe of blood) died preſently with the very feare of being killed. But I ſhould be too tedious if I ſhould reckon vp more examples.
                  Now, if theſe Paſſions could be ſo deadly in pure Aires,Feare, how it is moſt apt to bring Infection. and holſome ſeaſons; how much more (thinke we) are they pernicious in peſtilentiall times? But in reſpect of Contagion, there is no Paſſion ſo dangerous as Feare. For

by it the Spirits are enforced to retire inward to the heart, to guard that Prince of life from the danger feared. By this retiring they leaue the outward parts infirme, as appeareth plainely by the paleneſſe & trembling of one in great feare. So that, the walls being forſaken (which are continually beſieged by the contagious Aire) in come the enemies without reſiſtance; the Spirits which are the Souldiers that ſhould repell them, having cowardly ſounded a Retrait. And hereby there is not onely way made for the evill Aire to enter, but alſo the Spirits (wherein is all our heat) being all drawne inward, doe draw in ſuch vapours after them as are about the body; even as the Sunne draweth towards it, the vapours of the earth. And here-hence it is, that Feare brings Infection faſter and ſooner then any other occaſion.
               
               
                  
                     The Cure.Now for Remedie againſt theſe Paſſions, we muſt know that they are diſeaſes of the Soule, and the cure of them belongeth chiefly to Divines. They are the Phiſitians to deale inwardly with theſe diſeaſes: To purge out the Loue of this World, and the diſtruſt of Gods Providence and Mercies, as alſo to miniſter the Cordialls of Faith, Hope, Patience, Contentedneſſe, &c. and to ordaine the ſtrict diet of holy Exerciſes, a good Converſation, and Walking with God. Wee that are Phiſitians to the Body, are but Chirurgians to the Soule: wee can but talke of Topicall remedies, as to apply Mirth, Muſicke, good Company, and lawfull Recreations; ſuch as may take away all time and occaſions for carefull thoughts and paſſionate affections.
               
               
                  Thus haue I brought you through that part of the Definition, wherein are the Cauſes of the Plague diſcovered. Now we are to lay open the Qualities of it, deſcribed before in the Definition, thus
                  
                     The qualities of the Plague.
                     
                     Which at the very firſt Striketh to the Heart, is Venomous, Deadly, and Infectious.
                  
                  
                     How the Sickneſſe ſtriketh firſt.
                     At the very firſt it ſtriketh to the Heart. Therefore it is called Morbus Cordis, A diſeaſe of the Heart. And that this is firſt ſtricken, is apparent by this, that at the firſt infection

the vitall facultie ſinkes, and languiſhes; the whole ſtrength of the Body is ſuddainly turned to weakneſſe; the vitall Spirits are greatly oppreſſed and diſcouraged. Whereas the Animall facultie commonly remaineth (for a while) in good plight and perfect in the vſe of ſenſe, vnderſtanding, iudgement, memorie and motion. The Naturall facultie alſo is not ſo preſently hurt, but there is concoction and all other actions performed by the liver, ſtomach, reyns, guts, bladder, and other parts, as Nature requireth. Though indeed in a little time, theſe and the brayne alſo are overcome, as appeareth by the Symptoms that follow, as Lethargies, Frenzies, Ʋomitings, Fluxes, &c.
                  
                  That it is Venomous,
                     The Plague is Venomous. is graunted of all both Phyſitians and Philoſophers. And it is apparent by his ſecret and inſenſible inſinuation of himſelfe into the vitall Spirits; to which as ſoone as he is gotten, he ſhews himſelfe a mortall enemie, with ſuddain violence choking and extinguiſhing them. Therefore, his ſubtle entrance, his ſly crueltie, his ſwift deſtroying; the vnfaithfulneſſe of his Criſis, and other Prognoſticke Signes; and the vehemencie, grievouſneſſe, and ill behaviour of his Symptoms, are manifeſt proofes of his venomous Qualitie. For in this diſeaſe, the Seidge, Vrine, and Sweat, haue an abhominable ſavour; the Breath is vile and noyſome; evill coloured Spots, Puſtles, Bliſters, Swellings; and Vlcers full of filthy matter ariſe in the outward parts of the body: ſuch as no ſuperfluitie or ſharpneſſe of humors, nor no putrefaction of matter (without a venomous qualitie ioyned with it) can poſſibly produce.
                  
                     It is Deadly.
                     Deadly. This needs no proofe, the weekly Bills argue it, and our owne eyes witneſſe it, while we ſee continuall Burialls, and ſome die in the very ſtreets: and while we finde alſo that few of thoſe that are ſtricken doe recover againe.
                  But that It is Infectious,
                     Infectious. is among many of the common ignorant ſort more diſputable, then among the learned. Yet is it apparent enough by much experience; For Garments and Houſhold-ſtuffe haue beene infected, and haue

infected many, as I haue ſhewed alreadie in the examples of a Gowne and a Feather-bed. Now though this Infection be not apparent to ſenſe (as indeed the deadlieſt Poyſons haue neither taſte nor ſmell) yet their lurking qualitie may be plainely demonſtrated by ſuch as are ſenſible. For we know that garments will a long time retaine any ſtrong or ſweete ſent wherewith they haue beene fumed, or with which they haue beene layd vp; now the Sent is meerely a qualitie, and his ſubſtance is the Aire, which is the vehiculum or ſeat of the Sent wherein it is carried, & by which it is made permanent. Other experiences we haue alſo; as liue Pageons being laid to the ſoares, are taken away dead, having not beene wounded, cruſhed, nor hurt by any hand at all. And laſtly, many that are infected, can directly tell where, and of whom they tooke it.
                  
                     Obiection.
                     But ſay ſome againe, then why is not one infected as well as another? I haue eaten and drunke, and lyen with them that haue had it, and the ſoares running on them. And yet I was not infected.
                  
                  
                     Anſwer.I ſay they haue the more cauſe to magnifie the Mercy of God to their particular; and not to obſcure it, by ſaying it is not infectious. This argument is not vnlike that of the Mountebanks, who tell you that ſuch and ſuch haue beene cured by his Medicines, but conceales how many haue died by the miſapplication. If one ſhould aske this man, I pray you, how many haue ſo converſed with the infected and haue ſo eſcaped? I am ſure they cannot name one of twentie.
                  
                     A new Opinion.Yea but ſayth Another, I hold the Plague to be nothing els but the very Influence of the Striking Angell, ſent of God to deſtroy here one and there another, as Hee hath particularly fore-poynted them out.
                  
                  
                     Anſwer.Such kindes of Plagues indeed we reade of in ſacred Scripture, as Exod. 12. Numb. 11. v. 33. Numb. 16. Numb. 25. and 2 Sam. 24. But there is great difference betwixt thoſe Plagues and theſe of ours. For in thoſe, Great multitudes ſuddainly, and all at once (as one would ſay) in a very ſhort

ſpace of time were both ſmitten and ſlaine. The longeſt time of Striking being but three dayes, namely that for Davids numbering the people. In thoſe plagues therefore the cauſe was onely ſupernaturall: for there was no time allowed for corruption and putrefaction of the Aire. But in theſe of ours (and in very many moe in all Countreys and Kingdomes, and in all Ages of the World) there hath beene ſufficient time to breed and increaſe the Contagion in the Aire: in which time of breeding alſo, the antient naturall obſervations haue beene found true from age to age; for many noyſome things haue apparently diſcovered themſelues, as fruits of the Aires putrefaction, and Prognoſticks of the Plague threatened. And when it hath begun, it ſpreads but by degrees; firſt ſtriking one man onely; then two or three; after that a few more; and ſo multiplying the ſucceeding number, as it evidently groweth more contagious by the number of bodies already infected. Beſides thoſe Plagues before mentioned, doe diſcover a ſtroke, but no ſickneſſe; but that of Hezekiah diſcovered a ſickneſſe and no ſtroke of any Angell. For it is plainly ſayd, that Hezekiah was ſicke. Iſaiah 38. And that his ſickneſſe was the Plague, appeares by the Soare which was vpon him, and the Medicine by which that ſoare was cured. This to the reaſonable is reaſon ſufficient.
                  But ere I part with this Poynt of Infection;What bodies are moſt apt to be infected. I thinke it good to diſcover what bodies are moſt, or leaſt apt to be Infected.
                  
                  And to finde this we muſt firſt know that bodies are infected two wayes; firſt, from without, in regard of the Aire; and ſecondly, from within, in reſpect of the preſent ſtate of the bodie.
                  
                  
                     From Without, thoſe are moſt ſubiect to it,Who are apt to receiue infection from Without. who haue thin bodies, and open pores; and whoſe hearts are ſo hot, that they need much attraction of Aire to coole them.
                  
                     From Within, they are moſt apt, whoſe veyns and veſſells are full of groſſe humors, and corrupt iuices;Who from Within. the evill matter (being thicke, and therefore cannot breath out through

the pores) increaſeth her putrefaction (by the heat within) vnto the greater malignitie, and ſo becommeth Peſtilent.
                  Therefore thoſe bodies that are moyſt, and full of iuice; whoſe veines are ſtreit (and therefore apter to intercept then intertaine the iuices) and the thickneſſe of whoſe skin denies the tranſpiration of the excrements; theſe are eaſily poluted and infected.
                  And ſuch are Women; eſpecially women with childe, for their bodies are full of excrementitious iuices, & much heat withall; which is as oyle and flame put together.
                  Alſo thoſe that are very Coſtiue, or haue their water ſtopped; the noyſome vapours that are by theſe excrements ingendered, make the body ſubiect to infection.
                  Young children, in regard of their tender and ſoft bodies are apt to admit of any alteration vpon the lighteſt occaſion: and becauſe they fetch their breath ſhort (having but little roome for reſpiration) they draw in much Aire, with which the ſeed of Contagion is attracted: and ſo are apt to be infected from without. And likewiſe becauſe they are naturally moyſt, and feed vpon the moyſter kindes of meates; and feed alſo with more appetite then iudgement; they are therefore the more ſubiect to peſtilent infection from within.
                  Likewiſe, the ſanguine and delicate faire complexion, (whoſe bloud and iuices are finer and thinner then others, and therefore more ſubiect to mutation) are quickly infected: for the Plague is able to inſinuate it ſelfe into all the humors; but into ſome more eaſily then others; as into Bloud firſt, Choler next, Fleam after, and Melancholie laſt.
                  
                     Poore People, (by reaſon of their great want) living ſluttiſhly, feeding naſtily on offals, or the worſt & vnholſomeſt meates; and many times too long lacking food altogether; haue both their bodies much corrupted, and their Spirits exceedingly weakened: whereby they become (of all others) moſt ſubiect to this Sickneſſe. And therefore we ſee the Plague ſweeps vp ſuch people in greateſt heapes.

Indeed in regard of the Aire, the rich are as ſubiect as they; for both breath the ſame: and delicacie of feeding makes the rich as apt to corruption: But then they haue meanes to get holſome food, good attendance, and precious Antidotes to preſerue them; for we ſee by experience that ordinary things doe little prevaile. And this is the reaſon alſo why feweſt of the Rich doe die of the Plague.
                  
                  Great Eaters and Drinkers (who can never be free from crudities) as alſo Luxurious idle livers, and Whore hunters (who ſpend the ſtrength of their bodies prodigally) are very apt to be infected.
                  Alſo ſuch as in former times haue had cuſtomary evacuations by ſweat, haemorrhoids, vomitings, menſtrua, fontanells, or other like wayes of expelling noxious humors; and haue them now ſtopped.
                  Thoſe likewiſe that faſt much (their bodies being emptie) receiue more Aire in, then they let out.
                  Thoſe alſo that are Fearefull; as I haue alreadie ſhewed in the point of Paſſions.
                  Furthermore, neareneſſe of bloud or kindred, by reaſon of the ſympathy of natures, maketh men very apt to receiue infection from one of their owne bloud.
                  And ſo thoſe that are neare the ſicke in body, being continually converſant with them, or often comming about them; as Chirurgians, Keepers, Searchers, and ſuch like.
                  Laſtly, Virgins that are ripe and marriageable; are apt to receiue infection, and being once ſtricken, ſeldome or never eſcape, without great and precious meanes. Quia ſpirituoſum ſemen in motu cum ſit, facilè ſuccenditur; vel, quia intùs detentum facilè corrumpitur, & in veneni perniciem abit. Mindererus de Peſtilentia. cap. 10.
                  But ſome thinke by the ſtrength of Nature to prevaile againſt againſt this infection. But wee ſee ſtrong and well nouriſhed bodies die as faſt as others: and that not becauſe it is ſafer to be weake; but as Hippocrates ſayth, Corpora impura quò magis aluntur, eò magis laeduntur. Their taking of

the infection proues their body to be impure (though ſtrong) and the more an impure body is nouriſhed, the more it is endangered.
                  
                     Who are the moſt likely to eſcape.But thoſe are moſt likely to eſcape Infection, that are troubled with the Gout; in whom the nobler parts of the body doe expell the noxious humors to the ignobler.
                  Thoſe that haue Fontanells, or any other kinde of iſſue, as vlcers, haemorrhoids, or plentie of other evacuations; whereby the hurtfull humors are drayned away.
                  Olde folkes, whoſe bodies are dry and cold.
                  Alſo bold and confident Spirits, whoſe courage can reſiſt all feares, are to themſelues an Antidote; if their body be withall kept cleane and pure by the common rules of preſervation.
                  Laſtly, thoſe who keepe themſelues private, and vſe Antidotes and meanes preſervatiue, repoſing themſelues in God with David in the fourth Pſalme, and laſt verſe. He will giue his Angells charge over them, to keepe them in all their wayes, &c. Pſal. 91.5.6.7. and 3. verſes. But they muſt then walke in the Way that God hath ſet before them, and that is, the vſe of Phyſicke. For, The Lord hath created Medicines out of the Earth, and he that is wiſe will not abhorre them. Ecclus. 38.4. And with ſuch doth he heale men, and take away their paynes. verſ. 7. And in the ſixt verſe, He hath given men skill, that he might be honoured in his marveilous workes. Then forſake not the Phyſitian; neither by thy ſcorning of his skill, force him to forſake thee: for as St 
                     Paul ſaid of the Marriners in his Ship. Acts. 27.31. ſo may I ſay of Phyſitians in this Cittie; Except theſe tarry, wee cannot be ſaved.
                  
                  And ſo much for the Qualitie of the Plague.
                  
                  Now I come to the laſt Part of the Definition, diſcovering the Signes and Symptoms of it,The Signes & Symptoms of the Plague.
                      in theſe words: And for the moſt part is accompanied with a Feavor; as alſo with Spots called Gods-Tokens, or with a Blayne, or Botch, or Carbuncle.
                  
                  I ſay, for the moſt part it is thus accompanied; but not alwayes. For ſome are ſuddainly ſtricken, and die before they haue any acquaintance, either with diſtemper or outward paine.
                  
                     Some haue thought there may be a Plague and yet no Feavor: But Mindererus proues that to be an idle conceit. li. de Peſt. cap. 6.
                  Some alſo, haue died of the Plague, and yet nothing hath appeared outwardly: and ſuch as die ſuddainly, haue ſeldome any Spots, or ſuch like outward ſigne: and are therefore leſſe infectious then others, if they be not too long kept vnburied.
                  But to come to the ſeverall Points, which haue two Generalls, to wit, Inward Signes, and Outward Signes. The Inward is a Feavor, and his Symptoms. The Outward are, The Tokens, the Blayne, the Botch, and the Carbuncle.
                  
                  The firſt and Inward Signe, is a Feavor.
                     Feavor. As ſoone as the Heart is ſtricken with the putrid vapour, the Spirits grow diſtempered and inflamed. And this diſtemperature is a Feavor (not Proper, but Symptomaticall or Accidentall) and this Feavor is not of one kinde in every one; but diverſe, and ſuch are his Symptoms alſo. As ſometime Pleuriticke, ſometime Squinanticke, ſometimes Cholericke, ſometimes Continuall, and ſometimes Intermitting.
                  Theſe diſtempers relate the cruell Combate begun betwixt Nature and her M
                        •••
                     all Enemie.
                  The outward Signes bring Newes of the Hopes or Feares to which ſide the Victorie is like to fall. For, if Nature expell any part of the venom outward, it is a ſigne of ſome ſtrength in her.
                  If the Tokens appeare, either the Enemie is but weake;What kinde of fight is diſcouered by the Tokens. or els Nature is but weake, and ſhews her good will more then her power. For except the aſſault be but ſlight; thoſe repulſes will not get the Conqueſt.
                  If there be a Blayne or Bliſter,
                     Blayne. it ſhewes Nature is a little ſtronger, and the enemy not a little curſ
                        •
                     er.
                  If the Botch or great Apoſtumation riſe.Botch. Then hath Nature a crowd of corrupt matter to encounter with; an Armie of Enemies, againſt which ſhee ſtoutly beſtirres her ſelfe. If ſhee driue forth a great quantitie of matter, and withall be well fortified (within by Antidotes, to maintaine

her Spirits, and ſtrength: and without by perfumes) that while the Body of the Battalion is driven out, the skouts of ſtraggling vapours that ariſe from it, ſteale not in againe by the mouth, noſtrills, and other outward paſſages; then is ſhe like to winne the day.
                  And by the places where ſhe driues them out; it appeares, againſt which of the three Caſtles of Nature the greateſt aſſault is given and continued.
                  
                     What part is moſt affected.For if the Swelling ariſe in the Armepits, it ſhews that the the Seidge is continued (where it firſt begun) at the Heart. If in the necke, then is the Battery layd at the Brayne. And if in the Groyne, then is the Liver beleaguered. But ſometimes theſe Princes are all at once aſſaulted; and then is it altogether vnlikely that Nature can recover. For though both ſhe and they be never ſo ſtout, and ſeeme for a time to prevaile, by expelling abundance of matter (in the breaking of the Botches) yet Nature may be ſo over-charged; and the enemie (whoſe venome is ſly and ſubtle) may ſhew himſelfe ſuch a Machavilian, as one way or other he weakens her forces, puts her braue Spirits to flight, and tyrant-like demoliſheth all her beautious Buildings.
                  
                     Carbuncle.If the Carbuncle ariſe. Then we may ſay, Nature playes the Lion, but alas ſhee hath to deale with a fiery Dragon: this of all venoms being the moſt malicious and cruell.
                  But that the colours of theſe bloudy Enſignes, may the better be diſcovered, I will play the Herald, and blazon every Signe by himſelfe. So many (I meane) as are moſt inſeparable from the Plague, & therfore chiefly to be reſpected. As for the reſt, (though they be many) they belong as well (and more properly) to other diſeaſes; and are more deceitfull, and leſſe vſefull to any but the Phyſitian onely.
                  
                     The Signes of the Plague (therefore) are commonly theſe.
                  
                  
                     Signes of being Infected.Firſt, a ſecret ſinking of the Spirits and Powers of Nature, with a painfull wearineſſe of the bones, and all without any manifeſt cauſe. Then follows great trouble and oppreſſion of the heart, that the partie vnquietly rowles vp and downe for reſt from one place to another; ſighing often, and either offering

to vomit, or vomiting filthy ſtuffe of divers colours, yellow, greene, and blackiſh; then come paines in the head, which ſtill increaſe; and faintneſſe. But after theſe come the ſureſt Signes, which are the Tokens, Blayne, Botch, and Carbuncle.
                  
                  The Tokens are Spots of the bigneſſe of Flea-bitings,The Tokens deſcribed. ſome bigger, ſome as bigge as a penny. They ſhew themſelues commonly in the breſt and backe; but they will ſometimes appeare in other places alſo. In ſome they will be many, in ſome but a few, in others but one or two. In colour they are for the moſt part of a pale blew, but ſomtimes alſo purple or blackiſh, circled with a reddiſh circle.
                  The Blayne is a little Bliſter ſomwhat like one of the Swine-Pocks; and many times of the ſame colour;The Blayne. but ſomtimes, of a blewiſh or leaden colour; and being opened, affordeth filthy matter of the like complexion. Round about the Bliſter, there is a redneſſe the breadth of a groat, ſix-pence, or nine-pence: Theſe will riſe in any part: ſomtimes one alone, ſomtimes two or three; but never very many. And theſe will breake, and fall, and leaue a dry cruſt, which will ſcale off.
                  The Botch is a hard ſwelling,The Botch. riſing as I ſayd before in the necke, vnder the eares, or vnder the chinne; in the armepits; & in the groynes. It ſwelleth ſomtimes no bigger then a Nutmeg; ſomtimes as bigge as a Wall-nut; others as a Hens egge, and ſome as bigge as a Mans fiſt. Alſo in ſome it ſwelleth out very fully to be ſeene plainly, and becommeth ſo ſoare that it can endure nothing to touch it; in others it lieth low and deepe in the fleſh, onely to be found by feeling; and ſomtimes alſo ſcarcely to be felt; but if you touch the place, it is painfull. Thoſe that lie high and plaine to be ſeene, are more hopefull; the low lurking ones are very ominous and pernicious.
                  The Carbuncle riſeth like a little puſh or puſtle,The Carbuncle. with a prettie broad compaſſe of redneſſe round about it. It is wonderfull angry, and furiouſly enflaming, as if a quicke

coale of fire were held to the place: whence it hath his name Carbunculus, a little coale of fire. It creepeth ſecretly in the fleſh next vnder the skin, and is full of ſuch a furious malignant poyſon, as it will quickly conſume and eate out ſo great a peece of fleſh (for the capacitie it is in) as a man would wonder how it could ſo ſuddainly be done: being as if one did burne a hole with a hot iron. And it is ſtrange to ſee that ſo ſmall a tumor ſhould be ſo deviliſh and dangerous to life: for if it be not with great care, and exceeding good meanes attended, it bringeth ſpeedy death.
                  
                     How to know if one be dead of the Plague, when neither Spots, Blayne, Botch, nor Carbuncle appeare. Mr. Iohn Baniſter.
                     But moreover obſerue this. Somtimes (as I ſaid before) a man dies of the Plague, when neither before nor after he is dead, there appeareth any Tokens, or Blayne, Botch, or Carbuncle. And yet there will be a ſigne which few haue obſerved; My Grand father (who was a famous man, and of great experience) hath taught it me; and my Father (a Phyſitian of aboue fortie yeares practiſe and experience) hath confirmed it vnto me. That is, that after ſuch a body is dead, in one place or other the fleſh will grow ſofter then the reſt: and the whole body will alſo grow ſofter & ſofter, and the longer the body lies, the ſofter will be the fleſh. Which ſhews the vileneſſe of the putrefaction within. Heurnius mentions this alſo among his ſignes in his booke De Peſte; and addeth alſo theſe.
                        Heurnius his ſignes of a body dead of the Plague. That in a Body dead of the Plague, The noſe lookes very blew, or blackiſh blow; as if it had beene beaten or bruiſed. The like colour is in the eares and nayles: and ever worſe coloured then other dead bodies vſe to be.
                  
                  Thus haue I diſplayed thoſe Signes which are leaſt fayling: that the Searchers may rightly informed themſelues; and not miſtake (as many haue done) calling the purple ſpots of the Peſtilent Feavor Gods Tokens. And ſomtimes letting Bodies paſſe as not dead of the Plague, becauſe they had neither Tokens, Botch, nor Carbuncle. I haue done it alſo to teach people how they may know when they are ſtricken with this infection; that they may preſently haue recourſe to ſome skilfull man, and good meanes to recover them before it be too late. An houre is a precious ſpace of time, and cannot be let ſlip but with hazard.
                  
                     And having thus ſhewed you what this dreadfull Sickneſſe is, what are the Cauſes, Qualities, and Signes of it. Before I leaue you, I will leaue with you a ſhort generall direction to keepe your body ſafe from infection: and alſo (if you feele ſuſpicious ſignes of being taken) how to begin to driue the venome from the heart, till ſuch time as you may haue ſome more ſpeciall meanes (particularly fitting your preſent conſtitution and ſtate of body) by the counſell of ſome skilfull Phyſitian.
                  
               
               
                  While Health continueth,
                  It is neceſſary that twiſe in the weeke,Preſervatiue Medicines. the body be evacuated with ſome gentle purging Pill, to keepe the humors from ſuperfluous increaſe.For Men and Women generally to be vſed. And in this caſe the Pills of Ruffus (which are to be had in every Apothecaries ſhop) are very apt and good. Or take of theſe Pills of mine twice or thrice in a weeke.
                  
                     Rs. Aloës Roſatae, vnc. j.
                        Pillulae Bradwelli.
                     
                     Rhabarbari,
                     Croci, ana drach. iij.
                     
                     Myrrhae, drach. vj.
                     
                     ſantali citrini, drach. j.
                     
                     ambrae grifiae, ſcrup. j.
                     
                     Cum ſyr. de ſucco Citri, q. ſ.
                     fiat Maſsa Pillularum.
                  
                  
                     Make Pills of 8. or 10. grains a peece. Take ij. or more of them in the morning faſting, foure or fiue houres before meate; They may be taken beſt in Syrup of Roſes ſolutiue, or in Conſerue of Violets. And preſently after them drinke a little white Wine mixed with a little Balme-water (in cold weather): with Roſe water, and a little Roſe-Ʋineager (in hot weather): and with Carduus, or Scabious water in temperate weather.
                  On the other dayes wherein you take no Pills. Take every morning faſting a dram or two (or the quantitie of a Nutmeg) of London Triacle, with as much conſerue of red Roſes: this is for a temperate Conſtitution.
                  
                     A cold conſtitution may take the Triacle alone, onely ſweetening it with a little ſugar.
                  
                  And a hot complexion may mixe both the Triacle and Conſerue in a few ſpoonefulls of Roſe-water and Vineager.
                  
                  Theſe Powders following are good to caſt into the Broths of ſuch as are ſicke, or haue weake ſtomachs.
                  
                     Take of Red Saunders, halfe an ounce,
                     Cynamom iij. drams and halfe,
                     Saffron, halfe a dram.
                  
                  powder them fine, and mixe them together.
                  Another.
                  
                     Take of Cynamom, halfe an ounce.
                     Cloues, halfe a dram.
                     Red Corall, ij. ſcruples.
                     Saffron, halfe a dram.
                     And the weight of all in Sugar.
                  
                  Make theſe into Powder, and mixe them together.
                  Some giue this.
                  
                     Take of Pearle prepared, ij. drams.
                     Corall red, and white, of each halfe a dram.
                     Red Roſe leaues dried, Saffron,
                     Spodium, of each a ſcruple.
                     Cynamon a dram.
                  
                  Make them into fine Powder, and mixe them.
                  
                     This is my counſell for thoſe of ripe age, and for Women that are not with Childe.
                  
                  But for thoſe Women that breed Childe, and alſo for Infants or young Children, there ought to be another way of preſervation:

in whom Diet, muſt be moſt intended, and no purging vſed.
                  
                     
                        For Women, therefore,
                     Let them keepe their bodie ſoluble,For Women with Childe. by ſome gentle and familiar Suppoſitories; or gentle Clyſters, made of Poſſet-ale with Camomill flowers, and a little new-drawne Caſſia. Take theſe in the afternoone: now and then.
                     Let them alſo every morning take the quantitie of a Nutmeg of this Medicine following.
                     
                        Take Harts-horne, Cynamon, Nutmegs, all the Saunders, of each a dram. Roots of Angelica, Zedoarie, Enula-Campane; of each halfe a dram. Powder all theſe.
                     
                        Then take Conſerue of Bugloſs and Borage, of each iij. drams. With an equall quantitie of Syrup of Citrons, and of dried Roſes.
                     
                     Mixe all together, and make a Conſerue.
                     
                     Take it (as is ſayd) faſting, and faſt two houres at leaſt after.
                     Or els, Take Harts horne, red and yellow Saunders, of each two drams. Cloues and Cynamon, of each one dram.
                     
                     Beat them into fine Powder, and mixe them together.
                     With ſome of this, ſpice your Meate, Broth, or Cawdell; or whatſoever you haue to breakfaſt: and ſqueez into them a little iuice of a Lemon. You may adde alſo ſome Sugar as you pleaſe. Let this be your Break-faſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     For young Children.
                     There is nothing better then Bole armoniake,
                        For young Children. 
                        with a little Tormentill roote, and Citron Pills made into fine Powder: which you may mix with their meats, or caſt into their Broths: for their breakfaſt.
                     If they be coſtiue, put vp a violet comfit or two for a Suppoſitorie. Or mix a little Caſſia, newly drawne, in ſome broth of a Chicken, and giue it them now and then in a morning faſting. Let them faſt two houres after. And that day vſe not the powder, before preſcribed.
                     
                        
                        Obſervation.And note this. When you ſuſpect a Childe to be ſicke of the Wormes, in a Contagious time; vſe not Wormeſeed and thoſe common trifling things: but order him as if you ſuſpected he had the Plague; for that diſeaſe (comming of ſo much Putrefaction, as it doth) is as apt to receiue the infection of the Plague, as is Tinder to take fire. It muſt not therefore be dallied with.
                     But at ſuch a time, you may giue twentie or thirtie graines of this Powder following, for two or three mornings together.
                     
                        Take Harts-horne, j. dram.
                        Citron pill,
                        Rootes of Angelica,
                        and Tormentill,
                        Rhubarb, and Coralline, of each halfe a dram.
                     
                     Make theſe into fine Powder, and giue it as is ſaid in a little Carduus water, ſweetned with ſome ſugar.
                     Thus much for Preſervation in Health.
                  
                  
                     
                        What courſe is to be taken with him that is Infected.
                        But if there be Suſpicion of Infection, you muſt then looke about for a new courſe.
                     In which caſe generally I condemne both Purging and Bleeding: for I know no vſe of them in reſiſting or expelling the Venom; which is no other way effected but by Sweating and Running of the Soares.
                     
                     Yet I confeſſe Phlebotomie hath his vſe in Sanguine and Strong bodies; ſo it be at the very firſt, while the Spirits are ſtrong and able of themſelues to make good reſiſtance. But if that firſt opportunitie be let ſlip; I thinke it better to let it alone altogether; then to doe it out of ſeaſon; and ſo to impaire naturall ſtrength, which in this caſe ought moſt eſpecially to be preſerved and augmented.
                     Againe, though Sweating be the true way, yet it muſt not be violent; for that alſo weakens the Spirits, and makes the body faint, therefore thoſe Sweating Medicines muſt be mixed with Cordialls.
                     
                     As for example.
                     
                        Take Mithridate, or London Triacle, one dram.

Myrrh, Enula Campane root, and Butter burre roote, of each ten graines.
                     
                     
                        Mixe theſe in a quarter of a Pint of Poſſet-ale and white Wine mixed together; to which you may adde ſome ſugar to make the taſte ſomthing gratefull.
                     
                     Goe into your warme bed, then drinke this draught preſcribed, and cover you with a reaſonable weight of cloths; and ſo ſweat two or three houres, or ſomewhat more, as your ſtrength will beare. But take heed you ſleepe not in this while. Then by degrees let the clothes be taken away, firſt one, and then another; when you haue ſweat ſufficiently, or as much as you can endure. And let ſome one with warme Napkins wipe you drie, and ſhift your linnen; being very carefull of taking cold.
                     Then preſently take this Iulep.
                     
                     
                        Take of Carduus water three ounces. Syrup of Lemons one ounce. Bole armoniake, Tormentill, Angelica roote, of each one ſcruple.
                     
                     Mixe all together, and drinke it off.
                     Doe this once in twelue houres, if you finde ſtrength to beare it, till you haue performed it at the leaſt three times: and at the ſecond and third times, before you beginne to ſweat, binde vnder either arme-hole, and to eyther groyne, ſome thin ſlices of Radiſh roots, beaten with a little bay-ſalt, and ſprinckled with a little Ʋineager and Roſe-water: wrap them vp in foure little thin rags, and apply them.
                     Alſo, apply to the region of the heart, that Quilt which I haue preſcribed in ſtead of an Amulet.
                     
                     When this is done, and the Soares beginne to ſhew themſelues; follow the adviſe of thoſe that are appointed to that purpoſe. For I muſt not enter into the infected houſe. Therefore farewell.
                  
               
            
            
               And the LORD in Mercie looke vpon this afflicted CITTIE.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            IF any be pleaſed to vſe my Antidotes; I haue two Powders, one is for daily vſe, called Pulvis Peſtilentialis; the other in caſe of ſpeciall danger, called Pulvis Vitalis. I haue alſo an excellent Electuarie, which I call Antiloimon, for his ſingular vertue againſt the Plague. I haue likewiſe Lozenges, and Trochiſks to hold in the mouth; and rich Pomanders to ſmell too. They were all of my Grand-fathers invention, and haue beene proved to be admirably effectuall, both by his and my Fathers experience. I confeſſe they are coſtly: but ſlight meanes and cheape Medicines (how ever they promiſe) proue as deare as death. For we ſee by woefull obſervation, that the Plague will not be repelled but by imperious encounters. I could relate very true and admirable ſtories of the effects of thoſe three Medicines aboue mentioned, but I will begge no mans beliefe. Whoſoever knows any thing of the name of Iohn Baniſter, muſt needs haue heard of many famous Medicines by him invented. The firſt Powder is 12. pence a dram: his quantitie, to be taken at once is halfe a dram. The ſecond is 3. pence a graine: the quantitie is 10. or 12. graines. The Electuarie is, 2. ſhillings 6 pence an ounce: the quantitie is one or two drams.
            
            
               Becauſe many men know that I haue a whole volume of excellent Receipts left me both by my Grandfather, and my Father; and leſt they ſhould cenſure me as too ſtrict and covetous in keeping all ſecret to my ſelfe, I haue thought fit for the common good; to divulge this excellent Antidote following.
            
               Electuarium De Ovo,
               Stephani Bradwelli.
            
            
               Rs. vitelli ovi vnius,
               Croci pulveriz. ſcrup. ij.
               
            
            
               Conterantur ſimul donec in Pultiformam rediguntur. Poſtea imponantur in alia teſta vacua, cum exiguo foramine in capite facto; benè obturetur: et lento igne donec teſta nigreſcit aſſetur. Dein exempta materia, exiecetur & ſubtiliſſime pulverizetur. Cui
            
            
               Adde rad. tormentillae,
               zedoariae,
               Angelicae,
               Valerianae,
               Dictamni,
               Ariſtolochiae rotunda, ana vnc. j. ſs.
               Myrrhae, ſcrup. iiij.
               
               Baccarum lauri,
               Baccarum Iuniperi, and drach. ſs.
               Corticis citri, ſcrup. ij. ſs.
               ſem. citri,
               ſem. cardui Benedicti,
               ligni aloës, ana ſcrup. ij.
               
               Cornu Cervini,
               Boli armeni, ana drach. j. ſs.
               Moſchi gr. x. Pulveriz. omnia ſubtiliſs.
               Adde etiam Conſervae florum Calendulae, vnc. ij.
               
               Theriacae Lond. vnc. j.
               
               Cum aqua Cardui, et ſacchari. q. ſ.
               fiat Electuarium. ſ. ae.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THere is a Fellow in Diſtaffe Lane, that diſperſeth Bills abroad, bragging of a Medicine that was my Grandfather Baniſters; thinking vpon the fame of his name to get both glory and gaine to himſelfe. But let me warne all men to take heed of ſuch impudent lyers. My Grand-father was very ſcrupulous of giving any ſpeciall Receipts to others. But if any man can ſay he hath any Receipt of his: I am ſure, (if it were of any value) I haue the Coppie of it.
            But I profeſſe vpon the word and credit of an honeſt man, that among all his Receipts, he hath not preſcribed one Preſervatiue Drinke for the Plague: And beſides, his judgement ever was, that the beſt forme of an Antidote was either Powder, Pill, or Electuarie. Therefore this Drinke that he talkes of; was either none of my Grandfathers; or els ſome very ſlight thing, by him little eſteemed.
            I cannot beare it, that any ſhould abuſe the Kings people with ſophiſticate Medicines; and lay the imputation vpon ſo famous, and ſo all beloved a Man as Maſter Iohn Baniſter was.
            
         
      
   