
      
         
            
            A MEDITATION OF MANS MORTALITIE. CONTAINING AN Exposition of the Ninetieth PSALME.
            By that Reuerend and Religious Seruant of GOD Mr WILLIAM BRADSHAVV, sometime Fellow of Sidney Colledge in CAMBIDGE.
            Published since his decease by THOMAS GATAKER B. of D. and Pastor of ROTHERHITH.
            
               LONDON Printed by Iohn Dawson for Fulke Clifton, and are to be sold on New-fish streete hill vnder Saint Margrets Church. 1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND RELIGIOVS THE Lady GRACE DARCY, encrease of all Spirituall grace and true comfort here, with assurance of eternall glory and happinesse hereafter.
            
               
                  GOOD MADAME,
            
            These holy and heauenly Meditations were by the Author of them at first conceived upon occasion of the decease of that Religious

Gentleman, of blessed memory, your deare Father, under whose roofe hee then lived. Since which time it hath pleased God to giue you further occasion of Meditation in this kind, (not to mention the losse of the Author himselfe, which I well know, very feelingly affected you) by renting from you as it were the one halfe of your selfe, that worthy Knight, that was one flesh with you while he lived, and continueth one spirit with you notwithstanding his decease. It hath pleased God thus by sundry crosses successiuely to exercise his graces in you, and to preach that vnto you by reall, and those domesticall, (I may well so call them) Sermons, that this Discourse and Treatise mainly tendeth unto. Neither ought it at all Prov. 3. 11, 17. Heb. 12. 5, 6. to dismay or discourage any of Gods Children, when they shall consider, how it pleaseth God to follow them with Crosses, either in this kinde, or any other. Lam. 3. 27. Heb. 12. 10. It is for our good, that we be trained up in the schoole of afflictions. The Spirit of God pronounceth them Iob 5. 17. Psal. 94. 12. blessed, that are corrected and instructed.

And the very Heathen themselues haue held them Bias 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Infaelicem dicebat cum, qui infaelicitatē non tulisset. Laer. Nihil mihi videtur infaelicius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit aduersi. Demetrius Cynicus apud Senec. de provid. c. 3. Hinc Amasis Polycrati; 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Neminem unquam novi, aut fando audivi, qui non ad extremum funditus perierit, postres omnes prosperègestas. Herodot. hist. l. 3. unhappy, that had never tasted of any unhappinesse. Happy are wee that ever wee came into this Schoole, so be wee proue not truants in it, but Psal. 119. 67, 71. come better out of it then wee came in. Now this how it may be effected, this blessed servant of God now with God, having long beene experienced, and well profited therein, doth from the Spirit of God speaking by Moses the Man of God, here manifest. In regard whereof I haue the rather made choice to addresse that to your LADIESHIP, which your wel-deserving both of the Author and his issue doth otherwise giue you good interest in, and a just title unto. And so wishing unto your selfe, and all other that shall make use of it, that benefit by it, that by the Author was at first entended in it; with thankfull acknowledgement of your great loue and kindnesse shewed both to him while hee lived,

and to his poore Widow and Fatherlesse ones since his decease, I take leaue, and rest
            
               Your LADIESHIPS to be commanded in the Lord THO: GATAKER.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A MEDITATION OF MANS MORTALITIE.
            A GODLY MEDITATION ON PSALME 90. A Prayer of Moses the Man of God.
            
               THis Psalme is a Meditation of Mans Mortalitie: An Argument that all of vs haue most feeling Occasions to thinke of, and to be affected withall.
            This Meditation is conceiued in the forme of a Prayer, as is expressed in the Title; and is apparent by the Psalme it selfe: For the Prophet directeth his speech vnto God; and therein teacheth vs;
            That our Meditations, and thoughts, and affections in and about this Argument, should be holy and religious, such as are fit to be presented to God himselfe.
            
               
And that in our Meditations hereof we should withdraw our selues into the presence of GOD; and as it were in a speciall manner make him acquainted with them: For this is a meanes to reape found and true comfort thereby.
            The Author of this Meditation was Moses, as appeares also by the Title; Howsoeuer some vpon no good ground suppose, that it was a Psalme of Dauid made in the person of Moses. And albeit it be not set downe or mentioned in any other of Moses his workes; yet that no whit hindreth, but that it may well be his, as all Circumstances in it doe well fit thereunto. Neither indeed had any man after Moses more cause to meditate on this Argument, and to be throughly affected therewith.
            Now Moses the Author of it is here described to be the Man of God: that is, a speciall and more then ordinary Seruant of God. So that it is as if it had beene said; That famous and renowmed Seruant of God was in manner as followeth, affected with the consideration of Mans Mortalitie; and vpon the same penned this Psalme, that other of Gods seruants might learne of him, how in like manner to be affected therewith.
            Whence we learne:
            1. That euery true Seruant of God hath and euer shall haue iust cause to meditate of, and in most feeling manner to be affected with the consideration of this matter. Yea, the greater and more worthie Seruant of God one is, the more deeply will he be affected therewith.
            
               
2. That this is a part of our speciall seruice, wherein we shall shew our selues to be Men and Women of God in a speciall manner, to meditate seriously hereon, and to be affected herewith; As the neglect thereof is a speciall signe of one that is no Man of God.
            3. That the Seruants of God herein had neede not onely of generall Rules, but of speciall patterns and directions, how and in what manner to be haue themselues in this consideration; least on the one side they be swallowed vp in the gulph of despaire, or on the other side encouraged and hartned on to prophanenesse, making that cursed and damnable use thereof, that Epicures use to do, saying, Let vs eate and drinke; for to morrow we shall 
               Esai. 22. 13. 1 Cor. 15. 31. 
               die: Let vs be merrie while we may.
            
            The Psalme it selfe consisteth of 
                  1. A Preface.
                  2.

                        A Complaint.
                        A Petition.
                     
                  
               
            
            IN the Preface, the Prophet prayseth God: and by praysing him laboureth to moove God the rather to hearken unto the Complaint and Petition, that afterwards he is to make.
            And indeed this is a speciall meanes to make our Complaints to be regarded of God, and our Petitions graunted, when in the making of them, we shall bring hearts possessed with the loue of God, and our mouths filled with his prayse.
            For there is no true Child of God, be his soule neuer so deeply possest with sorrow and plunged

in misery, but he shall finde Arguments of the prayse and glory of God in the very middest of his misery. Neither will God find mercy to be mooved with their Complaints, nor regard their Requests, that in the apprehension of their miseries haue no hearts to conceiue, or mouths to utter his prayse.
            So that would we mooue the Lord to Compassion in our misery, and to graunt our requests? Let us in the first place stirre vp our hearts, to consider Gods goodnesse, and prayse, and to manifest the same in the middest of all Gods Iudgements; els it will nothing boote us to begge, or to complaine. Those therefore that in the sense of their misery, can finde no true and heartie matter to prayse and glorifie God, though they should rend the Heauen with their cryes, and beg and aske from morning to euening, yet cannot looke to receiue any comfortable answer at Gods hands. So that herein we should examine our hearts and affections. For looke with what measure of the loue of God, and of the acknowledgement of his goodnesse they are replenished, in that measure may we hope that the Lord will hearken vnto us.
            The Prophet prayseth the Lord 
                  1. For his goodnesse towardes his people.
                  2. For his worthinesse in himselfe.
               
            
            IN the first he manifests his thankfull minde to God for his kindnesse passed; in the other his hope & confidence in God for the time to come.
            
               
               
                  VERS. I. Lord, thou hast beene our dwelling place in all generations.
               IN this first part, the Prophet acknowledgeth, That God at all times, and in all ages hath had a speciall care of his Saints and Seruants, to prouide for them all things necessary for this life; For vnder the name of dwelling place, or Mansion house, the Prophet vnderstandeth all helpes and comforts necessary for this life, both for maintenance and protection. For the use of such houses was wont to be not onely to defend men from the iniurie of the Wether, and to keepe safely, within the walls and vnder the roofe, all other things necessary for this life; and to be a place of abode, wherein men might the more commodiously prouide for all other things necessary, and walke in some Calling, profitable to their neighbour, and to the glory of God: But also to protect them from the violence of bruit Beasts and rage of enemies. Now the Prophet herein seemes to note a speciall and more immediate prouidence of God toward himselfe, and the people of God: (For of all kind of people they seemed to be most forsaken and forlorne:) That whereas the rest of the world, seemed to haue their habitations & Mansions rooted in the earth, and so to dwell vpon the earth; to liue in Citties and walled Townes in all wealth and State; Gods people were as it were without house and home. Abraham was called Hebr. 11. 8, 9. out of his owne Country, from his fathers house, where no doubt he had goodly buildings, and

large revenues, and was commanded by God to liue as a Forreiner in a strange Country, amongst sauage people, that he knew not; and to abide in Tents, Boothes, and Cabins, hauing little hope to liue a setled and comfortable life in any place. In like manner liued his posteritie, Isaac, Iacob, and the twelue Patriarks, wandring from place to place, in the Land of Canaan; from thence translated into the Land of Egypt; there liuing at courtesie, and as it were Tenants at will, and in such slauery and bondage, that it had beene better for them to haue beene without house and home. After this for fortie yeares together, (at what time this Psalme was pen'd,) they wandred vp and downe in a desolate Wildernesse; Remoouing from place to place, and wandring as it were in a maze. So that of all the people of the Earth, Gods owne people had hitherto liued as Pilgrimes and banished persons, without house or home. And therefore the Prophet here professeth, that God himselfe more immediately by his extraordinary prouidence, for many ages together had protected them, and beene as it were a Mansion-house vnto them; That is, The more they were depriued of these ordinary comforts of this life, the more was God present with them, supplying by his extraordinary and immediate Prouidence, what they wanted in regard of ordinary meanes.
               The due consideration of this point may minister matter of great Ioy and Comfort to such children of God as are thoroughly humbled with the

consideration of Mans Mortalitie in generall, or of theirs, that they relie and depend vpon in speciall: and it may serue as it were for a bottome, and for brinkes to keepe their sorrow within bounds and compasse. For surely this cannot but bee a meanes of great sorrow and trouble of minde to them that liue and depend vpon others, (especially when any feeling occasion shall be offred vnto them) to consider the mortalitie of these that they depend vpon, and from whom they receiue the comforts and meanes of this life, upon whose life and breath, vnder God hitherto they haue enioyed their Mansion, or dwelling places. Neither can it be lesse sorrow and trouble for these vpon whom others depend, to consider their owne Mortalitie, when they shall haue wife and children, or any other depending vpon them, liuing and breathing as it were by them; It cannot I say, but goe neare their hearts, if they loue those that are vnder them, to thinke, that they are but mortall and frayle flesh, that they know not how soone they shall be called from them, and that then they shall leaue them destitute of those comforts and helps which now they haue by them. Sorrow herein, especially when by the hand of God we shall be called to thinke of our Mortality, can hardly keepe it selfe within bounds and compasse. But if we could meditate of that which the Prophet here speaks, it would support and vphold vs, and keepe our feares and sorrowes within bounds and compasse.
               Hence then we are to learne:
               
                  
1. That God is in all those meanes and comforts, and stayes that we haue in this life: That we should not liue in any dwelling place, vnder any person with any comfort or content, were it not by the Prouidence of God, and such a Prouidence as Gods childe shall (if he rouse vp his thoughts) haue such a sence and feeling of the same, that he shall see and feele God in the meanes: and shall acknowledge, that though he haue had a house to dwell in, and other helps of this life, yet they are nothing without God, that it is he indeed that is his dwelling, his liuing, his maintenance, &c.
               2. That the more that God withdraweth these meanes from his children, the poorer and more vncertaine their states are in their houses and Farmes, or places of abode, the more shall they find the Lord to be himselfe all these vnto them. For his Prouidence herein is neuer more felt then when they are most destitute of all outward helps and meanes.
               3. This is a Doctrine of comfort, not onely in regard of our selues, but of those we shall leaue behind vs. Euery man cannot leaue his wife or children, or seruants houses to dwell in, though they desire and endeuour it neuer so much. Yet this may be a 
                     •
                  ay vnto vs, and may moderate our griefes herein, That God himselfe is a dwelling house vnto all 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; and certainly will prouide for all his, whatsoeuer shall be needfull and the more destitute and forlorne we leaue them, when through mortalitie we shall be taken away from

them, the more he will be an habitation and Mansion house vnto them; which is a surer house then any of our houses of stone and clay: And this we may be sure to leaue our wiues and children, if they be Gods.
               4. The more experience we shall haue of this good Prouidence of God, the more let vs be readie to giue the prayse and glory thereof to God: And shew our selues in our deepest thoughts of Mortalitie to be such as yet do acknowledge God to haue beene in all ages an habitation vnto his, and at all times vnto vs.
               5. Let vs delight onely in this Mansion, which we cannot let nor loose: which will not leaue vs, when we leaue this world, but will abide by vs for euer.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 2. Before the Mountaines were brought forth, or euer thou hadst formed the earth; euen from euerlasting to euerlasting thou art God.
               THE second Argument of Gods prayse is from his worthinesse and excellencie of himselfe; That he is a God eternall and immutable; one that euer hath beene, and euer shall be the same; in whom there is no alteration, nor shadow Iam. 1. 17. of change. He was God before the Mountaines were brought forth, yea, before the earth was made, and he will be God for euer and euer: And those properties and qualities that are in him; were euer in him, and will be in him for euer and

euer. This prayse of God doth fit that present Argument which the Prophet hath in hand: And tends to moderate and keepe in compasse immoderate sorrow that may arise either from the consideration of our owne Mortalitie, or the Mortalitie of any other. For that, notwithstanding the changes and alterations that we see in the world, that may discourage vs, and breede distrust and diffidence in vs, yet, if we be the true Children of God, we haue had a true feeling and sence of his loue and speciall Prouidence ouer vs. And if we haue once felt it indeed, there is no cause but to hope for the continuance thereof. For as he is an eternall God, so his loue is an eternall loue; it was before all Worlds, and shall be for euer and euer.
               Is therefore the hand of God vpon thee? Dost thou see and feele thy selfe to be mortall? Dost thou see those thou dependest vpon to be such? What? Dost thou thinke therefore that God that did loue thee, and that in his loue raised vp these and these meanes for thee, is mortall also and mutable? No: Though he change and alter the meanes, and therby would haue thee to feare and tremble before him; yet doe not thou for all that despaire? Be thou still the Child of God: Let no changes either threatned or effected change thy minde and affection to God: and though God shall for a time humble thee, and seeme for a time to thrust thee from thine house, and all comforts of thy life, to make thee to know thy selfe; yet his affection is the same to thee that euer it was; it

can no more change then he doth change. And therfore as God out of his eternall loue hath heretofore beene good vnto thee, so be thou assured, that out of the same loue he will continue so to be in the midst of all changes and alterations whatsoeuer.
               The particular description of Gods eternitie and immutabilitie fitteth this place and Argument. What more firme then rockes and mountaines! What more stable then the earth that neuer Psal. 93. 2. And 78. 69. Eccles. 1. 4. remooues out of his place, nor moues in his place? Yet that God, which is eternall, which was before they were made, is more immouable then they. The greatest Mountaines vpon the earth, yea, the earth it selfe shall sooner be mooued and remoued, then he, not onely in his nature, but in his affection and disposition. And though wee had neuer such certaine dwelling places in this World, though our houses were built vppon the firmest Rockes and highest Mountaines; yet wee should not be sure, except the Lord himselfe bee our dwelling place. Our confidence in such places is nothing without him. What sayth the Lord by his Prophet to the Edomites, Obadiah 3. 4. The pride of thy heart hath deceiued thee thou that dwellest in the Clefts of the Rocke, whose habitation is on high; that sayth in his heart, Who shall bring mee downe? Whereas if the Lord bee our dwelling house, we Psal. 18. 2. are sure and safe. For hee is a Rocke, a Castle, a Fort, a Secret place to all his.
            
            
               
               
                  VERS. 3. Thou turnest man to destruction, saying, Returne, ye Children of Adam.
               HIs complaint is to God, as to the Author of our mortalitie: and that mortalitie which is from God he setteth forth. 1. By diuerse Comparisons, 2. By the cause that moueth God to make man see such mortalitie.
               In the first place the Prophet conceiueth of God as of a Potter, that hauing of dust tempered a masse and framed it into a vessell and dried it, doth presently, within a minute of an houre after, dash it againe in peeces, and beat it to dust, in passion as it were speaking vnto it, Get thee to the dust againe.
               
               The word here translated Destruction, signifies a Beating, or Grinding, or Pounding of a thing to Powder. And the Prophet seemes to allude to the third of Genesis, where God speaks of Adam, Dust thou art and to dust thou shalt returne, as if he should Gen. 3. 19. say: O Lord, thou that hast made and framed man of the dust of the earth, thou beatest him to dust againe: And as thou madest him by thy Word alone, So with thy Word thou suddainly turnest, and beatest him againe to dust; as a man that makes a thing, and presently marres it againe.
               Hence we learne:
               1. That as it is God by whom we liue; So it is he by whom and whose meanes we die: By what meanes soeuer men come to their ends, whether by a timely or vntimely death, God hath the maine stroke. The sword that takes away our life,

must goe out of his mouth, before we can die. Its hee that sayth, Returne, Oh sonne of man ! before a man can returne to dust. So then let vs not so much regard the threats and brags of men: but let vs that feare death, feare the Lord that gaue life. For he onely quickneth, he onely killeth. Deut. 32. 39. 1 Sam. 2. 6.
               
               2. He doth it with a word, against which is no resistance, when that word is once come out of his mouth, it is not all the dyet Physicke, & helpe, and prayers in the world that can saue the life, And this he can doe suddainly, in the twinckling of an eye. And therefore we should, as wee loue our liues, feare him, and take heed how we offend and displease him, that can with a word turne the strongest man into dust.
               3. The style that God giueth to man, when he calleth him out of this world, is the Child of Adam, and of Dust: as if he said; Thou art but the Child of dust; of dust thou art made; thou art sprung from them that were but dust, and which are all turned vnto dust; goe thou also to dust.
               So that we should thinke seriously of the matter that we are made of, and be humbled with the consideration thereof; And herein iustifie the Lord in his dealing. For why may not he that hath made vs of dust, turne vs againe vnto dust?
               And this should teach vs to take heed how wee place our maine and principall hope in Man, who is but the child of dust, who must returne to dust Psal. 146. 3, 4. as soone as God calls him, and bids him returne.
               4 This sheweth the absolute power which the Lord hath ouer these bodies of ours. A Potter

hath not more power ouer the vessell of clay that he maketh. Which as it should teach vs to take heede how we murmur and repine against GOD for ought he doth in this kind: so it should likewise admonish vs, to use our bodies whilest wee haue them, and before wee and they returne to dust againe, to his glory; That so from dust they may be raised againe by him to immortalitie.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 4. For a thousand yeares in thy sight are but as yesterday that is past, and as a Watch in the night.
               THe Prophet sheweth further in this part of his complaint, that God doth as it were suddainly raise vp a man and breake him againe, because that in his eyes a thousand yeares are but as yesterday that is passed; and as a watch in the night. Now if it be so with God in regard of his eternity, that a thousand yeares are but as yesterday, and the fourth part of a night; then surely in his eyes the life of man, though he should liue to threescore and ten, is but short; as short as if a man should make a thing, and marre it within a quarter of an houre, yea, in the very same minute or moment almost.
               Hence we learne.
               1. Not to measure length of time by the time we spend here, though wee were sure to liue till eightie or a hundred yeares, but to measure it by Gods eternitie; to consider what it is in respect of God, and of theirs that liue with God, and are in

grace and fauour with him. For surely when they haue enioyed his presence a thousand yeares in all blisse, they are no whit then weary thereof, nor is it but as if they had beene with him but an houre.
               2. This is a terror to the wicked, for though they be a thousand yeares in hell, yet with God it is but as yesterday. Which shewes the extreame folly of them, that for a little pleasure in this life, which is so vncertaine, and so momentary, do so little regard eternall woe.
               3. The consideration of this should perswade that God hath made vs for another end then to liue here. For we may not thinke he would with such endeuour make Man in his owne Image, to destroy it suddainly againe, and to no other purpose; But he destroys man, and makes him returne to dust againe, that he may translate him to another condition of life. And therefore our life here is but a way to another.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 5. Thou carryest them away as with a Floud—
               THE Prophet hauing before shewed what mortality God hath subiected the sonnes of Adam unto: how he doth make them, and as it were the same day, yea, the same houre that he hath made them, marre and destroy them againe, a thousand yeares in his sight being as yesterday, or but as it were the eyghth part of a day.
               He proceedes now to set forth this condition of

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
Man more plainly by three Comparisons.
               In the first Comparison, he resembles him in respect of his life to those things that are violently carryed-away in an Invndation. As we see in great and extraordinary floods & invndations, all that is in the way, Beast and Cattell, and all that are within the force of the streame are carryed violently away; so it is with man: God doth as it were set open certaine flood-gats against him, and by violent streames and inundations of waters, as it were, he sweepes him away. For (as he shewed vs before) the time that we liue here, though we live more then the ordinary period of mans daies is with God but a very short time, but as a watch in the night, the fourth part of the night. It continually flowes, and flowes faster, swifter, and with greater violence then the strongest streame; and it carryeth vs with it; and the course thereof wee cannot stay, no more then the ebbing and flowing of the Sea, or the courses of the Sunne and Moone. Against this streame we cannot swimme, but the more we shall striue against it, the faster we shall be carryed away with it.
               Hence the Prophet teacheth vs.
               To meditate seriously of the swift passage of our dayes, how our life runnes away like a streame of waters, and carryeth vs with it; our condition in the eyes of God, in regard of our life in this world being but as if a man that knowes not how to swimme, should be cast into a great streame of water, and headlong carryed downe in it, so that he may sprawle sometime, lift vp his head or his

hands, cry for helpe, catch hold of this thing and that for a time; but his end will be drowning, and it is but a small time that he can hold out, but that as it carries him away, so it will swallow him vp. And surely our life here if it be rightly considered, is but like the life of such a person, as is violently carryed downe a streame. All the actions and motions of our life, and for it, are but like vnto the striuings and struglings of a man in that case: Our eating, our drinking, our Physicke, our sports, and all other meanes, they are but like his motions, that is violently carryed downe the streame: When we haue done what we can, die we must, and be drown'd in this Deluge.
               The use of this consideration may be to teach us.
               1. The vanitie of Men, that thinke here vpon earth, to build them euerlasting habitations, and neuer to be remooued; and that trouble their minds about nothing but how they may get sure houlds and tenures here. Alas what vanitie were in this man that is carried down a violent streame of water, that hath no hope to recouer himselfe, but is sure, howsoeuer for some small time hee breathes and hath his sences, to bee drowned out of hand, yet whilst he breaths and hath his sences, to be thinking, and fore-casting of building of houses, of purchasing lands, of planting orchards, and of prouiding this thing and that thing for his use for fortie or sixtie yeares to come.
               2. This should teach vs in the want of the meanes of this life, for our selues and posteritie,

to be content to take it lesse to heart, then worldly and couetous persons vse to doe. Who in feares and distrusts in regard of the time to come, how they shall doe when they are old and not able to worke, how they shall liue when such and such friends be gone, how their children shall do when they are dead; many times in the abundance, for the present, of those things which others before their eyes doe want, liue most miserably and vncomfortably, yea, a life worse then death, and that onely for thinking of the time to come, whereas if these persons would thinke how mortall they, and their children are, how short a time they haue to liue here, how they are carryed away as it were with a flood, they and their children, and all else, these matters would neuer so much run in their heads, neither would they vexe and trouble themselues and others so much about them as they do: But now we dreame of immortalitie in this life, and put from vs as much as we can the houre of our death, So liuing and desiring to liue here, as if we should liue euer here, or there were no liuing els where. Were not they starke mad that seeing their children carried away with a flood, strugling and breathing in the waters for life, and readie to be drown'd, and no hope of pulling them out, would be carking and caring, and vexing themselues, how they should prouide for them? Nay, let Christians, seeing their liues are so short, here comfort themselues in their wants and their childrens, and labour so that small time they haue to liue, that after this short and transitorie life, they

and their children may liue eternally in Heauen.
               
                  —They are as a sleepe.—
               
               THE second Comparison followeth, wherein the Prophet compares the life of man & all the pleasures and sorrowes accompanying the same to a sleepe. Alas, what sooner passeth away? What is easier broken off then sleepe? how short also are the pleasures and sorrowes that are in sleepe? Surely the whole state and condition of a man in this life is but like the state and condition of a man in sleepe: all things fall out so like in either.
               Our life may be compared to sleepe in foure respects.
               
                  1. In regard of the shortnesse of it.
                  2. In regard of the easinesse of being put out of it.
                  3. In regard of the many meanes to disquiet and breake it off.
                  4. In regard of the many errors in it.
               
               For the first three; sleepe is but short: and the sweeter it is, the shorter it seemes to be. And as it is but short of it selfe, though it should last the full swinge of nature: So the soundest sleepe, is easily broken; the least knock, the lowest call puts men out of it; and a number of meanes and occasions there be to interrupt and breake it off. And is not it so with the life of man? Is not the longest life short? Is it not the shorter, the sweeter and fuller of contents it is? And is it not easily taken away? Are there not many meanes to bring vs vnto

our ends? Euen as many as there are to waken vs out of sleepe?
               For the fourth, how many errors are we subiect to in sleepe?
               In sleepe the Prisoner many times dreames that he is at libertie; he that is at libertie, that he is in Prison; he that is hungry, that he is feeding daintily; He that is in want, that he is in great aboundance; He that abounds, that he is in great want. How many in their sleepe haue thought they haue gotten that, which they shall be better for for euer, and when they are even in the hope of present possessing some such goodly matter, or beginning to enioy it, or in the midst of their ioy, they are suddainly awaked, and then all is gone with them, and their golden fancies vanish away in an instant. So for euill and sorrow as well.
               And is it not just so in the life of Man? Whose life passeth sooner away or swifter then theirs that haue most comforts and sweetest? Whose life is longer then theirs in seeming, that liue least at ease? Who are ordinarily more bound, more in trouble, haue greater vexation, and disquiet, then those that haue most libertie and aboundance? Who are freer and more at libertie, and want least, then they that haue least? How ordinarie a thing is it for men in the most aboundance to bee least satisfied? And in the poorest cottage to find the greatest content? And how suddenly are men even as if they had beene in a dreame cut off from all their hopes, all their delights and pleasures, that in this world they enjoyed?
               
                  
The use hereof then is;
               1. To teach vs, to account of the things that meerely concerne this life, the profits, the pleasures, the honors of it, but as of dreames; such as are transitorie, and passe away as a sleepe, that we can haue no certaintie or assurement of, but such as we may be depriued of even as easily, as we may be broken of our sleepe.
               2. To watch and take heed how we looke to place any setled comfort in this life, or the things of this life. For we shall find as many errours in it and the things thereof, as we doe in sleepe. Men may fancie this and that, but the issue will be nothing: no more then of him who going to bed hungry, dreames he eates, &c.
               3. This should teach Christians not to enuie, and malice the comforts, honors, and prosperity of wicked men: for they are but as dreames: thou hast much cause, hast thou not? to enuie a poore man, that he should fare daintily in a dreame.
               4. It should make vs thinke the lesse of the sorrowes and miseries of this life, that either our selues or others endure. Our selues here are but as a sleepe. The sorrowes that we endure here, especially for righteousnesse, are but as a dreame. Our sleepe will soone end, and our sorrowes will end with them, and wee shall see that we were but deluded herein.
               5. Neuer to thinke that we doe the actions of Men that are truely waking, but when we doe the actions that concerne the life to come, where we shall euer watch, and need no sleepe; where wee

shall euer reioyce, and neuer be deluded.
               
                  —In the morning they are like grasse that groweth.
               
            
            
               
                  VERS. 6. In the morning it flourisheth, and groweth vp: in the euening it is cut downe, and withereth.
               THE third Comparison followeth, wherein the life of Man is compared to grasse. That as it is with grasse; A man shall see it flourishing in the morning, and the same day cut downe and withered; So is man; This day flourishing and lustie, and to morrow laid in the dust; Nay, as it were in the morning well, and before night hee and all his strength and glory vanished and gone.
               1. The consideration of this should teach men in the midst of all their glory and state in this life, to thinke what a fading thing it is, how soone it is cut downe and withered. And therfore we should take heed, how we set our hearts vpon these transitorie things: for, as Medowes, when they are most pleasant, and fullest of varietie of flowers, they are then sodainly cut downe, and all the beautie of them vanished; So it shall be with all things that in this world wee delight in, whether life, or honor and riches, though a man flourish neuer so much in them; yet as it were the same day, they shall be taken from him, and he from them; and then their hearts will be as gone with them, that had their hearts before set on

them. Let vs therefore learne to set our hearts vpon another life, and the things thereof: and then we shall be sure neuer to loose that we loue. And let vs striue to be Plants in Gods house, liuing Plants, trees of righteousnesse, Planted by the rivers of his Sanctuary. And then wee shall neuer be cut downe: Our leaues shall neuer fall, our branches neuer wither.
               2. Let vs learne so to loue this life, and all things of this life, as matter that we must part with, that we haue no Lease or Assurance of for one day. And where God makes them instruments of comfort and helpe vnto vs, if we enioy them day after day, let vs blesse God for it, and count euery day that he lends vs, & euery blessing that he bestowes vpon vs day after day, an aduantage vnto vs more then we deserue.
               3. Let vs euery morning, fit and prepare our selues for cutting downe. Though we be neuer so lustie, and flourish neuer so much, yet let vs consider, that wee are but as grasse; and though this morning we flourish, yet before night we may be cut downe and withered; and all our glorie and comforts lie in the dust. It were well with vs if we so liued, that when death shall come to cut vs downe, we could not say, I little thought that I should die so soone.
               
               And for others whose liues are deare vnto vs, and whose deaths may bee a judgement vnto vs; let vs so set our sinnes before our eyes, that they may be a meanes to worke in vs an holy and religious feare of their death, in the midst of these

comforts and contents wee receiue from them; And how strong and flourishing so euer wee shall see them in the morning, yet let vs thinke with feare, that before euening they may be cut down, and we may loose them, and all the comforts that depend vpon them.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 7. For we are consumed in thine anger; and by thy wrath are we troubled.
               HItherto the Prophet in his complaint hath set forth by Comparison, what great mortalitie God hath brought vpon the Children of Adam. Now here in this verse he sheweth the cause thereof; The anger of God. Adam and all the sonnes of Adam haue offended him: and therfore he hath brought this universall mortality and deluge upon man. And this Anger of GOD hee sets forth;
               
                  1. By the cause.
                  2. By the greatnesse.
               
               Concerning the anger of God, wee must not thinke, that it is a perturbation of minde in him, whereby he indeed fretteth, and is vexed within himselfe, as men use to bee, whose wrath and anger doth ordinarily more hurt & torment themselues, then those they are angry withall. But it is in God an holy and just disposition, to inflict deserued punishment upon his creature. Though God therefore haue absolute power of his owne free will to destroy the creature which hee hath made without any cause, yet he doth not destroy

man without some speciall cause, and motiue therevnto. And this cause is not a pleasure and delight, as though it should be a sport and pastime of God to make and marre so excellent a workmanship of his owne; as it is with Children to kill Flies, or Huntsmen to kill wild Beasts. Neither is any speciall profit, or use, any cause thereof; As it is the cause, why Husbandmen cut downe grasse, not that they are angry with it, or that they place any delight in so doing, but for necessary use and benefit. But the true and immediate cause is Anger; that which is the cause of mortalitie in war. God hath beene prouoked by vs. And as a mightie King being prouoked by his subiects, nothing followeth but death; so is it with God.
               1. Hence then we learne to labour to see, and behold the wrath and anger of God, in sicknesse, distresses, old age, death, and in that mortalitie that we see in this world; and vpon speciall occasion to acknowledge it.
               And it should teach vs, to feare and tremble before him, and to take heed, how we farther prouoke him to wrath.
               2. We should admire the goodnesse and grace of God, that his wrath being so universall vpon all the sonnes of Adam, yet in this wrath he should remember mercy, and raise those againe to life, even to eternall life, that in anger he hath wounded to death.
               3. We should labour more to see the wrath of God in our accursed estate after this life. God doth but play with vs, as it were, in taking away

our liues here. And if the first death be such a signe thereof, what a signe therof is it in them in whom there appeare fearefull and prodigious fignes of the second death, which is eternall, wherein a man shall for ever die, and yet neuer be dead.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 8. Thou hast set our iniquities before thee; our secret sinnes in the light of thy countenance.
               THat wrath of God from which proceeds mortalitie, and all the troubles and calamities and alterations of this life that attend vpon the same, is set forth here; 1. By the cause, 2. By the greatnesse of it.
               The cause is the remembrance of our sinnes not knowne onely but secret.
               Whence we learne, that
               1. It is sin, that first kindled that fire of GODS wrath, whereby we are consumed on this wise. God is not angry with his creatures for nothing. But there is a just cause of that wrath of God, from whence proceedes the mortalitie of mankinde. Yea, the greater and more infinitely wise the Maiestie of God is, the greater must that cause bee that prouoketh him to wrath. Its weaknesse to be prouoked with a small matter: Weaknesse nor no propertie of weaknesse can befall the Almightie God. Sinne therefore, whatsoeuer it is, can be no small matter, no trifle, that prouokes the infinite Maiestie of God to wrath, and to such a wrath as hath such deadly effects.
               
                  
The use of this then is.
               When we see any signes of Gods displeasure in the world; (as which way almost can wee turne our eyes but we see it? even the very prints of death, how his footing is in euery Towne, yea, in euery House?) presently to thinke of sinne, and the greatnesse thereof, and to make it a meanes to make vs haue it in great detestation, in whom soever it is.
               2. It is our sinnes that haue prouoked God to this wrath. It was not the sinne of Angells, that made God thus angry with mankinde: Nor the sinne of any particular persons that made him angry with them all. But it is our owne sins, that haue done this: All of us, euery mothers sonne haue our parts, and haue joyned hands in prouoking the Lord to bring this universall mortalitie vpon the world:
               The true use therefore, that we are to make of this, Is not so much to thinke of sin in generall, or of this or that bodies sinne, when wee see the generall judgements of God; but to see and looke after our owne sinnes, wherein we haue trespassed against God, and broken his Law; and not rest till we haue found them out. Especially when the Lord by any speciall judgment shall come neerest vnto vs; (As the Lord hath lately to this family:) If we hereupon doe not make a speciall inquisition after our sinnes, and so by Repentance make our peace with God, wee haue cause even euery one of vs to feare a greater stroke, though this hath made many of our hearts to ake.
               
                  
3. They are not onely our greater sinnes, that haue prouoked God; but all our sinnes, great and small; not our publicke onely, and knowne sins, but our speciall and hidden ones; euery one of them hath his part herein. And if wee will not haue this wrath of God to pursue vs eternally, we must learne hence, not onely to hate and forsake our greater sinnes, and to repent of those that are great and notorious, but even of our smaller sins, of our lighter vanities also. Yea, herein we should not content our selues with leauing those sinnes which other and our selues knowe to bee sinnes; but we should seeke after our secret and hidden sins, whither there be not some sinnes in vs that we nourish in our selues, and know not to be sins. And to this end, we should diligently search into the Law of God, and not be at rest till wee haue taken notice of them: and giue no leaue of continuance to any the least sinne, but hate and forsake all.
               4. That all our sins are present before GOD. Our great, our small, our knowne, our secret sins, they are all in his presence, they are before his eyes, he knowes them, he sees, and beholds them. This should make vs the more afraid & ashamed to sinne; because there is no sinne how secret soever, but we doe it in the face of God, he looking on. A seruant that hath any grace or loue in him, whatsoeuer he may do behind his masters backe, yet he will not doe that before his Masters face which may prouoke and displease him; many things he doth priuately, that if he thought they

would come to his Masters knowledge, he would not doe them: But there is no sinne ever so secret, though committed in our Closet, yea, though in our owne breasts onely, but he knows it, and sees it, and beholds the committing of it.
               Further, this noteth the hay nousnesse of all sin. For those trespasses that are committed before the face of a Gouernour, are accounted contempts. So is euery sinne committed; it is committed in the eare and eye of God: and is therefore the more grieuous and odious.
               5. God needs no other light to discerne our sinnes by, but the light of his owne face. It peirceth through the darkest places: the brightnesse thereof enlightneth all things, discouers all things. So that the sins that are committed in deepest darknes, are all one to him as if they were done in the face of the Sunne. For they are done in his face, that shines more, and from which proceeds more light then from the face of the Sunne. So that this, it ought to make vs the more feareful to offend, Hee sees vs when we see not him, and the light of his countenance shines about vs, when we thinke our selues hidden in darkenesse.
               6. They are not onely then in his sight when they are a committing, and whilst the deed is doing; but euer after, when the act is past and gone, and forgotten, yet then is it before the face of God, even as if it were in committing: And how should this make vs afraid to sinne? When our sinnes are not onely in his sight while they are a committing, but so continue still for euer after

they are past and done.
               7. Gods sets our sins before him; this shewes he is so affected with them, hee takes them so to heart, that he doth in a speciall manner continue the remembrance of them. As those that hauing had great wrong, will store it vp, or register it, or keepe some remembrance of it or other, least they should forget, when time shall serue, to bee quit with those that haue wronged them; so doth God, and his so-doing is a signe, that he takes our sins deeply to heart; which should teach vs to feare the more how we offend him. When God in any judgement of death, or sicknesse, or losse of friends shewes his wrath, wee should thinke and meditate of this; especially when he comes neerest vs, Now the Lord lookes vpon my sinnes; they are now before him; and wee should neuer rest till wee had by repentance moued him to blot them out. Yea, to this end we should our selues call them to remembrance. For the more we remember them, the more God forgets them: the more wee forget them, the more God remembers them; the more we looke vpon our selues, the more he turneth his eyes from them.
               And this also we are to manifest and acknowledge, as here Moses doth vnto God himselfe by Prayer.
            
            
               
               
                  VERS. 9. For all our dayes 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     ▪
                   goe backe againe in thy wrath.—
               HItherto of the cause of that wrath of GOD which moueth him to smite the world with such mortalitie. Now here he further sets forth the same by the effects and degrees thereof in respect of that present Argument he hath in hand.
               1. That our dayes doe as it were goe backward in his wrath: That whereas God gaue vs being to liue, our life and our being is nothing els but a going backward as it were to death, and to nothing. Euen as if a stranger being suddainly rapt and carryed the mid way to his home, where are all his comforts, he should spend all the time that is behind, not in going forward to his home, but in going backward to the place from which he was suddenly brought. All the sonnes of Adam as soone as they haue being and liue are brought suddenly a great part of their way: And whereas they should goe forward and liue longer and longer, they from their first beginning to liue goe backward againe to death, and to nothing. This is the summe in effect with that which the Lord sayth in the beginning of the Psalme, Thou 
                  Verse 3. 
                  bringesi man to destruction; saying, Returne againe ye sons of Adam: As if he should say, Thou makest a man, and when he is made, hee in thy wrath doth hast to nothing else, but destruction, and to bee marred againe. Thus doe our dayes as it were goe backward, and wee in them returne from whence we came.
               
                  
Our lesson then hence is this.
               That our life in this life is nothing els but a returning backe againe vnto death. Euery man, whilst he is here, walkes to the house of his graue; and though he bee a little longer in going backe vnto the earth, then he was comming from it; yet he doth nothing while he is here but goe backe to it. Yea, our dayes passe away in such a manner, as if a man, being a childe should suddainly bee made a man; and after that should presently goe backe againe, and bee a child. So that though we haue here some time of growth and strength; yet the more wee grow in strength and yeares, the neerer we draw still to the place from whence we came. In so much that there be none of vs but are neerer to our end to day then yesterday, and this houre then the houre that is past. And though some walke backward more slowly somwhat then others doe; yet all goe one way; and no bodie knowes how swiftly, or how soone he shall come to his end.
               The use hereof.
               1. This should teach vs euery day to meditate and thinke seriously of our death, and the graue. It is the place that wee are continually trauailing unto. All the dayes and yeares we liue, goe backward as it were with us, and carry us backward thither. So that which way soever our faces are, we moue and goe thitherward. Since Adams fall all men are condemned and adjudged vnto one death at the least; and our life here is nothing else but a going to the place of execution. How then

should we not thinke of our end? Is it possible for condemned Malefactors, whilst they are going to the place of death, to forget wher-about they go? And yet though all our life bee nought else but a leading to death, yet ordinarily nothing lesse troubles our minds; and we so liue, as if death should neuer come neare vs, or we it. Nay, though we see many both neare vs and farre off vs die before vs, and wee know that our condition is the same; yet we lay it little to heart, as if wee alone were exempted from the common condition of all Adams issue.
               2. This should teach vs also, whilst we do liue here, to behaue our selues in that manner, that wee may die with comfort. And this should bee it that in this life should most trouble us, and about which we should most beat our braines, how wee should so die that wee might eternally liue. But alas that which runs altogether in our minds whilst we liue here, is about the meanes of our living here, how we shall doe for this yeare and the next, and the other yeare after that; and how our children should do after us: never taking thought for the maine: which is as if parents and children being altogether drawne vpon a Sled, or carryed in a Cart, for diuers dayes to execution, and the meanes of this life being left them onely for this end, to bring them thither; they should never trouble their mindes about that that they were drawne unto, but should bee carking and caring, how they should doe, and their children for this thing and that thing concerning this life.
               
                  
The second point is that our dayes goe thus backward in the wrath of God: that is to say; through the iust judgement of God vpon the sin of Man it comes to passe, that our dayes thus returne and goe backward, and passe away.
               This then is our lesson:
               That euery day whilst wee liue here is a day of wrath; an euill day, subiect to some judgement or other. Few and euill (sayeth old Iacob) be the daies of my Pilgrimage. All things vnder the Sunne are 
                  Genes. 47. 9. Eccles. 2. 11, 17. 
                  nothing but matter of vanitie and vexation of spirit. The best of Gods Saints haue found nothing here that this life and world hath brought forth, but matter of sorrow. What day is it that passeth ouer our heads, but wee might easily perceiue it (if we were not besotted,) marked with Gods wrath, bringing with it some judgement and Memorandum or other of Gods anger for sin? There is not a day nor houre that passeth ouer our heads, but that wee might, if wee looked about us, and considered the judgements that some way or other cleaue to vs, See, that it is in some respect or other passed away in wrath.
               The use of this serues:
               1. To reproue those that haue no sence and fecling thereof; but so passe away their time and dayes whilst they haue them, as though they were vnder no wrath and judgement at all; But all were well and sure betweene God and them: That glory in their daies past, how merrily they haue liued, and how many comforts they haue had; such as never felt any wrath of God past, nor feare any to

come, but say ordinarily in their madd moods; Away with sorrow; let the world slide, &c.
               
               2. It should teach vs to labour euery day that passeth, to marke and obserue wherein God hath manifested unto us his wrath for sinne. For there is no day but bringeth terrible remembrance thereof, not in others onely, but in our selues. So that if we consider the Revolution of times, wee shall be able to say, that there is not a day, nor an houre passed over our heads, but it is mark'd with the wrath of God by some judgement or other for sinne: yea, and the very passing of it away (it vseth to goe in such a manner) is in wrath.
               3. The more our dayes that are gone, are passed in wrath, the more in those that are to come wee should labour to appease and pacifie that wrath, and seeke after the meanes of our attonment with God. Its a desperate madnesse, when wee shall perceiue that God for the time past hath shewed himselfe angry with vs, to haue no care for the time to come, to prevent further indignation.
               4. This should make the children of God that haue any grounded hope for life to come, to lessen their stay on and delight in this life; and delight in their hope and meanes of that life, wherin never a day shall passe away in wrath, but all in loue, fauour, and glory; and wherein the dayes of our life shall not be a returning to death, but a going on from life to life, and ioy to ioy; when we shall liue to liue; and the longer wee shall liue, the longer we shall haue to liue; and that in all happinesse and glory, which daies and times shall

never wast. Whilst we liue here, (if we had hearts to consider of things as they are,) there is never a day goes over our head, but yeeldeth matter of sighing, and groaning vnder some act or other of Gods wrath, doe wee the best wee can. Yea, let a man haue the greatest causes of comfort, both for this world and the world to come, that the world can afford, or that any man euer had, yet when he shall sum vp his accounts, he shall find the dayes hee liues here are but dayes of euill; and he shall see more cause of sorrow and mourning then of joy. Let this therefore win vs from this life, and the dayes thereof; And let the bitter of Gods wrath here make vs the more seeke after the daies of eternitie; wherein there shall be no sence thereof in the least crosse or affliction.
               
                  —Wee spend our yeares as a tale that is told.
               
               THe Prophet here further amplifieth the aforesayd effect of Gods wrath: shewing in what manner our dayes passe away, even as a tale that is told, a meditation or thought that is conceived and gone. A tale is quickly told; a word is soone spoken, and a thought or meditation is soone conceiued. So are the yeares of a man, especially if we compare them with things aboue, and with the daies and yeares that we are to liue in heauen. So that let a man looke backe to the time passed, and wisely judge of it, and set to it the uttermost of the time to come, and all will appeare to passe

away from vs, either as the time wherein a tale is told, or those things passe away that are told in a tale, which is very quickly and speedily.
               1. This shewes the vanitie of them that make such a-doe for states, and titles, and tenures for this life. Oh they thinke it a goodly matter, if they haue and hold a thing for so many liues, and for theirs and their childrens liues. And yet alas it is, if it be compared with the life of Heauen, but as if it were a tenure for the space of a tale telling, or a word spoken. And what madnesse then is it, that most men shew, to hazzard the one to get the other, that they care not almost how they breake the Lawes of God and Man for it? Surely the little faith and hope or none that we haue of the life to come, makes persons so dote and mad vpon the titles and tenures of this life, which are of the same nature that our dayes and yeares are, they passe away all alike.
               2. It shewes also the vanitie of such, who as though their dayes and yeares would never come vnto an end, spend day after day, and yeare after yeare in that they call pas-time: whereas time passeth away of it selfe swift enough, and that in Gods wrath. It were more agreeable to reason, if it could bee, to use meanes to hold and continue time, rather then to passe it away.
               3. Let this teach vs, whilst we haue it, to make the best use wee can of it. When our yeares are gone, we cannot reuoke them. How soone they are gone, the holy Ghost here teacheth, and wee may feele by our owne experience. Therefore

whilst we liue here, let vs not so much trouble our thoughts about the meanes of this life, as about devising how we may imploy our time, and spend our life to best purpose.
               4. Though we are to count the shortnesse of our liues, in regard of the misery thereof, and in regard of the life which followes, a blessing; Yet in it selfe we should not so account of it: but tho it be miserable, and the longer it is the longer it keepes vs from a better; yet the very shortnesse of this miserable life is to be considered as an effect of Gods wrath: And therefore it is a blessing of God, if wee know how to use it, to liue long here, though we should liue as miserable a life as any euer lived. Neither should wee endevour or desire to doe any thing to shorten the same.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 10. The dayes of our yeares are seuentie yeares: and if by reason of strength they be eightie yeares, yet is their strength then labour and sorrow: for it is soone cut off, and we fly away.
               IN these words the Prophet proues that which he sayd before, that wee spend our yeares as a tale that is told. The yeares of them which ordinarily liue the uttermost of their dayes is but threescore and ten, and if any liue till eightie through strength, yet is their strength then labour and sorrow, &c. Now if the longest period of dayes that men ordinarily liue, be so short a time, and the longest time flyeth so fast, then well might the Prophet

say, That our dayes passe away as a tale that is tould. For those who by reason of their strength liue till 2 Sam. 19. 35. eightie yeares, either they are men that vnder-goe in this life many labours and trauels, and then their very strength brings nothing vnto them but matter of labour and sorrow; For, the stronger a man hath beene, and the greater labours and trauels he hath vndergone, the more full of aches and paines is his old age wont to be: Or they liue merrily and chearefully, free from ordinary passions and grievances; And then their life flyeth away, and when they are brought to these yeares, their daies are but daies of sorrow, and that with them the rather, because they cannot follow those delights then, that formerly they haue done. Howsoeuer it be, there are none cōmonly whose dayes haue seemed to them to passe swifter away, then those that lived the longest; None are lesse weary of life, nor more unwilling to die commonly then they. The life therefore of such, though full of never so much sorrow and trouble flyes away. And such is the loue that ordinarily we beare to this life, that though death come not till eightie yeares, yet it seemes then to fly vnto us.
               The Doctrine is plaine.
               That our dayes are now but seventie yeares, that is to say; The time, that ordinarily man doe not passe in this life, is no more; or if more, their life after is but a Death, and Death comes flying.
               1. This then should teach vs also to remember Eccles. 12. 1. our Creator betimes in the dayes of our youth. Alas, not one of a hundred of us liue till sixtie or

seuentie years, or if we liue longer, and haue spent that time in prophanenesse, except the Lord shew more then ordinary mercy, wee shall bee no more fit then to honour our Creator then so many dead men. The longest that wee can hope to liue and not be children againe is eightie yeares; and then commonly we are as children againe mewed vp, and our children are either Parents or Lords ouer vs, vsing vs as innocents.
               2. It shewes the strange folly of so many of us as are come to the height and middle of our Age, yea, to be fistie and vpward, yea, to be sixtie, &c. Wee can talke of our dayes past, and of things we did fortie yeares since, as if they were done but yesterday; and for the time to come, though wee haue no reason to hope it should be as much as we haue spent, and though wee may presume it will flie as fast away as that which is past in the whole, though not in the parts; yet we liue as though we had a 100 yeares, yea a 1060 yeares to come. Yea, You shall haue many that are of 60. 70. yea, 80. years, that haue no more care to fit them to death, but put the houre thereof as farre from them, as if they were in their freshest youth. If some liued a 100. some 500. some a 1000. some 10000. yeares amongst vs; as now they liue some 5. some 10. some 40. some 60. some 70. &c. there might bee some colour for this folly: but seeing one of 500. liues not til 60. one of 5000. til 80. one of 100000. till a hundred: None till 200. what madnesse it is then, especially in those that haue passed the greatest time they can expect, to haue no care of the

houre of death, and of the account they shall then make, when their whole time is but short, as a tale that is told: As you shall haue old men in a tale of lesse then an houre long, runne over all their life.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 11. Who knoweth the power of thine anger? Euen according to thy feare, so is thy wrath.
               THE Prophet in this 11. verse, concludes his Complaint; and in the same complaineth of the dulnesse of Mankinde, that whereas GOD shews such signes of his wrath, they haue no sence or vnderstanding of the power thereof.
               The second part of this verse, is somewhat doubtfull: word for word in the Hebrue it is thus. And according to thy feare thy wrath. Our Translatours (as you heare) translate it otherwise; and therin follow learned men that went before them. And the words, if necessitie require it, will beare such a construction, and teach a profitable truth; to wit, That howsoeuer the wicked do not know the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Gods wrath; Yet those that feare God, know and vnderstand the same. But I had rather here take the words more simply, and read them thus.
               
                  Who knoweth the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of thine anger; and of thy 
                  power 
                  wrath according to thy feare?
               
               That is to say; How rare a thing is it, to finde a man, that hath any true sense and vnderstanding

of this thy mightie wrath, or that makes any religious use thereof?
               The first Doctrine we hence obserue is;
               That Christians ought to marke and obserue the power and force of Gods wrath, in all those particulars, wherein hee sheweth it. It is not enough for vs to know, that God is a mercifull God, and louing, and gracious, but we must know also, that hee is an angry and a wrathfull God: yea, that he is exceedingly angry, when he is prouoked the vnto. And therefore we must not onely consider, and vnderstand the signes, tokens, and effects of his loue and kindnesse in the world, but the signes of his wrath also. For in both he manifests himselfe; and from both he lookes to reape glory: and he is no lesse powerfull in the one then in the other: And in our liues and conversations there is as much use of the one as of the other. Yea, a man shall never be able to discerne or make any good and true use of Gods loue, That doth not first regard, marke, and labour to vnderstand his wrath.
               The second Doctrine is;
               That it is not enough to know that God is angry; but that his anger is powerfull, hee is mightie in his wrath, (Vanae sine viribus irae, That anger that is without strength is nothing:) and therefore to bee feared and trembled at. Many of vs can talke of and obserue the wrath of God in this or that particular: but we use to make a matter of nothing of it; we are not ordinarily affected with it so much as with the anger of any man that

hath but the least power to hurt vs. But the lesse we marke and know it here, the more we shall know and feele it hereafter.
               The third Doctrine:
               That the greatnesse and force of Gods wrath shines and shewes it selfe in the mortalitie of mankinde aforesayd. So that if there were no other Argument to shew that God is angry, and that his anger is exceeding powerfull; The generall mortalitie of mankinde is sufficient to shew the same. Who can deny that hee was angry when hee drown'd the whole world; when he destroyed the first borne in Egypt; when hee over-whelmed the hoste of the Egyptians in the red Sea; when hee destroyed all his owne people in the Wildernesse that came out of Egypt? Verily if we could well consider of the matter, It can bee no lesse signe of Gods wrath, that at some time or other after, after some manner or other, euery man in the world must die; And that so many Ages before vs are dead.
               The fourth Doctrine.
               That it is a rare thing for any man to conceiue aright, or to vnderstand that God is angry: or that there is any such feare in his anger. Many so liue and follow such courses, as if they were perswaded, that God could not be angry, or that, if hee were angry, it were as easie a matter to please him, as a childe. Hence when they haue over-shot themselues in any sinne, if they say, God forgiue me, or, I cry God mercie, they thinke all is well, and they shall never heare more of the matter. When

men trespasse against a man, if they thinke they haue hindred themselues by it, how carefull, how diligent are they to pacifie his anger, and to seeke to regaine his fauour and good will againe? Whereas the neglect hereof to God-ward, when they haue offended him, sheweth euidently that they little regard his anger, or esteeme it not preiudiciall at all to them.
               The fift Doctrine;
               That it is not enough, to know the force of Gods wrath; but we must make a right use thereof: Wee must thereby bee stirred vp to feare the Lord, and to tremble before his Maiestie; and take heed how any thing may either incense, or continue his anger.
               And we should take heede also how his anger prouokes vs to anger, or to any sinne whatsoeuer, that may further prouoke him.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 12. So teach vs to number our dayes, that we may apply our hearts vnto wisedome.
               HItherto of the Prophets Complaint of the mortalitie of Mankinde.
               Now vnto this Complaint hee annexeth certaine petitions; wherein he craueth of God such gifts and graces as are most needfull for men in respect of their mortalitie aforesayd.
               In which Petitions the Prophet prayeth;
               
                  1. For divine Instruction.
                  2. For divine Consolation.
               
               
                  
His Petition for divine Instruction is contained in this twelfth verse; and there are foure thinges therein expressed:
               
                  1. The gift desired;
                  2. The persons for whom it is desired;
                  3. The meanes whereby the gift desired may be obtained;
                  4. The end for which it is desired.
               
               1. The gift and grace desired is that we might so number our dayes, &c.
               
               Now to number our dayes is rightly to judge and discerne of that time, that we haue to liue in this world.
               This numbring of our dayes, consisteth in these particulars.
               1. In a due consideration of the uttermost time that we can hope to liue here; which is but till we be 70. or 80. yeares of Age. Not one of fiue thousand liues longer; or if he liue some few dayes or yeares longer, his life is vnto him but as death: the world growes weary of him, and hee of the world. So that we so liue here, as men that make account to liue no longer.
               2. In comparing the smallnesse of this number, with that number of dayes that wee shall liue in another world. Alas, what is eightie yeares to eternitie? When we shall lie a thousand thousand yeares, and bee as farre from death as the first day we began to liue.
               3. In considering how much of our time is alreadie past, that cannot be revoked: and that wee must deduct and draw out of that number of 70.

or 80. some of vs haue spent of the maine summe 10. 20. 30. 40. yeares: and so the one and better halfe is gone.
               4. In considering the vncertaintie of those dayes that are to come; that there is not a day nor an houre that we can make any certain reckoning off, that it shall be a day or an houre unto us: it is the present instant onely that we are sure off.
               5. In making account, as for the time past, so for the time to come, that a great part of it shall be spent in sorrow, and travaile, and paine, and distraction. So that if we shall deduct all those dayes, which when they are come, wee shall wish they were gone; and before they doe come, wee wish they might never come, it wil diminish the maine summe exceedingly.
               The second point is the persons for whom this grace is desired.
               The Prophet desireth it for himselfe, and for all Gods Children; Teach us, sayth he, to number our dayes.
               
               Whence obserue we, that it concerneth euery Child of God to be skilfull herein, even in the numbring of his dayes: that is, to consider seriously of the shortnesse and uncertaintie of his life in this world, and accordingly to make reckoning and account of his time here. So that the fewer our dayes are, the better use wee should make of them. The more uncertaine our time to come is, the better we should imploy the time present. For those things that we number and reckon, wee use to make reckoning off: And those things that we

make reckoning of, wee doe not negligently and carelesly spend. So that the spirit of God teaching vs to number and reckon our dayes, teacheth us therein to make reckoning of them, and in that regard not to mis-spend them.
               Now first this condemneth the practise of most men; especially, our Gentlemen, and many of their Servants: who care not how they passe away day after day, and weeke after weeke; as though nothing were more troublesome to them then the day present. To day they wish for to morrow: when to morrow is come, they are as wearie of it; and devise this and that, not to make use and benefit of the day, but to spend it and passe it away with idlenesse: and they thinke that day is best spent, that is most lightly, and merrily flowne over their head.
               2. This should teach Gods children to repent them vnfainedly of so many dayes as haue passed over their head without profit: And it should teach them to make more use of the time to come: Even to resolue with themselues, that no day to come shall passe away vainely and idly; but that they will make some speciall use and reckoning of it: And therefore this day to thinke what good use they shall put the morrow to, if God spare them life, and so one day after another. But the Heathen Painter will rise vp in Iudgement to condemne many of vs Christians: If any day had passed, wherein he had not done some worke belonging to his Art, It is reported hee would haue sighed and sayd, Oh this day haue I drawne never a

lyne. What a shame then should it bee for any Christian to passe day after day without drawing any lyne, or doing ought that to their Christian profession appertaineth?
               The third Point, to wit; the meanes by which the Grace desired is to bee obtained, is by being taught of God. So that it must be obtained,
               
                  1. In generall, by Teaching:
                  2. In speciall, by divine Teaching;
                  3. This divine Teaching is to be obtained by Prayer.
                  4 This Prayer must be stirred vp by a sence of our mortalitie.
               
               1. The first lessen hence then is this, that
               The best of Gods children stand in need to bee taught to number their dayes. If Moses the great Prophet of God, among the rest desired to bee taught herein, it shewes that he had not yet thoroughly learned it: and if hee had not, who can say that he hath? There is none therefore too good to be taught this: for certainly we shall the best of vs in our experience find it, that wee are very dull and ignorant in this dutie. And though we be taught to doe and practise it at some time; yet often we are as farre to seeke in it as if we had neuer heard of it; neuer thinking of our end, how short our time is, how many dayes we haue alreadie spent, how few are to come; but we commonly liue as though we had so many dayes to liue, as it were vaine and idle to bestow time to number them, as though wee might well spare the numbring of them.
               
                  
The second lesson;
               That except God teach this dutie, all other teaching is in vaine. It is not all the wit and learning in the world, that can truly teach it. Though Philosophers, Orators, and Divines should vse the utmost straine of their wits, they cannot without a speciall ayd and helpe of God learne this lesson throughly, but they will some way or other sayle in it: Those therefore, that in any good measure haue learned it, haue beene taught it of God.
               We should therefore trie our abilitie herein: and if we find that in some good measure wee are inabled to doe this dutie, let vs acknowledge that wee haue therein received speciall grace and fauour from God. For without his speciall blessing and instruction, wee shall never make any good and holy use of those dayes and times that we liue here; but wee shall suffer day after day to passe over our heads without making any reckoning and account at all of them. This shewes the difficultie of this worke.
               The third lesson is,
               That the speciall meanes to moue God to teach vs to make reckoning and account of our dayes, as matters of worth, is Prayer. This the Prophet teacheth in his owne example, and speaking in the person of all Gods people: So that those that haue a heart to call vpon God herein, shall be sure to finde God readie herein to assist them. If the Spirit of God to this purpose haue made a Prayer in the name of Moses, and the whole Church, surely, if Moses or any servant of God shall with a

good heart make that Prayer, they shall bee sure therein to obtaine their desire.
               The fourth lesson;
               That to stirre up our Prayer to God, herein we must be deeply possest and affected with the sense of our mortalitie. And surely, if we did seriously consider that which hath beene taught vs in the words going before, it could not but make us to pray earnestly to God for this grace: And there was neuer earnest Prayer made to God, that went emptie away.
               The fourth and last point in this Petition is, why and to what end we are to number our dayes thus; to wit, that so wee may apply our hearts unto wisedome: that is, that so we may spend that small and uncertaine time, that we haue to liue here, in those things that may bee most for our behoose and advantage. And how is that done? surely, by seeking for and pursuing after, whilst we liue here, the meanes of Gods fauour, and life eternall. For therein consisteth true wisedome; and this alone deserveth the name of Wisedome: all other severed from this, or not subjected to this, is but meere folly and madnesse; though it be esteemed wisedome of those that are possest with the same folly and madnesse themselues.
               Now to apply our hearts herevnto, is to bend and spend the strength of our thoughts & affections that way: that as we see worldly minded men, how their minde runneth altogether upon the world, and the meanes of this life, and the humoring and pleasing of them that they looke for

most from; and all the streame of their affections floweth that way: They are never so merrie, as when the world and the meanes of this life commeth in upon them: they are never so sad and heauie, as when they haue lost, or are in daunger to loose any thing thereof: All the power and faculties of soule and bodie are set on worke, one way or other about them; at least the very strength of them: So should our hearts and affections bee set upon and carryed after this true wisedome, being seriously bent unto the speedie, and earnest, and constant pursuite of the grace and favour of God, and life everlasting, and the meanes whereby they may be atchieved.
               Now hence in generall we learne▪
               
               1. That till we come to number our dayes, as is aforesayd, all our labours and endevours are about nought but starke folly: such as we shall never reape any sound or solid fruit there-from, but that which in the end shall be vanitie and vexation of spirit.
               2. That we should never thinke either our selues, or others truly wise, or to follow wise courses indeed, till we haue learned in the first place to number our dayes. Yea, till then, the wiser wee are, the greater fooles shall wee shew our selues, though for our humane wisedome wee were fit to giue Princes counsell.
               3. That it is not enough for the Child of God in a slight manner to follow Wisedome, but hee must set and apply his heart unto it in the same manner, as a covetous man setteth and applyeth

his heart to the getting of goods, an ambitious man of honor, a voluptuous man of his pleasure, or the like.
               More specially we shall by this meanes, and in this manner apply our hearts unto Wisedome; when upon the serious consideration of our mortalitie & uncertaine estate here, and the few daies we haue here to liue; we shall carefully endevour,
               1. To waine our selues by degrees from the loue and delights of this world, and of the things therof: since the time we haue to enjoy them is so short and uncertaine. For there is no greater bane to the soule then the loue of this world: and no better meanes to make us out of loue therewith, then to number our dayes that wee haue to liue therein, in manner aforesaid.
               2. To make no reckoning or account of this life, or of any thing concerning this life any further then it may further us unto the life to come.
               3. To count all those dayes lost, that are not spent in the furthering of us unto eternall life.
               4. To judge the losse of any hope or certaintie in this life, to be a good change for any hope or certaintie in the next life.
               5. To keepe our selues free, as much as we may, from all distractions, and from whatsoever may hinder us in the pursuite of this wisedome.
               6. To make no reckoning of more then the time present; and therefore not to put off our Repentance, or the pursuite hereof, from this day to that day, as if we were sure of so many and so many dayes.
            
            
               
               
                  VERS. 13. Returne, ô Lord.—
               THE second Petition followeth, wherein the Prophet prayeth for divine comfort and consolation, by reconciliation unto God, and the sweet effects and fruits thereof: that God would be pleased to minister comfort unto him and to his Church by being pleased to be reconciled in mercy unto them, and by giuing them a liuely sense of the same.
               Whence out of the Order that the Prophet vseth here, we may note by the way;
               That in the sense of Gods wrath for sinne wee must first desire wisedome, and all the effectuall meanes thereof, that is, the true knowledge and understanding to do Gods will, and to please him, before we desire that he should be reconciled unto us, or expect any drop of sound comfort from him. It is senselesse and against common reason, that in the sense of Gods wrath we should desire or hope for his favour, and yet continue in our folly and wicked courses still. And yet this is the course that most men take, when they lie under any judgement of God; they can call for & hope for mercy and fauour, and pray God to helpe them: but in the meane while they haue no desire nor purpose to seeke after true wisedome, that is, the sure and certaine meanes whereby to please God. But if ever in the sense of Gods wrath thou desire that God should be reconciled unto thee, desire first that thine heart may bee applyed unto wisedome.
               
                  
Now in this Petition of divine Consolation he prayeth;
               
                  1. For the grace of Reconciliation itselfe.
                  2. For the feeling and effectuall fruits of it.
               
               The reconciliation of God to them is noted out principally by two termes;
               
                  1. Of returning,
                  2. Of repenting.
               
               First, Hee prayes the Lord to returne againe: therein resembling God to one that turneth his backe toward us, and in his anger is gone away, and departed from vs. Whence
               1. Wee may note a difference betweene Gods Child and the wicked. The wicked they in their heart desire the Lord in this life to goe farre from them: and they are best content when they thinke God farthest off them. But the Children of God are otherwise affected. This is their greatest misery and woe in this life, when the Lord is farre off them, and when he hides his face from them. They are not so deeply affected with the absence and departure of any, as of God. You shall see in many places of the Psalmes, how Dauid complaines Psal. 13. 1. And 27. 9. And 88. 14. And 143. 7. of nothing more then this.
               2. As the Children of God desire nothing more then the face and presence of God: so when God turnes his face from them, and is departed, they easily discerne it, and haue lightly a sense and feeling of it; so that as they are able to discerne and feele his presence, so haue they a liuely sense and feeling of his absence. And those that never felt the one, cannot possibly feele the other, they that

complaine not of his absence, never felt his comfortable presence.
               3. Note the effect of sinne even in Gods owne Children. It makes the Lord in their owne sence and apprehension to haue forsaken them, and to be gone away from them. And if he bee gone, all blessings are gone with him; and nothing can appeare but terrors and cursings.
               4. In that he calls vpon the Lord not to come, but to returne; that is to say, to come backe againe to the place from whence hee is gone: it shewes, that Gods people haue had a sense of his presence, before they felt his absence and departure. Those onely desire the presence of God, and bewaile his absence, that haue had former experience of the sweetnesse and comfort of his presence. Till God shew vnto us his goodnesse and kindnesse, it is not possible for us to desire his presence, but still the more rather to hate it and flie from it.
               5. Note a propertie of Gods childe, that is, to runne after God, and to follow him the faster, the faster he departs from him; to seeke him the more, the more hee hides himselfe; to labour to please him the more, the more hee sees him offended: And never to giue over, till hee bee sure of Gods fauour: and not to feare that he will turne againe to their hurt, but to their good.
               6. Wee learne here, that in the sence of our It was delivered shortly after the, decease of Mr Alex. Redich. Mortalitie, (especially when the Lord shall come neare unto us, as he hath done of late to this Family, whence the members thereof are scattered,

&c.) wee should labour therein to see the Lords anger against vs, and in it behold him as it were; after a sort departed from us: and therefore wee should call vpon him to returne againe. And calling vpon him servently, vpon such occasions as these, out of a sence of his displeasure, and of our sinnes the cause thereof, the Lord will in mercie returne to vs againe; And some way or other bring with him as great a comfort and blessing, as hee hath taken away from us, reparing in his blessed time the ruines and breaches thereof.
               
                  —How long?—
               
               THis is an argument to moue the Lord to returne; as if hee should say, Oh Lord nowe returne; for, thou hast beene a long time absent.
               Whence we learne, that
               1. God vseth many times to be a long time absent from his Children, as one that had utterly forsaken them, and meant never to looke after them more.
               2. His children are sensible thereof; and measure the time: And the longer he is away, the more they desire him.
               3. A speciall meanes to make the Lord after his long absence to returne, is to urge him herewith.
               
                  
                  —And let it repent thee concerning thy Servants.
               
               HItherto of the first Act of Reconciliation; to wit, that God would Returne; that is, shew himselfe a louing and gracious God vnto them, as formerly he had done.
               Now secondly, he desireth that it would repent him: whereby wee are not to conceiue, that the Lord can repent in any such manner as man useth, that is, that he is indeed grieued and troubled for any thing that is done, wishing it had not beene done; Or, that in any thing his minde is altred and changed. God is not as man, that he 
                  Num. 23. 19. 1 Sam. 15. 19. 
                  should repent; Seeing hee doth not, nor can doe nothing, but it is for good ends; and he ever obtaines his ends; and he never doth any thing, but he doth it with that wisedome, that it is better done then left vndone. Repentance in God is nothing else but a surceasing of his former course; When after hee hath corrected and chastened, he shewes loue and mercy, which vnder his chastisement did lie hid. Yet in euery such change, the Lord seemeth to us, to bee like a person that is sorry for that hee hath done, performing such like actions, as repenting persons use to doe in the like case.
               For as a Father, after he hath corrected his child, shewes no signes of sorrow for that he hath done, so long as the childe continues stubborne; but after that hee hath amended his fault▪ and is sorry for it, the Father presently burneth the rod,

or by some such signe shewes as if hee were sorry; yea, and bestowes some gift on the child, as if hee had done him wrong, when it is indeede neyther so nor so, but onely a testification of his loue more plainely to the sense of the child, that was hidden vnder correction before. So that, as the child thinkes, his Father hates him, when he corrects him, and repents his hatred, when he ceaseth to correct; So Gods children in a manner so conceiue of God; and God is pleased that they should after some sort so esteeme of him.
               1. Then God is sayd to repent, when upon our repentance, he ceaseth to correct and punish vs: For God doth not alwayes incessantly and continually beat his children, but he vseth mercy and moderation in the correction of them: like a kind Father, who though some time he beat his child till the bloud follow, and the child therevpon can apprehend nothing but that he is a cruell and hard hearted Father; yet those stripes are moderated with mercy; hee will not breake the bones of the childe, nor continually lie beating of him, but will stay his hand; especially then when he hath obtained his end, that his childe is humbled and sorry for his fault.
               2. God doth not so onely, but often as a louing Father or Mother useth to do, he manifests a kind of wrath against the rod, wherewith he corrected his childe, That is, those whom he hath raised vp to afflict his Children withall, whom he calls the rod of his indignation; he punisheth them as though Esai. 10. 5. he were angry with himselfe, and with the instruments

that he made or used to that end.
               3. God doth not so onely, but if his childe be soundly humbled under his hand, laboureth to see his fault, and acknowledge it, God will shew some way or other speciall kindnesse, he will recompence his childe as it were for the hurt hee hath done him, as though he had wronged him. So that God will never shew himselfe more kinde to any then to those that hee hath corrected; He will double and treble his kindnesse unto them.
               And the Prophet in praying thus, and teaching us to pray thus, teacheth us to hope; and embouldeneth us in all our afflictions or chastisements to craue this at Gods hands. Yea, the unfained begging of this will bee a meanes of obtaining so much.
               1. Therefore hence let vs learne lying vnder Gods hand, though for a long time together, not to despaire, as though when God shewed himselfe once angry, there were no hope or expectation, that hee would ever againe shew himselfe mercifull. Nay, God is a God of mercy; and the Psal. 86. 25, more wrath he shewes to his child, the more mercy and grace he will shew.
               2. This should not discourage vs that trust in God, to see the enemies of Gods children afflict and vex them, and triumph over them. God is a 
                  Deut. 32. 36. 
                  God that will repent; and when he repents, woe to them: for Gods children shall fare the better for the evill that is done vnto them; and they the worse, though they haue beene instruments of Gods owne wrath and indignation in those euils,

that his Children at their hands haue endured.
               3. There is an holy grieuing and angring of God, when vnder his hand we can so humble our selues, that we make him as it were sorry and angry with himselfe, that hee hath beaten vs. Wee haue no other meanes, when God punisheth vs, to grieue and vex him. Wee cannot make him any other-wise to repent of the euill that he hath done vnto us.
               
                  —Concerning thy Servants.
               
               IN these words is implied a motiue, to stirre up the Lord to grant this request: as if hee should say, Wee are thy servants; ergò let it repent thee concerning vs.
               Note wee hence;
               1. That vnder Gods correction his Children still remaine the seruants of God. Yea, the more he corrects them, the more studious they are to serue him.
               2. That the onely way to make GOD repent him of the judgements hee brings on vs, is to manifest and professe that wee are his servants.
               3. That those that are not the servants of God, haue no cause to hope, that God will repent him of any evill toward them. But they are to expect rather evill upon evill, and judgement vpon judgement; till they come to everlasting judgement.
            
            
               
               
                  VERS. 14. Oh satisfie vs early with thy mercy: that we may reioyce and be glad all our dayes.
               HItherto the Prophet prayed for Reconciliation it selfe: now hee prayeth for the feeling and effectuall fruits of it.
               These feeling and effectuall fruits of it, are a liuely sense of Gods mercy, and a fulnesse of joy, arising and issuing there-from. For the Childe of God can haue no hope of comfort, but in the hope of Gods Reconciliation: nor hope of Gods Reconciliation to him, but in the sense of his mercie. And where there is a liuely and full sense of his Mercy, there cannot but be sound, solid, and lasting joy and delight in that soule.
               Where note also;
               That Gods children are not wont to content themselues with a meere fancie and imagination of Gods savor: but they are never at rest, till they feele it in the signes and fruits of it.
               Now for this mercy the Prophet prayeth;
               
                  1. In generall in this Verse;
                  2. In speciall in the next.
               
               In the generall there is a Petition, and a reason thereof rendred.
               The Petition is for Mercy wherein hee prayeth;
               
                  1. For the Grace it selfe;
                  2. For the measure of it,
                  3. For expedition in the granting of it.
               
               The first act or effect of Reconciliation is the 

worke of Mercy; when the Lord manifesteth that he is affected with compassion towards those servants of his, whom he hath formerly afflicted.
               Whence we note:
               1. That there is no cause to hope that God is reconciled vnto vs, till he some way or other shew mercy vpon us.
               2. That there can bee no unfained desire of mercy till we feele our owne misery, and our just desert; till we haue a sense of the just judgement of God vpon us for our sinnes: Our misery is his mercy.
               3. That there is no hope of mercy, where men feele not the want of it, and earnestly begge it at Gods hands.
               Secondly, he desireth to be satisfied with it.
               Whence wee note:
               1. That nothing will satisfie Gods Children but Gods mercy. All is as nothing to them without it.
               2. That they desire not onely mercy, but that they may rest in it, and be content with it. They desire nothing but that, making no doubt but that having that; they shall haue all things together with it.
               3. That they desire not some small drop of it, but craue such a measure of it as may even fill and satisfie their soules.
               Thirdly, his suite is that they may haue this mercy early; that they may haue the sense and feeling of it betimes.
               
                  
Where obserue we;
               1. A difference betweene Gods children, and wicked worldlings. Gods children desire to haue Gods mercy betimes: whereas the wicked put it of still from time to time; they desire, with Balaam Num. 23. 10. to haue it in the end; but they care not for it early.
               2. That those that will be satisfied earely with Gods mercy, must earely repent, and earely seeke after it, and earely desire and pray for it.
               The reason followeth, That we may reioyce, and be glad all our dayes.
               
               Whence we note;
               1. That Gods children may lawfully desire to rejoyce and be glad all their dayes.
               2. That true joy and gladnesse springeth from the mercy of God, and our assurance of it.
               3. That Gods children desire no other joy or gladnesse, then that which springeth from the same.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 15. Make us glad according to the daies wherein thou hast afflicted us, and the yeares wherein wee haue seene evill.
               AFter the generall suite for mercy, followeth a more speciall suite for the same:
               Wherein,
               1. In speciall the Church calleth upon God himselfe to make her to rejoyce; and that according to the degree and proportion of her former affliction.
               
                  
2. Shee in her Prayers beggeth the speciall meanes thereof.
               In the first we learne.
               1. That the Church being humbled with the sense of Gods wrath, no bodie can comfort her and reioyce her but God onely. For if the Fountaine be bitter, how can the streames bee sweete? If God the Fountaine of all Goodnesse afflict us with evill, what hope can wee haue of God from any other? If the Almightie wound vs in his wrath, who can heale vs? Or if any shall heale one wound, shall wee not haue cause to feare two for that one? To reioyce in any thing else, when God is angry with us and smites us, is as if whilst wee are in the pawes of a Lyon, and readie to bee deuoured, wee should then bee delighted with the Friskes and Gambols of Apes and Munkies. To seeke for comfort and delight in any thing else, whilst God is angry with us, is as vaine as if a man in his drought being kept from water, should thinke to quench his thirst by drinking of Brine.
               The use hereof.
               1. This should teach us in our miseries and afflictions in the first place to labour to see Gods hand in them; That it is God that chasteneth and afflicteth, and maketh vs sorrowfull; And when wee see that, it should teach us to flie to him for comfort and ease; and never to expect it els-where. Yea, herein wee should in our afflictions approue our selues to be Gods children, if wee can seeke to him for ease and comfort that hath smitten vs; And the contrary is a signe of a Gracelesse childe,

who at that time that he knowes his Father is exceedingly wrath with him, and hath beene corrected by him, will never seeke to him, but sport and delight himselfe with the servants, or with Dogs.
               2. In comforting others that are afflicted under the sence of Gods wrath, It should teach us to speake in that manner to them, that they may discerne that God speakes in and by us, and that that comfort that wee desire to possesse them with, is a divine comfort, and hath his ground from Gods owne word. Else all comfort will bee but vaine. Yea, wee shall shew our selues but lewd and prophane persons, if wee shall endeuour to comfort Gods childe by any other kind of comfort, then that which proceeds from God; this being to teach them to despise God, as it is a despising of ones Parents for a childe whilst his Father is wrath with him, and is smiting of him, to laugh at and be merry with others.
               3. Gods childe in his sorrow should desire no other joy or gladnes, but what God maketh him: as indeed no other joy can make him truely glad againe, but that which proceedes from him that before made him sad.
               In the second place we learne.
               That in the midst of the signes and tokens of Gods wrath, Gods childe may haue hopes and encouragements of joy and comfort even in God: That God that humbles his childe will comfort him, if whilst hee is humbled hee shew himselfe to be the child of God, and doe not stubbornly carry

himselfe under the rod, but submit himselfe and pray unto him for comfort. For Gods spirit would never haue taught his Church to haue asked this of God, if God herein would not be readie to yeeld to his child.
               The measure of joy that the Church craues from God is according to the dayes and yeares of their afflictions, a joy answerable and proportionable to their affliction: that as God had a long time, for many daies and yeares afflicted them, so he would be pleased to send them answerable comfort.
               Whence by the way we may note;
               1. That the speciall affliction and calamity of Gods Church in the Wildernesse seemes to be an occasion that mooved the Prophet to pen this Psalme concerning the frailtie and mortalitie of Man in generall, teaching vs upon the like speciall occasions to meditate of this Argument.
               2. That it is no new thing, That God should humble and afflict his Church, not for an houre or a day, but for many dayes and yeares together sometimes: which should teach vs the more patiently to beare shorter afflictions; and in our affliction from day to day and yeare to yeare waite the Lords leasure for deliverance.
               But the speciall poynt wee are to note is this; That the Church in this doth imply an Argument to moue the Lord to make them glad, yea to make them glad for a long time, because they haue for a long time bin afflicted; as if he should say, Oh Lord thou knowest how many dayes wee haue beene afflicted, yea, how many yeares wee

haue seene euill, therefore accordingly make vs glad.
               Whence wee learne.
               That there is a proportion betweene the afflictions and miseries of Gods children, and their comforts.
               Are they greatly afflicted? Surely they shall haue great gladnesse. Are they dayes, moneths, and yeares chastised? They shall accordingly rejoyce. Yea, the greatnesse of our afflictions are as it were a bond, and doe tie the Lord to make vs glad. So that wee cannot use a more forcible reason then this to induce him therevnto. And why? Surely because the Lord is a most mercifull and kind Father: and therefore cannot but please and delight his childe the more, the more hee hath afflicted him; especially, if vnder his affliction hee shall shew himselfe a dutifull childe.
               This should teach us to be of good comfort in our greatest and longest afflictions; yea, to be the more comforted for them, so we make true use of them. For these are tokens and sore-runners of great and lasting joy. If wee call vpon the Lord, though it be long ere he heare vs, yet at length he will heare vs; and the longer it shall be before he heare, the more he will glad vs when he heares vs. So that when he comes to make vs glad, hee will pay vs usury, nay, use vpon use And wee should rather feare then otherwise, when wee never saw any evill dayes, or saw it but for a few dayes. For how glad and merry soever wee haue beene; yet wee haue cause to feare that the Lord did never

make vs merry. And our sorrow to come shall bee according to the dayes and yeares of that mirth which is not of the Lords making.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 16. Let thy worke appeare upon thy servants: and thy glory unto their Children.
               HItherto of the measure of Gladnesse that the Church desires.
               The meanes of Gladnesse followes, which he craueth 
                     1. In generall.
                     2. In speciall.
                  
               
               In generall. 
                     1. That the worke of GOD may appeare upon his servants.
                     2. That his glory may appeare unto their Children.
                  
               
               
                  His worke in this place signifieth the issue and fruit of their afflictions. So that the Church prayeth here that God would manifest vnto her, that good worke that he hath aymed at all this while in afflicting her.
               The very afflicting of his Church is a worke of God: but that more especially is his worke, which by afflicting her hee propounds to effect. The Hewing, Squaring, and Sawing of Timber is the worke of the Carpenter: but his speciall worke indeed is the House, that by meanes thereof hee worketh: So the melting, refining, and polishing of Siluer or Gold is the worke of the Gold-smith,

but more especially the Cup or Boule that by that meanes he frameth.
               Hence we may learne.
               1. That God many times hideth the speciall end, why he doth afflict vs. He beats his Church sometimes for a long time together; and the Church neither can tell the speciall cause why, nor what will bee the issue or consequent of it. Ordinarily Parents never correct their Children but before-hand they acquaint them with the particular fault, and the child can gesse at the end that his Father aymes at: So doth God many times, and his children also can see in the very rod of God, their fault, and what God aymes at in the same; But sometimes they cannot for their liues for a long time, though at length they shall see it. God puts them oft into the fire, he hammers them oft ouer and ouer againe: but what peece of worke the Lord will make of them, they no more know somtimes then the iron vpon the Anveile knowes what the Smith will make of it, whether a Locke or a Key.
               2. Though the Church or Gods child do not yet see what the worke of God will bee, yet how hardly soever God doth deale with them, though he cast them never so oft into the fire, & hammer and beat them never so much, yea, though they haue an apprehension of his wrath therein, which is not in the Smith when hee beateth his iron; yet the child of God presumeth that that worke 
                     〈◊〉
                   God is good, and that there will a good issue and blessed effect spring there-from. Hence they pray Iob 1
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     
                  
                  
and desire earnestly to see the same: and prayer is a meanes to obtaine the sight of it.
               3. This is a speciall meanes to make them glad, when the Lord shall manifest vnto them the blessed fruits and effects of his affliction. Yea, till then they cannot be soundly made glad; though the Lord should surcease to afflict them. But when that worke appeares, then they cannot but bee glad, yea, so glad that they shall blesse the day that God did chastise them, when they shall see the evill that God kept them from, and the good he hath effected by the same. As Dauid Psal. 119. 71. It is good for mee that I haue beene afflicted. So that how bitter and sharpe soever thine affliction bee, yet comfort thy selfe in this; thou art vnder the Lords hammer, and when the worke he aimes at is finished, and appeares, thou shalt be glad and rejoyce in God. When therefore wee lie vnder any crosse, let vs possesse our soules with patience, till the worke of the Lord appeare; and then wee shall be glad.
               The Church in this Petition giues her selfe againe the title of Servants, that is to say, persons both bound and readie to yeeld all obedience, and to performe any seruice to God that hee shall put them vnto. So that this is an argument to moue the Lord to grant this request, and a meanes to obtaine it, for one to be Gods servant even vnder affliction: for to none else shall ever this worke appeare to make them glad, but rather to adde vnto them crosse vpon crosse. So that the more seruiceable and dutifull we bee vnto God in our

afflictions, the more wee shall discerne the worke of the Lord in them, and such a worke as shall make vs rejoyce according to the proportion of our afflictions.
               The second meanes in generall followeth. And thy glory vnto their Children, that is to say, that our children may see the glorious fruit of this affliction in vs, that so they may not bee discouraged thereby to serue thee, but rather the more hartned, when they shall see what a glorious worke thou hast wrought in and vpon vs by afflicting vs.
               So that by making good use of our affliction, not onely our selues, but our posteritie also shall fare the better for it, the Lord will worke such a worke thereby as shall not onely make vs glad, but make his glory shine in the eyes of our Children, and them that shall follow after vs; so that they shall haue occasion to blesse God for vs. Hence it is, that the bloud of Martyrs is the seed of 
                  Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. 
                  Gods Church: and that wicked persecutors are so crossed in their maine ends, that in the end the contrary to their hopes falleth out.
            
            
               
                  VERS. 17. And let the beautie of the Lord our God bee upon us; and establish thou the worke of our hands vpon us; yea, the worke of our hand establish thou it.
               THE more speciall meanes of Gladnesse followes.
               1. That the beautie of the Lord her God bee upon

her, as if he should say, That by this meanes shee may be purged from that corruption which was the cause of prouoking the Lord vnto wrath; and that the image of God thereby may bee renued more and more in her, and may appeare so to bee to others. For then the beauty of the Lord is upon vs, when wee are like to him and resemble him in holinesse and righteousnesse; when wee shine by his beames; when our wills are conformable to his will, and when we giue entertainment to all his Ordinances; and when to this end he vouch safeth his Church all the ordinary meanes of saluation. Where this is wanting, all other beautie and glory is but as a gold Ring in a swines snout, and as a painted Sepulcher, having nothing but filthy and loth some matter within it.
               Whence we note; that
               Gods children afflicted, count pietie, religion, and the feare of God their greatest beauty and ornament; yea, by afflictions God is wont to bring them to an higher estimation of these graces, and a purer use of his ordinances then formerly they had. And then may we well deeme that our afflictions haue done good on vs, when they haue brought us into a further measure of liking, and high esteeme of spirituall graces, and a greater conformitie unto God in them.
               2. That the Lord would establish upon them the worke of their hands. By vouch safing a prosperous successe, and good issue to their attempts and endeuours.
               
                  
Whence we obserue; that
               Gods children can never hope to thriue or prosper in ought, so long as God is offended with them, or hath for their sins estranged himselfe from them. All that while they saile but against the wind, & striue against the streame, in whatsoever they attempt and put their hand unto: all is sure to goe crosse with them, and nothing to bee established or brought to any good issue. They shall but doe and undoe, and be as far; when they haue wearied and tired out themselues, though they should labour like Horses, and even worke their hearts out, from effecting of ought, as they were when they first set hand to their worke, till God vouch safe to turne unto them, and with his favour and assistance graciously to strengthen them, and to establish their endevours upon them. Yea, by afflictions God oft fitteth men for a blessing in this kinde, which when we haue made that holy use of that we ought, wee may well hope that God returning againe in mercy unto us, will giue better successe then ever before to all our affaires.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   