
      
         
            
            DIVINE CONSIDErations of the Soule, Concerning the excellencie of God, and the vilenesse of man. Verie necessarie and profitable for euerie true Christian seriously to looke into. By N. B. G.
            
               LONDON Printed by E A. for Iohn Tappe and are to be solde at his shop on the Tower-Hill, nere the Bulwarke Gate. 1608
         
         
            
            
            To the right worshipfull and worthy Knight, Sir Thomas Lake, one of the Clarkes of his Maieiesties Signet: health, happinesse and Heauen.
            
               WOrthy KNIGHT The longe affectionate duty, wherin I haue followed your vndeserued fauour, hath made me study how to prooue some parte of

my protestation: but finding my spirite by the crosses of fortune, vnable to be it selfe, in the best nature of thankfulnesse, I haue yet, by Gods greate blessing, laboured in the vineyard of a vertuous loue, where hauing gathered those fruites, that are both pleasant and holsome, bounde vp this little handfull, I presente them to your patience, knowing that your loue to learning, your zeale in Religion, and your wisdome in iudgement (being able in diuine Considerations, to finde comforte aboue the worlde) will vouchafe to make that good vse of them, that maie giue me comforte in your regarde of them: but least tediousnesse maie prooue displeasing

yea in matter of much worth, I wil leaue my labour to your liking, and my seruice to your imploimēt, in which I humblye rest in heartie prayer for your much happinesse.
            
               Yours deuoted and obliged at commande: NICH. BRETON.
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            MAnye reade they knowe not what, too many they care not what, but how necessarie is it for all men before they reade, to consider what they reade, and to what end they bestowe both time & labour in that excercise, I refer to the iudgement of their discretions, who are able to finde the difference betwixt good & euill: you then that reade this little worke to your greate good, if you well disgest the considerations contained in the same, Let mee intreate you what you finde for your good, to esteem of as you haue cause,

and what may be to your dislike to correct in your kinde patience; in a little room is matter enough for the good consideration of a cōtemplatiue sperit, which looking towards heauen, and longing to bee there, shall finde such comfort in these considerations, as I hope shal giue cause to gloriefie God the Author of all good, and not thinke a misse of me, that by his goodnes haue set them downe for the good of all his Seruants: of which number, not doubting you to be one, I leaue you in this and all your good labours, to his onely gratious blessing.
            
               Your well wishing friend, N. B
            
         
         
            
            In praise of these Diuine Considerations.
            
               GOe little Booke, the Iewell of delight:
               The heauenly organ, of true vertues glory:
               Which like a christall mirror sets in sight:
               The truest tract of high Iehouahes story:
               Which who so reades, shall finde within the same
               Gods powerfull loue, to those that feare his name,
            
            
               I reading of it did much comfort finde:
               And so no doubt, may euery Christian doe:
               
                  That is to vertue any whit inclind:
               Such right directions doth it lead him to.
               Read then (dear friend) for heere I dare well say:
               To know God truely is the ready way.
            
            
               And more, within this lttle volume heere
               Who so doth read with due consideration,
               His owne estate most vilely will appeare:
               If not reformed by heauenly meditation.
               Consider then▪ and doe aplaud his paine:
               That thus directs. true knwledge to obtaine.
            
            
               
               And for my selfe, as hauing gain'd therby:
               These few lines of my loue shall specifie:
               Pleasure attend the author that did write it:
               Heauens happinesse the heart that did indite it:
               True comfort be to him, that loues to read it,
               And ioy betide his soule: that truely treads it
            
            
               I. T.
            
         
         
            
            
            A Diuine Poem.
            
               O Lord that knewst me ere that I was knowne,
               And sawst the cloath before the thred was spunne
               And framd'st the substance, ere the thought was growne
               From which my being in this world begunne:
            
            
               Oh glorious God, that onely of thy grace:
               Didst all and onely to thy seruice make me:
               and hauing giuen me heere an earthly place:
               Vnto the Guard of thy faire grace dist take me.
            
            
               
               Of all pure bright, and euer-seeing eye:
               That seest the secret thoughts of euerie heart,
               Before whose presence doth apparantlie,
               Heauen, earth, Sea, Hell, in all and euerie part.
            
            
               In wisdome more O then wit can comprehend!
               That mak'st and iudgest, gouern'st euerie thing▪
               
               power of all powers, on whome all powers attend,
               Spring of all grace from whence all glories spring
            
            
               
               From that high, holy, heauenly throane of thine:
               Where mercy liues to giue thy glorie grace.
               Looke downe a little on this soule of mine,
               That vnto thee complaines her heauie cace.
            
            
               Oh sweetest sweete of my soules purest sence,
               That in thy mercie, madst me first a creature!
               And in the truth of loues intelligence,
               The neerest image to thy heauenly Nature.
            
            
               
               And hauing framde me to thy fauours eye,
               Didst with thy finger fairely write me out,
               In holy writ of heauenly Misterie,
               How I should bring a blessed life about.
            
            
               Forbidding onely what might be my harme,
               Commaunding onely what might doe me good:
               preseruing me by thy Almigtie arme
               and feeding me with a celestiall foode.
            
            
               
               Thou madst the ayre to feede the life of nature,
               That I might see how weake a thing it is▪
               
               The earth, the labour of the sinfull creature,
               Which beares no fruite but onely by thy blisse.
            
            
               Thou madst the water but to clense or coole,
               Or serue thy creatures in their sundrie vse:
               That carefull wit, might reason not befoole
               In vsing nature to the soules abuse.
            
            
               
               The fire thou madst to c
                     •
                  eere the chilling colde,
               With a reuiuing heate of natures ne
                     •
                  de;
               That reason might in natures ruine holde
               How farre that Force might stand the life instead.
            
            
               Thus vnder heauen, thou madst these Elements
               To maintaine all those creatures thou hast made,
               But so, that nature with her ornaments
               shall haue a time to flourish, or to fade
            
            
               
               But that same heauenly fire that doth enflame
               The heart and soule with a continuall heate:
               Whose loue doth liue but in thy holy name,
               Where faith doth mercy but for grace intreate.
            
            
               Where that did kindle, or that Cole to finde,
               Or smallest peice or sparckle of the same:
               I found the eye of nature was too blinde,
               To finde the sence, or whence thee secret came.
            
            
               
               Till by the inspiration of that grace,
               That to thy seruants doth thy goodnesse showe:
               I found thy loue the euer liuing place,
               From whence the substance of this sweete doth flowe
            
            
               And when I saw within this soule of mine,
               How farre thy loue exceedes the life of nature,
               and natures life, but in that loue of thine,
               Which is the being of each blessed creature:
            
            
               
               Then I beg
                     •
                  n to finde the foile of sinne,
               And onely long'd to liue in mercies grace,
               and hate the world, that doth their hel begin,
               That doe not long to see thy heauenly face.
            
            
               And thus perplexed in that passions griefe:
               That hath no ease but in thy mercies eye
               To thee that art the faithfull soules releife
               haue I laide open all my misery:
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               THE First part of consideration concerning God.
            
               Consider:
               
                  THis word Consider, in a few letters containeth a large volume, wherein the eies of iudgement may read what is necessarie for the vnderstanding of humaine reason: yea, and the best parte

parte of the moste perfect and diuine contemplation, of the moste gracious and blessed spirites in the worlde: for if it please the Almightie God of his infinite goodnes, so farre to inspire the soule of man with the grace of his holy spirite, as that being by the heauenly power thereof, Drawen from the worlde to beholde the courses of higher comforts, when leauing the delights of fading vanities, he shall be rauished with the pleasures of eternall life.
               Then may he saye with the Prophet Dauid (entring into the contemplatiue consideration that may well be

called the admiration of the greatnes and goodnes of God) as it is written, in the 8. Psalme verse 3. Lord when I consider the heauens, the Moone and the Starres that thou hast made, what is man (say I) that thou wilt looke vpon him? yea let me saye vnto thee (Oh man) if thou couldest with an humble spirit looke into the greatnes of the goodnes of God in the power of his creation, in the wisdome of his workemanshippe, in the preseruation by his grace, and in the increase, by his blessing: if with all this thou couldest note the

difference of Heauen and earth, the brightnesse of the heauens, & the darkenesse of the world: the purenesse of the Sunne and Moone and Starres, and the dimnes of the obscured light of earthly natures: the perfection of the Angells, and the corruption of man; the glorie of the diuine, and the disgrace of our humaine nature: well mightest thou say to thy selfe, oh what am I? a worme, dust & ashes, & a substance of all foule and filthy corruption, that my GOD, the pure and bright, gratious, holy, good, and glotious essence of the incomprehensible Deitie, will vouchsafe to cast downe the least looke of his

mercie vppon me?
               Since therfore there is nothing that can be so truely pleasing to the spirit of man, as knowledge, neither is there any thing well knowne but by the true consideration of the substance, nature or qualitie thereof: let me begin to enter into this necessary course of consideration, in which we shall finde what is most necessary, fit and conuenient, for the vse, profit, pleasure, and honor of man; that the obiect of the eye, considered by the sence of the spirit, the substance digested by the power of reason, nature may finde most comfort in the vertue of the application.
            
            
               
               Touching Consideration in generall.
               FIrst, and aboue all things, we are to consider what is aboue all things to be considered; then for the excellencie of the goodnes in it selfe; and last, for the good that from it wee receiue: for in the instinct of nature wee haue planted in ourselues an insatiable desire of knowledge, whereby we finde in our selues, somewhat more then our selues, leading vs to a longing after somewhat aboue our selues, which if by a light inlightning our mindes we be led out of the darkenes of our blinded sence of nature, to the cleare

beholding of the glorious brightnes of Gods graces, wee shall see that in him onely and altogether, is the infinite goodnes and incomprehensible greatnes of all perfect knowledge, and knowledge of all perfection; and that so much neerer cōmeth our nature vnto the diuine: as by the light of grace wee feele in our selues, an apprehension or participation of those graces, that essentially doe onely dwell, and are inheritant in the diuine nature. To come to a plainer explanatiō of the first due point of consideration: euery thing is to be desired for some good that it doth containe in it

selfe, and may bring vnto other: the goodnes therefore of euery thing, must be considered before the thing it selfe be effected. Then if good be for the goodnes desired; the better that the good is, the more it is to be desired, and so the best good for the best goodnes to be best and most desired.
               Now who is so euill, that hath the least sparkle of Gods grace, but by the light of the same, doth see in the wonder of his works, the glory of his goodnes? but leauing al doubts, ther is no doubt to be made, that God is in himselfe the essence of all goodnes, the first moouer, the continuall actor, and the infinite furnisher

of all good, in thought, word & deed; where, when, & in whatsoeuer: this first position thē grāted that god is only good & the onely essence of al goodnes, what obiection can be made, why he should not be aboue all things to be desired, humblie to be affected, faithfully to be loued, louingly to be serued, duly to be obeyed, and infinitely to be glorified? for the Athists, whom the Psalmist calleth fooles, Psalme, 53. verse 1. that said in their hearts there is no God, because they knowe no good, I saie nothing to them, but their soules shal finde there 1 a Deuill that taught them, and will reward them for their euill
                     •
                  
                  
but for them that knowe there is a God, and haue a feeling of his goodnesse, in the comfort of his grace: let me a little speake vnto them touching the pointes that I meane to speake of in the considaration of the greatnesse of God aboue all thinges, and for which for all thinges in all, & aboue all thinges hee is to be admired, loued, and honoured: and first touching the greatnesse of God.
            
            
               The first consideration touching the greatnesse of of God.
               TO consider the greatnesse of God, at least that greatnesse

in which himselfe only knoweth himselfe is incomprehensible, & therfore aboue the power of cō
                  templation, meditation, & consideration of man or Angelles whatsoeuer; for in the maiestie of his power, hee is incōprehensible in his wisdome; vnsearchable in his graces; incomparable, and in his glorye infinite: in all which he doth so far exceede the compasse of all consideration, as in the humilitie of confession must be left only to admiration; But for so much as of his mercie he hath left to our contemplation, let vs with such humilitie consider thereof, as may be to his glory and our comfort. Touching therefore his greatnesse, let

vs humbly lift vp the eyes of our hearts to the beholding of those thinges, that in the excellent great workmanship of the same, wee may finde that there is a further greatnes, then wee can euer finde againe. Let vs consider in the Creation of al creatures, his admirable power, who but spak the word & they were made; oh powerfull word, by which all thinges were created; and if his word was so powerfull, how much more powerfull is he that gaue such power vnto his word? loath I am to enter into particularities, to set downe the greatenesse of his power, though the least of his workes shewe not a little, and the greatest of his

workes shew but a little of that greatnes which his glory doth contain; where such varieties as well of the formes, as natures of creatures, aswell in their differences as agreement, in number so innumerable, as prooue an infinitenes in the power of their creation, yet when the greatest of all things vnder the heauens, yea the heauens themselues shall waxe olde as doth a garment, and (as a vesture) shal be chāged, how great is his power, who shall loose no part of his grace, but increase infinitely in his glory? Who hath spand the heauēs but the finger of his hand? who hath settled the earth but the word of his mouth? who hath

digged the greate deep, but the wisdome of his will?
               Looke vp the heauens, they are the works of his hands: look downe to the earth, it is the worke of his word: beholde the Seas how they are obedient to his will: now to beholde in the Sunne the light of the daye, the Moone and the Starres; as it were the lampes of the night; yet these so keepe their courses in a continuall order, that one is not hurtfull to another, but all and euery one in their seruice to man, performe their dueties to their Creator: Doth not the consideration of these obiectes to our eyes, strike an impression in our hearts of an admirable

power in the greatnesse of his workmanship? Again, to behold the thicke cloudes, whereby the Sun is obscured, the boisterous & tempestious windes, wherby the highest Caedars are shaken, and the terrible lightning and thunders, that amaze the hearts of the beholders: are not these great proofes of a great power? But let vs looke downe a little lower vppon the earth, and consider how it is possible that so great and huge a Masse shold be carried in such a circūference; Again, the world of great & huge trees in the woods, with great and strange wilde beastes in the wildernes; the one to beare fruit, the other to feede and breede, as

it were to an infinite increase, & yet place and foode enough for all. Again, to beholde the raging Seas how they roare against the bankes of the earth, to whose boundes they are limitted: & to cōsider of the great & huge fishes that make their walks in these watry pathes: are not all these, spectacles, great aparāt proofes, of a moste great and admirable power? Again, to note the great and stout Foules, that with the force of their winges make their passage through the ayre, & yet neither the lights of the heauēs, the creatures in the earth, nor seas, nor birds in the ayre, shall lōger retain their places, then stā
                  deth with the pleasure of the

Almightie: Oh how admirable is that greatnes to whom all things are in such obedience, which in him onely hauing their being, are onely at his will in their disposing?
               But let me come a little lower to thee: Oh man, compounded of the worst matter, the very slyme of the Earth, how great a power is in thy God that hath created thee, not by his worde onely (as he did all other creatures in the Earth) but aboue them all in a Diuine nature of grace; so neere vnto himselfe, as that he woulde in the greatnes of his loue, cal thee his Image, & to this Image of himselfe, giue so great a power ouer all his creatures,

that both Sunne, Moone, and Starres in the heauens, the beasts in the fielde, the birdes in the aire, the fishes in the Sea, the Trees in the woods, and the mineralles in the earth, shoulde all be subiect to the disposing of thy discretiō & obedient to thy commaund. Hath he not made the great horse to cary thee, the great Lyon to be led by thee, the Beare, the Wolfe, the Tygre and the Dogge, yea withall other beastes, to stand affraid at the frowne of thy countenance? yea doth he not coward their spirits to become seruiceable to thy cōmaund? doth not the Faulcon stoope her pitch to come downe to thy fist, and

make her fight at the Fowle, to feede thy hunger or pleasure? doth not the Dog leaue his kennell, and make his course at the Deere for thy food or thy sport? doth not the fish come out of the deepe waters and hang vppon thy baite, for thy profit or thy pleasures? & what a greatnesse is this to haue this commaund ouer so many creatures? but againe, consider withall how much greater is that infinite greatnesse in thy Creator, that hath giuen such greatnesse to his Creature.
               Againe, consider withall, the greatnesse of his glorie, and glorye of his greatnesse, that his Angelles tremble at his brightnesse:

if hee touch the hilles they shall smoake, and the Mountaines shall melt at his presence, and no man can see him and liue: so greate is his Brightnesse, as no eye can beholde: so pure his essence, as exceedes the sence of nature: so deepe his wisdome, as is vnsearchable in reason: & so infinit his perfection, as surpasseth the power of consideration: and therefore let vs consider, that in regarde of that Almightie power, in his greatnesse the greatest: yea, and all power without him is so greate a smalnesse as nothing can be lesse.
               Againe, let vs in admiration of his greatnes, and knowledge of

his goodnes, consider whom we are to thinke on, how we are to thinke of him, what we are to thinke of our selues without him, and what we are onely in him: For the first, whō we are to thinke on, is the incomprehensible Maiestie of all powers, the biginner of all times, the Creator of all thinges, the Cōmaunder of al natures, the disposer of al properties, the life of all beings, and the endles glory of al graces: absolute in his power, resolute in his will, incomparable in his wisdome, and admirable in his worke: thus I saye, let vs consider whome wee are to thinke of, not a Creature but a Creator: not a King, but a

King of Kinges; not a power, but a power of powers; and not an Angell but GOD: now howe shall wee thinke of him? with feare and trembling, and remember the sayings of Mathew, Chapter 10. verse 28. Feare not him that can destroy the bodie, but feare him that can destroye both body and soule.
               
               And therefore when wee fall into sinne, let vs feare the greatnesse of his wrath, and the greate power in his furie: for though hee fedde Elias in the Wildernesse by the Rauens, and preserued Daniel in the Den from the Lyons, made the Dogges licke the sores of Lazarus,

and made the Sunne to stay his course at the prayer of Iosuah, yet, with the wicked he maketh his Creature in the vengeance of his wrath, tooke another course, for the Lyons deuoured the false Prophets: The Beares came out of the wood to destroy the children that mocked the Prophet: the dogs fed vppon Iesabell, and the darkenesse blinded the Sodomites, till fire came downe from Heauen to consume them.
               Consider therfore (I say) whom wee are to thinke on? in one word which concludeth all that can be spoken, God & not man: for in God is all greatnesse, without whome the greatest of

all powers, is but the power of all smallnesse: but since so great is his greatnesse euerie way, as is no way to be comprehended, let vs onely know and acknowledge his infinitenes therin to be such, as we must humbly leaue to admiration, and say with the Prophet Dauid, Psalme. 1
                     •
                  6. vers. 26. Praise yee the God of heauen for his mercie endureth for euer.
               
               Now let vs see what wee are without him; as bubbles of water that breakes in an instant: or a blasted flower ere it bee out of the bud: the shame of nature: meate for Dogges: fuell for fire: out-lawes from Heauen, and Prisoners for Hell. Oh fearefull

state of such as feare not God: feare therefore the greatnes of his wrath, least you be consumed in the greatnes of his fury.
               Now what are wee to thinke of our selues in him, the chosen vessels of grace, the comaunders of all earthly powers, the compagnions of his Saints▪ coheires in the heauenly Kingdome, & brethren with his blessed Sonne and our Sauiour Iesus Christ: thus greate doth his greatnes make his, both in this world, & in the worlde to come: and thus much for the first pointe of consideration of the greatnes of God.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               Touching the goodnesse of God the second Consideration.
               IT is a position infallible, that of goodnes can come nothing but good: God then being the onely & euer true and pure essence of al goodnes, of him what can be spoken but all good? is it not written, that whatsoeuer he created, hee sawe that it was good? and hauing made man to his owne Image, the best good, how did he shew to him his exceeding goodnes, in giuing him dominion ouer al his good creatures? onely the Tree of life excepted, which though in it selfe it was good, yet in that he knew it was not good for man to meddle with, hee forbad

him to taste of the fruite therof; & this good warning his good God gaue him, that there might nothing but good come to him: but we may well say there is nothing good but God; it is the worde of truth spoken by the Lord of life. Our Sauiour Iesus Christ, when the Pharises called him good Maister, his answer was, why call you me good? there is none good but God: And if the only begotten Son of God wold not be called good, how can this title of good, be properly giuen to any of his creatures? though it pleased him to say that he sawe euery thing was good that hee created, yet it was good onely respectiuely as it came from his

goodnes, and onely effectiuely as might serue to his glory: for though the spirite of man by the grace of the holy Ghost doe participate with the great blessing of God, which from his goodnes proceeding, cannot be but good; yet onely and altogether in God doth abide and dwell that pure essence & Eternall goodnes, which may onely make him be iustly and properly called good.
               Now all goodnes being in him and of him, and whatsoeuer is or may be in any part thought, or called good, must be onely in respect of God, the onely giuer of the same: and whatsoeuer good we receiue, is

things good, & all the good that he created for the good vse of man, that good knowledge, knowledge of goodnes, and goodnes of knowledge, the perfection whereof is onely in himselfe, and the participation wherof shold be in none but the Image of himselfe: this Image did hee chuse to make in man, and this good onely to bestowe vpon man: now howsoeuer the Deuill by corruption of temptation, hath drawen away the hearts of those outward men which retaine in their soules small or no parte of the Image of God, vnto the delight of euill, yet those men that are touched with the least parte

of Gods grace, haue not onely a hatefull loathing of the nature of euill, but a longing desire after good, and a delight in the good of the desire of that good that they long after: Man being therefore by the goodnes of God elected for his best creature, his best seruant and coheire with his onely beloued Sonne in his heauenly Kingdome: hee hath also elected him to that knowledge of God, that by the good thereof, may breede in him the greefe of sinne, vnto which by corruption he is a subiect, and a neuersatisfied desire to enioye the good that by faith he is assured to come vnto: now as he hath

elected man onely, and aboue all his creatures to this knowledge of good, which he did as it were chuse out of all his blessings, to bestow onely vpon man, so did he withall giue him knowledge how to come to the possession of that good, to which onely he is elected: Oh how infinit a goodnes is this in God towards vs, in this gratious benefit of our election! oh what heart can (without the rauishing ioy of the soule) think vpon this goodnes of God towards man, that (as I aforesaid) hauing chosen him for his best creature, his best seruant and coheire, with his bestand onely beloued Son, he did not only inspire his

soule with an especiall knowledge aboue all other creatures, but with this knowledge of good, a knowledge likewise of a direct way to come vnto it; which waie is not to be sought in a strange country, nor among the Saints or Angells, but euen here at home, and in his holy word, and that waie to be onely founde, by the faith of that grace, that in the good creatures of God doth onely worke to his glorie: in somme, when hee himselfe is both the waie to life, and the life of the faithfull. What an excellent comfort is this in one worde, one truth, and one Christe; to seeke and finde the waie to our

is from the aboundance of his mercie, and for the which wee are bounde in all humilitie to giue him glory: let vs acknowledge all goodnes to be onely in him, and himselfe the glorious Essence of the same: consider with thankefulness the good that vnworthylye wee receiue from him.
               First let vs thinke on the goodnes of God, in out election, that being the worst matter to worke vpon, hee would show the best of his working, in framing a substance to the Image of himselfe: can there be any thing so good vnto man as to be made the Image of God? and when in the

righteousness of the soule, which is the best goodnes in man, wee be most like vnto God? what glory are we to giue vnto him, who ingrafteth in our hearts such a loue vnto righteousnes, and such a righteous loue vnto his grace, as that by the vertue thereof we become as it were members of his sacred body, & branches of the Tree of life: Consider I say thus, first the goodnes of God in our election from the slime of the earth, the worst matter in the world to worke vpon, to be the best and fairest of his works in the world: and all earthly things to endure but their time, in the course of their liues, man onely

in his grace to liue for euer: in himselfe, he is onely all goodnesse, and from whome onely being onely good, we receiue this first good of our election: how great a proofe of the glorious essence of the goodnesse in God is this? that not by perswasion of Angelles, nor the merrite of any power of nature, this free election of man aboue all creatures, & vnder him to be Lord ouer them, fell vnto vs by the onely gratious working of his holy wil to his onely infinite glory & our vnspeakable comfort: Now let vs againe consider a further goodnes, that from his grace we receiue in our election, not onely to be made the best

best of his creatures, but to serue him with such loue that wee maic liue with him in glory: he hath not onely chosen vs for his best creatures, but also for his best seruants; yea his beloued sonnes, and not onely sonnes, but coheires with his blessed Sonne in the heauenly kingdome: he hath chosen vs before the worlde, to preserue vs in the worlde, and to take vs out of the worlde to eternall ioyes aboue the worlde: Oh what tongue can expresse the greatnes of this his goodnes towards vs, besides the infinite comforts, graces and blessings, that euer in this life he bestoweth vpon vs? hee created all things

could giue him nothng to perswade or allure him to make vs to his Image, being created: we were so poore, that wee had nothing but what he gaue vs, & therfore could giue him nothing for our creation: when hee had giuen vs dominion ouer his creatures, what could wee giue him but what was his owne, and whereof he had no neede, but might commaunde at his will? naie more, what did man giue him but vnthankfulnesse in being disobedient to his commaundement? and lastly being fallen through sinne, so farre from the state of grace that there was no meanes but the death of his dearest Sonne

and our Sauiour, for our redemtion: what could wee giue him hauing nothing? and if we had had al the worlde it was but his owne, and as nothing to recompence this admirable point of his goodnes in our redemption: Consider then for our election we could giue him nothing, and therefore it was only of his grace: for our creation we had nothing to giue him, for we had nothing but what he gaue vs: for our redemtion the least drop of the pretious Bloud of his deere beloued Sonne, was more worth then the whole worlde: Oh then thinke wee coulde giue him nothing worthy of so greate a loue as to

dye for vs: with the grace of his holy spirite hee doth sanctifie vs, and who can thinke or dare presume to buy that glorious blessing of him, shall with Symon Magus perish in the horror of such a sinne, the least sparke of his grace, being more worth then the whole worlde; and the worlde all his, and man but a creature in the worlde. Againe, for our iustification, his onely righteousnesse in his life and death, his patience, and his Passion, is the onely substance of our iustification: for as wee are iustified by faith in his Bloud, an effect of grace in the inspiration of his

holy spirite: so is that pretious Bloud of his, the glorious ground of our beleife, whereby onely wee are iustified: our election then from grace, our creation in grace, our redemption by grace, out sanctification by grace, our iustification by grace, and our glorification by grace: what hath the world, or man, if he had the whole worlde to purchase the least parte of the glory that the onely goodnesse of God hath in his mercie ordained and reserued for the good of man?
               Let then no man be so blinde or blinded with the mist of arrogancie, as to runne into merite in himselfe, or to mingle

our saluation? Oh let vs a little consider, how many are the sundry, yea and infinite varieties of God, that by the goodnes of our election wee receiue from the mercie of the Almightie: first to be created to his owne Image, to be inspired with a Diuine knowledge aboue all his creatures, to haue dominion ouer so many creatures, to be feareles of damnation by the assurance of our election to saluation, to vse the things of the world, as if wee had them not, to accompt the worlde with all the pompe and pride thereof, but as vanitie, to haue a loathing of sinne, and a loue to vertue, to be furnished of what

is necessarie to be deffended from euill, preserued from hurt, to dread no danger, to be weary of the worlde, and longe to be with Christ: To speake of the goodnes of his bountie dayly bestowed vpon his creatures, as beautie to some, strength to other, to other wealth, to other wisdome, to other honour, to other diuine inspirations; these I say are no small causes to make vs consider of his goodnesse towards vs: but aboue all, to giue vs himselfe, in his loue to bee with vs, with his grace to guide vs, with his power to defend vs, with his word to instruct vs, & with his holy spirit to inspite vs: to finde the way made for vs to

our eternal ioyes that none shall take from vs, to which before the worldes & world without end, he hath only elected vs: oh man how canst thou thinke humblie enough, thankfully enough, and ioyfully enough of the goodnes of thy God, in this good of thy electiō? in summe what goodnes can be greater vnto vs, then to know yt God to his dearest loue through his beloued only dearly Son Iesus Christ, hath elected vs, & as it were chosen his loue aboue al his creatures, in his Son Iesus Christ our Lord and Sauiour, to be bestowed vpon vs; i
                     •
                   that loue to liue with vs, and that euer-liuing loue neuer to leaue vs here on earth; with his

infinite blessings in his gratious goodness to comfort vs, and in heauen to reserue a Crowne of glory for vs, to create vs when we were not, to redeeme vs being lost, to preserue vs from destruction, to giue his deerest Sonne to death for our sinnes, to assure vs of saluation, and to receiue vs to glory.
               All this did hee, and all good that euer was, is, or euer will or can be, for vs, to shew and make vs consider of his goodnes towards vs: for let vs in breefe a littltle consider how freely, and onely of his grace hee hath thus made manifest his vnspe
                     •
                  
                  kable goodnes in this our election, when wee were not: wee

                  
                     〈1… pages missing〉
                  
gle his corrupt actions with the pure merite of Christe Iesus for his saluation; but say with Iob all our righteousnesse is as a filthie cloth, and with the Prophet Dauid, Psalme 116. verses 11. 12. meditating vppon the greatnesse of his goodnes towards him, what shall I giue the Lord for all that hee hath done vnto me? I will take the Cuppe of Saluation, and be thankfull to the Lord: see here all that wee are, and all that wee can giue him for all the good that wee receiue from him, bare thanks: and yet as much as hee requireth, and more then from a great many (the more their shame) hee receiueth.
               
                  But let those that feele these great effects of grace in the goodnes of the liuing God, say with the holy Prophet, Psalme 136. verse 1. be thankfull to the Lord, and speake good of his name, for his mercie endureth for euer: but since so infinite is his goodnes in all things and to al things, and specially to man aboue all things, let me onely wish al men for their own good, to acknowledge all goodnes onely to bee in the Lord, the onely Author and substance thereof; & whatsoeuer is good in heauen or earth, is onely a free guifte of his grace, that must onely work to his glory; the election of man to be an effect of loue in the

grace of his goodnes, and not to dreame of merite, but to giue glory vnto mercie, for the benefit of such a blessing, as being freely giuen to man, through our Lord Iesus Christ by his merite, is onely confirmed to the eternitie of his glory: and thus much touching the goodnes of God.
            
            
               Touching the wisdome of God the third Consideration.
               TO speake of the wisdome of God, is so farre aboue the capacitie of man, that it is rather with all humble reuerence to be honored and admired, then either to be spoken of or considered:

yet for so much as the creature doth giue glorye to his Creator, in praising and with admiration beholding the excellent workmanshippe in the varietie of his workes, and finding it so farre aboue the reach of reason, as must noedes proceede from a vertue of diuine grace, hee doth in contemplation acknowledge a wisdome of that excellencie, that maketh him saie with the Prophet Dauid, in the 104. Psalme 24. verse, Oh how wonderfull are thy workes? in wisdome hast thou made them: but though the wisdome of God as it is in it selfe, is an other himselfe, and not to be comprehended

of any but himselfe, yet the effectes thereof in all things, doe giue him so greate a praise, as make him aboue all things, to receiue the highest of all glory: for to enter into particulers, let vs beginne to looke into his creation, in the power whereof hee sheweth no small parte of wisdome: as in the brightnes of the Sun, Moon, & Stars, and the cleernesse of the skie, the courses of the Planets, & the motions of the Celestiall powers: in the opperations of the elements, in the perfection of proportiōs, in the diuersity of creatures, in the wō
                  der of arte, and quicknesse in working: what excellent arte

hath he taught nature, in painting all the Trees, fruits, and flowres of the earth? yea and all the haires, skinnes, feathers, and scales of beasts, fowles, and fishes? the eeuennes & purenes of euery one, of whome being truly considered, wil startle the best witts in the due consideration of that onely point of wisdome.
               Againe, what a further secret cunning hath he taught nature, in perfuming so many Trees, hearbs, and flowres, all growing out of this darke and dusky earth: by what wisdome he doth vnite the people, and hauing deuided the languages, how hee giues the meanes of vnderstanding: how hee makes the fishes

paths, and the shippes passages through the seas, the birds walkes through the ayre, and the Salamanders dwelling in the fire, and the wormes howses in the earth: how admirable is this wisdome that so worketh all things by it selfe? To speake of the excellency of Arts, in the secrecie of their working, what can it finally approoue but an admiration of knowledge in the maister of them? But hauing with Salomon found by the light of grace, and experience of labor, that al things are vanity, except onely the vertue of that grace, that enricheth the soule with inestimable treasure: what a pointe in wisdome is this,

not onely to instruct the soule of man in knowledge of natures, with their qualities and effects, but through the power of it selfe to breede a kinde of spirituall knowledge in the apprehension of Faith, that in contemplation of heauenly treasure, maketh trash of the whole worlde.
               Oh superexellent exllencie in wisdome, that frameth the heart vnto the soule, to seeke out the waie of life, and in the prison of the flesh, preserues it from the perill of infection; that man being created the Image of perfection, can neuer be destroyed by the venome of corruption, but in the daies of

iniquitie, being guided by grace, escaping the snares of hel, shall fly to the ioyes of heauen.
               Consider that if man by the wisdome of God attaine to this excellent knowledge, how to walke through the passages of nature, to make vse of them for his seruice, to withstand the temptation of sinne, to receiue the instructions of grace, to dispise the delights of the worlde, to bridle the affections of the flesh, and ouercomming the power of death, to finde the path vnto life; if this I say, and more then can be said, by the instruction of the diuine wisdome, man hath power to attaine vnto, thinke how infinite

is that wisdome from whome only commeth the essence of this, and all knowledge: in whome it onely liueth, and without onely whome all is but meere ignorance: And since it is written, that the beginning of wisdome, is the feare of God; learne onely that lesson, and feare to be otherwise learned: Paule thought he knew enough in Christ, & him crucified: and enough wise shalt thou be, if thou canst applie his knowledge to thy comfort.
               But to returne breifely to speake of the wisdome of God, it is in the heauens so highe, in the earth so large, in the water so deep, in the aier so secret,

and in the fire so powerfull; in all things so exquisite, and in perfectiōs so infinite, that I will onely in the admiration thereof, giue glory to the same, and saie with the Apostle 1. Corin. chapter 3. verse 19. The wisdome of the worlde is foolishnesse before God; And againe, with the Prophet Dauid, Psalme 104. verse 24 Oh Lord how excellent are thy workes in wisdome hast thou made them all. Psalme 139. verse 6. Such knowledge is too excellent for mee. O all ye workes of the Lorde, praise him and magnifie him for euer: but since so many and so infinite are the praises that may worthyly bee giuen vnto it:

I cannot so leaue off, but I must speake a little more of the consideration of it, for the power of it: It maketh all things for the knowledge of it, it knoweth all things for the direction of it, it ordereth all thinges for the goodnesse of it, it is good in, and to all things, for the greatnesse of it, it comprehendeth all things for the grace of it, it is gratious in all good things, and for the maiestie of it, it is glorious aboue all things: for in the power of it is the life of vertue; in the life of it is the mercie of loue; in the loue of it is the blessing of grace; and in the grace of it, is the eternitie of

Glorie: who seeketh it shall finde it, who findeth it shall loue it, who loueth it, shall liue in it, who liueth in it, shall ioy in it, and who so ioyeth in it, shall be blessed by it. It is brighter then the Sunne, purer then Golde, sweeter then the honie and the honie combe, and for the worth of it, it is more worth then the whole worlde: it beautifies nature, it rectifieth reason, it magnifies grace, and glorifieth loue: it loueth humilitie, it aduanc
                     •
                  th vertue, it enricheth knowledge, and maintaineth honour: it laboureth in heauen for such as from heauen are preserued for heauen, to bring them to heauen: in somme, it is

where it is the blisse of nature, the honour of reason, the light of life, and the ioye of loue.
               The elect loue her, the Saints honour her, & God onely hath her: in summe, so much may be said of her, and so much more good thē can be said or thought is in her, that fearing with the deuine light of my praise, to obscure the glory of her worthynesse, I will onely wish the worlde to seeke her, the godly to finde her, the gratious to loue her, the vertuous to serue her, the faithfull to honour her, and all the creatures in heauen and earth to praise her: and so much, touching the consideration of the wisdome of God.
            
            
               
               The fourth Consideration touching the loue of God.
               OH: who coulde with the eyes of wisdome, in the humilitie of the hearte, looke into the vertue of that grace that liueth in the loue of the Almightie, should finde that sence of sweetnes, that should rauish the soule of vnderstanding: but though it bee in it selfe so gracious, and in grace so glorious as exceedeth the exceeding o
                     •
                   all praise, yet as a Mole-hill t
                     •
                   a mountaine, a Flie to an Eagle or an Ante to an Elephant, le
                     •
                   me with the poore widdow put in my myte into the treasurie, in humilitie of my hear
                     •
                  
                  
to speake of the life of my soule, which being onely in the loue of the liuing God, let me speake a little in the cōsideration of the same, that the vngratefull world seeing their lacke of grace, may blush at their blindnes, & be ioyful of a better light, where beholding the beautie that rauisheth the soules of the beloued, they shall find the loue that is the ioy of the blessed: touching the which, let me by degrees speake of such points as I find most necessarie in this consideration: 
                     •
                  et vs first I say consider this first 
                     •
                  oint of the loue of God, that 
                     •
                  efore we were created for his 
                     •
                  eruice, wee were elected in his 
                     •
                  oue, then to make an Image to

it selfe, yea & as it were another it selfe, for the first, Romans 8. Iacob haue I loued, euen before he had done good or euill; There is election prooued in loue.
               When the Angell saluted Elizabeth, with the message of her conception, was it not of Iohn the baptist, who was sent to pronounce the word of the Lord, to make streight his way before him? and what greater proofe of loue, then to electe him to such a message? againe, doth not Christ the Sonne of God praye to his Father, that as hee is one with his Father, so his maye be one with him? Oh how can there be so greate a proofe of the election of loue

in Christe, as by his loue to be made one with him: Looke I saie into the excellencie of this incomparable loue in God towards man: first to make him to his Image, and not onely by his worde (as by which he made all other creatures) but as it were by a consent, or consultation of the Trinitie about an especiall worke, to the pleasing of the Deitie, as it is written: Let vs make man in our owne Image according to our likenesse.
               
               But well may it bee saide that Nullum simile est idē, for though he were perfect in respect of our corruption, yet by his fall, it appeareth that the creature

was farre shorte of the perfection of the Creator: but being falne from that perfection, by the venome of temptation, into the state of damnation, how greate was the loue of God, to effect againe by himselfe the blessed worke of his saluation? for as it is written:
               GOD so loued the worlde, that hee gaue his onely begotten Sonne to death, that all that beleiue in him shalbe saued: againe, looke into the admirable loue of Christe to his beloued, to come from the bosome of his Father in heauen, to his graue in the earth: to leaue the seruice of Angelles,

to be skoffed of diuelish creatures; to leaue the ioyes of Paradise for the sorrowes of the worlde; to leaue his Throane in heauen, for a maunger on the earth; to leaue his seate of iudgemente, to suffer death vpon the crosse: well might hee say as in respect of his sorrowes for the sinnes of the worlde, with the punishement that hee was to endure for the sinnes of others, himselfe without sinne, when hee felte the extremitie of those paines that in the sweate of Bloud and water, prooued the passion of true patience, and the life of true loue.
               
                  
                  Vt, non est dolor sicut meus, sic non est amor sicut meus; for indeede he knoweth not, nor can he iudge, what loue is that in his heart cannot saie in honour of his loue, neuer such loue: the freinde to die for his enemies; the maister to die for his seruants; the King to die for beggers; the Sonne of God, to dye for the sonne of man: well maye it be saide neuer such loue: to leaue all pleasures to bringe thee to all pleasures; to endure all crosses to worke thee all comforts; to leaue Heauen for a time to bring thee to Heauen for euer.
               What art thou that in the thought of such loue, canst not

saie in thy heart, in the ioye of thy soule, as Nullus dolor sicut eius, sic Nullus amor sicuteius: as no sorrowe is like to his, so no loue is like to his: doth not hee truely saie that can say nothing but truth? loue one another as I haue loued you: greater loue then this cannot be, for a man to lay downe lyfe for his beloued: Oh let vs a little meditate vpon this excellent comforte that is vnspeakable in God towards man, through his loue was man created the goodlest creature: & where al other creatures haue their eyes bēt downward (to the earth, where they seeke their foode) man hath a face, looking vpwards toward

heauen, where the soule seeketh foode aboue the flesh: Againe, through the loue of God was man made the wisest creature, to know the varieties of natures, to giue names vnto creatures, to note the courses of the heauens, to till the earth, and make his pathes through the seas, to deuide the times, to distinguish of doubts, to search into knowledge, and to know the giuer and glory thereof: Againe, through the loue of God, man was made commaunder of all creatures vnder the Sunne, Lord of all the earth, foreseer of after-times, messenger of the worde of God, student of Diuine misteries,

cheife seruant to the Lord of Lords, freinde to the King of Kings, and coheire in the heauenly kingdome, through the loue of God; hee was made a seruante, but as a friend, a brother and a coheire: now hee that thinks on these pointes of loue, is worthy of no loue if he cannot say in his heart there was neuer such loue: hee loued man in himselfe, when there was none to perswade him to loue him but himselfe; he loued man as himselfe, that he wold haue him one with himselfe; yea he loued man more if more could be then himself, that for man to death would giue himselfe: hee made man louingly, he blest man louingly,

hee came to man louingly, and dyed for man most louingly: in the beginning hee shewed his loue without beginning, and in the end will shew his loue without ending, he made him better then his creatures, for hee made him Lord ouer them: hee made them better then his Angells, for hee made them to serue him alittle lower then himselfe. Psalme 8. verse 5. that himself might chiefly loue him: see further his loue vnto man as it is writen, I say 49. 15: Can a Mother forget her children, yet wil I neuer forget thee. Se heere loue more tender then of a mother, and more carefull then of any other Father: O loue of

loues, what loue is like to this loue? a kingly loue, which defendeth his subiects; a lordly loue, which rewardeth his seruants; a friendly loue, that is kind to his friēds; a brotherly loue yt is kinde to his brothers; a motherly loue, that is tender to her children; a fatherly loue, that is carefull of his Sonnes; and a Godly loue, that is gratious to his creatures; a faithfull loue that neuer fainteth; a bountifull loue that euer giueth; a mercifull loue that neuer grudgeth, a pitifull loue that euer releiueth; a mindefull loue, that neuer forgetteth; a gracefull loue that euer loueth.
               Now who can enter into the true and due consideration

of loue, worthy louing, & in the thought of this loue, will not euer confesse there was neuer such loue? which regardeth nothing but loue: oh how did God loue Abraham for shewing his loue in Isaack? where God regarding more his will then his worke, would not suffer the sacrifice of his Son, but so loued him, as besides many other great fauours that he did him, could say within himselfe (when he had determined a destructiō of his enemies) shal I hide from my seruant Abraham what I will doe? as thogh he wold keep nothing frō his beloued that he knew fit for his knowledge: Againe, how loued he Eliah that he wold neuer

let him see death? how loued he his seruant Dauid that he made him to his owne heart? how loued he the blessed Virgine to make her the mother of his blesssed Sonne? how loued hee Iohn the Euangeliste, to let him leane in is bosome? how loued hee Paule to bringe him from idolatry? & how loued he Peter to forgiue him whē he had denyed him? how loued hee Lazarus when he wept ouer him, how loued he Mary Magdalen when he disposs est her of fowle spirits, and at his Resurrection let her beholde him? and how loued he the Theife when hee carried him into heauen with him?
               To recite all the pointes of

his particuler loue to a worlde of vnworthy persons, were more then a worlde could set downe but for so much as I haue said, and more then may bee saide of his loue, I am perswaded, that if wee consider the power, the grace, the wisdome, the bountie, the pittie, the maiestie, the mercie, the patience, the passion, the sorrow, the labour, the life, and the torments of his loue, for our loue; he hath no feeling of loue, or is worthie of no loue, that will not in the ioye of his soules loue, giue all glory to this loue, and say with the Prophet Dauid. Psalm 31. verse 23. Loue him all ye his Saints, praise him and
                  
                  magnifie him for euer. For as there was neuer such a sorrowe as he hath endured for vs, so is there no such loue as he hath to vs, and in his mercie dooth euer shew vs. When he came first into the world, he came as an infant, to shewe vs the mildenes of his loue in further yeares: he came as a doctor in the wisdom of his loue, to teach vs the way vnto eternall life, in the vertue of his loue: he came as a Phisition to cure vs of all diseases: in the power of his loue, he came like himselfe as a God to driue out the Deuils from vs: and in the meekenes of his loue, came as a Lambe to be sacrifised for vs: & in the care of his loue, at the

right hand of his father, is now a Mediator for vs, & in the glorie of his loue, into the possession of our inheritance, that hee hath purchased for vs: will receiue vs: oh milde! oh wise! oh vertuous! oh powerfull! oh meeke! oh carefull! oh glorious loue! who can thinke of this loue, and in the true glorie of true loue, cannot most truely say, there was neuer such loue! no, as Non est dolor sicut eius, so Non est Amor sicut eius. And thus much touching the consideration of the loue God.
            
            
               
               The fift consideration of the mercy of God.
               IN this admirable vertue of the loue of God, I finde the greate and gratious worke of his mercie towards man, which Considering the wickednesse of our nature, and the wofulnesse of our estate, is necessary to be considered: for so farre had the temtation of the Diuill poysoned the heart of man, as through the sinne of pride, sought not onely to driue him out of Paradice, but (in as much as he might) to throwe him downe into hell, when the Angell of his wrath was sent to giue him punishment,

yet wrought his mercie so with his Iustice, as saued him from perdition: yea, though hee cursed the earth for the sins of his creature, yet he blessed his labour with the fruite of his patience, and reserued for his beleefe a ioy in his mercie: Looke through the whole course of the Scripture, how his mercie euer wrought with his Iustice, yea, & as it were had oftētimes the vpper hand of it: as in the time of Noah, when sinne had made as it were the whole world hateful in his sight, that he saide within himselfe he repented that he had made man, yet in his mercie hee made an Arke to saue Noah and his Children, yea, and of all liuing

creatures, reserued some for generation: in Sodome and Gomora he saued Lot & his Daughters: & yet Adam deserued nothing but destruction for his disobedience. Noah deserued no grace for his drunkennes, not Lot any fauour for his Incest, & yet mercy so wrought with iustice, that God not onely for gaue their sins, but blessed their repē
                  tance: such hath enerbene, is, and euer will be the mercye of God vnto mā, as so far doth mit
                     •
                  igate the furie of his iustice, as reserueth comfort for the penitent. Oh how sweete are the reports and proofes of the mercie of god vnto man in all the world! For is it not written by the Prophet

                  Dauid, Psa. 145. vers. 9. His mercy is ouer al his works? And again, speaking of his mercy, Ps. 103. 13 As a father pittieth his owne Children, so is the Lord merciful vnto all that feare him, and in Psa. 103. vers 12. As far as the East is from the west, so far hath he set our sins from vs: and in the 136. Psalme, through euerie verse, speaking to all his workes, both in heauen & earth, he vseth these words. Blesse him and praise him, for his mercie endureth for euer. In mercie hee turned his wrath frō ye Israelits whē Moyses stood in the gap: in mercy hee saued Moyses floating in the reedes: in mercy he preserued the children in the surnace of fire: in mercye hee preserued the

the Israelites from the hoste of Pharaoh: in mercy hee preserued Dauid, and deliuered him from all his troubles: in mercy he deliuered Ioseph from the pit and the prison: in mercy he sent▪ his Prophets to warne the world of their wickednesse, and to pronounce comfort to the penitent: in mercy he sent Iohn Baptist, to deliuer the tydings of saluation: and in mercie hee sent his onely Sonne Iesus Christ to be a Sauiour of all his people: Oh infinite mercie, worthy of infinite glorie! Consider againe how powerfull is his mercie in all his workes, to feede fiue thousand people with a few Loaues and Fishes, and with the fragments

to fill more baskets then the Loaues when they were whole: to heale the disseased that touch ed but the hem of his garment: to giue sight to the blinde, knowledge to the simple, health to the sicke, soundnesse to the lame, comfort to the penitent: to driue the Diuells from the possessed: to giue life to the deade, and ioy to the faithfull.
               These words of glorious mercy, doth the moste gratious and glorious word of truth plainely and truly lay before vs, to make vs with the holy Prophets iustly say: Oh the infinite light and bottomles depth of the mercies of our God! Glorie be to the Lord, for his mercy indureth for euer.
               
               
                  Againe, how absolute he is in his mercie, where he saith, I will haue mercie, where I will haue mercie, and therefore be free both in his power and will, hath mercye for all that will humblye and faithfullye call vppon him: and againe, all are vnder sinne, that all may come to mercie: Oh how all glorious is that mercie which is extended ouer all!
               Let vs therefore looke a little into the blindenesse of man, in the immagination of his owne merrit, of the mercy of the liuing God, which is onelye a fruite or effect of grace, or free guift of his onely glorious loue. How did Adam merit mercie, when hee

fled from his presence? What merited Moyses when hee angred the Lord? What merrited Noah when hee was drunkens? What merrited Lot when hee committed Incest? What merited the Israelites with their goulden Calle? What merited Dauid when he comitted murther and adulterie?
               Againe, what merited Mary Magdalen that had seauen Deuils within her? what merited Paul that persecuted Christ in his people? what merited Peter that denyed his maister? & what merited the world to work ye death of the Son of God? all & euerie one (in the iudgement of Iustice) nothing but dānation. Look thē
                  
into the inexplicable glorye of ye mercie of God, which not only forgaue all these, but saued all, and blessed all, and so will euer, al those whom and whersoeuer, that ashamed are of their sinnes, and confessing their merrit of nothing but wrath and destruction, in the humble faith of repentance, flye onely to the mercie of God in the merrit of Christ Iesus for theyr saluation. Oh the powerfull mercy in the loue of God, that will not suffer his Iustice to execute his wrath vpon sinne! and though such be the pure and glorious brightnes of his grace, as cannot endure the foule and filthie obiect of sinne, yet doth his mercy so rule

the power of his wrath, as will not let him destroye the sinner with his sinne: many are the afflictions that hee layeth vppon his belooued: many are the corrections that hee vseth to his Children: manye are the sorrowes that hee inflicteth vppon his Elect, but all is for sinne) in the loue of a Father, in the care of a Maister, & mercy of a God) as onely meanes to purge them of those euills that are hinder ances to their good; and being healed of their corruption, to bring them to their first, and a far better perfection. For in the correction of mercy, is the sinner saued from destruction; & by the regeneration of grace, brought

to eternall saluation: Oh the vertuous, gratious, and glorious nature of mercye, which hath such power with God in the preseruation of his people! It keekeepeth the fire that it fall not from heauen to consume vs: it keepeth the water that it riseth not to drown vs: it keepeth the ayre that it doth not infect vs: & keepeth ye earth that it doth not swallow vs: it keepeth vs in peace that discention do not spoile vs: it keepeth vs in plenty that want doe not pinch vs: it keepeth vs in loue that mallice cannot hurt vs: and keepeth vs to God that the Deuill cannot confound vs.
               In summe, it is a gift of grace, a worke of glorie, a bountie in

God, & a blessing to man, to speake of these daies wherin we liue, and of the late times which we cannot forget: Let vs a little consider the mercies of God towards vs, how often were we preserued from forraine enemies by Sea, and ciuill or vnciuil enemies at home; when not the pollicy of mā, but the only mercy of god did break the forces of the one, and reueale the deuises of the other? And while our Neighbor Countries by continuall warres haue shed a world of blood, we haue beene preserued in increase of people: and while they haue bin mourning in the punnishmēt of sinne, wee haue beene singing in the ioy

of grace: oh how are wee bound to giue glorye vnto God for the aboundance of his mercie, and say with the Prophet Dauid, Psal. 136. verse. 26, Great is the God of Heauen, for his mercie endureth for euer. But as I said of loue, the life of mercy; so of mercy the glory of loue: since it is so infinite in goodnesse, as exceedeth in worthinesse the height of all praise that the heart of mā can think, or the tongue of man can expresse, I will onely say with the Prophet, Psalme. 106. verse. 1. to all powers whatsoeuer. Blesse ye the Lord and praise him, for his mercie endureth for euer.
               
               And thus much touching

the consideration of the mercy of God.
            
            
               The sixt consideration of the grace of God.
               IN the mercy of God, finding so great a measure of his grace as in the bountie of his goodnes deserueth no little glory, I cannot but with admiration speake of that grace, that through his loue made him haue such a fauour vnto man, as to elect him to his loue, to frame him to his image, to inspire him with his spirit, to instruct him in his word, to defend him with his power, to preserue him in his mercie: to dye for him in his

loue, and to receiue him to glorie: all these and what euer other good wee receiue, either through the loue or mercye of God, are free guifts of his grace, and not for any merrit in man, How can this beame of glorious brightnes bee beheld with the cies of humilitie, but that the soule wold be rauished with the contemplation therof? and say with the Psalmist, Psalme. 103. verse. 8. Gratious is the Lord, and mercifull, long suffering, and of great goodnesse. Furthermore, of so great effect in the working of comfort in the hearts of the faithfull, is this vertue of grace in God, that wee finde the writings of the Apostles in their Epistles,

commonlye to begin with this word Grace: Grace, mercie and peace from our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ: As if from grace came mercie, and from mercie peace. Oh consider the works of grace, our election out of a speciall fauour: our creation out of a gratious wisdome: our vocation out of a gratious kindenes: our sanctification out of a gratious holines: our iustification out of a gratious merit: our redemptiō out of a gratious loue, & our glorification out of a gratious mercy. So that still we see that grace worketh in all thinges to the onelye glorie of God, in whome it worketh to the good of man. Oh how sweet

a salutation was deliuered to the blessed Virgin Mary by the Angell Gabriell, Haile Mary full of grace, God is with thee. So that if God be with any soule, it is full of grace, & where the fulnes of grace is, there is surely God: but as it is written of Christ Iesus, Psalme. 45. vers. 7. That hee was annointed with the Oyle of Grace aboue his fellowes, So may wee well say of the Grace of God, it is so excellent in working to the Glorie of God, that as it is infinite in goodnes, so must it haue the same measure in glorie, I say, to be glorified aboue all things. Note a little the varieties of the guiftes of this grace of God vnto his seruants:

                  Moyses hee made a leader of his people, and gaue him the tables of the law: to Abraham he gaue the blessing that should follow in his seede: in Isaack shall the seede be called: at the prayer of Eliah, hee sent raine after a long drought: to Dauid hee gaue a kingdome, and a treasure more worth then many kingdomes, the enlightning knowledge of his holy loue, the spirit of prophesie, the confession of sinne, the repentance of offence, the passion of true patiēce, the constancie of faith, and the humility of loue. To Salomon he gaue especiall wisdome to sit in the Throane of iudgement with the greatest maiestie and wealth of

any earthlye creature in the world, To the blessed Virgin Marie hee gaue the fulnesse of grace, in the conception of his only Sonne; but to him he gaue that grace that filled heauen and earth with his glorie.
               Let vs then consider not only the vertue, goodnesse and glory of grace, but with all, the height and glorie therof; which being only in Iesus Christ our onely Lord and Sauiour, let vs in him onely beholde the summe and substance, the beautie & brightnesse, the goodnesse and glorie thereof, & forsaking our selues in the shame of our sinnes, only flie to his mercie for the comforte of those blessings, that receiuing

onelye from him, may make vs giue all honour and glorie to him.
               And so much for consideration vpon the grace of God.
            
            
               The seauenth consideration of the glorie of God.
               HAuing thus considered of the greatnes, the goodnes, the wisdom, the loue, the mercy & grace of God towards man, I cannot but finde in this good God, an admirable glory, who containing all these excellencies in himselfe, and beeing indeede the verie essence of the same, doth in the vertue of his bountie, appeare so gratious

vnto this people: But since to speake or thinke of the glory of God, or the least part thereof, is 
                     •
                  o farre aboue the reach of the power of reason, as in all confession must be onely left to admiration: Let me onely say with the Apostle, Glory only belongeth vnto the Lord, in his presence so glorious is his brightnesse as nothing can see him and liue: and therefore in a bush of fire hee spake, but not apeared vnto Moyses: vpon the mount in a cloud and a piller went before his people in the wildernesse: was as it were inclosed in the Arke; in an Angell did appeare vnto his Prophets, and in his Sonne Iesus Christ, so farre as

he would and might be seene to his Apostles and Disciples, but for his glory, his diuine essence cannot be seene of any but himselfe, verified by his own word, Iohn 1. chap. verse 18. No man hath seene the Father but hee that came from the Father, euen the Sonne of man that hath reuealed him: and againe, verse 28 I came from the Father, and I goe to the Father, for the Father & I am one, with his glory he filleth both heauen & earth, as it is written, Heauen and earth are ful of the Maiestie of thy glory: and againe, in the Psalme 19. verse 1. The heauens declare the glory of God, and the firmament sheweth his handy worke, his workes speake of his
                  
glorie, his Saintes write of his glorye, his Angelles sing of his glorie, and all powers doe acknowledge his glorie.
               It is higher then the Heauens, larger then the Earth, deeper then the Sea, purer then the fire, cleerer then the skye, brighter then the Sunne: The power of strength, the life of Loue, the vertue of mercie, the beautie of grace, the honour of Wisdome, and the Essence of Maiestie: The Angelles tremble before it, the Saintes fall at the feete of it, the Prophets beholde it a farre off, and the soules of the elected doe adore it: and being then so farre aboue the power of man,

to come neerer the thought of it: How can the heart of man but in admiration speake of it? it liues in the wisdome of the wise, in the vertue of the valyant, in the liberalitie of the Charitable, in the patience of the Temperate, in the virginitie of the chaste, in the constancye of the faithfull, in the humilitye of the louing, & in the truth of the Religious: it dyrects the will of the Trinitie in the vnitie of the Deitie: it commaundes the seruice of the Angells, it blesseth the prayers of the Saints, it pardoneth the sinnes of the repentant, it prospereth the labours of the vertuous, and

loueth the soules of the righteous: in summe, it is the Maiestie of Maiesties, the power of powers, the vertue of vertues, the grace of graces, the honour of honors, the Treasure of treasures, the Blessing of blessings, and the being of beings: and in all effects so neere vnto God himself, that as he is in his glory incomprehensible, so is the same for the infinite perfection of all worthines inexplicable; it droue out of Paradise the disobediente to the comaund of it; it made the earth swallowe the murmurers against the will of it; it sent fire from heauen, to consume the Captaines that came against

the seruant of it; it deuided the Sea to make a walke for the chosen of it; it made the same Sea to drowne the hoast of the enemies of it; it sent destruction vpon the Cities that wrought abhomination in the sight of it; it drowned the world for sinning against it; and hath cursed the Iewes for the death of the beloued of it: in summe, it is in all so farre beyond all that can be said or thought of it, in the infinitenes of excellēce, that in humilitie of adoration I will leaue it to the seruice of the wise, the loue of the vertuous, the honour of the blessed, and the admiration of all.
               And thus much for consideration

of the glorie of God.
            
         
         
            The second part of consideration concerning man: and first touching the weakenesse or smallnesse of man.
            
               HAuing now set downe a few notes touching the necessarie consideration of the greatnesse, goodnesse, wisdom, loue, mercie, grace and glory of God, Let mee a little speake of the contrarieties in man, in mine opinion not vnnecessarie to be considered: and first, of the weakenesse or smallnesse of man: First of his smallenesse touching the substance of his

creation, it was of the slime of the earth, then what could bee lesse, or of lesse force, quantitye or esteeme? Next for the substance of generation, what was man before the meeting of his Parents? not so much as a thought, then which nothing could bee lesse, then by the effect of consent, What was his substance? as in his creation a matter of like moment, the quantitie not greate, and the force little, contained in a little roome: bred vp in darkenes with paine and sorrowe, fed by the nauil
                     •
                   without vse of sence or member. Then come into the world, is in quantitie little, in strength

meere weaknes, naked and feeble like anowne adiectiue that cannot stand alone, cryeth for it knoweth not what, either paine that it cannot expresse, or for want of that it cannot aske for: Now continuing long time in this weaknes, being come to further yeares, what doth it finde but it owne imbecillitie, desiring that it cannot haue, beholding that it cannot compre hend, and enduring that it cannot helpe.
               Subiect to sinne, by the corruption of nature, by temptation of the flesh, by the enchantment of the worlde, and the iclousnesse of the Deuill: subiect to the burning of the fire,

to the drowning of the water, to the infection of the aire, to the swallowing of the earth: subiect to sicknesse, subiect to care, to sorrow, to want, to wronge, to oppression, to penurye, to ignorance, to presumption, to tyranye, to death: so vnable to defend himselfe, that a flea will byte him, a fly will blinde him, a worme will wound him, and a gnat will choake him.
               And for his sences, his hearing may greeue him, his sight may annoye him, his speeche may hurt him, his feeling may distemper him, his smelling may infect him, and his tasting may kill him: in summe, poore thing proud of nothing, come of little

better then nothing, and shall returne to (almoste) as little a
                     •
                   nothing: muste hunger, must thirst, must labour, must sleepe, must loose the vse of his sences, and committe himselfe to trust: must waxe olde, must die, cannot chuse, hath no power to withstand any of these: and though hee haue the commaund of creatures, is but himselfe a creature, and can no longer liue then to the will of the Creator: sees the Sunne, cannot behold the brightnesse: heares the windes, knowes not whence they blowe: feeles the ayre, knowes not how to lay holde of it: sees the fire, dares not touch it: sees a world

of earth, but possesseth little of it, perhappes none of it: lookes at Heauen, but cannot come at it: and in summe, as a substance of nothing, or if anye thing, like a Clocke, that no longer mooueth then by the will of the Clockemaker: So no longer man then in the wil of his maker: what shall this little, weake, small creature think, when he shal in the glasse of true sence beholde the obiect of himselfe, and then think vpon the greatnes of his God, in whome not onely himselfe but all creatures in heauen & earth haue their being, and without him haue no being? in how little a compasse himselfe, withall

his is contained, while such is the greatnesse of his God, as filleth heauen and earth with his glory; who comprehendeth all things, not comprehended in any, nor all; but aboue all in himself, in the infinitenes of himselfe. Oh poore man what canst thou doe, but with Iob lay thy finger on thy mouth, and say: I haue spoken once and twise, but I will speake no more: I thought I was something, but I see I am nothing, at least so little a thing, as in it selfe is nothing: My righteousnesse is as a filthy cloth, my strength is Weakenes, my dayes as a shaddowe, my life but a spanne, and my substance so smal, as but in thee my God is as nothing or worse
                  
                  then nothing at al: thus I say wilt thou say when beholding the least of gods creatures, thou shalt consider thyne owne smalnesse; and looking on the one and the other with the Prophet Dauid, say in the admiration of his glorious goodnes, Psalme 8. vers. 4. O God what is man that thou doest vouchsafe to looke vpon him?
               
               And thus much touching the smalnesse or weaknes of man.
            
            
               The second Consideration, touching the vilenes or wickednes of man.
               NOw I haue a litle spoken of this smalnesse or small strength of man, a thing doubtles

most necessary for euery mā to think vppon, least finding his greatnes in commaund ouer the creatures of the earth, he forget the Creator both of heauen and earth, & al things in the same: so let me tell him, that finding his smalnes to bee so great, and his greatnes to be so smal, as maketh him nothing more then in the wil of the Almightie, hee must withal looke into the vilenes of his nature, in ye wilfull offending of his moste good and glorious God▪ for in his first offence, how much did he shew the vile wickednes or wicked vilenesse of his conditiō, in forgeting the goodnes of his God, in framing him of so vile a matter as ye slime of the

earth, a liuing creture to his own glorious image? then to plāt him in Paradice, a place of so much pleasure, to giue him so large a possessiō, as of al his ground, his fruit, yea & commaund of al his creatures vpon the earth: thus not like a Lord, but like himself Lord of Lords, to giue him a world of earth, & there onely to except one Tree, with a sharpe warning of death, in the touching of the same, when neither his loue in his creatiō, his bountie in his possession, nor his care in his commaund regarded, but either carelesly forgotten, or wilfully disobeyed: Oh what greater vilenes could be shewed then in such vnthankfulnes? and what greater

greater wickednesse, then to shake handes with the Deuill, to offend the God of so much goodnesse? but more to make him blush at his owne shame, in beholding the foulenesse of his abhominable filthynesse, let man in the glasse of truth see the leprosie of his soule, by the infection of sinne.
               Pryde hath defiled humilitie, couetousnesse charitie, lecherie chastitie, wrath patience, sloath labour, enuie loue, and murther pity: so that whereas man was before in these vertues a creature of Gods loue, and in whose presence hee tooke pleasure, now through these vices is hee become a most vglye and

hatefull creature in the sight of the Creator: what Peacock more proude of his taile then man is of his trumpery? what Tyger is more cruell to any beaste, then one man to another? what Goate more lecherous then the licentious Libertins? what Dogge more couetous in hiding of meate, then the dogged miser in hoording vp of money? what Snake more venemous then the tonge of the enuious? and what Dormouse so sleepie as the slouthfull Epicure?
               Consider then if there bee a vile nature in any of these, how much more vile is man, that hath the condition of all these?
               
                  Oh should a man haue his Image or proportion drawne according to his condition, how monstrous would he finde himselfe? with a Tygers head, a Goates bearde, a Snakes tong, a hogs belly, a Dormouse cie, and a Beares hand: But let the Image goe, and looke into the vilenes of man, and see if it bee not such as passeth the power of discription: when God is forgotten, the Deuill shalbe remembred; when grace is forsaken, sinne shalbe entertained; and when Christ shalbe crucified, Iudas shalbe monyed.
               A Dogge will fawne on his maister, Oh how much worse

then a Dogg was man that was the death of his maister? an Elephant is a monstrous beast, and yet is pitifull to man, & wil lead him out of the wildernes: but man more monstrous then any beast, will leade man into wickednes: the Goate hath his time, wherin to shew the heate of his nature, but man spareth no time to follow the filthinesse of his lust: the Dogge will bee satisfied with a little that hee hath hidden, but the vsurer is neuer satisfied till hee bee choaked with his Golde: the Lyon will not praie vpon the bloud of a Lambe, when the murtherer will not spare the bloud of the infante:

the Ante will worke for prouision for his foode, while the Epicure will burst in the bed of his ease.
               See then (oh man) the vile substance of thy condition, whereby, of the best creature in thy creation thou art become the worst in thy corruption: & therfore looking on the goodnes of thy God, and the vilenesse of thy selfe, Thou maiest well saie with Peter: Luke chap. 5. verse 8. Lord come not neere mee, for I am a poluted creature, and with the Prophet Dauid, Psa 44. ver. 16. Shame hath couered my face, yea and beholding the leprosie of thy soule by the spottes of thy sinne, stand without the

gates of grace, that the Angells may not abhorre thee, nor the Saincts be infected by thee, till thy heauenly Phisitian with the Bloude of the Lambe haue cured thee of thy corruptiō: Look I say (oh vile man) vpon the wickednesse of thy will, to offend thy good God, to bee a seruant to sinne, the ruine of thy selfe, and the plague of thy posteritie.
               In thy riches see the rust of coueteousnesse; in thy pryde see the fall of Lucifer; in thy lechery see the fire of lust; in thy wrath see the bloud of murther; in thy sloath see the filth of drosse: and thus beholding thy besmeered soule, see if thou canst see so vile

a creature, vile in vnthankfulnes, vile in haughtines, vile in coueteousnes, vile in sloathfulnes, vile in furiousnes, vile in filthines, and so vile, in all vilenes.
               Thus I say looke into thy selfe, and see what thou arte, and if such thou be not, think of the greatnes of the goodnes in thy God, that by the vertue of his power in the mercie of his loue, hath healed thee of thy sinne, & made thee fit for his seruice, which till thou findest in thy selfe, thinke there is not so vile a creature as thy selfe.
               And thus much touching the vilenes or wickednes of man.
            
            
               
               The third Consideration, touching the folly or Ignorance of man.
               THe smalnesse and vilenes of man thus considered, we are now to looke a little vpon the folly or ignorance of man, not a little needfull with the precedēts & what shall follow to be considered: First, to the first point of folly; could there bee a greater folly thought vpon, then to lose the benefit of Paradise, for the bit of an Apple, for touching one tree to loose all, to loose the plesure of ease, to labor for food, to forget god, to listē to women, to distrust God and to beleiue

the Deuill; to loose the beautie of perfection, for the foulnesse of corruption; and as much as in him lay, to leaue heauen for hell: are not these (without comparison) so high pointes in ignorance, as make a ful point in folly? But leauing the first folly of the first offender, Oh what a swarme of follyes hath this ignorance begotten in the worlde? which like Snakes in a Bee-hiue, sting the takers of misstaken hony? what a folly is it in man to worship a golden calfe, which at the houre of his death, can giue his body no breath, but in the time of his life, may hasten his soule into hell? For example reade, the history of Diues,
                  
and see the fruite of such a folly.
               Againe, what a follye is it for man to make an Idoll of his fancie, when Sampson with his Dalila may shew the fruite of wantonnesse? Againe, what a folly it is to execute the vengeance of wrath, Let the murther of Cain speake in the bloud of his brother Abell: what a folly is enuie, let the swallowing of Coran, Datha
                        •
                     
                   and Abiram speake in their murmering against Moses: what a folly is pride, looke in the fall of Lucifer: But as there are many great follyes in the world, so there are many and great fooles; but aboue all, one most great foole which wee may iustly call foole by the

word of God, Psalme 53. verse 1. The foole hath said in his heart, there is no God: This foole doe I holde the foole of al fooles, who hath ben so long with the Deuil that he hath forgotten God, for he is more foole then the Deuil, who will acknowledge God, tremble at his Maiestie, and be obedient to his commaund; & therefore I may well say, that he is not only a deuilish foole, but worse then a Deuill foole, and so the foole of al fooles: Now to speake of follyes in particular, nor of a number of Idle fooles, such as when they are gay, thinke they are rich, or when they can prate they are wise, or when they are proude they are

noble, or when they are prodigall they are liberall, or when they are miserable they are thriftie, or when they can swagger they are valiant, and when they are rich they are honest:
               These and a world of such idle fooles, least I should be thought too much a foole, for standing too much vpon the foole, I leaue further to talke of, & hoping that the wise will confesse, that all the wisdome of the worlde is foolishnesse before God; and therefore man finding in himself so little touch of true wisdome, as may make him then confesse all the wit hee hath to be but meere

foolishnesse without the grace of God, in the direction thereof. I will leaue what I haue written vniustly to the correction of the wise, and for the vnwise, to the amendement of their indiscretion: and thus much touching the consideration of the folly of man.
            
            
               The fourth Consideration, touching mallice or hate in man.
               NOw hauing spoken myne oppinion, touching the foolishnes of man, I finde that follye or ignorance of better iudgement, to haue begotten in

him a kinde of malice or hate, as it were opposite or contrary to the loue of God, or at the least contrary to that loue which God commaundeth to bee in man, where hee saith: Iohn chap. 13. verse 34. Loue one another as I haue loued you: for in some wicked people it is too apparant, which I may rather terme Deuills then men, those Atheisticall villains, that if they haue not their wills will not onely murmure against God, but with Iobs wife seeme to curse God; and with the Deuill blaspheme God: may not these iustly be called the reprobate, that but looking towards heauen, dare stirre vp athought

against the glory thereof: and being themselues but earth, dare mooue against the Great or of heauen and earth.
               Oh how hath the Deuill had power with man, so to poyson his soule with the venome of temptation, as by the power of the corruption, to bring him to etrrnall confusion? but as the Deuill through his malice at the greatnes of God, was cast downe from Heauen, so hath hee euer since and during his time will, by the same poison, in as much as he can, keepe man from Heauen: but leauing to speake of the vngratious, vngratefull and malicious nature

in some man towards God, most grieuous to be spoken of: let me come to ye malice or hate of man to mā, when there were but two brethren in the world Cain and Abel, one so maliced another, that he sought his death, & not for the hurt he did him, but for that God was pleased in his brother, and not in him: Oh pestiferous poison, to wound the soule vnto eternall death! Gen. chap. 4. ver. 8. what need I to alleage examples, either in the booke of God, or wordes of bookes in the worlde, touching that vile & hellish nature or humor of malice in the corrupted nature of man, when it is dayly seene euē almost in al kingdōes,

Countries, Cyties, and Townes, to be an occasion of ciuill discorde, yea and sometime of greate and long warres, to the vtter spoile of many a common wealth: doe not wee see euen sometime before our eyes, how many are hated euen for the good that is in them? and for the good that they intend to them that hate them? when a wise man reprooueth a foole of his folly, will not the foole hate him for being wiser then himselfe, or for telling him of his folly? yea, will he not carry it in minde many a day, and worke him a mischeefe if hee can, for his good, and as the Iewes did with Christ, put him

to death for teaching them the waie of life, hate him for his loue, and kill him for his comforte? Oh malicious nature in the hearte of man! if the lawe giue land to the right heyre, will not the wrong possessor hate both the heyre for his right, and the lawe for giuing it him, though himselfe would be glad if the case were his own to haue it so? if two freindes bee suiters for one fortune, if the one carry it, is it not often seene, that the other will hate him for it? yea, of a friend become a foe, for enioyning that he should euer haue had if the other had missed it? is it not often seene that vpon a humor of ielouzie

a man wil hate his wife, and the wife her husband, the sonne the father, and the mother the daughter, brother and sister, neighbor and neighbor, and al one another sometimes for a tryfle, & that with such a fire of malice, as is almost vnquenchable. Oh how too full are the Chronicles of the worlde, of the horrible and miserable Tragedies, that haue proceeded out of that hellish spirite of malice, that hath spit her poyson through the hearts of a great part of the whole worlde, to the destruction of a worlde of the inhabitans therin?
               Let me a litle speake of this wicked spirite, and how it

wrought the fall of Lucifer from Heauen (through his malice) at the Maiestie of the Almightie: againe, being falne from Heauen, how it wrought in him the fall of Adam, enuying his blessed happines in Paradise, and therefore by temptation, sought in as much as hee could, his destruction: In Cain it wrought an vnnaturall hatred to the death of Abell: in Esawe it wrought an vnbrotherly hatred to the great feare of Iacob: in Pharaoh it wrought an vnkindly hatred to the poore Isralites, because they throue by their labors vnder him & increased in his kingdome: it wrough a hate in the children of Iacob to

their brother Ioseph, because their father loued him in breife, you shall finde in the whole Scripture the hate of the wicked vnto the godly, because God blesseth them: and as in the diuine writ, euen in these our daies, do we not see the good ha ted of the euill? which being the spirite of so much wickednesse, as worketh so much mischeefe, what doth it differ from the Deuill? Truly I thinke I may well say, that as it is written, God is charity and hee that dwelleth in charity dwelleth in God, and God in him: so contrarily the Deuill is malice and hee taht dwelleth in malice dwelleth in the Deuill, & the Diuill in hlm:

But where God entereth with his grace, the Deuill hath no powre with his malice, and though hee droue Adam out of Paradice, yet hee could not keepe him out of Heauen: and therefore of greater power is the mercy of God, then the malice of the Deuill: but seeing such is the vile nature of malice, as doth figure nothing more truly then the Deuill, let no man that can truly iudge of it, but hate it as the Deuill, which maketh a man, in whom it is hatefull vnto God, wicked vnto man, throwen downe out of Heauen, and cast into hell, from which God of his mercie blesse all his seruants for euermore:

and thus much touching the consideration of the hate or malice in man.
            
            
               The fifth Consideration of the crueltie in man.
               NOw as it is euident by too many proofes, that one euill begetteth another, so in this it appeareth that from the hate or malice of man, procedeth the crueltie or tyrannye executed vpon man: for what beast in the world was euer found so tyrannous vnto another, as one man hath ben to another? yea such a power hath tyrannye in the hearts of some men, as

hath bene the spoile and death of many a thousand: what tyrannye did the Iewes shewe in the crucifiing of our blessed Sauiour Iesus Christ, which did proceed, not out of any desert in him (who deserued all loue and honour of all people) but out of a malicious humour yfused into their soules by the power of the wicked finde? examples of this vile and pestilent humour, not onely the books of God, as well in the olde as the new Testament, as in many lamentable histories extant to the whole worlde, is too ful of the persecution of the Prophets and the chosen people of God, by the wicked

and vnbeleeuing Princes, and people of the worlde; some their eyes put out, other their tongues cut out, some broyled vpon hott Iron, other boyled in skalding lead: some torne in peeces with horses, some flead quicke, some starued to death, other tortured with vnspeakable torments, in some for the displeasure conceiued of some one, how many thousands haue suffered either death, or vndoing, or both: when whole howses, whole Cities, yea and almost whole Kingdomes, by the bloudy execution of tyrany, haue ben brought almost to vtter confusion: a Lyon when hee hath licked his lippes after

warme bloud, returnes to his den and takes his rest: the Dog if he fight with his match, if hee runne away from him, and cry, he seldome pursues him, and if he kill him, he leaues him, and as it were mourning goeth from him, that hee hath bene the death of him: & so of many other beasts, Wolues, Tygres, and such like death, or flight satisfies their crueltie: But man more feirce then the Lyō, more bloudie then the Wolfe, more tyranous then the Tygre, and more dogged then the Dogge, will neuer be satisfied, till he see the death and seeke the ruine of the father, childe, wife, and seruant, kinred and generation,

and neuer taketh rest through feare of reuenge, so that he is not onely tyranous vnto other, but through the vexatiō of his spirit, is become euen a torment vnto him-selfe, whyle feare and wrath keepe him in continuall perplexities: Oh how vnaturall, how monstrous in this horrible disposition haue many bene in the world, some murthering their own children, yea in the time of their infancy, some their parents, some their bretheren, some their Princes, some their Prophets, some their maisters, some their seruants? what crueltie, yea more then in any beast, will many such a one shew to another in pride, malice, orrevenge?

the examples wherof the world is euery day too full of: what Butcher can more cruelly teare in peeces the limmes of a beast, then one mā in his malice will the very heart of another? what scourges, what terrors, what tortures and what vnhumaine kinde of mortall punishments, hath mā deuised for man no lesse intolerable then inexplicable? in some the cryes, the blood, the sorrowes, the miseries of the murthered, the imprisoned, the afflicted, and the distressed, through the oppression of pryde, and the tyrannye of wrath, may very well euen from Abell to Christ, and from him to the worlds end,

sufficiently conclude the condemnation of man, for the greatest tyrant in the worlde.
               And thus much touching the consideration of the cruelty or tyranny in man.
            
            
               The sixt Consideration of the basenes of man.
               HAuing now spoken of the smalnesse, the vilenesse, the foolishnesse, the hate, and the crueltie in man, let me a litle shew him the basenesse of his condition, in going from that nature of grace wherin he was created, vnto that horror of sinne by which hee is confounded-God in his gracious nature

made him like vnto himselfe in holinesse, purenesse, and righteousnesse, and through these graces, amiable in his sight, sociable for his Angells, and coheire with his blessed Sonne in the paradise of the soule: what greater title of honour, then to weare a Crowne? what Crowne so rich as of grace? what grace so high as in Heauen? and what glory so great as to bee gracious in the sight of God: all which was man? (through grace) assured of, and through the lacke, carlesse, wherof, hath not only lost all, but through sinne is become vgly in the sight of God, banished the courte of Heauen, and

through the drossy loue of the worlde become a slaue to the Deuill in hell. What basenesse can be more then man by sinne hath thus drawne vpon himselfe? who while hee should looke towards Heauen, is digging in the earth, while hee shoulde thinke vpon Heauen is puzled in the world, and while he should be soaring towards Heauen, is sinking into hell: Oh base wretch, that seeing the shamefull nature of sinne, will yet so be meire his soule with the filth thereof, that of the best and noblest creature, hee becometh the worst and most base of all other. Will the

Spaniels leaue their maister to carry the tinkers budget? will the horse leaue the warlike rider to drawe in a carte? and will man leaue the King of Heauen to serue a slaue in hell?
               Oh basenes of all basenes! in Heauen is man a companion for the Saintes, the virgins, the martyrs and the Angells: In hell for the fiends, ougly spirits, and horrible Deuills.
               And is not hee of a base spirit, that will leaue the heauenly for the hellish company? fie vpon the basenesse of man, that by sinne will bee brought vnto so base a nature:

there is no place so base as hell, which is called the bottomlesse pit, the receptacle of all filthinesse, the caue of the accursed, the denne of the desperate, the habitation of the reprobate, the horror of nature, the terror of reason, the torment of sinne, the misery of time, the night of darknesse, and the endles torture, where Serpents, Dragons, Night-rauens, and Shrichowles, make the best musique in the eares of the damned; where all obiects are so ougly, all substances so filthy, all voyces so frightfull, all torments so continuall, all paines so pitiles, all care so comfortles, and all hurte so helplesse, that if a man

through sin were not worse then a beast, hee would not shew more basenesse then in the most beastly nature of the most beastly creature: what shall I say? such is the basenesse of sinne in the imbasing of our spirits, and so base are our spirits in the yeelding to the basenesse of sinne, that I must conclude with the Prophet Dauid (thinking of the glory of God, and the basenesse of man) Oh what is man that thou O God wilt vouchsafe to looke vpon him? And so much in breife touching the consideration of the basenesse of man.
            
            
               
               The seauenth Consideration touching the ignominie or defame of man.
               IT is an olde prouerbe (and too often true) that hee who hath an euill name is halfe hanged: and surely that man that delighteth in sinne, by the name of a reprobate, is more then halfe damned before hee come in hell, to bee called a villaine is a name of great infamy, and doth not sinne make a man a villaine to God? to be called a Dogge is most hatefull to man,

and is not man called a hellhound by the hate of his sinne? would not man bee loath to be tearmed a Serpent, and hath not sinne made man become of a Serpent like nature?
               Oh the filth of sinne, how hath it fouled, and defiled the nature of man? the vtter infamy of his name, the election of loue, the Image of God? the Lord of the best of creatures, to become the hated of grace, the substance of drosse, the worste of creatures, and the slaue of hell? what a shame is this to man (by sinne) to fall into so foule an infamy?
               Is it not a name of great disgrace to be called a disobedient

Sonne or a faithlesse feruant? a rebellious subiect, or vnthankfull freinde? an vnkinde brother, and an vnnaturall childe? and is not man by sinne become all this vnto God? to bee stubborne to so louing a Father, false to so good a maister, rebellious to so gratious a King, vnkinde to so kinde a brother, and vnthankfull to so bountifull a Lorde? it is a shame to liue to beare the iust blotts of such blames: one of these faults were enough, but altogether, are too too much.
               The Dogg will follow his maister, the Horse will cary his maister, and will man runne from his maister? the Oxe

knowes his stall, and the Asse his cribbe, and shall not man know his place of rest after his labours? then more vile then the Dogg, more vnkinde then the Horse, more foolish then either Oxe or Asse.
               Fie what an infamy is this vnto man? a seruant to entertaine his maister vnkindly, to vse him villanously, and to kill him shamefully, were not this a horrible infamy, and did not the Iewes so with Christ? to forget a kindnesse, to distruste a truth, and to abuse a blessing? is not he infamous that doth so, and what sinner but doth so? so that still I see infamy vpon infamy▪ one followeth another by the

venome of sinne to the shame of man: to leaue robes of silke for rotten raggs, sweete wine for puddle water, and a pleasant walke for a filthy hole: what foole would doe this, and doth not sinneful man doe this? leaue the rich graces (the comly vestures of the soule) for the poore fading pleasures of the flesh? the sweete water of life for the puddle watter of death? the filthy pleasures of this world, and the comfortable way to Heauen, for the miserable way to hell?
               Oh wretched, blinded, sencelesse, & bewitched foole, that doost suffer sinne so much to be-foole thy vnderstanding!
               
                  Looke I say what a name thou iustly gettest, by yeelding thy seruice vnto sinne: a slaue, a foole, a beast, a serpent, a monster, and of the best, the worste creature in the worlde.
               Loose the beautie wherein thou werte created, the honour wherwith thou werte intitled, the riches whereof thou werte possessed, the libertie that thou enioyedst, the loue wherein thou liuedst, and the life wherein thou reioycedst; to put on deformitie in nature, basenes in ciuilitie, beggery in wante of grace, bondage in slauery, hate

hate wherin thou diest, and death wherin thou arte euer accursed; and all this through sin: who now could in the glasse of truth, beholde this vglye obiecte of sinne, and would gaine himselfe so foule an infamy, as to be called an obiect? through the loue thereof, hath not Cain from the beginning, bene iustly called a murtherer? Laban a cozener, Sampson a foole, Achitophel a knaue, Salomon an Idolator, Symon magus a sorcerer, Diues an Epicure, and Iudas a traytor, and the Deuill a lyar? and wilt thou (Oh man) that readest and beleeuest all this, bee infected, nay delighted in all these sinnes? to receiue the

name of a murtherer, acozener, a foole, a knaue, an Idolator, a a sorcerer, a traytor, and a lyar? Oh most hellish titles to set out the flagge of infamye! which to auoyde, seeing thy vildenes, and knowing thy weaknesse, praye to thy God, the God of goodnesse, to draw thee from the delight of wickednesse, vnto that delight of goodnesse, that may recouer thy credit lost, blot out the spots of thy shame in thy sinne, and through the dropps of the pretious Bloud of his deere beloued Sonne Iesus▪ to wash thee cleane from thyn
                     •
                   iniquities, make thee capabl
                     •
                   of his graces, thankfull for his blessings, and ioyfull in receiuing

the gratious name of his faithfull seruant: And so much touching the consideration of the infamye orignominy of man.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Conclusio.
            
               TO conclude as a Chirurgian, that hath receiued a woūd, hath many medicines & salues, which well applyed might giue him ease, and restore him to health (though he haue knowledge how to make vse of them) yet if he put not his knowledge in practise, shall either languish or perish through want of helpe, So in this woun
                  •
                of the soule made by sinne whereas euery man must▪ b
                  •
               
               
vnder God, his owne Chirurgian and helper, Though hee heare, reade, beleeue, and feele the goodnes of God many wayes, in his power, wisdome, loue, grace, and glorious mercy towards him, yet if hee do not meditate vpon the same thankfully, consider and truely confesse his vnworthinesse of the least part thereof, hee may either languish or pertish in the consuming paine of sinne, or dispaire of grace or mercy: Looke then vpon the greatnes of God and the smalnesse of man; the goodnes of God, and the vilenesse of man; the wisdome of God, and the folly of man; the loue of God, and the

hate of man; the grace of God, and the disgrace of man; the mercy of God, and the tyranny of man; and the glory of God, and the infamy of man: and fixing the eye of the heart vpon the one and the other, how canst thou but to the glory of God, and shame of thy selfe, with ablushing face, & trēbling spirit, falling prostrate at the feete of his mercy, in admiration of the greatnesse, kindnes, and goodnes, that the Lord in his mercy hath extended vnto thee, but cry with the Prophet Dauid, Oh Lord what is man that thou doest visit him?
            
            Which comfortable visitation, when thou findest in thy

soule, acknowledge in the greatnesse of his goodnesse, the wisdome of his loue, and glory of his mercy, that of so small, so vile, so foolish, so hateful, so tyranous, so disgracefull, so infamous a creature, by the infection of sinne, his glorious maiestie out of his mere mercy, will vouchsafe in the pretious Bloud of his deare and onely beloued Sonne Iesus Christ, to wash thee cleane from thy filthinesse, admit thee into his prefence, take thee into his seruice, loue thee as his Sonne, and make thee coheire in that Heauenly inheritance, which no power shall take from thee: but in ioyes euerlasting with his

Saints & Angels, thou shalt cō
               tinually sing the true and due Halleluiah, to his holy Maiestie.
            Thus I say, apply these spirituall considerations, to thy spirituall comforts, that God may the better blesse thee, thy reading well considered may the better profit thee, and my labour may bee the better bestowed vpon thee: which with praier for thy good, leauing to thy best cōsideratiō wishing the acknowledging the goodnes of God in all things, aboue all things to giue him all glory, I end with the Prophet Dauid▪ 
               O al ye works of the Lord, blesse ye the Lord, praise him & magnifie him for euer.
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A Prayer.
            
               O Most gratious, almighty, most mercifull and holye, glorious & euer louing GOD, who from the highest Throne of thy heauenly mercie, doost vouchsafe to beholde the meanest creature on the earth! & aboue all, with a comfortable eye of a fatherly kindenesse, doost beholde man as the chiefe matter of thy workmanship! and considering since his first fall by temptatiō, his weaknes in resisting the like assault,

doost by the light of thy grace, make him see the difference betwixt good and euill, and by the inspiration of thy holye spirit, doost leade him from the traine of sinne, the true way to eternall happinesse: glorious God, that knowest whereof we are made, that our daies are but as a shadow, and we are as nothing without thee, who hath reuealed to the simple, and hid from the wise the secret wisdome of thy wil, & to me thy most vnworthy seruant hast so often shewed those fruits of thy loue, that makes mee asham'd to think of my vnthankfulnesse to thy holy Maiestie, my forgetfulnesse of thy grace, and vnworthinesse

of thy mercy: Oh my Lord, when I consider these things, with all other the manifolde blessings that from time to time I haue receiued from the onelye bountie of thy blessed hand, what can I doe but in admiration of thy greatnesse and contemplation of thy goodnesse, giue glorie to thy holy Maiesty, & with thy chosen seruant Dauid in the griefe and shame of my sinne, and only hope of thy mercie, in true contrition of heart, fall prostrate at thy feete, and flie only to thy mercie for my comfort: beseeching thee so to direct me in the waies of thy holy will, that seeing thy greatnes in thy good

nes, & thy wisdom in thy loue, thy grace in thy mercie, and thy glorie in thy grace; and confessing my weakenesse, vilenesse, folly, malice, sloath, & basenes, attend the worke of thy will, in working mee to thy holye will: giue me power to cōsider, that although I read neuer so much, beleeue all I reade, and remember all I beleeue, yet without one drop of the deawe of thy grace it will take no root in my heart: but good Lord consider the corruption of nature through the infection of sinne, in which I accuse, not excuse my selfe vnto thee: make me to know thy will, let me rather crie before thee Hosanna, with

the little Babes, then with the Pharisies make boast of my righteousnesse, and as it hath pleased thy holy Maiestie to make mee consider of thy mercies, so let these considerations (by taking root in my hart) be so comfortable to my soule, that loathing the world with al the vanities therof, I may in the teares of true penitence, shewe the sorrow of my sin, and in the ioy of thy mercie, I may sing to thy glory. Amen.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Errata.
            
               First Consideration, Page 4 line 3 for looke vp the heauens, reade looke vp to the heauens.
            
               The second Consideration page. 12. line 4. for God reade good.
            
               The last page of the third consideration, the tenth line, for deuine reade dimme.
            
         
      
   