
      
         
            
            
            AN APOLOGIE
AND TRVE DECLARATION
OF THE INSTItution
and endeauours of tvvo
Engliſh Colleges, the one in Rome,
the other novv reſident in Rhemes:
againſt certaine ſiniſter informations
giuen vp againſt the ſame.
            
               1. Pet. 3.
Sanctifie our Lord Chriſt in your hartes, ready alwaies
to ſatisfie euery one that aſketh you an accoumpt of
that hope which is in you, but with modeſtie and
feare, hauing a good conſience, that in that which
they ſpeake il of you, they may be confounded which
calumniate your Good conuerſation in Chriſt.  For it
is better to ſuffer as doing wel (if the wil of God
will haue it ſo) then doing il.
            Printed at Mounts in Henault. 1581.
         
         
            
            
               The contents of this Apologie.
               THE preface of the authors intention herein.
               Chap.1. The reaſon of our abſence and liuing out of our
natiue Countrie.
               2 Of our reſorting ſometimes to the citie and court
of Rome.
               3 The meaning and purpoſe of the inſtitution of
the Seminaries.
               4 That we liue not in them againſt the lawes of
God and our Countrie: with a duetiful exhortation
to the Queenes Maieſtie.
               5 That the Students therof be not trained vp  in
erroneous doctrine.
               6 Of Prieſts and Ieſuites, and for what cauſe they
are ſent into England.
               7 An admonition and comfort to the afflicted Catholikes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
             AN APOLOGIE
AND TRVE DECLARATION
OF THE INSTItution
and endeauours of tvvo
Engliſh Colleges, the one in Rome,
the other novv reſident in Rhemes:
againſt certaine ſiniſter informations
giuen vp againſt the ſame.
            
               
                  ❧ Derely beloued countriemen in
Chriſt Ieſus:
            
            
               ALthough for our ſelues,
our ovvne conſciences
giue vs ſufficient ſatisfaction
and teſtimonie of
innocencie in al thoſe
things vvherof vve be accuſed, and God
himſelf not onely at the general iudgement
in the face of the vvhole vvorld,
but at the particular daies of euery of our
deaths, vvhat ſide, ſort, or cōdition ſo
euer vve be, ſhal diſcerne our cauſe and

iuſtifie our intentions againſt al our
aduerſaries: Yet for that vve be vvarned
by the Apoſtle, to make our
actions allovvable not to God alone,3. Auguſtine.
but to men alſo, and a great Clerke telleth
vs that it vvere great crueltie ſo to
reſt in the cōfidence of our conſcience,
that vve regard not our fame, the one
being as neceſſarie for our neighbours
as the other for our ſelves:  Vve meane
by Gods grace and your fauours, ſincerely
and truely as in the ſight of our
Sauiour, and yet moſt humbly and tē
               perately
for the due reſpect of our Soueraine
and Superiors, to make cleere
and defend our miſcōſtrued good purpoſes
and needeful offices tovvards our
natiue Countrie in theſe many heauie
yeres of our coacted abſence from the
ſame. Truſting that ſo our Lord may
alter the mindes of many that miſtake
our doings, and may turne the Q.

Maieſties and her honorable Councels
eares from our calumniators, her hand
of indignation from our afflicted brethren,
and her hart to vvonted mercie
and clemēcie tovvardes her ovvne Catholike
ſubiectes.
            Neither needed our defenſe to be
long, nor could be hard or doubtful, if
it vvere to be made either before the
vvhole Church of God in any age,
vvhich both of old in the like caſes heretofore,
and of late in our ovvne, by
her higheſt Courtes of Councels and
Seates Apoſtolike (the graueſt, ſureſt,
and to our cauſes the moſt proper Tribunals
in earth) hath giuen ſentence
for our faith and doctrine and al our
endeuours agreable therevnto: Or before
al other Chriſtian countries, States,
or Vniuerſities vvhereſoeuer vve havue
liued, al vvhich by their manifold mercies,
comfortes, encouragements, and

by diuers honorable atteſtations (vvich
ſhalbe extant to the poſteritie) do approue
and praiſe our ſtudies and ſcholaſtical
trauailes proper to our trade, for
the reclaiming and ſuccourſe of the
poore deceiued ſoules of our nation: Or
before any of al the old Chriſtian kings
her Highnes moſt noble progenitors,
in any of their honorable Courtes of
Parliament, Synodes or Conſiſtories of
famous Prelates, Congregations of the
learned in either their renovvmed Vniuerſities,
from the firſt faith of our countrie
til this our od miſerable age: al their
lavves, decrees, definitions, ſtatutes, al
their vvorkes, vvritings, actions, life and
death, approuing our doings, and condemning
the contrarie. Neither can
vve miſtruſt (though the ſight and certaintie
therof be in God alone) but our
poſteritie recouering it ſelf from this
preſent blaſt of doctrine and peculiar
tempeſt of this time (vvhich kind of

maladie, as experience and recordes of
other ages teach vs, ſeaſeth lightly on
Countries by ſtartes and ſeaſons onely)
both the ſimple and vviſe, that at the
firſt for great allurements vvorldly,
grateful noueltie and alteration, vvould
not bevvare, novv by a fevv yeres proofe
eaſily vvaxing vvearie of the ſame,
vvill like, allovv, and iuſtifie our duetiful
ſeruice to God and the Church of
England.
            Hauing then the vvhole Church of
Chriſt for vs, the nations abrode vvith
vs, al our countrie beforetime aſſuredly,
and (as vve truſt) al after our daies agreable
vnto vs: our defenſe before God
and man muſt needes be moſt eaſie, acceptable,
and reaſonable.
            The difficultie novv onely remaineth
in the preiudice and partialitie of
the preſent cōdition and ſvvay of time,
vvhich by authoritie, force, and feare

of lavves, fauour of the Prince, domeſtical
educatiō, plauſible preaching and
perſuaſion of profite, peace, and pleaſure,
doth ſometimes alter and infect
the very iudgement and reaſon of the
invvard man, and much oftener doth
byas and peruert the external actions of
many vvorldings euen againſt their
ovvne natural inclinatiō, knovvledge,
and conſcience: of vvhich ſort there be
no doubt in our Countrie innumerable,
not onely of thoſe vvhoſe conſtrainte
is euident, but euen of ſuch as
ſeeme principal promotors of the one
part and perſecutors of the other. Vvho
becauſe they be vviſe, can not be Proteſtants
23 yeres, that is to ſay, any long
time together: but yet becauſe they be
alſo vvorldly, can not or vvil not confeſſe
their former fall to their diſuātage
in this life, vvhich they preferre before
eternal glorie: Vvitte and experience

being ynough oftentimes to diſcouer
falſhod, but not ſufficient vvithout
Gods grace (vvhich many haue not
becauſe they vvil not) to retire to the
Church and truth againe. Theſe mens
exterior aſſent ſhal in deede hardly be
obtained for the approbation of our
actions, be our defenſe neuer ſo open
and euident.
            But our confidence being in God,
into vvhoſe hād the hartes and doings
of all Princes and peoples be put, vvho
can at euery moment forcibly touch
and incline them to acknovvledge the
equitie of our cauſe, as to his glorie and
vviſedom ſhalbe beſt, and vvho hath
already giuen vs (eternal honour be to
his name) the hartes and ſoules of ſo
many thouſands of our deere Countriemen:
Vve may aduenture vvith al
hope, ioy, and comfort, to ſpeake in our
defenſe, and diſcouer vvithout al diſloyaltie

loyaltie to her Maieſtie or any her
Highnes Miniſters, the vvrong informations
that certaine enimies of the
Catholike Church haue giuen vp againſt
vs and our brethren, as to our
great greefe vve perreiue by ſome late
proclamations publiſhed in Iulie and
Ianuarie laſt, and othervviſe. Vvherein
becauſe vve vvould not in any vviſe oppoſe
our ſelues to publike authoritie, or
giue occaſion of further offenſe, ſpecially
in theſe daies and ſectes ſo prone to
deſpiſe Domination, vve durſt not preſume
to direct the vvordes of our defenſe
to her Maieſtie or Councel particularly
(though S. Iuſtine, S. Hilarie,
and other holy fathers haue done the
like to their Princes) but to al indifferent
readers generally: Praiyng neuertheles
to God vpon our knees that he
vvil incline her Graces and her honorable
Councels hartes, vvith mercie and

equitie to read the ſame. Vve require it
vvith teares euen for the paſsion of our
Sauiour, and for their ſoules ſake.
            
               
                  ❧ Our coming beyond the ſeas and liuing
out of our natiue Countrie.
CHAP. 1.
               
                  FIrſt, vvheras vve be cloſely
charged in the Edict of the
15 of Iulie 1580, that vve
be fled into forraine partes
and refuſe to liue in our natural Countrie:
Vve proteſt to al the vvorld that
it is not for any vnduetiful affection,
alienation or eſtranging our hartes
and likings frō the ſame, as our daily
prayers and ſacrifices to God, our continual
ſighes and teares both publike
and priuate, our ſundrie duetiful attempts
and hazards of our perſons, and
the bloud and liues of our brethren
yelded in Apoſtolike and peaceable

ſort for the vveale and ſaftie therof, do
abundantly teſtifie: Nor for that by
vnkind affectiō vve preferre any Countrie
or Commonvvealth before our
ovvne, be the commodities in them
ſelues neuer ſo many, or their courteſies
to vs neuer ſo great (as in deede
through Gods goodnes, to vvhoſe honour
it ſpecially pertaineth and for
vvhoſe cauſe they be done, the fauours
euery vvhere ſhevved vs are vvorthy
immortal memorie and thankes) vvherof
our often ſorovvful bevvailing before
God and complaintes one to an
other do beare vs vvitneſſe. Vvhich vve
novv vvillingly diſcloſe alſo to the
vvorld, concerning the hard ſtate of
our long baniſhment: vvhich, be it neuer
ſo much eaſed by Chriſtian contentation
and manifold graces of the
people vvith vvhom vve conuerſe, yet
neuer vvanteth the ordinarie difficulties

and diſpleaſant accidēts that folovv
ſtrangers in euery place.
               Thou knovveſt, Good Lord, hovv
often vve haue lamented together, that
for our ſinnes vve ſhould be conſtrained
to ſpend either al or moſt of our
ſeruiceable yeres out of our natural
Countrie, to vvhich they are moſt
due, and to vvhich in al ages paſt they
ſhould haue been grateful: that our
offices ſhould be acceptable and our
liues and ſeruice agreable to ſtrangers
and not to our deereſt at home. Thou
knovveſt hovv earneſtely vve haue together
deſired thee to incline our Princes
hart to admitte vs to our Countrie
into vvhat ſtate ſo euer, ſo that vve
might there in pouertie and penance
néuer ſo extreme, ſerue the poore ſoules
to their ſaluation, voiding our cogitations
of al the honours, commodities,
preferments, that our forefathers and

the Realme yelded and gaue to ſuch
functions, acquitting them for our
ovvne partes to the preſent poſſeſsioners
and incumbents or to vvhom ſo
euer God ſhal permitte. Thou knovveſt
hovv iuſtly vve haue bevvailed
our heauy caſe, that ſo many ſtrange
nations hauing their Churches vvith
freedom to ſerue God after there maner
in our Countrie,No libertie of Catholike Religion in England. onely Catholikes
(vvhich in our fathers daies had
all, and for vvhom and by vvhom al
Churches and Chriſtianitie aroſe)
can by no interceſsion of forraine Potentates,
nor no ſighes nor ſorovves
of innumerable moſt loyal ſubiectes,
obtaine one place in the vvhole land
to ſerue their Lord God after the rites
of al other good Chriſtian Princes,
Prieſts, and people of the vvorld:
That no Ievv, no Turke, no Pagan

can by the lavv of God, nature, or
nations, be forced from the maner
and perſuaſion of his ovvne Sect
and Seruice, to any other vvhich by
promis or profeſsion he or his progenitors
neuer receiued: onely vve
(that neither in our ovvne perſons
nor in our forefathers, euer gaue conſent
to any other faith or vvorſhip
of God, but haue in preciſe termes
by proteſtation and promis bound our
ſelues in Baptiſme to the Religion,
faith, and Seruice Catholike alone)
are againſt diuine and humane lavves,
and againſt the Proteſtants ovvne
doctrine in other nations, not onely
bereued of our Chriſtian due in this
behalfe, but are forced by manifold
coactions to thoſe rites vvhich
vve neuer knevv nor gaue our aſſent
vnto.
               
                  
Vvherein our greefe of hart is much
increaſed, either vvhen vve looke into
other States and Countries, as Germanie,
Suitzerland, Suetia, Polonia, Boëmia,
and the like, vvhere though there
haue been great alterations in religion
theſe late yeres, yet lightly none be forced
ſo but if they can not haue the exerciſe
of their profeſsion in one territorie,
Canton, tovvne, Church, or Pariſh, yet
they may haue it neere them in an
other, as alſo in al the Prouinces and
kingdoms ſubiect either to the Perſian
or the Turke at this day, the old Chriſtians
be permitted to vſe freely their
deuotions: or vvhen vve looke backe
to the like diſtreſſes of Catholikes in
old time vvhen certaine Emperours
vvere cheefe fautors of Arianiſme and
other Sectes, vvho yet vvere often induced
of their natural benignitie to
yeld certaine Churches or at leaſt Oratories

in Churcheyardes and other places
adioyning, for the Catholike ſeruice
in their dominions.Socr. Ec. hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 18. & li. 4. ca. 12. 16. So did Conſtantius
the Arian Emperour and Valens
graunt to S. Athanaſius and his folovvers
in Alexandria:Niceph. li. 11. c 49. 50. vvhich Valens God
plaged aftervvard becauſe he vvould
not ſuffer the ſame at Antioche.Li. 5. de Baſ. trad. Valentinian
alſo the yonger profered the
like to S. Ambroſe in Millan.
               Vvhich onely grace of our Prince if
vve might haue obtained, no pleaſure,
profite, or preferment that the vvorld
beſide yeldeth in any part of Chriſtendom,
ſhould haue kept vs out of our
deerely beloued Countrie ſo long, for
vvhoſe ſaluation, and ſo much libertie
of conſcience as is mentioned, vve haue
often vviſhed diuers of our perſons in
perpetual priſon, for pledge and vvarrant
of the peaceable and loyal demeanour
of our brethren the Catholikes,

and for ſecuritie of the ſtate, vvherof
her vviſe Counſelers haue alvvaies in
ſuch caſes greateſt regard. But neither
this durſt our Catholike brethren demaund
in their manifold feares, doubtes,
and diſgraces at home, nor vve in
ſuch ſuſpicion and miſconſtruction of
al our actions, could euer vvith hope
attempt it abrode.
               And alas much leſſe then the graunt
of publike places for exerciſe of our ancient
religion, vvould haue giuen infinite
contentment to the Catholikes
vvithin, and haue called home moſt of
them abrode, vvhen both ſortes vvould
haue counted it a ſingular grace, during
the diſtreſſe of theſe daies, to haue
had by permiſsion, pardon, conniuence,
their ſoul rightes (vvithout vvhich
men periſh doubtleſſe euerlaſtingly)
in their priuate houſes and chambers,
yea in priſons, in the cloſeth and leſt offen

fenſiue maner in the vvorld: as the Apoſtles
and Confeſſors did often in the
primitiue Church,Cyprian 
                        •
                     p. 5. and S. Cyprian teſtifieth
that ſome did in his time, and S.
Athanaſius him ſelfe did vvith the Catholikes
in Antioche.Niceph. li. 9. c. 23. From al vvhich,
being by rigor of penal ſtatutes, diligēt
enquiry of temporal Officers, vvatchfulnes
of Miniſters, ſpies, and promotors,
cōtinually reſtrained, and by them
often chaſed from their houſes, ſpoiled
of their goods, diſgraced and diſcouraged
in al their affaires, many thouſands
yea the farre greater part of her
Ma.ties ſubiectes languiſh avvay in ſorovv
and ſadnes irremediable.
               Neither be ſuch men miſerable onely
by ſo long lacke of things neceſſarie
to ſaluation, but much more for that
they be enforced to things vvhich aſſuredly
procure damnation. In vvhich
caſe, very lamentable it is to thinke

vpon al the diſtreſſed conſciences that
through out the Realme repine vvith
inconſolable ſighes and grones againſt
their receiuing, hearing, and vſing of
the pretended Sacraments, Seruice, Sermons,
and other actions, vvherevnto
they be inuoluntarily and againſt their
vvil dravven, and ſpecially for the othe
of the Queenes ſoueraintie in ſpiritual
regiment,The othe of the Supremacie. a thing improbable, vnreaſonable,
vnnatural, impoſsible: and yet
the forme therof ſo cōceiued in ſtature,
and ſo tendered, that the takers muſt
ſvveare vpon the Euangoliſtes (hovv
ſo euer they thinke in deede) that they
acknovvledge euen in their conſciēce
that, vvhich neuer learned man of any
ſort or ſect did euer thinke to be true,
and vvhich they knovv euery Catholike
man to cōdemne in hart, and vvhich
the cheefe makers of the ſame, by exēpting
them ſelues from it by a ſpecial

prouiſo, haue iudged either damnable
or very dangerous. Vvhich othe therfore
to exacte of moſt Officers in the
Commonvvealth, of euery one that is
preferred in the Vniuerſities, or othervviſe
almoſt throughout the Realme,
and namely of al ſuch as they ſuſpect
thinke it vntrue, is nothing els, but
vvittingly to driue men to pitiful
torment of mind, remorſe, and vtter
deſperation.
               Vvhich thing if her Ma.tie did knovv,
ſhe vvould neuer of her natural clemē
                  cie,
for a title and claime that neuer
King (much leſſe Queene) Chriſtian
nor Heathen, Catholike nor Heretike,
in her ovvne dominions or in al the
vvorld beſide before our age, did chalenge
or accept, ſuffer her poore ſubiectes
to be ſo invvardly and deepely afflicted
in their ſoules, but vvould no
doubt haue cōpaſsion of their coacted

miſeries, that her ſelf alſo may find mercie
at the day of her departure, vvherof
the greater ſhe is in this life, the
more ſhe ſhal haue neede in the next,
vvhere ſhe muſt anſvver not onely for
the things done by her commaundement
and knovvledge, but for vvhat
ſo euer is done vniuſtly by her name or
authoritie, though ſhe neuer knovv
therof: as it is verily hoped that of theſe
calamities aforeſaid her Ma.tie hath no
intelligence. And the Kings of the
vvorld ſhal find their countes large
and intricate ynough at their iudgement
day, of their temporal gouernements
onely, though they trouble not
them ſelues vvith the ſpiritual regimēt
alſo.
               The vniuerſal lacke then of the ſoueraine
Sacrifice and Sacraments catholikely
miniſtred, vvithout vvhich the
ſoule of man dieth, as the body doth

vvithout corporal foode: this cōſtrainte
to the contrarie ſeruices, vvhereby men
periſh euerlaſtingly: this intolerable
othe repugnāt to God, the Church, her
Ma.ties honour, and al mens cōſciences:
and the daily dangers diſgraces, vexations,
feares, impriſonments, empoueriſhments,
deſpites, vvhich they muſt
ſuffer: and the railings and blaſphemies
againſt Gods Sacraments, Saincts,
Miniſters, and al holies, vvhich they
are forced to heare in our Countrie: are
the onely cauſes, moſt deere Sirs, or (if
vve may be ſo bold and if our Lord permitte
this declaration to come to her
M.ties reading) moſt gratious Soueraine,
vvhy ſo many of vs are departed
out of our natural Countrie, and do abſent
our ſelues ſo long from that place
vvhere vve had our being, birth, and
bringing vp through God, and vvhich
vve deſire to ſerue vvith al the offices of

our life and death: onely crauing correſpondence
of the ſame, as true and
natural children of their parents.
               From vvhich vve are not fugitiues, as
ſometimes vncourteouſly vve are called,
nor are fled for folovving any factions
or differences of noble families,
nor for any crimes or diſloyalties
done againſt the Prince or Commonvvealth,
nor for any diſorder in our
liues, or vvorldly diſcontentment or
diſagrement vvith the preſent ciuil
ſtate and politie, or for miſlike of any
her Ma.ties miniſters, vvhoſe perſons,
vviſedoms, moderation and prudence
in gouernement, and manifold graces,
vve do honour vvith al our hart
in al things: excepting matters incident
to Religion, vvherein their honours
can not be offended, if vve preferre
the iudgemēt of Gods Church before
their humane counſel. Acknovvledging

that her Ma.ties reigne and
their regiment had been moſt glorious
and renovvmed to the vvorld abrode,
and moſt ſecure and happie to the ſubiectes
at home, if it had not been contaminated
by the fatal calamities (ſo to
call Gods prouident iuſtice for our ſinnes)
of alteration in Religion and the
things thereon depending. Vvhich not
conſiſting (as vve haue declared) vvith
any Chriſtian Catholike mans cōſcience,
ſuch as vve profeſſe our ſelues to be,
nor vvith libertie of mind, nor ſaftie of
bodie, vve vvere conſtrained to flee and
forſake our Countrie, parents, frendes,
and vvhat ſo euer by nature is there
deere vnto vs, by the vvarrant and
exāple of Chriſt, his Apoſtles, S. Athanaſius,
S. Hilarie, and other our forefathers
in faith, in the like perſecutions.
               Therfore certaine men, othervviſe of
good credit and degree in Englād, and

coming ouer for publike affaires, haue
done vs ſometimes great iniurie, in that
they gaue out to diuers ſtrangers marueling
to ſee ſo many vs abrode out
of our natiue Countrie (vvhich euery
man affecteth, and of al other, as they
thinke, the Engliſh) that her M.tie vvas
deſirous to haue al come home, and
that being othervviſe quiet and cōtented
ſubiectes, none vvere nor ſhould
be moleſted for their cōſcience: vvhich
many in foraine partes haue ſo miſtakē,
that they verily thought vve might
haue the exerciſe of our religion, and
freedom of conſcience from cōſtrainte
to any other contrarie vnto our profeſſion.
For vvhich onely grace, that it
might be common to al Catholikes in
the Realme, vvould God vve had giuen
our liues. Vvhich can be no longer
nor othervviſe grateful vnto vs, then
vve haue hope to ſerue her Highnes

and our beloued Countrie, vvhen it
ſhal pleaſe Chriſt to giue them the
mind to require or admitte the ſame.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Our repairing ſometimes to the Citie
and Court of Rome.
CHAP. II.
               
                  CERTAINE yong felovves,
fugitiues form
their Maiſters on thisſide,
being deprehended in diuers
coſinages, counterfaiting of letters,
and plaine theftes (by vvhich kind of
men Athanaſius and the cheefe Catholikes
in the Arians daies vvere maruelouſly
plaged) ioyning to them others
of il diſpoſition that ſometimes thruſt
themſelues ſecretely into ſuch companies
liuing together as vve do, to take
and giue notice of mens doings and demeanour,
vvhom men call commouly

ſpies or intelligencers, vve by the Scriptures
vvord name them Falſebrethren:
haue done very il offices of late, not to
vs onely, vvhom of malice, hope of impunitie
and lucre, they haue traiterouſly
ſlaundered, but to ſome of the honorable
Counſel alſo, vvho thought ſuch
conditioned men not vnvvorthy to be
heard and truſted, againſt men (to ſay
the leaſt) of faith and honeſtie, and
vvorthy alſo to be vſed and preferred:
for further affliction of poore Catholike
men, through the vvhole Realme.
by vvhom and other like loſt companions,
they haue had ſuch a pitiful fitte
theſe later moneths, as neuer before.
Vvhich to vs that be abſent, giueth vnſpeakable
greefe, for that our deere
brethren, innocent in them ſelues,
ſhould be ſo heauily chaſtifed for our
defaultes, and them not true, but onely
ſurmiſed: excepting alvvaies our

ſcholaſtical attempts, for the conuerſion
of our Countrie and reconcilement
of our brethren to the Catholike
Church, vvhich vve euerlaſtingly
profeſſe and vvil indeuour
vntil death.
               Therfore touching ſome of our late
repairing to the citie of Rome this
yere paſt, vvhervvith vve are charged:
the principal of that viage doth
proteſt, that he neither ioyned vvith
rebell, nor traitor, nor any one or other,
againſt the Queene or Realme, or traiterouſly
ſought or practiſed to irritate
any Prince or Potentate to hoſtilitie
againſt the ſame. Further inuocating
vpō his ſoul, that he neuer knevv, ſavv,
nor heard, durīg his abode in the Court
there, of any ſuch vvritings as are mētioned
in the ſaid Proclamation of Iulie,
conteining certaine articles of cōfederation
of the Pope, King of Spaine, and

other Princes, for the inuaſion of the
Realme: nor euer aftervvard gaue counſel
to publiſh any ſuch thing, though
he vvere in Rome at the day of the date
that ſome of thoſe copies, vvhich aftervvard
he ſavv vvhen they vvere
common to al the vvorld, do beare.
Being alſo moſt aſſured that no other
Engliſh Catholike vvould or could be
the author therof, nor (as it may be
thought) any other of thoſe Princes, or
their miniſters, that are pretended to be
of the foreſaid league: being neither
vviſedom nor pollicie, if any ſuch thīg
vvere intended (as vve verily thinke
there vvas not) much leſſe if it vvere
neuer meant, to publiſh any ſuch libelles,
to giue the Realme vvarning purpoſely
to prouide for it, ſpecially al the
vvorld knovving, that the pinching of
the poore Catholikes at home (a lamentable
caſe) is their fenſe and repay

for al aduerſe accidents abrode. And it
verily may be thought (and ſo it is certaine
that ſome of the principal miniſters
of the forenamed Princes haue auſvvered,
being demaunded therof) that
the Proteſtans hauing exerciſed ſkil
ād audacitie in ſuch practiſes and counterpractiſes
(of vvhich France, Flanders,
Scotland, and other countries haue
had ſo lamentable experience) did
contriue them, to alter her Maieſties accuſtomed
benignitie and mercie tovvards
the Catholikes, into ſuch rigor of
iuſtice as in the ſaid Edict is theatened.
               Hovv ſo euer it be, and from vvhence
ſo euer they came, Chriſt knovveth
our going to Rome did neither fetch,Cauſes of going to Rome.
cauſe, nor procure any ſuch matter, nor
vvas for any treatie or counſel againſt
our Countrie, but much more for the
aduācemēt of the ſame, and for the neceſſarie
releefe of our felovv ſtudents in

baniſhment, as other mens going to
other Princes Courtes vve doubt not to
be for the like purpoſe: though vve can
not ſo preciſely vvarrant the actions of
other men, vvhervvith vve be not ſo
vvel acquainted, as our ovvne.
               Once, our ovvne Countrie by the
fear of one ſort, and alienation of an
other, not yelding vs neceſſarie liuelihod:
reaſon and nature force vs to ſeeke
for ſuccour at ſuch Prelates and Princes
hands, as of old haue had compaſsion
vpon our forefathers in ſuch like caſes
of diſtreſſe: the curteſie and cuſtom of
al Kings and nations inclining them
to the fauour, helpe and protection of
ſtrangers and deſolate perſons, namely
vvhen their miſeries fall vnto them for
religion and the ſame faith that them
ſelues be of, the honorableſt quarel either
to do or ſuffer for, in the vvorld.
               And for vs of the Schoole and Clergie,

vvhither ſhould vve rather flee for
releefe either of body or ſoul,Hiero. ep. 16. then to
the head or (as S.Rome alwaies the citie of refuge and recourſe of al Chriſtians out of al Nations. Hierom ſpeaketh)
to the moſt ſecure part of our Catholike Communion, to the
rocke of refuge in doubtful daies and
doctrines, to the cheefe Paſtor and
Biſhop of our ſoules in earth, to the
Vicar general of Chriſt, out of the
compaſſe of vvhoſe fold and familie no
baniſhment can bring vs: to him, that
by office and vnction hath receiued the
grace of loue, mercie, pitie and compaſſion:
to him, that counteth no Chriſtian
nor domeſtical of faith, a ſtranger to
him, vvhoſe citie and Seate is the natiue
home of al true beleuers, and the paterne
of al Biſhoply hoſpitalitie and benignitie: to
him,Bede li. 1. hiſt. Ang. vvhoſe predeceſſors gaue
vs our firſt faith in the time of the Britannes,
reſtored it aftervvard in the
daies of the Engliſh, recouered vs from
Paganiſme, from Arianiſme, from

Pelagianiſme, from Zuinglianiſme,
often receiued, harboured, and relieued
diuers bleſſed Biſhops and Prieſts of our
Natiōs as vvel in the times of their proſ
peritie as perſecution, and vvho haue
receiued againe of all our Princes, Prelates,
and people, all dutiful and correſpondent
honours and good offices for
ſo many hundred yeres together, vvhen
they and their dominions floriſhed in
much glorie and felicitie, and vvere
dreadful to Gods enimies, the Churches,
and their ovvne: (among vvhom,
her Ma.ties father, for his vvorthy vvritings
and doings againſt the Lutherās,
receiued the glorious and eternal title,
of Defender of the faith:) to him, of vvhoſe
predeceſſors al the famous fathers called
for aide, comfort, and counſel in
their like diſtreſſes, Cyprian of Cornelius
and Stephanus, Athanaſius of Iulius
and Marcus, Chryſoſtom and Auguſtine

of Innocentius, Baſil of Liberius,
Felix, and other Biſhops of Italie,
Hierom and Miletius of Damaſus,
Theodorete of Leo the Great, ād al the
reſt, of other holy Popes, as time and neceſsitie
required: to him,Li. 4. c. 22. hiſt Ec. vvhoſe Seate (as
Euſebius reporteth out of S. Denys of
Corinth) did alvvaies ſend releefe to
al the Chriſtians perſecuted and condemned
to metalles, and refreſhed al
the faithful coming vnto it, as the parent
the children: to him, vvho as he
Canonically ſuccedeth al theſe in Seat,
doctrine, and dignitie, ſo is inferior to
none, farre paſſeth many, and reſembleth
moſt S. Gregorie the Great, our
Apoſtle, in al Charitie, hoſpitalitie,
zeale, and tendernes of hart and affection
tovvard the deſolate, namely of
our nation: for the ſpiritual calamitie
vvherof the vvriter of this hath ſeen
him vveepeful hartily, and hath heard

him ſay that the goods of that holy
Seat, vvherof he had the diſpenſation,
vvere for the poore afflicted domeſticals
of faith. Finally, vvhither could
vve vvith more hope haue recourſe,
then to him, by vvhoſe bounteous
goodnes ſo many Patriarches, Biſhops,
Learned, Gentlemen, and Chriſtians
of al ſortes, Engliſh, Scotiſh, Iriſh,
Almans, Hungarians, Syrians, Armenians,
Cyprians, and al other vnder the
Turke, or any vvay for Chriſtes ſake
oppreſſed or empoueriſhed, haue been
and ſhalbe relieued?
               If vve be further in particular demaunded
of the cauſes of ſome of our
late reſort thither: to temper al mens
ielouſy as much as vve may, in faith
and truth they vvere none other, but to
make humble ſute for the eſtabliſhmēt
and perpetual foundation of the College
or Seminarie, vvhich his Holines

had not long before inſtituted in place
of the Hoſpital of our Nation there, as
a thing much more proper to this time,
and more fruitful to our Countrie,
then it vvas, adding of his ovvne much
then, and a great deale ſithence, to the
old prouiſion,The Seminarie at Rome founded. and novv in Ianuarie laſt
fully founding and accompliſhing the
ſame: this vvas one thing. An other
vvas, that the Gouernours of that College
in Rome aboue, and of this other
novv reſident in the citie of Rhemes
beneath, might giue and take mutual
direction, for correſpondence in regiment,
diſcipline, and education moſt
agreable to our Countrimens natures,
and for preuention of al diſorders that
youth and cōpanies of ſcholers (namely
in baniſhment) are ſubiect vnto.
               Vvherein vve thanke God of al that
paines and endeuours, for that it pertained
excedingly to the general good

and honour of our Nation, that vve
may perpetually haue a number of the
moſt pregnant vvittes brought vp in
the principal Seat, place, and fountaine
of our Chriſtianitie. Vvhither vvhat
ſo euer is learned, vviſe, vertuous, of al
the moſt famous Vniuerſities, Monaſteries,
Societies, and Colleges through
the vvorld, is recuiled as to a continual
mart of al kind of doctrine and prudence:Hiero. praef. li. 2. comm. in ep. ad Gal. Caluin.
S. Hierom calling it the place
of greateſt faith and deuotion, and the
Aduerſarie him ſelf confeſsing, that the
great reſort thither heretofore vvas, for
that the beſt learned and vviſeſt men of
the vvorld vvere there: beſides the experience
of the Vniuerſal Churches practiſe:
vvhere there is daily entercourſe
betvvixt al Princes, Prelates, and peoples
Chriſtened, in cauſes of conſcience,
religion, and other ſpiritual affaires:
and vvhere they may ſee and
vvonder at Gods promis and proprouidence

in the continual preſeruation
of that ſtate and regiment, in perſecution
in proſperitie, in vvealth in
pouertie, in good life in il life, the Heretikes
(as S.De vtilit. cred. c. 17. Auguſtine ſpeaketh) in vaine barking
about it: That the Arians, Macedonians,
Pelagians, Donatiſtes, Neſtorians, and
al other Sectaries, that ſtood at the bay
vvith this Seat, are al buried in infamie:
that theſe preſent Proteſtants, Anabaptiſts,
Puritans, Trinitaries, and other
vvolues of vvhat heare ſo euer, (that
ball againſt the Paſtor, the ſooner to
ſeaſe vpon the flocke,Ep. 55. nu. 3. as S. Cyprian
ſpeaketh) daily decay and diſcouer
their ovvne malice and folly: that al
Empires, Kingdoms, and States, be by
certaine ſeaſons either decaied or manifoldly
altered, and this Seat to ſtand
immoueable and to be as firme and
floriſhing in this diſordered reuolt of
many peoples from it, as euer before.
               
                  
Theſe and ſuch other high experimēts,
vvith innumerable examples of vertue
and deuotion, ſhal this Romane inſtitution
giue to our Countriemen, vnder
the famouſeſt teachers and gouernours
of youth in our age or ſome vvorldes
before. Vvho othervviſe vvould admire
their pety Maiſters at home, the
cauſe of al errour and ignorance.
               To do this ſeruice then to our Commonvvealth,
for vvhich if euer it come
to it ſelf againe, it vvil thanke the doers
as much as novv it blameth them, vvas
that viage taken ſpecially: And then, to
make like humble ſute for the augmentation
of the monethly prouiſion of
this other College, for that (the number
and neceſitie therof daily encreaſing)
it vvas not ſufficient. Vvhich ſute his
Holines alſo of his incomparable loue
to our Nation, benignely heard.
               
                  
Theſe lo God knovveth vvere our
laſt dealings, and theſe are our treaſons
and ſinnes, and none other, that vve
contriue at Rome againſt our natural
Countrie.
            
            
               
                  ❧ The meaning and purpoſe of the inſtitution
of the Seminaries.
CHAP. III.
               
                  AND concerning his
Holines intentions, if
they be any other in the
inſtitution and entertainement
of theſe Seminaries,
thē ours are, they be vnknovven
to vs, none being ſo preſumptuous to
ſearch further into his ſecretes, thē ſtandeth
vvith his good pleaſure and vviſdom
to vtter of him ſelf, nor any
hauing iuſt cauſe to deeme vvorſe or
othervviſe of his doings, then is agreable
to his holy high calling, approued

good affectiō to our Countrie, his great
vertue, and the euidence of the thing.
               This is a cleere caſe, that the perſons
vvhich firſt put them ſelues together in
the Vniuerſitie of Duay the yere 1568,The beginning of the Seminarie at Duay.
yelding to Collegial forme of ſtudie
and diſcipline vnder one Preſident
(vvhich after ſome yeres and good
proofe of their profitable endeuours, by
Gods goodnes obtained his Holines
protection and monethly exhibition)
had theſe intentions: firſt, to dravv diuers
youths, vvho then for their conſcience
liued in the lovv Coūtries, from
ſole, ſeueral, and voluntarie ſtudie, to a
more exact methode and courſe of cō
                  mon
conferēce and publike exerciſe, to
be purſued by their Superiors appointmēt
rather then their ovvne choiſe: that
they might be more apt to ſerue their
Countrie, vvhen it ſhould pleaſe God
mercifully to reduce thē home againe.
               
                  
Secondly, doubting the time of our
chaſtiſement might be ſo long as to
vveare out either by age, empriſonmēt,
or other miſeries, the elder ſort of the
learned Catholikes both at home and
abrode, it vvas thought a neceſſarie duety
for the poſteritie, to prouide for a perpetual
ſeede and ſupply of Catholikes,
namely of the Clergie: nothing miſtruſting
but the times and opportunities
vvould come (vvere they neere, vvere
they far of) vvhē they might take aduā
                  tage
for reſtitutiō of religiō, no Sect euer
being liked lōg, nor permanēt vvithout
enterchāge, as vve ſee in Arianiſme the
paterne of al other: Vvhich though it
troubled the vvorld ſome hūdred yeres
together, yet it changed places, had lucida
interualla, gaue ſeaſons of calme and reſt to
holy Biſhops, Prieſts, and faithful perſons
according as the Emperours vvere
diuerſely affected tovvard the Sect,

or more or leſſe giuen to rigor or clemencie.
Vvhich is the prouidence of
God for the perpetuity of the Catholike
faith, vvhich no hereſie that euer
vvas or ſhal be, can vvholy exclude, by
no vvitte or violence of man: according
to the ſaying of S. Auguſtine:
Nemo delet de coelo conſtitutionem Dei,
                  Ep. 162. 
                  Nemo delet de terra
Eccleſiam Dei.
               
               Thirdly, their purpoſe vvas, for their
better furniſhing of meete men to the
end aforeſaid, and for diſaduantaging
the aduerſarie part therein, to dravv
into this College the beſt vvittes out of
England,Vniuerſitie men and other coming to the Seminarie. that vvere either Catholikly
bent, or deſirous of more exact education
then is theſe daies in either of the
Vniuerſities (vvhere, through the delicacie
of that Sect, there is no art, holy or
prophane, throughly ſtudied, and ſome
not touched at all:) or that had ſcruple
of conſcience to take the othe of the
Queenes Supremacie in cauſes Eccleſiaſtical,

(vvhich gaue vs diuers, not
onely Catholikes but others, out of
both the Vniuerſities, vvhere it is ſpecially
exacted, and tormēteth the conſciences
of many that ſeeme pure Proteſtants:)
or that miſliked to be forced to
the Miniſterie, as the vſe is in diuers
Colleges, a calling cōtemptible euen in
their ovvne conceit, and very dānable
in the iudgmēt of others, (the due conſideratiō
vvherof hath yelded to vs many,
yea ſome ſcores, partly before, and
partly after their enterāce to that trade:)
or that vvere doubtful vvhether of the
tvvo religiōs vvere true, vvherein to take
trial of none but the one vvhich the
ſvvay of the Countrie forcibly driueth
vnto, vvhen they might haue proofe
of the other ſo neere at hand in a College
of their ovvne, vvithout great coſt
or trauail, ſeemed to many much ſhame
and inexcuſable negligence in cauſe

of ſaluation, vvhich is the iuſteſt cauſe
to trauail (as S.De vtil. cred. c. 7. Auguſtine telleth Honoratus)
in the vvorld. Vvhich hath
driuen diuers ouer, to their great ſatisfaction
and admiration of the euidence
of our part.
               Grammar Schooles alſo from al partes
of the Realme haue yelded vs many
youthes, vvhich hauing their vvhole
and ful trayning in Catholike Colleges
here, proue no leſſe ſeruiceable
for their Countrie then the others.
               And the reſt brought vp in the Vniuerſities
there, do eaſily here by compariſon
perceiue the great corruption in
the ſame, ſpecially of life and maners:
ſinne, libertie, and licentiouſnes daily
more and more ſhevving them ſelues
to be companiōs of this nevv doctrine.
Vvhich doctrine vvho ſo euer attempteth
to amend, let him knovv by our
experience, that the place affected is cuſtom

and pleaſure in ſinne, and ſhame
and lothſomnes to cōfeſſe and amend:
Vvhich being cured, there remaineth
no difficultie.
               Theſe youths (Gentlemens ſonnes
ſpecially) are much propenſe in our
Countrie (God be thanked for it, as alſo
for that it giueth exceding hope of better
times) to the Catholike faith, and
many aduenture ouer to vs vvithout
their parents conſent, and ſometimes
much againſt their vvilles: Vvho
though they could be content to haue
their children better brought vp then
they can be at home, yet for feare of
disfauour of the vvorld, vvherein they
be more entangled then their ſonnes,
they refuſe often to giue them any releefe
at all, feare ſometimes ouerpaiſing
their natural affection, and God taketh
the care of their deere pledges, and keepeth
them here for their Countrie.
               
                  
And becauſe one College could not
be ſufficiēt for ſo great ſtore of al ſortes
as is ſaid, and for that this beneath
might be ſubiect to diuers diſturbances,
by fine practiſes of the aduerſarie,The Seminarie inuited to returne to Duay.
vvherof our remoue from Duay gaue
vs good experience (notvvithſtanding
the Catholike and honorable
Magiſtrate ſithence by their letters inſtantly
inuiting vs thither againe) therfore
God moued the hart of the Popes
Holineſſe,The beginning of the Seminarie at Rome. to erect that other alſo in Rome,
a place not commonly ſubiect to
the like hazards: that ſo theſe tvvo Colleges
might be more plentiful Nourceries
for the Church of our Countrie,
and ioyntly vvorke together for the benefite
of the ſame.
               The firſt intended and moſt certaine
fruite therof (ouer and aboue the prouiſion
for the time to come) being, to
ſaue ſo many ſoules, as not onely vvere

any one time in both the Colleges, or
in other Schooles in theſe partes, expecting
roomes in the ſame, but al othets
that in diuers times and ſeaſons haue
been or ſhal be brought vp in them,
during the ſchiſme: the number of
vvhom (vvhich is already exceding
great) and the reſt vvhich are to come
hereafter, Chriſt onely knovveth: beſides
many trauailers, that intending not
preciſely any matter of religiō, haue yet
by Gods careful prouidence, that ouerreacheth
mans purpoſes to his ſaluation,
been happily by them conuerted
to Chriſtian faith and life, to their great
and inexpected ioy. Al vvhich, if they
had taried in the Engliſh Vniuerſities,
or thervviſe had folovved the maner of
our Countrie, had periſhed euerlaſtingly
vvithout al queſtion, though by
the erroneous iudgement and perſuaſion
of the Proteſtants, many feare not

their damnable ſtate.
               The ſecond and further fruite of the
ſaid Colleges is, to inſtruct men in al
Caſes of conſcience and Controuerſies,
and to breede in them zeale and deſire
to be Prieſts, euen in theſe daies ſpecially,
vvhē they can looke for no vvorldly
honour, lucre, preferment or promotion
thereby,Prieſts of the Seminaries. but manifold dangers, diſgraces,
perſecution, vexations: onely by
praiers, and Sacrifice (the ſpecial office
of that holy Order, and an act that maketh
the moſt forcible clamour to God
for mercie of al others) to make interceſsion
for our deſolate frendes at home:
and to aduēture into England, there
to ſerue them, vvhoſe hartes God ſhal
touch to admitte ſpiritual comforts, and
to preferre ſaluation before vvordly cō
                  modities:
and to miniſter vnto them al
Sacraments neceſſarie for the life and
grace of their ſoules.
               
                  
Vvhich duety, through loue that is
ſtronger then death, very great numbers
of both the Colleges (beſides other
vertuous and learned Prieſts) haue godly
and happily done, to the benefite and
vnſpeakable ſolace of infinite perſons,
great alteration of mindes throughout
the vvhole Realme, and vvonderful
encreaſe of courage in al ſortes, not onely
to thinke vvel in hart, but opēly and
(as Chriſtian Catholikes are bound to
do) boldly to profeſſe their faith and
religion, and to refuſe all actes contrarie
to the ſame. Vvhich vvas thought a
hard thing to the vvordly at the beginning,
but novv they vvould not be in
their former caſe for al the goods the
Realme yeldeth: acknovvledging it to
be an extreme miſerie, that the greateſt
part of the Coūtrie ſhould be Catholikes
in their hartes, and in their mouths
and actions, Proteſtants.
               
                  
And this they haue done onely by the
povver of Prieſthod, in ſpiritual, ſilent,
and peaceable maner, ād not vvith riottes,
tumults, or vvarlike concourſe: they
haue done it, as the Apoſtles and other
holy men did in the primitiue Church,
by trauails, vvatchings, faſtings, perils at
the portes, perils in the ſea, perils on the
land, perils of open enimies, perils of
falſe brethren, feares of the lavves, feares
of hurting their frendes, feares for ſcandalizing
the vveake: by contumelies,
diſgraces, pouertie, priſonments, fetters,
dungeons, rackes, deaths. And this the
omnipotēt God, becauſe it is his ovvne
vvorke enterpriſed by order and authoritie
of his cheefe Miniſter in earth,
hath proſpered excedingly: though it
ſeemed at the beginning a thing hard
or impoſsible, the Aduerſaries hauing
ſo many yeres the lavves, the ſvvord, the
pulpits, and al humane helpes for them.
               
                  
But the enterance to this ſpiritual attempt
and traffike vvas vvel opened before,
by bookes vvritten from theſe partes,
and by ſundrie letters of the vertuous
youthes to their parents and frendes,
vvhom they beſought to regard
their ſoules, and not to damne them
ſelues vpon pretēce of ſauing their lāds
and goods to the profite of them, their
childrē and poſteritie: deſiring no other
inheritance then their ſaluation and
companie in heauen, the lacke vvherof
ſhould be to them more then al mortal
ſorovves.
               To this, the fruites of the Proteſtants
doctrine, their profane life and maners,
their reſtles contentions, debates, and
diſſentions among them ſelues, their
ſcandals mo in thoſe fevv daies of their
felicitie, then vvas giuē of the true Clergie
in a thouſand yeres before (though
al the Aduerſaries ſlaunderous reportes

of them vvere Goſpel, as many of them
be more falſe then Eſops fables:) theſe
things, and the great vvearines that the
vvorld, and ſpecially vviſe men that eaſily
forſee the euent of their pretended
ſpiritual gouernement, haue of that religion,
did giue great ſucceſſe to the
former good endeuours.
               Yea euen the very ſeueritie of the
lavves made againſt the Catholikes
and theſe attempts, and the popular
pulpit-mens perpetual balling and railing
againſt the Pope, cauſed many
one that othervviſe ſhould neuer haue
heard or thought of him, to enquire
further vvhat that Pope is, in
vvhom they perceiued by the vehement
contradiction and choler of
their preachers, that there lay ſome
great moment in theſe cauſes of religion:
and ſo happily admoniſhed,
and looking backe to the antiquitie,

they find that it vvas the propertie of all
Sectes, and that it is as ſure a ſigne of rebellion
againſt Chriſt and his Church,
as to raile vpon the Soueraine temporal,
is to rebel againſt the Commonvvealth.
               Theſe things novv vve haue thus
openly, particularly, and plainely ſet
dovvne of the end and actions of our
Seminaries, perhaps more folovving
equitie and ſinceritie, then policie, in
diſcouering our doings to ſome diſaduantage
of the cauſe vvhich vve
ſeeke ſo much to preferre, though vve
truſt in Chriſt Ieſus, vvho hath hitherto
turned al humane impediments
to the aduantage of his name and
truth, that our plaine dealing ſhal neither
offend our Aduerſaries, not hurt
our frendes, nor hinder our good meanings.
               
                  
As for the Popes Holineſſe, vvho
of his great benignitie hath inſtituted
and endevved the ſayd Seminaries, no
man can by reaſon reprehēd his doings,
being moſt agreable to his Apoſtolike
careful ſolicitude of al Churches and
Chriſtian Nations, to the deſire he hath
to ſeeke and reduce (vvith vvhat coſt or
paine ſo euer) the loſt ſheepe of his fold,
to his ſpecial loue of our Countrie:The Popes affection and loue toward our Nation.
vvhich (notvvithſtāding their vnkind
reuolt from the felovvſhip of his faith
and authoritie, vvhich they entered into
at their firſt conuerſion: notvvithſtāding
the vnciuil lavves made againſt
him in more exquiſite termes then againſt
any enimie or Turke, vvhoſe
meſſengers they vvould not generally
repel as they do his: novvithſtanding
their perpetual prayers, ſpeaches, preachings,
and proclamations againſt the
vvhole order) he tenderly affecteth and

pitieth ſtil, and for the honour and ſaluation
of our people, and for no other
vvorldly reſpect or cōmoditie, he hath
of his ovvne charges (beſides other munificēce
beſtovved on ſundrie perſons)
erected theſe tvvo Colleges, that by
them in moſt ſvveete, peaceable, and
Apoſtolike maner, he might reuoke
our Prince and Countrie to the honorable
ſocietie of al Chriſtian Catholike
kings and Countries.
               Theſe be his cogitations touching the
Seminaries, vvhat ſo euer other ſpeculatiue
and ſuſpicious men do ſurmiſe
othervviſe.
               They might ſee that it is Gregorie
the Thirtenths proper glorie and gift
of God,The Popes Seminaries of other Nations. to inſtitute ſuch Nourceries for
the help of al Nations: and our ſpecial
bleſſing, that he doubleth his grace and
fauour, tovvards vs in that kind.
               He hath made a Seminarie for the

Hebrues that vvil conuert from their
Iudaiſme: he hath made for the Greekes
and Hungarians infected vvith Turciſme
ād other errors and hereſies: he hath
endevved the College of Germans ſo
largely, that it receiueth Polonians,
Suetians, and other neere Nations, trauailed
ſpecially vvith Lutheraniſme:
he hath made one for the Dalmatians:
he giueth great ſuccourſe to the Seminarie
of the Romane Clergie, and other
Colleges of the moſt famous Societie
of the name of Ieſus, vvhoſe labours it
pleaſeth him to vſe in the gouernement
of moſt of theſe Colleges, to the eternal
good of al people. He contributeth to
the Seminaries of Prage and Vienna,
and hath relieued the famous Vniuerſitie
of Louan diſtreſſed by the rebelliō
of Orenge: vvith many other in far partes,
vvherof vve haue not knovvledge:
finally, he helpeth in this kind, Scotland

our next neighbour, that hath lately be
gonne in Paris a Seminarie for the ſame
end that ours and others vvere begonne.
               Vvhich Nation hath been theſe many
yeres moſt pitifully plunged in many
calamities by the Sectes of this time,
but novv beginneth to haue hope (as al
Chriſtendom hath) of their noble yong
Prince.The yong Prince of Scotland. Vvhoſe graces, giftes, and tovvardlines
in al kingly qualities, are ſaid
to be exceding rare in that age, and
therfore no doubt he vvil ſhortly ſee
the late calamities that his Realme hath
ſuſtained by the Caluiniſts, their
horrible infamous murdering of his
Highnes father, and more then barbarous
vilany and miſuſe of his deereſt
mother vvhiles ſhe vvas among them,
and the ſundry deteſtable treaſons contriued
againſt his Royal perſon vvhen
he vvas yet in his mothers vvōbe, and

often ſince, as vvel othervviſe by vnvvonted
treacheries, as by infecting (as
much as in them lay) his tender age,
both vvith that damnable hereſie, and
vvith ill affection tovvards his deereſt
parents.
               Vvhoſe infelicitie, procured onely by
the fine practiſes of Heretikes (the bane
of al Kings and Commonvveales) may
giue his Highnes and his vviſe Counſelers
vvarning to take heede betimes,
and to adioyne him ſelf and the Realme,
to the noble and ſecure ſocietie of
Chriſtes Catholike Church, and the
moſt high and mightie Princes of the
ſame, agreably to al his honorable Progenitors
both of England and Scotlād:
and to vſe the ſeruice of ſundrie his Catholike
and excellent learned ſubiectes
abrode in diuers partes of Chriſtendom,
and at home in his ovvne Realme,
for the reducing of his ſtate to the

old ancient glorie and proſperitie againe,
and to enforme his Ma.tie (as far as
his age can beare) hovv neceſſarie the
fatherly care, counſel, and affection of
the Popes Holines, the father and Paſtor
of al Princes, ſhal be for his Countrie
and people: engraffing theſe graue
vvordes of holy S. Hierom in his hart
yet innocent, for a preſeruatiue againſt
the poiſon of theſe daies.Ep. 8. ad Demetriadem. This one thing
I thinke good of charitable pietie and affection
to forwarne thee, that thou hold faſt the faith of
holy Innocentius, who is ſucceſſor and ſonne of
the Apoſtolike chaire and of the forenamed Anaſtaſius,
and that thou receiue not a ſtrange doctrine,
though thou ſeeme vnto thy ſelf neuer ſo wiſe
and ſubtill.
               Vvhich notable leſſon is novv in
like maner to be inculcated and often
commended concerning the faith of
Gregorie the xiij their ſucceſſor and
ſonne in Seat and beleefe. Vvho hath
(as is ſhevved, and as it is cleere by
the inſtitution of the ſaid Seminaries)

an vnſpeakable affection to al Chriſtes
flocke and the vveale of euery Kingdom.
For vvhich his affection and Paſtoral
offices, not to thanke him moſt
humbly, is great vnkindnes: but to
blame him or miſconſtrue his beneficial
and benigne actions, that is intolerable.
               He doth the like things for almoſt
euery other Nation in diſtreſſe, and none
is ſo il, ſo ſuſpicious, or ſo vngrateful,
as to miſtruſt his benefites to be their
deſtructiō, not the Germās, not the Hū
                  garians,
not the Greekes, not any other
Prouinces, for al vvhich his Holines
hath erected Colleges euen as for our
Countrie. Of vvhich though al take
not ſo much good as they might do,
yet none feare hurt nor make lavves
againſt his holy and charitable actions
but vve.
               
                  
The beſt is that vve haue to do vvith a
moſt benigne father, that vvil ſtruggle
no othervviſe vvith our vnnatural affections
but by continual benefites, not
doubting but he ſhal gaine that in heauen
of God, vvhich his immortal merites
do deſerue, and of our poſteritie
(vvhich ſhalbe void of theſe preiudicial
humors) perpetual memorie,
prayer, and benediction.
               And this much by occaſion of a
certaine clauſe in the Proclamation of
Ianuarie, concerning the erection of
the ſaid Seminaries in forraine partes.
            
            
               
                  ❧ That we liue not in them againſt the lawes
of God and our Countrie: with a
duetiful exhortation to the
Q Maieſtie.
CHAP. IIII.
               
                  
                  AND vvheras in the ſame
Proclamation vve be
charged to liue contrarie
to the lavves of God and
the Realme: if it vvere meant in matters
of our life and cōuerſation (as vve truſt
it is not) our purgation might eaſily
be made, hauing ſo many vvitneſſes of
our demeanour both for common and
priuate, vvhereſoeuer vve haue liued,
and vvanting not publike teſtimonie
of diuers Princes and cities for the ſame,
vvhich ſhalbe forth coming as neede
requireth. But meaning (as it is like
they do) of our regiment, and behauiour,
in doctrine, religion, and ſubiection
to the lavves of our Countrie: vve
deſire in this point if euer els (moſt benigne
Readers) both for your ovvne
ſake and ours, that fauorable attention
and indifferencie, vvhich the vveight
of the cauſe touching both parties ſo

neere, doth chalenge and require.
               Vve anſvver then, that if the lavves
of God and the lavves of the Realme
did alvvaies conſent and concurre in
deede,Gods lawes and mans ſometimes repugnāt. as in this clauſe and other common
vvtitings and ſpeaches proceding
from authoritie, they be lightly in
vvordes couched together againſt vs:
hardly could vve defend our doctrines
and doings from errour and vndutiefulnes
tovvards our Prince. But ſeing
the lavves of kings and Countries are
not euer conſonant but may be contrarie
to Gods commaundemēts, vve may
iuſtly miſlike the one vvithout diſloyaltie
to the other.Ep. 166. VVhen Emperours
(ſaith S. Auguſtine) be in errour, they
make lawes for their errour againſt the truth, by
which iuſt men are tried and crowned, for not
doing that which they commaund, becauſe God
forbid deth it.
               If our Prince or Realme had the promis
that their faith ſhould not faile,Luc. 22.
                  
that Hel gates ſhould not preuaile againſt
thē,Mat. 16. 28. 18. that Chriſt vvould be vvith
them to the end of the vvorld, that
vvhen ſo euer they meete together in
conſultations, him ſelf vvould be in the
middes of them:Io. 14. 16. that the holy Spirit
ſhould perpetually direct them into
al truth,Eſa. 59. that he vvould be in their
mouth, and the mouth of their childrē,
and the mouth of their childrens children
euerlaſtingly:Deut. 17. Malach. 2 if in doubtes of doctrine
vve vvere by the Scriptures referred
to them,Luc. 10. if the States there aſſembled
might iuſtly vſe this clauſe of ancient
Councels,Act. 15. It hath pleaſed the holy
Ghoſt and vs: then ſhould our Statutelavves
euer cōcurre vvith Gods lavves,
and the breach of one ſort ſhould condēne
vs of trāſgreſsion of both. Vvherof
novv vve neede not feare, knovving
that no temporal king, nor Commonvvealth,
hath ſuch priuileges of Gods
protection, being the ſpecial prerogatiues

of the Churches tribunals: vvhoſe
lavves therfore neuer ſvvarue frō Chriſtes
commaundements, as our Parliaments
haue done (by our Aduerſaries
iudgement) al theſe vvorldes paſt together,
and vve are ſure that theſe later
haue done, and that al other preſuming
to determine of matters Eccleſiaſtical,
muſt needes do.
               And it vvere the pitifulleſt hazard, and
vncertainty of our faith and ſaluation,Religion altering with the Prince.
that could be, ſo to hang on the Princes
vvill, or the lavves (commonly vvholy
thereon depending) that there could be
imagined no neerer vvay to religion,
then to beleeue vvhat our tēporal Lord
and Maiſter liſt. And it is the turpitude
of our Nation through the vvhole
vvorld, vvhereat vve bluſh before ſtrā
                  gers
that ſometimes fall into diſcourſe
of ſuch things, that in one mans memorie
and ſince this ſtrange mutation

began, vve haue had to our Prince, a
man, vvho aboliſhed the Popes authoritie
by his lavves, and yet in other pointes
kept the faith of his fathers: vve haue
had a child, vvho by the like lavves
aboliſhed together vvith the Papacie,
the vvhole ancient religion: vve had a
vvoman, vvho reſtored both againe,
and ſharply puniſhed Proteſtants: and
laſtly her Ma.tie that novv is, vvho by
the like lavves hath long ſince aboliſhed
both againe, and novv ſeuerely
puniſheth Catholikes, as the other did
Proteſtants: and al theſe ſtrange differences
vvithin the compaſſe of about
30 yeres.
               Neither may vve looke for more ſecuritie
or reſt in religion in the times to
come, ſo long as our ſoules ſaluation
and damnation depend vpon our temporal
lavves and Princes. Vvho if they
ſhould for the peoples ſinnes, either by

errour in iudgemēt, or for any vantage
and aduancement of their ſtate, vvhich
often leadeth ſuch mens conſciences,
fall to Arianiſme or apoſtaſie (as great
Emperours haue done, and Princes are
in no leſſe peril of ſuch miſeries, but
much more then others be:) vvith as
great facilitie may they force their ſubiects
to folovv them, and prouide lavves
for them (vvhich alvvaies in ſuch
caſes muſt be counted Gods mere word)
as they haue done in points aforeſaid:
ſpecially vvhen the reſiſtance of the
vvhole Clergie both ſuperior and inferior
ſhal not be therein any vvhit regarded,
as late experience in the firſt
Parliament of the Q. Highnes reigne
teacheth vs.
               In vvhich Parliament,The firſt Parliamēt of this Queene. the determination,
deciſion, and definition of truthes,
or of hereſies and errours, of the true
vvorſhip of God and the falſe, is attributed

to that Court of the States no leſſe,
or rather more, then to the foure firſt
or any other general Coūcel: to vvhich
the deciding of ſuch things is there
graunted vvith this limitation, ſo far as
they can vvarrant their doings by the
expreſſe vvordes of Canonical Scriptures,
and no further: but to the Parliamēt
abſolutely, decreing at the ſame time,
that nothing there determined ſhould
be counted hereſie, errour, or ſchiſme,
vvhat order, decree, ſentence, conſtitution,
or lavv ſo euer vvere to the contrarie,
the holy Scriptures them ſelues not
excepted.
               Al this that Parliamēt did, and vvithal
aboliſhed al the rites of the Catholike
Church, and the right vſe of miniſtring
the holy Sacraments and Sacrifice, preſcribing
a nevv forme, in moſt things
agreing vvith Zuinglianiſme, in ſome
vvith Lutheraniſme: al the Biſhops of

the Realme, moſt graue, learned, and
honorable Prelates, preſent (as hauing
principal place and voice by the lavves
of our Countrie in the ſame) diſſenting,
and diſſuading vvith al their povver
poſsible: the inferior Clergie then alſo
gathered in Conuocation, by moſt
humble remonſtrance oppoſing it ſelf
therevnto: as alſo many vviſe men
both of the ſaid Parliament and abrode,
did ſignifie their much miſlike of the
ſame.
               Thus yet did the ſentence of the Laity
conſiſting onely of Noblemen,
Gētlemen, citizens, and ſome artificers,
preuaile (a monſtruous caſe) and that in
cauſe of religion, not onely againſt al
the Biſhops of the Vniuerſal Church
beſides,Li 4. c. 43. vvhich haue (as S. Ireneus ſaith)
receiued vvith their Epiſcopal ſucceſiō,
the grace and gift of vnderſtanding the
truth: but euen againſt their ovvne

Prelates and Paſtors: vvho (to ſay the
leaſt) muſt needes both by their great
vviſdom, learning, godly life, and by
their vocation, be more like to knovv
the truth and giue true ſentence in matters
belonging to their ovvne profeſſion,
and vvere vvith more reaſon to
be heard then thoſe, vvho neither for
age, learning, nor diuinitie, vvere
comparable to them, and to vvhom
al the ſaid perſons by Gods lavv and
mans did ovve (ſpecially in theſe caſes
of religion) al ſubiection and obedience,
as to the proper Paſtors of their
ſoules.
               Aboue al this, they moreouer at
the ſame time cauſed a forme of othe
to be conceiued concerning the Queenes
ſpiritual Souerainty,The othe of Supremacie. vvhich
ſhould be offered to al Archbiſhops,
Biſhops, and other Eccleſiaſtical perſons,
ſpecially vvhom they knevv

by their former declaration and Proteſtation
againſt it, could not in conſcience
take it, nor vvould againſt
their conſcience receiue it: that vpon
refuſal therof, they might be depoſed,
to vvitte, the Paſtors and parents
euen by their ſheepe and children:
Certaine hungrie companions from
Geneua, ſhaped into ſheepeſkinnes,
vvayting in the meane time to enter
vpon their flockes, as aftervvard
they did: the ſaid Prelates honorably
and gladly ſuſtaining depriuation,
and euer ſince empriſonment
for confeſsion of their faith, vvhereby
and by tracte of time, moſt of
them be happily and gloriouſly deceaſed.
               Theſe ſtrange and vnnatural dealings,
theſe procedings diſhonorable to
her Ma.tie and the Realme, theſe lavves

againſt Gods expreſſe cōmaundements
vvhich preſcribe obedience and ſubiection
to our Prelates, theſe decrees that
limite Gods conſtant and permanent
truth to the mutabilitie of temporal ſtatutes,
to mortal mens vvilles and fanſies:
theſe are the lavves of the Realme
(and not the Ciuil ordinances of our
Prince) that vve refuſe to obey: and
vvhich not onely in our life and doctrine,
but vnto death and yelding our
bloud, vve truſt to vvithſtand: vviſhing
that ſo at the leaſt God vvil haue
mercie on our Countrie, and vvipe
avvay the ignominie of ſuch violent
diſorders, vvhich to all our poſteritie
muſt needes breede ſhame and rebuke,
and to vs Gods indignation.
               Vve liue not then here in this our abſence
from our Coūtrie, any vvhit contrarie
to Gods lavves, as vve be charged,
but againſt mans lavves ſo far, as it is

euident that they be repugnant to the
lavves of God, the Church, and nature:
as by the premiſſes is plaine, and as vve
are able further to proue againſt any
Proteſtant Diuine in the vvorld.
               Yea vve auouch further, that as no
Proteſtant Diuine in Chriſtendom, can
proue vve liue againſt Gods lavves, ſo
no Proteſtant Lavvyer of the Realme
(for the Catholikes of neither ſcience
vvil ſtand againſt vs in this poynt) can
conuince vs, that vve liue contrarie to
the lavves of our Counrrie. Vvhich
vve affirme, not for that onely, that ſuch
lavves be vniuſt, and therfore lightly
bind not in cōſcience: nor for that, that
pertaining to religiō they paſſed vvith
out the conſent of any of the Clergie:
nor for that, that being repugnāt to the
dignitie and priuileges of the Church,
they are againſt the othe of the makers
and of al Chriſtian Princes in due order

conſecrated: but for that they be not
in deede any lavves at al, the makers
lacking competent povver, authoritie
and iuriſdiction to procede iudicially
and authentically, to heare, determine,
define, or giue ſentence in
any ſuch things as be mere Eccleſiaſtical.
               The Parliament is a mere temporal
Court,The court of Parliament. the Biſhops them ſelues hauing
voice there no othervviſe but as Barons
of the Realme, nor hauing authoritie
thereby or in that reſpect, to treat or define
of any matters, other then pertaine
to the ciuil regiment of the ſtate: al the
povver that they or others there haue,
being deriued from the Prince and
Commonvvealth ciuil, vnto vvhom
neither by the lavv of God, nor of nature,
the defining of ſuch matters do belong.
And it is an euident errour, reproueable
by al humane and diuine

learning,The Eccleſiaſtical ſouerainty, and the temporal. that the ſouerainty or ſupremacie
in cauſes Eccleſiaſtical is by nature
or by Chriſtian lavves implied in the
right or title of a temporal King: or
that it euer vvas due or can be due to
any temporal gouernour, Heathen or
Chriſtian, in the vvorld.
               Not to the crovvne of a Heathen
Prince can it belong (vvhoſe Emperial,
Kingly, or Princely povver ouer their
peoples, vvas notvvithſtanding lavvful
and true ſoueraintie, and agreable to
the lavv of nature and Gods ordinance,
of vvhich States the Apoſtles ſpake,
vvhen they charged the Chriſtians to
pray for them and to be ſubiect and
obedient to them, generally through
their Epiſtles: as our Sauiour alſo
did in the Goſpel, concerning the paiment
of tribute) foraſmuch as for
ſome hundred yeres after, there vvere
not many Princes conuerted to Chriſt,

and yet al that vvhile the Church had
her ſeueral regiment. Not to Pagan
Emperours then did it belong (though
they vvere no leſſe Emperial and Kingly
then novv) neither vvas it chalenged
of them: for, the principal Apoſtles
ruled the Church in Rome, vvhē Nero
reigned: likevviſe vvhere the Kingdoms
are reuolted againe (as in al the
Turkes dominion) needes muſt the
Church there haue a ſpiritual regimēt,
vvithout any dependance of the Heathen
Kings: vvhom yet in temporal
matters they obey and ſerue. And therfore
al that the Proteſtants alleage out
of Scriptures, make no more for the
claime of a Chriſtian Prince, then for
the right of the Heathen.
               Againe, not to the crovvne of Kings
or kingdoms, in that they be Chriſtian:
for then the Church, vvhich is Chriſtes
myſtical body or Commonvvealth,

matching and meeting vvith a terrene
or earthly ſtate, ſhould forſake her proper
regiment, iuriſdiction, and forme of
gouernement receiued immediatly of
Chriſt, and yeld the ſame and it ſelf to
the earthly povver vvhich the Apoſtle
calleth humanam creaturam.1. Pet. 2. By vvhich
meanes, vvhen ſo euer a king or Countrie
is conuerted, the Church ſhould
come and ſubmit to them, and not they
to Chriſt and his Church, vvhich muſt
needes be moſt abſurd: Princes and
peoples conuerted, alvvaies ſubmitting
them ſelues to Chriſt and his lavves,
not dravving the Gouernours of the
Church or any perſon therof to more
ſubiection then they vvere before their
Chriſtianitie, yea often rather rem
                     •…
                  
                  ting
ſome of that for Chriſtes honour.
And therfore the holy Scriptures informe
vs by euident ſpeaches, that conuerted
Kingdōs muſt ſerue the Church.

The Kingdom and Nation,Eſa. 60. ſaith the Prophete,
that ſerueth not thee (meaning the
Church) ſhal periſh.Ep. 169. And S. Auguſtine,
Our Lord, ſaith he, wil not ſail to defend his
Church, who hath made al earthly kingdoms ſubiect
to his yoke within her lappe ſpred through
out the whole world.
               Kings by receiuing Chriſtes religion
are not become Chriſtes Maiſters, or
Lordes ouer the Church as it is his ſpiritual
and myſtical Commonvvealth,
but are called by the Prophete her
foſter fathers,Eſ. 49. 60. as Queenes be alſo named
her nources: becauſe it belongeth to
the earthly povver that God hath giuen
them, to defend the lavves of the
Church, to cauſe them to be executed,
and to puniſh rebelles and tranſgreſſors
of the ſame.
               The Church then, liue ſhe among
the Heathens, liue ſhe vvith the Chriſtians,
muſt haue and hold that forme
of regiment and Commonvvealth

vvhich Chriſt immediatly inſtituted,
and vvas not choſen, made, or created
by the peoples ordinance and conſent
(vvhich is the origine of al other humane
ſtates and formes of Politie) the
holy Ghoſt perpetually aſsiſting, protecting,
and propagating the ſaid ſpiritual
regiment in al degrees and functions,
as in Apoſtles, Biſhops, Prieſts
and the reſt, to the end of the vvorld.
And to theſe the Apoſtle ſaid,Act. 20. Attend to
your ſelf and to your whole flocke, ouer which
the holy Ghoſt hath put you to rule the Church.
Of theſe he ſaid to vs,Heb. 13. Obey your Rulers
and be ſubiect to them, for they watch as being
to giue accoumpt for your ſoules.
               This regiment is not the right of any
earthly crovvne, Prince, or State: they
al, if they be Chriſtians, ovving ſubiection
to the Paſtors of their ſoules
and vnto the Church of Chriſt. The
Church neuer yelded it, nor can yeld
it vnto them. It is not agreable to them

by nature, as vve ſee in the Heathen: it
can not be chalenged by their Chriſtianitie,
by vvhich them ſelues are bound
to obey the Church and may not commaund
it: no earthly Commonvvealth
can giue or conferre it to their Prince,
becauſe they can not giue that vvhich
they haue not by any natural facultie.
The Prince therfore neither taking it
of the people, nor hauing it by birth or
othervviſe, can not communicate it to
Parliament, and conſequently can not
poſsibly make lavves, heare or determine
by him ſelf, Parliament, or any other
Court in ſuch ſort ſubiected vnto him,
of the Churches regiment.
               And ſtrange it is (ſpecially in that
firſt aſſembly of the States) hovv they
could attempt to bring the Churches
ſpiritual and proper regimēt into conſultation,
iudicial cognition, and deliberation,
before the Prince or them ſelues

vvere found lavvful iudges in ſuch
caſes: no ſtatute then that ſtood in force,
graunting them any ſuch povver,
nor no ſuch thing any vvay lavvful othervviſe
then by the falſe preſuppoſition
of the Princes Eccleſtaſtical ſupremacie,
vvhich yet vvas not by lavves
(nor in truth by nature could be) agniſed
before the determination therof in
Parliament. Vvhich hauing no legal
meanes to deliberate of the matter,
could much leſſe giue ſentence for it.
               But ſuch knottes vvhē they cā not be
looſed,Knottes brokē not looſed. thē they are bold to breake thē,
as they did an other like inſoluble, in
the next Parliament, about creating
their Biſhops. Vvhich being deficient
in the foundation, can hardly be amended.
               In truth the Prince or Court of Parliament
hath no more lavvful meanes
to giue order to the Church and Clergie

in theſe things, then they haue to
make lavves for the hierarchies of Angels
in heauen. To bring in theſe nouelties
many a hard ſhift is ſought, God
knovveth: and of al abſurdities this paradoxe
of the Supremacie paſſeth, the
Lutherans flatly controvvling it in general,Magdeburg. in praef. Cēt. 7.
and Caluin him ſelf vvith al the
Puritās at the leaſt,Calu in 7 ca. Amos. much miſliking and
reprehending the firſt graunt therof to
King Harrie. for it is al one to be head
of the Church, and to be cheefe Gouernour
in cauſes Eccleſiaſtical. And it
may be thought, that it is for ſome ſuch
quidditie, that their B. of Canterburie
hath been reſtrained. The truth is, novv
after they haue flattered the Prince there
vvith ſufficiently, for the eſtabliſhing
of their religion, they vvould gladly
haue the ſpiritual ſouerainty thē ſelues,
the better to eſtabliſh other nevv deuiſes
of their ovvne: vvherein if they

might do as they liſt, ſquare ſhould haue
been round long ſince, and of al
daies in the yere, ſunday vvere like
to be faſting day. But hovv ſo euer ſuch
giue or deny the ſame to the Prince, it
is plaine againſt al reaſon and nature,The abſurdities of a temporal Princes Eccleſiaſtical ſouerainty.
and that much more in a vvoman then
a man, vvhich is not capable therof by
her ſexe. It giueth povver to the Queene
to conferre that to others (as to the
Prieſts and Biſhops, to preach, miniſter
Sacramēts, haue cure of ſoules, and ſuch
like) vvhich ſhe neither hath, nor can
haue, nor do, her ſelf. It giueth her that
may neither preach nor ſpeake in publike
of matters of religion,1. Cor. 14. to do that
vvhich is much more,1. Tim. 2. euen to preſcribe
by her ſelf or her deputes or lavves authoriſed
onely by her, to the preachers
vvhat to preach, vvhich vvay to vvorſhip
and ſerue God, hovv and in vvhat
forme to miniſter the Sacraments, to

puniſh and depriue, teach and correct
them, and generally to preſcribe and
appoint vvhich vvay ſhe vvil be gouerned
in ſoul.
               It maketh the body aboue the ſoul,
the temporal regiment aboue the ſpiritual,
the earthly Kingdom aboue Chriſtes
body myſtical. It maketh the
ſheepe aboue the Paſtor: It giueth her
povver to commaund them, vvhom
and vvherein ſhe is bound to obey: It
giueth povver to the ſubiect to be iudge
of the Iudges,Ep. 55. nu. 2. yea and of God him ſelf,
as S. Cypriā ſpeaketh: It maketh her free
frō Eccleſiaſtical diſcipline, frō vvhich
no true child of gods familie is exēpted.
               It derogateth frō Chriſtes Prieſthod,
vvhich both in his ovvne perſon, and
in the Church, is aboue his Kingly dignitie.
It deuideth (vvhich is a matter
of much importance) the ſtate of the
Catholike Church and the holy communion

or ſocietie of al Chriſtian men
in the ſame,Aug. li. 2. cont. 2. ep. Gaud. c. 25. into as many partes not
communicant one vvith an other nor
holding one of an other, as there be
vvordly Kingdoms differing by cuſtoms,
lavves, and maners, ech from
other: vvhich is of moſt pernicious ſequele,
and againſt the very natiue qualitie
of the moſt perfect coniunction,
ſocietie, vnitie, and entercourſe of the
vvhole Church and euery Prouince and
perſon therof together. It openeth the
gappe to al kind of diuiſions, ſchiſmes,
ſectes, and diſorders.
               It maketh al Chriſtian Biſhops,
Prieſts, and vvhat other ſo euer borne
out of the Realme, forainers and
vſurpers in al iuriſdiction Eccleſiaſtical
tovvards vs: and that there can
be no iuriſdiction ouer Engliſh mens
ſoules, but proceding and depending
of her ſoueraine right therein.

Vvhich is directly againſt Chriſtes expreſſe
commaundement and commiſſion
giuen to Peter firſt, and then to al
the Apoſtles, of preaching, baptizing,
remitting, retaining, binding and looſing,
ouer al the vvorld, vvithout difference
of temporal ſtate, or dependance
of any mortal Prince therein.
               It keepeth the Realme from obediē
                  ce
to general Councels, vvhich haue
been or ſhal be gathered in forraine
Countries: It taketh avvay al cōuenient
meanes of gathering, holding, or executing
any ſuch Councels and their decrees,
as appeared by refuſing to come
to the late Councel of Trent, notvvithſtanding
the Popes Meſſengers, and
letters of other great Princes, vvhich
requeſted and inuited thē to the ſame.
Vvhen a realme or Prince is in errour,
it taketh avvay al meanes of reducing
them to the truth againe: no ſubiection

being acknovvledged to Councels or
Tribunals abrode, al other Biſhops, Patriarches,
Apoſtles, Chriſt and al (becauſe
they vvere and be forrainers) not hauing
iuriſdiction or ſufficient authoritie
to define againſt Engliſh Sectaries
and errours. Finally if this iuriſdiction
ſpiritual be alvvaies of right a ſequele
of the crovvne and ſcepter of al Kings,
aſſuredly Chriſt nor none of his Apoſtles
could othervviſe enter to conuert
Countries, preach, and exerciſe iuriſdiction
ſpiritual, vvithout Caeſars and others
the kings of the Countries licence
and delegation.
               To conclude then, theſe are the lavves
of the Realme (if vve may ſo call ſuch
violences) to vvhich vve cannot conforme
our ſelues in conſcience, except
vve like to periſh euerlaſtingly.
               Vvherein though vve may ſeeme to
haue ſaid ynough for our defenſe, yet

vve vvil lay before al our deereſt Countrie-men
ſome breefe ſpeaches of the
principal perſons of Gods Church,The ancient fathers agaīſt the Eccleſiaſtical iuriſdiction of temporal Princes. to
giue them a taſt of their iudgemēt, concerning
ſuch vſurpation of ſpiritual Soueraintie
by ſome Emperours of old time:
that they may ſee this caſe to be already
ruled vnto al that haue faith and
the feare of God.
               S. Athanaſius the Great,Ep. ad ſolit. vit. degentes. one vſed to
ſuch ſtormes as this, ſaith of Conſtantius
the Arian Emperour: What hath he
left for Antichriſt? for yet againe in place of Eccleſiaſtical
cognition he hath appointed his palace
the iudicial ſeat of ſuch cauſes, and made him
ſelf the cheefe iudge and arbiter of our controuerſies.
And who ſeing him to make him ſelf the
ruler of Biſhops, and preſident of ſpiritual iudgements,
would not iuſtly deeme him to be that very
abominatiō of deſolation foretold by Daniel?
And in an other place of the ſame
vvorke: When was it euer heard of ſince the
beginning, that the Churches iudgement did depend
of the Emperours authoritie? or who euer
accepted that for lawful iudgement?
               
                  
The renovvmed Oſius vvriteth to
the ſame Emperour:Cited of S. Athanaſīus in the ep. aforeſaid. Meddle not o Emperour
in cauſes Eccleſiaſtical, nor do thou commaund
vs in this kind, but leaue ſuch things to
vs rather. God hath giuen thee the Empire, but to
vs the Church. At the ſame time, and to
the ſame Emperour,Suidas in verbo Leontius. thus ſaith Leontius
the Martyr: I maruel that thy vocation being
for other things, thou meddleſt with theſe matters.
Thy charge is of Ciuil and Martial affaires
onely, and yet thou wilt needes be Preſident of
Eccleſiaſtical cauſes. Sainct Hilarie alſo
to the ſame Emperour vvriteth thus:
we beſech thy Clemencie to prouide,Li. imperf. 2. ad Conſtantium. that charge
be giuen to al iudges of Prouinces, that hereafter
they preſume not, nor vſurpe the hearing of Eccleſiaſtical
cauſes.
               S. Ambroſe to the yonger Valentinian
the Emperour thus auſvvereth:
Vexe not thy ſelf ſo far,Ep. 33. ad ſororem. o Emperour, to thinke
that thy Emperial right pertaineth to Diuine
things, exalt not thy ſelf aboue thy meaſure. For
it is written, Giue to Caeſar that which is Caeſars,
and to God that vvhich belongeth to God.
the Palace for the Emperour, but the Churches
are for the Prieſt. Againe the ſame holy
Doctor:Ibidem. When didſt thou euer heare,

moſt clement Prince, that laie men haue iudged
Biſhops? ſhal vve bend by flatterie ſo far, that forgetting
the right of our Prieſthod, vve ſhould
yeld vp to others that vvhich God hath commended
to vs? And recounting the vvhole courſe of
holy Scriptures and al times paſt, vvho can deny
but that in the cauſe of faith, in the cauſe of faith
I ſay, Biſhops haue iudged of Emperours, and not
Emperours of Biſhops?
               S. Gregorie Nazianzene alſo vvriting
to his citizens,Orat. ad ciu. Nazianz. thus turneth his
ſpeach to the Emperour his Prince:
You alſo hath Chriſtes law ſubiected to my Tribunal.
for we haue a Soueraintie and that more
excellent and perfect. vnles the ſpirit ſhould ſubmit
it ſelf to the fleſh, and the heauenly things
yeld to earthly. Which my libertie of ſpeach I
feare not but thou wilt allow, ſeeing thou art an
holy ſheepe of my ſacred fold, and a pupil of the
great Paſtor, and wel inſtructed by the holy Ghoſt
from thine infancie.
               And to this purpoſe S. Chryſoſtom
moſt expreſly giueth vvarning, that ſpiritual
gouernement and vvoman ſexe
are not cōpatible. for thus he vvriteth:
Why did our Lord ſhead his bloud?Li. 2. de Sacerdotio. truely to redeeme
thoſe ſheepe, the cure of which he committed
both to Peter and alſo to his ſucceſſors.

And a litle after, when it cometh to the
gouernement of the Church and committing the
charge of ſo many ſoules, al womākind muſt needes
vvholy giue place to the burden and greatnes
therof, and a great number of men alſo.
               Thus al theſe highly vertuous and
learned fathers vvrite, thus they beleued,
thus they behaued them ſelues
tovvard their Princes, and yet they vvere
not traitours, they liued not contrarie
to Gods lavves, nor any iuſt lavves of
man. Vve beleue no othervviſe, vve
teach no othervviſe, vve behaue our
ſelues no othervviſe, vve liue againſt
Gods and our Countries lavves no othervviſe,
then theſe noble Clerkes
did, novv ſo glorious in heauen and
earth.An exhortation to the Q. Maieſtie.
               
               And it cometh here to our cogitations
(as often els in our prayers to almightie
God) that it vvould pleaſe
him to touch our Princes hart before he
call her to his dreadful iudgement, to

admit into her graue conſideration our
former reaſons ſo aſſuredly grounded
on the Scriptures and lavv of Nature,
of the indecencie, incongruitie, impoſſibilitie,
that temporal Princes (ſpecially
vvomen) ſhould rule and commaund
the Church, Biſhops, and Paſtors of
their ovvne ſoules, and that in things
merely concerning the ſoul.
               But vvhat ſhould vve deſire that her
Ma.tie may vouchſafe to heare vs poore
vvormes and vvretches?The Biſhops and Clergie of England empriſoned. At leaſt
(alas) that ſhe vvould not contemne
the vvhole conſent of al the learned
Biſhops and Prieſts of her Realme, teſtifying
this truth once in Parliament,
and aftervvard by their continual empriſonment
and death in the ſame: that
ſhe vvould conceiue deliberatly of ſo
much holy bloud meekely yelded for
the teſtimonie of this truth, ſpecially of
that noble paire, famous Fiſher B. of

Rocheſter,B. Fiſher, S. Tho. the beſt learned of al the
Clergie of that Realme for many ages,More, the Carthuſians, and others.
and renovvmed More the greateſt Clerke
of al the Laity: ſuch a coople as any
other Chriſtian Nation vvould haue
bought vvith millions, but thought
vnvvorthy to liue by the lavves of ours:
that ſhe vvould vouchſafe to looke
backe to al holy Biſhops, learned Diuines,
vviſe Lavvyers, and the faithful
Princes her Highnes noble predeceſſors
of al ages paſt, none of them
euer knovving or admitting any ſuch
title of Supremacie, reigning vvithout
it in al glorie, ſecuritie, and felicitie:
No Crovvne or Kingdom
euer leſſe mighty, ſure, and honorable,
for ioyning vvith or liuing vnder
the Churches compaſſe and regiment,
but many one periſhing by forſaking
the ſame.
               
                  
Or if domeſtical teſtimonies be in
this kind ſuſpicious, yet that the ſayings
of theſe ancient fathers void of affectiō,
feare, flattery, partiality, may find place
in ſo generous a mind. They alſo ſo many
vvorldes paſt, haue giuen ſentence
againſt that ſtrange claime of ſpiritual
iuriſdiction, vvith your Biſhops impriſoned,
your poore ſubiects baniſhed,
your Catholike Prieſts and people afflicted,
vvith al your aunceſtours.
O Lord Chriſt, o Madam my Liege:
ſhould Chryſoſtom, Ambroſe, Gregorie,
Hilarie, Leontius, Oſius, Athanaſius
and the reſt, not be heard in your Parliament
be depoſed, be empriſoned, be
executed? No, it vvould not agree vvith
your good nature, vviſdom, and clemencie.
Heare them then for your ſoules
ſake, vvithout the ſaluation vvherof,
al theſe mortal ioyes, titles, crovvnes
and Kingdoms ſhal turne you (vvhich

God of his infinite mercie forbid) to immortal
miſerie.
               The very duety of our Prieſthod, the
zeale of God, and the honour and reſpect
of your Princely ſtate, moue vs in
al loyal humilitie to vvarne your Ma.tie
of that, vvhich being neceſſarie to your
ovvne, and the vvhole Realmes eternal
good, may not, nor can not (in that
preeminent height of dignitie and contrarie
lavves) be told your Ma.tie at home:
moſt humbly vpon our knees deſiring
pardon for our plaineſſe and ſinceritie,
for his ſake, of vvhom you alſo
and al earthly Princes muſt aſke pardō
for your ſinnes.
               Though your Ma.tie in yonger yeres,
your iudgemēt, knovvledge, and experience,
not then ſo mature as aftervvard,
and at the beginning of your reigne,
vvhen the ſenſe and feeling of ſome rigour
tovvard your noble perſon in the

former gouernemēt, vvas yet freſh, and
had ſomevvhat alienated your Highnes
mind from the Church and ſtate
Catholike, and much more by the forcible
motions of others, perſuading you
to alteration, vpon opinion of better ſecurity
of your ſcepter, vvhich vvas an
vntrue and an vndutiful ſuggeſtion:
though your Ma.tie vvere then in maner
by importunitie induced to chaunge
(for vve haue been credibly enformed,
that of your ovvne inclinatiō you
vvere not deſirous, but very loth to admit,
being a vvoman and the only vvoman
that euer did, the title of the Churches
gouernemēt:) Yet novv, Madam,
after ſo many yeres of proſperous regiment,
your ſeat eſtabliſhed in long
peace and ſecuritie, your mind endued
vvith more mature knovvledge and
experience, your daies dravving you
neerer and neerer your death, iudgement,

and accoumpt, vvhich be neceſſarie
cogitatiōs for Princes, no leſſe, but
rather ſomevvhat more, then for poore
men: Conſider deeply, hovv to reduce
your ſelf, and your Realme, to the
Catholike ſociety of ſo many noble Prelates
and Princes, preſent and paſt: hovv
your Ma.tie may giue ſolace to innumerable
oppreſſed ſoules your loyal ſubiectes,
that out of baniſhments, priſonments,
chaines, and dungeons, lift vp
their hands and hartes to God and your
Ma.tie for the ſame.
               Your Highnes noble father (as of
vvorthy and vviſe mē vve haue heard)
vvas fully determined to giue ouer the
title of Supremacie, and vnite him ſelf
and his Realme to the See and Church
Apoſtolike againe: but being preuented
by death, could not accompliſh his
moſt neceſſarie and honorable deſignement,
and therfore may be both an

example and a vvarning to your Ma.tie
the laſt of al his deereſt Children, to
accompliſh that thing, vvhich to his
great vviſdom, at the very going out
of this life, vvas thought ſo neceſſarie
for his ſoul, his people and poſterity.
Vvhich diuers Princes and Prouinces
begin novv to thinke vpon more
ſeriouſly then before (as of Polonia,
Suetia, Tranſyluania) knovving
vvhy and of vvhom S. Hierom ſaid,
Qui tecum non colligit,Ep. 57. ad 
                        •
                     amaſum Papam. ſpargit: and finding
it the honorableſt condition to ioyne
to that Catholike Queene, to vvhom
God hath giuen the vvhole vvorld
for dourie, as one of the fathers ſpeaketh.
               Incline your hart for Chriſtes loue,
gratious Lady, to our humble ſute,
made for your ovvne ſoul: and be
not offended vvith your poore ſubiects,

for mouing your Ma.tie in ſo plaine
termes, in Gods and the Churches
cauſe. Vvherein if our Lord of his
ſecret iudgement permit vs not to be
heard, yet in doing ſo dutiful and endeuour,
vve can not looſe our labours,
for vvhich vve muſt be alvvaies ready
(as God ſhal pleaſe) to looſe our
liues.
               In the meane time, not repugning
nor reſiſting any your Ma.ties or the
Realmes temporal lavves, vve truſt no
reaſonable man can reproue vs, if vve
refuſe to be obedient to the pretended
lavves of religion, vvhich vve thinke in
conſcience, and can proue, to be againſt
the lavves of God, and not conſonant
to any iuſt and truely called lavves of
our Countrie.
            
            
               
               
                  ❧That the Students of the ſaid Seminaries
be not trained vp in erroneous
doctrine.
CHAP. V.
               
                  FOR our liuing againſt
Gods lavves and the
Realmes, vve haue giuē
our accoūpt. And novv
concerning the doctrine
vvherein vve traine
our ſcholers, vve are charged that it is
falſe and erroneous, grounded on fanſies
and vaine traditions of men, and
not Gods mere vvord. Vvhich accuſations,
phraſes, and faſhion of ſpeach,
are proceded from the nevv pulpits,
vvhich borovved them of old Sectes.
For they are common to al ſuch ſortes,
in euery age and diuerſitie of opinions
repugnant to the Catholike truth and
Church.
               
                  
And that the old Maiſters of errours
did ſo ſpeake,Al Heretikes vaunt of Scriptures. vve giue this example
out of S. Auguſtine, vvho reporteth
Maximinus the Arian Biſhopsvvordes
vnto him thus:Cōt. Maximinū li. 1. in principio. If thou alleage any thing of the
Sctiptures which is common to vs al, we muſt
needes heare it: but theſe ſayings that be not in
the Sctiptures, haue no weight with vs in any
caſe: ſeeing the Lord admoniſheth vs and ſaith,
without cauſe they ſerue me, teaching the commaundements
and precepts of men. And againe
in the ſame booke: I wiſh and
pray alwaies to be a ſcholer of the holy Scriptures:
if thou alleage any where that which is written,
we wil be diſciples of holy writte.
               This felovv (you ſee) after the ordinary
of Heretikes, vvas bold to compare
him ſelf to no leſſe Clerke then Saint
Auguſtine, and to offer him the combat
alſo, vvith this prety prouiſo, that
he vvould be vrged vvith nothing but
Scriptures, vvhich novv a daies is called
the mere vvord of God, making exception
againſt al other things that Catholike
men vſe to alleage for the true

meaning of the holy Scriptures, as againſt
the fanſies, precepts, and traditions
of men. Vvhich vulgar flight, rather
then fight, of ſuch felovves the ſaid
Doctor contemneth, not vouchſauing
it an anſvver, but calling his aduerſarie
to the matter: telling him, that theſe
and ſuch like vaine and void floriſhes
be cōmon to al ſortes and ſides, as they
be in deede: not only Catholikes (to
vvhom as vvel the poſſeſsion, cuſtodie,
and vſe of the Scriptures as the true
ſenſe and interpretation of the ſame do
properly and onely appertaine) iuſtly
chalenging them, but al Sectes of Heretikes,
be their opinions neuer ſo improbable,
and learning neuer ſo ſmal,
making claime that vvay, and preſumptuouſly
contemning and cōdemning
al the learning and the vviſdom of the
vvorld or Church, for folly and phantaſie.
               
                  
There is not the pooreſt artificer of
al the Anabaptiſtes in Holland, or of
the Puritans, Brethren of loue, and Proteſtants
in England, nor the yongeſt
Grammarian, or Logician in the Vniuerſities
or ſchooles of Sectaries: but he
vvil oppoſe him ſelf boldly againſt al
the Church, vvith this pretext alvvaies,
that Gods mere vvord (ſo they call their
Bible falſely, corruptly, and deceitfully
tranſlated, together vvith as foul,
fantaſtical, and falſe ſuppoſitions deduced
out of the ſame) muſt be folovved
before al mens doctrines and inuentions.
               And generally al Sectmaiſters, to abuſe
the people (them ſelues ſhamefully
deceiued before) make the ſtate of
the controuerſie betvvixt them and the
Catholikes their aduerſaries to be this:
Vvhether they grounding their doctrine
on Gods mere vvord, are to be

beleued rather then their aduerſaries,
founding theirs vpon mans traditions
and fantaſies. Vvhere that is not the
poynt of the doubt, but this: vvhether
(the vvord and vvritten letter being
redde, acknovvledged, and common
to both) they haue the true ſenſe and
vnderſtanding of it, rather then vve:
and, vvhether they folovv fanſie, that
be ledde by their ovvne priuate ſpirit,
or vve, that leane to the Spirit of the
Church.
               Novv then al men muſt knovv,Heretikes folow their owne priuate ſenſe of Scriptures, Catholikes the Churches iudgemēt and conſent of ancient fathers. that
as it is the propertie of the Proteſtants
and ſuch others, to call the ſenſe that
them ſelues of pride and ignorance make
choiſe of, Gods mere vvord: ſo alſo, to
terme the holy Churches ſenſe or interpretation,
mans fanſie or inuention. Vvheras
euer the priuate, ſingular, nevv and
particular ſpirit, is fanſie: and the common,
vniuerſal, old and Catholike interpretation,

is the true and mere vvord
of God: vvhervpon our doctrine and
trayning vp the Studēts in theſe Catholike
Colleges are grounded.
               And the very drift of Catholike
ſchooles in theſe daies muſt be, to dravv
men from phantaſie, priuate imagination,
and liking of their ovvne iudgement,
to the truſting of al the learned
fathers of al ages, to the beleefe of the
Catholike Church, according to a Chriſtians
profeſsion: to obey in doubtes of
doctrine the holy Councels and other
authentical Iudgements, vvhich Chriſt
hath left in his Church for that purpoſe.
to vvhich end vve do ſvveare al
that take degree (according to the ordinance
of the holy Councel of Trent)
that they ſhal,Seſſ. 4. during their life, in al
their preaching, teaching, diſputing,
vvriting, and othervviſe, expound
the holy Scriptures as neere as they can,

ſecundum vnanimem conſenſum Patrum,
according to the vniforme and agreable
ſenſe of the Fathers.
               This is not to bring vp men according
to fanſies,Io. 14. 16. but according to the promiſed
Spirit of truth. This is to auoid
the particular preſumptiō of Heretikes,
vvho are vvholy ſo caried avvay vvith
the priuate ſpirit of pride and contention,
that they frame to them ſelues
certaine platformes of doctrine, according
to euery of their particular Sectes,
vvhich they call their analogie of faith,
and dravv Gods vvord vnto it, making
it to ſovvnd and ſay vvhatſoeuer they
dreame of.Li. 32. c. 9. cōt. Fauſt. And therfore S. Auguſtine
noted this to be the propertie of Fauſtus
the Manichée and the like, ſo to
handle the matter by much talking of
Scriptures, that al the authoritie therof
might be ſubiect to them ſelues, and
yeld no other meaning then their fanſie
allovved of.
               
                  
To auoid therfore theſe partial ſpirits,
vve imitate in our learning and teaching
(as neere as the time and opportunitie
of things do ſuffer vs) holy S.
Baſil and S. Gregorie Nazianzene,
of vvhom thus Ruffinus vvriteth:Ec. hiſt. li. 2. c. 9.
For the ſpace of thirtene yeres they ſtudied only
the bookes of holy Scripture, and the vnderſtanding
of the ſame they folowed not of their owne
preſumption, but of the vvritings and anthoritie
of their forefathers, vvho alſo them ſelues vvere
vvel knovven to haue receiued the rule of vnderſtanding
by ſucceſſion from the Apoſtles.
               Vve teach and learne humility and
obedience to our Prelates: vve teach
all ours, to knovv and keepe thoſe traditions
vvhich the Apoſtle commendeth
to his flockes,2. Theſſ. 2. both vvritten and vnvvrittē:
thoſe precepts of the Ancients,
and the like of our Superiors,Act. 15. 16. that the
faithful in the Actes vvere cōmaunded
to obſerue, according to the difference
of things and times, preſcribed by the
gouernours of our ſoules: In al doubtes

vve reſolue our ſelues by the definition
of holy Doctors, Councels, and See
Apoſtolike, to vvhich Chriſt hath giuen
the Spirit of truth, the right ſenſe
of holy Scriptures, and the grace of diſcerning
the falſe priuate ſpirits of errour,
from the true common Spirit of
Chriſtian Catholike people.
               Vve teach them, that ſuch precepts
and traditions as be in Scriptures commended
vnto vs, and al other holy
Churches decrees, are vntruely called
the traditions or commaundements of
men, in the ſenſe of Heretikes: for that
they be the Ordinances of the holy
Ghoſt, vvho continually aſsiſteth our
lavvful Paſtor in the due regiment of
our ſoules. Vve teach them, that the
Scriptures be hard, and high, and many
vvaies miſconſtrued to damnation: that
Manes, Arius, Macedonius, Eutyches,
Sabellius, Pelagius, though they redde

the Scriptutes, and as much vaunted thē
ſelues therof, as the Caluiniſts novv do,
yet erred and miſconſtrued them ſhamefully,
and that the Proteſtants therfore
may ſo do, and in deede do, folovving
the like particular, contentious,
and diſobedient ſpirits, as they
did.
               Vve tel thē of S. Auguſtines experiēce,Li. de ago. chriſt. c. 16.
That Heretikes by daily contentions and fightes,
raiſe vp miſtes and ſmoke vnto them ſelues, that
they can not conceiue the truth, vvhich is hardly
ſeen euē of a ſtil and quiet mind. And againe,Ib. c. 4.
Heretikes piking out ſuch ſentēces and chapters
of Scripture as ſimple men vnderſtand not, by
them do deceiue the ignorant ſoules, which by
curioſitie are eaſily miſledde: becauſe euery vnlearned
ſoul is curious. But he that hath well learned
the Catholike faith ſpred throughout the
vvhole vvorld, and is armed vvith good maners
and true pietie, can not be deceiued.
               Vve teach our Scholers,The ancient fathers more like to vnderſtād the Scriptures, thē the new preachers. that the ancient
fathers of al ages agreing together,
are more like to vnderſtand the
Scriptures, then the Proteſtāts: and that

if humility make any thing in this caſe
(as it doth al) they vvere more humble
then the Proteſtants: if ſtudie and diligence
be required, they paſſe them: if
great knovvledge in al ſciences, our
good felovves be not comparable: if the
tonges, diuers had the cheefe of them
naturally, vvherof ours get but a ſmal
taſt by art: if much exerciſe of reading,
conferring, comparing, expounding
the Scriptures, help to vnderſtād them,
hovv far they excel our delicate Doctors,
their vvorkes and infinite treatiſes
do vvitneſſe: if prayer ſerue any thing
for attaining truth, and Gods ſpirit
(vvithout vvhich no ſuch verities cā be
knovven:) ſurely to cōpare onely their
deuotions, vvatchings, faſtes, ſacrifices,
to theſe companions endeuours, vvere
a great iniurie and ridiculous: if to be
void of vvordly diſtractions, to liue
ſingle and chaſt (vvhich to the onely

ſtudie of Philoſophie vvas of old
thought conuenient) profit to the
knovvledge of Diuinitie, the Proteſtants
haue no great aduantage: if Gods
great graces and vertues, euen to the
vvorkes of miracles, and ſuſtaining
Martyrdom, and ſo high holines of life
that they are beleued of al Catholike
men (and not denyed of Heretikes) to
be in heauen, help to the vnderſtāding
of Gods vvord, that preeminence aboue
Proteſtants they haue alſo. Finally, if
the time of their liuing in this vvorld,
vvas by much more then a thouſand
yeres, in diuers of them, neerer to Chriſt
then ours is, and thereby they might
very eaſily trace out the Apoſtles doctrine,
by the report of not many ages
before them, in theſe things novv
doubted of, that aduantage alſo they
had beyond the Proteſtants. Al theſe
things, vvith vvhat other preſcriptions

ſo euer any Catholikes haue had againſt
Heretikes in al age, vve haue
againſt the Proteſtants in the moſt euident
ſort that can be. So that vve may
very fitly ſay as S.Li. 2. cont. Iulian. in 
                        •
                     ine. Auguſtine did by the
like compariſon, onely changing the
Heretikes names: Hath long time ſo
confounded heauen and earth, light
and darknes, that Luther, Caluin, Zuinglius,
Bucer, Beza do ſee: and Hilarie,
Gregorie, Ambroſe, Hierom, Chryſoſtom,
and the reſt are blind?
               Therfore if either grace, cōmon ſenſe,
diuine or humane probabilitie vvil
ſerue, our Schooles cary al vvith them
againſt the Aduerſaries: if the expreſſe
vvordes of Scriptures may preuail, vve
haue them a thouſand times more cleere
for vs, then the Aduerſaries haue
for them: if the ſenſe muſt be ſought
for, vve haue as many helps of nature,
of learning, and of grace (honour and

thankes be to God) as they haue, to find
it out: the ſentence is giuen for vs, and
againſt our Aduerſaries, in al the Tribunals
of Gods Church. Al Vniuerſities,
al Colleges, al Churches, al Biſhoprickes,
al Monaſteries, al monuments
of Chriſtianitie vvere made by and for
Catholikes, and for Proteſtants none:
Al the ſoules of our Chriſtian fathers, al
the Saints in heauen, al their actions,
vvorkes, vvritings, liues and deaths profeſſe
for vs. Therfore if our doctrine be
erroneous, there is no truth, nor can be,
no God, Chriſt, religion, nor ſaluation.
Vvhich Atheiſme is the end of al theſe
vnhappy reuolts from the vnitie of
Gods people.
               And for the particular points of our
doctrine Catholike, vve haue, and diuers
other learned in baniſhment haue
before vs, by ſundrie bookes in our vulgare
tonge, defended them vvith al

maner of learning and proofes, that the
Proteſtants them ſelues required, and
haue refuted the contrary inuincibly.
By vvhich combat in vvriting bookes,
though they vvere the chalengers,M. Iuel. and
promiſed for the entertainemēt therof,
or at leaſt vviſhed in ſhevv of vvordes,
al freedom and impunitie, yet aftervvard
they vvere driuen to forbid the
entering, hauing, or reading of al our
vvorkes. Vvherevpon madde I. Pace
meeting one day vvith M. Iuel (called
the B. of Saliſburie, but not ſecundum
vſum Sarū) the Proteſtāts chāpion, ſaluted
his L. courtly, and ſaid, Novv my Lord,
ꝙ he, you may be at reſt vvith theſe felovves,
for you are quit by Proclamatiō.
               Neuertheles the Aduerſaries haue
not ceaſed to make ſhevv of anſvver
to diuers of the ſaid Catholikes vvritings,
but vvith ſuch il grace in the
ſight of al vviſe men, that they haue rather

furthered our cauſe, then their ovvne.
For their anſvver is nothing els but a
plaine running avvay, like vnto ſome
covvardly dogges, that fleing from the
fight, yet in running avvay looke backe,
and barke, and bay at their enimie or
the game: vvhich any man of iudgement
may ſone eſpie.
               Alleage them Scriptures,Their euaſions and foul ſhiftes in anſvvering the Catholikes. it is not Canonical:
alleage that vvhich them ſelues
acknovvledge to be Canonical, they
corrupt it vvith falſe tranſlation, deceitful
alteration, fantaſtical gloſing, ſuch
as neuer came to any vviſe faithful mās
mind before. Alleage them Doctors,
they deny the bookes: alleage others, or
their bookes confeſſed, they ſay they
vvere in a blind age: of ſome, that they
folovved the errors of the Gentility: of
al together, that they vvere men. Alleage
ſacred Councels, they vvil not beleeue
them vvithout expreſſe Scriptures.

Vvhen vve reply, yea but vvhy beleeue
you not theſe men, and Saints, and iudicial
meanes of trial of the true ſenſe of
Scriptures, ſeing you are but men alſo
your ſelues, and a litle vvorſe men then
they? then at length they come to the
ſpirit of God, vvhich they arrogate to
thē ſelues, and deny it to Gods Church,
Prieſts, and Councels, to vvhom it vvas
promiſed.
               And being at this exigent, they
flee from the queſtion of doctrine, to
liues and maners of Popes, Prelates,
and Prieſts: as though there vvere any
creature liuing more profane and impure,
then the preacher Proteſtant: or
al vvere true, vvhich the deepe hatred
and malice of Heretikes feine againſt
Gods Prieſts: or the vulgar vices of
humane frailety, vvere the fruites by
vvhich falſe teachers be tried: or vve
for the condemmation of the Proteſtants

doctrine, charged them onely or
ſpecially vvith the ſinnes incident to
mens infirmitie of euery ſort, and not
rather vvith ſuch crimes as be natural
to Heretikes, namely of this ſect.
               Vve charge them vvith rebellion
againſt Chriſtes Church, lavves, and
ordinances: vvith diſobediēce to their
lavvful Paſtors, vvith contempt of
holy Councels, fathers and Doctors:
vvith falſifying, corrupting, denying
diuers bookes and places of holy Scripture:
vvith contention and diſſenſion
among them ſelues, diſturbances of
Kingdoms and Countries, deſire of
liberty and nouelty, inconſtance and
daily chaunge of their opinions, preſumptuous
arrogance and vaunting of
their knovvledge aboue al antiquity:
vvith ſingularity, ſacrilege, apoſtaſie,
inceſtuous mariages of vovved perſons,
ſpoile of Churches, profanation

of al holy things, preaching and teaching
altogether to the diſgracing of
faſting, vvatching, virginity, continencie,
voluntarie pouerty, al good vvorkes,
and many other points directly
tending to the corruption of good life
in al ſtates: finally, vvith blaſphemie
againſt Chriſtes Sacrifice, Sacraments,
Saincts, and ſuch like their enormities:
vvhich are faults properly proceding
from their doctrine, and therfore far
vnlike to thoſe (proceding onely of
humane infirmitie and mans frailety)
vvith vvhich they either falſly or truely
charge the Clergie, and ſpecially the
Popes and See Apoſtolike, euen as the
Nouatians and Donatiſtes did before
them. Vvhich offenſes do ſo litle preiudice
the truth and doctrine of the ſame
Seat, that S. Auguſtine auoucheth,
if ſome Iudas or traitor vvere in that office,
as there vvas one in the College of

the Apoſtles, that it could not be preiudicial
to the doctrine of that See, or
the peoples obedience to the ſame.
Our heauēly Maiſter,Ep. 166. in fine. ſaith he, concerning
naughty Gouernours of the Church, hath made
the people ſecure and void of care, that for them
the Chaire of holeſom doctrine be not forſaken,
in which euen the euil them ſelues are compelled
to ſpeake good thinges. For it is not their owne
that they ſpeake, but Gods, who in the chaire
of vnitie, hath put the doctrine of veritie.
And S.Ep. 69. nu. 1. Cyprian giueth vvarning to all
faithful people, not to maruel,Let N. the Miniſter marke this, that fled out of England for impunity of his diſorders, afterward abiured his hereſies in Rome voluntarily, and now is fallen in relapſe at home. nor in
any vviſe to truſt an Heretike (ſpecially
one fallen into relapſe) vvhen he raileth
on Gods Prieſts. With the fallen and profane,
ſaith he, and ſuch as are out of the Church,
out of vvhoſe breaſtes the holy Ghoſt is departed,
there can be nothing els, but a wicked or peruerſe
mind, and deceitful tonge, and venemous
hatred, and ſacrilegious lies. Whom whoſoeuer
doth credite and beleue, he muſt needes be
found with them, vvhen the day of iudgement
cometh.
               But, as for the moſt part they make
theſe foul and open ſhiftes, by diſgracing

and diſcrediting (as much as in
them lieth) the Church, and Councels,
and cheefe Paſtors, becauſe of the ſcandals
and faults of a fevv: ſo ſometimes
they do it more cloſely, and therfore
more deceitfully: vvhich their dealing
is alſo much vvorth the noting.
               For vvhē Sectaries pretēd to truſt and
obey the foure firſt or any other Coūcel
general,Their craftie and hypocritical pretences. vvith this clauſe of exception,
ſo far as they determine according to
expreſſe Scriptures Canonical: there is
a double deceit in their meaning. Firſt,
they vvould make the people beleeue
that they reuerēce Councels: ſecondly,
that they do the cheefe honour to the
Scriptures: vvhere in deede they diſhonour
both, and make them ſelues
iudges of both. For, to credit the Councels
ſo far as they bring expreſſe Scriptures,
is no more but to truſt the Scriptures,
vvhich if the ſimpleſt perſon

in earth do euidently alleage, he muſt
be beleeued: but vvhether the Scriptures
alleaged by the Councels, make for
the purpoſe, or cōuince that for vvhich
they are cited, that them ſelues vvil
iudge, no leſſe, then if the pooreſt tinkar
in England had alleaged them. Vvhich
is no more (as is plaine) but to make
them ſelues iudges of the Councels,
vvhich the ſimple people thought they
had reſpected much, by ſo ſolemne mē
                  tion
and promiſes made of them.
               Againe they purpoſely in naming
the Scriptures, adde Canonical, that if
an euident place be alleaged againſt
them out of the holy Bible, they may
at their pleaſure deny the booke to be
Canonical, and ſo eſcape. Vvhere alſo
they ſeeming to do honour to the Scriptures,
do in deede make thē ſelues iudges
of the Scriptures, deciding vvhich
be Canonical Scriptures, ād not graunting

ſo much authoritie to the Councels
and Church, vvhich haue determined
ſuch things already to their
hands. So they bring al to their priuate
fanſie, from the general truth and ſpirit
of Gods Church.
               An other vvay they vſe alſo of like
deceit, to bring al to their priuate iudgement,
vvhen they pretend ſometimes,
rather to be tried by Councels,
and Popes, or Prieſts paſt many hundred
yeres ſithence, then by the Councels,
See Apoſtolike, and other iudgements
of their ovvne daies: pretending
that they vvil yeld to the foure firſt
Councels, or See Apoſtolike, and Popes,
vvhen they vvere good: vvith an
exception yet for their more ſecurity,
ſo far as they agree vvith Gods vvord:
for that they knovv, that the Popes and
Councels of old, dealt not directly
vvith their opinions (though vvhen

any came obiter in their vvaies, they
condemned them of hereſies) but vvith
other Sectes and falſe Prophetes, proper
to thoſe times. Vvhereas in deede
the old Councels and their decrees, are
rather inſtructions and recordes to vs,
and to the Councels in theſe daies, thē
iudgements or iudges of our actions
or perſons, tovvards vvhom they proceeded
not directly nor iudicially: but
the See Apoſtolike, Prelates, and Coū
                  cels
of our time, vnder vvhoſe povver
and iuriſdiction al Chriſtian men are,
be our iudges, and may reſolue, define,
and determine iudicially in our caſes
of Controuerſie, and vve are bound to
obey theſe,Deut. 17. as the former Chriſtians,
thoſe in times paſt: God in the Scriptures
plainely cōmaunding, in doubtful
caſes, to go to the Prieſtād Iudge for the
time being: ād vve are vvarned to obey
the Church preſent,Mat. 18. not onely paſt:

the old fathers, Popes, and Councels
being recordes of truth, but the other
being iudges of our cauſes and hauing
iuriſdiction of our perſons. Vvhich to
auoid, they feine an appellation to the
former onely, eſteeming in deede of
both alike, as of men deceiued, as of humane
traditions, and ſo forth, as in their
vvritings is moſt euident, vvhere from
Peters time dovvnevvard,Beza in 2. Theſ. 2. they make
the cheefeſt fathers,Retentiue Pag. 248. the miniſters and
furtherers of Antichriſt. Al this is no
more but, both to barke and flee at once,
for anſvvers be they none.
               Let them obiect any thing againſt vs,
vve ſay to it roundly, this muſt needes
be the ſenſe, by comparing other Scriptures
to the ſame: thus ſuch and ſuch
a Doctor expounde it, thus the fathers
interprete it, thus ſuch and ſuch a general
Councel vnderſtande it. If they obiect
againſt praying for the dead, vve

giue them S.Aug. Fnchiri. 110. haer. 53. Auguſtines anſvver to
Aerius, and his vvhole booke de cura pro
mottuis: if they argue againſt the honouring
of holy Relikes, and Pilgrimage,
vve anſvver vvith S. Hieroms
vvordes againſt Vigilantius: if they diſpute
againſt the inuocation of Saints, or
vvorſhipping the holy Croſſe ād other
memories of Chriſt or his Martyrs, vve
giue them S.Cyril. Cōt. Iulian. li. 6. Cyrils ſolution againſt
Iulian the Apoſtata: if they diſpute againſt
the holy Sacrifice: vve appoint
them to S.Chryſ. in c. 10. ad Hebr. Chryſoſtoms ſolution vpon
the Epiſtle to the Hebues:Ambroſ. Primaſ. ibidem. if they contend
againſt the corporal preſence of
Chriſtes body and bloud in the Sacrament,
vve referre thē to Lateran Councel
againſt Berengarius, and to the iudgement
of al antiquity: if they alleage
againſt ſacred Images, vve lay dovvne
vnto them the anſvver and reſolution
of the ſecond Councel of Nice,

of S.Grego. li. 7. ind. 2. ep. 109. & ep. 53. in fine. Gregorie to Serenus, of S. Damaſcene
in his 3 bookes of that argument:
if they ſtād vvith vs againſt the povver
of Prieſthod to remitte ſinnes, vve anſvver
them,Ambroſ. lib. 1. de poenit. c. 2. & deinceps. as S. Ambroſe and others
did the Nouatians: and ſo forth in al
caſes.
               And yet they vvil not yeld, but flee
from al Councels and Fathers to their
ovvne imaginarie ſenſe of Scriptures,
pretending to be tried onely by them,
and by conferring the ſenſe vvhich liketh
thē, to the like ſence of other places,
conceiued alike in their ovvne imagination.
Vvherein they are like to the
forgers of falſe coynes, that vvould not
haue their money tried by the touchſtone,
but by ſome other peeces, either of
true and fine metals, or of ſome ſuch like
forged vvare as their ovvne.
               So that it falleth out betvvixt vs and
the Proteſtants, in ſuch things, as it did

(by Plutarchs report) about tvvo famous
vvreſtlers in the games of Olympus:
of vvhich, the one being both ſtrō
                  ger
and nimbler then the other, did
often and eaſily giue his felovv a faire
fall, but yet being laid on the ground,
he vvould neuer confeſſe that it vvas a
fall, but by vvordes, geſtures, and ſhuffling
to and fro, ſo daſled the ſenſes of
the ſtanders by, that the victor could
not get ſentence of his ſide. and therfore
he vſed to ſay that he could eaſily
ouerthrovv his companion, but not
ſtop his mouth, or cauſe him to confeſſe
ſo much. Euen ſo vve can eaſily (thankes
be to God) ouerthrovv the Proteſtants,
but vve can not tie their tonges.
Of vvhich kind of men S.Dial. cōt. Lucif. in fine. Hierom alſo
had this experience, Facilius eos vinci poſſe,
quàm perſuaderi: that they may more
eaſily be ouercome, then perſuaded.
And againe,Ibid. c. 5. cùm diſputare neſciāt, litigare tamen
nō deſinunt: vvhen they can not diſpute,

yet they ceaſe not to vvrangle.
They vvere ouercome in Aërius, Vigilantius,
Iouinian, Imagebreakers, Berengarius,
and others, by many iudicial
ſentences, and by plaine learning refuted
before our daies: they are condemned
by the like meanes in our time, yeld
they vvill not, til God miraculouſly cō
                  found
their cheefe preachers.
               And for further trial of our doctrine,
vvould God it might pleaſe our Prince,
to cōmaund ſome of vs her Catholike
ſubiects abrode, or of them vvhich be
at home, either in priſon or at libertie, to
appeare before her Ma.tie
                  The Proteſtāts are chalenged to a diſputation. or any indifferēt
iudges, in ſcholaſtical cōbat vvith
any one, or any number of Proteſtāts of
her dominions, or any other part of the
vvorld. Vvhich men though they durſt
not ſhevv their faces in the late General
Councel (vvhich is the proper place of
ſuch diſputes) vpon trifling and vnvvorthy
pretences refuſing the ſame,

blaſpheming that holy aſſembly, and
barking at it in bookes a far of, vvhen
they durſt not come neere it, as the Heretikes
condēned in the firſt foure great
Councels, did alſo tovvard the ſame:
yet their cauſes of feare or exception
vvould ceaſe in this caſe, if it pleaſed her
Highnes, by her vviſdom and clemēcie
to giue order for the libertie and ſaftie
of both partes therein. Neither neede
our Aduerſaries be curious in the caſe,
the perſonal feare or danger being on
our ſide, but the ſhame and confuſion
(vve truſt in God) ſhal be on theirs.
               Once there vvas a conference in deede,
but vvithout al order and indifferēcie,
and at that time vvhen there vvas
ſuch a greedly deſire of nouelty and
chaunge, that vvil and affection forcibly
ouerruled al the matter. Novv ſo
many yeres, hauing both vvel cooled
the inordinate heat that the people

lightly haue in ſuch caſes, and giuen
good experience of the Sect, vve doubt
not but God vvould proſper the matter,
to the great good of the Realme, and
contentmēt of her Ma.ties and al doubtful
conſciences.
               For though ſuch diſputes vvith the
Catholike Churches Aduerſaries, out
of Councels and fit places, be not in
them ſelues alvvaies ſo allovvable nor
profitable, yet oftentines they haue done
good, and haue been thought neceſſarie
both of late and of old: as vve ſee
by the diuers conferences of S. Auguſtine
and others vvith the Manichées,
Arians, and Donatiſtes in Afrike: and
ſome in France, and Germanie, vvith
the Caluiniſts, and Proteſtāts. And that
this vve alſo might do vvith our Superiors
liking, vve moſt hartely deſire:
truſting that our doctrine, vvhich novv
is condemned of fanſie and humane

tradition, ſhould then be inuincibly
proued to be moſt agreable to Gods ſacred
vvord and holy Scriptures.
               Thus alſo further being bold, and of
duety to his Holines (vvho alſo is charged
to haue inſtituted theſe Colleges
to traine vs vp in erroneous doctrine)
bound to ſay, as the truth is, that in theſe
his Colleges there be vſed as many
meanes to attaine to the knovvledge of
the Scriptures, and Gods truth reſerued
in them and his holy Church, as in many
mo of theirs.
               Our vvittes be of God as theirs are,
and alloted to vs by his goodnes, in as
plentiful meaſure as theirs; our abſence
from our Countrie, the aduerſity and
pouerty incident to the ſame (being not
exceſsiue) is as fit for ſtudie, as the more
plentiful and delicate ſtate of our Engliſh
Vniuerſities at home, being
othervviſe for that thing, and for al

vvorldly ſplendour, the nobleſt Schooles
in Chriſtendom: Our foundation
in al kind of faculties requiſite for the
ſtudie of Diuinitie, is as deeply laid as
theirs: our diligence rather more then
leſſe: our time both of age and ſtudie
more complete then theirs commonly
can be, that are for the moſt part in our
daies ſo timely called out of the Schooles
to pulpits and promotions: Our order,
methode,Our exerciſes in Diuinitie, and ſpecially the ſtudie of Scriptures. and courſe of Diuinitie
kept and ruled by obedience and the
Superiors preſcription, much more profitable
then theirs that is mere voluntarie.
               Vve haue mo diſputations, leſſons,
conferences, examinations, repetitions,
inſtructions, Catechizings, reſolutions
of caſes both of conſcience and controuerſies,
methodes and maners to procede
in the cōuerſion of the deceiued, and
ſuch like exerciſes (ſpecially for daily

practiſe in the Scriptures, vvherein the
Proteſtāts vainely pretend their cheefe
praiſes to cōſiſt, becauſe they can promptly
alleage the leafe and the line of
their booke) in our tvvo Colleges, then
are in their tvvo Vniuerſities cōteining
neere hand 30 goodly Colleges.
               And as concerning Sermons, no
Sunday nor Holy day in the yere vvanteth
one, and tvviſe a vveeke beſides, for
the exerciſe of yong preachers, declamations
in matters of Diuinitie. For the
tonges alſo (notvvithſtanding ſo many
their publike and priuate leſſons and
great vaunting of the ſame) I vvould
vve might haue opportunitie to ſhevv,
vvhether they or vve haue more commoditie
of them, either to the knovvledge
of Diuinitie, or to the aduantage
of our cauſe.
               As for the Maiſters and Profeſſors
of our Colleges, ſpecially the Romane

Readers (of vvhom vve may vvith better
reaſon and reſpect of our ſhamefaſtnes
ſpeake, then of our ovvne here,
vvhom yet I truſt our Aduerſaries ſhal
find ſufficiēt, vvhen God ſhal put them
to the proofe) vve may be bold to ſay,
they be in al kind, the moſt choiſe and
cunning men in Chriſtendō, for vertue,
learning, gouernemēt, and al education
of youth: vvherof vvould God our Nation
at home might once take triall.
               Novv for that part of education
vvhich pertaineth to Chriſtian life and
maners:Exerciſes of religiō and deuotion. becauſe knovvledge and learning
be obtained ſpecially by prayer
and godly behauiour (impure perſons
being not ſo apt to receiue and obey
the faith) our cheefe endeuour is in
both the Colleges, to breede in our
Scholers the feare of God, deuotion,
and deſire of ſaluation: Vvhich is done
by diuers ſpiritual exerciſes, as, daily

examinations of their conſciences, often
Communicating or Receiuing the
B. Sacrament, often confeſsing, much
praying, continual hearing and meditation
of holy things, deepe conceiuing
and compaſsion of their Countries ſtate,
and danger of their deereſt frendes
ſoules. Al vvhich things to tell in particular,
vvere to long.
               Neither this much vvould vve haue
ſaid of ſuch matters, had not our neceſſarie
defenſe driuen vs therevnto. For
vvhich, and principally for the honour
of God, and his Holineſſe eternal commendation,
vve haue touched the maner
of that education, vvhich our Aduerſaries
haue perſuaded her Highnes
Councel, to be diſagreable to Gods
vvord: Humbly thanking our Lord
God, that for our further vvarrant therein,
he hath giuen to theſe endeuours
ſuch effect, that many haue found

eternal good thereby in our Countrie:
and that he neuer ſuffered any (as far as
vve could perceiue, and do remember)
vouchſauing to conferre vvith vs one
moneth, to go hēce not perſuaded and
contended in conſcience: though many
yerely reſort to both the Seminaries,
either vvholy doubtful, or plaine Proteſtants.
               Vvhereby vve find it certaine, that
many a good ſoul periſheth in our Nation,
onely for lacke of hearing and
ſeeing the Catholike faith and practiſe
therof. The ſenſible comfort vvherof is
ſo vnſpeakable to al that truely do taſt
it, that our pouerty here, is Paradiſe to
the good folkes that haue ſo lōg lacked
ſuch ſpiritual conſolation, and been tied
from the truth, lamenting their frendes
miſeries at home vvith theſe vvordes of
S. Auguſtine and the like: O cuſtom of
ſinne, o cecitie of hart, the cōpanion and puniſhment

of ſinne.Aug li. de duab. animab. c. 14. You once auerted vs from the conſideration
of ſo manifeſt things, but you did hurt
vs when we had no feeling: Now you torment
vs feeling, in our familiars that haue not yet the
ſenſe therof them ſelues. But giue eare and attention
to your ſaluation, moſt deere frendes, whoſe
wittes and capacitie we wel know: and to you
we promiſe, that if you eſteeme of vs your frendes
as men of any conſcience, reaſon, or common
ſenſe, theſe things be much more certaine, then
thoſe vvhich we there at home ſeemed to learne,
or rather by force were compelled to beleeue.De vtil. cred. c. 8.
And againe vvith the vvordes of the ſame
holy Doctor to Honoratus his deceiued
frende, If you thinke your ſelues ſufficiētly
toſſed and troubled, and wil haue an end of
theſe trauailes, folow the way of the Catholike
diſcipline, which deſcended from Chriſt him ſelf
by the Apoſtles euen vnto vs, and from hence
ſhal deſcend to the poſteritie.
            
            
               
                  ❧ Of Prieſts and Ieſuites, and for what
cauſe they be ſent into England.
CHAP. VI.
               
                  
                  THE laſt and moſt
odious informatiō giuen
vp, not aginſt vs
onely, but his Holineſſe, is, that Prieſts
and Ieſuites be by his,
and his delegates ſpecial direction, ſent
into the Realme out of the Seminaries,
not onely to deale vvith the Subiects in
matters of religion and conſcience, but
to vvithdravv them from their obediē
                  ce,
and to moue them to attempt ſomevvhat
againſt the ſtate.
               Vvherof that her Ma.tie and honorable
Counſellers haue good care, it is
moſt laudable and agreable to their
lottes and high callings: but to haue
feare and doubt, that ſuch holy, peaceable,
and ſvveete endeuours of moſt orderly
and humble perſons, ſhould tend
further then to the good of the peoples
ſoules, that cometh of the Aduerſaries

vntrue ſuggeſtion. againſt vvhich, our
ſimple, ſincere, and true declaration,
grounded on moſt certaine knovvledge
of the vvriter hereof, and vpon authētical
recordes, vvhich he hath in his
hand to ſhevv vvhen neede ſhal require,
for full iuſtification of his ovvne and
his brethrens actions and attempts herein,
ſhal (vve truſt) preuail vvith al men
of equitie and indifferencie.
               Therfore vve proteſt,The commiſsiō of the Ieſuites and Prieſts in England. that neither
the R. Fathers of the Societie of the holy
name of Ieſus, vvhom the people call
Ieſuites, (an expreſſe clauſe being in the
inſtructions of their miſsion into England,
that they deale not in matters of
ſtate, vvhich is to be ſhevved, ſigned
vvith their late Generals hand of vvorthy
memorie) neither the Prieſts, either
of the Seminaries or others, haue any
commiſsion, direction, inſtruction or
inſinuation, from his Holineſſe, or any

other their Superior, either in Religion
or of the Colleges, to moue ſeditiō or to
deale againſt the ſtate or temporal gouernemēt:
but onely by their Prieſthod
and the functions therof, to do ſuch
dueties as be requiſite for Chriſtian
mens ſoules, vvhich conſiſt in preaching,
teaching, catechizing, miniſtring
the Sacraments, and the like.
               Neither doth the Pope cōferre or cō
                  municate
any exterior iuriſdictiō to Ieſuite
or Prieſt, either in the Realme, or
to be ſent thither, but onely giueth authoritie
or iuriſdictiō in foro conſcientie, in
Court of conſciēce, to abſolue the penitent
people from their ſinnes of vvhat
ſort ſo euer, not ſchiſme and hereſie excepted.
Vvhich povver of abſoluing
from ſinne, can not proceede, by the
lavv of God or nature, frō the Queene,
but muſt needes depend of the holy
order of Prieſthod, and muſt be holden

in Capite (ſo to ſpeake in this kind) of
him,Cypt. ep. 55. ad Cor. nel. nu. 6. Leo ep. 89. to vvhom Chriſt gaue the firſt
and moſt abſolute povver to bind and
looſe in al the earth, vvithout exceptiō
of either England or Ireland, and vvithout
dependance of either King or
Queene in the vvorld, and in vvhom
he founded the Church and the Prieſthod
of the ſame, and of vvhom al
Preſtly and Spiritual function after a
ſort is holden: though neither our Prieſts
ſent into England haue, or other
alvvaies neede to haue, expreſſe vvritings
or comiſsion ſpecial from him,
to execute theſe holy actes of their order.
               Neither do vve ſuppoſe that any Prieſt
ſent frō either of the Colleges, or frō
the Societie, hath any ſuch ſpecial Bull
frō his Holineſſe, not ſo much as to abſolue:
though they may do it, ād ought
to do it, by their order, and by due authoritie

taken of their Superiors, and
holden of the Pope as the ſupreme
Povver ſpiritual in the vvorld.
               But vvhether they execute thoſe
ſpiritual offices by a ſpecial Commiſſion
vvritten or vnvvritten, or no, this
is certaine, that no ſuch Commiſsion,
or any act executed by the ſame, conteineth
or implieth, directly or indirectly,
any commaundement or condition,
that the parties abſolued ſhould
forſake their obedience in Temporal
cauſes to the Queene, as the matter
ſeemeth to be miſtaken, both in the
Proclamation of Ianuarie, and in the
ſecond chapter of the actes of Parliament
holden the 13. yere of her Ma.ties
reigne. In vvhich, though there be diuers
pretended lavves, ſuch as neuer
Chriſtian cōmonvvealth before hath
made (the dangers and tranſgreſsions
vvherof it is hard for any Catholike

man to eſcape, liue he neuer ſo orderly
and obediently, except he vvould, to
obey man, forſake God) yet if vnder
the name Forraine iuriſdiction there aboliſhed,
the interiour povver of the tribunal
of God and cōſcience be implied
alſo, vvhich kind perchance in the Tē
                  poral
lavv, is not properly termed
Iuriſdiction, but if that be implied alſo, it
is a thing, in the face of God and his
Church, more intolerable, and moſt
diſagreable to the Scriptures, made to
dravv matters of mere religion and
conſcience,Matters of religiō called and made treaſon. to caſes treaſonable as they
novv ſpeake: and the dueties done to
God, to be vnduetifulnes and diſobedience
to the Prince.
               Vvhich is no nevves to Gods Church
and people, againſt vvhom al the perſecutiōs
that haue been raiſed in vvhat
age ſo euer, vvere ſo coloured. The
caſe of Chriſtes ovvne death, and of his

Apoſtles, as before of his Prophets, and
aftervvard of al his Martyrs almoſt,
vvas for pretended treaſons, ſeditions,
diſturbances, diſobediēces, and vnduetifulnes
to the Emperours, Kings, and
States temporal of the vvorld: though
in deede they committed nothing agaīſt
the ſtate or right of any Price or
Countrie, but ſuffered for mere religiō,
vvhich is not repugnāt to any lavvful
earthly Politie.
               Therfore vvhat ſtatutes ſo euer they
make, ſo to dravv our actions tending
directly and onely to the aduancement
of true religion in peaceable and Prieſtly
ſort: vve proteſt before God, vvho
ſhal diſcerne our cauſe, that they do vs
the greateſt vvrong and violence that
can be: and that to make ſuch things
treaſons, or puniſhable as treaſons,
vvhich haue no affinitie in nature and
condition, by the lavv of God or

Nations, Chriſtian or Heathen, to the
crime of Laeſa Maieſtas, or the Commonvvealths
diſturbāce, is but to ſeeke meanes
to haue the bloud of innocēt men,
that neuer committed treaſons nor treſpaſſes
againſt any Prince or Commonvvealth:
it is to make our liues and
deaths odious, and the true cauſes therof
vnknovven to the vvorld, baptizing
that by the name of treaſon and ſedition,
vvhich is mere matter of religion,
ſoul, and conſcience.
               Vvhat hath Maſſe, Matins, Confeſſion,
Abſolution, beades, Agnuſdeies,
and other conſecrated tokens of our
communion vvith al the Churches of
Chriſt through al ages, vvhat affinitie
haue they in nature vvith treaſon? Stād
they not in al Nations round about
you vvith the high duety and loyaltie
that belongeth to Princes? is there any
definition or deſcription of that treſpaſſe,

vvhich can of reaſon include the
premiſſes, or proue them treaſons? And
though the lavves may make things
treaſon, vvhich before vvere not, yet in
making them ſo, conſideration is alvvaies
had of the qualitie and cōdition
of the faultes and offenſes. For, as to
make the ſaying of Diuine ſeruice after
the rites of the Catholike Church, to
be Simonie, vſurie, felony, or aduoutrie,
vvere ridiculous and impoſsible: ſo
it is impoſsible to make theſe matters
of mere religion, in true and proper fenſe,
the offenſe of treaſon or diſloyaltie
to the Prince or Commonvvealth.
               Neither doth euery commaundemēt
of the Soueraine (though in things
lavvful) not fulfilled, make the offenſe
treaſonable: much leſſe, either vvhen
it concerneth matters, merely repugnāt
to Gods vvord and our dueties to the
Diuine Maieſtie, as it did in Daniels

and the Three childrens caſe:Dan. 3. or in cauſes
not truely ſubiect to any temporal
King or his lavves. For, if ſuch a Prince
ſhould make the like lavv that Darius
did,Dan. 6. That no man ſhould pray to any
God, other then him ſelf, for certaine
daies: al the lavves in the vvorld can not
make the refuſant a traitour, nor bound
to obey, more then Daniel vvas then:
not onely becauſe lavves euidently
vniuſt and againſt God, may not be
obeied: but for that the prayer to the
true God, and ſeruing him, is not repugnant
to any duety that the ſubiect
ovveth to his Soueraine, by Gods lavv
or nature: and therfore can not be made
treaſon in true and proper ſpeach. The
Churches holy Sacrifice, Seruice, and
Sacraments, and conſecration or bleſſing
of creatures by the vvord of God
and prayer, haue no qualitie or condition
of treaſon or crime againſt the

maieſtie of the Prince, or the repoſe of
the people.
               But if in making ſuch factes treaſon,
the meaning be nothing els, but to
make them puniſhable by death and
othervviſe, as treaſons by the ſtatutes of
the Realme are and ought to be: then
haue vve the pitifulleſt iniurie in the
vvorld, that beīg no traitours in deede,
yet vve muſt ſuffer the ignominie and
paines of treaſon: and ſo much the
greater, that it is done by pretenſe of
lavves, and publike authoritie, then if it
vvere done (as it hath been in Holland,
Zeland, and ſome part of France) by
barbarous crueltie of Heretikes, the
Prince and Commonvvealth not agreing
therevnto.
               For it is a greuous ſinne, and diſhonorable,
vvhen a vvhole State agreeth
vpon any iniquitie. And vve think
verily, God vvould haue taken vengeance

vpon our poore Countrie, if
her Ma.tie of great clemencie had not
ſtaied the execution of ſo vniuſt and
intolerable diſorders: though diuers
mo then her Highnes knovveth of,
haue fealt the extreme ſmart therof in
moſt cruel ſort: God turne his iuſt ire
from vs for the ſame.
               But ſeeing a ſtaffe is eaſily found to
beat a dogge, and vvith lions, eares be
often hornes, and ſuch caſes of religion
and cōſcience muſt needes be ſo extremely
puniſhed: Vvhy do they reduce
our offenſe rather to Treaſon, then to
Hereſie? If our doctrine be vvicked, our
actions ſuperſtitious, our vvorſhip of
God ſacrilegious, idololatrical, or anyvviſe
vntrue or vnlavvful:vvhy are vve
not condemned of ſuch crimes, rather
then of treaſon or vnduetifulnes to our
Prince? for if they be faultes, they are
directly againſt Gods honour, and but

indirectly and conſequently againſt the
Prince.
               But for the better enterance into Caluiniſme,
and entertaining the ſame, the
old lavves peraduenture for puniſhing
Heretikes, vvere repelled: or becauſe
they can not ſo eaſily determine, vvhether
vve be Heretikes, or our Aduerſaries,
vvho haue been dubbed vvith that
name ſo long by the lavves both ſpiritual
and temporal of al Chriſtian countries,
vvhich alſo yeld vs (the Proteſtāts
making no great claime therevnto)
both the name of Catholike, vvhich
vvith S.Cont. ep. Fund. c. 4. Auguſtine vveighed ſo much,
and al the properties and preſcriptions
of truth therevnto belonging: therfore
they thought it a neerer vvay to make
vs traitours, then Heretikes, and to puniſh
vs for pretenſed fedition and conſpiracie,
then for errour in doctrine, or
hereſie. Vvherein, though they haue giuen

authoritie to the Court of Parliament,
to determine together vvith their
Conuocation of the Clergie, vvhat is an
errour or an hereſie:yet it is not like they
vvil agree of any ſuch thing ſhortly.
               This alſo being a common thing in
times of errour and diſorder, to make
the fault committed, or ſaid to be cōmitted
againſt the Prince, greater and more
puniſhable, then the offenſe done directly
againſt God: againſt the Common.
vvealth, thē againſt the Church: againſt
the body, thē againſt the ſoul: more a do
about Caeſars tribute, then Gods due: as
both in al other things, and in the very
title of Supremacie is plaine. Vvhere the
ſuperiority Tēporal hath the firſt place
and preeminēce, and the Spiritual is but
acceſſorie, vvholy vpholden and directed
by the other, as vvel for the right
of the thing, as for the exerciſe of iuriſdiction
agreable therevnto.
               
                  
And in that caſe it muſt needes ſo be:
the crovvne being not a ſpiritual dignitie,
but a temporal: the perſon of a Prince
not ſpiritual, but temporal: the Realme
not a ſpiritual Commōvvealth, but
a temporal: the Parliament not a ſpiritual
Court, but a temporal▪ the ſtatutes
not ſpiritual lavves, but temporal: Or if
not al theſe vvholy and ſoly temporal,
yet al theſe more tēporal then ſpiritual:
vvhich our Aduerſaries them ſelues can
not vvith any reaſon deny.
               So that in ſuch Countries and lavves,
vve can expect no other, but that al our
ſpiritual endeuours miſliked of the State,
muſt needes, againſt Gods lavves
and mans, be violently dravven to treaſons
and treſpaſſes temporal (vvhich, be
they lavvful or vnlavvful, be euidently
mere ſpiritual) firſt to be condemned
by their Clergie, of errour, or hereſie,
and then to be puniſhed by the temporal

lavves, if they had any ſtanding in
force againſt ſuch offenſes.
               Therefore in al theſe caſes pretended
treaſonable, vve for our ſelues and our
brethren, by S.Act. 24. Paules example (vvho
being charged before the ciuil Magiſtrate,
of conſpiracie and il demeanour
tovvardes his Countrie, proteſted that
he vvas iudged concerning the Reſurrection,
a queſtion in religion, and not
for ſedition or concourſe in tumultes)
do crie to God and al Chriſtian people,The Catholikes of Englād ſuffer for Religion.
vvhich behold our afflictions and ſufferings:
that it is for religion, for our fathers
faith and ſpiritual inheritance, for
the ſeruing of God in the maner of al
Catholike Prouinces, and not for treaſon,
or diſobedience to her Ma.ties temporal
lavves, or the Realmes.
               Vve haue not committed any other
treaſons, neither haue the Fathers or
Prieſts ſeruing God in our Countrie,

done any other treſpaſſes tovvard the
Realme or Prince, then are done by the
ſame endeuours, in any other Nation
either Chriſtian or Heathen. No commiſsion
haue they or authoritie to abſolue
(vvhatſoeuer it be, or in vvhat forme
ſo euer, vvritten, or by vvord of
mouth) that implieth any more ſpecial
clauſes of treaſon to the Prince there,
then they do in al other through the
vvorld, graunted or vſed in the like
caſes.
               Our holy Apoſtle S.S. Auguſtine our Apoſtle had his commiſſion alſo from Rome, and from Pope Gregorie. Auguſtine came
to our Countrie (then vvholy in maner
heathen) vvith the like, and no leſſe authoritie,
to conuert the Prince and people
to the faith: vvith order, there to
preach the ſame doctrine that the Catholike
fathers and Prieſts novv do, no
vvhit altered ſince then, vntil this day:
to miniſter the Sacraments in the ſame
ſort as they do, as by the recorde of

S.Bed. hiſt. li. 1. c. 25. Bedes hiſtorie and other, appeareth:
Vvho entered in vvith Croſſe, Chriſtes
image, and Litanies, much more openly
then ours do novv: profeſſed to come
from Pope Gregorie the firſt, to a
Pagan people, vvhich is novv ſo heinous
a matter for vs to do, from Gregorie
the xiij,Halowed tokens. to a Chriſtian Countrie:
brought giftes from him to our King
and Queene,Grego. li. 9. ep. 60. euen ſuch like conſecrated
tokēs,Bed. hiſt. li. 1. c. 22. as novv cā not be had, or brought
in, vvithout death and treaſon.
               Vvhich conſecrated creatures,Augu. & Paulin. ep. 31. 34. 35. or the
like,Leo ep. 72. though they vvere in vſe in al antiquitie
(not onely among the ſimple
people,Grego. li. 2. ep. 72. 86. li. 3. ep. 30. li. 5. ep. 6. li. 7. ep. 53. 126. ind. 2. as the Aduerſaries vvould make
the vvorld thinke, but vvith the beſt
learned) and are great helpes to deuotion,
and ſpecial badges of our Catholike
communion one vvith an other:Let the good Readers that vnderſtād latin, ſee theſe places here quoted. yet
not being ſo neceſſarie as to incurre the
extreme rigor of lavves therfore, or to

bring our Catholike frendes into peril
for them, vve haue tempered the affectiō
and zeale of ſome Prieſts and yong
gentlemen (othervviſe moſt commendable)
al that vve could poſsibly, requiring
them to carie rarely and ſparingly
ſuch things vvith them: that the forces
of our patience and ſufferance may be
entiere and vvhole for ſuch brunts as
may fall vnto vs and our brethren, in
matters of greater importance for our
faith and ſaluation: though he be happie
that dieth for the leſt momēt of our
Catholike religion.
               But to paſſe that point, ſuch things
vvere ſent from S. Gregorie the Great,
the famous Doctor, to our Princes and
people then: ſuch authoritie from him
had S. Auguſtine then: in ſuch ſort he
preached and miniſtred the Sacramēts,
as vve do novv: it vvas no treaſon, it
vvas no ſeditious practiſe: it had a bleſſed,

honorable, and gratious effect in vs:
it vvas the beginning of our Chriſtianitie,
euen the ſame Chriſtianitie vvhich
is of al Natiōs, and vvhich hath bredde
ād brought furth al our Princes, Prieſts,
and people, and al this goodly forme of
Commonvvealth, vvhich our forefathers
left vs.
               This ſame commiſsion,The Ieſuites cōmiſſion and trauail for the cōuerting of Coūtries. end, and intentions,
haue the fathers of the Societie
in al other Countries vvhither they be
ſent by their Superiors, through the
vvhole vvorld. By vvhich they haue
(our Lord Ieſus giuing grace and force
of vvord, vvorke, and miracle, to their
godly and heroical endeuours) in the
zeale of Gods houſe, and incomparable
loue of ſoules, for vvhich our Sauiour
gaue his pretious bloud, entered into
the extreme partes of the vvorld, almoſt
through al the Eaſt Indes, and moſt barbarous
Countries, and haue conuerted

diuers mightie Princes, vvith their prouinces
and peoples, and innumerable
perſons in other Kingdoms beſides
(vvhere the vvhole ſtate yet yeldeth
not) vnto the faith of Chriſt, euen the
ſame Catholike, Apoſtolike, Romane
faith, that vve and al Natiōs are named
Chriſtians by.
               In the like ſpirit haue they paſſed
into the vveſt Indes, to the gaine of
millions of ſoules, vvith infinite perils
of the iourney, both by ſea and land,
moſt long and dangerous:diuers of thē
intercepted by Heretikes, by the Heathen,
by Pirates, and many martyred,
many brought to captiuitie, many languiſhing
avvay by the vnacquainted
ſauage diet, or diſagreing of the aire,
and many, by other accidents.
               To thoſe places they go yerely vvith
the ſame obediēce, the ſame cōmiſsion,
the ſame intentiō, that they come novv

to England: they neuer committed
reaſon, nor diſquieted the ſtate vvhere
they come:the preaching of the Catholike
religion, and miniſtring the holy
Sacraments, being not coumpted of
any of thoſe peoples, ſeditious attēpts,
as being done vvithout concourſe of
people:no, nor vvhē it is vvith cōcourſe
of peaceable, poore, ſimple, vnlearned
men and vvemen, ſeruing God in
Chriſtian maner.
               They be ſent to diuers Prouinces
and cities throughout al Germanie,
Bohemia, Auſtria, Polonia, Tranſſyluania,
Suetia, Dalmatia, and many
other Coūtries diuerſly affected in religion,
no leſſe then ours, vvith no other
charge, purpoſe, or commiſsion, then
they are come to England: none of al
thoſe ſtates (though by the endeuours
of Proteſtāts, the good fathers haue beē
endāgered, and moleſted many vvaies)

fearing their endeuours to be pernicious,
but finding them daily more
and more, to be moſt profitable, beneficial,
and agreable to the preſeruation
of their Commonvvealths and
Countries.
               And they are receiued not onely into
theſe partes aforeſaid,Their teaching of al good learning, and other great bene fires to the Church, Princes, and Cō
                     monvveales. for reclaimīg the
deceiued ſoules from Paganiſme and
hereſie, to the vnitie of Chriſtes catholike
Churh againe: but alſo for their exē
                  plar
life, and vertue, for their exceding
exerciſe, diligence, and dexteritie in the
education of youth, both in pietie and
knovvledge, for their great learning,
and diſcretion, and for other their rare
graces of Gods ſpirit, they are vſed to
the maruelous benefite of the Church,
as vvel by his Holineſſe, as other greateſt
Princes of Chriſtendom, for their
preachers, confeſſors, ſpiritual counſelers,
profeſſors in their Vniuerſities, reformers

of the decated maners of al ſortes,
and moſt exquiſite Maiſters of al
religion, deuotion, and true vvorſhip
of God.
               Theſe mens order in deede, and rule
of life, is nevv, but their faith and doctrine,
is the ſame that our forefathers and
al the Church had, and hath. They are
hated of Heretikes,Ep. 80 ad D. Augu. vvhich S. Hierom
coumpteth a ſingular glorie. for, thoſe
holy fathers vvhich vvere raiſed of God
to cōbate vvith Heretikes of old, vvere
hated as theſe be novv, ſent to repaire
the ruines of Luther, and Caluin, and
the reſt. But vvould God our people
vvere ſo happie, as to haue full proofe
of their giftes and qualities: that ſo they
might ſee and feele, that they are ſent to
bring ſaluation, reſt and peace of conſcience,
and not diſquietnes to their
Countrie.
               
                  
Alas poore men, theſe ſame fevv that
you there haue, might as vvel haue been
ſent to the Indes, or to any part of Turky
or Heatheneſſe, if it had been their
lotte, and their Superiors commaundement,
as vvel as to you. For thither they
go vvith no more danger then to England,
and euery vvay vvith like good
vvil, and hourely expectation of death.
Vvhich, for the gaine of one ſoul, they
coumpt the greateſt vantage in earth.
They are ſent to the Heathen, to tell
them, there is no ſaluation vvithout
Chriſt: they are ſent to the Engliſh, to
tell them, there is no ſaluation vvithout
the Catholike Church. Vvhether they
die for the one, or for the other, al is one
matter to them.
               This vvorke then haue they to do,
and muſt not ceaſe from the ſame for
any feare of mortal man, no danger
of death, or vvhat diſtreſſe ſo euer may

fall: vvhich they coumpt in ſuch a
caſe, the next revvard to heauen it
ſelf, and moſt ioyfully chooſe to accept
it, though for to do their dueties the
longer, they vvill not vvilfully runne
vpon it.
               Vve therfore, ſeeing both before, and
novv theſe late daies, ſome euen of our
Countrie ſent to the Indes: motion vvas
made to their Superiors, that thoſe of
our Nation might rather be employed
vpon their ovvne Coūtrie: vvhere vnto
after good deliberation they did moſt
charitably cōdeſcend, much moued by
the example and profitable endeuours
of the Prieſts of both the Colleges, and
other learned men at home and in baniſhment,
vvhom they knevv ſo vvillingly
to ſuſtaine both priſonmēts and
death for the ſame, vvith vnſpeakable
alteration in fevv yeres of vvonderful

numbers to the liking and embracing
of the Catholike faith.
               And to tell you al,The zeale of the Ieſuites ſtrangers, and their deſire to be ſent into England. vvhen it vvas once
ſecretly bruted among the Fathers
(vvhom men call Ieſuites) that hereafter
ſome of the Order vvere like to be
deputed in times and ſeaſons, for England,
it is incredible to tell (but before
Chriſt it is true) hovv it vvas ſued and
ſought for, of diuers principal learned
men, ſtrangers, no leſſe then of our ovvne,
vpon their knees, vvith tears and
affection exceding extraordinarie: that
they might haue the lotte, either to diſpute
vvith the Proteſtants in their Vniuerſities,
or to die for the profeſsion and
preaching of their faith, in ſo noble a
Countrie, vvhich they pitied to ſee deceiued
vvith ſo improbable and barbarous
hereſie.
               Yea diuers learned men ſtrangers,
neither Ieſuites nor Prieſts, ſeing alſo at

the ſame time,The zeale of other learned ſtrangers for the cō
                     uerſion of England. the Scholers of the Engliſh
Colleges giue their promis and
profeſsion ſo promptly and zelouſly,
to ſuffer vvhatſoeuer, for their poore
Countries and parents ſaluation, and
for the ſame, to be made Prieſts, vvith
out expectation of vvordly prefermēt
or honour (giuen heretofore, and novv
alvvaies due to that order, in al good
Commonvveales) but vvith certaine
knovvledge of hatred, diſgrace, rebuke,
and perhaps death thereby: herevpon
(I ſay) the ſaid ſtrangers vvere much
inflamed to hazard their perſon in the
ſame ſpiritual aduēture, and made great
ſure to certaine that had the doing in
thoſe matter, vvith manifold perſuaſions
that ſo it might be. And being
told, that the dealing in Englād (in ſuch
caſes ſpecially) for ſtrangers vvas much
harder, then in the Heathen Countries,
vvhere there vvere no ſuch exquiſite

lavves againſt religion, as in the
Countries reuolted: they replied, that
they had no feare of dangers, nor
deaths, nor miſeries vvhatſoeuer, but
that they vvould ſell their ovvne perſons
to any ſeruitude, and for vvhat
vvorke ſo euer: either in Vniuerſities,
that they ſo might deale vvith ſcholers,
or othervviſe to learne the language,
thereby to practiſe vvith the people for
their ſaluation for, hauing had that intention
of long, either tovvard Turky,
or other Pagan places, novv our mindes,
ſaid they, are excedingly ſet vpon
Engliſh ſoules, vvhom S. Gregorie ſo
many hundred yeres agoe pitied vvith
like compaſsion.
               But hauing ſo many of our ovvne
Nation inflamed vvith the like holy
deſires, not onely in the tvvo Colleges
vvholy bent and ordained therevnto,
but in the Societie aforeſaid, and in

diuers Vniuerſities, vvhere there be
many learned of our Nation in baniſhment
ready to help vs in this harueſt,
beſides the great numbers that
already are vvithin the Realme: it vvas
not thought needful nor meete, eaſily
to admitte the ſaid ſtrangers, for this time:
but rather to employ our ovvne, of
the ſaid Colleges ſpecially, and of the
Societie of Ieſus.
               Into vvhich order,Many Engliſh men enter into the Societie of Ieſus. becauſe it is
moſt agreable to the Churches and
our Countries ſeruice in this time,
diuers of our Nation of al ſortes haue
yelded them ſelues, and novv the
rather, for that they truſt to be rather
employed vpon their ovvne Countrie,
then vpon the Indes or other
Nations in like diſtreſſe. Truſting
that ſo theſe companies, vvith the
help of our zelous Countriemen
in many places both at home and

abrode, ſhal be able to ſupply al vvants
that may fall in England from time to
time, by the deaths, executiōs, or enpriſonmēts,
of ſuch as novv be, or hereafter
ſhalbe, by vvhat extremitie ſo euer, reſtrained
from the vvorke of our Lord.
               For, theſe late terrours (thankes be to
God) trouble them ſo litle,Prieſts ſue to be ſent into England, and other to be made Prieſts, notwithſtāding al terrours. that diuers
ſtraight vpon the arriual here in Rhemes
of the late Proclamation of Ianuarie,
came to their Superiors, to deſire
leaue to go in: and being anſvvered
that the times vvere not ſeaſonable,
they ſaid, it vvas no Godamercie for a
Prieſt to enter in at other times, but that
they vvere brought vp and made ſpecially
for ſuch daies: and nineteene perſons,
the ſame vveeke folovving, tooke
holy Orders. Such is their deſire: but
for their going in, they ſhal be moderated
as reaſon requireth.
               
                  
The principal point is, that they be
not (God be praiſed) much afraid of
death or danger in ſo happie and honorable
a quarel, and many deſire Martyrdō,
if god ſhal ſo diſpoſe: by vvhich
vve euer gaine more to Gods Church,
then by any office of our life: and bloud
voluntarily yelded, crieth forcibly for
mercie tovvard our Countrie. Thus the
Church ſtood and increaſed in moſt
places of the vvorld, for ſome hundred
yeres after Chriſt together,Ezech. 16. the Prophete
forvvarning it, that it ſhould liue
in bloud.
               If our Countrie yeld vs no ſuccour
for feare of mans lavves, God that hath
fedde vs theſe 20 yeres, vvil not forſake
vs. If frendes and parentes muſt giue
vs no releefe,Ep. 56. ad Apron. vve ſay vvith S. Hierom,
It is better to begge bread, then to leeſe faith.
And being the Churches orphans,Luc. 9. vve
ſhal liue of the tvvelue baſkets of the

brokē meates, remayning of the loaues
and fiſhes miraculouſly multiplied by
Chriſt, to feede his folovvers into the
deſert. For, theſe fragments are not yet
ſpent, but dure to the vvorlds end, for
the ſuſtenance of the deſolate that depend
vpon our Lord. Dravv from vs
vvhatſoeuer they can or vvil, our affections
and offices tovvardes them ſhal
be doubled. If houſes muſt not receiue
vs, dennes, and deſerts, and grottes ſhal
be our harbour. If vve can not make
our abode in certaine places, vve vvill
not be aſhamed to be, or ſo to be called
of our Aduerſaries, vagarant perſons:
ſeing of our betters in the like caſe the
Apoſtle ſaith,Heb. 11. They had trial of mockeries
and ſtripes, of bands alſo and priſons: they
were ſtoned, they were hewed, they were tempted,
they died in the ſlaughter of the ſword,
they went about in ſheepeſkinnes, in goatſ kinnes,
needy, in diſtreſſe, afflicted, of whom the
world was not worthie, wandering in deſerts,
in mountaines and dennes, and caues of the earth.

And the Apoſtles them ſelues eſteemed
it no reproche to ſay,1. Cor. 4. Vntil this
houre we do both hunger, and thirſt, and are vagarants.
               Hovvbeit vve doubt not (though
thus the enimie vvould haue it,Marke this al ye bleſſed folke, that entertaine and releeue Gods Prieſts. and
this vve hope patiently to beare for the
ſaluation of our deereſt Countriemen)
but there vvil be left many thouſands,
vvhoſe harts, bovvels, and doores ſhal
be open to vs in our Lord, notvvithſtanding
vvhat lavves of man ſo euer:
there vvil be alvvaies that vvil rather hazard
their liues and goods vvith holy
Tobie,Tob. 1. then ſee their innocent brethren
vnharboured, or vnburied.
               Some good Sunamite vvil prepare a
poore chamber,4. Reg. 4. bed, ſtoole, and candelſticke,
for the trauailed Prieſts of God.
Some vvil rather harken to our Sauiours
admonition ſaying,Mat. 10. He that receiueth
a Prophete in the name of a Prophete, a iuſt

man in the name of a iuſt man, and (as S.
Marke ſpeaketh) Becauſe he is Chriſtes,Marc. 9.
ſhal receiue a revvard accordingly, thē
to mans edictes, againſt the receiuing
of the faithful afflicted. And if death be
threatened by man, to ſuch as receiue
and ſuccour them: our Lord on the
otherſide,Mat. 10. denounceth his vae and vengeance
to the refuſers of them,Luc. 10. in as large
vviſe as to the cities of Sodom and
Gomorrha
               Some good Oneſiphorus vvil refreſh
vs,2. Tim. 1. and embrace our chaines, to obtaine
mercie of our Lord for him ſelf, his
familie and poſteritie after him.Act. 16. God
vvil moue the keepers of our perſons in
priſon, as he did often in the like times
of old. England can not lacke Albans,
vvhoſe Protomartyr being of that name
(that famous S.Bed. hiſt. Angl. li. 1.c.7. Alban, bleſſed in
heauen and earth therfore for euer)
ſuffered, and offered him ſelf to the

perſecutors, to ſaue his Chriſtian gueſt
a Clergie man, that lay ſecrete in his
houſe.
               Vve can not feare, vve neede not
doubt: it ſoundeth in euery Catholikes
care novv night and day,Luc. 12. Feare not them
that kil the body, and further are not able to do:
but feare ye him, who after he hath killed, hath
power to caſt both body and ſoul into hel fyre.
Thouſands daily lying on their death
beddes, and departing, in our Countrie,
can not be afraid of mans offenſe or indignation,
that muſt vvithin fevv'vveekes,
daies, or hovvers, be cited before
Gods throne, and be exempted from
theſe mortal feares: ſuch vvil be glad of
neceſſarie Sacraments and comforts of
conſcience, for vvhich they vvould giue
al the lands in the vvorld.
               Yea the lay people of al ſortes, learned
and vnlearned, noble and meane,
rich and poore man and vvoman, are
as ready often to ſuffer for Chriſt and

his Church, as the Prieſt or Biſhop,
euerlaſting thankes and praiſe be to
God: vvho alſo vvil continually
through the prayers of the faithful (as
vve verily truſt) indue her Ma.ties hart
vvith pitie and cōpaſsion of her ovvne
ſubiectes afflicted, for no treaſons or
vnlavvful attēpts, but merely for their
faith and conſcience, vvhich cometh
vnto them by ſo good vvarrant and authoritie,
that they can not put it of by
no earthly feare, force, or perſuaſion.
               Much leſſe vvil any Catholike (vve
hope) be aſhamed of the rebukes and
contumelies vvhich vve ſuffer for the
ſame, the cauſe being Chriſtes, vvho
ſuffered many mo before vs. And becauſe
one ſpecial reproch giuen vs, pertaineth
not to our perſons, but to the
vvhole order of Prieſthod: vve may be
bold to adde a vvord or tvvo for our
defenſe, ſpecially cōcerning that terme,

Maſſing Prieſts.Maſsing Prieſts. vvhereby the nevv pulpits
(the very chaires of the ſkorneful) merily
or mockingly often call vs and our brethren.Pſ. 1.
               
               Vvhich name yet, giuen vs alſo in
publike vvriting of authoritie, is not
doubtles of ſkornefulnes, vvhich muſt
needes be far from the enditers of ſuch
things: but, as vve take it, for diſtinction
and difference betvvixt vs Catholike
and in deede onely Prieſts, and the other
of the nevv creation, vvhom the
people, for ſome reſemblance of their
actions in the miniſterie, to the vvonted
celebration of diuine things, often call
Prieſts. though the Proteſtants liſt not
ſo to be called, as in deede the Miniſters
can not of right haue any ſuch calling,
hauing no more povver, right, or authoritie
to miniſter any Sacramēt (other
then Baptiſme, vvhich in ſome caſes
vvemen alſo may do) then they haue

to make a nevv moone or an other
ſunne.The Apoſtles thē ſelues, and ancient fathers of al ages, were Maſſe Prieſts.
               
               The Church of God knovveth no
other Prieſts, neither hath Chriſt inſtituted
any other order of Prieſts,Iren. li c. 32. Cyp ep. 63. ad Cae
                        ••
                     l. but of
theſe vvhom contemptuouſly they call
Maſſe Prieſts. It is that ſort, and none other,Chry. ho. 12. in ep. ad Heb. Amb
                        •
                     . in p
                        •
                     . 38 post med.
to vvhich our Sauiour gaue povver
to cōſecrate his body and bloud, and offer
the ſame, vvhich is, to ſay Maſſe.
               The firſt holy Councel of Nice,Cap. 14. to
vvhich our Proteſtants vvould ſeeme
to attribute ſomething, knevv none but
ſuch offerers, or ſacrificing, that is, Maſſing
Prieſts. S. Hierom, himſelf alſo
of the ſame order, honoured no other,
nor knevv no other, but Maſſe-Prieſts,
vvhoſe ſpecial functiōs he maketh euen
theſe tvvo, vvhich our Prieſts namely
ſeeke to excerciſe to the ſaluation of their
brethren, and vvhich tvvo be ſpecially
forbidden, and moſt puniſhable by the

late lavves of the Realme.Ep. 1. ad Heliod. 
                  God forbid,
ſaith he, I ſhould ſpeake any thing amiſſe of
rhem,Vvhē Leo the Great (ep. 81. c. 2.) tooke order, for ſaying mo Maſſes then one, in a day, in one Church: vvere thei not Maſſe Prieſts, that ſaid thoſe Maſſes? who ſucceding into the Apoſtles degree,
with ſacred mouth make our Lordes body, by
whom we alſo are Chriſtians: who hauing the
keies of the kingdom of heauen▪ iudge after a
ſort before the day of iudgement.
               
               Theſe lo are your Maſſe-Prieſts,
vvhoſe harbouring is ſo dangerous,
vvhoſe abſolution is ſo traiterous, vvhoſe
ſacred ioyntes, vvithout reſpect of honour
devv to the order, or to degree of
learning, or gentrie, are racked ſometimes
almoſt to death.
               
                  Li. 5. ep. 33.S. Ambroſe vvas a Maſſe-Prieſt, teſtifying
of him ſelf, that he offered Sacrifice
and ſaid Maſſe, euen in that plaine
terme.Ep. 5. S. Cyprian acknovvledgeth the
Prieſts of his time to haue offered or ſacrificed,
yea euen in priſons, in times of
perſecution: vvhich is a great comfort
and vvarrant for vs in theſe miſeries, to
do the like, as long as God ſhal ſuffer it.

He vvas a Maſſe prieſt,De ciu. li. 22. c. 8. that S. Auguſtine
ſent to do ſacrifice in a houſe infeſted
vvith euil ſpirits.Li 10. Confeſ. c. 12. 13. They vvere Maſſe prieſts,
that did ſacrifice at the burial of his
mother, and the reſt vvhom he deſireth
to remember his fathers and mothers
ſoules at the holy alter. They
vvere Maſſe prieſts, of vvhom Euſebius
vvriteth,In vit. Conſt. li. 4. c. 45. That they pacified the diuine Maieſtie
with vnblouddy ſacrifices ād myſtical cōſecratiōs.
The high dignitie of Prieſthod ſet
forth in the noble vvorke of the ſame
title,Chryſoft. De ſacerdotio. by S. Chryſoſtom, is ſpecially there
commended for thoſe tvvo points, for
vvhich ours novv is condemned: that
is, for the high ſupereminent povver of
doing the vnblouddy ſacrifice vpō the
alter, and for the authoritie of remitting
ſinnes. See his notable places for
the ſame, and thou ſhalt not doubt but
that Prieſts vvith him, vvere no other
then Maſſe-prieſts.
               
                  
To be ſhort, he and al the other fathers,
both Greeke and Latin, vvere
Maſſe prieſts, none being euer made
but for that purpoſe principally:In 1. Tim. 4. S. Ambroſe
teſtifying, that to take the order
of Prieſthod, vvhich he calleth vvith
the Apoſtle, Impoſition of hands, is to receiue
authoritie to offer ſacrifice to God
in our Lords ſteede.
               And as for S. Gregorie the Great,Greg li. 2. ep. 9. 93. li. 7. ep. 63. ind. 2. li. 11. ep. 17. Ad. 3, interrog. Auguſt.
vvho knovveth not that he vvas a Maſſe-prieſt,
vvho hath the very vvord, the
maner, and the partes therof ſo expreſly
in his Epiſtles: vvho ſent al holy furniture
and ornaments for the ſame to our
B.Bed. li. 1. hiſt c. 26. 29. Apoſtle S. Auguſtine, him ſelf alſo
vvithout controuerſie a Maſſe-prieſt?
Such vvere our Countriemen, Venerable
Bede, and before him Gildas ſurnamed
the Vviſe, and vvhoſo euer els in al
our Churches ſtories, of that calling, al
vvere Maſſe prieſts: as, the honorable

Prelates, founders of ſo many goodly
Colleges, the authors of ſo many noble
vvorkes, Counſelers to ſo many her
Ma.ties noble progenitors: breefely al
the ancient fathers of our faith, vvere
Maſſe-Prieſts.
               And vvhen this, ſometime ſo honorable
and ſo general, is novv turned into
contumelie, and made puniſhable
by lavves: vvo be to our ſinnes, and
Chriſt haue mercie on their miſeries
that ſee not their ovvne damnable condition.
for vvhom the Prieſts ſacrifice,
and prayers are ſo much more neceſſarie,
the leſſe ſenſe them ſelues haue of
their ovvne pitiful ſtate.
               And a thouſand times happie be
they, that either are ſo bold and zealous
of their ſoules health and their deereſt,
to ſeeke or accept the neceſſarie offices
of this Prieſthod, vvith vvhat vvordly
danger ſo euer: or that feele the lacke

therof,Want of Prieſts a lamētable thing. and expreſſe their ſorovves for
vvant therof, in ſuch vvordes or ſenſe as
the people of Afrike once did, vvhen
their Biſhops and Prieſts vvere caried
avvay from them into baniſhment, in
the perſecution of the Arians, as Victor
vvritethLi. 2. de vāſ▪ perſ. To whom, ſay they, do you leaue
vs deſolate? Who ſhal now baptize theſe poore
babes? who ſhall looſe vs of our ſinnes by pardon
and reconciliation? Who ſhal preſcribe vs
penance for our offenſes paſt? For to you it was
ſaid, whatſoeuer you looſe in earth, ſhal be likevviſe
looſed tn heauen. Who ſhal burie vs vvhen
vve die, vvith ſolemne prayers? Who ſhal exhibite
the accuſtomed tite of the diuine Sacrifice?
               S.Ep. 180 Auguſtine alſo doth liuely deſcribe
the miſerable deſolation and diſtreſſes
of faithful people, by the abſence
of their Prieſts, both for vvant of
other needeful dueties, and ſpecially
of the conſecration and communication
of our Lordes body, and reconcilement
by penance and abſolution.
               
                  
Vvithout vvhich later, becauſe none
can come to ſaluation that is fallen after
Baptiſme, he ſaith, the ſorovv of their
frendes being ſure to lacke their companie
in heauen, muſt needes be exceding
great, and therfore notably diſcourſeth
of the caſes, that Prieſts and
Paſtors may not forſake their flockes
for vvhat danger ſo euer, vvherof vve
neede not ſpeake at this time.
               It is ynough, that the good Reader
ſeeth, vvhat kind of Prieſts they be, that
novv be perfecuted, contemned, and
condēned: and into vvhat miſerable ter.
mes vve be fallen, that that ſhould novv
be coumpted ſeditious, traiterous, and
pernicious to Chriſtian peoples and ſtates,
that once, and alvvaies before our
daies, vvas deemed of al good men, and
learned, and vviſe, and by the lavves of
al Chriſtian Nations, ſo ſoueraine, holy,
and needeful.
               
                  
But they vvil ſay vnto vs, hovv ſo
euer the matter be in it ſelf, or vvas iudged
in old time, novv the caſe is altered:
ſuch men and ſuch doings can not ſtād
vvith our ſtate. But (alas) vvho hath
brought the ſtate and forme of our Cō
                  monvvealth
into theſe ſtraites, that it
can not ſtā vvith that Prieſthod, vvith
that ſeruice of God, vvith that faith,
vvith that regiment, that al our aunceſtours,
al Catholike Countries, al Princes
and peoples haue paſſed in, vvith
grace and glorie, ſo many vvorldes together?
               Vvere vve the doers, the cauſers, the
mouers? If there be any perils feared or
foreſeen by the vviſe, in the middes of
the greateſt calme that our Countrie
hath had theſe many ages: vvhich vvay,
and by vvhom come they? Is our doctrine
ſeditious? be Catholikes by nature
or profeſsion, vnquiet perſons? are

they deſirous of diſorder, chaunge, and
noueltie: or vvearie of peace, order, and
antiquitie? are they libertines, deſpiſers
of authoritie, ſeekers of ſpoile, ſacke,
and garboil? are they giuen to ſacrilege,
to irreligioſitie, Epicuriſme, Sadduciſme,
or Atheiſme?
               Looke vvhat maner of people,Catholikes, peaceable and orderly: and
vvhat conditioned men folovv the other
ſectes, ſo many,Ptoteſtāts licētious, feditious, and rebellious, out of meaſure. and ſo ſtrange, as
both our Countrie and other places haue
lately brought forth: and compare
their life, their lightnes, their inconſtancie,
their promptneſſe to diſorder, diſobedience,
licentiouſnes, noueltie, mutabilitie,
and hauocke of the vvorld:
compare them (I ſay) to the conſtancie,
grauitie, patience, peaceable, ciuil, and
ſvveete behauiour of ſuch as be enclined
to the Catholike religion in euery
Countrie. See, I pray thee, benigne Reader,
take paines to looke about thee theſe

thirtie yeres compaſſe onely, both at
home and abrode, vvhether Proteſtāts,
or Catholikes, haue oftener attempted,
by armes or other forcible vvaies, ſuch
alterations as they haue deſired: vvhether
ſort, either by preaching, vvriting,
or perſuaſion, haue oftener ſtirred the
people to mutinies, murmurations,
and commotions, againſt their Prince
or State.
               That mortal men (and ſpecially
Communities) ſhould for diſcontentments
and manifold accidents of humane
infirmitie, and great variety of
humors, mindes, and manners, ſometimes
fall to mutinies, no man can maruel,
reading the ſtories not onely of the
Heathē, but euen of the people of God,
vvhiles they vvere guided by Moyſes
and Aaron through the vvilderneſſe,
as aftervvard often, vvhen they vvere
come to reſt in their promiſed land:

and of the Catholike Chriſtian people,Theſe, for ſome one of their Paſtors, and becauſe they vvould not yeld to the Emperour ſo much as one Chur.
that ſometimes by force and tumults
haue ſought to defend their faith, and
their Biſhops, namely S. Athanaſius, S.
Chryſoſtom, S. Ambroſe, and others:
vvhich the ſaid fathers had much a do
to repreſſe.
               That the Catholike part of England
(to ſay the leaſt) equal,ch in the whole citie of Milā, for the Arians: (Ambr. li. 5. ep. 33). excepting the
Princely authoritie, to the other, being
in their conſcience, goods, eſtimation,
and libertie,which ours did not, for all their Biſhops taken frō them at once, nor for al the Churches in the Realme, deliuered to the Proteſtants in one day. ſo much in deede, or in
their ovvne cōceites, diſtreſſed for religion,
ſhould (not al neither, but ſome
fevv Noblemen and Gentlemen, not
al for religion neither, though al pretēded
it) once take armes theſe 23 yeres,
in the moſt ſeditious daies that euer the
Chriſtian vvorld had: and Ireland likevviſe
once, vvhere this nevv Sect hath
euer in maner vvholy ſtood againſt
the ſtreame: can it be to any man maruelous,

or could it be to vviſe men vnlooked
for? or vvere it poſsible that ſo
many yeres could haue paſſed vvith ſo
litle contradiction or oppoſition of
Proteſtāts, if the ſtate had been againſt
them, and they of ſuch numbers and
callings, as the Catholikes vvere and
are in the ſaid Dominions?
               Compare to theſe tvvo commotious,
the furious attempts of moſt barbarous
rebellions of Caluiniſts or Proteſtants,
in Scotland,Their rebelliōs in France, Flanders, Scorland, England. Flanders, and France,
againſt their natural Princes, to the ruine
and deſolation of the greateſt partes
of thoſe noble Countries. Yea, if you
liſt not go from home, call at the
leaſt to your remembrances, into vvhat
hazards the ſcepter and crovvne of
Queene Marie, and conſequently of
her Ma.tie that novve is, came by the
Proteſtants, both in the ſaid Queenes
reigne, and ſpecially vpon the death

of King Edvvard the ſixt: vvhen
they attempted by armes vnnaturally
to haue thruſt out of the Regal
throne, both the one and the other,Zuingliā Biſhops and Clergie conuicted of treaſon.
their Zuinglian Biſhops and Clergie
not onely ſubſcribing to the treaſons,
but preaching diuers traiterous and
ſeditious ſermons at London, and in
the Vniuerſities, and other famous
places of the Realme, againſt both
their royal perſons, and contributing
and ſetting out ſouldiars to the maintenance
of the ſame rebellion: for
vvhich, ſome of the cheefe of them
vvere conuicted by the high Court
of Parliament, of treaſon: and the principal
of that conſpiracie (othervviſe a
right vvorthie and noble Gentleman)
being aftervvard executed for the ſame,
confeſſed at the houre of his death, that
al that, and other late miſcheefes and
miſeries of the Real me, proceded of hereſie

and forſaking the vnitie of the Catholike
Church this they did then.
               And aftervvard, their felovves being
fled to Geneua and other places, ceaſed
not to moue hoſtilitie both abrode
and at home, againſt the Realme,
as ſhort a vvhile as they vvere abſent,Their traiterous ād ſeditious bookes.
ſundrie vvaies: and cauſed, by the allovving
and conſent of Caluin and
Knokes (the tvvo fannes of ſedition
and calamitie of France and Scotland)
an abominable treatiſe to be publiſhed,
againſt the regiment of vvemen:
at once to defeat the Queene that then
vvas, her ſiſter that novv is, the Q. of
Scotland, and cōſequently the vvhole
raſe of renovvmed Henry the ſeuenth.
               And vvhat ſhal I ſpeake of the Puritans
late malapert and ſeditious booke
againſt her Ma.ties honorable intētions,
and againſt her next neighbour ād fre-end,
a principal Peere of Chriſtendom?
               
                  
Or of the diuers peſtilent bookes, ſet
out theſe late yeres in french and other
languages, againſt the perſons of ſundrie
Princes and Potētates of Chriſtendom:
vttering and amplifying in particular,
moſt barbarouſly, their opē or ſecrete
faultes, and feyning many crimes
neuer committed, to alter their ſubiects
affection from them, and ſo to prepare
their hartes to rebellion againſt them: a
popular practiſe, moſt common novv
in the vvorld among Proteſtants, as it
alvvaies hath been a meane to aduance
ſedition, none euer intending commotion
or alteration, either in the Church
or Commonvvealth, not vſing the
ſame?
               Vvhich kind of inhumane, irreligious,
and vnciuil dealing, vſed by Heretikes,
firſt againſt Popes and other
principal perſons of the Clergie, to induce
the people to their contempt,

being not duely puniſhed by the temporal
Magiſtrate, but either vvinked at,
liked, or of hatred to the order and of
pollicy procured: is novv vſed for like
purpoſes tovvards Kings and Queenes
alſo, that be ſubiect to ſinnes, and the
ſight of the vvorld, and yeld matter to
ſlaunderous tonges and pennes as vvel
as Popes and Prelates do: and vvil hazard
al the Commonvvealths that ſuffer
it.
               It is no good,Slaunderous reportes ād infamous libels agaīſt Princes and cities, vnſeemly ād intolerable. graue, nor Chriſtian gouernement,
to ſuffer a ribald to open in
booke or pulpit, to the people vvhoſe
eares itch for ſuch ſport, againſt Superiors
of al ſtates, the particular faultes,
either feyned (as they be commonly) or
taken vp by heareſy, or in deede committed,
of Prelates, Princes, or peoples
of other Nations.
               If there vvere ſome Italian or Engliſh
fugitiue, that vvould take vpon him in

Rome to make a preach before the Prelates
or citizens there, of al the ſinnes
donne in the Court, or in London, or
by the Noblemen them ſelues, or in
their houſes, or through the Realme,
and not onely vvhat is in deede cōmitted,
but vvhat malice and impudencie
may forge to be done: ſhould ſuch a
monſter (trovv ye) be heard of honorable
or honeſt men there, or eſcape the
coarde or galleies? No doubtles, none
could be ſuffered ſo to do againſt any
Prince, famous citie, or Nation, Catholike
or Proteſtant, in the vvorld, vvithout
iuſt correction.
               And yet (alas) in our Countrie, men
make ſport, or rather a ſolemne act of it:
and that is thought not vnvvorthy to
be ſpoken in pulpits, and aftervvard publiſhed,
and printed, vvhich neither
the Old Comedie, nor Paſquino, nor
any ruffian or Carneuall-youth in Rome,

vvould ſpeake vvithout a viſard.England much altered frō our forefathers grauitie, by the new preaching. So
are the māners and grauity of our forefathers
altered, by this nevv preach, into
Chās conditiōs, detraction and malediction
euen of Gods Prieſts and the Princes
of the people,Act. 23. vvhich the Apoſtle
taught vs by his ovvne moſt humble
example, ought not to be vſed, no not
tovvards ſuch as haue but the name and
reſemblance of true Prieſts, and vvhich
S.Ep. Iudae v. 9. Iude by the fact of S. Michael proueth,
ſhould not be vſed to the Diuel
himſelf.
               Oh vvhat a diſ honour is it to our noble
Countrie, that can heare and beare
ſuch vvicked ſlaunderers, returning home
from honorable States, Cities, and
Cōmonvveales, and vttering nothing,
but onely filthy, falſe, and reprochful
matter againſt them! And hovv great
a ſhame and iniquity is it, that men
borne in a civil Countrie, can trauail ſo

far,The guiſe or faſhiō of profane Pilgrimes and lewd trauailers. and into ſuch renovvmed places,
Churches, and ſtates, and find nothing,
nor bring home to their freendes any
thing, but filth and ribauldry.
               Vvhich kind of mē, are like vnto one
that ſhould go to take the ſight and vevve
of ſome Princely palace or citie, and
vvhen he cometh there, neuer looketh
on the ma.tie, magnificence, beauty, cō
                  modity,
order, gouernement, iuſtice, or
other ſuch things: neuer aſketh for the
vviſe, the godly, the learned, and the like,
for vvhich the places be notorious:
but onely rūneth to the chānels, ſinkes,
gutters, iakes, dunghils, and other ſtinking
offices of mans infirmities, and acquainteth
him ſelf onely vvith the blacke
guard, ād other of abiect ſeruices, and
returneth vvith outcry, that nothing is
found there but ſtinke and lothſomnes.
               Euen ſuch in good ſooth are theſe
vnhoneſt Pilgrimes, that as ſoon as
they arriue in any famous citie, ſeeke

not after any things of excellent fame
for vertue, learning, regiment, religion,
deuotion: but according to their ovvne
taſt, hunt after nothing, aſke for nothing,
but vvhere the Stevves be, vvho
frequent them, vvhat crimes, iniquities,
or diſorders haue beē done in thē, vvhat
vices the Princes or Prieſts are giuen to:
and ſo partly of that they find, partly of
that they feyne, partly of that they borovv
of vvanton Poetes, and partly of
that vvhich holy men haue of zeale and
charitie reprehended, they make vp a
fardel of malicious ſlaunders and detractions
of Popes and Princes, and vtter
ſuch ſeemly vvares in their ſeditious ſermons.
Vvherein for al that, hovv ſpitefully
ſo'euer they ſpeake agaīſt ſuch perſons,
in effect cōmōly they ſay nothing
of importāce againſt thē, that hath any
ſhevv of truth, or iuſt cauſe of blame, in
the ſight of any vviſe indifferent man.
               
                  
But theſe be the diſordered and ſhameful
meanes of Proteſtants in theſe
daies, to preferre their rebellions againſt
both the ſpiritual and temporal Gouernours:
beſides the horrible deſignements
of their Caluiniſtical Conſiſtories,
pretented Synodes, and Prophecyings,
in diuers Countries, al tending
directly to pernicious innouations.
               Compare novve theſe factes, and other
the perilous treacheries done againſt
the repoſe of al Realmes round
about, and you ſhal vvel perceiue the
attēpts of the other ſide, to be ſport and
paſtime in any vviſe mans iudgement,
of vvhat religion ſo euer he be, to the
implacable fiercenes and furie of the other,
a people by this nevv no religion
made moſt brutiſh, conſcienceles, reſtles,
and that vvil hazard al the Kingdoms
of the vvorld, before it be filled
vvith bloud and ſpoile, except God preuent

the matter vvith his mercie, and
reduce al men to the obedience of his
Catholike Church and their Princes
againe.
               And for the preſent troubles in Ireland,Ireland.
vvhich novv namely ſeeme to giue
ſome cauſe of doubt, that our brethrens
intentions may be againſt the
ſtate, no leſſe then for the preferment of
the Catholike faith: moſt ſure it is, and
of certaine knovvledge the vvriter hereof
proteſteth, that they neither vvere
nor could be acquainted othervviſe
thervvith, then by the common brute
of the vvorld.
               If the Pope haue any part in thoſe
affaires, aſſure your ſelues, their elders
(vvhich of reaſon ſhould rather knovv
it) neither by his Holines mouth nor
any of his miniſters, in the time of thoſe
Students being in Rome, heard ſo
much. And therfore to racke thoſe

poore innocent perſons, and to vvreaſt
out of them Princes ſecrets, vvherof
there can be no reaſon that they
ſhould be partakers, is a lamentable
and rare caſe in our Countrie, ſpecially
in the clement reigne of her Maieſtie.
               Imagine ye the Italian gouernement,
and ſpecially the Papacie, to be ſo diſcretely
menaged, that euery poore Prieſt
or ſcholer in the citie knovveth the
Popes ſecrets? No no, Chriſt doth
knovv it, and he ſhall one day open
their innocencie, and iudge their cauſe
and ours, vvho, as vve ſhal then anſvver
before him, neither knevv then,
nor novv knovv any intentions of Pope
or Princes, concerning ſuch things
as are conteined in the Articles of the
pretended confederacie, mentioned in
the Proclamation of the 15 of Iulie,
as more largely vve haue declared before.
               
                  
As that alſo, vvhich the late relapſed
Miniſter levvdly reported in
open pulpit and printed booke, that
the Excommunication of the Queene
ſhould be publiſhed here in our College
of Rhemes, and ſet on the poſtes
and publike places of this citie,
vve proteſt to be an impudent vntruth
and ſlaunder: vvherof the vvhole tovvne
vvill beare vs vvitnes. and euery
vviſe man might eaſily diſcouer that
caluminious fiction, becauſe in the
dominions of his Ma.tie moſt Chriſtian,
vve neither could nor durſt do
any ſuch thing. So that by this one
thing ſo maliciouſly feyned, al ſincere
and indifferent men may deeme of
the reſt of his heareſaies and ſightes at
Rome, as of impudent lies and ſlaunders.
               
                  
Humbly therefore vve deſire, for the
honour of God, her Ma.ties vviſe and
graue Counſelers, not to conceiue vpon
ſuch baſe felovves contriued calumniations,
othervviſe of our doings and our
brethrens, either at home or abrode,
then as of men moſt obediently, duetifully,
and naturally affectioned to her
Ma.tie, to their Honours, and our deereſt
Countrie, ſo far euer, as ſhal ſtand
vvith our ſubiection to Gods lavves
and the Churches, to vvhich vve are as
much bound by our Baptiſme and religion,
as to the former by nature and
birth. Being, in the behalfe of God,
bold this much further in like loyaltie
to tell them: that the cauſes of vvhat perils
and dangers ſo euer may be tovvard
that Realme (vvherof, ſo God ſaue our
ſoules, vve haue no knovvledge) can
not be iuſtly attributed but to the firſt
alteration of religion and forſaking the

ſociety of the Catholike Church and
kingdoms.
               Hereof proceedeth the multitude of
nevv Sectes, directly tending to the diſturbance
of publike repoſe: vvhich for
the ſpecial attentiō giuen to the doings
of Catholikes, are vvittingly ouerſeen.More dā
                     ger in forced diſsimulation, thē in plaine and open confeſsion of faith or religion.
Vvhich Sectes in this caſe muſt needes
proue more pernicious, becauſe, by the
propertie of many of them (teaching
their likers, by contrarie actes, othes,
and aſſeuerations, to couer their conſcience
til time require) their intentions
can hardly be diſcouered: and, by the
common condition of al hereſies, bringing
noueltie, chaunge, and libertie,
vvhich yeld them many folovvers, ſhal
hardly be reſiſted.
               Catholikes abhorred theſe mutations
from the beginning, becauſe it is their
grace to loue antiquitie, grauitie, and
conſtancie. Vvhom alſo it is our principal

endeuour to induce to the open
confeſsion of their faith, vvhen by the
lavv of God it is required, and neuer
by contrarie othes or actions to pretend
an other religion then they beare in
their breaſtes. Vvhich plaine diſcouerie
of our ſelues, can not be diſagreable
or dangerous to the Politie.
               And maruel it is in our eies, that
ſuch extreme diligence ſhould be vſed
by al penal lavves, othes, puniſhments,
and perſuaſions, to driue the Catholikes
to profeſſe that outvvardly, vvhich
is knovven they hate in their hartes invvardly▪
as though there vvere imminent
danger of open profeſſed Catholikes,
and none of the cloſe diſſemblers
in the ſame kind. For I thinke their
vviſedoms do not imagine, that their othes
and ſtatutes do chaunge their meanings,
though they alter their countenances,
nor that feare can long or ſurely

keepe his maiſter.
               Hovv ſo euer it be, alteration of religion
is the cauſe of al inconueniences,
though a fevv yeres vvordly proſperitie
couer from the ſimple, that
very firſt ſurge of our miſerie and perplexitie:
and to returne to Gods Church
againe, is the onely right remedie,
out of vvhich al Kingdoms are ſure
to periſh aſſuredly. Vvhich not acknovvledged,
maketh many a plaiſter
and preſeruatiue to be vvrongly
applied.
               Againſt our Lord no force nor counſel
can preuaile, vvho hath vſed (as
their vviſdoms muſt needes knovv)
the rod of his ire againſt al thoſe great
Kingdoms, once moſt floriſhing in
Chriſtian faith and libertie, novv vnder
the tyrannie of the Turke and other
Heathens, ſpecially for ſinne, ſchiſme,
and hereſie.
               
                  
Let not their Honours contemne the
voice and admonition of a poore creature,To the honorable Counſelers.
vvhoſe ſpeach may be the inſtrument
of Gods prouident care ouer that
poore afflicted people, vnder her Ma.ties
and their gouernement.
               But if the reſtitution of the Realme
to the Catholike Church, can not ſtand
vvith their conſciences, as being perſuaded,
their ovvne religion to be true: or
at leaſt not vvith their vviſedoms, for
that, being thus far gone, the retiring
backe might be dangerous to the ſtate:
yet for Chriſtes loue vve aſke it, let their
Honours haue ſome care and conſideration
of our conſciences alſo, and of
other innumerable in the Realme, no
leſſe timorous, and as vvel informed, as
theirs, or any mens can be in this caſe:
that for our ſatisfactiō before God, and
for the peril that may fall, through his
offenſe and indignation, to them and

to the vvhole ſtate, if ſo iuſt a requeſt ſo
humbly aſked in his name ſhould be
cōtemned, it vvould pleaſe their goodnes,
to vvithdravv their heauy hand
from the poore Catholikes, and rather
procure them licence of her Ma.tie, to
ſerue God after the manner of al their
Chriſtian forefathers, then to afflict thē
in body and mind ſo pitifully: that ſo
both the Seminaries might ceaſe, and
their Honours might haue Gods Prieſts
and all Catholikes pray for them, rather
as their patrons, then as their perſecutors.
               Truſting, that they and al the vviſe
of the Realme be perſuaded, that the
Kingdom of God firſt ſought,Mar. 6. is the
vvay to the peace, felicity and ſecurity
of al vvordly vveale: vvhich not onely
their ovvne pietie and prudence may
teach them, but alſo the example of the
Hebrues, vvho for feare of endamaging

their temporal ſtate, for ſooke their promiſed
Lord and Sauiour. Of vvhom
therfore S. Auguſtine vvriteth this ſentence,
vvorthy to be emprinted in the
hartes of al ſuch as haue the rule and
charge of kingdoms.Tract. 49. in loan. Temporalia perdere
timuerunt, & vitam aeternam non cogitauerunt,
& ſic vtrunque amiſerunt.
            
            
               
                  ❧ An admonition and comfort to the
afflicted Catholikes.
CHAP. VII.
               
                  NOVV hauing ſincerely
ſet forth to the vvorld
our intentions, vve may
turne our talke, for concluſion
of this Defenſe, to you our fathers,
frendes, and brethren in Chriſt,
being either in the fornace of Gods probation,
or in the burden and broile of
that hote harueſt of our Lord, or by

ſure treading, threſhing, and vvinovving,
laid vp for vvel tried vvheat
in the barne-floore of Chriſtes Church,
to you vve ſay: Be humble, vviſe,
meeke, peaceable, patient, and conſtant,
in all your cogitations, vvordes,
anſvvers, doings, and ſufferings:
that Chriſt Ieſus vvhom you
ſerue, may bleſſe and proſper your endeuours,
moue her Ma.ties hart to haue
compaſsion, open her graue Counſelers
eies to ſee your innocencie, alter
the enimies and il informers malice
and malediction, vnto loue and good
affection tovvardes you, ſtirre vp the
mindes of al men, invvardly and in
conſcience to conſider the cauſe of your
afflictions, and giue them ſuch ſenſe,
reaſon, and religion, that they may acknovvledge
your vndeſerued calamities.
               
                  
For, your life and behauiour agreable
to your faith and calling, and formed
in all pietie, diſcretion, and modeſtie,
after the demeanour of all old Martyrs,
and according to the paterne of
thoſe glorious Confeſſors our true fathers,
Paſtors, and Maiſters, that haue
by their ſacred perſons ſanctified your
priſons by tvvo and tvventie yeres durance,
ſhal defend your Chriſtian intents
and ours, more then all the vvordes
that vve can make. In the meane time,
both you and vve, vvith all our louing
brethren the Catholikes, muſt reſt
vpon God, and the equitie of the cauſe
ſo vvell knovven and approued to the
vviſeſt in the vvorld, and our ovvne
vvell enformed conſcience.
               For as the cauſe,Aug. ep. 
                        •
                     1. and not the paine or
perſecution (vvherof only Heretikes
do vaunt them ſelues) iuſtifieth vs, ſo
Chriſt and our conſcience teſtifie, that

vve are not acquainted vvith any conſpiracies
againſt our Prince and Countrie,
nor do ſuffer for rebellion or treaſon
attempted againſt man, but for that
vve vvill not conſpire vvith Coré and
his complices,Num. 16. againſt Moyſes and Aaron,
Peter and Paul, vvhich the holy
Scriptures call rebellion againſt God:
and for that vve crie vpon our deereſt
Countriemen, that the reuolt from the
Catholike Church is a greater fault by
manifold, then defection from any earthly
king or Cōmonvvealth: fyre once
ſent from heauen, and the earth opening
and ſvvalovving ſuch offenders
aliue dovvne to Hel, for our vvarning,
and for Gods reuenge of ſo greuous a
crime.
               For this (in truth) and none other
matter, do you and vve ſuffer. It is for
the honour, peace, and vnitie of the
Church: it is for the ſauing of our ovvne

ſoules, and the ſoules of our beloued parents
and frendes: it is for the defenſe
of Chriſtes Prieſthod and ſouerainty in
earth: it is for his eternal Sacrifice and
Sacraments: it is for the cuſtodie of
that doctrine and truth,1. Tim. 6. vvhich vvas
laid vp as depoſitum in the hands of
S.2. Tim. 1. Timothee and other Biſhops and
Prieſts, to be preſerued from al corruption
and alteration coming by hereſie
and noueltie: it is for the good garding
of the holy Scriptures, and the
natiue ſenſe therof ſet dovvne by Gods
Church and al the holy Doctors, from
heretical adulteration and deprauation:
it is for our inheritance left vs by S.
Gregorie and S. Auguſtine our firſt
Apoſtles, vvhich vve may not betray
for a thouſand deaths: finally it is for
al our Chriſtian fathers faith, honour,
and memorie, to vs moſt deere and
bleſſed.
               
                  
The defenſe of any one article of
the Catholike faith, of any one point
of Chriſtian doctrine, any title of our
Lordes lavv, any one Sacrament, the
ſauing of any one ſoul (being the price
of better bloud then ours) is cauſe iuſt
and great ynough, vvillingly and
patiently to ſuſtaine al mortal paines:
but, for ſo many partes of our beleefe
impugned, for ſo many holies
profaned, for millions of ſoules hazarded,
for the ſaluation of our Prince
othervviſe ſo gratious, our Countrie,
our parents, and our poſteritie,
not to ſuffer, vvere againſt al
duety of nature, charitie, and religion.
               Such is then your cauſe, deere Sirs,
as neuer Martyrs nor Confeſſors ſince
Chriſtes time, had any more vvorthy,
more cleere, or more glorious:

Vvhich to forſake for any feare of man
or flatterie of this vvorld, ſhould be our
eternal ignominie, both here in this life,
and before God and his Angels in
the next.
               The manner of your ſuffering, cōfeſſion,
and Martyrdom (for, bleſſed be
God, ſome of our brethren haue gladly
and honorably perſiſted euen to death,
and many mo are ready by his grace for
the ſame) reſembleth alſo the old proceding
in that kind, vvhich hath not
been commōly vſed ſince Kings vvere
Chriſtened. For, as the perſecution of
Prieſts and Biſhops (vvherof S.Li▪ cont. Hilarie
complaineth againſt Cōſtantius the
Arian Emperour) is oftentimes ſo couertly
and craftily conueied,Conſtant. vita defunctum. that being
in deede great and perilous, yet it can
not appeare to the due commendation
of the ſufferers, or good example of the
ſeers: ſo both of old and of late, almoſt

in euery Countrie (as by the Arians and
Circuncellions in Afrike and Italie, and
by the Caluiniſtes in France, Holland,
and Zeland) Prieſts and Catholikes haue
been perſecuted more often, and more
cruelly tormented and maſſakred,
then vvith vs, thankes be to God: but
yet neither ſo much to the merite of the
ſufferers, before God, nor to the edification
and aduancement of the peoples
faith and hope in him, as vvith vs: vvhere
the matter paſſeth vvith deliberatiō,
and in forme of lavv and order.
               Vvhen Chriſtian Catholike men are
barbarouſly aſſailed, and ſodenly ſlaine,
no queſtion made of their faith or
holy order, no promis giuen of life or
promotion, if they liſt to deny their
profeſsion, no deliberation nor time to
conſult, nor former terrours ſhevved,
no tedious nor lingering paines of priſonment,
of famine, of infamie, of frendes

or aduerſaries ſolicitation, of loſſe
of lands, goods, and life, or care of vvife,
children, and familie: in this caſe,
though they be holy and happy Martyrs
alſo, yet ſuch ſuffering is not that
vvhich is called after holy Scriptures
ſpeache, Confeſsion of Chriſt before
men vntil death or temporal torment
vvhat ſo euer. Vvhich kind is almoſt
proper to our Countrie in theſe daies:
at the leaſt it is in no other place els ſo
euident and vſual.
               There you are conuented before Officers,The maner of proceding againſt Catholikes, in England.
you are examined of your Prieſthod,
of ſaying or hearing Maſſe, of
abſoluing or taking abſolution: you
are called traitours and ſeditious perſons,
you are priſoned in dungeons
among theeues, and ſome of your chaſt
virgins (as of old the bleſſed Martyrs
S.Bridewel. Agnes and S. Lucie) thruſt into
infamous places: the lodgings ſometime

of murderers and malefactors, are
novv filled vvith men of God, Chriſtian
innocent people of euery ſtate
and ſexe: you are tempted by faire
promiſſes on the one ſide, and fearful
threatenings on the other, to yeld
though it be neuer ſo litle: not relenting,
you languiſh there in perpetual
priſon, or be condemned to
die, and are executed in maner of traitours.
               Vvhich laſt extremitie that no mo
of you be put vnto (though ſo many
be moſt ready) vve attribute to God
firſt, and then to her Ma.ties clemencie,
that hath euer been hardly dravven
to giue conſent to the execution of
ſuch vniuſt lavves againſt her Catholike
and faithful ſubiectes. But vvhen
our Lord permitteth it for his glorie, it
proceedeth in al reſpects after the maner
of old Martyrdom.
               
                  
And this is it that giueth vs ſo great
hope of the cōuerſion of our Countrie,
knovving by the Apoſtle, that it is a
great perfection and accompliſhment
of our Chriſtian charitie and duety, to
reſiſt not onely vnto the loſſe of Countrie,
vvife, children, parēts, goods, lands,
libertie,Heb. 12. honour, but vſque ad ſanguinem,
euen to the loſſe of bloud and liues.
               Bloud ſo yelded maketh the forcibleſt
meane to procure mercie that can
be. Euery time that you confeſſe Chriſtes
name, euery vvrinche of any ioynt
for it, euery opprobrious ſcoffe and
ſcorne giuen by the popular, vvhen
you be caried in the ſacred veſtiments
through the ſtreates (for that alſo ſome
of our brethren there haue happily borne)
euery vilany and ſacrilege done to
your Prieſthod, euery of your ſores, ſorovves,
and ſighes, euery of your vvantes
and neceſsities, make a ſtronger interceſsion

for our Countrie and afflicted
Church, then any prayers lightly
in the vvorld.
               This is the vvay, by vvhich vve hope
to vvinne our nation to God againe.
Vve put not our truſt in Princes or practiſes
abrode, nor in armes or forces at
home. This is our fight, and for this
vvarre, the Societie of Ieſus and our Seminaries
vvere inſtituted. to this, by al
ſpiritual exerciſes and cōtinual reading
of the Scriptures and antiquity, our
Prieſts and Students are trained. This
being plainely of God, can not (vve
truſt) by any violence or prudence of
man be made fruſtrate. Vvherof he
hath giuen reaſonable good proofe already,
by the great encreaſe of the number,
and the zeale of knovven Catholikes,
gained principally by the long confeſsion
(vvhich is a true, though a ſlovv
Martyrdom) of the cōſtant and learned

Prelates beſides others, and aftervvard
by the like ſuffering of the yonger Prieſts,
and others, being the frye and fruite
of the former ſpiritual fight. Vvhich
novv being come to perfectiō, hath ſeede
in it ſelf, to be ſovven in teares, and
vvvatered (if neede require) vvith bloud.
               To vvhich ſort our Lord hath euer
giuen ſucceſſe,The church grewe and increaſed by perſecution. him ſelf no othervviſe
planting his lavv and religion, but
by giuing vp his bloud and life, for
vvhich his Father promiſed him, that
he ſhould ſee ſemen longaeuum:Eſa. 53. nor any
othervviſe more ſuſtaining or furthering
and promoting it in the Apoſtolike
and primitiue ſtate for ſome hundred
yeres together, then by the precious
deaths of the preachers and faithful
people: the Kings of the vvorld in
vaine vſing al force and moſt exquiſite
diligence to extirpate the ſame: and
the courage of the Chriſtians continually

(through Gods goodnes) increaſing
by the crueltie of their perſecutors,Martyrs.
at vvhat time vvhole cities and
commonalties, vvhole legions of noble
ſouldiars, great troupes of virgins
and matrones yelded them ſelues to
death and torments for their faith.
               As novv alſo, a litle more zeale and
knovvledge of Chriſtian duety engendred
by Gods ſpirit, in the mindes of
the people, through the vſe of this ſpiritual
practiſe and combat, ſhal make
vvhole ſheeres ād prouinces of deuout
perſons, moſt gladly offer their lands
and liues, for the loue of Chriſt and
their ovvne ſaluation. This flame and
feruor of faith daily more and more enkindled
in the harts of al ſortes (vvhich
is the fyre that our Lord caſteth into
our Coūtrie,Luc. 12. and vvhich he vvill haue,
as vve hope, to burne) can not be extinguiſhed,
except it be long of our ſelues.
               
                  
Truth preuaileth in time, becauſe it
is Gods dereling,3. Eſd. 4. againſt vvemen, vvine,
or kings: and ſpecially the truth of
Chriſtes religion, vvhich riſeth vvhen
it is oppreſſed, and floriſheth vvhen it
is moſt impugned. It hath not alvvaies
an external tēporal ſtate, nor the lavves
alvvaies for it, becauſe Princes be not
alvvaies ſubiect vnto it: but if it be not
forſaken by the covvardeneſſe of the
Prieſts and profeſſors, God neuer ſuffereth
it to ceaſe or faile in any Countrie:
though it ſtād vvith trauail and bloud,
as it did in Rome and al other places almoſt
til Conſtantines daies.
               And therfore vvhere God giueth the
grace of Martyrdom,Martyrdom. it is a ioyful ſigne
of mercie, and that he vvill not forſake
the place nor people, vvhich he bleſſeth
vvith ſo high and rare a benediction,
but vvil either mollifie the hartes of the
Prince and Magiſtrate, or giue aboundance

of grace and fortitude to ſuffer
and hold out, til it pleaſe him of his
goodnes, to ſend a calme, or the conuerſion
of the vvhole: vvhich vve vvil expect
(and as much as in vs lieth, procure)
other xxtie and xxtie and tvviſe
xxtie to that, and hovv many mo yeres
ſo euer be appointed by his prouidence
for chaſtiſement of our ſinnes.
               If vve ſtood againſt Gods Church and
truth (as in hereſies many be obſtinate
at the beginning) then forcible good
lavves and puniſhments,Ep. 48. as S. Auguſtine
teacheth by experience of his ovvne
Citie and Countrie, vvould in fevv
yeres breake our endeuours, as repugnāt
both to Gods lavves and mans. But the
Catholike Church and faith can not
by any violence be expugned, vvhere
fortitude of ſpirit and Apoſtolike due
reſiſtance is. The lacke of vvhich hath
brought many great Prouinces from

one hereſie to an other, and at length
to plaine Paganiſme, Turciſme, or
Atheiſme, that is, to no God nor faith at
all, the end alvvaies of theſe many faithes,Li. ad Cō
                     ſtantium.
as S. Hilarie ſaith. From vvhich
to ſaue our Countrie and poſteritie, vve
are bound to ſuffer vvhat ſo euer.
               Proteſting to al our louing brethren
the Catholikes of Englād,Againſt diſsimulation and coldneſſe in religiō. that it is not
diſsimulation, hiding or couering our
conſciēces by othes, going to the Churches
ſeruices and preachings of Proteſtants,
nor halting on both ſides, coldneſſe
and careleſneſſe, nor yelding to
the preſent ſvvay of pretended lavves,
to ſaue our liues and liuings til time ſerue
our turne: that can deliuer our ſoules,
or euer recouer the Realme to the
vnity of Gods Church againe.
               There is nothing in the vvorld but
zeale of Gods houſe, and ardent loue of
our Lord, and of the ſoules bought

vvith his bloud, that can vvinne vs
this field.Martyrdō, a high dignitie and ſingular bleſsing. Vvhich excellent grace of
moſt high charitie proceeding from
Chriſt, that giueth you not onely to
beleue in him, but to ſuffer for him,
is the happieſt lotte that you could
haue in this life, brethren moſt deere:
a benediction of God, not to your
ſelues onely (among ſo many thouſands
ful good men, that attaine not
to ſo high dignitie of Confeſsion and
Martyrdom) but to al your Countrie,
name, frendes, and familie,
being bleſſed and protected by your
trauailes, in Chriſt for euermore: a
thing ſought for of many ful perfect
men and ſaincts, but not obtained: ſo
extraordinarie is your gratious happe
herein.
               You knovv the ſuperaboundant
revvard, the glorious crovvne, the

eminent ſtate, the ineffable felicity of
ſuch as confeſſe Chriſt before men,Apoc. 7. and
vvaſh their garments in the bloud of
the lambe. You knovv, the revvard ſo
incomparable ſuccedeth immediatly al
the paines: but a moment betvvixt
mans momentanie puniſhment, and
Gods euerlaſting payement: betvvixt
the temporal ignominie, and eternal
glorie. You knovv, vvithin an houre
aftervvard euerlaſtingly, the pooreſt
Confeſſor of Chriſt is not onely more
glorious vvith the Angels and Saincts
in heauen, but alſo often (as vve ſee
both in the old and late Martyrs) of
more renovvmed memorie amōg men,
then their perſecutors.
               You knovv, once before the throne
of Chriſt, in the theatre of heauen and
earth, theſe rufflers of the vvorld ſhal
ſay vvith many ſighes and grones:
Theſe (lo) are they of whom we made a mocke,Sap. 5.
coumpting their life madnes, and their death inglorious:

and now wo be to vs, they are reckened
among the Children of God, and their lotte
among the Saincts.
               You knovv,Cypr. ep. 52. the force of Martyrdom
is ſuch (as S. Cyprian alſo telleth vs)
that vvithout al chaſtiſement, paine or
purgation in the next life (vvhich S.Aug. in pſ. 37.
Auguſtine ſaith, is greater then any torment
in this vvorld) it deliuereth the
ſoul from all vvordly infirmity, remaines,
reliques, impurity, and debt of
former offenſes, and yeldeth it immediatly
vnto ioy vnſpeakable. No vertue,
no act, nor office of this life ſo meritorious
to the ſufferer, ſo acceptable
to the revvarder, nor that ſo ſpeedily,
amply, and ſecurely procureth eternal
glorie.
               To be felovves of Chriſtes crovvne
and glorie,Mat. 5. to be pronounced bleſſed
by his ovvne mouth, to be of that deſigned
number of elect perſons,Apoc. 6. for the
accompliſhment of vvhom the iudgement

and reſurrection ſo deſired of
Saincts,Col. 1. is differred: to contribute any
drop of bloud, or iote of affliction, to
the making vp of the full meaſure of
Chriſts paſsions for his body, vvhich
is the Church, far excedeth al humane
dignitie and felicitie.
               For this revvard then ſo paſsing, for
a cauſe ſo good and glorious, for a Maiſter
ſo louing, merciful and mighty,
vvhat earthly miſerie ſhould vve refuſe
to ſuffer? Let vs conſider, that men
for their Prince, freend, Countrie, and
home, put their liues in extreme peril:
they refuſe no aduenture, be it neuer ſo
deſperate: they put them ſelues before
the mouth of the canon, they enter into
any breach, they ſuſtaine al the plagues,
famines, feares, calamities, that
nature may endure: and they do vvell,
for it is their duety, and the dignity of
mans condition, not to yeld to theſe

tranſitorie afflictions, in the ſeruices of
the Commonvvealth, or other honorable
quarels.
               See (I pray you) the daily diſtreſſes
and hazards of life, lands, and
goods, in ill cauſes: all vvhich be
vſual among ſo many deſperat cutters
and companions, ready for a ruſh to
kill and be killed euery moment: that
for ſatisfying of their inordinate luſt
to vvine, vvemen, dice, gorgious
apparel, or deſire of reuenge, contemne
al dangers, giues, and gallovves.
Remember hovv many of the
Nobilitie and others, in al Nations,
haue aduentured their perſons, frendes,
and poſteritie, to aduance ſome
particular faction againſt their
ovvne Countries, neuer atchieued
vvithout infinite bloudſhed and calamitie.
               
                  
In al theſe quarels, be they iuſt or
vniuſt, ſo many of al degrees to be ready
to ſuffer al the extremities of death
and ignominie, euery man for his Prince,
many for frendes, thouſands for mere
fantaſies and falſehod: and ſhal none
ſuffer for our Sauiour, for the Church
our mother, for our brethrens ſaluatiō?
ſhal vve thinke it ſtrange to haue three
or foure hundred ready to die for Gods
cauſe, to ſuffer for the beſt and moſt honorable
quarel of al other that man can
haue in this life? that Chriſt ſhould
haue ſome ſouldiars of al orders, that
can be content to loſe lands, goods, and
life for his ſake, in this ſpiritual fight
of patience and toleration, vvhen the
vvorld hath ſo many?
               One tovvne valiantly aſſaulted and
ſtoutly defended, loſeth mo men, and
ſuſtaineth more miſerie in a yere, then
vve ſhal beſtovv vpon Chriſt (that died

for our ſakes before, and vvill recompenſe
vs incomparably aftervvard) in
the hoteſt perſecution that lightly can
be theſe xxtie yeres. In vvhich caſe, to
ſay nothing of noble Catholike Gentlemen,
and other deuout people of
vvhat ſort or ſexe ſo euer, to vvhom
God giueth euen novv the ſpirit of conſtancie,
by the example of S. Sebaſtian,
S. Vincent, S. Maurice vvith the vvhole
legion of Thebes, and S. George the
paterne and patrone of our Engliſh
knighthod, vvhoſe courage in ſuffering
for Chriſt vvas more glorious, thē their
fighting for man: but to ſay nothing
of them, nor of S. Catherine, S. Margaret,
S. Agnes, S. Lucie, and the like
mirrours for our deuout maidens and
vvidovves to behold: for vs that be of
the Clergie, this is the onely and proper
kind of fight.
               Our order and condition make vs

free from the vvarres and other perilous
or martial affaires,To the afflicted Prieſts. often bringing death
and dāger both at home and abrode.
Vvemen haue their continual perils
and miſeries by bearing and bringing
vp their children. Vve (beſides our natural
deaths and aduerſities cōmon to
al other) are ſubiect to no violence nor
troubles, but very fevv, and very ſeldom,
and in ſuch meaſure as God appointeth
or permitteth, and in ſuch moderation
that it may by his grace eaſily
be borne. If vve ſhould for feare or covvardeneſſe
forſake our ſtation in Chriſtes
field, hauing the example and encouragement
of ſo many Prophets, ſo
many Apoſtles, ſo many Biſhops and
Prieſts, in the raſe of Martyrs, and of
Chriſt him ſelf, vve vvere the vnvvorthieſt
Prieſts that euer vvere. And our
glorious Sauiour and his Church, if
they had none to commaund for their

ſeruice and defenſe in this kind of combat,
vvere in vvorſe caſe then any temporal
king or Countrie in earth, vvho
neuer vvant their ſeruants and peoples
trauailes in their diſtreſſes.
               In time of eaſe and vvealth, our Lord
hath as many ſeruiteurs of his Clergie,
as any other ſtate hath of others: God
forbid he ſhould lacke them, or his
Prieſts ſhould forſake him, in the daies
of his perſecution. He is not vvorthy
not fitte to haue honour, priuilege, and
vvealth by him in proſperitie, that vvil
not ſuffer ignominie, lacke, and miſerie
vvith him in aduerſitie. It is novv
(deere brethren) our courſe to ſerue in
this ſort, and a far better lotte is it, thē our
forefathers had, that ſerued onely in reſt
and peace, neither vvith ſo much ſecurity
of ſaluation, nor ſo litle danger of
ſinne and damnation.
               
                  
Our daies can not be many, becauſe
vve be men: neither can it be either
godly or vvorldly vviſdom, for a remnant
of three or foure yeres, and perchance
not ſo many moneths, to hazard
the loſſe of all eternity. They can
not be good in theſe euil times, much
like to thoſe vvherof S. Polycarpe complained
thus: Lord, vnto what times haſt
thou reſerued vs? And vvere they neuer
ſo many or good, to him that refuſeth
his faith and Maiſter, they ſhal neuer
be ioyful, but deadly and doleful. Corporally
die once vve muſt euery one,
and but once, and therevpon immediatly
iudgemēt, vvhere the Confeſſor
ſhal be acknovvledged, and the Denyer
denyed againe.
               No Martyrdom of vvhat length or
torment ſo euer, can be more greuous,
then a long ſicknes and a languiſhing
death▪ and he that departeth vpon the

pillovv, hath as litle eaſe as he that dieth
vpon the gallovves, blocke, or bouchers
knife. And our Maiſters death,
both for paines and ignominie, paſſed
both ſortes, and all other kinds either
of Martyrs or malefactors. Let no tribulation
then, no perill, no priſon, no
perſecution, no life, no death ſeparate
vs from the charity of God, and the ſociety
of our ſvveete Sauiours paſsions,
by and for vvhoſe loue vve ſhal haue
the victory in all theſe conflictes.
               Neuertheleſſe, if by Gods ſuffering,
for cauſes hidden vnto vs, any ſhrinke
(vvhich Chriſt forbid) for feare of
death, torments, or tribulations, from
the felovvſhip of your happy confeſſion
and crovvnes prepared for the ſame,
as in the time of S. Cyprian and
alvvaies diuers did,Ep. 54. & li. de lapſis. and as one of the
40 did,Homil. 20. vvhoſe glorious fight S. Baſil
deſcribeth, and the Church celebrateth

the 9 of Marche: be not ſcandalized or
troubled thereat, but vſe ſuch vvith all
lenitie, taking compaſsion of their infirmitie,
conſidering that your ſelues
alſo, or any of vs all, may be tempted
and ouerthrovven vvith Peter, and by
Gods grace aftervvard repent and riſe
vvith him againe. Though it be perilous
to preſume theron, many mo folovving
him in his fall and miſerie,
then attayning to his Martyrdom and
mercie.
               Neither be ye diſcouraged at the further
fall of any Iudas, to plaine apoſtaſie
and extreme blaſphemie, or at the traiterous
cōſpiring of ſome ſuch vvith the
Aduerſaries, by proditiō and practiſe, to
afflict you and all other cōſtant Catholikes
more deeply: but haue this ſaying
of S. Cyprian alvvaies in your mind:Ep. 55. nu. 1.
Nihil intereſt quis tradat, aut ſaeuiat, cùm Deus
tradi permittat quos diſponit coronari. neque
enim nobis ignominia eſt pati à fratribus, quod

paſſus eſt Chriſtus: nec illis gloria eſt facere, quod
fecit Iudas. That is. It maketh no matter who
betrayeth, or rageth, wheras God permitteth
them to be betrayed whom he appointeth to be
crowned. Neither is it ignominie or diſhonour
for vs, to ſuffer that of our brethren, which Chriſt
ſuffered: nor for their honour and glorie, to do
that which Iudas did.Ibid. nu. 3. And a litle after:
It ought not to moue any faithful man, and him
that remembreth the Goſpel,2. Tim. 3. and the Apoſtles
forwarning, if in the later daies certaine proud
and obſtinate felowes and the enimies of Gods
Prieſts, either reuolt from the Church, or do
againſt the Church: when both our Lord, and
his Apoſtles haue foretold, that now there
ſhould be ſuch.lo. 6. When ſome of Chriſtes diſciples
by incredulitie forſooke him, he turned to his
Apoſtles and ſaid, wil you alſo be gone? Peter
vpō whom the Church was builded,Mat. 16. in the name
of all, and in the voice of the whole Church
anſwered, that he had the wordes of eternal life,
and therfore him they beleued, and they vvould
go to none other: ſignifying and ſhevving, that
thoſe vvhich reuolt from Chriſt, periſh through
their ovvne fault, but the Church, which beleueth
in Chriſt, and holdeth faſt that vvhich ſhe once
hath knovven, neuer to reuolt from him at all,
and that they are the Church, vvhich tarie in
Gods houſe: the reſt to be the plant vvhich God
the father planted not, ſuch as vve ſee, not to haue
the ſtedfaſtnes of vveighty corne, but like chaffe

to be blovven avvay vvith the puffe of the ſcattering
enimie:1. lo. 2. of vvhom S. Iohn in his epiſtle ſaith,
They vvent out from vs, but they vvere not of vs:
for if they had been of vs, verily they vvould
haue taried vvith vs. S. Paul alſo vvarneth vs,
vvhen euil men periſh from out the Church, not
to be moued, nor to thinke that faith is diminiſhed
vvhē the faithleſſe reuolt.Ro. 3. For vvhat (ſaith
he) if ſome of them haue fallen from the faith?
hath their infidelity made the faith of God fruſtrate?
God forbid.
               Therfore feare no Iſrariote, feare no
Simon,Act. 1. 8. 6. feare no Nicolas, feare no open
perſecutor, nor no ſecrete proditor: but
haue courage in Chriſt, our deere felovves.
And as hitherto, vvhen you vvere
at libertie, and alvvaies ſo long as you
may, you haue offered and vvil offer
our Lords bleſſed body and bloud,
in true Sacrifice, to procure Gods mercie
to our Countrie:2. Tim. 4. So novv vvith S.
Paul you muſt be ready to offer your
ſelues to death in a ſpirituall ſacrifice,
for the confirmation of your faith, and
accompliſhment of al your Prieſtly

actions: Vvhich ſhal make a forcible
crie for grace and pardon, both for your
frendes and perſecutors,
               And vvhat a goodly thing it vvere
to die (if needes you muſt) among
your Catholike brethren and children
there, as it vvere among your ovvne
ſheepe, for that faith vvhich you haue
taught them,Ep. 83. S. Cyprians example is
very notable, vvho choſe to ſuffer Martyrdom
in Carthage his ovvne Biſhopricke,
in the ſight of his flocke, rather
then at Vtica or els vvhereſoeuer, hiding
him ſelf till the ſtorme of perſecution
came thither.
               There is no comfort left in the vvorld
abrode (brethren) nor cauſe vvhy you
ſhould much deſire either longer life,
or more libertie: nothing could you behold
in our countrie, but the Churches
calamitie, diſtreſſe, and deſolation: nothing
could you heare, but nevv Orators,

and (as S.Baſil. ep. 69. & 70. Baſil ſpeaketh) the pulpits
opened to euery blaſphemous tonge:
vvhich cauſed all ſortes of people of
right iudgement (as he alſo vvriteth in
the ſame place) to flee from Oratories
and the houſes of prayer, as ſchooles
of impiety: and rather to make their
prayers vvith teares, out of the Church
doores, and in vvilderneſſe. As the
faithful ought novv to do alſo, mountaines,
vvooddes, lakes, priſons, and
gulfes, being more fitte for a Chriſtian
(as S.Li. cont. Auxent. in fine. Hilarie ſpeaketh) then the Churches:
the Seruice and preaching in
them, much more altered, profaned,
and blaſphemous, then they vvere in
the daies of their complaint.
               Your priſons are the onely ſchooles
novv of true conſolation, vvhich no
doubt God giueth you fully anſvverable
vnto, or rather ſurpaſsing the meaſure
of your afflictions, of vvhat ſort

and greatnes ſo euer they be, or ſeeme
to the vvordly, that haue not the experience
nor ſenſe of ſuch ioyes of conſciences.
Death and dungeons be not ſo
terrible things to Chriſtes ſouldiars, as
they ſeeme to the vnacquainted: becauſe
God giueth not the taſt of ſuch his
comfortes to any, but ſuch as are in the
trauail for him.
               Our Sauiour had in his greateſt agonie,Luc. 22.
an Angel ſent to giue him comfort:
S. Steuen the firſt Martyr after Chriſt,Act. 6. 7.
for the moſt certaine cōfort of al Martyrs
that ſhould folovv, ſavv heauen
open and the ſonne of man ſtanding
on the right hand of God, him ſelf in
cheereful and glorious countenāce, like
vnto an Angel.1. Pet. 1. 4. S. Peter, that vvilleth
vs to reioyſe in our paſsions and ſorovves
ſuffered for iuſtice,Act. 12. lacked not in
his empriſonment and bands, the office
of an Angel alſo, He and the reſt of the

Apoſtles after vvhipping and reproche,Ib. c. 5. 16.
vvent avvay reioycing in their hartes,
that they vvere coumpted vvorthy ſo
to ſuffer: they ſung pſalmes and hymnes
often in their priſons and chaines:Dan. 3. 6. 4.
the Three children vvere ioyfull in
the fornace of fyre, Daniel in the lake,
S. Athanaſius ſix yeres in a dry ceſterne,
and foure monethes in his fathers
ſepulchre: breefely, al ſuch places vvere
euer not onely full of Diuine conſolation,
ſufficient to the repulſe of al contrarie
terrors and temptations of the
vvorld, but alſo haue been ſprings of
ſpiritual ioyes and comforts to others
abrode. It is the priſons, that haue yelded
vs ſo many godly prayers, prophecies,
letters, treatiſes, both of old and
later yeres: diuers of S. Paules diuine
epiſtles vvere endited by the ſpirit of
Confeſsion in priſon: there vvere the
famous bookes of Comfort vvritten by

Sir Thomas More, and many mo
goodly vvorkes in our time.
               Therfore, dere brethren, vve are to
craue comfort of you, rather then to
yeld any, praying you for our Lordes
loue, that vve may be partakers of your
paines and prayers, as vve daily praiſe
God, pray, and ſacrifice for you, in to
vvhoſe ſeruices, ſufferings, and bonds,
vve may by Chriſtes grace ſhortly ſuccede:
if it rather pleaſe not his vviſdom
(vvhich vve hartily and humbly vvith
daily teares deſire) to moue the Queene
our Soueraines hart, to mercie and pitie
vpon her innocent ſubiectes: and by
his diuine povver to vvithhold her
Royall aſſent and hand from further
making or executing of ſuch lavves as
be againſt his truth and glory, and
muſt needes be the vndoubted deſtruction
of the Realme: vvhich ſhal be the
ſurer vvay doubtles for her Ma.tie to

procure both eternal memorie and cō
                  mendation
of clemēcie vvith al the poſteritie,Ib. c. 5. 1
and mercie and pardon at the
iuſt, mighty, and terrible Gods hand,
vvho taketh avvay the life of the Monarches
of the earth,Pſal. 75. and calleth them
to dreadful iudgement at his pleaſure.Dan. 4.
               
               To him firſt, be all honour, empire,
and glorie: and to his holy Iſrael the
Church, his peace and bleſsing: then tribute
to Caeſar, that is, all duety, proſperitie,
and felicitie in Chriſt, to our noble
Prince and moſt deere Countrie.
               
                  
                     Pſal. 31.
Viriliter agite, & confortetur cor veſtrum, omnes
qui ſperatis in Domino.
            
            
               Your louing felovv and ſeruant
in Chriſt Ieſus.
WILLIAM ALLEN.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ The faultes in ſome copies eſcaped,
let the gentle Reader
amend thus.
            
               Fo. 5. pa. 2. Perreiue,
               perceiue.
               14 form,
               from.
               16. theatened,
               threatened.
               18 Miletius,
               Meletius.
               25 thervviſe,
               othervviſe.
               59 for condemmation read
               condemnation.
               81 ſeditiōs,
               ſeditious.
               85 vnlearned,
               vnarmed.
               85 emploied our vpon
ovvne their Countrie,
               employed vpon
their ovvne Countrie.
               85 vpon, the
               vpon the.
               119 Iſrariote
               Iſcariote
            
            
         
      
   