
      
         
            
            AN ADMONITION TO THE NOBILITY AND PEOPLE OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND CONCERNINGE THE PRESENT VVARRES made for the execution of his Holines Sentence, by the highe and mightie Kinge Catholike of Spaine.
            By the CARDINAL of Englande.
            
            Ao. M. D. LXXXVIII.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Gulielmus miſeratione Diuina S. R. E. Tituli Santi Martini in Montibus Cardinalis Presbyter de Anglianuncupatus, Cunctis Regnorum Angliae & Hiberniae Proceribus populis & perſonis, omnibuſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Chriſti fidelibus ſalutem in Domino ſempiternam.
            
               RIghte honorable worſhipfull and moſte dearelie beloued in our lorde, no man can be ignorante that eyther by reporte, readinge, or remēbrance, liſt looke backe, not muche further thē fiftie yeares paſte, that this great miſerie, and mutation of ſtate and Religiō in this our realme of England by which our Churche (Alas) ys already ouerthrowne, our cuntrie in extreame tearmes of periſhinge, and our ſelues with what ſo euer is deare vuto vs, in daily dreade of deſtructiō and damnation proceaded not firſte of the ſubiectes diſorder or diſobedience to theire kinges (as els where Hereſie often dothe) and as we ſee in many of the next nations vnto vs yt preſently hapneth, where popular mutenie againſt theire magiſtrates, hath cauſed their like calamity: But begonne firſte and wholly in effecte, by our Kinge that then was, Henrie the eighte, and afterwarde till this daie, hathe bene ſpecially purſued, by

our princes pretenſed lawes, and vſurped ſouerainty ouer our ſoules, to the which our Nobilité, Prieſtes and people, by force and feare, haue rather bene drawne then by lawful conſente yeilded therunto.
            
               
                  lob. 14. And albeit wicked and hipocriticall kinges, be ſuffred ſumtimes or ſent from God, for the ſubiectes ſinnes and for our offences, greate no doubte and greauous in euerie eſtate (let none excuſe themſelues, let none accuſe others;) and that we hereby, may worthely alſo be thought to haue deſerued bothe our princes fall, and our 1. Reg. 13. owne puniſhement, accordinge to Gods moſt holy cōmination, that when his people ſhould ceaſe to ſerue him in truthe, and comitt wickednes, bothe they & theire kinge ſhoulde periſhe together: Neuertheleſſe, to ſee and knowe the place ſpecially affected, and the nexte immediate ſurge of all our ſores▪ where we expecte remedy and not ruine, ys neceſſary for our recouery. VVherin, though the caſe haue longe ſemed vvel neere deſperate, yet God himſelf not forget full of his olde mercies, beholdinge from heauen our not voluntary but coacted miſeries, and our moſte holy and zelous father in Chriſte Sixtus the fifte, his higheſte Miniſter, and our chefeſt magiſtrate and maſter in earthe, to whom our Sauiour hath giuen Apoſtolike power to take vengeance vpon diſobedience, moued by the ſorowes and ſighes of ſo manie aflicted ſoules, and inſtant praiers of all Chriſtian people that pittie our enforced periſhinge in Schiſme and Hereſie, doth giue vs at this time, both better meanes, more hope, and redyer helpe, then we

coulde euer poſsiblie haue either deſerued or de ſired: yea thei haue (not the pope alone but God himſelſt ſuerly, and other the moſt zelous and mightieſt Princes in Chriſtendom by his Induction) takē the whole care of our caſe into their owne handes, and that with ſuche ſinceare intention (whereof my-ſelf can beſt beare witnes and aſſure you my deare cuntrymen) and in ſuch ſweete moderate & mercifull ſorte, that in the appliance of the prepared remedie, neither the corps of our commonwealthe, nede to feele or feare any diſtreſſe, nor any parte, (other then the principall affected, and ſum ſuche feawe as will not followe this offer of Gods ordinaunce) be wroonge or wrinched thereby. For albeit of ten els, in likecaſe of reuolte from Gods Churche and our fathers faithe, not onlie the kinges, but alſo their cuntries, after diuers dreadefull Cenſures and Sentences, haue bene by ſupreme authority of Chriſtes vicar, giuen vp to Inuaſiō, warres, waſtes, and final diſtruction, and we nowe mighte by way of rigor and extreame Iuſtice, be bothe charged & chaſtiſed far more depely then the Churche of Theatira for tollerating Apo. 2. the wicked Ieſabell, not now as then callinge herſelf a prophetiſſe, but the verie cheefe ſpirituall gouerneſſe vnder God, to teache and deceaue Gods ſeruantes, and to force them to fornication, to eate breade of Idolatrie in Schiſmati call ſeruice. And alſo for that, by error of cōſcience or wante of couragc, we haue ſo longe vnnaturally ſubdued our ſoules to our bodies, hazarded our eternall ſaluation, to ſaue our tranſitorie ſubſtance, obeyed man more then God, preferred

the temporall title, not only of lawful ciuill authority, but of manifold vſurped Tirannie, aboue the ſupreame Biſhops ſpirituall ſoue Mat. 16. Io. vl
                     •
                  . raignty, by Chriſtes expreſſe worde eſtabliſhed on earthe, yeilding to the one moſte ſeruilly as to our houſehold and home God, and as to a verie nationall idol, ſubiection bothe of bodie and ſoule, & thearby diſobeyinge, diſgraceynge diſpi ſinge, and blaſpheminge the other, as a forrē power, or rather as a ſtrange deuill or Antechriſte 
                  Deut. 17 Luc. 10. Num. 16. (a thinge puniſhable in the olde lawe by deathe reputed inthe newe for expreſſe contempt of Chriſtes owne perſon, reuenged in Core and his confederates by fearefull fier from heauen, by horrible gapinge of the grounde they ſtoode vpon and by ſudden ſinkinge downe to hell.) Yet all this notwthſtandinge, the Popes holines, who accordinge to his Apoſtolike benignity, wholly inclined to mercy, followinge Gods rule and example rather of ſparinge the wicked for the good, then puniſhinge the innocent for the euil, that the ſoule which ſinneth onely may periſhe, doth moſt mercifully forget and forgiue all the premiſſes, aſwell in the whole body of the cōmō wealthe as in euery particuler perſon, that ys penitent and wearie of theſe horrible diſorders and treaſons committed againſt God, the See Apoſtolike, holie Churche, and our cuntrie (incorrigible perſons, and principall procurers of theſe miſchefs only excepted) and only meaneth in Chriſtes woorde and power giuen vnto him, and in zeale of Gods houſe, to purſue the actuall depriuation, of Elizabethe the pretenſed Queene, eftſones declared and iuditially ſentenſed,

by his Holines predeceſſors, PIVS QVINTVS and GREGORIE the XIII. for an heretike and vſurper▪ and the proper preſent cauſe of perdition of millions of ſoules at home, and the verie bane of all Chriſtian kingdomes and ſtates neere aboute her. That in this one womans condigne correction, Gods mighty arme that depoſeth the proude and powrable perſons frō their 
                  Luc. 1. ſeates may be feared and glorified, and the horrible and wicked outrages of Henrie the eighte her ſuppoſed fathers houſe and perſon, together with Gods vengeance on the ſame, may in ſum meaſure of his iuſtice be accompliſhed, and our whole people put in happy hope of ſaluatiō and full fredom of conſcience againe, that all the 
                  Pſal. 5
                     •
                  
                iuſte of the earthe may ſaie. Lo this is ſhe that tooke not God for her ſtrenghte, but truſted to her treaſures and preuailed in her wickednes. And that all the worlde, and namely our owne nation and people, to whom the matter ſo nearly apperteineth, may throughly iudge aſwell of this womans and her parentes de
                  •
               ertes, as of his Holines and his mightie and godly confederates moſte happie intention; and howe iuſtelie and nedefullie for our only benefi
                  •
               e and ſuccour, they procede at this preſent to her chaſtiſement and depoſition; Yt may pleaſe all my moſt deere cuntrymen▪ and ſpecialy our peeres and Nobilitie, on whom the auncyent honor and libertie of our churche and cuntrie cheifely dependethe, and by whoſe ſworde and kinghtehood (ſpecially giuen to them and theire noble progenitors for defence of the Catholike religion) our cuntrie hathe often bene deliuered from the tyranny

and vexation of diuers diſordered inſupportable kinges and cruell vſurpers. May it pleaſe them (I ſaie) to conſider but alitle with me, the condition of the perſon purſued, and cenſured by Gods Churche, together with the weight, qualety, & number of her offences, and horrible crimes, which beinge open almoſte to all the worlde before, and now brefely recorded by this writinge, no man (I truſte) ſhall maruell why Chriſtes vicar here in earthe, with other highe miniſters of Gods iuſtice, wolde or could depriue this tirante of her vſurped ſtate and dominion, when no commonwealthe by lawe of nature nether wolde nor mighte iuſtelie ſuffer any ſuche, to rule or raigne ouer any humane ſocietie, thoughe neither Chriſte, Pope, fayth, nor religion were knowne.
            
               The chee ſe poinctes of this admonitiō. To procede therfore brefely and plainely we will ſett downe what manner of womā ſhe ys againſt whom this holie enterpriſe ys made; of whom and in what māner diſſended; Howe intruded into that dignity wherin ſhe ſtandeth; Howe ſhe hath behaued herſelf both at home and abrode; By what lawes of God and man her puniſhement ys purſued; Howe iuſte, honeſt, and neceſſarie cauſes all true Engliſhmen haue to embrace & ſett forward the ſame, ſeing yt procedeth from ſo lawfull authorite, ſo iuſt groundes, ſo holie intentions, and tendeth to ſo happie an ende, and is to be executed by ſo ſuer and ſweete meanes, and choſen perſons, as now ſhall be declared.
            And firſt of all it is notorious to the whole worlde, that Henrie the ſuppoſed father to this

pretenſed Queene, beſides the infinite quantety and enormeous qualety, of his moſt execrable wickednes, for the which by all lawe of religiō, reaſon, & nature, he deſerued often times to be depriued, was in fine, for his horrible ſacriledges, murtheringe of Saintes, and rebelliō againſt Gods Churche, lawfully excommunicated and depriued by Paulus tertius in the yeare 1535▪ and there withall by name and in particuler all the iſſue that ſhould procede of his inceſtuous copulation with Anne Bullen, was moſte iuſtly declared illegitimate and vncapable of ſucceſsion to the croune of England: and that aſwell by the ſentence of the ſaid Paule, and of his predeceſſor Clement the VII. in the yeare of our lorde 1533. (bothe which ſtande in theire full force ſtill) as by ſundry actes of parliament made by Henry him ſelf and neuer repealed legitimating her ſiſter and declaringe her to be baſe, ſhe muſt nedes be adiudged by lawe & nature vnable to inherite the croune.
            Neyther may ſhe here alege, that by conſent of the ſtates and Commonwelthe ſhe ys lawfully poſſeſſed: for that by force ſhe intruded, and conſtreyned many men to giue theire conſentes, depoſinge vniuſtly the Lordes of the Clergy without whome no lawfull Parlament can be holden in that Realme, nor Statute made which hath force to authoriſe Prince or binde Subiectes. Ouer and beſides that ſhe neuer had conſente nor any approbation of the See Apoſtolike, without which, ſhe nor any other can be lawfull Kinge or Quene of Englande, by reaſon of the auncyent Acorde, made betwene

Alexāder the. III. the yere 1171. and Hēry the II. then kinge when he was abſolued for the deathe of ſainte Thomas of Cāterburie that no mā might lawfully take that Crowne nor be accō
               pted as Kinge, till he were confirmed by the ſoueraigne Paſtor of our ſoules which for the time ſhoulde be: This accorde afterwardes beinge renewed, aboute the yere 1210. by Kinge Iohn, who confirmed the ſame by othe to Pandulphus the Pope his legate, at the ſpeciall requeſte and procurement of the Lordes and Comons, as a thinge moſt neceſſary for preſeruatiō of the Realme from vniuſt vſurpation of Tyrantes, and auoydinge other incōueniences which they had proued, and mighte eaſely fall againe by the diſorder of ſome wicked Kinge.
            But howſoeuer ſhe be diſſended or poſſeſſed of the croune, her manifolde wickednes hath ben, ſo heinous and intollerable that for the ſame ſhe hathe bene in perſon iuſtly depoſed by the ſentences of thre ſundrie Popes, wherunto yf we adde the two former cenſures condemninge her inceſtuous natiuity and generatiō, we ſhall finde that ſhe hathe ben condēned by fiue declaratorie iuditiall ſentēces of Gods Churche.
            
               Perſonable crimes of Elizabeth, and firſt of Hereſie. And to beginne with the higheſt and moſt heinouſe crime of all againſt God and his Churche, ſhe ys conuicted of many damnable hereſies, and open rebellion againſt Gods Churche and See Apoſtolike, for which ſhe ys ſo notoriouſly knowne, termed and taken for an heretike, aſwell at home as abrode, that ſhe was glad to prouide by a ſpecial acte of parliament, that none ſhould call her heritike, Schiſmatike, Tyrante,

vſurper, or infidell, vnder paine of highe treaſon.
            
               She arrogateth ſpirtiuall dignite. She vſurpeth by Luciferian pride, the title of ſupreme Eccleſiaſticall gouernment, a thinge in a woman, in all mens memory vnheard of, nor tollerable to the maſtres of her owne ſecte, and to Catholikes in the world moſt ridiculous, abſurde, monſtrous, deteſtable, and a verie fable to the poſterite.
            
               Baſtardie. She vnlawfully intruded herſelf, as before I haue ſaid, in to poſſeſsion of the croune of England, and the annexed dominions not by any diſſent of inheritannce or other lawfull title, but only by enforced vniuſt partly made by her ſuppoſed father beinge then an excommunicated perſon, and partely coacted by herſelf and her coplices in the beginninge of her pretended raigne, beinge indede taken and knowen for an inceſtuons baſtard, begotten and borne in ſinne, of an infamous curteſan Anne Bullen, after warde executed for aduoutery, treaſon, hereſie and inceſte, amōgeſt others with her owne naturall brother, which Anne, her ſaid ſuppoſed father kepte by pretenſed mariage▪ in the life of his law full wife, the moſt renonmed and bleſſed ladie Queene Katherine, daughter of Caſtill and Ara gon, as he did before vnnaturally knovve and ke pe bothe the ſaid Annes mother and ſiſter.
            
               Periury and impiety. She ys guilty of periury and highe impietie for that ſhe did breake, violate, and deride, the ſollemne othe and promiſe made in her coronation, for defence of the Eccleſiaſticall liberties and priuileges graunted by the aunciēt Chriſtian kinges of our realme, and for the contempte

of the holy ceremony vſed in the annointinge and inueſtinge of all faithfull princes: wher in her wickednes was ſo notorious, that the principall Prelate that then was in the realme, and to whom by auncyent order (the Cardinall of Can terbury then being deade) that function apperteined, durſt not for feare of God, and reſpect of his conſcience, nor did not annointe her.
            
               Aboliſſhinge Catholike Religion. She did immediately vpon her ſaid intruſiō, violentlie againſt all lavve and order (the whole Clergie, and many of the nobility and cōmons conſtantlie reclaminge) to the predition of infinite ſoules, aboliſ he the whole Catholike Religion, and faithe, that all the former faithefull kin ges of our cuntrie honorably liued and died in; repealinge at the ſame time all the godly actes that Queene Marie the onlie lavvfull daughter of Kinge Henrie the eighte, made for the reconcilement of the realme, to the vnite of Gods vniuerſall Churche againe; and reuyued all the impious ſtatutes, made by her forſaid ſuppoſed father and brother againſte God, the Churche, the See Apoſtolike, & all innocencie, by which ſhe ſeuered herſelf and ſubiectes violently from the ſocietie of all Catholike cuntries, and from the felovvſhip of all faithefull princes and preiſtes in the worlde.
            
               Prophaninge Sacramentes. She did at the ſame time aboliſh or prophane all the holie ſacramentes of Chriſtes Churche, and aboue other in particuler, the very bleſſed and ſoueraine facrifice of Chriſtes bodie and blud, errectinge for the ſame, and in diſgrace therof, highe idolatrie, and poluted breade of ſchiſme and abhominable deſolation.
            
               
               Forbiddinge preachers. She did ſhutt vp bothe pulpits and Churches from all Catholike preiſtes, preachers, and people, cauſed all Gods publike trew auncyent honor, ſeruice, and ſollemnity, throughout the whole realme of England (a moſte lamētable caſe) and not longe after in Ireland, to ceaſe vpon one daie, conſtrayninge by greate penalties and extreme puniſhment many thovvſand poore chriſtian ſoules of euery degree and ſexe, to forſake that faith and religiō, in which they and all theire forfathers were baptiſed and brought vp, euer ſince the realme was firſt conuerted▪ to Chriſte, to the great torment of theire mindes and cō
               ſciences and ſhortninge of theire daies.
            
               Prophaninge of churches and all holies. She impiouſlie ſpoiled all ſanctified places of their holye Images, Relikes, memories, and monuments of Chriſte our Sauior, and of his bleſſed mother and Saintes, her owne deteſtable cogniſaunce and other prophane portratures and paintinges exalted in theire places: and thearwith hathe ouerthrowne, deſtroied & robbed, all holy alters, chalices, veſtiments, Churche bookes, and ſacred veſſelles, with what ſo euer was conſecrated to Gods true vvorſhip▪ and the reuerence of Chriſtian religion, in the aunciente Apoſtolike miniſterye of the holye ſacraments.
            
               Violatinge ſacred perſons. She hathe ceazed vpon the ſacred perſons of Gods annointed, euen of verie Biſhops that had charge of her ovvne ſoule, called them to accompte for their preachinge and doctrine, conuented them before her prophane counſellers and comiſsioners, depoſed and impriſoned thē with all others that were of lerninge and dignitye amonge the Clergie, till by the miſery of

their captiuité they be in effecte wholly worne and waſted avvaie.
            
               Impious ſcorneful nes. She hathe cauſed the Preiſts of God violently to be plucked from the aulter in the middeſt of the ſoueraine action, and to be caried in ſcornefull māner reueſted through the ſtreates, and expoſed to all the vngodly villanie, irriſion, furie, and follie of the ſimple and barberous people: a thinge certes that aboue all other kindes of irreligioſity moſt deſervethe and ſoneſt procureth God vengeance.
            
               Suppreſſiō of Mo naſteries. She hathe ſuppreſſed all the religious houſes of bothe ſexes, ſo manie as vvere reſtored after her fathers former horrible ſpoile, diſperſed the profeſſed of the ſame, and robbed thē of all their landes and poſſeſsions.
            
               Oppreſſiō of Catholike Gentlemē
                  ▪ and ex
                     •
                  orſiō. She hathe by vniuſt tyrannicall ſtatutes iniuriouſly inuaded the landes and goodes of Catho like Nobles and gentlemen, that for conſcience ſake haue paſſed the ſeas: and moleſted, diſgraced, impriſoned, and ſpoiled, many at home of all degrees, becauſe they vvolde not giue othe and agreemēt, to her Antechriſtian, and vnnaturall proude challenge of ſupremacy, nor honor the Idoll of her prophane communion borde, whereby ſum prouinces, be in manner wholly bereaued of theire iuſt gētlemē in adminiſtratiō of the lavves, & the people excedingly anoied by loſſe of ſo good lordes, and ſo great houſkepers, for lacke of vvhō, the poore dailye periſhe.
            
               Deſtruction of the Nobilitie. Beſides all which ſacrileges abhominations and extorſions againſt God his Churche and her ovvne people, ſhe paſsingly hath indaungered the kingdom and cuntrie by this great alteracion

of religion, vvhich thinge ys neuer vvith out ineuitable perille, or rather ſure ruine of the common vvealthe; as alſo ſhe hathe done by great contempte and abaſinge of the auncyent Nobilite, repellinge them from due gouernmēt, offices, and places of honor, thruſtinge them to ſhamefull and odious offices of inquiſition vpō Catholike men, to the greate vexation and terror of their ovvne conſciences, forcinge them through feare and deſier of her fauor, and of her baſe leaders, to condemne that in others, vvhich in theire hartes and conſciences themſelues like of, and putting into their houſes and chambers, traitors, ſpials, delators, and promoters, that take vvatche for her of all theire vvaies, vvordes, & vvritinges; by vvhich the principall be alredy Norfolke Northū
                  berland▪ vveſ mer land, Da cres &c. ruined moſte lamentablie, and the reſt ſtande in continuall thraldom daunger and diſhonor: ſo ielous be all tyrants and vſurpers, of their ſtate, and ſo lothe they are to be ſeconded by any other then of theire ovvne creation.
            
               Nevve Nobilitie. She hathe in ſteade of the forſaid, and to their ſhame and deſpite, aduaunſed baſe and vnpure perſons, inflamed vvith infinite auarice and ambition, men of great partialitie briberie and iniquity, to the higheſt honors and moſt proffitable offices of her courte and cuntrie, repelling from all publike actiō, charge and authority, vnder colour of religion, the wiſeſt, Codlieſt, lernedſt, and ſinceareſt of all ſortes of men, to the ſpeciall annoiance and diſhonor of the vvhole ſtate.
            
               Nevve Clerglie. She hathe intruded the very reffuſe of the vvorſt ſorte of mortall men, infamons amorous

Apoſtats and heretikes, to all the ſpirituall dignites and prefermētes in the realme, vvho by their inſatiable couetouſnes and concupiſcence, haue made lamentable hauoke, vvaſte, and deſtructiō of the anncienteſt (vvelneare) and honorableſt ſpirituall ſtates in Chriſtendō, herſelf not alitle helpinge to the ſpoile of the ſame.
            
               Harboringe ſtrā
                  gers. She hathe laid the cuntrie vvide open to be a place of refuge and ſanctuarie of all Atheyſtes, Anabaptiſtes, heretikes, and rebellious of all nations, and repleniſhed ſundrie the coſte tovvnes and other, vvith innumerable ſtrangers of the vvorſt ſorte of malefactors and ſectaries, to the great impoueriſhinge of the inhabitantes, and no ſmall perill of the vvhole realme: this beinge taken to be certen, that the number and qualetie of them is ſuche, that vvhen time may ſerue and fauour them, they may giue a ſturdy batail to the inhabitantes of the realme.
            
               Po
                     ••
                  nge the peaple. She hathe not ſpared to oppreſſe her ſubiects (neuer hauinge iuſt vvarres vvith any kinge or cuntrie in the vvorld) vvith manifolde exactiōs not only by ordinatie meanes of more frequent and large ſubſedies (for vvhich only ende ſhe hathe had more parliaments and more often prorogations therof then euer any lavvful prince had, in ſo many yeares) but alſo by ſundrie ſhameful guiles of lotaries, lavves, decrees, & falles of money and ſuche like deceites: and hathe imploied the riches of the realme to ſett vp and ſuſteine Rebells and Heretikes againſt their naturall princes, to the great diſhonor of our nation, damage and daunger aſvvell of our marchauntes, as of all other trauaylers; a publike piracie

and robberie bothe by ſea and land, thervvith authoriſinge by her letters of marte, and othervviſe permittinge, diuers vvicked perſons to ſpoile vvhom they liſte, vvithout ſparinge, ſum peece of the gaine retorninge to ſum of her ovvne cheif councellers and officers.
            
               Sellinge of lavves She dothe for monye and bribes, to the enrichinge of herſelf and ſeruantes, by licenſes, diſpenſations, pardons, and permiſsions, aboliſhe or fruſtrate many proffitable lavves: as ſhe dothe to the ſame ende multeplie ſundry friuolous actes, vvith great ſorfets to the tranſgreſſors▪ vvittingly forbearing (as yt may be thought) the execution of the ſame, that after obliuion of the obſeruation therof, her courtiers and other loſte Coſines and compagnions (vvhom her exceſsiue auarice vvill not ſuffer to revvarde of her ovvne) may make pray by promotinge the poore people, & ſo liue and fede on the carcas of the commonvvealthe: yea euen ſucke out the verie bludd of poore aflicted Catholike mens conſciences, vvho beſides thoſe ſacrilegious maſ mulctes, and the nevv made ſpoiles and intollerable extorſions, for not cōminge to their dam nable Idolatry of the communion, (vvhich for the loue of Gods lavve they often incurr and ſuſteine, to the vtter lamentable ruine of them & their poſterity) be faine by great importable giftes to procure at her officers handes, ſum little eaſe and releaſe of the intollerable feares and miſeries that they liue in. By vvhich vvicked trafique and other pittifull pillage of the people, ſum of her creatures are grovvne ſo great inſolēt, that all ſtates & degrees vvithin the Realme

ſtand in avve and daunger of them.
            
               D
                     •
                  yteſter In vvhich ſorte, beſides others whō vve nede not note, ſhe hath exalted one ſpeciall extorſioner, vvhom ſhe tooke vp firſt of a Traitor & vvoorſe thē naughte, only to ſerue her filthy luſte, vvherof to haue the more fredō and intreſt, he (as may be preſumed, by her conſent) cauſed his ovvne vvife cruelly to be murthered, as after vvarde for the accompliſhement of his like brutiſ The Erle of Eſſex. he pleaſures vvith an other noble dame it is openly knovvne he made avvaie her huſband; who novv of an amorous minion aduaunſed to highe office, degree, & exceſsiue vvelthe, is becum her cheife leader in all her vvicked and vnvvonted courſe of regimēt her inſtrument of the deſtructiō of the nobilitie, by many indirect meanes, & of the ruining, abacinge, diſgracinge▪ diſauthoriſinge diuers auncyent hovvſes names and perſons of renoume; beſides innumerable of the cōmunalty periſhed moſt pittifulie in ſundry prouinces for the feeding of his infinite auarice and other his vnſatiable companions & reteinors, liuinge only of briberie, ſpoile, and roberie: wherby, and throughe the fauoure of the pretended he hathe this n any a yeare ouerruled the chamber, courte counſell, parliamēt, portes, fortes, Seas, Shipps, borders, men, munition, and all the cuntrie; hathe had ſtill at commaundment all officers iuſtices, Benches, Barres & Seſſions, hath had the ſale and monopolie of all lawes, offices, licenſes, 
                  •
               or
                  •
               ettes, Byſhoprickes, benefices and Colleges; hathe made ſuche traffique▪ hoppinge & chaunginge with his miſtris, aboute the treaſures, prerogatiues, landes, and

commodeties of the croune, that ſo & by diuerſe vnſpeakable trecheries, he hathe enabled and fortefied himſelfe farr aboue the meaſure of any Engliſh ſubjecte, and hathe bene the principall diſturber and deſtroyer of the prouinces rounde about vs, to the impoueriſhment of the people at home, and decay of all trafique abrode, with extreme perill of the lande.
            
               Her diſhoneſt lyfe. VVith the forſaid perſon and diuers others ſhe hathe abuſed her bodie, againſt Gods lawes, to the diſgrace of princely maieſtie & the whole nations reproche▪ by vnſpeakable and incredible variety of luſte, which modeſty ſuffereth not to be remembred▪ neyther were it to chaſte eares to be vttered how ſhamefully ſhe hath defiled and infamed her perſon and cuntry, and made her Courte as a trappe, by this damnable and deteſtable arte, to intāgle in ſinne and ouerthro we the yonger ſorte of the nobilitye and gentlemen of the lande, whereby ſhe is become notorious to the worlde, & in other cuntryes a comō fable for this her turpitude, which in ſo highe degre namely in a woman and a Queene, deſeruethe not onelie depoſition, but all vengeaunce bothe of God and man, and cannot be tollerated with out the eternal infamie of our whole cun rie, the whole world deriding our effeminate daſtar die, that haue ſuffred ſuche a creature almoſt thir tie yeares together, to raigne bothe ouer our bodies and ſoules, and to haue the chief regiment of all our affaires aſwel ſpirituall as temporal, to the extinguiſhinge not onely of religion but of all chaſte liuinge and honeſty. Refuſinge 
                     〈…〉
                  
               .
            She coulde neuer be reſtrained from this incontinence

thoughe the principall peers of the realme and others of high authority as deputies from the whole parliament and eſtates, made humble ſute and ſupplicacion to her, that for pittie and compaſsion of their deſolate caſe, and of the daunger that the whole realme, and ſpecially the nobility ſhould be in, yfſhe deceaſed without lawful iſſue, in ſuche a number of competitors of the croune, ſhe wold therfore marrie and procure (yf yt were Gods pleaſure) lawfull heires of her bodie to inherite her dominions after her: to whom ſumtimes ſhe merely and mockingly anſwered, that ſhe wold die a maidē Queene, but afterwards in contēpte and rebuke of all the ſtates of the realme, and to the cō
               demnation of chaſte and lawfull mariage (wher unto as to a bridle of her licentiouſnes, ſhe ys enemie) ſhe forced the verie parliament it ſelf to giue conſent and to prouide by a pretēded lawe, not tollerable (nor euer I trowe hearde of before in a Chriſtian free people) that none ſhould ſo muche as be named for her ſucceſſor duringe her life, ſauinge the naturall, that ys to ſaie baſtard borne childe of her owne bodie. A wonderfull thraldōe, a lamētable caſe, that this highe courte of olde ſo renoumed for fredome and iuſtice, ſhould now be at the deuotion of one woman ſo farr, as to authoriſe both her ſhamefull incontinency & pernitious obſtinacy againſt the honor and good of the whole realme: hauinge no cauſe in the worlde why the next laufull heire may not better beare the naminge, then her vnlawfull longe concealded or fained yſſue, ſauing that yt might be preiudiciall to her priuate & pre

ſent peace, which ſhe euer prefferreth before the publike; as ſhe preſumeth vpon the experience and late remembrance of her owne wicked practiſes againſt her ſoueraine, when the time Her treae ſons againſt queene Maria was, meaſuring all other by her owne impatient ambition: but indede yt procedeth ſpecially, vpon the agniſinge of her vnrightfull po ſ ſeſsion, vſurpers alwaies ſtanding in more awe of the next heire and ſucceſſor, then lawfull princes commonly doe.
            
               The pretenſe of mariage. The Earle of Arū
                  dell & others. The Erle of Arrā. the K. of Svvethē. Archeduke Charles▪ the Duke of Holſt. Hē
                  ri novv kinge of France. Monſeur Alanſon. She, all this notwithſtandinge, in the meane ſeaſon, as often before and afterward, promiſed mariage to ſum of the nobillity at home, makinge many of them in ſingle lyfe to the danger of their ſoules, and decay of their famelies, to attend her pleaſure: & no leſſe depelie dallied & abuſed by diſſembly almoſt all the great perſonages of Europe, to whom aſwel by letters, as by ſollemne Embaſſes, ſhe proffered herſelf, to the mockery & finall deluliō of thē all, to her owne infamy, and the daunger of her people, and ſpecially of late yeares ſhe hathe moſt pittifuly and deuiliſhly abuſed, the late noble brother of Frā
               ce, by manifold hope and promiſe of her mariage and croune, by which baite, and her deceitefull ſuggeſtion, the poore yonge gentleman was driuen in to thoſe dangerous actions and diſhonorable affaires of Heretikes and rebells, to his great diſhonor, and likelie ſhorteninge of his daies.
            
               Her vnnaturall affection to vvardes the cuntrie. By all which diſhonorable & vnworthy dea linge, the whole worlde may ſee that in Atheiſme & Epicuriſme, ſhe would (yf yt were poſsible and might be ſuffred as ſhe hathe begun)

turne the lyfe and whole weale of our cuntrye once moſt floriſhinge, to the feedinge of her owne deſordered delites, being lothe no doubte that any thinge ſhould be lefte after her lyfe, that her rage and riot had not ouerrun, or that her realme ſhould be extant any lōger then ſhe might make pleaſure of it; moſt gladd (as may ſeeme) that ſo floriſhing and auncyent a commōwealth which ſhe hathe in manner brought to deſtructiō in her lyfe, might be buried in her ignominious aſhes when ſhe ys dead. VVherin her affectiō is ſo paſsinge vn̄atural, that ſhe hath bene heard to wiſhe, that the day after her death ſhe might ſtand in ſum high place betwene hea uen and earthe, to behold the ſcamblinge that ſhe conceyued wold be for the croune; ſportinge herſelf in the conceyte and foreſight of our future miſeries, by her onlie vnhappines procured: not vnlike to Nero, who intending for his recreation to ſet Rome on fier, deuiſed an eminent pillar wheron himſelf might ſtand to behold it, but ſo God may prouide for her, and vs, that ſhe may ſee and feele ſum parte of this paſtime in her daies, or rather ſhe only and a fewe ofher Complices feele the paine, who alone or principallie haue deſerued it, if we be ſo wiſe as to follow Gods ordinances.
            
               Conſede ration vvith rebelles. Beſides all theſe outrages in her perſon and regiment, and beſides ſundrie wicked attemptes, and treaſons before ſhe came to the croune, againſt her prince & cuntrie at home, ſhe hathe ſhewed ſuch faithles dealinge towardes all neere neighboures moſt iuſte mightie and Catholike kinges abrode, that it is almoſt incredible:

Sum ſhe hathe ignominiouſlie ſpoiled of great treaſures; One that fledd to her for promiſed ſuccor and ſafety yea euen her that was our true lawful and worthie ſoueraine, ſhe hathe againſt all lawe of God, nature, and nations, after longe impriſonment at lengthe alſo murthered; of 
                  •
               um ſhe hathe ſurpriſed tounes and teritories; with ſum ſhe hathe in great ſimulation offreindſhip, in effecte broken moſt aunciēt lea gues and amitie; againſt them all, ſhe hathe not only notoriouſly cōfederated herſelf with their rebelles, Hugonotes, Geuſes, publicanes, & Male contents, giuinge them great ſuccourſe bothe of men munition and monye, with muche continuall incoragement and counſell in all their wicked attempts: but was and yet is knowne to be the firſt & principall fountaine of all theſe furious rebellions, in Scotland, France, & Flanders, to the fall almoſt ofall their whole ſtates, & the great calamitye of the Churcheof God, wher by it is euident to all the world that herſelf raigneth vnlawfuly as an vſurper and rebell, who onely ſtandeth and holdeth herſelf vp all this while, by ioyning with Traitors and rebelles, and ſuccoringe them againſt their lawfull princes and ſoueraines.
            
               Her lea gue vvith the Turks. In this kinde ſhe hathe by the execrable practiſes of ſum of her cheeſe miniſters, as by their owne handes, letters, and inſtructions, and by the parties confeſsions it may be proued, ſent abrode excedinge greate numbers of intelligenſers, ſpies, and practiſers, in to moſte princes courtes, citties, and commun wealthes in Chriſtendom, not onely to take and giue ſecret notice

of princes intentions, but to deale with the diſcontented of euerie ſtate for the attemptinge of ſum what againſt their lordes and ſuperiors, namely againſte his holines and the Kinge of In fanes inſtructions. Spaine his maieſtie, whoſe ſacred perſons they haue ſoughte many waies wickedly to deſtroie, as furthermore it is euident, how ſhe hathe by meſsingers and letters, dealte with the cruel and dreadfull Tirante and enemie of our faithe the Great Turke himſelf, (againſte whom our noble kinges haue in olde time ſo valiantly foughtē, and vowed themſelues to all perriles and peregrinations) for the inuaſiō of ſum partes of Chriſtendom, and interceptiō of ſum defenſible portes and places of the ſame, as for the diſturbance of Chriſtianity and annoiance of the principall defenders of the Catholike religion, ſhe hathe at this day a ledgar in his courte.
            By which Machiuelian, godleſſe, and conſcienceleſſe courſe, iniuſte vſurped regimentes be alwaies conducted; aduaunced not by counſell or courage, but by plaine trumperie, treaſon, & coſinage, workinge their owne peace, welthe, and felicity, by their neighbours warrs, woe, and miſerie, which neuer endeth well, nor dureth lōge, nor is in fine vnreuenged; thoughe the preſent proſperity, vpholden by others calamity, hathe auerted the ſence the ſimple & worldlie, from the beholdinge of that extreme plague, which alwaies bothe by Gods iuſtice, and mans reuenge inſueth of the ſame.
            
               
                  
                     ••
                  er'extreme pri
                  
                     ••
                  
                VVhich longe felicitie, not withſtādinge, hath ſo puffed vp this vſurper in preſumption & pride of harte, that beſides all other inſolences and

glorious vanetyes and vauntes in her wordes, crakes, countenances, and ieſtures, in all her lyfe and behauiour (in which kinde ſhe exceadeth all creatures liuinge,) ſhe hathe cauſed the annuall daie of her coronatiō in all partes of the realme to be ſacredly kepte and ſollemniſed, with ringinge, ſinginge, ſhewes & cerimonies, & farr more vacation from all ſeruile labors then any day either of our bleſſed lorde or ladie, & which ys more abhominable, hauinge aboliſhed the ſolemne feaſte of our bleſſed ladies natiuity, ſhe hathe cauſed her owne impure birthe day to be ſolemnlie celebrated, and put in to the kalender the verie eue of the ſaid holie feaſte and put out the name of an other ſainte the 17. of Nouember, to place the memory of her Coronation: God graunte ſhe may repente, leaſte in ſteade of her `exceſsiue praiſes that her fauorers and flaterers now giue vnto her, ſhe heare yet in her owne daies, the ſaienge of the prophet againſt the proud prince Nabuchodrnoſor: how dideſt 
                  Eſa. 14▪
                thow fall Lucifer from heauen, that waſt ſo orient in the moringe? how waſt thow brought doune to the grounde that woundedſt nations, that ſubuertedſt kingdoms, and ſaidſt in thy hart, I will be like the higheſt? or feele the plague of one of the Herodes that for to to muche delytinge in the peoples praiſes & acclamatiōs, and for not giuinge glorie to God▪ was ſuddenly ſtricken by Gods angel, eaten of wormes, and died.
            
               Obſtinas in mali
                     ••
                  
                Now of all theſe heynous horrible facts, not credible almoſt to be acheiued by one woman, and her cōplices not ſo many, ſhe hathe in fine

ſhewed herſelf incorrigible, and altogether impatiet of admonitiō, wherof ſhe neuer had wā
               te, aſwell by the writinges of ſundrie her lerned ſubiectes, as ſumtimes by the Imperiall Maieſtie, and other temporall Princes, and namely by diuers holie Popes, whoſe Nuntioes ſhe wold neuer admitt to tell her (as of deutie they thought themſelues bōude) Gods threatninges for all her forſaid and many other intollerable Her excomunication and contēpte therof. diſorders of beleife, lyfe, & gouernment. But to accompliſhe all other impiety, and to ſhew herſelf wholly ſolde to ſinne, ſhe hathe now eightene yeres ſtoode ſtubbernly, contemptuouſly, and obduratly, as in the ſight of God by her owne willfull ſeparatiō through ſchiſme and he reſie iudged & condemned before, ſo now by name notoriouſly excommunicated and depoſed in the word of Chriſte and omnipotent power of God by ſentence giuen againſt her by holie Pius the fyfte the higheſt courte of religiō vnder the heauens. The which ſtate of excomunication (thoughe preſently of the faitheleſſe, where ther is no Senſe of religion, it be not felt nor feared) is moſte miſerable, moſt horrible, & 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                moſt neare to damnation of all thinges that may happen to a man in this lyfe: farr more greauous Aug. lib. 1. contra Faust cap. 17.
                (ſayeth a certen glorious Doctor) then to be hewen in peeces with a ſword▪ conſuned by fier or deuoured of wilde beaſtes and it is expreſſed in the ſcriptures by the ſtate of kinge Pharao his obduration and excecation in wilfull wickednes.
            
               She murthered the executors of the Popes ſentence. And ſhe hathe not onely continued in this dā
               nable contempte of the holie Churches Cenſures ſo lōge as we haue ſaid, but alſo cōmaunded

and cauſed the publiſhers, defenders, approuers, and all others that attempted moſt honorably & godly the execution therof aſwell of the nobility as the Cleargie and commons, ſum beinge apprehended at home, and others traiterouſly bought and ſoulde abrode and ſent home, & all in cruell manner murthered, yea and for theire partes verie willinglie martyred to their eternall eſtimation, rather then they wold liue, ſerue, or ſee any ſuche hereticke, Atheiſte, and vſurper, from whoſe pretēſed kingly authority, they wete in conſideration of all theſe her heinous crimes, clearly by Chriſtes owne vicar, & the warrante of all the faithefull world (that neuer tooke it ſelf bounde to obey a condemned heretike or an Apoſtata) before God and man diſcharged.
            
               The murther of Biſhopes and Preiſtes. In which her obſtinacie and Sathanicall obduration dailie increaſing ſhe hathe theſe late yeares imbrued her handes and cuntrie with the ſacred blud of a number of moſt innocent▪ lerned, and famous religious men, yea & holie Biſhopes The Archebiſhop of Caſſeles, and the Biſhop of Mayon. alſo aſwel in England as Ireland, cauſed thē pittifully to be racked, rent, chained, famiſhed, beaten, buffeted, derided, abuſed, and by falſe accuſation of crimes neuer intended, vnder pretēce of treaſon againſt her vſurped ſtate and perſon, to be finally with all crueltie executed to the regret and ſhame of our nation and wonder of all the worlde. And finally to accompliſhe the meaſure of all her inhumaine crueltie, ſhe hathe this laſt yeare barberouſlie, vnnaturally againſt the lawe of nations by a ſtatute of riot and conſpiracie, murthered the ladie Marie of famous me morie, Queene of Scotland, douager of France, The ſlaughter of the queene of Scotlande.
               
Gods Annointed, her next kinſwoman, and by lawe and righte the true owner of the croune of England.
            
               The iuſtice of the ſentence▪ againſt Elizabeth. All which her open enormities, and other her ſecret wickednes hiddē from vs (which muſt nedes be great, and not numerable, in a Caytif ſo longe vnder Gods and holie Churches curſe, & giuen vp into a reprobate ſenſe and hardnes of harte) may put all faithefull and reaſonable men out of doubte, of the iuſtice of the Apoſtolike ſentence and cenſure againſt her: beinge well aſſured that if any caſe may fall, in which a Prince may iuſtly be forſakē or reſiſted by his ſubiects, or yf any crime in the worlde eyther in lyfe, regimēt, or religiō, can deſerue depoſitiō of a kinge, that here all cauſes together do concur in the perſon of the pretenſed, in the higheſt degre; None euer not amongeſt the heathen, ſo vnprofitable, ſo euill, ſo faithles, ſo pernitious, no realme euer ſo farr falne from religion, publike honeſty, order and ſincerity, as ours hathe done in her vnhappie vſurped gouernement.
            
               A neceſſati conſideration. And here we may beholde, the pittifull race of an vnbridled powrable ſinner (woe be to our offences that haue deſerued the experience of ſolamentable a caſe) this vnworthie womans ſuppoſed father, friſt, as now her ſelf afterward, by reaſon of theire height of erthly power, free frō ciuil chaſtiſemēt, could not be cōtent therwith▪ till they had alſo diſcharged themſelues of all remorſe of conſcience, of all awe of religion, of all ſpirituall diſcipline, & put themſelues in full fredome from Pope, Prelate, Prophet, Prieſt, and ghoſtlye father (an example for all cōmon weal

thes in the world to beware of by vs, for euer) & therfore not onely in their hartes ſaid againſt God & his annointed, Let vs ſhake of theire yoke and breake theire bondes a ſunder; But opēly and boldly both ſaid, and made thēſelues heades of the Churche & ſpirtualtie, aſwel now of the ſoules, as they were before of the bodies: That all lyfe, faithe, religion, Churche, counſell, conſcience, ſcripture, Sacrament, ceremonie, & what ſoeuer was i heauē or earthe, might wholli hāge at their hādes, luſtes, & lykinges. At which licentious irreligioſity, & Antechriſtian pride, thoughe the higheſt in heauē doe in the meane time laugh, & by lōge patiēce not onely forbeare the preſent reuenge therof, but alſo by ſecret iudgmēt for the parties increaſe of damnatiō, or expectatiō of their repentaunce, or the peoples deſeruinges, ſuffer it in them by continuall proſperité & preuaylinge againſt the good, to be muche cōfirmed & increaſed, yet theſe ſtubborn Nemroths, that aſpire ſo farr, and wolde ouerreache the higheſt, can not, nor ſhall not eſcape Gods ire, and furious wrath, neither in this lyfe nor in the next. Feare not my deare cuntrymen, feare not, one generatiō is not yet paſt ſince this wickednes began; truſt now in God▪ & in this ſelf generation it ſhall be reuenged, and in the perſon of this the forſaid kinges ſuppoſed daughter (in whoſe parēts cōcupiſcēce, all thiscalamity was cōceaued) ſhalbe both puniſhed & ended.
            
               
                  Pſal. 
                  
                     •
                  6. & 7
                     •
                  . Haue patience therfore a little, and maruell not to ſee the vngodly floriſhe and fede himſelf with the wealthe of the world: nothinge beinge a more ſure ſigne of wrathe, to cum, nor more

vnlucky to a mortall man, ſpecially to a Prince, then to haue proſperité and good lucke in wickednes, and ſo to be beſett wholy with flatterers that rocke him a ſlepe in the peace of ſinne, that he may neither heare his dutie, nor beare checke or chaſtiſement for the ſame.
            
               Gods prouidēce to vvardes princes. It was Gods great prouidence (who by his prophet warned kinges to take diſcipline, and to ſerue him in feare, leaſt in hisire he ſhould ſuffer thē to fall to vnrightuouſnes) that euer lightlie the Princes of his people had ſum Prophets or Preiſts their ouerſeers, that might frō time to time admoniſhe thē of their offences and enormities, but ſpecially of their fallinge from God, & to denounce Gods threatnings, yea and execute his ſentence vpon them: whom all rightuous & godlie princes did feare, reuerence▪ honor▪ and obey, euen as Gods angels appointed for theire cuſtodie; as contrariwiſe ſuche as were wicked Tirants not contented to be bridled by the almightie, did ſeeke cruelly their deathe and deſtruction, that their diſorders might paſſe with all liberty and licenſiouſnes, and without Gods owne controlment in his lyfe.
            Kinges (I ſaie) beinge not otherwiſe ſubiect to ſuperiors, and often impatient of admonition of their inferiors, may eaſelie fall. Their fall muſt nedes tende to the danger of whole cuntries. Therfore in reſpecte of them namely, great power, courage, and fredome of ſpeache were graunted by God, aſwel ordinarely to Preiſts, as extraordenarely to ſum Prophets & religious perſons in all ages, ſpecially in the time of the newe teſtament, as ſhall further be declared herafter.
            
               
               Saule depoſed. Saule the firſt temporall kinge that the Iewes (then Gods peculiar people) had, though choſen and inſpired by God, was led and directed by Samuell, ſo lōge as he was in order▪ but afterward for aſpiringe to ſpirituall function, & other diſobedience, was by Gods apointment and ſentē
               ce pronounced againſt him, by the ſaid Samuell depoſed of his kingdome, and an other named Dauid anointed by him in the lyfe of the ſaid Saule: who now after his depriuation and as it were after his excomunication, was inuaded by an ill ſpirite, that prouoked him, to kill not only him that was now made the rightfull owner 1. Reg. 22. of his croune (as Elizabethe hathe by Gods permiſsion accompliſhed her like diueliſhe deſiers agaiſt the lady Marie Queene of Scotland) but alſo to ſeeke for Samuels deathe his ſpirituall gouerner, yea and to cōmaunde all the holie Preiſts of Nobee (findinge none ſo wicked as to execute his will ſauinge prophane Doeg the Ido mite) to be cruelly ſlaine as traitors and fauerours of Dauid the cōpetitor of his kingdō. And ſo he ſtoode many yeares againſt God, & kepte the kingdom by tiranicall force not withſtandinge he was accurſed and depriued as the pretenſed hathe done. Dauid neuertheleſſe (in whō was the right of the croune) was lawfully vp in armes with one of the principall Preiſts that eſcaped the forſaid murthet, thoughe not of ſuche power as the pretenſed kinge was▪ till at length Ang. con tra Ad. the vſuper whom he might lawfully haue killed but for reuerēce of his former holy vnctiō wold not, beinge ſlaine in battell, he obtained his righte, firſt of a parte of his kingdome and afterward

of the whole, of which the ſaid Saules ſōne If boſeth did for two yeares vſurpe a parte by the pretended right of his father. By which exāple thow nedeſt not now maruell that kinge Henry or his daughter ſhould ſo lōge raigne after their depriuation and excomunication, & be ſuffred to their owne damnation, to execute cruelty vpon the Biſhops and Preiſts, yea & to kill them as traitors, whō they honored for vertue and lerninge before, euen ſuche perſons as any iuſte kinge or cōmonwealthe, would haue bought and ranſomed from deathe, by the worthe of half a kingdome; or to cōmitt other outrages, ſeinge the ſpirite of Sathā entring into ſuch by their excomunication, inciteth them to all miſcheif, and ſpecially to hate Gods Churche & miniſters, by whom Chriſte executeth his ſentence againſt them.
            
               Hieroboā 1. Reg. 13. &. 14. So did Hieroboam ſeeke to apprehend the Prophet that threatned vengeance and deſtruction to him for his Schiſme, and ſeperacion of his people from the old auncient true worſhip of God in Ieruſalē, & for erecting of a new aulter in Bethell (In which all Schiſme and diuiſiō from the Apoſtolike ſee is prefigured) and creatinge of naught, out of Aarons order, new, hungrie, baſe, and vnordred Prieſtes, the verie patterne of all theſe contemptible miniſters, put vp out of the araie, and lawful ſucceſsion of Apoſtolike preiſthood: A crime ſo highely afterward bothe in himſelf and his ſtocke reuenged, that none of his houſe was left to piſſe againſt a wall.
            
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  . Para
                  
                     •
                  ip. 29▪
                Oſias alſo like vnto our diſobedient kinges, that can beare no function aboue their owne,

pufte vp whith pride would haue executed ſpiritual function (a thinge infinitely leſſe thē our pretenſeds chalenge of Eccleſiaſticall gouernment) but valianty by Azarias and foureſcore preiſtes with him, aſſailed and thruſt out of the temple, whilſt he went a boute violētly to reſiſt, was ſtricken with a filthie leproſie, and ſo ſeuerid by the ſaid preiſtes authority (a figure alſo of the preiſtes power to excomunicate in the new lawe) from the cumpainie of men and conſequently from gouernment, and the regiment of his realme and people comitted to his ſonne, wherby thow perceyueſt that preiſts alſo may vſe force to repreſſe impietie, when the honor of God and his Churches neceſsitie ſo require it.
            
               
                  Athalia. 4. Reg. 11. But the zeale and dutie of Gods preiſtes is no tably recommended vnto vs▪ in the caſe of Atha lia a wicked cruell Queene alſo; who to obteine the croune after Ochoſias, killed all his Childrē, onely one which by certen good womens pietie was ſecretlie ſtolne away, ſaued, and brought vp within the temple for ſeauen yeares ſpace, all which time the ſaid Queene vſurped the kingdō, til at lengthe Ioiada the highe preiſt, callinge to him forces bothe of the preiſtes and people, proclamed the right heire that was in his cuſtodie, annointed and crouned him kinge, and cauſed immediately the pretenſed Queene to be ſlaine, with her fautors, at the courte gate, not withſtādinge they cried TREASON, TREASON▪ as not onely iuſte poſſeſſors, but wicked vſurpers vſe to doe. & this loe is the ende of iniuſte titles, & this is the zeale & authoritie of preiſtes for the maintenāce of righteouſnes & religion▪
            
            
               
               Achab and 
                     •
                  eſabell. 3. Reg 18 & 19.
                No man can be ignorante with what courage and conſtancie Elias being ſought to death by Achab & Ieſabell, that ouerthrewe holie aulters and murthered the true religious of the lande, told them that they and their houſ
                  •
                were the ſubuerſion of Iſrael, and ſlew in his zeale all the Queenes falſe prophets foure hundrethe at one time, and ſo ſett vp holie alters againe. He ſpared 4. Reg. 1. not the Idolatrous kinge Ochoſias his capitains and meſſengers but deſtroied them by fier from heauen, till the third capitain was forced to humble 4. Reg. 9. himfelf vpō his knees vnto him Elizeus alſo cauſed Iehu to be cōſecrated kinge, & the houſe of Achab to loſe their right to the kingdom, and his ſonne Iorā to be ſlaine; by whoſe cōmaundment curſed Ieſabell was afterward throwne out of her chāber window in to the courte, and after eaten of dogges, in the very ſame place where ſhe had comitted crueltie and wickednes before▪ This Ieſabell for ſacrilege, cōtempte of holie preiſtes, rebellion againſt God & crueltie, dothe ſo muche reſemble our Elizabethe, that in moſte forrein cuntries and writinges of ſtrāgers ſhe is comonly called by the name of Ieſabell. I know not whether God haue appointed her the like, or a better ende.
            
               
                  Maacha▪
                   2. Par. 15. Queene Maacha mother to good kinge Aſaa was as ours is an apoſtata from the true faithe, and in fleſhly luſt not vnlike: for ſhe erected opēlie and worſhiped the filthy Venerius ſtatua of Priapus, and repleniſſed all her courte & cuntrie with effeminate and amorous perſons, and therfore was depoſed from her regalitie by her owne ſonne (which the holie ſcriptures muche

commende in him) and the land purged of her whoriſhe abhomination.
            By all which we lerne what crimes deſerue in a prince, depoſition: And howe preiſtes and prophetes haue bene principall workers and Gods miniſters in there depriuatiō. VVhearin the prophet Ely was ſo notorious, that to his honor it is thus ſaid of him in holie writ. He caſt downe kinges 
               
                  Eccle. 48▪
                
               and destroied them, and plucked the honorable from theire ſeates. And of Elizeus in the ſame place, thus: He neuer feared prince, nor could of no man be ouercum. And thus it was in the olde teſtamēt.
            Nowe in the newe teſtament where the preiſtes haue muche more ſoueraigne authoretie, & the prince far ſtrairer charged to obeye, loue, and cheriſhe the Churche, the cauſe for vs is muche more cleare: of which Churche it is ſaid, Kinges 
               
                  Iſa. 49. 
                     •
                  2. Iſa. 60. Pſal. 2. 
               ſhal be thy foſterfathers, and Queenes thy nurces. And againe: Kinges breſts ſhall nuriſhe the, and euery kingdome that ſerueth not the, shall vtterly periſhe▪
                In this Churche without faile, is the ſupereminent power of Chriſtes preiſtehood, who with his irō rod bruſeth like a potſheard the pride 
                  Ier. 1. of princes that rebell againſt his holie ſpouſe; and hathe righte in his Churche ouer all kingdoms▪ to plante and to plucke vp, to buyld and deſtroie; afore whom all kinges ſhall fall doune & all nations ſhall do him ſeruice.
            
               
                  Matt. 16. Now is Chriſtes preiſtly prerogatiue in moſte ample and exacte termes comunicated to the chefe preiſt and paſtor of our ſoules, in other manner of clauſe then our pretenſed monſtrous ſpirituall gouerneſſe can ſhew for her ſelf (fie on that ſecular pride and wilfull blinde

hereſy that ſo repugnethe to Gods expreſſe ordinaunce, and yet is wickedly vpholden of her flatterers, though reproued both at home and abrode by the moſt notorious heretikes & ſectmaſters of all ſorts. Now all Chriſtes ſheepe without exceptiō
               ▪ be they princes, be they poore mē if they be Chriſtiā men, are put to Peters feadinge 
                  I
                        •
                     an 21. Matt. 1
                     •
                  . and gouernment: now the keyes of heaue giuen to Chriſts vicarr, to let in, to locke out, to bynde, to looſe, to pardon, to puniſhe.
            Nowe we be commaunded euery one, be we 
                  Hebr. 13. kinges, be we Ceſars, to obeie our prelates & paſtors, and to be ſubiecte (what Chriſtian prince can excepte himſelf) to thē, as to thoſe that muſt make accompte for our ſoules. Nowe they haue 1. Cor. 
                  
                     •
                  . 2 Iohn 2 ad 
                        ••
                     t. 3. authoritie to forbid vs the cumpany of heretikes, idolaters, & blaſphemers; & not ſo muche as to ſalute them, muche more not to obeie thē.
            
               
                  Act. 5. Nowe we finde by the experience of the Apoſtles practiſes and exāple of their vſage, that not onely our ſoules, but our bodies & goodes, be in our paſtors ſubiectiō, ſo farr as is expediēt to our ſoules healthe, and the Churches vtilitie, which the very order and courſe of nature requireth.
            Nowe S. Peter, for Sacralege and ſimulation, ſtrooke ſtarke dead bothe man and wyfe by his worde. Now did S. Paule ſtrike blinde Elimas 
                  Act. 13. the ſorcerer for reſiſtinge Gods truthe. Now 1. C
                        •
                     r. 4. 1. Cor. 5. did he threaten to cum to his cōtemners in rodd of diſcipline. Now did he excomunicate a notable perſonage at Corinthe for inceſte: Not all onelie by ſpirituall puniſhement but by bodely vexation, giuinge him vp to Satans chaſtiſmēt.
            Now he alſo by excomunication corporally

moleſted by an euill ſpirite, for hereſie and blaſphemie, 1. ad Timo▪
                   1. 2. Cor. 10 
               Himeneus and Alexāder. Nowe he hathe authoritie to reuenge all diſobedience, and to bringe vnder all loftie ſpirites, to the obedience of Chriſte.
            
               Apoſtolicall povver. Suche loe now is the Apoſtolicall force, and power of Chriſtes Preiſtehood in the new teſta mēt, ſo farr aboue the authorety of earthly kinges, as the ſun is clearer then the moone, heauen aboue the earthe, the Soule of man better then his body, and the comō weale of the Catholike Churche formed by Chriſte, more excellēt then any ſecular ſocietie ordeined by man.
            VVhere were then theſe diſordred lawes and ſtatutes, that make the Apoſtles, yea Chriſte him ſelf, and all his preiſtes that be borne out of Englād to be forren powers? it was fiftene hūdred yeares before kinges euer conceiued ſuche wickednes, muche leſſe to chalenge this mōſtrous ſpirituall regiment for laie men, children, and verie women. But this was then enacted, this lawe ſtoode thē firme, and bindeth the higheſt potentate of the world if he beare the name of a Chriſtian, aſwell as the pooreſt perſon in earthe: This I ſaie, yfhe obeie not, or heare not the 
                  Mat▪
                   18. Churche, let him be taken for an Ethnike.
            
               Strugglinge of princes againſt ſpirituall povver. Yet ſuch is the miſerie and peruerſnes of men, that in a cauſe ſo plaine as this is, ſome kinges haue bene founde to ſtruggle againſt the ordinaunce of God; and now oflate haue had flaterers to ſaie, yea and ſome ſo ſimple as to thinke, that they whom Chriſte at his departure hence, did endue with moſt ample commiſsion, and Iohn▪ vlt. ſent foorthe with that auctorety which his father

had geuen vnto him, haue no power to denounce or declare▪ when princes be heretikes or violaters of Gods lawes▪ Nor right to excomunicate them, nor to diſcharge the people of their othe and obedience, towardes ſuche as no Chriſtiā man by lawe of God or nature may lawfully obaie. In which neceſſarie pointe euery ſtudious and reaſonable mā may reforme him ſelf, aſwell by the forſaid, as by the hiſtories of the Churche ſince Chriſtes time.
            And heire thow ſhalt finde, ſtraight vpon the firſt cōuerſion of kinges to the faithe▪ how they coulde not withdrawe them ſelues from the Churches diſcipline▪ thoughe bothe heretikes and other of wicked lyfe haue alwaies muche repined, but euer were either driuen to order & obedience, or in fine confounded.
            Almoſte thirtene hundrethe yeares agoe, Babylas biſhop of Antioche, excommunicated the onely Chriſtian Kinge or Emperoure that Chriſoſt. in vita Babilae. then was (as ſum counte, Numerius, as others Phillip) for executinge a prince that was put to him for an oſtage: VVhervpon, as ill Kinges vſe to doe, he martired his Biſhop; whom for that, S. Chriſoſtom and others recken for the moſt famous martire of that time. VVherby all true Biſhops may lerne, that it is their dutie to chaſtiſe and excommunicate diſobedient tirants, whatſoeuer fall to their perſons therfore. Afterwarde holie Fabianus the Pope purſued the ſame Emperour, by like excomunication and other meanes, till at the lenghte he brought him to repentance.
            
               Ser. li. 7. cap. 24.
                Afterwarde S. Ambroſe Biſhop of Milan with

notable courage excōmunicated the elder Theodoſius 
               Theod li. 
                     
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                      17▪ 19. Am
                     ••
                  l
                     •
                  . 5▪
                   ep
                     •
                   
                  28. Aug. de Ciu
                     ••
                  at. Dei lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . cap. 26.
                the Emperour, put him to eight monthes penance, and in the ende forced him to make a lawe or prouiſiō againſt the like crime for which he was excomunicated.
            This was an other world (moſt deare cuntrymen) maruelous courage and zeale for Gods cauſe, was then in preiſts; great humilitie and obedience in princes. Then was there no flatterers ſo ſhamefull, nor no heretike on the earthe ſo impudent, to make temporall Kinges aboue all correctiō of Gods Churche & their owne paſtors, they hauing moſt nede therof yea aboue all others, when they paſſe the limites of Iuſtice & the lawes of God.
            
               Nice. lib. 
                     
                        •
                     3. c. 14. Georg. Patrtar. de vita Chriſost. 
               Nere this time againe Innocentius the firſt, excomunicated Arcadius the Emperor & his wife Quene Eudoxia, for that they diſobeyed and perſecuted their Biſhop S. Chriſoſtom. I will reporte the Iuditiall ſentence brefely becauſe it is muche to the purpoſe, and full of maieſtie. O Emperour, the bludd of my brother Iohn Chriſoſtom crieth to God againſt the, thou haſt caſte out of his chaire, the great Doctor of the whole world; and in him, by thy wiues that delicate Dalida her perſuaſions, perſecuted Chriſte: therfore (I though a poore ſinfull ſoule) to whom the throne of the great Apoſtle S. Peter is comitted, do excomunicate the and her; and do ſuſpende you bothe from the holie ſacramē
               tes; comaundinge that no Preist nor Bishop, vnder paine of depriuation, after this my ſentence come to their knowledge, geue or miniſter the ſaid ſacraments vnto you.
            Thus did this bleſſed father, whome Saint Au

guſtine excedingly commendethe in his time, hādle that Emperor and wicked Queene which was the cauſe of her huſbādes fall and offences, and at lengthe brought them to repentance.
            And when by proceſſe of time the Churche became more potent, and ſome Princes were falne to contempte of Religion, as it lightly hapneth by hereſie or Apoſtaſie; and that Excō
               municatiō or other ordinary eccleſiaſticall diſcipline wolde not ſerue being onely ſpirituall penalty, and now not hauing ordinarely annexed that corporal vexatiō, executed by ſathan vpon excōmunicate perſons & therfore ſo much feared in the Primatiue Churche: then aſwell the Biſhopes & godlie perſons their owne ſubiects, did craue aide and armes of other Chriſtian Princes againſt them, as alſo the moſt holie and aunciente Popes of Rome, did with all godly zeale incite the Catholike Kinges to the ſame; that thoſe whom the ſpirituall rodde could not frutefully chaſtiſe, might by externall force be driuen doune, or to repentance of their diſorder. There is no warre in the world ſo iuſte or honorable, as that which is waged for religion, whether it be forren or ciuill: nor crime in the world deſeruinge more ſharpe and zelous purſute of extreme reuenge, then falinge from the faithe to ſtrange religions, whether it be in the ſuperior or ſubiectes.
            
               2. Parali. 15. 
               VVho ſo euer ſeeke not after the lord God of Iſraell, let him be ſtain, from the highest to the loweſt. ſaid Kinge Afa admoniſhed by Azaria the Prophet. And againe charge was giuen expreſly

in Deutronomie, to ſlei all falſe Prophetes and 
               
                  Cap. 13. 
               their followers, were they neuer ſo neere vs by nature, and to deſtroie vtterly all citties with their inhabitāts, that were proued to followe newe ſtrange Gods or religions: Princes and rulers no more excepted, but muche more puniſ hable in this caſe then the people, as appeareth by Gods commaundmēt to Moiſes, that he ſhould 
                  Num. 
                  
                     ••
                  . hange vp all the Princes of Iſrael vpon gallowes againſt the ſun, for communication in ſacrifice with the Moabites; and the reſte of the people euery one by the hand of his neighbor, to be put to the ſworde for the ſame faulte.
            As an other time by Moiſes appointment, the faithfull Leuits ſlewe thirty three thouſand of their nert neighbours, frendes, and brethren, for comittinge Idolatrie and forſakinge the true 2. Paral. cap 1
                     •
                  . God: ſo iuſte a quarrell is the deffence of religiō. For which alſo the Kinges of Iuda, as Abia and others, fought moſte iuſtly and proſperouſly againſt Hieroboam and other Kinges of Iſraell, and iuſtly poſſeſed the cities which they conquered in the warre; as alſo Edom and Lobna for 2. Par▪
                   21. religion, euen bicauſe he forſooke the God of his forfathers, did reuolte from Kinge Ioram and could neuer be recouered.
            
               
                  Ioſue 22. VVherin the example alſo and zeale of the children of Iſraell was very notable, that they wold haue denounced Battell againſt the tribe of Rubine and Gad, for erectinge (as they tooke it) a Schiſmaticall alter out of the only place, in which God appointed to be worſhiped by Sacrifice. So did the Chriſtian Armenians 
               
                  Euſeb. li. 9. c. 8. 9. take armes, againſt Maximinus the Emperour

for deffence of their faith; So did Conſtantine againſte Maxentius the tyrante.
            By all which it is cleare, that what people or perſon ſo euer be declared to be rebelious againſt Gods Churche, by what obligation ſo euer, either of kinred frendſhip, loialté, or ſubiection I be bounde to them, I may or rather muſt take armes againſt them▪ nothinge doubtinge but whē my Kinge or Prince hathe brokē with Chriſte, by whō and for deffence of whoſe honor he reigneth, that thē I may moſt lawfully breake with him.
            So in olde times of the primatiue Churche, the Catholike people did often by armes, defend and kepe their Biſhopes in their ſeates, againſt the Infidels, and ſpecially againſt the cōmaunde ment of hereticall Emperours: Yea and lawfully reſiſted them in the deffence of theīr Churches and Churche goodes. So the people defended See Pruden▪ de monacho Antioch. Nazian. in etus laudibus lib. 
                     •
                  . epi. ipſius. the Churche of Antioche from the Emperour Galerius his officers. So they deffended S. Baſil in the like caſe. So they deffended S. Ambroſe.
            
            Prouided neuertheleſſe, alwaies in this caſe, that we followe not our deceitfull wills, as our aduerſaries doe, condemning for Gods enemies ſuche Princes or perſons as the holie Churche (who muſt be ouriudge & informer in all theſe thinges) pronounceth and holdeth to be moſt iuſte, godly, and Catholike kinges: But then muſt we take thē for heretikes, when our lawful Biſhops and popes do ſo adiudge them to be, and ſo commaunde vs to take them yea and charge vs to forſake them. Then be we ſure in conſcience, diſcharged of our othe & obediēce,

which be bands of ſuch qualety and nature, that they hold not, nor haue force, againſt iuſtice, and where the matter ys vnlawfull. And we haue iuſt cauſe to arme our ſelues for defence of Gods honor and our innocencie, and to ſeke for ſuccor at Popes and Princes handes.
            
               Theod. li▪ 
                  2 cap 5. & 13. Soc. li. 1. cap 13. Soz. li▪ 
                  4. 
                  
                     •
                  rp. 7.
                Yea Biſhops of the cuntrie ſo oppreſſed, and ſo perſecuted by hereticall princes, ſhould ſo ſpecially doe. For ſo did holie Athanaſius (who knewe his devvtie to his kinge and ſoueraigne vvel enoughe, and vvhen and vvhere he might riſe againſt him) aſke ayde againſt Conſtantius the Arian and firſt hereticall Emperour (vvhom Pope Felix declared to be an heretike) of his ovvne brother Conſtance the Catholike Emperour of the vveſt. For feare of vvhoſe armes he reſtored Athanaſius and other Catholike Biſhopes to their Churches and honors againe: But aftervvarde, vvhen the Caholike Conſtāce vvas deade, the ſaid Emperours brother did more furiouſly perſecute Athanaſius for the ſame.
            
               
                  Soc. lib. 4 cap. 16. 17 30. Sor. lib. 6 cap. 19. So againſt Valens the Arian Emperour, did Petrus, Athanaſius his ſucceſſor, brother to Saint Baſil, ſeke to he Pope of Rome for ſuccor, as all other biſhops in like diſtreſſes euer did, that no man neede to maruell why we haue done the like now.
            
               Sol. 2▪
                   ca. 18. Nice. lib. 14. ca▪ 
                  21
                So did Atticus Biſhop of Cōſtantinople craue aide of Theodoſius the yonger, againſt the Kinge of the Perſians that perſecuted his Catholike ſubiectes, and was therby forciblie depriued & the Catholikes deliuered. Leo epist. 7
                        •
                     . euāg. 
                     •
                  i. 2. ca. 8.
               
            
            So did holy Pope Leo the firſt perſuade the

Emperour called Leo alſo to take armes againſt the Tyrant of Alexandria, for the deliuerie of the oppreſſed Catholikes from him and the heretikes Eutichians, who then threw doune monaſteries, and did other great ſacrileges, as ours now doe and haue done in England. O Emperour (ſaied S. Leo) If it be lawdable for thee to inuade the hethens, how muche more glorie ſhall yt be to deliuer the Churche of Alexādria from the heauy yoke of outragious heretikes, by the calamité of which Churche, all the Churches in the world be iniured. As at this time ther is no Churche in Europe, that feeleth not the ſmarte of our Engliſh miſeries.
            
               
                  Lib. 1. epi. 72. In brefe, ſo did S. Gregory the firſt moue Gen
                     •
                  
                  dius the Exarke, to make warrs againſt the hereti kes, as a very glorious thinge: & ſo haue euer all holy Biſhopes of the primatiue Churche done.
            
               Depoſitiō of Princes for hereſie. For which crime of hereſie and iniuries done to Gods Churche, as for a fault moſt deteſtable, and moſt directly ſubiect to their correction, they haue ſpecially intermedled, aſwell by way of excomunicatiō, as by force procured for their De conſideratione ad Eugen. li. 4.
                depoſition. For as ſaith Saint Bernard, though Popes fighte not in perſon, nor draw the ſword themſelues, yet it muſt be done at their commaundment, where Gods honor and our ſaluation require it. For religion therfore ſpecially, though otherwiſe ſumtimes, Princes haue bene by Popes iuſtly bothe excomunicated & otherwiſe puniſhed for notorious crimes, namely whē their owne ſubiectes require the Churches Rhegino anno 864.
                aide and ſentence therin; as kinge Lotarius brother to the Emperour Lewis the ſecond, was

excomunicated by Nicolas the firſt for deuorſinge Sigisber
                     •
                   Tr
                     ••
                  hem. his lawfull wife, and marieng a ſtrumpet, and diuers others for ſuche like offences: yea & namely Popes haue purſued in princes their fall from religion, & diſobediēce to Gods Churche, as a ſinne properly ſubiect to their correction.
            
               Zon. in vita Leonis 3.
                For hereſie, was Leo the third both excommunicated, and depriued of all his temporallties in Italie, by Gregorie the ſecond.
            
               Chalc ō rerum turc. li. 1.
                For hereſie and Schiſme, were the Greke Empe perours diſcharged, and the Empire therby trāſlated to the Germans, by Pope Leo the third: and like wiſe diuers German Emperours for iniuries done 
                  Tho. 2. 2. queſt. 12. art. 2. to Gods Churche, and for hereſie, by ſundry holie Popes haue ben brought to order, as Henry the fourthe, Frederike the firſt, Otho the firſt, Frederike the ſecōd, Lewis the third, & many other.
            
               Bonifa. Dec. 4.
                For hereſie was George kinge of Bohem excomunicated, & ther vpon by the forces of the kinge of Hungarie finally depriued: As John Albert 
               Guie. lib. 2. Honuf. in vita 
                     •
                  ulij ſecundi. Polid. lib. 15.
                had half of his kingdō of Nauar takē from him, by Ferdinandus ſurnamed Catholicus, Kinge of Aragon, bicauſe he gaue aide to Lewis the xij. then excomunicated by Iulius the ſeconde.
            For ſhamefull iniuries done to the holie Churche, and for perſecution of Biſhops & religious, was Iohn one of our kinges of England with his whole cūtrie Interdicted, and at length forced to yeild his croune and dominions to the curteſie of the Popes legate, as afore is mēcyoned.
            
               Nubrig. lib. z. c. 25. & 34.
                For like cauſes, and namely for being acceſſarie to the murther of the bleſſed Biſhop S. Thomas of Caunterbury, was Henry the ſecond driuen by Alexāder the third, to order & penaunce.
            
               
               Henry the eighte alſo, for more horrible waſte and deſolation of Religion, wherin he farr ſurmounted all his auncetors, and all other that euer we reade of ſince the time of Julian the Apo ſtata: for arrogatinge the title of ſupreme head of the Churche, and forcinge all his people to ſweare to his folly, and that his concubine Anne Bullen was their Queene and his lawful wife: for moſt cruell ſlaughter of Catholike Biſhopes, Preiſtes, religious and laie men: for infringinge and vtterly aboliſhinge againſt his owne othe, all the priuileges and liberties, graunted to the Churche of England by holie Kinge Edward and other his forfathers: for deſtroing all holie houſes of Religion▪ and ſacrilegiouſly inuading all their goodes and poſſeſsions: for marrienge, remarringe, changinge, deuorcinge and killinge of his wiues, when, where▪ and whome he liſte: Honuf. in vita Pau li tertij. for theſe and ſuche like vnſpeakeable outrages, he was excomunicated by Paulus tertius as hath before bene declared.
            
               Elizabethe excomunicated and depriued anno 1570.
                And novv laſtly, not onely for iniuſt intruſiō and vſurpation, but alſo for the forſaid crimes, and followinge her ſaid ſuppoſed fathers waies (who was radix peccati of our daies, and offended the more greuouſly, bicauſe he firſt compelled the people of God to Schiſme and ſinne, as Ieoroboam did the Iſraelites) this woman was by good Pius Quintus excomunicated and depriued, and all her ſubiects diſcharged of othe and obedience towardes her, with charge efte
                  •
               ones to all the ſubiectes of the realme of Englāde, or other her dominions, that from thence forthe vnder like paine of excomunicatio and Gods &

holie Churches curſe, they ſhuold not acknowledge her for their Princeſle or ſuperior, nor obey, defend and manteine her, but according to euery ones power and habillite, to cocurr to her depoſition and condigne puniſhment.
            
               Executiŏ of the en
                  
                     •
                  en
                     •
                  e deferred. VVhich ſentence moſt holie, iuſte, and dread full, though hitherto it haue not bene openly purſued, partely by reaſon of the deceaſe of Pius Quintus the publiſher, which enſued not longe after; and partely for that the vſurpers forces, rage, and crueltie wer ſo great, that they could hardly be reſiſted by the onely inhabitans of the realme, without euident daunger & deſtructiō of very many noble & godlie perſons, in which caſe the churches cenſures ſo farr as they concerne onely temporall matters, by the meaninge of him that gaue the ſentence, dothe not binde; & laſtlie for that his holines that now is (as his predeceſſors before him) hauinge exceding tender care not onely of our ſoules but of our bodies & goodes alſo, haue hitherto tollerated in vs, our enforced ſubiectiō and obedience to her in ciuill affaires▪ ſpecially vpon expectation, and hope, that ſhe wold after ſo longe and fatherly ſweete patience of the ſupreme paſtors of our ſoules, at the requeſt of ſo many princes Chriſtian, at the pittifull ſutes, cries, clamors, & complaints of ſo many of her owne people, for the bludd of ſo many men meekely yeilded and the inconſolable complaintes of ſo many afflicted cōſciences, either aknowledge her faulte, incline to mercie towardes the Catholikes, and ſeeke (as her ſuppoſed father deſired to doe in the end of his life) to reconcyle herſelf to the Churche,

or to cum to ſum good order at leaſte with the ſee Apoſtolike, and graunt her Catholike nobibility and people, leaue to ſerue God after their conſcience, and manner of all their forfathers. Though (I ſaie) for all theſe cauſes and other more, the former iuditiall ſentēce hath not bene all this while executed, yet now our holy father Sixtus the fifte, ſeinge this vſurper and excomunicate perſon, to be nothinge moued eitherwith pittie of the people, or Apoſtolike authoritie, but ſtill obſtinately and obdurately to perſiſte, and procede in all her former miſcheefes & wickednes, could not conteine or ſorbeare any longer, not onely himſelf to imploie againſt ſo monſtrous and pernitious an heretike, rebell, vſurper, and fierbrand of all miſcheefe, the treaſures ſpirituall and temporall, that the Omnipotent God hath giuen him for maintenannce of iuſtice, innocencie, and religion; but alſo by the forſaid examples of his predeceſſors & other holie Biſhopes, and by a ſpeciall canon of the great De 
                     •
                  eret. cap. 3.
                generall Counſell of Laterane touchinge the chaſtiſement of princes that will not purge their do minions of hereſie and heretikes, hath ſeriouſly dealte with the chefe and greateſt princes of his Chriſtian Catholike cōmunion, that they wold giue ſuccurſe to their afflicted brethrē & cōfede rates, & ioine together with him their ſupreme paſtor, for chaſtiſemēt of that wicked womā
               ▪ the bane of Chriſtēdome and all their kingdōs, the ſcoorge of God, and rebuke of womākinde; as in this caſe euery one wold haue bene moſt redy, had they not beneforced at this time, to im ploie all their forces againſt the heretikes & rebels

of ther owne dominions, & therfore hathe ſpecially intreated Philip the highe and mightie Kinge Catholike of Spaine, that for the greatnes of power giuen him by the almighty, for his ſingular loue towardes that nation wherof by mariage of Holie Queene Marie of bleſſed memorie he once was kinge, for the olde loue and league betwixt the ſaid cuntrie and the houſe of Burgogne, for the infinite iniuries and diſhonors done to his maieſtie and people by Elizabethe, and to conclude for his ſpeciall pietie and zeale towardes Gods houſe and the See Apoſtolike, together with the conſideration of the freſh barbarous murther of his conſine the Queene of Scotland, by which the ſacred honor and name of Kingly dignety is diſhonored, and all lawfull princes highely intreſſed; that for theſe and many other cauſes, his maieſtie wold take vpon him in the name of God almightie, this ſacred and glorious enterpriſe. VVho at lenghte, aſwell by this his Holines auctority and exhortation, as by his owne vnſpeakeable zeale and pietie, moued alſo not a litle by my humble and continuall ſute together with the afflicted and baniſhed Catholikes of our nation, of all and euery degree, who haue bene by his ſpeciall cō
               paſsion and Regall munificence principally ſupported in this their longe exile, hath conſented atlaſt, & taken vpon him this ſo holie and glorious an acte, to the onely honor of God, the benefite of the Chriſtian worlde, and your deliuerie (my good brethren) from the yoke of hereſie and thraldom of your enemies, and for reſtitutiō of thoſe realmes and the ſubiects of the

ſame to their auncient liberty of lawes and conſcience. For which cauſes his maieſty hath in the name of the lord God of Hoſtes, commaunded ſufficient royall and mayn forces bothe by ſea & lande to be gathered, and to be conducted in to our cuntrie (if nede be, and if the pretenſed and principall offender will not otherwiſe cum to order) by the moſt Godly & valerous Generall, and Capitaines that be of his maieſties ſeruice in all Chriſtendom.
            Of whoſe procedinge in this action, & aſwell of his holines as his maieſties intention & meaninge therin, we are to aduertife you all, by theſe preſents, and to forwarne you againſt all falſe ſclaunderous and ſeditious ſpeaches of the enemies, and heretikes, by which they haue many yeres and in wonderful maner deluded ſome ſtrāgers, to their vndoinge, & the ruine of their cuntreyes; And to comfort yow againſt all other popular feares of the ſimple ſorte: that neither the Cōqueſte of the lande, diſpoſſeſsinge of the Engliſhe; diſtruction of Catholikes; ruine of auncyēt howſes; aboliſhinge of our olde lawes liberties or cuſtomes, is purpoſed; nor any other annoiaunce or alteration in the world to be made, ſauinge ſo muche as the eſtates of the realme ſhall agree vpon with his holines, and Maieſtie, for the reſtitution and preſeruation of the Catholike religion, and neceſſary puniſhment of the pretended. Aſſuring you all (my moſt deare cuntrymen) by my honor, and in the worde of a Cardinall, that there ſhall be as greate care had of euery Catholike & penitent perſon, as poſsibly can be, for that is the Pope and kinges expreſſe

will and pleaſure.
            VVherof you may all be the more ſecure, that his maieſtie hathe appointed for the execution of this affaire, ſo worthie, fortunate, and victorious a Prince, no leſſe renoumed for his pietie mercie, and clemencie (wherof you haue ſene theſe yeares, hard by you, ſo many examples) thē for his valour & manifold victories, obteined againſt the Churches and the kinges rebelles▪ As on the otherſide, for your like ſecuritie, one of the worthieſt peeres of Spaine, for valor, vertue, & ſwetenes of nature, & with him a greate number of the flower of that nobilitie, who haue no nede of any thinge of yours, are appointed for your ſuccor, that if by your faulte or miſhapp, the matter ſhould come to a battaile, they might after the victory, ouer rule and reſtreine the fury of the Comon ſoldiors, leaſt they ſhould ruine and ſack the whole cuntry.
            And for the ſame cauſe, his Holines hath alſo, not for my deſerts, but of ſpeciall care and loue of our nation preferred me, beinge of your fleſh and blud, to this highe function; intendinge to ſend me as his Legate, with full commiſsion & cōmaundment, to treate and deale from time to time, aſwell with the ſtates of the realme, as with his holynes, and the kinges maieſtie for the ſweter maneginge of this godly and greate affaire, and with them to deliberate of all the beſte meanes, how with the leaſte damage of our cuntrie, nobillitie, and gentrie, and beſte preſeruation of the whole people, this godly purpoſe of reſtoringe the Catholike religion, and putting the realme in order (aſwell for the

title of the croune as other controuerſies that may fall, betwixt the Churche and the common wealthe, or any membre therof, for what matter ſo euer, ſince the time that hereſy, ſciſme, & diſorder began) may be acheiued.
            Therfore hauinge now through Gods merci full goodnes, full and ſufficiét helpe for your happy reconcilement to Chriſtes Churche, and to deliuer yourſelues, your cuntrie, & poſterité, frō that miſerable ſeruitude of body & ſoule which you haue ſo longe bene in for the more eaſie acheiuinge of this godly deſignement, and for your better information: his Holines cōfirmeth, renueth, and reuiueth, the ſentence declaratory of Pius Quintus of bleſſed memorie, and the Cenſures of all other his predeceſſors, and euery brā
               che clauſe and article of them, againſt the ſaid Elizabeth, aſwell concerning her illegitimation, and vſurpation, and inhabillitie to the Croune of England, as for her excomunication and depoſition in reſpecte of her hereſie, ſacrilege, and abhominable life: And diſchargeth all men from all other obedience, l
                  •
               altie, and fidelity towards her; requiringe and deſiringe in the bowells of Chriſte, and commaundinge vnder paine of excomunication and other penalties of the lawe, and as they looke for the fauours and protection to them and theires, afore promiſed, and will auoide the Pope, kinges, and the other princes highe indignation, that no man of what degree or conditiō ſo euer, obeie, abetter, ayde, defend, or acknowledge her for their prince, or ſuperior, but that all and euery one, accordinge totheir qualetie, callinge, and habillitie, immediately

vpon intelligence of his Holines will, by theſe my letters, or otherwiſe, or at the ariuall of his Catholike Maieſties forces, be ready, to ioine to the ſaid army, with all the powers and aydes they can make, of men, munition, and victuals, to helpe towards the reſtoringe of the Catholike faithe, and actuall depoſinge of the vſurper, in ſuche ſorte and place, as by the chefe manegers of this affare, and the Generall of this holye warr ſhall be appointed, for the beſt aduauncement of the cauſe.
            In which caſe, vpon eſpeciall deſire I haue to preſerue and continue all your noble Names & Famelies, beinge lothe that for the oſfence of the preſent poſſeſſors the whole houſe ſhould periſhe, or any other ſuffer, but the offenders them ſelues: Promiſe to make humble ſupplication in your behalfe, that the honors and poſſeſſyons of all ſuche offenders, may diſſende to the next hei res of that name and bludd, ſo that he or theycan be proued to ioine with the Catholike armye, with all the forces and frendes they can make, imediately vpon knowledge had of this preſent, and meanes to accompliſhe their deſire.
            Nowe therfore, My lordes and deere Cuntrymen, if yow liſte followe this Gods ordinaunce, and happy prouiſion that he hath of his great mercie, made for your honors, libertie, and faluation; If yow without delaie ioine yourſelues, as God, conſcience, and nature bindethe yow; If yow take parte one with an other in ſo Godly and honorable a quarrell, you ſhall atteine your purpoſe without all bludſhed: where otherwiſe if you ſhould either ſitt ſtill, or refuſe

to helpe or ſeuer your ſelues one frō an other, or any of you ſeke to vphold (which God forbid) the vſurper or her complices, beinge thus curſed by the Churche, and forſaken of God and of all good men; yow that ſo doe, ſhall firſt incurr the Angels curſſe and malediction vpon the inhabitantes 
                  Iudi▪
                   5. of the land of Meros, who ſat ſtill, and wold not helpe God nor venture their liues in his quarrell; and ſecondly be as depely excomunicated as ſhe is, and ſo yow ſhall be guiltie of your owne ruine▪ and the bludd of the people, and yet ſhall not preuaile.
            Yow ſhall fieghte againſt God, & againſt his annointed, againſt your next lawfull kinge, againſt truthe, faithe, religion, conſcience, and your deere cuntrie: yow ſhall bootles defend, yea to your owne preſent deſtruction and eternall ſhame, a moſt iniuſt vſurper, and open iniurer of all nations; an infamous, depriued, accurſed, excomunicate heretike; the very ſhame of her ſexe, & princely name; the cheife ſpectacle of ſinne and abhomination in this our age; And the onely poiſon calametie and deſtruction of our noble Churche and Cuntrie.
            Feight not, for Gods loue, feight not, in that quarell, in which if yow die, you are ſure to be damned: feight not againſt all your aunceſters ſoules, and faith, nor againſt the ſaluation of all your deereſt, wiues, children, and what ſo euer you wolde wel to, ether now or in the time to cum. Matche not yourſelues againſt the higheſt: this is the daie no doubte of her fall, this is the hower of Gods wraths towardes her and all her partakers▪ Forſake her therfore betim
                  •
               , that you

be not inwrapped in her ſinnes, puniſhement, and damnation. Truſt me, there was neuer any perſecutor of the Churche, but in himſelf or his next ſeede, he came to ſhame and confuſion. Remember the ende of Antiochus, Iaſon, Ieſabell, Iu lian, Valeus, and of other the Apoſtatous and hereticall Emperors, with ſuche like vſurpers and oppreſſers of Gods Churche, how ſpedely they paſſed to eternall ignominie.
            
               Cūforts▪ and helps of the Catholike parte. On the otherſide, you moſt noble & valiaunt Champions of Gods Churche, the honor of Engliſhe kinghtehood & the deffenders of the glorie and liberties therof, you, and all the bleſſed people, to whom God hath giuen ſo happie a lote, zeale and coorage, to feight for your fathers faithe, for your cuntries libertie, for Chriſte, for religion, and for the dread ſoueraigne ſacramēts of our ſaluation; the honorableſt quarrell, the likelieſt and moſt cōmendable cauſe, in the ſight of the preſent world, and the poſteritie, that poſſibly can be. If you winne, you ſaue your whole realme from ſubuerſion, & innumerable ſoules, preſent and to cum, from damnation; If you die, you be ſure to be ſaued, the bleſsinge of Chriſte & his Churche, the pardon of his Holines, giuē to all, in moſt ample ſorte, that either take armes, die, or any waie duely indeuor in this quarrell. The praiers of all Chriſtian people, which be publikly promulgated for your ſafetie & good ſucces: The blud of all the bleſſed Biſhops, religious, preiſtes, and laymen, ſhed in that lande, crie to God at this hower for your victorie, and vengaunce to your enemies their perſeoutors: All the Saintes in heauen, whoſe holy Churches, bodies,

and memories, your enemies haue ſpoiled and prophaned, make now inſtant ſute for your happy ſucceſſe. All the vertuous preiſtes of your cuntrie, who by the longe Tyrānic of this time, haue ſuffred manifold miſeries & martirdomes, bothe at home & abrode, to ſaue their owne ſoules, and winne their decreſt cuntrimen to ſaluation, they alſo ſtreche foorthe their conſecrated handes night and day for your victorie, and be preſent diuers of them to ſerue euery mans ſpirituall neceſsitie, by Confeſsiō, Counſell, and all Conſolation in Chriſte Ieſus, giuinge you teſtimony by their redines to liue and die with you, how iuſte the cauſe of this holie feight is, and how happy and glorious is the bludd that ſhall be ſhed therin.
            VVith theſe bleſſed patrons both in heauen & earthe; with the guarde of all Gods holy Angels; with our bleſſed Sauiour himſelf in the ſoueraigne Sacrament, preſent amonge you to your protection, comunicatinge cōforte & coorage; and with the daily moſt holy oblation of Chriſtes owne dere body and bludd, makinge more forcible interceſsion frō the earthe for you, then the blud of Abel; with ſo many diuine vnſpeakeable helpes; if you were neuer ſo fewe you could not loſe: without theſe & againſt theſe holies, our enemies (be they neuer ſo fierce, neuer ſo proude, neuer ſo manie, neuer ſo well appointed) then cā not preuail, fear you not, thei cā not. Though neuer ſo great ſhewe be made, neuer ſo many raiſed againſt you, bicauſe moſte of thē be Catholiltes or notoriouſly iniured by heretikes, they be armed for vs, they cā not ſtrike, they

will not fighte againſt their owne conſciēces, be bolde of it, they will not. Many others of thē be indifferente, of neither, or no religion; whoſe witt and waryneſſe will be ſuche in this extremitie, and in ſo iuſt cauſe to deſire a Chāge, that where by ouerthrow of the heretikes many ſhal be aduaunſed, and by theire good ſucceſſe no man bettred, in ſo great haſſard of thinges, they will neuer adore the ſun ſetting, nor folow the declininge fortune of ſo filthie, wicked, and illiberall a Creature, or her ſo baſe and diſhonorable leaders: who alſo haue bene at deadly variaunce amonge themſelues theſe many yeares, and ſum of them mortally hatinge their miſters, will neuer omitt this opportunitie to be deliuered of her, and reuenged one of an other.
            The reſte of them that be pure zelous heretikes, which be very fewe in compariſon, & not very well contented neither, with the former regiment, of all mē in the world moſt effeminate, delicate, and leaſt experte in the wars: the Angel of God will perſecute them, and they ſhall flie in feare and torment of their owne wicked mindes, though none purſue them.
            You may all remember how the late great traitor the Duke of Northumberland, was in the height of his pride and power forſakē of all his men, and forced to yeilde to a poore deſolate Catholike ladie. All the world knowethe how the like vſurper Richard the third, beinge moſte worthely in the verie feild and feighte abandoned of the nobility and people, was made an example of Gods ire towards all tirantes and vſurpers.
            But how ſo euer it fall out throughe the ſinnes

of the people at home, the Catholike forces are ſtronge enough, their prouiſiō ſufficiēt, their appointmēt paſsinge, moe expert Captains thē the enemy hath good ſouldiers, all reſolute to die, not auailable for any to flie awaye, all excedingly incoraged by the equitie of the cauſe, & wonderfully confirmed by Gods mercies ſo oft in our dayes ſhewed in all quarrels of the Catholike religion.
            Theſe fiftie yeares there was neuer Catholike army which ſtoode to it, but had the victorie: by miſtruſtinge God, by ouermuche truſting man, by flying or auoidinge the battell, by yeildinge or cōpoundinge, ſundry great & Godly attēpts haue bene fruſtrated: but in manly and cōfident combating for God and the Church, none at all.
            Call to minde the miraculous victories of Charles the fifte, ſubduinge al the powrable Lutheran princes in Germanie, to his & the Catholike Churches obeiſance, with paſsinge ſmall forces, and in a fewe yeares or rather moneths ſpace, the enemies being almoſt innumerable. Remember the three famous battaills that the Catholike Cantons and people of the Swiſers, beinge in number, power, & prouiſion, muche inferior to the other; obteined by Gods ſpeciall grace, & iuſtice of the cauſe, againſt the Swinglians their Neighbours, in one of which Swinglius himſelf was ſlaine, and in euery one a maruelous nūber of heretikes, and of Catholikes ſo fewe, that in ſuche inequalitie of humane helpes, God muſt nedes be the extraordinary worker of the ſame.
            Reade the Hiſtories of France, and ſee whether the Catholikes haue not had in manner, alwaies,

miraculous victories againſt the Caluiniſts: amonge many, the fights at Druſe, at larnabe, at Saint Denis, at Mountcounter, and ſpecially the mercifull worke of God this laſt yeare, wherby we ſawe the huge forces aſwell of Germans as Swiſers, by Gods mighty arme and very ſmall aide of man, wonderfully defeated.
            Recounte furthermore all the famous and for tunate rēcounters, of a very fewe Catholikes againſt the heretikes and rebelles in Flanders: as at Grooning, at Mock, at Mounts, at Antwerp, at Iemblous, and many other conflictes, wher without loſſe almoſt at all, many thouſandes of Gods and the Kinges enemies haue bene cutt in peices, our lord God no doubte cōbatinge with his people againſt his enemies, as he did againſt Senacharib, Nicanor, and other mentioned in holie writ.
            VVhich (thinge moſt noble and valiant gentle men of England) may giue you courage and cō
               fort from God himſelf, euen the lord God of Hoſtes, to aduenture your ſelues in a quarrell moſt honorable, in a cauſe that the diuine Maieſtie hathe ſhewed himſelf, not onely in other ages, but euen in all our eyes & memories to haue ſingular care of, In a caſe of the extrea meſt neceſsitie of our Iuſte defence and armes, that euer any Chriſtian people had, or can haue.
            Thus much, my good lordes and moſt deere frendes, I haue thought good to forwarne you of the whole cauſe of theſe preſent ſacred wars, and of his Holines and Catholike Maieſties ſincere intention therin; and bothe their incomparable affections towardes our Nation, wherof

I could giue you farr more comfortable intelligence, yf I were perſonally preſente with you, as I truſt I ſhalbe verie ſhortly, for that is fully meant by our Holy father and his maieſtie, and of me ſo much deſired, that euery ſhorte daye ſemeth a longe yeare, till I enioye you in our lorde, though in the meane time I ſtand here wholy for your ſeruice; wherin as I haue ſpente theſe many yeares of my baniſhemēt, ſo wold I now as God ſhall appointe, and nede require, beſtowe my bludd & the remnaunt of my lyfe, amonge you in my deereſt cuntrie, for the better accompliſhment of that which all true Chriſtians and Godly Engliſhe hartes doe deſire.
            Our lorde God bleſſe and directe you all to followe that in this action, and in all your lyfe that ſhall be moſte agreable to his glory our cuntries good, & your owne honor and ſaluation.
            
               From my lodginge in the Palace of. S. Peter in Rome this 28. of Aprill. 1588.
                  
               
               The Cardinall.
            
            
         
      
   