
      
         
            
            
            THE COPIE OF A LETTER VVRITTEN BY M. DOCTOR. ALLEN: CONCERNING THE YEELDING VP, OF THE CITIE of Dauentrie, vnto his Catholike Maieſtie, by SIR VVILLIAM STANLEY KNIGHT.
            VVherin is ſhevved both hovve lavvful, honorable, and neceſſarie that action vvas; and alſo that al others, eſpeciallie thoſe of the Engliſh Nation, that detayne anie tovvnes, or other places, in the lovve countries, from the King Catholike, are bound, vpon paine of damnation, to do the like.
            
               Before VVhich is alſo prefixed à gentlemans letter, that gaue occaſion, of this diſcourſe.
            
            
               Matth. 22.
               Reddite ergo quae ſunt, Caeſaris, Caeſari:
               Render therfore the things that are Caeſars, to Caeſar:
            
            Imprinted at Antuarpe, by Ioachim Trognaeſius, Anno 1587.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE ANSVVERE OF M. DOCTOR ALLEN TO THE FORMER LETTER.
            
               HONORABLE good Sir, Your letters came vvith good ſpeede, and in ſeaſon, hauing at this preſent readie meanes to returne anſvvere, and yet time ynough to vvaighe vvel the matter of queſtion you moue vnto me. Into the more particular cōſideratiō vvherof, I vvil enter the rather at your requeſt: though othervviſe by the dutie of my prieſthoode, and profeſſiō, I compt my ſelfe bound to ſerue my chriſtian countriemen, in al ſuch things, as may any vvay perteine to their ſaluatiō. For you muſt not thinck, that I am ſo reſtray ned to ſtudētes matters, though that be my ſpecial trade, and charge, that I haue no care of ſo manie vvorthie men of your vocatiō, vvhom vvith hart, prayers, and penne, I doe moſt vvillinglie ſerue knovving that ſtate of life to be neceſſarie for the commō vvealth, godlie, honorable, and eſpeciallie appointed by God, for defenſe of Iuſtice, and Religion.Manie ſouldiars great, Sainctes ād Martyrs. Out of vvhich order the Church of Chriſt celebrateth ſun drie, for high Sainctes: and whole legions haue benne, for their conſtancie in faith, martyred at once. Manie in the holie Scriptures, for ſingular deuotion tovvardes Chriſts perſon, and ſpecial promptnes to receiue the faith, by the Apoſtles preaching, by name commended. And remembring in S. Lukes narration,Act. 10. of the holie Capitaine Cornelius, and of one of his ſouldiars,

vvhom the Euangeliſt nameth: militē met uentem Dominū, à ſouldiar fearing God, it eaſely brought me to conceiue, that ſundrie of your bande, in vvhoſe behalfe you propoſe the doubt, haue the feare of God, before their eyes: vvhich is à peerleſſe prayſe, in ſuch as folovve art militare: and that the vvhole companie is not farre from the kingdome of God, that haue ſuch regarde, of their conſcience, and good name.
            To come then to your purpoſe, though I haue alreadie, by my letters to Sir William, geuen myn opinion, I vvil yeat for better clearing the cauſe, ſet here dovvne, my minde more largely, and diſtinctly.
            
               Rēdering vp of tovvnes, VVrongfully holden, to be neceſſaire.Therfore firſt I ſay, that the rēdering vp of ſuch tovvnes, and places of the lovve countries as be in anie Engliſh mēnes cuſtodie, is not onlie lavvful, but neceſſarie to be done, vnder paine of mortal ſinne, and damnation. The cauſe is, for that euerie thing vvrongfully obtayned, and vniuſtly detayned from the true ovvneres, vvhether they be, by fraude, or violence come by, according to al diuine, and humane lavves, and by the very rule of nature, ought to be reſtored to them, to vvhom they duly pertayne.Reſtitution of thinges vvrongfully detayned, neceſſarie in al VVarres, iuſt or vniuſt. Which thing as it is euident in al other negotiation of mannes life, vvherin no man may lavvfully detayne other mēs goodes: ſo the olde holie fathers, and al the latter ſchoole Doctors agreably to the Scriptures, and the ciuil and canon lavves, determine reſtitution to be ſpecially neceſſarie, of al thinges vvrongfully obtayned in vvarres: vvhether the vvarres be lavvful, or vnlavvful. For vvarres being nothing els but an act of vindicatiue iuſtice, muſt,

as much as is poſſible, be in al pointes, voide of iniurie, and iniuſtice.
            Againſt vvhich vvhen anie thing is committed, either by the Prince that cauſeth the vvarre, or the ſouldiars that are executioners of his vvil, and ſentence, both the one and the other, are bound to make recompence, and reſtitution according to the meaſure and maner, of the iniuries done. And this I ſay, euen in lavvful vvarres, or ſuch as to the common people may be, vpon their Princes credit, ſo deemed. Where, though they may offend the enimie in life, goodes, libertie, and othervviſe as farre and in ſuch ſorte, as the lavve of armes permitteth, and preſcribeth: yeat vvhat ſo euer is done againſt militare diſcipline, and iuſtice, is ſinne, & puniſhable by Gods lavves.
            But vvhere the vvarre is vvholy,In VVarres plainly vniuſt, recompence and reſtitution is to be made of al damage: and of al things vniuſtly detayned. and plainlie vnlavvful, denounced, and vvaged vvithout iuſt cauſe, yea euidently againſt right and reaſon, and ſo knovvne to be to men of vnderſtanding, and to the ſoldiars them ſelues: in that caſe the Prince that publiſhed the vvarre doth principally, and moſt damnably offend: then euerie one that ſerueth in thoſe vvarres, doth ſinne mortally: and al and euerie one bound to ſatiſfaction, and reſtitution, for vvhat ſoeuer anoyance is done, by the ſaid vnlavvful armes, to the Prince, and people, to vvhom the iniurie is done. Neither doth the Souereignes authoritie, and commandement excuſe the ſouldiars, or ſubiectes, vvho can not in conſcience, nor may not, be executors by their ſeruice, of the Princes knovvne iniquitie. Ovving euer obedience to God more then to any man: though vvhere the iniuſtice of the vvarres vvere not ſo

aſſuredly knovvne to the ſubiectes, they might vpon their Princes vvarrant, and commandement ſerue in the ſame.
            
               The Engliſh vvarres proued to be vniuſt both by land and by ſea.But novve that the vvarres of the lovve countries, on the Engliſh part be moſt vniuſt, not only ſuch as be in conſcience Catholike (for other cauſes vvhich aftervvard I vvil rehearſe) doe moſt certainly ſee: but euen thoſe alſo vvhich are not vvel inſtructed in Religion, endued only vvith good nature, reaſon, and ciuil honeſtie, muſt heedes confeſſe. Wherby it vvil be plaine, that neither the one ſorte of conſcience, nor the other of moral iuſtice, can lavvfully ſerue in the ſaid vvarres.Lib. Etym. 28. c. 1. Cauſa 23. Queſt. 
                     •
                  . The vvarre is iuſt, ſaith Cicero in his bookes de. De Republica: as Iſiodorus citeth it, vvhich is denounced for recompence, or reuenge of iniuries, and anoyance, or for defence againſt enimies.
            
                1. The Quene of England, as al the vvourld knovveth, can make no iuſt claime to Holland, Zeland, or any other of thoſe partes, vvhich by armes, ſhe hath ſeazed on: al thoſe prouinces being confeſſed, to be his Catholike Maieſties auncient, and vndoubtful inhaeritance: therfore that vvay, ſhe can haue no pretence, to inuade thoſe countries.  2. The defence of the kings rebelles, againſt their moſt iuſt Lord, and Soueraigne, is no lavvful, nor honorable quarel of vvarres: neither haue the ſaid Traytoures, and rebelles any authoritie, to yeeld vp their Soueraignes tovvnes, and portes into his enimies handes, or thē ſelues to the Engliſh protection, or ſubiection.  3. Rebelles againſt their lavvful povvers, be not properly the confoederates or Socij, of anie Prince, or commonvvealth, that for their defence armes may be takē.
            
               4. The kinges Maieſtie hath done to the Quene, or her realme, no ſuch iniuries, for redreſſe, or reuenge vvherof, ſhe ſhould by hoſtilitie, enter into his Domnions, and ſurpriſe his tovvnes, and caſtles, and bring his people into her ſubiection. Neither theſe cauſes, nor any other pretenſes being ſufficient to make her vvarre lavvful, but al plaine proofes, of moſt vniuſt quarel, it muſt needes be euident to eche reaſonable man, of vvhat ſenſe in Religion ſo euer he be, folovving only moral vertue, and the lavve of nature, and natiōs that as vvel this warre by land in the lovve countries, as that other by ſeas, be nothing elles but à publike robberie, ād pyracie. In both vvhich not only the Prince, or her principal miniſters, my lord of Leceſter, and Sir Francis Drake, but al other that ſerue, in either of the ſaid armies, or any ſuch like, offend God damnably, and are bound to reſtore, to the King Catholike, and his people, al that euer they haue, or ſhal by this vniuſt violence, extorte from them.
            It is not the pretence of the Quenes counſel, or realmes publike allovving, or permitting theſe things, that can excuſe them before God, or man, either in conſcience, or honour. For iniuſtice done by publike pretended authoritie, is more ſhameful, then that, vvhich is done by priuate offenders. S. Auguſtin affirming, that whole Kingdomes, when they agree vpon open iniquitie, are nothing els, but à great larondge, that is, a brotherhoode of theeues, cōcurring and conſpiring in cōmon robberie,Li. 4. Ciuit. Ca. 4. 
               Quid ſunt regna (ſaith he) remota iuſtitia, niſi magna latrocinia?
            
            I remember, tvvo of the beſt learned Diuines in Louaine, being demaunded, of the lavvfulnes,The iudgement of the Diuines of Louaine concerning the like vvarres. of

the Duke of Alinſones late like actions, in thoſe countries, & of the obligation of that oth, vvhich he cauſed the people to make, againſt their Lord & Maiſter, to him, anſvvered: and put forth their anſvvere in print, that vvarre to be vvholy vnlavvful, & al othes, & promiſſes made to him, to be of them ſelues vnjuſt & not to bind any man either in honour, or conſcience.
            And yeat that Prince, might perchance ſeme to haue ſome better pretence, vpō I can not tel vvhat old intereſt, that Fraunce chalengeth in Flaunders, & other thoſe Prouinces, vvhich once vvere vnited, and ioyned vvith Fraunce: and of ſome hope he had, and gaue to many, to reduce thoſe countries to libertie, at leaſt of Catholike conſcience againe. But this Engliſh action, hath no apparance of iuſtice, or aequitie in the vvorlde. And therfore to any gentleman, or ſouldiar, that ſtandeth vpon his honour (as that ſtate of men, of al others, haue moſt reaſon to doe) it muſt needes be à great diſgrace, to ſerue in ſuch publike robberies, either by ſea, or land. Which I ſay to al noble Capitaines, or ſouldiars, of vvhat Religion ſoeuer they be, vvho may eaſely perceiue, by conference of our old Engliſh honorable denounced vvarres vvith theſe of our dayes. None other hauing benne vvaged by our countrie, theſe thirtie yeares almoſt, then in the cloke of amitie, to ſurpriſe the tovvnes, & countries of their freindes, & confederates: and for the defence, or encouragement of deteſtable rebelles, againſt their lavvful annointed Kinges.
            
               They helpe the Scotiſh rebelles.As ſoone as the Scottes rebelled, againſt their Quene, the Engliſh ioyned their forces, to the vtter

ruine, and deſtruction of both her, and her Dominion. They rebel againſt their Kinges in Fraunce: our Engliſh helpes, & armes vvere ſtraight readie, to ſuccour them,The French rebelles. and to ſeaze vpon the ſtrong places, of that land, in their ovven, or the rebelles behalfe. They riſe in the lovve countries, and in other partes of the vvourlde,The Flemish rebelles. againſt the iuſteſt povvre that can be: and immediatly (as though our countrie vvere ordayned, to be the buckler of al rebellion, and iniuſtice, and an enimie of lavvful Dominion, & Superioritie) the Quene thincketh it honorable or needful, to protect the ſaid rebelles, & to aſſayle vvith the vvicked traitours, and ſeditious perſons, the oldeſt, faithfulleſt, and greateſt confoederate, that euer our realme had.
            When therfore our Engliſh vvarres, that in other ages, vvere renoumed for iuſtice, fortitude, and foelicitie, are become to be infamous, & infortunate through the vvourlde, as made for the patronage of rebellious, and ſeditious perſons, & maintenance only of iniuſtice, and iniquitie: Who can not of very moral reaſon, and honeſtie perceiue, his good name, and honour to be ſtayned, by cooperation in ſuch infamous actions? & his ſoule to be in daunger of aeternal perdition, by follovving, and executing, other mennes moſt vnlavvful, and barbarous deſigmentes, to the diſturbance of the quiet, and vveal, of al chriſtian natiōs. rovvnd about vs? or thincketh it not à moſt glorious reſolutiō, to reuolt to that ſide, vvith vvhich al true honour, and iuſtice, & al conditions of lavvful vvarres doe ſtand? Of ſuch I ſpeake of our countrie men, in vvhom is yeat lieft ſome

remorſe of conſcience, or reſpect of iuſtice, neceſſarie for humane ſocietie: though by this euel times, & error of education, at home they be not vvel inſtructed yeat in chriſtian Religiō, & vertue. For of others (as I feare ſome ſuch be, in the Atheiſme,Atheiſtes of England vn capable of admonition. that our countrie is fallen into) that haue put of al ſenſe of ciuil iuſtice, honour, & honeſtie, togeather vvith the feare of God, and his iudgemēts in the next life, I can ſay nothing. In this ſorte ſome ſuch may be, not only among priuate poore ſouldiars, but of the counſelers of our coūtrie, that vvithout reſpect, of either chriſtian diſcipline, or olde heathen obſeruation in this caſe, vvhich vvas euer moſt ſacred, thinke Regna eſſe occupātium, kingdomes to be rightly theirs that can catch them: and al their ovvne, they can either by Machiuiliā ſhiftes, or violent armes obtayne: that regard not the ould honour, rule, and diſcipline of Chiualrie: that feare not the compt they haue to make, for the bloud of innocents, for ſackages, ſpoyle, rapine, deſtructions, depopulatiōs, and ſubuerſion of vvhole kingdomes: that thinke it cauſe of vvarre good ynough to hinder their neighbours greatnes, ād to diſturbe other mennes quietnes, to procure their ovvne peace, ād ſafetie. If either, (I ſay) our countrie, once of notable name, in martial iuſtice, or any of our ſouldiars, be come to this extremitie, to deale vvith ſuch, either by humane, or Diuine lavves, vvere, To be madde vvith reaſon. 
               Cum ratione inſanire. As the Poete ſaid.
            And theſe haue only to make their prayer, in the morning dayly, as vve haue heard, of a certaine holy theefe, in the bordes: Good Lord ſend me, to hurte many this day, and none to hurte me.
            
               But novve to come to thoſe,This that folovveth ſpecially to be noted of Catholike
                     •
                  , that in the campe be Catholikes, as I perceiue by you, Sir, and othervviſe, that verie manie be in their hartes fully reſolued, our forefathers faith to be only true, and that innumerable, at home in our coūtrie, do dayly more and more perceiue, that theſe nevve Sectes vvere but to make broyle, and garboyle in the vvourlde, that in the vniuerſal ſhuffle of things, poore loſt companions might haue their partes, yea & other mennes partes too. To ſuch therfore as be, by Gods ſpecial gift, Catholikly bēt, it ſhal be an eaſier matter, to make cleare this point. For as they be more capable of reaſon, & more obſeruant of ciuil iuſtice, and moral vertue: ſo they haue their conſciences better informed, by the rules of Chriſtian Religion, for gouernment of their actiōs, in al partes of life. Such may eaſely perceiue not only for the cauſes aforeſaid, this vvarre, on thengliſh ſide, to be vniuſt, and that the ſeruice in the ſame, is ſinful, diſhonorable, & obnoxious to reſtitution: but principally, for that it is vvaged, for defēce of Haereſie, and Haeretikes, and for the euerſion of the Catholike faith: that is to ſay, directly againſt God, and his holy Church.
            The holy Prophet of God, that reprehēded King Ioſaphat, for geuing ſuccourſe (of amitie only, & not of euel meaning in Religion) to the vvicked King Achab, ſayng: Impio praebes auxilium,
               2. Taralip. 19. Aug. lib. 2. contra Epiſt. Parmem. 
               & ijs qui oderunt Dominum amicitia iungeris, idcirco irā Dei merebàris. Thou geueſt ayde to the wicked & art cōfoederate with ſuch as hate our Lord, therfore thou deſeruedſt Gods ire: What vvould he haue ſaide, or vvhat may vve deeme of our Princes cōfoederacies, only & alvvayes, vvith Chriſt his enimies? as vvith the Ghevves,

Ghevves, Hugonots, & Caluiniſtes, in Flaunders, Fraunce, & Scotland, vvith moſt ample ſuccourſes cōtinually yeelded to euerie of them, for deſtructiō of chriſtian Religion? In vvich not only vnlawful, but ſacrilegious vvarres, al men of conſcience muſt conſider, that al Coronells, Capitaines, & ſouldiars, that in this caſe ſerue the Prince, and Haeretikes, are partakers of their iniquitie, cooperators vvith them in al their ſinne, executors of the Haeretical Princes ſentence, againſt their ovvne Catholike, and innocēt bretheren: fautors, and defenders of Haeretikes: and ſo by the cenſure of holy Church,The eaſe of Catholikes that ſerue Haeretikes. incurre Excommunication: à moſt pitiful, and dangerous ſtate, for à chriſtian man to liue or dye in.
            They muſt marke, vvhat an infinite miſerie it is, for à noble, and couragious hart (as lightly thoſe men of beſt ſeruice be) that vvith their ſvvoorde, and armes, the vvicked only ſhould be protected, & the innocent deſtroyed, Churches deſpoyled, Gods Prieſtes & ſeruantes murthered, the bleſſed Sacramentes profaned, yea euen the dread ſoueraigne holies, of Chriſts ovvne bodie & bloud. What death ſhould not à true Catholike knight ſuffer, rather then for to ſee, ſuch horrible vvickednes committed? Or to be in ſuch baſe ſeruitude of Haereſie, & her diſhonorable defenders, as vvith their ovvne handes, to be miniſters of ſuch ſacrilegious impietie, and vvich is yeat more pittiful, that one Catholike man ſhould be brought, to deſtroy an other, that in fine euerie one may be the inſtrument, of his ovvne deſtruction? In their ciuil gouuernment at home, they cauſe the Catholike iudge, to geue ſentence of death, againſt the

Prieſtes, vvhoſe innocēcie they knovve,The policie, and practiſe of Haeretikes to make one Catholike, deſtroy another. & vvhoſe Religion in hart, they beleue to be true. They make one Catholike neighbour, to accuſe an other, and one noble man to condemne an other. In their vvarres, they ſerue themſelues of Catholikes: & by Engliſh Catholikes, they deſtroy Catholikes abrode: that forreine Catholikes being ouerthrovven, they may more eaſely, ouerthrovve their ovvne at home. Alas for my deare bretheren: alas for our deſolate countrie: vvhich no noble hart can novve ſerue, either in Politike, or Martial matters, but vpō ſuch deteſtable cōditiōs, of aſſured dānatiō, ād in fine to their owne vtter ruine alſo in this life.
            Of al men in the vvorld,A ſouldiar 
                     〈…〉
                   had moſt need to be careful of his cōſciece. the ſouldiar ſhould moſt ſpecially attend to his conſcience: and ſtand vpon good & ſure groundes, for the iuſtice of the quarel, he hath in hand, being hovverly more ſubiect to death, and daunger then any other kinde of men: and being aſſured, that if he dye, in any knovven euil cauſe, and namely in this fight againſt God, and defence of Haeretikes, he is doubtles to be damned for euer. As contrarievviſe, to dye in lavvful vvarres, for defence of iuſtice, is euerful of hope. And for defence of true Religion,Souldiars dying in defence of true Religion are martyrs. & Gods honour, in moſt caſes plaine martyrdome. Let no chriſtian conſcience therefore, excuſe, or flatter it ſelfe, in this caſe, vpon the Princes commandemēt or the Superiors authoritie, or vpon the daunger of diſobeyng the Quenes lavves: no mortal creature hauing lavvful povver to commaund, nor any ſubiect bound, or permitted to obey, in matter directly againſt God. In vvhich caſe, à mā muſt ſay to his Prince, vvith S. Auguſtin: Tu minaris carcerē,
               S. Aug. ſer. 6. de verbis Domini. 
               Deus Gehennam. Thou threatneſt priſon, God threatneth Hel.
               
And as it is vndecent, for any Chriſtian for feare of man, to offend God: ſo it is moſt diſagreable to the manly courage, and conſtancie of a chriſtian Catholike ſouldiar, for feare of death, or daūger vvhat ſoeuer to enter in to ſo damnable, & diſhonorable a ſeruice, or to fight, or die in à cauſe cōtrarie to his ovvne conſcience.An other inconueniē
                  ce in ſeruing of Haeretikes. Beſides al this to ſerue in an haeretical cauſe, and vnder haeretical capitaines, catholikes are inforced, to heare continual blaſphemies of al Sainctes, & Sacraments, & to be preſent at the vvicked Sermōs, & profane ſeruice, of the Haeretikes. Which is no leſſe dānable, then it vvas in olde time, for ſuch as ſerued the heathen Emperoures, to commit Idolatrie, by Sacrificing to Idoles. For refuſing of vvhich abomination, and in particular for diſobeying the Emperoure Maximinus his commandement therin, the famous Coronel S. Mauritius,S. Maurice vvith his legion of ſould
                     •
                  ars martyred. Euſebi lib. 8. cap. 3. & 4. vvith the legion of Thebs, ſuſtayned moſt glorious martyrdome. As diuers others did vnder Iulian the Apoſtata, and the like. And many noble ſouldiars, for that they could not exerciſe their Chriſtian vſages, partly vvere driuen to abandon their profeſſion, in diſpleaſure of their Princes, and partly vvere licenſed to depart: as may appeare by à Decree,Can. 12. in the holy councel of Nice. Where it is forbidden to chriſtian ſouldiars ſo licē
               ced, to returne to thoſe profane vvarres againe. For that is the meaning, vvhen the Fathers vpon great ſpiritual paine commanded, that none ſhould reſumere cingulum militare, that is, put on the girdle militare againe, that for ſuch à cauſe, had leift it once.
            And ſurely if there vvere nothing els but this, that the Catholike ſouldiar being hovvrely in peril of death, can haue no Sacrament, nor Sacramē
               tal

for his ſinnes, nor any comfort of conſcience, nor ſuccour for his ſoule in the vvorld, it muſt nedes be the moſt miſerable condition that can be thought of. Novve to be reliued of this deadlie calamitie, & diſtreſſe of cōſcience, after à man is once by errour, or misfortune entred into the ſame, there is no vvay, but to forſake that vniuſt, and irreligious cauſe, and to retire to that part, vvhere à mā may ſerue vvith iuſtice, honour, great revvarde in this life, and ſure hope of ſaluation. And no doubt, but moſt happie be thoſe Gentlemen, that haue this occaſion, & commoditie offered them by God, to make amendes for their former errour, as vvel by ſeruing of the Church, vvich before they impugned, as by rendering vp the places, vvhich they (though not of malice, yeat) by other mens vniuſt appointement, did from the true Lordes, and ovvners detayne.
            Yea I ſay more to you (Gentlemen) ſeing you deſire to knovve my meaning fully, in this point,
                  Another cauſe vvh
                        ••
                      the vvarres of the Quene be not lavvful.
                  Bulla P
                        •
                     j quinti. an. 1569.
                that as al actes of iuſtice vvithin the realme, done by the Quenes authoritie, euer ſince ſhe vvas, by publike ſentence of the Church, and Sea Apoſtolike, declared an Haeretike, and an enimie of Gods Church, and for the ſame, by name excōmunicated, & depoſed from al regal dignitie: as (I ſay) euer ſithence an. 157
                     •
                  . the publication therof, al is voide, by the lavve of God, and man: ſo likevviſe no vvarre can be lavvfully denounced, or vvaged by her, though othervviſe in it ſelfe, it vvere moſt iuſt.An excommunicate perſon cannot lavvfully denounce vvarres. Becauſe that is the firſt condition, that is required in iuſt warre, that it be by one denounced, that hath lawful, and ſupreme povvre to doe the ſame: as no excōmunicate perſon hath: eſpecially if he be vvithal

depoſed, frō his Regal dignitie, by Chriſt his ovvne vicare, vvhich is the ſupreme povvre in earth. And al ſubiectes are not only abſolued,
                  Subiect. 1 ought not to on
                        •
                     y an Excommunicate Prince.
                  Cauſa 15. queſt. 6.
                & diſcharged of their ſeruice, oth, homage, & obediēce: but ſpecially forbidde to ſerue, or obey any ſuch canonically cōdemned perſon. Nos (ſayth Gregorie the ſeuēth) Sanctorum Praedeceſſorum noſtrorum Statuta tenentes, eos qui excommunicatis, fidelitate aut Sacramento, conſtricti ſunt, Apoſtolica authoritate à ſacramento abſoluimus, & ne eis fidelitatem obſeruent, omnibus modis prohibemus. that is: wee according to our Praedeceſſors Decrees, do aſſoyle, and diſcharge al them, that by obligation of oth, or fidelitie, are bound to perſones excommunicate: and that they doe not obey ſuch, we do expreſly forbid. And for their diſcharge eſpecially, that ſerue in ſuch vvarres, there is an expreſſe Canon of Vrbanus the ſecond:Vbi ſupra. 
               Iuratos milites Hugoni Comiti, ne ipſi, quandiu excommunicatus eſt, ſeruiant, prohibeto: qui ſi ſacramentum pratenderint, moneantur, oportere Deo magis ſeruire quam hominibus. Fidelitatem enim quā Chriſtiano principi iurarunt, Deo eiuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   Sanctis aduerſanti, & eorum praecepta calcanti, nulla cohibentur authoritate, perſoluere Which is thus in oure toung: Geue order, that the ſworne ſouldiars of Countie Hughe, ſerue him not ſo long as he ſtadeth excommunicate: And if they praetēd their former oth, made vnto him, admoniſh them, that God is to be ſerued, before men. For, that oth, which they made to him then, when he was à Chriſtian Prince, is not nowe to be kept towardes him, being an enimie to God, & his Sainctes, & à breaker, & cōtemner, of their cōmaundementes Theſe fevve, as I might doe much more, I alleadge, that you may ſee, the ſenſe of the Catholike Church, vvhich to you, that be the children of the ſame, vvil be à ful vvarrant, for al your

actions, & à guide for al Gentlemen, & perſons, of rightly informed conſciences, hovve to behaue them ſelues, vvhen not only the warres are for Religion, but vvhen any excommunicate, or canonically condemned Prince, is one partie. Whom no man by lavve can ſerue, nor geue ayde vnto, but he falleth into Excommunication. And therfore vvhē S. Auguſtin vvriteth, that ſometimes it falleth out,Lib. 12. con. Fauſt. cap. 74. & 75. that à iuſt man, may ſerue à vvicked, & ſacrilegious King in the vvarres, for obediēce to his ſuperiour, ſo that nothing be cōmaunded him plainly againſt Gods praeceptes: eſpecial exception is made,Cauſa. 23. queſt. 1. in Kinges excommunicated. Who differ in this caſe, in reſpect of ſeruice, & obediēce of their ſubiectes, and are in à vvoorſe Praedicament, then any either heathen, or vniuſt Prince, or Potētate vvho ſo euer: yea then Iuliane the Apoſtata him ſelfe: vvhom to ſerue in iuſt vvarres, & cauſes, Chriſtian ſouldiars vvere not by the Church, then prohibited:Cauſa. 11. queſt. 3. ca. Iulianus. but only vvere as vvel by the lavve of God, as the Church forbidden to ſerue him, in any vvarre or vvoorke, againſt Chriſt, and Chriſtians, or vvhen he vvent about to deſtroy the true Religion. But vvhere, for defection from the faith, or other enormities not tolerable, the ſentence of Excommunication, & Depoſitiō is alſo adioyned, there can neither be lavvful vvarres, nor any dutie of ſeruice in the ſame allovvable.Hovve heynous a crime it is for ae Prince to fal from the Church of God. So great à crime it is in à Prince, that is exalted by God, to adminiſter iuſtice, to defend Chriſts Church, & the faithful people therof, and taketh à ſolemne corporal oth, at his coronatiō, by his vvoorde & might, to obſerue, & maintayne, the lavves & priuilegies of holy Church, & al praerogatiues, graunted by his praedeceſſours,

to the ſame, and to honour the Biſſhoppes, & Clergie of his realme: aftervvard neglecting his oth, promiſe, and vocation, to bend al his povvre, to deſtroy Gods Religiō, Church, & Prieſtes, & become an enimie to al humane ſocietie. This then being the miſerable condition of ſuch Princes, as be cutt of by the Churches Cenſures, from the felovvſhippe of the faithful: you may ſee vvhat à diſhonorable thing it is, for men of honour, or honeſtie, to ſtriue by armes, for the vpholding of them, vvhō God by his iuſt iudgemētes, & the Churches ſentence doth pul dovvne. And thervvith perceiue, that thoſe that breake vvith God, can not claime any bōde of oth, or fidelitie of them, that were their ſubiectes. And leaſt of al, of chriſtian Knightes, & Gentlemen of armes:The dutie of a chriſtian Knight. the principal inſtitution, and profeſſiō, of al ſuch noble orders being, for defēce of the true Catholike, & Apoſtolike faith, and to be ſvvorne aduerſaries, and perſecutors of Gods enimies: the Croſſe and Cogniſſaunce they vveare proteſting the ſame.Liberius Epiſt. 1. ad Athanaſiū. As contrarievviſe, no Haeretike can be à lavvful ſouldiar, but by the imperial and canon lavves, is to be degarded, of militare dignitie, & armes, and to be ſpoyled of his militare girdle,Haereſie maketh à man infamous, and vncapable of al degree, and dignitie. as they then ſpake. For Haereſie maketh à man, by al chriſtian lavves, infamous, and voideth him of al degrees, and titles of honour, among vvhich militare order is, & of olde time vvas ſo great, that euery man of armes, vvas capable of the Imperial ſouereigntie. Therfore as in yeelding vp, the places vniuſtly poſſeſſed, you did an act of reſtitution, & iuſtice: ſo (Gentlemen) in forſaking the vvarres of the other ſide, for ſo many reſpectes, as I haue ſaide, diſhonorable, vnlavvful, & damnable,

you haue done doubtleſſe agreably to your chriſtian knighthood, & an act much renovvmed in al theſe partes, of the beſt & vviſeſt, of al degrees.
            And the ſame that you haue done, al other of honour, conſcience, and Religion, of our countrie, are bound to doe: as vvel in this vvarre, as in al other, vvhich either at home, or abrode, is vvaged for, or againſt Religion.1. R
                     ••
                  . 16. & ſequent. After King Saul vvas by God, and the Prophets ſentence, as it vvere, excommunicated, and depoſed, it vvas no fault for Dauid, or others, either of the Prieſtes, or people, to reuolt from him: nor for the vvorthie Capitaine Abner, to reuolt from Saules ſonne, that claimed the Kingdome, by the pretended right of his father: nor for any other Capitaines, or ſouldiars of Saules ſide, novve depoſed, to render vp al they had in their gouernments, to King Dauid, and his poſteripoſteritie. It vvas no crime, but great commendation for Ioiada the high Prieſt,4. Reg. 11. 
                     •
                  . Reg. 1
                     •
                  . & 4. Reg 
                     •
                  
                to reuolt from the vſurping Quene Athalia: nor for others to do the ſame, againſt vvicked King Achab, and curſed Ieſabel, nor to ſee, permit, and proue them, for their impietie condignly puniſhed: vvherunto the very Prieſtes, and Prophetes of God, did by counſel, and encouragemēt, cooperate. In vvhich caſe, vve may ſee, for our inſtruction, not only tovvnes vniuſtly detayned, to be reſtored, to the true Lordes, but an impious Kings ovvne countries alſo, & cities lavvfully by reuolt of the people, yeelded vp to other mennes handes.2. Paralip. 21.4. Reg. 8. As the Scriptures do recorde of the countries and cities of Edom, and Lobna: VVhich reuolted from King Ioram, and from the Dominion of Iuda, for euer, yeelding this cauſe therof: Dereliquer at enim Deum patrum ſuorū.

For (ſaith the holie ſtorie) he had forſaken the God of his fore-fathers. To forſake them, that forſake God, is moſt lavvful, honorable, & neceſſaire. As contrarievviſe to ſerue and defend them, vvhom God by the ſentence of his high Prieſt, & Tribunal in earth, hath pulled dovvne, & vvil haue puniſhed, is to fight againſt God, and to reſiſt his ordinaunce.
            
               
                  Examples of our ovvne coūtrie.
                  King Iohn forſaken.
               And I pray you, Gentlemen, (to geue you domeſtical examples,) vvhat diſgrace, or ſhame vvas it, for al the chiefe Lordes of our countrie, to reuolt from King Iohn, in his dayes? & abſolutly to denie him ayde, & aſſiſtence, euen in his lavvful vvarres, vntil he returned againe to the obedience of the Sea Apoſtolike, and vvere abſolued from the Cenſures of the ſame, vvhich he had iuſtly incurred? Or for the Engliſh Nobilitie, & ſpecially for the renovvmed Stanley, one of this Sir William his houſe,Richard the third lavvfully forſaken. and name, to reuolt from King Richard the Tyrant, and to yeeld him ſelfe, and his charge, to Henrie the ſeuēth? vvhat diſhonour vvas it, for the Nobilitie of England,Iane the vſuper forſaken. in our memories, to forſake Iane the pretended Quene: & Northumberland, the father of him, vvhom novve you haue forſakē, & to yeeld the Tovvre committed to their cuſtodie, and them ſelues, to the lavvful, and moſt Religious Quene Marie? Notvvithſtanding vvhat vniuſt bandes of oth, or promiſſe ſoeuer they had made, of feare & puſilanimitie, to the ſaid vſurper, & Haeretical Quene before? In al theſe, & the like, there is neither ſinne, nor ſhame, nor ſcandal committed. For that to reuolt, is of it ſelfe, lavvful or vnlavvful, honorable or othervviſe, according to the iuſtice, or iniuſtice of the cauſe, or difference of the perſon, from or to vvhō, the reuolt is made.

Wherin, vvhen the right from the vvrong is euident, & in the Capitaines, or ſouldiars conſcience, & in al godlie mēs ſight cleare, & vndoubted, there nedeth no more diſcuſſing of the matter.
            To conclude breifly. In theſe vvarres,Hovve Catholiques ſhould enforme their con
                     •••
                  rn
                     ••
                  s for the iuſtice of the vvarres. & al others, that may at any time fal for Religiō, againſt Haeretikes, or other Infidels, euerie Catholike mā, is bound in conſcience, to enforme him ſelfe, for the iuſtice of the cauſe. The vvhich vvhen it is doubtful, or toucheth Religiō (as is ſaid) he ought to imploy his perſon, & forces, by directiō of ſuch, as are vertuous, and intelligent in ſuch caſes: but ſpecially by the general Paſtour of our ſoules,A neceſſari
                     •
                   and à ſure rule. being Chriſtes vicare in earth. Whoſe ſoueraigne authoritie, & vviſdome, deriued from Chriſt him ſelfe, may beſt inſtruct, and vvarrant à chriſtian ſouldiar, hovve farre, vvhen, and vvhere, either at home, or abrode, in ciuil, or foraine vvarres, made againſt the enimies, or Rebelles of Gods Church, he may, and muſt breake vvith his temporal ſoueraigne, and obey God and his ſpiritual Superiour.
            Againe (Gentlemen) by this your retiring your ſelues, from the ſeruice of Gods,Other commodities of retiring to the Kings ſeruice. and the churches enimies, you haue not only prouided vvel, for your conſciences, honour. & ſaluation: but alſo for the encreaſe of your knovvledge, and experience in art militare, and of the exact order, & diſcipline to be obſerued in the ſame, being novve to ſerue, vnder ſo vertuous, valerous, fortimate, famous,The noble Duke of Parma. and victorious à General, as hath had fewe peers, in theſe latter ages. And in companie of ſo manie valiant, and expert Capitaines, and ſouldiars, of diuerſe Nations, as no vvhere in Europe, better can be founde. Which your ſelues (my maiſters)

may more eaſely conſider, by comparing your late General, my Lord of Leceſter, his vertues, & famous factes (ſcilicet) vnto the glorious exploytes, & victories, atchiued by the Duke of Parma his Highneſſe. Or the diſorder of the Engliſh irreligious, and licentious companies, to the religious diſcipline, of the Catholike campe. Betvven vvhich, I doubt not, but you finde à meruelous difference, and ſhal do dayly, more and more, to your infinite contentment. Would to God, by your honorable example,A neceſſarie conſideration. al others our deceiued countriemen, vvould begince to thinck earneſtly, hovve to diſcharge them ſelues of that dangerous, & infamous ſeruice of Haeretikes, and Rebelles, and render them ſelues, into this moſt iuſt, and godlie courſe, that you are happely entred into. Which they ſhould the rather ſpeedely reſolue vpon, for that they can not be ſo ignorant, of the times lately paſt, or the preſent dayes, but they muſt nedes haue marked, hovve God him ſelfe, fighteth for the iuſt cauſes, of his Catholike Maieſtie, and generally for al Catholike Armies, againſt Haeretikes,God geueth the victorie euer to Catholikes. and Rebelles. Wiſe men haue noted, that though God for our ſinnes hath ſuffered, and ſtil doth permit Haeretikes, to keepe great broiles, in al partes (almoſt) of the vvorld, for à time: yeat he euer hath put them, in fine, to confuſion: geuing the victorie, lightly in al battailes, and encounters, to the Catholikes. And that oftentimes very miraculouſly, defeating (as in the vvarres of the Machabees, & els vvhere in old time) great numbers, vvith à very fevve, & for one Catholike, à thouſand Haeretikes ſlaine: and many glorious victories obtained vvithout any bloudſhed.
            
               For Luther, & Zvvinglius his time, I referre you, to the recordes of Germanie, and Svvizerland, vvhich ſet dovvne the ouerthrovves of Haeretikes in the filde. The fightes in Fraunce, vvhere the Catholikes, euer haue had alſo the victorie, be in al our memories meruelous. But of al others thoſe of Flauders are moſt memorable. Where,Diuers vnbloudie victories, geuē to the King Catholike, in theſe vvarres. beſides the conflictes at Grunning, Mock, Mounts, Roſandal, Zerikſea, Northorne, Amerone, Antvvarpe, Luart, Gemblovve, & the like, in euery of vvhich (the Lord God of Hoſts mercifully fighting for his ovvne cauſe, & the Catholike Kinges right) verie few Catholikes, vvithout any loſſe of men, in mā
               ner, ſlevve and defeated manie thouſandes, of vvel appointed ſouldiars:God hath deſtroyed al the Haeretikes partakers miraculouſly. the ſame moſt iuſt God of reuenge, hath notoriouſly put to rebuke and confuſion, al ſuch forrein Princes, and people, as came to ayde his enimies. And ſometimes, by his iuſt iudgement, hath brought them to ruine, euen by thoſe ſame Haeretikes, & Rebelles, that called for them, and for vvhoſe protection, they came into that countrie. As vve haue ſeen both in the caſe of the Almaine, & French ſuccourſes. And the like lucke ſeemeth to approch vnto our Engliſh forces: except our Lord (vvhich I hartely pray for) cal them from that vniuſt, and infamous ſeruice of Haeretikes. VVho hauing the perpetual curſe of Chriſt, & his holie Church, lying heauely vpon them, can no more eſcape ſpeedie deſtruction, then others, who vnluckely haue folowed that ſide, haue done before them. Which I ſpeake of charitie, loue, & compaſſion of my deare countriemen: being aſſured, that if they periſh in bodie (as it is to be feared, they ſhal do in that ſeruice) they ſhal loſe their

ſoules alſo euerlaſtingly: & ſhal aeternally curſe thoſe,A neceſſarie admonit
                     •
                  on to ou
                     •
                   coūtriemen. that ledde them out of their countrie, to ſo certayne perdition. Let not the memorie, of the old Engliſh notorious battailles, and victories, vvhich in old time vvere cōparable to vvhat prouinces, or peoples vvere moſt famous: nor the eſteeme, either true, or partial, of their preſent ſtreingth, & courage in Englād, make them obſtinate, in ſo dangerous and doubtful ſtate of thinges. Let them not flatter them ſelues, nor be abuſed by others: it goeth not vvholy, nor principally, nor oftentimes at al, by the ſtreingth, or might of mannes arme, if they vvere as they pretend: but God ſtriketh the ſtroke, and geueth the victorie, according to his Diuine diſpoſition, to the vvorthie, & to ſuch, as ſerue him, put their truſt in him, & confeſſe vvith the Prophet:Pſalm 43. That. Nec in gladio ſuo poſſederūt terrā: & brachiū eorū nō ſaluauit eos: ſed dexteratua, & brachiū tuū. Neither in their owne ſvvorde haue they poſſeſſed the land: & their owne arme hath not ſaued them: but thy right hād, (ô God) & thy arme.
            
            
               1. Reg. 25.When our Princes did Praeliari praelia Domini, Fight the ſightes of our Lord (As holie vvritte ſaith of Dauid,By vvhat meanes our Princes became of old ſo victorious. being in armes againſt King Saul then depriued) and their ſubiectes, & ſouldiars ſerued, & feared God, reuerenced his Prieſtes, had their confeſſours vvith them in campe, dayly heard Maſſe deuoutly, adored the Bleſſed Sacrament, called on Chriſt, & his holie Angels, and Sainctes, and the ſpecial Patrones of their perſons, or countrie, for their defence, liued in martial diſcipline, order, & obedience,Luc. 
                     •
                  . religiouſly (according to S. Iohn Baptiſtes rule, geuen to men of that condition) abſtayning from rape, and violence, tovvardes the innocent,

cōbating only for their faith, or their countries right: thē both amongſt the Infidelles, & Heathen, & alſo among their Chriſtian neighboures, their fightes vvere famous, thier conqueſtes glorious, and the Engliſh armes redoubted in al places.
            But novve hauing forſaken God, & God forſakē them: vvhen they take no quarel in hand, but for the diſhonorable defence of Rebelles, Pyrates, & Infidels: vvhen their Princes are become, Socij furū,
               Iſaia. 1. Ezech. 22. 
               & quaſi lupi rapientes praedam▪ Companions of theeues, and rauenous woolues: and publike enimies of al true Kinges, and lavvful Dominion: keeping fidelitie neither vvith Gòd, nor man: though they vvere as ſtrong and valiant, as euer they vvere, & of provvder conceipt, of their ovvne courage, & cunning, then at this day, they pretend: yeat God vvil confunde them, & ſuch à feare vvil be put into their hartes, that they ſhal flie, vvhen no man perſecuteth them, & à thouſand ſhal runae avvay, before the face of one Catholike, that fighteth for Gods Church. Theſe things (my deare countriemē) you haue either ſeene with your ovvne eyes, or by aſſured faithful teſtimonie of others, haue heard to haue fallen, in al theſe vvarres of Flaunders, & ſhal dayly proue it, by your ovvne experiēce, to be moſt true that no humane ſtreingth, or deſperation, can match God: & that it neuer fel vvel vvith him, that oppoſeth him ſelfe to Chriſt, & his holie Church. To vvhich Church, the Prophet playnly ſaith:Iſaia. 60. 
               Gens et regnum, quod tibi non ſeruierit, peribit. The Nation and Kingdome, that ſerueth not thee, ſhal periſh.
            
            Novve in ſuch euident, & imminēt dāger of deſtructiō & death, as vvel of bodie as ſoul, to al ſuch as folovve theſe nevv Engliſh quarels, it vvere

bootleſſe to put you in mind,No aduaūcement by Engliſh vvarres vvith the Haeretikes: but intolerable miſeries. of the impoſſibilitie of aduauncement, by thoſe vvarres, vvhat ſo euer your ſucceſſe be: your ſelues hauing dayly experience, of the intolerable diſtreſles, both there & at home, & hovve ſhamfully they vvhich vvere the authors of ſuch vvarres, & novve are the chiefe leaders of the ſame, haue abuſed al ſortes of our countriemen: enforcing manie à Gentleman, and ſubſtantial perſon, to ſerue of their ovvne charges, & to ſpoile them ſelues at home, in hope of their inriching abrode. Who novve finding al things cōtrarie, to promiſe, & expectatiō, are ſo entangled, that they neither dare go
                  •
                home, for feare of hanging, nor can wel endure theſe miſeries abrode, for feare of dying ſhamfully, & miſerably in forraine countries. Nothing being leift for their reliefe, indeed, in this perplexitie, but only to do that (if they haue grace) vvhich you haue both vviſely, godly, & honorably done: praeſeruing your ſoules for life, & glorie euerlaſting, & your perſons, for the ſeruice of our Church, and countrie, in better times to come. In the meane while to occupie the fortitude and forces,Epiſt. 207. of your bodie, and minde (vvhich are Gods ſpecial gifts, as S. Auguſtin ſaith) in the ſeruice of the Almightie: and of the greataſt, & iuſteſt Monarch in the vvorld, vnder à General ſo peerles, vvho can, & vvil, according to the vvorthines of your courage, condition, and qualities, advaunce you, & beſtowe you in ſuch places of ſeruice, where you may encreaſe in honour, and knovvledge, and ſo be in time, vvhē it ſhal pleaſe God to haue mercie of our deſolare countrie, not only reſtorers of old militare vertue, and diſcipline in the ſame: but be notable helpers by the valerous arme of your

Chriſtiā Knighthoode, to reduce our people, to the obedience of Chriſtes Church: & deliuer our Catholike freindes, & brethrē from the damnable, & vntolerable yoke of Haereſie, and her moſt impure leaders.
            It is novve ſome yeares agoe, ſith à Gentlman, & Capitaine, of my name, vviſhed, & (to ſay the truth) conferred earneſtly vvith me about it, that as vve had certaine Seminaries, and Colledges for praeſeruation, or reſtitution of the Cleargie, vvhen the time ſhould come, to ſerue God, in our countrie:A Nourcerie 
                     〈…〉
                  . ſo that there vvere ſome compainies of Engliſh ſouldiars alſo, to be trayned vp in Catholike, and old godly militare diſcipline, for the helpe of our ſaid countrie, in that kind likevviſe. Which thing being honorably begune, by diuers Noblemen and Gentlemen before: ſo I truſt, God hath brought to paſſe in you nowe, that it ſhal be finiſhed, to the vniuerſal comfort of vs al, and the great good, and hope of our Nation. For redreſſing the euils vvherof, it is as lavvful, godly,VVhat merite it is to fight for the faith. & glorious for you to fight, as for vs Prieſtes to ſuffer, and to die. Either the one vvay, or thother, for defence of our fathers faith, is alvvais in the ſight of God, à moſt precious death, and martyrdome. And great comfort (truly) it is to me, and hope to our poore coū
               trie, that in this our deſolation, our merciful Lord hath leift vs ſeed in both ſortes: And that I may truly ſay to you, the vvordes of S. Auguſtin,Epiſt. 207. to Coū
               tie Boniface: Alij pro vobis orando pugnant, cōtra inuiſibiles inimicos: vos pro eis pugnatis, cōtra viſibiles Barbaros. God (ſaith he) geueth his giftes diuerſly: Others by praiers fight for you, againſt your inuiſible enimies: and you ſight for them, againſt viſible Haeretikes, or (as

he ſpeaketh) againſt the Barbarous.
               The Prieſt and ſouldiar ſhould concurre. So goodly à thing it is, for the Prieſt & ſouldiar to concurre, in the ſeruice of God, and their countrie, togeather.
            But I forget my ſelfe, and am alreadie paſt the meaſure of à letter. Therfore I vvil here make an end: & for the reſt referre you to the good Prieſtes, to vvhom I haue geuen order in al things. And you ſhal finde them ſuch, as for zeale, diſcretion, learning, and vertue, ſhal be agreable to your deſire, and expectation. Whoſe holie laboures, and al your honorable endevours, I beſeke Almightie God to bleſſe. Commēding vnto you for à farewel, this goodlie ſentence of the foreſaid holie Doctor S. Auguſtin, vvorthie to be vvritten in golden letters,Vbi ſupia. on euerie noble ſouldiars breaſt: Hoc primum cogita, quando armaris ad pu
                     •
                  nam, quia virtus tua etiam corporalis, donum Dei eſt: ſic enim cogitabis, de dono Dei non facere contra Deum. that is: When ſoeuer thou art armed, & in readineſſe for battayle, let this be thy firſt cogitation, that thy very corporal ſtreingth it ſelfe, is the gift of God: wherby thou ſhalt ſtil be put in minde, neuer to vſe the gift of God, againſt God him ſelfe, that gaue it thee. Fare you vve
                  •
                againe. And to commaund me in theſe matters, that pertaine to my profeſſion, make no courteſie. For I am vvholy yours, and al theirs, that ſerue the Catholike cauſe, & our countrie.
            
               At Rome the 23. of April, 1587.
               
               
                  Your freind and ſeruant in Chriſt: VVilliam Allen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Vidit & approbauit Silueſter Pardo, S. Theol. Licenciatus & Cathedr. Eccleſiae Antuerp. Can. librorum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Cenſor.
         
      
   