
      
         
            
            
            CONCEYTED
LETTERS, NEWLY
LAYDE OPEN:
OR
A MOST EXCELLENT
BVNDLE OF NEW WIT, WHERIN
IS KNIT VP TOGETHER ALL
the perfections or arte of Episteling, by
which the most ignorant may with much
modestie talke and argue with the
best Learned.
            
            A WORKE VARYING FROM THE
nature of former Presidents.
            
               LONDON,
Printed by B. Alsop, for Samuel Rand, and are to be sold at his
Shop neere Holborne bridge. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            To the iuditious Reader.
            
               THree things (Iuditiall
Reader) make Books,
and the puplication
of Bookes aboue
good; excellent, to
wit, Necessitie, Vtility,
& Implicity, & where
any one of these are
figured, no doubt but
the Image is most
comely, then how much more where all are contained,
not Helens thirty perfections can challenge
more admiration, and though it may sauor
of Ostentation, to say this Pamphlet hath all, yet it
shall not be against truth to approue the subiect,
more then a Master, yea euen the soueraigne of
all: for if writings be the verie soules and eternal
substances of Time, what writings are so excellent
as those which passe from man to man, Religion,
Aduice, Familiaritie, Courtship, and all necessary
commercements (by which euen the whole
state of the world is sustained) being in them (as it
were) bound vp to outli
                  •
               e all time, all computation,
then what more necessary, for the profit how

shall Kings know and communicate their great
actions, enlarge their bounds▪ redresse their peoples
iniuries, how shal the noble, know intelligēce
to serue his Coūtrie, the Merchant trade, or to his
owne bring the wealth of many Kingdomes, or any
or all sorts of people speake at a farre distance,
but by the helpe of Letters only, then what to mankinde
more rich and beneficiall, which Tully better
to expresse, made it the crowne of all his labors.
Lastly, in these written Heralds, are those imployments
and braue implications, that whatsoeuer is
excellent or good in man, is to be seene in them, as
in a myrror, and so to be implyed eyther exemplarily
or iudicially, according to the vertues and vices
in them contained. If then these vertues shadowed
in these Presidents shall giue thee that benefit
which thine expectation, hopes, or the Authors
ayme made his leuell vnto, I doubt not but
thou wilt loue it, reade it, and imitate i
                  •
                so farre as
to thy priuate benefit: Farewell.
            
               Thine,
I. M.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            CONCEYTED
LETTERS, NEWLY
LAYDE OPEN.
            
               A LETTER TO A FRIEND,
to Borowe Money.
               
                  IF borowing of Money be not a breach
of Friend-ship, let me intreat your pa
                     •
                  
                  tience
to open your Purse, a present occasion
puts me to the aduenture of your
kindenesse, the matter is not much, yet
will at this time pleasure me as much
as so much may doo: the sum fiue pounds,
the time three moneths, my credit the Assurance, and heartie
                     •
                  
thankes the Interest. Thus without troubling the
Broker, or charging of the Scriuener, hoping my Letter
shall be of sufficient power to preuaile with your loue; I
                     •
                  
treating your present answer, in the affection of an honest
heart, I cōmit you to the Almightie. Yours, or not his owne
               
               
                  D. M.
               
            
            
               His Answere.
               IF your Friendship were a follower of Fortune, Loue
would haue but little life in this world, the contents of
your Letter hath put mee to a strict account with my estate,
how I may helpe you, and not hurt myselfe. I could

make sufficient Excuses, but that they taste of sm
                     •
                  ll comfort:
and therefore knowing Time to be precious, and to
voyde delayes, let this suffise you, your Request I haue satisfied,
and the Money I haue sent you: and not doubting
your Credite, will take your word for a Bond. Now for
the Use without abuse, I wish but Requitall, vpon the like
occasion. And so (glad that in this, or any thing in my power,)
I may make proofe of my loue: I Rest in the same.
               
                  Yours, or not my owne.
N. R.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter to a Kinsman, for Newes.
               I Would be glad to heare how you doe, how the worlde
goes with you, what newes are stirring, what wherligigges
are in the braines of mad men, and what rekes
Raskals keep among better men, what their opinions are
that study the starres of the man in the Moone, and whether
honest men among the multitude be not taxed for their
wisedome: How farre a mans tongue will goe beyonde
his teeth, and doe no hurt to his lippes, and whether Dalyla
be dead that betrayed Sampson to the Philistines, How
Pride and Patience agree together in vngratious Spirits,
How the Diuell bestirs him about his villany in the
world: and whether loue bee not laught at for a m
                     •
                  trie
iest of witte, especially where the weaker sorte want the
strength of vnderstanding, many such notes may light in
the way of thy obseruation: of which what thou hast in
memory, I pray thee put downe in a few lines, which shal
not be lost in my loue, and the sooner the better, for by thy
long silence, I doubt of thy welfare, how euer it be kéepe it
not from thy friend, who regards not fortune but vertue:
vpon which my affection grounded can neuer be remoued:
Fa
                     •
                  ewel.
               
                  Thine or not his owne,
W. T.
                  
               
            
            
               
               GGod C
                     ••
                  zine, you write vnto mee to knowe how
I doe: in a word neuer worse, both weak
                     •
                   in bodie,
and sicke in minde, in briefe as neare death as
may be to liue: if you knew my crosses, you would pittie
my discomforts, the varieti
                     •
                   whereof is so great, that
I thinke there was neuer Carte so loaden with Wares,
as my heart is with heauinesse and woes!
               Oh this iron Ag
                     •
                   smells of nothing but Rust, whiles
the bagges of mettall eates vp the hearts of man: where
is kindnesse, but onely among Children for Apples and
Nuts? Friendship (I thinke) is flowen away for feare
of abuse, and loue is among the Saintes which are onely
in Heauen: and if the world be at this passe, in what
case are the people: wh
                     •
                  re Men in shape are Monsters
in Nature; and where Women (since the Creation,)
are become straunge Creatures? Whiles howling with
sinne, and wéeping with shame, makes such black ghost
amongst tormented soules, as if the Diuell had licence to
make a Hell vpon Earth? Some are all for the Church,
and nothing for GOD: other all for CHRIST, &
nothing for Charitie: and 
                     •
                  est men for themselues, and
leaue their Neighbours to the wide worlde. Children
are weary of their Parents, before they bee parence of
Children, and Parents so couetous and vnkinde, that nature
hath forgotten her course. To conclude, the misery
of Time is such, as puts Patience to the vtmost tryall of
her strength, and by the course of the Elements, the Almanack
                     •
                  
makers knowes not what will become of this
world: now for my selfe, I would I were with him that
madeit: but his Will be done, who can mende it at his
pleasure: vnto whose heauenly tuition, vntill I sée you,
I leaue you,
               
                  Yours, or not his owne.
R. B.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter of Challenge.
               IF I thought that you durst answer me, I would challenge
you, yet where the sicke of a Feuer may burue after

a shaking, I kn
                     •
                  we not how shame may make a
Cowarde more desperate, the
                     •
                   valiant: yet once my
wrongs I can put vp, whiles looking on the obiect of my
Reuenge, I become an a
                     •
                  iect to my selfe, to thinke what
mettall I am to temper with. But in brie
                     •
                  e to lose no
more time with you, to Morrowe is my day, the h
                     •
                  wer
eight in the morning, the pl
                     •
                  co, the Padock
                     •
                   within the
Thicket: where the determination of businesse I hope
will be briefer then discourse, and so I ende: endlesse.
               
                  Yours: as you haue
made mee.
T. N.
                  
               
            
            
               His Answer.
               IDle humors shewes add
                     ••
                   Brayues, where lacke of
iudgement, prooues imperfection indiscretion: To
challenge a Coward is no balour, but if your Sword
were as nimble as your Penne, I should not knowe
how to put by the poynte: but I thinke that your furie is
but a flash, which betwéene heats and colde, hath made a
little thunder, that will goe away in a Clowde: to temper
with Mettalls is fittest for Artistes, but in the rules
of honor scorne hath no place. But touching your agonie,
take héede of an Ag
                     •
                  e, left shame fellowes shifte, in
putting off a Quarrell, with excuse: in briefe, there shall
nothing fayle but your selfe; who as you deserue at my
hands, shall finde mée from my heart,
               
                  Yours, as you mine.
R. D.
                  
               
            
            
               A Loue-Letter, to a worthie
Gentle-woman.
               FAyre Mistris, if I had no eyes, I should not like you,
and it no wit I should not loue you, for the brightnes

of your Beauty is for no blind sight to gaz
                     •
                   vpon, nor the
worthines of your vertu
                     •
                   for no weake braynes to beate
vpon. If you say I flatter you, looke into your selfe, and
doo me n
                     •
                   wrong, and if I doo you Right, chyde not Affection,
for a discouerie, where truth is honourable, pardon
my presumption if it excéede your pleasure, and commend
his seruice, who will make an honour or your fauor:
So intreating your patience, for answer to my
poore Letter, vntill I heare from you, and alwayes I
rest.
               
                  Your deuoted,
to be commaunded.
N. R.
                  
               
            
            
               Her Answere.
               SYr; if your wits goes with your eyes, your braynes
may be on the out-side of your head: and th
                     •
                  n if you
deceyue your seife, I hope I shall not bee blamed,
Colours are but shadowes, and may b
                     •
                  full of illusions,
and the worthynesse of vertue may be a reach aboue the
Worldes reason, yet the discouery of affection may be
mor
                     •
                  in wordes then matter, especially where discretion
sounds the depth of desart, though the honour as truth be
worth regard. Where there is no faults there néedes no
pardon, and therefore without trouble of Patience, finding
no cause of displeasure, I thus conclude: Loue hath a
priuilege to be at the commaund of kindnesse, in which
I rest, to wish you much happinesse.
               
                  Your wel-willing Friend.
E. S.
                  
               
            
            
               A Conceyted Letter
of Newes.
               GOod Unckl
                     •
                  , I knowe you looke for newes, from
this plot of our Earthly Paradise, which when you

left, it was a place of great pleasure: but since your departure,
some wicked Blasts haue withered some of our
principall Plants, but God be thanked, we haue at this
time so good a Gardener, that so plucks vppe the Weedes
by the rootes, that (I hope) this Spring wee shall haue a
flourishin
                     •
                   piece of ground.
               Hobgoblin and the Fayries, hath brought theyr Beléeuers
to the Gallowes: where (had not Mercie giuen
grace) they had bene almost a
                     •
                   
                  O man in Desperation;
But it is an ill winde, that blowes no man to good: for
Halter-men and Ballet-makers were not better sette a
worke this many a day. Our Sunne shewes his beams
in great brightnesse, whiles the man in the Moone is fall
                     •
                  n
quite thorough the Clowdes: wilde Byrdes put in
Cadges, become tame in little time: but our Iacke-Dawes
will be chattering, whiles they haue a tongu
                     •
                  
in theyr heads.
               Our Turtle-Doues are the prettyest fooles in the
world: but when a Cuckow counterfaits the Nightingale,
there is an ill Closse in the Musicke: Our Peacocke
was so prowde, that hee could not leaue spreading
his tayle, but since moulting-time hee hath lost many of
his Feathers. Our Poast-horses haue galled their Riders,
and our Asses are kept but onely for theyr milke:
in summe, for Men and Women, the best (God be thanked
are well, and for the worst God will take order for
theyr amendment, and so with my most hearty commendation,
I rest
               
                  Your euer-louing Nephew.
T. M.
                  
               
            
            
               The Vnckles Answer.
               MY kinde Nephewe, I thanke thee heartily for thy
merrie Letter, in which I like well of thy iudgement
in wryting of Newes, to meddle with no matters

of state: for hée that lookes too high may haue a suddain
downe-fall, and olde Countrey-Prouerbe, may prooue a
good parte of spéeche;
               I remember I haue hearde my Gr
                     •
                  und. Father tell
of one that was taught him in his T
                     ••
                  uell: Let the
Horse neigh, know thou thy course and god thy way: and
so much for this. Now for your Earthly Paradise, I
thought it (when I came from it) a goodly poece of ground,
and t'was pittie that any Blaste should per
                     •
                  h the least
Plant in it: But as it is I am very glad to heare so well
of it, GOD blesse the owner of it, and the Gardener,
that so well wéedeth it.
               Now for the Byrdes, hee that knoweth not a Cuckowe
from a Nightingale, is like vnto a Lark-catcher,
that hauing caught an Owle, tooke her for a fine Hawke,
till looking on her face, and fearing she had bene aspirite,
he let her flye to the Diuell. As for Peacocks, they will
be prowde, till they looke on theyr legges, and Iackdawes
will prate, it is their nature: and therefore be not angry
with a Milke-wenche, if shée make not a curtsi
                     •
                   like Mistrisse
C
                     •
                  nstable, for there may be difference in their bréeding,
and so foorth.
               Now for our Countrey-newes, I will tell you what
is come to my hands: our Coultes are so lustie, that we
cannot kéepe a Filly in quiet for them, and our Géese are
so fatte that they wallowe as they goe: our Sowes are
so forward, that we shall haue a world of 
                     •
                  at Pigges: and
our Ewes so suckle our Lambes, that they leaue almost
no flesh on their backs: our Mill horse hath broken his
halter, and layd his load at the Mill doore: and our towne
Bull is so fat, that he shall be bayted for the Butcher: our
Towne is so full of Marriages, that there is scarce Cakes
enough for the Bridales.
               Tom Piper and the blinde Harper are hyred for these
Hollidayes with my young Landlord, who hath sworne
by his Fathers soule, that hee will whoord vp none of his
Siluer: Other such h
                     •
                  mely stuffe there is store about

vs, but because you haue better Wares nearer hand, I
care not much if I trouble you no longer with such Trifles.
I pray you let me heare from you, of such occurrents
as comes in your way: In the meane time alwayes
I rest.
               
                  The most louing Vnckle.
F. L.
                  
               
            
            
               A Conceyted Loue-Letter.
               SWéete Creature, to tell you I loue you, were a
Phrase of too plaine a fashion: and yet when truth is
indeed the best 
                     ••
                  oquence, affection needs no inuention
to expresse the care of her content; which being in three
Letters, makes a word soone to be read, which being
Y: O: V: nothing doubting you
                     •
                   spelling, I hope you
will so kindely put together, that a Coniunction of Lo
                     ••
                  
shall haue no separation daring life: And thus b
                     •
                  see
                  
                     •
                  hing
you to learne this lesson by hart, without a crosse in
conceyte, to hinder the course of loues comfort: Till I
heare from you in that nature, that may make mée a happy
creature, I rest.
               
                  Yours wholly,
and onely if you will.
M. D.
                  
               
            
            
               Her Answer.
               KInd
                     •
                   Syr, to tell you I loue you, were too crosse an
Answer with a comfortable request: and yet when
dissimulation is the worst fruit
                     •
                   of inuention, descretion
may be pardoned in concealing of loue. Touching your
letter, they are sooner read then vnderstoode, while Imaginatiue
hopes may be deceyued in theyr happinesse, and
yet to auoyde all touch of Ingratitude, in that nature of
kindenesse, that may giue honor content, as a simple
scholler in the arte of loue, 
                     ••
                  sath
                     •
                   to haue that by heart,

that may trouble more then my head, when separation of
Coniunctions may endanger the death of Comfort, wishing
nothing, nothing amisse, to them that meane all
well, I rest.
               
                  Yours, as I may be mine owne.
E. B.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter from 
                     •
                   Ladie to a Gentleman,
whom shee called her Seruant, for
the preferring of a Gentle-woman
vnto her.
               SEruant I haue often spoken to you for that you must
needs doo for mée: I am going to the Court, and shall
haue great vse of a Gentle-woman to attende mée,
I know you haue many Kins-men and acquaintance, among
whom you may finde 
                     •
                  ne to fitte mee: I will take
her at your hand, and regard her for your sake, and if her
desarts answers my desires, shée shall lose no loue in my
fauor, and therefore leauing this trusty charge to the care
of your discréete kindenesse, as you will expect a greater
courtesse at my hands: I rest,
               
                  Your louing Mistrisse.
F. T.
                  
               
            
            
               His Answer.
               GOod Madame; you spake vnto mée, to helpe you

                     〈◊〉
                   a Gentle-woman, which with my letter I haue
here sent you: a Woman and gentle, who I hope
will not be altogether vnworthy of your entertainment:
for her Person, shée is not deformed, nor her face of the
worst feature, shée is neither b
                     •
                  ea
                     •
                  -eyed, nor tongue-tyed,
and for her qualities I hope shée can doe more then make

curtsey and blush: her Parentage is not bare, nor her
breeding idle, and for her disposition, I hope it wil be nothing
vispleasing: to praise her in any perfection, I dare
not, but in all will leaue har to the tryall of your patience:
So wishing my dutifull seruice in this, or what else may
lye in my power, so Fortunate as to deserue your sauour,
and this Gentle-woman so gracious as to gaine the continuance
of your g
                     ••
                  d opinion, in Prayer for your health,
and hearts most wished happinesse, I take my leaue for
thie time, but rest at all times,
               
                  Your Ladyships
most humble Seruant.
R. G.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter from a kinde of Diogines,
to a Courtyer.
               SYr, I heare by some of my acquaintance that you goe
on apace with the World: I pray GOD you go
as fast towards Heauen; but by the way let me tell
you, what I thinke fittest for you, now and then to haue
minde of, least you forgette the mayne, while the byeway
deceyue you: for what is Honor without vertue?
King Dauid tells you, it is but a blast: meaning a
prowde man: and what is Wealth without Wisedome,
but Couetousnesse? and that is the toole of all
euill: and what is Life without Grace, the very highway
to Hell?
               Let therefore Vertue be your Honor: Wisedome
your Wealth: and Grace your Life: so that GOD
bless
                     •
                  yon, the diuell can neuer hurte you: Let not a little

wealth beget a great deale of pride in you, lest a great
deale of pride beget you but little witte. Know whence
you are: who you are: and where you are: You are
from the 
                     •
                  lim
                     •
                   of the Earth, but a Creature on Earth:
Be merry with measure, but be not madde in any case:
For Patience is the guyde, of Experience, where haste
makes more waste then good worke: To conclude, be
loyall to Soueraignti
                     •
                  : faithfull in Friendship: constant
in Loue: and honest in all: Farewell.
               
                  Thine as thou knowest.
B. B.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter of zealous loue, written from
a Gentleman to his Brother.
               BRother, since I last hearde from you, I am sorrie to
heare that I doo of you: that you are wound so farre
into the World, as if that you neuer meant to get
out of it; you know I haue trauelled farre, séene much,
and haue some vnderstanding: by all the obseruation of
time, in the courses of Nature, I finde Salomons truth
in the tryall of the Worlde, that there is little of it, but
is little worth in it, (when all béeing but Uanitie) there
is little Uertue to be found in it: Beléeue me Brother,
wée are neuer in one nature, but differ in another: in the
Flesh, but not in the Spiritie; For whiles I contemplate
the substance of the Soules comfort, thou art puzzelled
in the Worlde, among the puddles of the Earth,
yea, I feare the nature of thy affect to bee as farre from
the rule of Religion, as the most sen
                     •
                  lesse Creature is
from the vse of Reason:
               
                  
Oh brother, I know thou hast wronged many, and
thy selfe most, I would thou wert a Zacheu
                        •
                     
                   to write
all: but better betimes then to late, looke home to the
maine chance, haue a care of thy soule, and thy body will
be the better; beleeue it, there is no rust eateth so fast
into any mettall, as the venom of Au
                     ••
                  ice into the heart
of a wicked man: Prodigality is the way to penury, but
Couet
                     •
                  usnesse is the roote of all euill, betwixt both there
is a meane, that to hit on, is a kinde of happinesse, and
if thou hast no eares but of Midas, that can heare of nothing
but gold, take a heart of Simion, to ioy in nothing
but Christ Iesus. Turne a new leafe, serue God for
whom thou wert created, and let not the earth triumph
ouer thée, for whom it was made to tread vpon, lift vp
thine eyes towards heauen, where one ioy of the Elect
is worth all the Kingdomes of the world: leaue the
world ere it leaues thée, and loue him euer, that will neuer
leaue thée: let thy li
                     •
                  e be a Pilgrimage, and the earth
but a passage, and the heauen only the home of thy soules
eternall happinesse, once a day reade these few lines for
my sake, which if they doe that good to thée, which I hartily
pray for in thee, till when and euer my hearts loue.
               
                  Thy louing Brother,
N. P.
                  
               
            
            
               His answere
               MY good Brother, I thanke you for your carefull and
kinde Letter, yet let me tell you, that zeale without
discretion proues not the best part of Religion:
Reports may be idle, and then belee
                     •
                  e may be erronious,
when mistakings by misconstruings may bréed abuse of
good vs
                     •
                  s: I know that Riches are Witches to them

that make their heauen of this world, but he that hath a
leaden wit, will 
                     •
                  euer worshippe a golden Calfe: But
since I know Abraham and Lazarus were alike in election,
giue mée leaue while I am in this world, by
Christ rather th
                     •
                  n Auarise, rather to be a Husbandman,
then tobe a labourer for hire: if I haue wronged
any, it is vnwillingly, whom if I know, I will satisfie
most willingly, and for the wound of conscience, I
hope to be so farre from Hypocrisie, that I shall be free
from that feare, and therefore though trauel hath taught
you much experience in the world, and hauing sufficient
maintenance to passe through the world, you make the
lesse account of the world, yet when carefull thrist bréedeth
no couetous thraldome, be not iealous of my loue,
with all the pleasures of the world to make comparison
with the least of heauens comfort, I know the highest
mountaine is but earth, and the lowest valley is no other,
and therefore when I carry my foot-stoole on my
head, let mée walke like a foole or monster. In briefe, I
know the world and how to vse it, and kéepe account
with my cares, how I may most contentedly leaue it,
but for my loue to him that make it, let me liue no longer
in it, then I loue and honor him aboue it, and so intreating
you to blow off
                     •
                  ll breaths that may abuse my disposition,
and to be perswaded so farre of my soules health,
that my ioy is euer and only in Christ Iesus, to his preseruation,
leauing the happy issue of your hopes in the
nature of the best loue, till I sée you, and alwaies I rest:
               
                  Your most louing Brother,
T. W.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A Letter of Loue, to an
Honourable Ladie.
               HOnourable Madame: if Loue were not aboue
reason, it would not be so high in regard: who
dwelling onely in the spirites of the best vnderstandings,
feedes the heart onely with the frui
                     •
                  ts of an infallible
resolution: What it is in it 
                     •
                  wne nature hath bene
diue
                     •
                  sly described, but I thinke neuer knowne but vnto
them that inwardly knowe it. Some holde it a Riddle,
that none can interpret, but hée that made it: and others
a Myracle, that amazeth all that beleeue it: but
if it bée as I haue read of it, a Childe and Beautie begotte
it: I hope Nature will bée her selfe, and not vnkinde
vnto her owne breede: How to prooue truth, the
Honor in your Eyes, that haue wrought my heart to your
seruice, shall 
                     •
                  ake knowne to your fauor, in the happinesse
of your Employment. So crauing pardon for
my presumption, in my deuoted duety, to the honor of
your commaund, I humbly take my leaue.
               
                  Your Ladyships,
in all humblenesse.
R. M.
                  
               
            
            
               Her Answer.
               WOrthie Knight, if Loue be aboue Reason, it
must be eyther Diuine or Diuelish, and so regarded
accordingly: what it is I thinke is best known

by the effect of it, howsoeuer idle braynes haue beaten about
the description of it: Riddles are but Ieasts of
witte, and Myracles are ceased for being seene in our
Age, but if it be a Childe (though of a strange Parentag
                     •
                  ,)
surely Nature will not suffer the Mother to be
cruell to her owne bréede, but if it fall out to bée an vngratious
Father, what then will be thought of the Children?
yet least in misconstruing a conceit, I may mistake
a content, since in the secret of Nature may be a
sense of strange vnderstanding, I will suspend my iudgement,
till I haue made proofe of my opinion: when
Eyes and Hearts méete together in discourse, I hope the
businesse will be soone 
                     •
                  nded, (that is) referred to indifferent
iudgement: So till occasion be offered of the performance
of Employment, hoping that Uertue and Honor
will soone agrée vpon sure grounds, till I sée you,
I rest,
               
                  Your louing Friend.
M. W.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter from a Knight to a Nobleman,
for the entertaining
of a Secretary.
               NOBLE LORD, I heare that your Secretary
hath lately taken his leaue of this worlde,
in whole place (if you be not prouided) let my loue
preuaile with your Honor, for the entertainment of this
bearer, a Gentleman and a Kinsman of mine, in whose
commendations I dare thus farre vse my credite, his
heart shall bee as faire as his hand vppon any occasion
of your Employment, and for his wit it is both in Caput
and Copie-holde, for he hath read much, and obserued

more then a little, his discent hath béene from the
loynes of an honourable Line, and for his disposition
euery way, I hope you shall finde it no way displeasing,
not to trouble you with long circumstance, leauing your
happinesse to your acceptance, with my seruice to your
commaund: in all humble loue I take my leaue for this
time. But rest during lif
                     •
                  .
               
                  Your Honours deuoted,
to be commaunded,
W. R.
                  
               
            
            
               The Lords answere.
               MY kind Knight, I haue receyued your letter, fulfilled
your request, and entertained your kinsman,
of whom I am already so well perswaded, besides
the assurance of your knowledge, that I thinke a
little matter shall not make square in our loues: I finde
what you writte of him, and shall haue much employment
for him, I thanke you for him, and if he continue
his carriage, which I doubt not, he will bee of better
fortune then my fauour, and yet somewhat the more for
your sake, I will take such a care of him, that ere many
monthes passe you shall finde my loue in him, so till I sée
you at my house, where you shall make your owne welcome.
I rest,
               
                  Your most assured friend,
E. S.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A Letter of a simple man to a Scholler,
that was determined to play
the Wagge with him.
               WOrshipful Sir, I vnderstand by my honest
friend and Scho
                     •
                  lfellow in our Parish church,
that your Worshippe hath a great knowledge
in casting of Natiuities, and telling mens fortunes, to
tell you truely what yeares I am, my Grandame sayes
I was at lawfull age to enter vpon my Fathers Farme
at Lent last, and then your Worship may ghesse much
about the time, the the day and the hours I do not wel
remember: But to the purpose, I heare say that in your
Studie among the Starres, you haue gone by all the
Planets, and ten to one if your Worshippe will goe ouer
them, but you shall finde mee in one of them, and if
you aske of them that dwell in those hou
                     •
                  es, some of
them may tell you that of mee that all the world is not
acquainted with, I pray you Sirlet mee entreate you
to take a little paines for mee, and chiefely, what good
happe or ill is like to before mee, as well among men
as women, and when I come for my note, I will better
consider your paines, in the meane time I haue sent
you a peece of gold that saw no light this many a day: so
till I heare from you, which I pray you let bee as soone
as you can, I commit your Worshippe to God. From
my house at Columsbery this second day of Iuly, 1615.
               
                  Your Worships to commaund,
Ienkin Hoguiskine.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His Answer.
               MY good Friend, I receyued your Letter and your
kinde Token, and though I loue n
                     •
                  t to shewe my
skill in those secrets, yet 
                     •
                  or your Schoole-fellowes
sakes I haue taken a little paines for you: I will tell
you what I haue found among them all: if you were
borne vpon the Sunday, Sol is a hote Planet, and you
will be much subiect to Sun-burning, especially (if you
goe to Plough bare headed: if vpon the Munday, the
Moone is full of water, and if you 
                     ••
                  ll your braines too
full of Drinke, you may growe Lunatike, and so be in
danger of Bedlame: if vpon Tuesday, Mars is a bloody
fellowe, and if you goe to Fisticuffes, you will hardly
be without a bloody nose: if vpon Wednesday, you must
weare 
                     •
                   Nightcap, and bée euer at your booke: especially
(if you can write and reade) and be in any Office in your
Pa
                     ••
                  ish: if vpon the Thursday, you will be as prowde
as a Beggar, especially (if you weare your best cloathes)
on a working day: if vpon a Friday, beware Wenches,
least they make thée a poore man, especially (about Cuckow
time:) and if vpon a Satterday; Oh you will be
so froward that (if you Marrie) your Wife will neuer endure
the house with you, especially (if shée be of the bréede
of a Scholler:) and therefore not yet hauing heard any
newes in any of the houses of you: vntill I heare from
you againe, I can say no more to you, and so I rest,
               
                  Your assured Friend.
T. W.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter to a Friend, on the
otherside of the Sea.
               DIstance of placo must make no difference of minds,
Loue and Life amongst hearts make an ende together,

I haue long longed to heare from you, and if I
had knowne whether, I had 
                     •
                  are this written vnto
you: but now hauing met with him that meaneth shortly
to see you, I haue thought good to let you know, that
I yet liue to loue you, and forget net to pray for you, that
all happinesse may befall you; Glad I would be to see
you, and in the meane time to heare from you, how the
world goeth there about you, whether al birds be of one
feather, and how they flie together, what blazing stars
haue beene lately seene, and what your Astronomers
thinke what will follow of their appearance, whether
your wine be watered before it come ouer, & how youth
and age agrée vpon the Coniunction Coplatiue: how
the great Fish and the little agree together in your seas,
and how your Rabbets escape the Kite abroad, and
the Pole-Cat in their Borowes, how the fexes and
wolues prey vpon your Géese and Lambs, & what sport
your Swallowes make with the Flyes in the ayre.
I wish you not to write of any Wonders, because they
are incredulous, nor of matters of state, for they may
be perhappes ill taken: but onely how honest men
thriue, and knaues haue their rewardes, how Wise
men are honoured, and Fooles laught at, and how the
weaker sort hold their strength with the stronger, when
Wenches eyes pull out mens hearts out of their Bellies,
their wittes out of theyr braiues, and theyr
money out of their purses, and such matters of no
moment, then must needes if you will take a little
paines so set downe in a little Paper, I shall be glad
to looke vpon them, and in my loue to requite them,
for our World to heare it, were a worlde to thinke of it:
But the Messengers haste not giuing me time to write
of it vntill the next Poste, I will say but this of it, God
blesse the best, and mend or end the worst, grant all honest
harts good liues in it, and a ioyfull departure when

they are to leaue it, to which prayer, hoping you will say
Amen, till we meet, and alwayes, I rest,
               
                  Yours, or not mine owne.
I. G.
                  
               
            
            
               His Answere.
               MY long acquaintance, and worthy beloued friend
                     •
                  
I haue lately receyued your letters, wherein I find
your desire to heare of the passages in the world on this
side the salt-water. Now to satisfie in as much as I
can, let mee tell you that I finde some difference in the
natures of Nations, but touching their di
                     •
                  sions, I
thinke they are much alike thorow the whole World,
for on the one side, I 
                     •
                  inde the powerfull, imperi
                     •
                  us:
the ambitious en
                     •
                  ious, the couetous neuer satisfied, the
licentious idle, and the foolish vnprofitable: on the other side
Maiesty gratious, Honour v
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  uous, wealth
charitable, Thrift wealthie, 
                     〈◊〉
                   all, and Religion
loyall, and Labour commodious. Now looking into
the danger of Greatnesse, the charge of Honour, the care
of wealth, the misery of want, the 
                     ••
                  lly of wantonnesse,
and the beggery of idlenese: I haue chosen the meane
for my part of musicke, where I shall neither stra
                     •
                  n my
voyce, nor stretch my stringes, but with little charge
keepe my instrument 
                     〈◊〉
                   tune: The passages are heere
as in other places, when Ianuary and May meet in coniunction,
there are strange kindes of countenances that
shew not the best content.
               And when Windes are highest in Summer, the fruit
shall fall 
                     〈◊〉
                   they be ripe, Many idle exercises are more

costly then comfortable, much talke and little truth, &
gaye outsides haue poore insides, 
                     •
                  athes
                     •
                   and lyes as
common as High-wayes, and painted images make
feeles idels, honest men thought more silly then the wise
among she Wizards of the world, and the Diuel among
the Brokers dayly hunted with beggars, murmuring of
warre among vnquiet Spirits, and Peace guarded for
feare of a close stratagem
                     •
                  . In summe, such variety of
businesse, that euery mans braine is 
                     •
                  ul of humours: and
for women they are of such force, that they put men to
great patience: for my sel
                     •
                  e, I see the world at that
passe, that I thinke him happy that is well out of it: in
summe, God blesse the best while the worst mend, and
sen
                     •
                   vs his grace, and health with a happy méeting: so
till I heare from you, which I wish often with my harts
loue that shall neuer end but with life, with my heartie
commendations I commit you to the Almighty.
               
                  Yours as mine owne.
R. G.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter from a friend in the City to a
Scholler in the Vniuersity.
               HOnest Ned, since I left the blessed place wherein
thou dwellest, I am come into a world that doth
amaze me with imaginations, how Nature could
so iuggle with the world as to make men become shadowes,
women picture: but neare the end of daies
I see the Diuell labours hard about his haruest, else
could madnesse neuer so ouer-rule, as to turn wisdome
out of dores. The disloyaltie of Subiects to most gratious
Princes, vnthankefulnesse of seruants to most
bountifull masters, vnthankefull heartes to best deseruing

Spirite, disobedient children to most carefull parents
yea most vngracious creatures to the most gracious
Creat
                     •
                  r, makes mee feare a ne
                     ••
                   dealing vpon the
earth, to cleanse the World from iniquitie, the Diuel is
feared in his colours, but followed in his conditions, and
heauen more spokē o
                     •
                  , th
                     •
                   lookt after, charitable mouths
haue other meanings in their hearte, and 
                     ••
                  thes are so
common that they are little in account, the cuppe of

                     〈◊〉
                   is toppe full to the brimme, 
                     〈…〉
                  
to the health of the Diuell: Reason 
                     〈…〉
                   to
the World, that A. T. to much in the world 
                     •
                  akes
him a wofull Scholler that keepes that lesson in his
heart, Iacke a Lent scarce a Gentleman will ride on
Cocke-horse, like a rascal, and Io
                        •
                     e Fiddle in a French
hoode will be a Lady before her Mistresse. Prison is
become a practise of policie to deceiue the witt
                     •
                   with a
plot of villanie: The breath of some man is deadly, especially
vpon a capitall 
                     •
                  ffence: when iustice impartiall
weedes the land of the vnnaturall: The Pruner of
the three trees hath gotten
                     •
                   much by vnwholesome
fruit, who when he hath pared the outside, puts the rest
in an earthen pi
                     •
                  . Beléeue me Ne
                        •
                     , I shall not bee at
rest till I be with thee, where I may walke to the well
that yeeldes the Spirit a sweet Water. Shortly I
hope to see thee, in the meane time, let mee heare
from thee that vpon the least of thy wish, I may the
sooner be with thee. Farewell.
               
                  Thine if his owne.
R. D.
               
            
            
               
               His answere.
               KInde Francke, in perusing of thy Letter, I find no
little touch of passion, and that thy brain is not a little
distempered with the cares of this world, which
though they touch not thy person, yet being a Christian,
thou canst not but hate a Iew: far mine owne part, I
haue read of many idle passages in times past, but I am
most hartily 
                     •
                  ory to heare of the sinfull occurrents of this
age: I haue read in the Discourse of Sin, that Enuie is
a pestilent humor in a pestiferous spirit, and that Pride
is the fore-horse of Follies, that drawes the Diuels Car
into hell: I haue read likewise, that Queene Helens lust
was the spoile of Trey, and that her name will neuer be
blotted out of the blacke booke of Infamie: I haue read
of many things, of which I haue taken some notice, as of
the Cuckow 
                     •
                  illing the Sparow that hatcheth her, and
the Turkie cocke beating his henne when hee hath trod
her, but a Dogge to be too saw
                     •
                  ie with a Lion: fie vpon
it, there is almost no beast can abide it. I read likewise,
that vpon a time, that sin was growne to such a a height
that the Diuel laid about him like a great Lord, but God
be thanked, there was an Angell that had authoritie ouer
him, seeing his 
                     •••
                  kes, quickely weakened his force,
fetched him into his precinct, and kept him so fast lockt
in his chaine, that he could not passe beyond his 
                     •••
                  its,
but what is all this to thée, no more but a 
                     〈◊〉
                   of thy
kindnesse, as thou writest what thou hast séen, so I what
I haue read, when set the Hare against the Goose giblets
and there would be a strange 
                     •
                  ish of didlums: wel, when
thou art weary there, come hither, and as wee may, wee
will be merrie together: Farewell.
               
                  Thine, or not his selfe,
W. R.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A Letter to a Scholler that tooke vpon him the
Interpretation of Dreames.
               SIR I heare by a kinsman of mine, among other
your deepe iudgements in many other learned points
of Arte, of your excellent iudgement in the interpretation
of Dreames, and being perswaded much of your
kindnesse, by such as hath conuersed much in your company,
I am bold to intreate your opinion vpon some apparisions
that lately troubled me in my 
                     •
                  leep, and though
I will not be frighted with Furies, nor will trust vnto
flatteries, yet if I may haue some notice of the issue of
these night troubles, I shall take it for a kindnesse, that I
would not bury in obliuion. First, mée thought I saw
Phaeton in the skie, sitting in Sols glorious Carre, and
many fiery driuers about him, but on a sodaine giuing
his horses the bridle, for want of holding they run with
such a speed, that the Carre was ouerthrowne, Phaeton
fell downe and all his driuers with him: with the sudden
noise whereof I awoke, when I fell a sléepe againe, I
saw, me thought, certaine great Starres mounting aboue
the Sunne, but comming neere his heate they were
suddenly dissolued, hange a while in the aire, and at last
fell into the bottome of the earth, with the fall whereof
I awoke, now toward morning, taking a little nappe,
me thought I saw a kinde of Furie or shee Diuell let out
of hell with charmes or poisons to doe much hurt in the
world, but a gratious power came from heauen, for the
good of the world, and with the breath of his mouth made
her so vanish away, that I neuer heard more what bec
                     •
                  me
of her. These were the thrée dreames which troubled
me in my sleepe, the interpretation whereof, leauing
to the description of your kinde patience: I rest.
               
                  Your louing friend,
R. I.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His answere.
               SIR, though my profession be not to interprete night
troubles: yet at the request of your friend, I am content
to tell you mine opinion of your strange apparitions.
Touching your first dreame, it should seeme you
are somewhat Poeticall, and hauing the day before read
of the fiction, were troubled in the night with a fable: for
your mounting Starres, I guesse you were the euening
before at the Starre or the Moone, or some such elemental
signe, studying some Tauerne Astronomie, that your
braine being in the altitude of Canary. taking the candles
for starres, seeing one of them by mischance 
                     〈◊〉
                   with
his candle stick downe to the ground, being a little troubled
with it to bed-ward, brought out this strange vision
in your 
                     •••
                  pe, For the third, if you come to Furies,
shee Diuels, or such kinde of Spirits, I haue nothing to
say to them, nor will trouble my thought with them.
               And therefore leauing such as loue Hell to deale with
such Hagges, Beseeching God to blesse me and thee, and
all honest hearts from all such horrible creatures: I rest,
               
                  Your louing friend,
L. T.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter of a Patient to his Physitian.
               MAster Doctor, your Patient cōmends him to your
patience, to beare a little kinde chiding for your too
long absence: my disease holds his owne, and my
paine nothing diminished, and if you come not the sooner
your Physicke will be past working, for my stomacke is
weake, and my heart groweth faint, and yet I feede,

though my 
                     〈◊〉
                   be not the best, loath I am to languish
if I may haue hope of comfort, but your absence
makes me doubt of my recouery. I pray you therefore
haste you vnto me, and let me be assured of your comming
                     •
                  
lest you come too late, you know my disease and
are acquainted with my body, for my cure I leaue it to
God and your conscience, and so entreating your present
answere of your Spéedie presence, I commit you to the
Almightie.
               
                  Your sicke louing Patient,
T. N.
                  
               
            
            
               His answere.
               MY good Patient, I feare your impatience hath by
some passion encreased your paine, I know the
force of your disease cannot but be weakened, if you
be not mor afraid then hurt, you will not die of this malady,
if my businesse were not great, I would see you, or
if your need were great, I would not be from you: but
knowing euery erampe is not a con
                     •
                  ultion, nor euery
stitch at the heart: I will onely wish you to put off melancholie,
to take heed of cold, to haue minde rather of
heauen then earth: Eate good meat, but not too much:
Drinke good wine, but measurably: be in charitie with
all the world, but not too farre with any, especially with
the feminine gender: vse metion for naturall Physicke,

                     〈◊〉
                   let a merrie heart be your best Physitian, for conceit
is hurtfull, if it be not contentiue, and it is past the reach
of my reason to eure a corrupted mind: shortly, and God
willing, I will see you, in the meane time imagine I am
with you, for indeed I wil not be long from you: and this
let me tell you, that to put you out of feare, I haue no
feare of you, but that you will be past Physicke ere my

hope faile of your cure; and that will not be in haste, and
so hoping that you are not so weeke in spirit, but that
you can endure a little paine with patience in hope or assured
health, till I sée you, and alwaies I rest,
               
                  Your Physitian and louing friend:
W. R.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter from a yong Gentleman to an
old Captaine.
               MY good Captaine, hauing of late no little disposition
to martiall disciplino, and in the field of bloud to
aduenture life for honor, I am to entreate your aduice
as one long experienced in that course, for what you
shall thinke fit 
                     •
                  or my furniture for such seruice as may
deserue regard, and how I may so cary my selfe in al companies,
that I may not be 
                     •
                  anished the best: and i
                     •
                   it
please you shortly to go ouer to your Company, that you
will let me serue vnder your Colours: and so beseeching
your present answere, that I may the better determine
of my desires, leauing to your kinde di
                     •
                  cretion the care of
my instruction, protesting in my best endeauors to shew
my loue in you seruice; till I heare from you, I rest.
               
                  Your affectionate friend,
B. R.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His answere.
               SIR, your desire I mislike not, if your bodie will answere
your mind, your booke warres yéeld n
                     •
                   blowes,
and therefore séeme swéete in reading, but come to
the triall of the buisinesse, and you will finde it full of
bitternesse, but if resolution haue taken roote with you,
and not easily to bee remoued, I will tell you what I
thinke shall most behoue you to carrie with you; a good
heart, a stayed head, and a strong stomack, a purse to de
                  
                     •
                  ray
necessary charge, and a care in laying out of expences,
neither offer nor take wrong, at least not much:
borrow little, pay all, obserue the wise, loue the honest,
be not idle nor ill exercised, beware of for
                     •
                  eits, play and
wanton pleasures, for thy furniture, thy armor and pike,
thy peece and thy sword, shall be sufficient to make thee
a Souldier: serue God, and feare not the Diuell, let thy
enemie sée thy face, and not thy back, and be not proud
of any honorable action; but giue God the glory of all:
when I goe, which will be shortly, I will giue thée notice,
in the meane time sée mee, and I will loue thée:
Farewell.
               
                  Thy assured louing friend,
B. W.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A dogged Letter to a displeasing Companion.
               AFter my harty commendations, hoping that you are
in good health, as I was at the writing hereof, when
my head aked, wishing you no better comfort, then
a Scould to your wife, desirous to heare from you, that
I may neuer heare more of you, and sorie with my slefe
to be troubled with the thought of you, assuring you that
there is no man cares lesse for you, for the vilenesse I
know in you, and the villany I heare of you, wishing all
honest men to beware of you, no wise man to trust you,
hoping, if that God doe not the sooner m
                     •
                  nd you, the
Gallowes will and you: to deale plainly with you, as a
Rakehell I found you, so a Rakehell I leaue you.
               
                  Yours as you see
by your good seruice.
T. M.
                  
               
            
            
               His answere.
               O Man in desperation, how are thy wits out of fashion;
it seemes by thy spight, thy Spleene is full
of corruption, for thy wishes they cannot hurt
me; nor thy words trouble mee, 
                     •
                  ory I am that thy wits
are a w
                     ••
                  ll gathering, or gone God knowes whither:
what ill soeuer you think of me, I knew better then you
thinke of mee, if your head ake, you should better binds
vp your braines, then let them fly
                     •
                   so neere Bedlam,
to raile without discretion, vpon a causelesse imagination:
but while the wise note your folly, and the honest

pitie your 
                     •
                  urie, I shall be the lesse sorie for you, because
I will haue nothing to doe with you: if your breath bee
as 
                     〈◊〉
                   as your pe
                     •
                  ne, no Christian will abide you, and so

                     〈◊〉
                   nothing but as an idle humor followeth you, a
worse plague then a scoulding wife, which is as neare
hell as may he, wil torment you: as a Woodcock I know
you, and a Dawcock I hold you▪ and so 
                     〈◊〉
                   I see better of
you, to you
                     •
                   madde fits I leaue you, and so rest as you see
by the course of your owne cards.
               
                  Yours, as you mine,
D. R.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter of Reconciliation.
               HOnest Daniel, I thought to trie the vertue of thy
loue in thy patience, but I see we are all weake,
when rage gets vpto his height. Reason is a poore
man, if thou diddest thinke I was madde, thou mightest
haue béene sory and not angry, and if well in my wits,
thou mightest haue thought it an humor of iest to trie a
friend in earnest: onely louers haue not beene of a little
continuance, and shall a conceit of vnkindnesse breake
the knot of our friendship, 
                     •
                  acre bee it from both and either
of vs, thou knowest thine owne desert, and my disposition
and mightest therefore suspect my distemper of
braine through the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the same disease, then
fall into collor vpon 
                     〈◊〉
                   of male content: But
since I began a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ I will end the combate,
and all causes set aside, loue thee in spight of all spight,
and therefore let vs be as we were, and euer will be, one
minde in two bodies, and so with hearts shaking

hands, and shaking of all ill humo
                     •
                  rs, that may make
the least breach into our loues till I see thee, And alwayes
I rest:
               
                  If not thine, not mine owne.
W. T.
                  
               
            
            
               His Answer.
               MY most worthy Beloued, and neuer to be remoued
kind Wilkin, beleeue me it: I can be angry
and 
                     •
                  ke with kindnesse to meete with humors
in their kinde, onely to bee out of your dept for a
few good words. I tooke a little paines to blot a little
pa
                     •
                  er, which if you will put to the fice, mine shall soone
consume to ashes, and to auoyde all memoriall of mad
humours: I confesse Nature is subiect to imperfection,
yea and Reason is sometimes weake in discretion, but
loue is euer himselfe, where hee liues in the Spirites
of vnderstanding. Thinke therefore of me as of your
selfe, who rather embrace kindnesse then beléeue madnesse,
and leauing all humour of iest, haue a heart that
will euer loue you in earnest. So patting off all
thought of quarrell, where the combat is but a conceits
of kindnesse in the irremoueable resolution of infringeable
affection: I rest as I haue beene and can now
be none other.
               
                  But thine what I am mine owne.
I. G.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A letter written from an olde man
to his son before his death.
               MY Sonne, thou art now comming into the world,
that I am going out of, and yet before my departure
out of it, let me tell thee what I hold needfull
for thee to haue care of in it, I know thou wilt not break
thy bread all in one house, séede alwayes of one dish, nor
liue alwayes in one place, and therefore let mee reade
thée a short Lecture for thy carriage in all courses, the
Court is a place of charge more then ease, the Citie
gawdes of more price then worth, and the Country
sportes of more pleasure than profite, yet is there
no seruice to the King, no dwelling to the City, nor
pleasure to the Country, but all the waight of the
worth of them is in the hand of Wisedome, who in
the knowledge of the vse of them makes the best estéem
of them: but least long Lessons may ouercharge thy
Memorie, take this one Rule for thy learning in all,
and thou shalt finde it good in more then a few, wheresoeuer
thou goest, note the best, choose the best, & keepe
the best, bée not, buried in earth before thou commest
to thy Grau
                     •
                  , nor builde Castles in the Ayre, least
they fall downe vpon thy head, Let not thy eye abuse
thy heart, nor thy tongue discredite thy Will, and let
Reason gouerne Will in all the passages of Nature,
bée neyther néedy nor vngratefull, vn
                     ••
                  urteous, nor
vnkind, and examine thy Conscience in the care of thy
content, ground thy loue vpon Vertue, the hope vpon
reason, and thy happinesse vpon grace, liue as a
Stranger in the world, and make all the hast thou canst
into Heauen, bée loyall to thy Prince, naturall to thy
Country, faithfull to thy friend, kind to thy neighbour,

and honest to the whole World, So shall God
blesse thee, the best loue thee; and the worst not hurte
thée.
               And thus so weake in body, that the Spirit fainteth
in forced to expresse the full of a Fathers loue vnto thee,
with my Prayers to the Lord of heauen for thy preseruation
in this World, and eternall happinesse in the
World to come, with my loues blessing, and therewith
what I am able to leaue thee, to the mercifull guarde
of Heauens glory I commit thee.
               
                  Thy most louing Father,
W. I.
                  
               
            
            
               His Answere.
               MY most louing Father, this Legacy of your loue,
for the directiō of my life, how much I prize in my
hearts thankefulnesse, the eye of your iudgement shall
beh
                     •
                  ld in my obseruation, and giue mee leaue to tell you,
that in this little time that I haue spent idely in this
World, I haue had some taste of the meate that you
haue giuen mee, where I finde that the best meate
may bee spoyled in the dressing, while a cunning Cooke
will make a rich seruice of small cost, and though giddie
heads are in loue with gawdes, yet since the better
sorte of opinions estéeme a small Diamond before
a great Saphire, I care not if I rather aduenture far
for the honor of vertue, then lessen my estate, by breach
of arms, & since there are so many counterfeites, that the
best Ieweller may be mistaken, I will meddle with no
such wares as may call repentance to an after reckoning,
while my hart looketh toward heauen, I hope the

earth shall not blinde mine eye, nor the vaine delights of
nature preuayle against the vertue of Reason: but alis
in the power of powers, by whose grace being guided,
I shall bee euer so preserued, that howsoeuer my heart
be wounded, my 
                     •
                  aith shall neuer bee confounded, in
hope whereof, and prayers for which, beséeching the almighty
eyther in health to prolong your dayes, or in
the Election of his loue to call you to a better life, more
esteeming these precepts of your loue, then all the portion
you can leaue, 
                     •
                  aning your blessing, I humbly take
my lea
                     •
                  e.
               
                  Your most louing and
obedient Sonne,
W. R.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter to a Kinsman that came
from the Vniuersity to the
Court, was giuen much
to study.
               MY good Cosin, I hear since you came from the
Uniuersity to the Court, yo
                     •
                   are enclined much
to Melancholy, your minde onely delighted in
reading and study, and among many variety of matters
of import, that you take much delight in searching
out of Petigrees, and Heraldry, the knowledge
whereof I holde both honourable and profitable: but
the vse thereof requires a héedefull care, 
                     •
                  or in discoursing
of matters vnfit, may be brought within the compasse
of folly: but as a friend to giue you a caueatinal
your course of that study, take my adui
                     ••
                   for the bettering
of your vnderstanding in the best of your Cotes:

                  
                     •
                  ee not too busie with the Crowne, and of all beasts beware
of the Lyon, if he sleepe, wake him not least you
trouble his patience, and in his walke crosse not his
way, least his frowne growes wrothfull, for other
beasts thinke of them as your reason wil giue you leaue:
where you finde hon
                     •
                  urs, note if you can the desert
                     •
                   of
them, and for bought Cotes, consider of them in their
kinds, times alter and natures in them, and therefore
in the setting downe of Angiquities, there may be much
deceit thorow the corruption of the Writers or directors
for strange Cotes, as to see an Eagle haue a Flie
in her mouth, and a Mause bite a Catte by the tayle, or
a Goose keepe a Foxe in his denne: Wonder at it, but
make no words of it, and if you sée a black Swan in a
blew field, and an E
                     •
                  le in her belly, running out at her
tayle, or a Peacocke pulled out of his feathers, & making
his Pearch vpon a crosse barre, smile at the conceit, but
keepe the censure of it to your selfe. To conclude,
Reade much, but beléeue little: Thinke much,
but speake little, and know much but meddle little,
but in medling with other mens cotes, looke that you
loose not more then your owne ierkin: And so wishing
your Studies as profitable as pleasing to you, till I see
you, I commit you to the Almighty:
               
                  Your louing C
                        •
                     nse
                        •
                     ,
W. R.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His Answer.
               SYr, I haue read your Letter, and considered of the
contents: To the answere whereof, giue me leaue
to tell you that I am not determined to hurt mine
eye-sight with too deepe looking into a Milstone, nor
to beleeue Antiquity f
                     ••
                  th 
                     •
                   then Reason may carry my
vnderstanding, and whatsoeuer I finde of 
                     ••
                  tes, I will
so carry my due and true allegiance to the Crowne, that
I will 
                     〈◊〉
                   all touch of dis
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  altie: For the Lyon, I
will neyther trouble him, waking nor sleeping, and for
his walke, wish no beast to be so f
                     ••
                  lish, as to crosse his
pleasure in his passage: for your marcy conceites of
strange Cotes, I will onely smile at my contecture of
them, and so long as I know a F
                     •
                  lc
                     •
                  n from a Buza
                     •
                  d,
an Eagle from an Owle, and a Nightingale from a
Cuckow. Let mee alone to iudge of the Natures of
Birdes, and how they are borne, and when I looke into
the nature of Honour, whether by purchase, fauour or
desert I note the time with the persons, and so goe on
with my opinions to the iudgement, I keepe to my

                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  Your very louing Kinsman,
T. D.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A Letter of vnkindnesse vpon a conceite
of ill carriage in a
Friend.
               THere are two ill qualities in a Woman, and two
worse in a man: In the first vnkindnesse and inconstancy,
in the second, vnfaithfulnesse and vnthankefulnesse:
and will you beare both the imperfections,
that none may excéede you in euill, wha
                     •
                   my deserts
haue bin at your hands you know, and what your
requitall hath bin to me, I would I knew not: but what
shall I thinke? is euery man onely for himselfe, and let
the world go as it li
                     •
                  t, hath vertue abandoned the earth,
and is wisedome so rapt vp in the mistie clouds of concupiscence,
that she can scarce shew any glimmering of
the light of liue grace: God forbid, for vertue hath her
working in all the children of her loue: of which I would
you were one, that I might ioy as much in your conuersion,
as I feare your confusion: Bée notangry though
I seeme bitter, for I am touched to the quicke, yet write
I more out of loue then hate, for I will suspend my opinion
vntill your answere giue me satisfaction, that I
shall shortly with your presence cleare my thought of
your indignities, till when and alwayes I rest,
               
                  Yours as you know,
and shall know,
T. M.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His Answer.
               WHat women are I Know, but what mē should
be I know, and what I am you shall finde, alwayes
one and the same, in i
                     •
                  remoueable affection
to an assured friend. Uertue I know hath her
working in the hea
                     •
                  ts of the honest, and I hope you wil
not taxe me of a contrarie condition: but if a misse report
breedes a misse beliefe, an vngratious conceit may
worke a grieuous vnkindnesse; if your deserts, and my
requitall were weighed together in an euen Ballens,
I hope there would not bee much in equality: but let
humours bleed their last, and better thoughts wil follow:
I am content to make a bitter swéet of an angry loue,
shortly I will see you, and then so satisfie you that the
old Prouerbe shall come new in proofe. The falling out
of Louers is the renewing of loue: in which I wil rest
without all doubts,
               
                  Yours as I haue beene,
and euer will bee,
R. D.
               
            
            
               A fantasticke Loue Letter.
               MIstris if you were not a witch, your eyes could
not haue so wrought in my heart, as to make me
thinke of nothing but your loue: and if your words
were not char
                     ••
                  es they could not so commaund me from
my selfe, as to seuer me wholy to your seruice: but if it
be so that you are borne a Creature onely to craci
                     ••
                  e my
spirit, I must onely pray for patience to mitigate my

passion, finding your nature as 
                     •
                  arre from pitie, as my
hope is from happinesse, that if there be any spa
                     •
                  ke of
grace in you, let it kindle a cole in your kindnesse, to
warme the life of my loue, that I may not die in the col
                     •
                  
feare of disdaine: but reuiuing in the vertue of your fauour,
I may honor you aboue the whole world: so leauing
my life to the answere of your owne loue, I rest,
               
                  Yours what you will,
T. R.
                  
               
            
            
               Her answere.
               SEruant, if you were not a foole, you would not runne
so from your wits, as to write you care not how, vpon
an imagination you know not what: mine eyes
be mine owne, and if your heart be not yours, shall I
winke because you are wilfull? No such matter; and my
words haue made a metamorphosis of your wit, I am
sorie my breath should blow away your vnderstanding;
yet lest you should thinke I am past grace, in the pitie of
perplexities, let me entreate you not to feare your own
                     •
                  
shadow: walke temperately in the Sunne, and the heat
will doe you no hurt. So wishing you better then you
wish your selfe, not to trouble your head with idle humours:
I rest, as I haue reason,
               
                  Your louing Mistresse,
M. T.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A Letter of griefe to a faire creature, that was separated
from her second selfe, for playing false
with a third person.
               SWeet soule that once was, now the most wretchedest
creature that is, how haue you made a metamorphosts
of your selfe, when you were vertuous, you were
faire; now you are vitious, you are foule: when you were
w
                     •
                  e, you were honored; now you are foolish, you are
scorned: when you were gratious, you were beloued;
now you be wicked, you are hated. Oh strange alteration,
from vertue to vice, from wisdome to folly, from
grace to 
                     •
                  inne, as to make the creature so offensiue to the
C
                     ••
                  ator: what shall I say vnto you? but onely that I
am sorie for you, but cannot helpe you, and onely pray
for you, that your sin may be forgiuen, that your shame
may be forgotten: and so beseeching the Highest, whom
you haue offended most in the mercie of iustice, to shew
the glory of Maiesty, in the sorrow of humanitie and
Christian charitie, with a broken heart to thinke of your
wounded soule, wishing your true repentance to be a president
for the conuersion of all such vnhappy creatures:
I rest,
               
                  Your friend, and no further, but in
prayer for your soules health,
T. R.
                  
               
            
            
               Her answere.
               MY once kinde friend, now worthily farre off from
the title of such comfort, with sigh
                     •
                  s let me write
that which I seale with the teares of my heart: I
now finde the wound of conscience so déepe cut into my

heart, as comes too neer the danger of my soule, and were
not Faith the strong hold of Hope, Patience would bee
too 
                     •
                  ull of feare: I confesse shame to be a gentle punishment
of 
                     •
                  inne, and repentance a true pleader for mercy,
for none 
                     •
                  ees the angry face of sinne, but the repentant
sinner. For the world, I hate it, and my selfe most in it,
for my sinne, I loath it, and abhorre my selfe for it, and
for my life, I am wearie of it, that I care not how soone
I were ridde of it: but all things to Gods pleasure, to
whom I beséech you in Christian charity to pray for me,
that the Enemie of Christ may not preuaile against me,
that whatsoeuer befall me, I may not fall for euer. So
with a bleeding heart in the bitternesse of griefe, as full
of sorrow as a sinfull soule can hold: I rest,
               
                  Your worthy, forsaken friend,
E. R.
                  
               
            
            
               A Letter to a friend for his opinion in diuers
points of considerations.
               MY honest Ned, I pray thée write me word by this

                     •
                  earer how thou doest, thy opinion of the world, of
life and death, honestie and wit, and what comes
into thy head, when thou hast leasure to be idl
                     •
                  , I long
to heare from thee, to reade thy conceits, which if they be
of the old fashion, are better then of the new forme: 
                     •
                  ee
what will be, to me it shall be welcome, and thy selfe better
whensoeuer I may see thee: for dull wits and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
heads, so beate about the market in this Towne, that
I had rather goe a mile wide, then kéepe way with such
wilde: geese: and so loth to trouble thée with trifling

newes, to no good purpose, in the affection of a faithfull
heart, I rest▪
               
               
                  Thine what mine,
B. W.
                  
               
            
            
               His answere.
               KInd Henry, to answere thy request, in a few words
let me tell thee, for the world I finde it a walke that
soone wearieth a good spirit, this life is but a puffe,
and death but an abridge
                     •
                  ent of time. Now for some
notes I haue taken of the world, and diuers things in it:
let me tell thee, that if all the wealth in the world were
in one chest, it would not buy one howre of life, if all the
henesty of the world were in one heart, it would not buy

                     •
                  ne bit of bread and if all the wit in the world were in
one wicked pate, it would not buy one iot of grace: and
therefore it is meete with death at a meaner price, and to
carie money with honestie, the better to goe to market,
and to ioyne grace with witte, to finde the high way to
heauen. This is all for this time I haue had leasure to
think vpon as more comes in my head, I will make you
acquainted with it, in the meane time, marke what I
haue written, and it will doe thée no hurt in reading:
Farewell.
               
                  Thine, or not mine owne
W. F.
                  
               
               FINIS.
               
            
         
      
   