
      
         
            
            
            Melancholike humours, IN VERSES OF DIuerse natures, set downe by Nich: Breton, Gent.
            
            
            LONDON
            ¶ Printed by RICHARD BRADOCKE. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE LOVER OF good studies, and fauourer of good actions, Master Thomas Blount, heauens blessing, and earths happinesse.
            
            
               SIR, my knowledge of your good iudgement in the diuersity of humours, and your disposition to that best melancholie, that can not run madde with trifles, hath made me (vpon the gathering together of certain odde pieces of Poetry) to offer my labours te your patience, and my loue to your seruice. They are all waters of one spring: but they runne through many kinds of earth; whereof they giue a kinde of tang in their taste. Such as they be, I leaue them to the kindnesse of your acceptation, and my selfe to your like commaundement. And so (loath to vse ceremonious cōplements) in the affection of a poore friend, & in humble thankefulnesse, for your manie vndeserued fauours, I rest
            
               Yours, very much to commaund, N. B.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ To the Reader.
            
               PASQVILL, hauing been long in his dumps, in somewhat better then a browne studie, hath brought forth the fruites of a fewe melancholike humours: which chiefely he commendeth to spirits of his own nature, full of melancholy, and as neere Bedlem, as Mooregate; a figure in the fields to be easily disciphered. To be short, and to growe towards an ende, ere I haue wel begun, I wil tel you; the gētlemās brains were much troubled, as you may see by his perplexities: but with studying how to make one line leuell with another, in more rime then perhaps some will thinke reason, with much adoe about nothing, hee hath made a piece of worke as little worth. He that can giue him less
                  •
                commendation, let him vse his arte. For mine owne part, I haue taken paine to write his Will, which he hath sent to the worlde to like as it list. According to whose



will, I leaue it; entreating no man to wreste his will to any thing, further then may stand with his pleasure; but to speake indifferently of all things, as hee findes cause: and so I rest
            
               Your friende, N. B.
            
         
         
            
            In Authorem.
            
               
                  THOV, that wouldst finde the habit of true passion,
               And see a minde attir'd in perfect straines;
               Not wearing moodes, as gallants doe a fashion,
               In these pide times, only to shewe their braines,
            
            
               Looke here on Bretons worke, the master print:
               Where, such perfections to the life doe rise.
               If they seeme wry, to such as looke asquint,
               The fault's not in the obiect, but their eyes.
            
            
               For, as one comming with a laterall viewe,
               Vnto a cunning piece wrought perspectiue,
               Wants facultie to make a censure true:
               So with this Authors Readers will it thriue:
            
            
               Which being eyed directly, I diuine,
               His proofe their praise, will meete, as in this line.
            
            
               BEN: IOHNSON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            See, and say nothing.
            
               
                  OH my thoughts, keepe in your words,
               Least their passage do repent yee:
               Knowing, Fortune still affordes
               Nothing, but may discontent yee.
            
            
               If your Saint be like the Sunne,
               Sit not yee in Phoebus chaire;
               Least, when once the horses runne,
               Yee be Dedalus his heire.
            
            
               If your labours well deserue,
               Let your silence onely grace them:
               And, in patience, hope preserue,
               That no fortune can deface them.
            
            
               If your friend doe growe vnkinde,
               Grieue, but doe not seeme to showe it.
               For, a patient heart shall finde
               Comfort, when the soule shall know it.
            
            
               If your trust be all betrai'd,
               Trie, but trust no more at all:
               But in soule be not dismai'd,
               Whatsoeuer doe befall.
            
            
               
               In your selues, your selues enclose:
               Keepe your secrecies vnseene:
               Least, when ye your selues disclose,
               Yee had better neuer beene.
            
            
               And what euer be your state,
               Doe not languish ouerlong:
               Least you finde it all too late,
               Sorrow be a deadly song.
            
            
               And be comforted in this,
               If your passions be concealed,
               Crosse, or comfort, bale, or blisse,
               Tis the best, is not reuealed.
            
            
               So, my deerest thoughts, adieu,
               Harke whereto my soule doth call yee:
               Be but secret, wise, and true,
               Feare no euill can befall yee.
            
            
               ¶ What is hell?
               
                  WHAT is the place, that some do paint for hell?
                  A lake of horrour for the life of man.
                  Is it not, then, the death wherein I dwell,
                  That knowes no ioy, since first my life began?
               
               
                  What are the diuels? Spirits of tormenting.
                  What else are they, that vexe me in each vaine?
                  With wretched thoughts, my wofull spirit tempting,
                  Or else perplex mee in an after-paine.
               
               
                  
                  What is the fire? but, an effect of sinne,
                  That keepes my heart in an vnkindly heat.
                  How long shall I this life continue in?
                  Till true repentance mercy doe entreate,
               
               
                  And 
                        〈◊〉
                      euen at the latest breath;
                  Saue mee, sweet Lord, yet frō the secōd death.
               
            
            
               ¶ Mal content.
               
                  IF I desir'd vnto the world to liue,
                  Or sought in soule to serue the golden God:
                  If I did homage to an idole giue,
                  Or, with the wicked, wisht to haue abode,
               
               
                  Then well might Iustice lay her sword vpon mee,
                  In due correction of my crooked hart:
                  But, shall I liue, in soule thus woe begon mee,
                  That seeke in faith to serue the better part?
               
               
                  Ah wretched soule, why dost thou murmur so?
                  It is thy crosse, and thou art borne to beare it:
                  Through hellish griefs, thy hart to heauē must go,
                  For patience crowne, if thou wilt liue to wear it.
               
               
                  Then rest with this (since faith is vertues friend)
                  Death ends distresse, heauen makes a happy end.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ A dole full passion.
               
                  OH tyred heart, too full of sorrowes,
                  In night-like daies, despairing morrowes,
                  How canst thou thinke, so deepely greeued,
                  To hope to liue to be relieued
               
               
                  Good fortune hath all grace 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     ,
                  And cruell care hath too much torne thee:
                  Vnfaithfull friends do all deceiue thee,
                  Acquaintance all vnkindly leaue thee.
               
               
                  Beauty out of her booke doth blot thee,
                  And loue hath vtterly forgot thee,
                  Patience doth but to passion moue thee,
                  While only honour liues to loue thee.
               
               
                  Thine enemies all ill deuise thee,
                  Thy friends but little good aduise thee:
                  And they, who most doe duety owe thee,
                  Doe seeme as though they doe not knowe thee.
               
               
                  Thus pittie weepes to looke vpon thee,
                  To see how thou art woe begon thee:
                  And while these passions seeke to spill thee,
                  Death but attends the houre to kill thee.
               
               
                  And since no thoughte is comming to thee,
                  That any way may comfort doe thee,
                  Dispose thy thoughtes, as best may please thee;
                  That Heauen, of all thy Hell, may ease thee.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ A Testament vpon the passion.
               
                  TO care, that crucifies my heart,
                  My sighes, and sobbes, I doe bequeath,
                  And to my sorrowes deepest smart,
                  The latest gaspe that I doe breath.
               
               
                  To Fortune I bequeath my folly,
                  To giue to such as seeke her grace:
                  To faithlesse friends, that fortune wholly,
                  That brought mee in this heauie case.
               
               
                  To beauty, I bequeath mine age:
                  To loue, the hate of wit, and sense:
                  To patience, but the cure of rage:
                  To honour, vertues patience.
               
               
                  Mine enemies I do forgiue:
                  And, to my friends, I giue my loue:
                  And wish, vngratefull hearts may liue,
                  But like ingratitude to proue.
               
               
                  To pitty, I bequeath my teares,
                  To fill her eyes when they be dry:
                  To faith, the fearelesse thoughts of feares,
                  To giue to life, to let me die.
               
               
                  My care, I doe bequeath to death,
                  To cut the threades, that thoughts do spinne,
                  And, at my latest gaspe of breath,
                  To heauen my soule, to hell my sinne.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ A fantasticke solemne humour.
               
                  SOVND, good reason, sound my sorrowes,
                  Equall them with any liuing:
                  Finde the worst of all her giuing,
                  When she most her mischiefe borrowes.
               
               
                  Leaue not patience all perplexed,
                  Where no passions are appeased:
                  But her torments neuer eased,
                  Keepe her spirit too much vexed.
               
               
                  Tell, oh tell the truest story,
                  That hath long time bene described:
                  Whereto iustly is ascribed
                  Sorrowes pride, and death his glory.
               
               
                  Loue bred in discretions blindnesse,
                  Shadowes, for the sunne affecting
                  Nothing, but nothing effecting,
                  Shewes the crosse of Natures kindnesse.
               
               
                  Wit, bewitcht with wanton beauty,
                  Lost the raines of reasons bridle:
                  And, in folly all too idle,
                  Brake the bands of reasons duty.
               
               
                  Time misspent in follies trifles
                  (With repentance sorrow feeding)
                  In the rules of reasons reeding,
                  Findes them nothing else but nifles.
               
               
                  
                  Care, yet, seeking to recouer
                  Indiscretions heauie losses,
                  Found in casting vp my crosses,
                  Sorrow only left the louer.
               
            
            
               ¶ A briefe of sorrowe.
               
                  MVSE of sadnesse, neere deaths fashion,
                  Too neere madnesse, write my passion.
                  Paines possesse mee, sorrowes spill mee,
                  Cares distresse mee, all would kill mee.
                  Hopes haue faild mee, Fortune foild mee,
                  Feares haue quaild me, all haue spoild mee.
                  Woes haue worne mee, sighes haue soakt mee,
                  Thoughts haue torne mee, all haue broke mee.
                  Beauty strooke me, loue hath catcht mee,
                  Death hath tooke mee, all dispatcht mee.
               
            
            
               ¶ A solemne sa
                     •
                  cy.
               
                  SORROVV in my heart breedeth
                  A Cocatrices neast:
                  Where euery young bird feedeth,
                  Vpon my hearts vnrest.
               
               
                  Where euery pecke they giue mee
                  (VVhich euery houre they doe)
                  Vnto such paine they driue mee,
                  I knowe not what to doe.
               
               
                  
                  Oh broode vnhapp'ly hatched,
                  Of such a cursed kinde,
                  Where death and sorrowe, matched,
                  Liue, but to kill the minde.
               
               
                  Wordes torments are but trifles,
                  That but conceits confounde,
                  And Natures griefes, but nifles,
                  Vnto the spirits wounde.
               
               
                  They are but cares good morrowes,
                  That passions can declare:
                  While my hearts inward sorrowes,
                  Are all without compare.
               
               
                  Fortune, she seekes to sweare mee,
                  To all may discontent me;
                  Yet sayes she doth forbeare mee,
                  She doth no more torment mee.
               
               
                  Beauty she doth retaine mee
                  In scarce a fauours tittle:
                  And, though she doe disdeigne mee,
                  She thinkes my griefe too little.
               
               
                  Loue falles into a laughing,
                  At reasons little good,
                  While sorrow with her quaffing,
                  Is drunke with my heart blood.
               
               
                  
                  But, let her drinke, and spare not,
                  Vntill my heart be dry:
                  And, let loue laugh: I care not:
                  My hope is, I shall dy.
               
               
                  And death shall only tell
                  My froward fortunes fashion,
                  That nearest vnto hell,
                  Was found the louers passion.
               
            
            
               ¶ A solemne sonnet.
               
                  FORTVNE hath writ characters on my heart,
                  As full of crosses, as the skinne can holde:
                  Which tell of torments, tearing euery part,
                  While death and sorrowe doe my fate vnfolde.
               
               
                  Patience sits leaning like a pining soule,
                  That had no heart to thinke of hopes reliefe;
                  VVhile fruitlesse cares discomfort doe enroule,
                  Within the ground of neuer ending griefe.
               
               
                  Thoughts flie about, as all in feare confounded:
                  Reason growne mad, with too much mal content,
                  
                  Loue passion-rent, to see his patience wounded,
                  VVith dreadfull terrors of despaires intent:
               
               
                  While care concludes, in comforts ouerthrowne,
                  Whē death can speak, my passiōs shal be showne.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ An extreame Passion.
               
                  OVT of the depth of deadly griefe, tormenting day and night,
                  A wounded heart, and wretched soule, depriu'd of all delight,
                  Where neuer thought of comfort came, that passiō might appease,
                  Or by the smallest sparke of hope might giue the smallest ease,
                  Let me intreat that solemne Muse that serues but sorrowes turne,
                  In ceasselesse sighes, and endlesse sobs, to helpe my soule to mourne.
                  But, oh, what thought beyōd al thought hath thought to think vpon,
                  Where patience findes her greatest power in passions ouergon,
                  That neere the doore of natures death in dolefull notes doth dwell,
                  In horrors fits that will describe my too much figur'd hell.
                  What want, what wrong, what care, what crosse may crucifie a hart,
                  But, day and howre, I doe endure in all, and euery part?
                  Want to sustaine the bodies neede, wrong to distract the minde:
                  Where want makes wit and reason both to goe against their kinde.
                  Care, to deuise for comforts helpe: but so by fortune crost,
                  As kils the heart, to cast the eye, on nought but labour lost.
                  Desire to liue in spite of death; yet still, in liuing, dying:
                  And so a greater death then death, by want of dying, trying.
                  Oh hell of hels, if euer earth such horror can afford,
                  Where such a world of helpelesse cares doe lay the heart aboord.'
                  No day, no night, no thought, no dreame, but of that doleful nature,
                  That may amaze, or sore affright a most afflicted creature.
                  Friends turnd to foes, foes vse their force: and fortune, in her pride
                  Shaks hands with fate, to make my soule the weight of sorrow bide.
                  Care brings in sicknes, sicknes pain, & paine with patience passion,
                  With biting in most bitter griefes, brings feature out of fashion:
                  Where brawn falne cheeks, heart scalding sighs, & dimmed eyes with teares,
                  Doe shewe, in lifes Anatomy, what burthen sorrowe beares.
                  Where all day long, in helplesse cares, all hopelesse of reliefe,
                  I wish for night, I might not see the obiectes of my griefe.
                  And, when night comes, woes keep my wits in such a waking vaine,
                  That I could wish, though to my griefe, that it were day againe.
                  Thus, daies are nights: which nights are daies: which daies are like those nights,
                  That to my passiōs sēse presēt but only sorrows sights,
                  Which to the eye but of the minde of misery appeare,
                  To fill the heart of forlorne hope too full of heauie cheare.
                  Oh hart, how canst thou hold so long, and art not broke ere this?
                  When all thy strings are but the straines that cōfort strikes amisse.
                  Yet must thou make thy musicke still, but of that mournfull straine,
                  Where sorrowe, in the sound of death, doth shew her sweetest vain:
                  
                     Or, where her Muses all consent, in their consort to trie
                  Their sweetest musicke in desire to die, and can not die.
                  The Pellican, that kils her selfe, her young ones for to feede,
                  Is pleas'd to dy, that they may liue, that suck when she doth bleede▪
                  
                  But, while I in those cares consume, that would my spirit kill,
                  Nought liues by me, when I must die, to feede but sorrowes will.
                  The Hart, that's hūted all day long, hath sport yet with the hoūds,
                  And happly beats off many a dogge before his deadly wounds:
                  But my poore heart is hunted still, with such a cruell cry,
                  As, in their dogged humours, liue, while I alone must die.
                  The Swan that sings before her death doth shew that she is pleas'd,
                  To knowe that death will not be long in helping the diseas'd.
                  But my poore Swanlike soule (alas) hath no such power to sing,
                  Because she knowes not when my death will make my care a king.
                  What shall I say? but only say; I knowe not what to say:
                  So many torments teare my heart, and tugge it euery way.
                  My Sunne is turnd into a shade: or else mine eyes are blinde,
                  That sorrowes cloude makes all seeme darke, that comes into my minde.
                  My youth, to age: or else, because my comforts are so colde,
                  My sorrowe makes me in conceit to be decrepit olde.
                  My hopes to feares: or else because my fortunes are forlorne,
                  My fancie makes me make my selfe vnto my selfe a scorne.
                  My life, to death: or else because my heart is so perxplexed,
                  I finde my selfe but liuing dead, to feele my soule so vexed.
                  For, what is here that earth can yeeld in pleasures sweetest vaine,
                  But, in the midst of all my cares, doth still increase my paine?
                  While Epicures are ouerglut, I ly and starue for foode,
                  Because my conscience can not thriue vpon ill gotten good.
                  While other swimme in choyce of silkes, I sit alone in ragges,
                  Because I can not fitte the time, to fill the golden bagges.
                  While other are bedeckt in golde, in pearle and pretious stone,
                  I sigh to see they haue so much, and I can light of none.
                  Not that I enuie their estate, but wish that God would giue
                  Some comfort, to my carefull hope, wherby my heart might liue.
                  Some please themselues in choyce of sports, in trifles, and in toies▪
                  
                  While my poore feeble spirit feedes, of nothing but annoyes.
                  Some haue their houses stately built, and gorgeous to beholde,
                  While in a cottage, bare and poore, I bide the bitter colde.
                  Some haue their chariots and their horse to beare them to and fro,
                  While I am glad to walke on foote, and glad I can doe so.
                  Some haue their musickes hermony to please their idle eares,
                  
                     While of the song of sorrow, still, my soule the burthen beares.
                  Some haue their choyce of all perfumes, that natures arte can giue;
                  While sinne doth stinke so, in my soule, as makes me loath to liue.
                  They, like the wielders of the world, command and haue their will;
                  While I, a weakling in the world, am slaue to sorrow still.
                  The Owle, that makes the night her day, delights yet in the darke:
                  But I am forc't to play the Owle, that haue beene bred a Larke.
                  The Eagle, from the lowest vale, can mount the lofty skie:
                  But, I am falne downe from the hill, and in the vale must die.
                  The Sparrow, in a Princes house, can finde a place to builde:
                  I scarce can finde out any place, that will my comfort yeelde.
                  The little Wrenne doth finde a worme, the little Finch a seede;
                  While my poore heart doth hunger still, and finds but little feede.
                  The Bee doth finde her hony flower, the Butterflie her leafe:
                  But I can finde a world of corne, that yeeldes not me a sheafe.
                  The horse, the Oxe, the silly Asse, that tugge out all the day,
                  At night come home, and take their rest, and lay their worke away;
                  While my poore heart, both day and night, in passions ouertoild,
                  By ouerlabour of my braine, doth finde my spirit spoiled.
                  The winds doe blowe away the clowds, that would obscure the Sun:
                  And, how all glorious is the sky, when once the stormes are done!
                  But, in the heauē of my harts hope, where my loues light doth shine,
                  I nothing see, but clouds of cares, or else my sunne decline.
                  The earth is watred, smoth'd and drest, to keepe her gardens gay;
                  While my poore heart, in woefull thoughtes, must wither still away.
                  The Sea is sometime at a calme, where shippes at anchor ride,
                  And fishes, on the sunny shore, doe play on euery side:
                  But my poore heart, in sorrowes seas, is sicke of such a qualme,
                  As, while these stormy tempests holde, can neuer looke for calme.
                  So that I see, each bird, and beast, the sea, the earth, the sky,
                  All sometime in their pleasures liue, while I alone must die.
                  Now, thinke, if all this be too true (as would it were not so)
                  If any creature liue on earth, that doe like sorrow knowe.
                  Nay, aske of sorrow, euen her selfe; to thinke how I am wounded,
                  If she be not, to see my woes, within her selfe confounded;
                  Or say, no figure can suffice, my sorrowes frame to fashion,
                  Where patiēce thus hath shew'd her selfe, beyōd her selfe in passion.
               
               Par nulla figura dolori, nec dolor meo.
            
            
               
               A solemne farewell to the world.
               
                  OH forlorne fancy, whereto dost thou liue,
                  To weary out the senses with vnrest?
                  Hopes are but cares, that but discomforts giue,
                  While only fooles doe clime the Phoenix nest.
                  To heart sicke soules, all ioyes are but a iest.
                  Thou dost in vain, but striue against the streame,
                  With blinded eyes to see the sunny beame.
               
               
                  Die with desire, abandond from delight.
                  Thy weary winter lasteth all the yeare.
                  Say to thy selfe, that darknesse is the light,
                  Wherein doth nothing but thy death appeare;
                  While wit, and sense, in sorrowes heauy cheare,
                  Findes thee an humour, but vnkindly bredde,
                  Of hopes illusions, in too weake a head.
               
               
                  Fortune affrightes thee with a thousand feares,
                  While folly feedes thee with abuse of wit:
                  And, while thy force in fainting passion weares,
                  Patience is ready to increase the fit,
                  Where agonies in their extreames doe sit.
                  So that, each way, thy soule is so perplexed,
                  As better die, then liue to be so vexed.
               
               
                  
                  Say, patience somewhat doe asswage thy paine;
                  Prolonged cures are too vncomfortable:
                  And where that care doth neuer comfort gaine,
                  The state, alasse, mustneedes be miserable.
                  Where sorrowes labours are so lamentable,
                  That silence saies, that to the soule complains,
                  Concealed sorrowes are the killing paines.
               
               
                  Then doe not ceasse to sigh, and sobbe thy fill,
                  Bleede in the teares of true loues liuing blood,
                  Shewe how vnkindnesse seekes the heart to kill,
                  That hides a Buzzard in a Falcons hoode.
                  Feede not thy selfe with misconceipted good.
                  Better to starue, then, in a sugred pill,
                  To taste the poison of the spirits ill.
               
               
                  But, if thou canst content thee with thy life,
                  And wilt endure a double death to liue,
                  If thou canst beare that bitter kinde of strife,
                  Where crosse conceipts but discontents do giue,
                  If to this ende, thou canst thine humour driue,
                  And cares true patience can command thee so,
                  Giue mee then leaue to tell thee what I knowe.
               
               
                  
                  I knowe too well, that all too JOHg haue tryed,
                  That earth containeth not that may content thee.
                  Sorrowe will so beset thee on each side,
                  That wit, nor reason can the thought inuent thee,
                  But that will some way serue for to torment thee.
                  Hope wil deceiue thee, happinesse goe by thee,
                  Fortune will faile thee, and the world defie thee.
               
               
                  Beauty will blinde thine eyes, bewitch thine heart,
                  Confound thy senses, and commaund thy will,
                  Scorne thy desire, not looke on thy desart,
                  Disdaine thy seruice, quite thy good with ill,
                  And make no care thy very soule to kill:
                  Time will outgoe thee, sorrowe onertake thee,
                  And death, a shadow of a substance, make thee.
               
               
                  I know this world will neuer be for thee:
                  Conscience must carry thee another way.
                  Another world must be for thee and mee,
                  Where happie thoughts must make their holiday,
                  While heauenly comforts neuer will decay.
                  We must not thinke in this ill age to thriue,
                  VVhere faith and loue are scarcely found aliue.
               
               
                  
                  Wee must not build our houses on the sands,
                  Where euery flood will wash them quite away:
                  Nor set our seales vnto those wicked bands,
                  Where damned soules their debts in hel must pay:
                  Our states must stand vpon a better stay:
                  Vpon the rock we must our houses builde,
                  That wil our frames, from winde, & water shield
               
               
                  Goe, bid the world, with all his trash, farewell,
                  And tell the earth, it shall be all but dust:
                  These wicked wares that worldlings buy and sell,
                  The Moath will eate, or else the canker ruft:
                  All flesh is grasse, and to the graue it must.
                  This sinke of sinne, is but the way to hell,
                  Leaue it I say, and bid the world farewell.
               
               
                  Account of pompe, but as a shadowed power,
                  And thinke of friends, but as the sommer flies:
                  Esteeme of beauty as a fading flower,
                  And louers fancies, but as fabled lies:
                  Knowe, that on earth there is no Paradise.
                  VVho sees not heauen, is surely spirit-blinde,
                  And like a body, that doth lacke a minde.
               
               
                  
                  Then, let vs lie as dead, till there wee liue,
                  Where only loue doth liue for euer blest,
                  And only loue the onely life doth giue,
                  That bringes the soule vnto eternall rest.
                  Let vs this wicked, wretched world detest,
                  Where gracelesse hearts in hellish sins perseuer,
                  And fly to heauen, to liue in grace for euer.
               
            
            
               ¶ A solemne conceipt.
               
                  1
                  DOTH loue liue in beauties eyes?
                  Why then are they so vnlouing?
                  Patience in her passion prouing:
                  There his sorrowe chiefely lies.
               
               
                  2
                  Liues beliefe in louers hearts?
                  Why then are they vnbelieuing,
                  Hourely so the spirit grieuing,
                  With a thousand iealous smarts?
               
               
                  3
                  Is there pleasure in loues passion?
                  Why then is it so vnpleasing,
                  Heart and spirit both diseasing,
                  Where the wits are out of fashion?
               
               
                  1
                  No: loue sees, in beauties eyes:
                  He hath only lost his seeing:
                  Where in sorrowes only being,
                  All his comfort wholly dies.
               
               
                  
                  2
                  Faith, within the heart of loue,
                  Fearefull of the thing it hath,
                  Treading of a trembling path,
                  Doth but iealousie approue.
               
               
                  3
                  In loues passion then what pleasure?
                  Which is but a lunacy:
                  Where griefe, feare, and iealousie
                  Plague the senses out of measure.
               
               
                  Farewell then (vnkindly) fancy,
                  In thy courses all too cruell:
                  Woe, the price of such a iewell,
                  As turnes reason to a franzy.
               
            
            
               ¶ A straunge A, B, C.
               
                  TO learne the babies A, B, C,
                  Is fit for children, not for mee.
                  I knowe the letters all so well,
                  I neede not learne the way to spell:
                  And, for the crosse, before the rowe,
                  I learn'd it all too long agoe.
               
               
                  Then let them goe to schoole that list,
                  To hang the lippe, at Had I wist.
                  
                  I neuer lou'd a booke of horne,
                  Nor leaues, that haue their letters worne,
                  Nor with a fescue to direct mee,
                  Where euery puny shall correct mee.
               
               
                  
                  I will the treuant play a while,
                  And, with mine eare, mine eye beguile,
                  And only heare, what other see,
                  What mocketh them as well as mee,
                  And laugh at him, that goes to schoole,
                  To learne with mee to play the foole.
               
               
                  But soft a while: I haue mistooke.
                  This is but some imagin'd booke,
                  That wilfull hearts in wantons eyes,
                  Doe onely by conceits deuise:
                  Where spell, and put together proue
                  The reading of the rules of loue.
               
               
                  But, if it be so, let it be:
                  It shall no lesson be for mee.
                  Let them goe spell, that can not reede,
                  And know the crosse vnto their speede;
                  VVhile I am taught but to discerne,
                  How to forget the thing I learne.
               
            
            
               ¶ Fie on pride.
               
                  THE hidden pride that lurkes in beauties eyes,
                  And ouerlookes the humble hearts of loue,
                  Doth nothing else but vaine effectes deuise,
                  That may discretion from the minde remoue.
               
               
                  
                  Oh, how it workes in wit, for idle wordes,
                  To buy repentance but with labour lost:
                  While sorrowes fortune nothing else affordes
                  But showres of raine, vpon a bitter frost.
               
               
                  A wicked shadowe that deceiues the sight,
                  And breedes an itch, that ouerrunnes the hart:
                  Which, leauing reason in a pitious plight,
                  Consumes the spirit, with a curelesse smart.
               
               
                  While wounded patience in her passion cries;
                  Fie vpon pride, that lurkes in beauties eyes.
               
            
            
               ¶ A farewell to loue.
               
                  FAREVVELL loue, and louing folly,
                  All thy thoughts are too vnholly:
                  Beauty strikes thee full of blindenesse,
                  And then kils thee with vnkindnesse.
               
               
                  Farewell wit, and witty reason,
                  All betrai'd, by fancies treason:
                  Loue hath of all ioy bereft thee,
                  And to sorrow only left thee.
               
               
                  Farewell will, and wilfull fancy,
                  All in daunger of a franzy:
                  Loue to beauties bowe hath wonne thee,
                  And togither, all vndone thee.
               
               
                  
                  Farewell beauty, sorrowes Agent:
                  Farewell sorrow, patience pagent:
                  Farewell patience, passions stayer:
                  Farewell passion, loues betrayer.
               
               
                  Sorrowes agent, patience pagent:
                  Passions stayer, loues betrayer,
                  Beauty, sorrow, patience, passion,
                  Farewell life of such a fashion.
               
               
                  Fashion, so good fashions spilling:
                  Passion, so with passions killing:
                  Patience, so with sorrow wounding:
                  Farewell beauty, loues confounding.
               
            
            
               ¶ A ieasting curse.
               
                  FIE vpon that too much beauty,
                  That so blindeth reasons seeing,
                  As, in swearing all loues duety,
                  Giues him, no where else, a beeing.
               
               
                  Cursed be thou all in kindnesse,
                  That with beauty, loue hast wounded;
                  Blessing loue, yet in such blindenesse,
                  As in beautie is confounded.
               
               
                  Euer maist thou liue tormented,
                  With the faith of loue vnfained,
                  Till thy heart may be contented
                  To relieue whom thou hast pained.
               
               
                  
                  Thus, in wroth of so well pleased,
                  As concealeth ioyes confessing,
                  Till my paine be wholly eased,
                  Cursed be thou, all in blessing.
               
               
                  So farewell, and fairely note it;
                  He, who as his soule doth hate thee,
                  From his very heart hath wrote it,
                  Neuer euill thought come at thee.
               
            
            
               ¶ A solemne toie.
               
                  IF that loue had beene a king,
                  He would haue commanded beauty:
                  But, hee is a silly thing,
                  That hath sworne to doe her duety.
               
               
                  If that loue had beene a God,
                  He had then bene full of grace:
                  But, how grace and loue are odde,
                  Tis too plaine a pitious case.
               
               
                  No: loue is an idle ieast,
                  That hath only made a woord
                  Like vnto a Cuckoes neast,
                  That hath neuer hatcht a bird.
               
               
                  Then, from nothing to conceiue
                  That may any substance bee;
                  Yet so many doth deceiue,
                  Lord of heauen deliuer mee.
               
            
            
               
               A displeasure against loue.
               
                  LOVE is witty, but not wise,
                  When he stares on beauties eyes,
                  Finding wonders in conceit,
                  That doe fall out but deceit.
               
               
                  Wit is stable, but not staied,
                  When his senses are betraied:
                  Where, too late sorrow doth proue,
                  Beauty makes a foole of loue.
               
               
                  Youth is forward, but too fond,
                  When he falles in Cupids bond:
                  Where repentance lets him see,
                  Fancy fast is neuer free.
               
               
                  Age is cunning, but vnkinde,
                  When he once growes Cupid-blinde.
                  For, when beauty is vntoward,
                  Age can neuer be but froward.
               
               
                  So that I doe finde in briefe,
                  In the grounds of natures griefe,
                  Age, and youth, and wit doe proue,
                  Beauty makes a foole of loue.
               
            
            
               ¶ A farewell to conceipt.
               
                  FAREVVELL conceit: Cōceit no more wel fare,
                  Hope feeds the heart with humours, to no end:
                  Fortune is false in dealing of her share:
                  Vertue, in heauen, must only seeke a friend.
               
               
                  
                  Adieu desire▪ desire, no more adieu.
                  Will hath no leasure to regard desart:
                  Loue findes, too late, the prouerbe all too true,
                  That beauties eyes stoode neuer in her heart.
               
               
                  Away poore loue: loue, seeke no more a way
                  Vnto thy woe, where wishing is no wealth:
                  In nightes deepe darkenesse, neuer looke for day,
                  Nor in hearts sicknesse, euer seeke for health.
               
               
                  Desire, conceipt, away, adieu, farewell.
                  Loue is deceiu'd, that seeks for heauen in hell.
               
            
            
               An vnhappy, solemne, ieasting curse.
               
                  OH venome, cursed, wicked, wretched eyes,
                  The killing lookers on the heart of loue:
                  Where witching beauty liues but to deuise
                  The plague of wit, and passions hell to proue:
               
               
                  That snowy necke, that chillest, more then snowe,
                  Both eyes & harts, that liue but to behold thee:
                  That graceles lip, frō whēce loues grief dothgrow,
                  Who doth, in all his sweetest sense infold thee:
               
               
                  Those chaining hairs more hard then iron chains,
                  In tying fast the fairest thoughts of loue,
                  Yee shameful cheeks, that in your blushing vains,
                  The rauisht passions of the minde doe proue:
               
               
                  
                  Yee spider fingers of those spitefull hands,
                  That worke but webbes, to tangle fancies eyes:
                  That Idole breast, that like an Image stands,
                  To worke the hell of reasons heresies:
               
               
                  Those Fairy feete, whose chary steppes doe steale
                  Those hearts, whose eies do but their shadowes see:
                  That ruthlesse spirit, that may well reueale,
                  Where loues confusions all included be:
               
               
                  To thee, that canst, or wilt not bend thy will,
                  To vse thy gifts all gratious in their nature,
                  To patience good, and not to passions ill,
                  And maist, and wilt not be a blessed creature,
               
               
                  I wish, and pray, thine eyes may weepe for woe
                  They cannot get one looke of thy beloued:
                  Thy snowy necke may be as colde as snowe,
                  With colde of feare, it hath no fancy moued.
               
               
                  Thy lippe, in anger by thy teeth be bitten,
                  It can not giue one kissing sweete of loue:
                  And, by thy hands, thy shriu'led haires be smitten,
                  For want of holding of thy hopes behoue:
               
               
                  Thy blushing cheekes loose all their liuely blood,
                  With pining passions of impatient thought:
                  That Idole bodie, like a piece of wood,
                  Consume, to see it is esteemd for nought.
               
               
                  
                  Those spider fingers, and those Fairy feete
                  The crampe so crooke, that they may creepe for griefe:
                  And, in that spirit sorrowes poisons meete,
                  To bring on death, where loue hath no reliefe.
               
               
                  All these, and more iust measures of amisse
                  Vpon thy frownes, on faithfull loue, befall:
                  But, sweetly smile, & then heauēs pour their blisse
                  On thy hairs, neck, cheeks, lip, hands, feet, & all.
               
            
            
               ¶ A quarrell with loue.
               
                  OH that I could write a story
                  Of loues dealing with affection;
                  How hee makes the spirit sory,
                  That is toucht with his infection.
               
               
                  But he doth so closely winde him,
                  In the plaits of will ill pleased,
                  That the heart can neuer finde him,
                  Till it be too much diseased.
               
               
                  Tis a subtill kinde of spirit,
                  Of a venome kinde of nature,
                  That can, like a conny ferret,
                  Creepe vnwares vpon a creature.
               
               
                  Neuer eye that can beholde it,
                  Though it worketh first by seeing;
                  Nor conceipt, that can vnfolde it,
                  Though in thoughts be all his being.
               
               
                  
                  Oh, it maketh olde men witty,
                  Young men wanton, women idle,
                  While that patience weepes, for pitty
                  Reason bitts not natures bridle.
               
               
                  In it selfe it hath no substance,
                  Yet is working worlds of wonder,
                  While, in phrensies fearefull instance,
                  Wit, and sense are put asunder.
               
               
                  What it is, is in coniecture,
                  Seeking much, but nothing finding:
                  Like to fancies architecture,
                  With illusions, reason blinding.
               
               
                  Day and night, it neuer resteth,
                  Mocking fancy with ill fortune,
                  While the spirit it molesteth,
                  That doth patience still importune.
               
               
                  Yet, for all this, how to finde it,
                  Tis vnpossible to showe it;
                  When the Muse, that most doth minde it,
                  Will be furthest off to know it.
               
               
                  Yet can beauty so reteine it,
                  In the profit of her seruice,
                  That she closely can mainteine it,
                  For her seruant chiefe in office.
               
               
                  
                  In her eye, she chiefely breedes it:
                  In her cheekes, she chiefely hides it:
                  In her seruants faith, shee feedes it,
                  While his only heart abides it.
               
               
                  All his humour is in changing:
                  All his worke is in inuention:
                  All his pleasure is in ranging:
                  All his truthe but in intention.
               
               
                  Straunge, in all effectes conceiued:
                  But, in substance, nothing sounded,
                  While the senses are deceiued,
                  That on idle thoughts are grounded.
               
               
                  Not to dwell vpon a trifle,
                  That doth follies hope befall,
                  Tis but a newe nothing nifle,
                  Made for fooles to play withall.
               
            
            
               ¶ A wish in vaine.
               
                  OH, that wit were not amazed,
                  At the wonder of his senses:
                  Or his eyes, not ouergazed,
                  In Mineruas excellences.
               
               
                  Oh, that reason were not foiled,
                  In the rules of all his learning:
                  Or his learning were not spoiled,
                  In the sweete of loues discerning.
               
               
                  
                  Oh, that beauty were not froward,
                  In regard of reasons duety:
                  Or, that will were not vntoward,
                  In the waiward wit of beauty.
               
               
                  But, since all in vaine are wishes,
                  Patience tels them that haue past it;
                  Poys'ned broth, in siluer dishes,
                  Kils their stomackes that doe taste it.
               
               
                  Wit, and reason, loue, and learning,
                  All in beauties eyes are blinded,
                  Where, in sense of sweete discerning,
                  She will be vnkindly minded.
               
               
                  Let those hartes, whose eyes perceiue her,
                  Triumphe, but in thoughts tormented:
                  Labour all they can to leaue her,
                  Or else die, and be contented.
               
            
            
               ¶ A conceipt vpon an Eagle, and a Phoenix.
               
                  THERE sate sometime an Eagle on a hill,
                  Hanging his wings, as if he could not flie:
                  Blacke was his coate, and tauny was his bill,
                  Grey were his legges, and gloomy was his eye,
                  Blunted his talents, and his traine so bruised,
                  As if his brauery had beene much abused.
               
               
                  
                  This foule olde birde of some vnhappy brood,
                  That could abide no hauke of higher wing
                  (But fed his gorge vpon such bloody foode,
                  As might, in feare, maintaine a cruell king)
                  Faire on a rocke of pearle and pretious stone,
                  Espied a Phoenix sitting all alone.
               
               
                  No sooner had this heauenly birde in sight,
                  But vp he flickers, as he would haue flowne:
                  But, all in feare, to make so farre a flight,
                  Vntill his pennes were somewhat harder growne:
                  He gaue a rowse, as, who should say, in rage
                  He shew'd the fury of his froward age.
               
               
                  And, for this Phoenix still did front his eyes,
                  Hee cald a counsell of his kites together:
                  With whom, in haste, he wold the mean deuise,
                  By secret arte to leade an armie thither,
                  And so pull downe, from place of highe estate,
                  This heauenly bird, that he had so in hate.
               
               
                  Much talke there was, & wondrous heede was held
                  How to atchieue this high attempt in hand:
                  Some out were sēt to soare about the field,
                  Where flue this grace and glory of the land,
                  To mark her course, & how she made her wing,
                  And how her strēgth might stād with such a king.
               
               
                  
                  And forthwith should such cages be deuised,
                  As should enclose full many thousand fowles:
                  By whom, her seat should quickly be surprized,
                  And all her birds should handled be like owles:
                  No time detract this deede must needs be don:
                  And ere they went, the world was wholly won.
               
               
                  But, soft a while: no sooner seene the land,
                  But, ere they came in kenning of the coast,
                  So great a force their fortune did withstand,
                  That all the brauery of the birds was lost:
                  Some leakt, some sanke, & some so ran on groūd,
                  The cages burst, and all the birds were drownd.
               
               
                  But, when the eagle heard what was become
                  Of all his flight, that flick'red here and there,
                  Some sicke, some hurt, some lame, & all & sūme
                  Or farre from hope, or all too neere in feare,
                  He stoupt his traine, and hung his head so sore,
                  As if his heart had neuer burst before.
               
            
            
               ¶ A conceited fancy.
               
                  PVRE colours can abide no staine:
                  The sunne can neuer lose his light:
                  And vertue hath a heauenly vaine,
                  That well may claime a queenely right:
                  So, giue my mistresse but her due,
                  Who tolde mee all these tales of you.
               
               
                  
                  From heauen on earth, the Sunne doth shine,
                  From vertue comes discretions loue:
                  They both are in themselues diuine;
                  Yet worke for weaker hearts behoue▪
                  
                  So, would my mistresse had her due,
                  To tell mee still these tales of you.
               
               
                  But, oh, the Sunne is in a clowde,
                  And vertue liues in sweetes vnseene:
                  The earth with heauen is not allow'd,
                  A begger must not loue a Queene:
                  So must my mistresse haue her due,
                  To tell mee still these tales of you.
               
               
                  Then shine faire Sunne, when clouds are gon:
                  Liue vertue in thy queenely loue:
                  Choose some such place to shine vpon,
                  As may thy Paradise approue;
                  That, when my mistresse hath her due,
                  I may heare all this heauen in you.
               
            
            
               ¶ A smile misconstrued.
               
                  BY your leaue, a little while:
                  Loue hath got a beauties smile,
                  From on earth, the fairest face:
                  But, he may be much deceiued,
                  Kindenesse may be misconceiued,
                  Laughing, oft, is in disgrace.
               
               
                  
                  Oh, but he doth knowe her nature,
                  And to be that blessed creature,
                  That doth answere loue with kindnesse.
                  Tush, the Phoenix is a fable,
                  
                     Phoebus horses haue no stable:
                  Loue is often full of blindnesse.
               
               
                  Oh, but he doth heare her voice:
                  Which doth make his heart reioyce,
                  With the sweetenesse of her sounde.
                  Simple hope may be abused.
                  Heares he not he is refused?
                  Which may giue his heart a wound.
               
               
                  No: loue can belieue it neuer.
                  Beauty fauours once, and euer,
                  Though proud enuie play the elfe:
                  Truthe, and patience haue approued
                  Loue shall euer be beloued,
                  If my mistresse be her selfe.
               
            
            
               ¶ An odde humour.
               
                  PVRELY faire, and fairely wise,
                  Blessed wit, and blessed eyes,
                  Blessed wise, and blessed faire,
                  Neuer may thy blisse impaire.
               
               
                  
                  Kindely true, and truly kinde,
                  Blessed heart, and blessed minde,
                  Blessed kind, and blessed true,
                  Euer may thy blisse renue.
               
               
                  Sweetely deare, and dearely sweete,
                  Blessed, where these blessings meete:
                  Blessed meetings neuer cease,
                  Euer may thy blisse encrease.
               
               
                  Blessed beauty, wit, and sense,
                  Blest, in natures excellence,
                  Where all blessinges perish neuer,
                  Blessed maist thou liue for euer.
               
            
            
               ¶ Awaggery.
               
                  CHILDRENS ahs, and womens ohs
                  Doe a wondrous griefe disclose:
                  Where a dugge the tone will still,
                  And the tother but a will.
               
               
                  Then, in gods name, let them cry.
                  While they cry, they will not die.
                  For, but fewe that are so curst,
                  As to cry, vntill they burst.
               
               
                  Say, some children are vntoward:
                  So some women are as froward:
                  Let them cry them, 'twill not kill them:
                  There is time enough to still them.
               
               
                  
                  But, if pitty will be pleased
                  To relieue the small diseased,
                  When the helpe is once applying,
                  They will quickly leaue their crying.
               
               
                  Let the childe then sucke his fill,
                  Let the woman haue her will,
                  All will hush, was hearde before:
                  Ah, and oh, will cry no more.
               
            
            
               ¶ An odde conceipt.
               
                  LOVELY kinde, and kindly louing,
                  Such a minde were worth the mouing:
                  Truly faire, and fairely true,
                  Where are all these, but in you?
               
               
                  Wisely kinde, and kindely wise,
                  Blessed life, where such loue lies.
                  Wise, and kinde, and faire, and true,
                  Louely liue all these in you.
               
               
                  Sweetely deare, and dearely sweete,
                  Blessed where these blessings meete.
                  Sweete, faire, wise, kinde, blessed, true,
                  Blessed be all these in you.
               
            
            
               ¶ A dolefull fancy.
               
                  SORROVV rippe vp all thy senses,
                  Neerest vnto horrors nature:
                  Taste of all thy quintessences,
                  That may kill a wretched creature.
               
               
                  
                  Then, beholde my wofull spirit,
                  All in passions ouerthrowne:
                  And, full closely, like a ferret,
                  Seize vpon it for thine owne.
               
               
                  But, if thou doe growe dismaid,
                  When thou dost but looke on mee,
                  When my passions well displaid,
                  Will but make a blast of thee,
               
               
                  Then in griefe of thy disgraces,
                  Where my fortunes doe deface thee,
                  Tell thy Muses to their faces,
                  They may learne of mee to grace thee.
               
               
                  For, thy sighes, thy sobbes, and teares
                  But thy common badges beene:
                  While the paine the spirit beares,
                  Eates away the heart vnseene.
               
               
                  Where, in silence swallowed vp
                  Are the sighes and teares of loue,
                  Which are drawne to fill the cuppe
                  Must be drunke to deaths behoue.
               
               
                  Then beholding my hearts swoune,
                  In my torments more and more,
                  Say, when thou dost sit thee downe,
                  Thou wert neuer grac't before.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ An Epitaph vpon Poet Spencer.
               
                  MOVRNFVLL Muses, sorrowes minions,
                  Dwelling in despaires opinions,
                  Yee that neuer thought inuented,
                  How a heart may be contented
                  (But in torments all distressed,
                  Hopelesse how to be redressed,
                  All with howling and with crying,
                  Liue in a contiuuall dying)
                  Sing a Dirge on Spencers death,
                  Till your soules be out of breath.
               
               
                  Bidde the Dunces keepe their dennes,
                  And the Poets breake their pennes:
                  Bidde the Sheepheards shed their teares,
                  And the Nymphes go teare their haires:
                  Bidde the Schollers leaue their reeding,
                  And prepare their hearts to bleeding:
                  Bidde the valiant and the wise,
                  Full of sorrowes fill their eyes;
                  All for griefe, that he is gone,
                  Who did grace them euery one.
               
               
                  
                  Fairy Queene, shew fairest Queene,
                  How her faire in thee is seene.
                  Sheepeheards Calender set downe,
                  How to figure best a clowne.
                  As for Mother Hubberts tale,
                  Cracke the nut, and take the shale:
                  And for other workes of worth,
                  (All too good to wander forth)
                  Grieue that euer you were wrot,
                  And your Author be forgot.
               
               
                  Farewell Arte of Poetry,
                  Scorning idle foolery:
                  Farewell true conceited reason,
                  Where was neuer thought of treason:
                  Farewell iudgement with inuention,
                  To describe a hearts intention:
                  Farewell wit, whose sound and sense
                  Shewe a Poets excellence:
                  Farewell all in one togither,
                  And, with Spencers garland, wither.
               
               
                  
                  And, if any Graces liue,
                  That will vertue honour giue,
                  Let them shewe their true affection,
                  In the depth of griefes perfection,
                  In describing forth her glory,
                  When she is most deepely sory;
                  That they all may wish to heere,
                  Such a song, and such a quier,
                  As, with all the woes they haue,
                  Follow Spencer to his graue.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   