
      
         
            
            
            THE FOVRTH PART OF THE TRVE WATCH: CONTAINING PRAYERS AND TEARES for the CHVRCHES. OR A helpe to hold up the hearts and hands of the poorest servants of God, untill our Lord Iesus Christ shall have rescued his Glorie, Kingdome, and People in all the world, and fully prepared the way to his most glorious appearing.
            In praying learne to watch, in watching pray; in watching and praying is our victorie.
            
               Zech. 4. 6. Not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith the Lord of hosts.
            
               Hos. 12. 4. He had power over the Angell and prevailed, he wept and made supplication unto him.
            LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pavier. 1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE AND VERTVOVS Ladies, the Ladie ZOVCH, wife to the Right Honourable the Lord ZOVCH, with her Noble Sisters, Ladie DVDLEY, and Ladie WINFIE
                  •…
               D, all Grace and happinesse.
            
               IT is too well knowne (Right Honourable and Worthie Ladies) how both in Court and Countrey the hearts not onely of poore simple women loaden with sinnes, bu
                  •…
                of our chiefe Ladies and of all

other, are stollen away (so much as the Lord permite) from all true allegeance and obedience to our Lord Iesus Christ and his Anoinced, to ioyne themselves to the Church of Rome, to the endlesse perdition both of their soules and bodies. This also is as evident, that this is wrought principally by this subtiltie of the old Serpent: That they in that Church haue moe holy devotions, and doe also spend much more time therein, than wee in ours.
            By this enchantment amongst others, Satan and his instruments seeke to deuoure not widowes houses alone, as those did in the dayes of our Sauiour; but in time to swallow us all up quicke unlesse our mightie God stid deliver us from their iawes, as hither to he hath done.

Considering therefore how the Romish Seducers swarme in everie place, to the present indangering of all the Churches and people of the Lord, & even this our nation amongst the rest; and having heard moreover (by one of speciall note inD. Wh. the Church of God, for his learning able to silence the proudest Adversarie) that some of our most Honourable and chiefe Ladies, have in these & the like respects, earnestly desired that some amongst us would more seriously labour herein, that we might match them even in this kinde, not as theirs in blinde & vaine superstitions, but in true, sincere and holy devotions; I haue thought it my bounden dutie, to tender for the good of all sorts, such meditations and prayers as the Lord hath in his

mercie beene pleased to vouchsafe unto me in this behalfe.
            This also the rather, for that he having long agoe put this verie same care into my heart, to seeke hereby as much to save us all, as they doe to destroy us all, hath now much more enflamed it, with an ardent studie hereof: upon this religious motion, and most honourable desire of those great Personages, mentioned to me againe and againe, and that in Gods speciall providence, as I have taken it, to stir me up more earnestly hereunto. Let me therefore herein (right noble and worthie Ladies) humbly beg pardon, if I presume upon your truly renowned courtesie, and tender and compassionate affection, to be more than ordinarie in this my dedication to your Honours, upon this important

and extraordinarie occasion, from this intolerable insulting of the common Adversarie, and the pitifull deluding and destroying of multitudes of poore unstable soules, and also the endangering of us all, to lie open daily more and more unto the butcherly cruelties of Rome, when they have thorowly prepared the way, by drawing enow unto their part, through this and other their cunning stratagems and strong delusions. Grant me leaue (deare Ladies) I beseech you (though a thing unusuall in such dedications, which are wont usually to bee verie briefe; yet (to manifest my long studie and earnest desire for the sauing of such of our brethren and sisters, as are endangeredRom. 9 2. 2 Sam. 5. 1. to be destroyed by this and the like subtilties of Satan)

to helpe hereby, and by our instant prayers for them, to pull some of them backe againe from the subtill Serpent, unto our Lord Iesus Christ; and withall to keepe others from falling away from him, even so many of them as belong to the election of grace, and to leave the rest of them more without excuse. Now is the time that Michael and his Angels strive speciallyApoc. 12. 7. against the Dragon and his Angels, about the whole bodie of his Church. Now is the time, that our Lord Iesus lookes for us all to helpe him and his poore Church, to remember our Baptisme vow in a speciall manner, to 
                  •…
               ight manfully under his banner, and to stand for him, for our selves, & for our brethren.
            I haue therefore presumed upon the occasion of that their

right Christian and tender commiseration, to write a generall Epistle to all the plaine and simple-hearted people of our land, seduced by those deceiuers, or in danger thereof: and not onely to them, but to all sorts: That all may take the better notice of the delusions of Poperie, the difference betweene the devotions of the Romish Synagogue, and of the true Church of Christ, and to make fully known unto them all, that they must all either renounce Poperie, and professe the Gospell with us, or else professe themselues therein to be of Satan, and to stand for his religion against our Lord Iesus Christ. That thus all may get out of Baby
                  •…
               on, seeke to save themselves, and helpe to pull out and save all others.
            And so much the rather, for

that this verie service hath beene required of me particularly by a truly religious, worthie and ancient professour of Christs Gospell, in the behalfe of a great and honourable Ladie, who hath beene drawen away by this same delusion principally; to wit, That they have moe holy devotions in their Church, than wee in ours, and doe spend more time therein. Whereupon hee requested mee to write some Epistle, to helpe to reclaime her, and to bring her backe againe unto us. Which service or a greater I could not well denie, as God should bee pleased to vouchsafe mee abilitie and opportunitie, especially hauing beene long obliged by his ancient loue, though the unablest of thousand others.
            
               And moreouer, for that I have likewise stood for many yeeres (after a sort) bound by promise, for the verie like service in effect unto a Gentleman, much respected generally of all that are affected to that Romish Religion, for his speciall devotion in that superstitious kinde; one worthie indeed to be duely respected of all, in regard of his good parts of nature, learning, and also descent, if the Lord shall bee pleased to shew him that mercie to reclaime and bring him backe into the bosome of his owne true Church and people againe.
            This have I therefore more heartily wished to accomplish, not onely for that I have remained long thus bound by my particular promise unto himselfe

(as after shall more fully appeare) but likewise for that I was specially obliged in dutie, both to his father, being a worthie Iudge of our Land, and in love to his eldest brother, who was a rare hope in his time, even in his tender yeeres (as the Commons house of Parliament could then have borne witnesse) if our God had beene pleased to have prolonged his daies. And this the more cheerefully also, for that the Lord had formerly shewed mercie on that his hopefull brother, vouchsafing me, a poore and weake instrument, to helpe to pull him from Satan to Christ; out of deepe despaire, whereunto he had fal
                  •…
               e by reading some part of their devotions, even of Parsons Resolution of the paines of hell, and to bring him to much assurance

and comfort in Iesus Christ, by the right use of a little part of ours, viz. of the practise of some directions in the first part of the True Watch. My trust is therefore that your Ladiships and all others will iudge my boldnesse to bee borne withall, though I thus presume, because I know assuredly, that you will not onely ioyne your hands, but your hearts to the reclaiming and saving of them both, and of all other so deluded, and even enchaunted with their sorceries, and that they themselves will most praise the Lord for this service, if ever hee shall thorowly open their eyes; wheras otherwise without unfained turning and speedie preventing it, they will undoubtedly fall into a farre more forlorne and irrecoverable despaire,

when it will bee too late.
            And who knoweth how far this service may prevaile, being both thus requested and also promised; and now thus undertaken in all dutifull and loving affection, and also in uprightnesse and singlenesse of heart towards them, and towards all other, as before our blessed God, who hath ever beene wont not onely to worke by the weakest and unlikeliest meanes, that himselfe alone may have all the glorie, but also to doe the greatest good to his Church, by the extremest rage, yea by the deepest and most mischievous plots of the Adversaries against it. Who knowes, whether his goodnesse may not make it an instrument, through your instant prayers, with the prayers and teares of many of

his people furthered by this occasion, to pull not them two alone, but with them likewise many thousands, yea hundred thousands from hell, and to bring them to heaven, & withall to keepe innumerable soules from ever declining from the Lord. Yea, what knoweth any one, whether he may not make it a meanes amongst others, to helpe to save us all, and with us, all Christs true Churches, from that common calamitie and destruction, which Satan and his Agents doe fully assure themselves in time to bring upon them all, and upon all the people of the Lord. Our bloudie enemies, having so resolved never to rest, untill, under the name of Heretiques, they have utterly rooted us all out, from off the face of the earth. My

trust is therefore (Right Honourable) that all who unfainedly love Christs Gospell, and the soules of these our deluded brethren and sisters, and desire the saving of the Church of God, will thinke it an acceptable service, to set before the eyes of all the world, the palpablenesse of this most notorious delusion: and to take away that forged imputation and shame from the true Church of Christ, and from all the Israel of God; viz. That our Adversaries of Rome have moe holy devotions than we, and also doe spend more time therein, than we in ours.
            
            Accept then, I beseech your Honours, this poore service here now in this entrance into this fourth part of this Watch thus undertaken chiefly upō the occasion

of that most Christian desire of those great Ladies, to whom yet I durst not presume to dedicate it, being unknowne unto them: albeit I have heard much good concerning them, & heartily pray that all heavenly graces may be ten times more resplendent in them, to their everlasting praise & happines. Accept it as one speciall use and application of all the three former parts of it, to the helping of the poorest and weakest Christians in all the land, that everie one herein may have the benefit of all the former, that all in praying may learne to watch, and everie one in watching may learne to pray, & each in watching and praying, may not onely helpe to save themselves, but also their owne native Countrey, with all the true Churches

of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to pull all Gods Elect out of the mouth of the roaring Lion.
            All may see (so farre as I am able to coniecture) that to bee true, which was mentioned, That the battle of the great day is come; That Satan hath openly, and even visibly entred the field with his armies to fight against the Lords most glorious Maiestie and his Armies, even against all his poore Church at once; for that this spirituall warre is set on by his principall Commanders, the Pope and his Cardinals, with their chiefe Agents the Iesuites, and other Seminarie Priests, and managed and foughten by his most deadly weapons, lying and murder.
            Wee are therefore ever to keepe in memorie, that wee are

not now so much to labor to fight against flesh & bloud, as againstEphes. 6. 12. principalities and powers, the Princes of the darknesse of this world, and to that end to be armedVers. 11. with all the complete armour of God, both defensive and offensive.
            To this end, like as I have long travelled to helpe all our poore Countrey Schooles, and all of the inferiour sort, that the meanest of them, who will suffer themselves to bee directed, might not need to feare the insulting of any, or of all the proudest Iesuites, in regard of laying a sure foundation of all good learning in our Grammar Schooles (with all sweet delight both to Master and Schollars) neither doth it repent me, but I blesse the God of heaven, that gave me a heart so to abase my

selfe; so have I here for all the poore people of the land, laboured to prepare and fit them weapons against this great day. Which day all my labours will witnesse for me, that I have long feared, seeing the malice and rage of the Adversarie daily growing more and more, with the increase of our iniquities to provoke the Lord to send it upon us, like as upon all the other Churches; to the end to make us all to seeke him by unfained repentance, & that euerie one of u
                  •…
                may turne from our evill way unto his Covenant. That thus seeking him unfainedly, he may take our cause into his owne hand, fight his owne battles, and save us from these our mercilesse enemies. The better instructed sort of Christians, who are able to pray better of themselves,

need them not, I have therefore endevoured to fit them chiefly for all the younger and weaker sort, who would as faine learne to pray, to save themselves and the land with all the Churches, and long as much to be helpers in this worke, as any of those who are best instructed.
            Wherefore (deare Ladies) as you have so much reioyced in the former parts of this Watch, and to doe all things which may tend not onely to the saving of your selves, but also of our native Countrey, and to make us a happie people; so I assure my selfe, that you will not disdaine these poore helps, though they bee composed in a plaine, easie, and homely stile; so as to leade the poorest by the hand, and to support their weaknesse, to

helpe to confirme weake hands and wearie knees, that all herein may helpe together. It is not any painted (much lesse Players) eloquence, that will pacifie our blessed God, and defend us, or put to flight our proud Adversaries. Wee have had a great while too much experience of that, in too many both of our Sermons and Prayers; no, no, it must bee the evidence and power of the word of the Lord, sent forth by the sighs and groanes of his holy Spirit, though all heavenly eloquence rightly used, be his most gracious gift, and if ever, now specially to be wished. Thus have I studied to fit weapons, as hee hath enabled mee against this time of need, meet for all sorts; that old and young, noble and ignoble, yea our most honourable

Ladies may have their weapons from his Armourie; so as all, from the chiefe of them to the verie poore woman that grindes at the mill, may in thisIudg. 5. 23. battle helpe the Lord against the mightie, and so keepe that bitter curse from all our land. That Iael may strike the naile into theIudg. 4. 21. 5. 26. temples of Sisera. And that thus in the 
                  •…
               ud, shee that sits at home may have part in the spoile, and all of us ioyntly together, when we shall see the Lord to have got himselfe the victorie with his owne right arme,Iudg. 5. 1. may sing the song of Deborah
               Exod. 15. 21. and of Miriam, yea of all the host of heaven, saying; Praise,
               Apoc. 5. 13. 
               and honour, and glorie, and power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lambe for evermore.
            
            Pardon me (worthie Ladies)

I humbly againe beseech you, if so much presuming upon your Ladiships patience, according to my assurance of your tender commiseration, and true Christian humilitie, I have so farre passed the bounds of an ordinarie Epistle in this matter of such extraordinarie moment and importance, so nearely at this present concerning the safetie and happinesse of your Honours, and of all the people of the Lord. If I may (by the worthy ensamples of your honourable Ladiships) provoke other of your noble ranke and condition (as who have most leisure and best opportunitie) and so others of his servants and children to a holy emulation, seriously to meditate hereof, and to put all these in practise, onely so farre forth as his heavenly Maiestie cals all

hereunto, and expects these duties at the hands of everie soule, I shall have an abundant reward of all my poore travels. Or if I may but helpe to awake such of his servants, as to whose view they shall be presented, to labour to be for all the rest, as the Angels for Lot, to pull all from Satan to our Lord Iesus Christ, and chiefly those of our owne native Countrey, who are so seduced by Antichrist, and by those who are sent abroad by him into the world to deceive, and to draw all to his part.
            Reade and consider, and so farre as your Ladiships shall clearely see our Lord Iesus Christ leading you by the hand, so farre follow him, doing as he directs you. So you shall not onely be sure to save your owne soules, but also helpe to save all

sorts, and more specially all the Honourable, and others; who either shall looke at, or heare of your worthie ensamples; yea, your native Countrey (as was said before) and all the true Churches of Christ, and shall in like manner be helpers, to gather in all the remainder of his Elect, both Iewes and Gentiles, so to prepare the way to his most glorious comming. Thus shall you increase your owne eternall honour and happinesse, and shall shine more and more in all heavenly graces and good works, and in greater glittering before the Lord, his Saints and Angels, than by being adorned with all the gold, pearles and diamonds, which the whole earth can afford.
            In which humble desire, I take my leave, and commend

your Ladiships unto that Celestiall grace, which performeth all the holy desires of them that feare him and trust in his mercie, and so shall ever remaine
            
               Your Ladiships in all service and intire affection, Iohn Brinsley.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO ALL THE PLAINE AND simple-hearted people of our Land, seduced by Poperie; that they may forthwith bethinke themselves, both from whom they have departed, and also upon what grounds; and to let them know that they must either returne to our Church againe, or professe themselves to be of Satans Religion, and so will remaine to fight under his banner against our Lord and Saviour.
            
            
               BEloved in our Lord Iesus Christ, so many of you, as of whom we may hope that you belong to the election of grace, for whom my hearts desire and continuall prayer to our God is, that you may be saved; give me leave to shew my unfained affection towards

you, in performing that service for you all, which hath beene requested at my hands, by such as wish much better to you, than you doe unto your selves. And that but only in these two things: First, in manifesting in what an estate and condition you presently stand, and so your danger eternally; and after, in helping to procure, that all the people of the Lord may cry instantly and joyntly for you, that he may shew you mercie, in opening your eyes, to see how palpably you have suffered your selves to be deluded, and in plucking you out of the verie jawes of that old Serpent. Howsoever, for the present, you take it at my hands, yet y• time will come, as I certainly assure my soule, that you will either blesse y• God of Heaven for the endevour of my ardent affection towards you, if it shall be available for you, or cry out against your selves, wt wringing of your hands, and tearing of your haire, when it will be too late, and no more place found for your repentance. Vouchsafe me this favour, that being amongst the weakest of all my brethren, I may leave all matters of higher dispute, in maintaining the truth of Christ against the Iesuites and other Seminarie Priests, by whom you have beene so inchanted and abused, unto my more learned and reverend

brethren, who have alreadie entred the lists with them, and to others exercised in that kinde, whose bookes I acknowledge my selfe unworthie to beare; and that (sith what spare thoughts God hath vouchsafed mee from my necessarie calling, I have specially employed in this kinde, to helpe his people in holy meditations, and other like devotions) I may thus farre onely presume without offence: First, to put you in minde of your Baptisme vow, and Covenant made with our blessed God, from which you have so farre departed. And in the second place, to advertise you, that you may consider well upon what grounds you have departed. And finally, whither you are come. Whether by their cunning sleights you be not gotten under the verie banner of Satan, to fight even against our Lord and Saviour Iesus▪ Christ, though you doe not imagine so much, but the cleane contrarie.
            In everie one of these therefore, I desire to deale lovingly, plainly, and ingenuously, as in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ, before whom I stand: as he shall be pleased to assist mee with his grace, and according also to the weight of the businesse which wee have in hand, which concernes the saving of everie soule of you.
            
               For our Baptisme vow & Covenant, (which wee are all bound to performe all our dayes, as wee looke to have the Lord our God, or any benefit by our blessed Saviour, or ever to appeare with boldnesse before his Tribunall) I referre you first unto it, as the summe of it is set downe expresly in our publike forme of Baptisme; and if you please, as it is (amongst other of our bookes) more particularly and largely explained, but even in the first part of this Watch, The Rule of Life: In which little booke, I have laboured, so farre as the Lord hath enabled mee, to shadow out the same vow, and so to trace out the narrow path of life, as to direct everie soule from step to step, and as it were, to guide them by the hand, untill wee have finished our whole course, and shall have entred within the gates of the Celestiall Ierusalem: which, though it be but amongst the least and weakest of our helpes for our de
                  •…
               otions, yet I would wish everie one of you so drawne away from us, to reade, that therein you may first see and know our way of life, before you so condemne it; to try what iniquitie you finde in it,Ier. 2. 5. before you so utterly depart from it, and herewithall from Christs true Church and Spouse, your mother, which hath bred and borne you, and

consequently, even from Christ himselfe, so farre as I am any way able to conceive, judging as before his heavenly Majestie. And having so read and thorowly weighed and compared it with your way of life, according to any of your bookes of the like kinde, then to give sentence (as before him to whom you must surely give an answer, even for this) whether is the better and more holy, your way or ours, whether more agreeable to his heavenly patterne.) And thus much for the first point, and your Baptisme 
                  •…
               ow, which you seeme to have so far abjured, in so departing from the bosome of your mother, and utterly casting her oft: and to leave it to your more serious meditation and more mature deliberation.
            For the second: viz. Vpon what grounds you have departed; I will content my selfe to have instanced but onely in this one; which, as is said, hath beene of late such a principall cause of your departure, and as I my selfe heard one poore soule, who had beene seduced, specially alleaging it (before sundrie witnesses, and some of them most learned) as a maine cause of her joyning to that religion, viz. That they have in their Church and Religion moe holy devotions than wee in ours, and spend
               
               more time therein. That by the palpablenesse of this delusion fully discovered, you and everie one of you may judge of all the rest of their delusions, which have nothing the like power so to bewitch you, and to steale away your hearts.
            And that I may proceed in order, to make all the mysteries of this delusion as cleare as the Sunne at the noone-day, even to the understanding and full capacitie of the simplest in the land, I will divide it into three parts, which are the three heads of this fell destroying Hydra, so maine a cause of your present departure from our Church and Religion, and of your turning to Poperie: To wit, Because
               The delusion what, and the parts of it. 
               they have in their Religion moe holy and and better devotions, and doe also spend more time therein, than we in ours. The first head then of this poysoning Serpent is this; That they have moe helps for devotion in their religion, than we in ours. The second, That their many devotions are more holy and better than ours. And theThe first part of the delusion. third is, That they spend more time in these their holy devotions, than we doe in ours.
               That in Poperie they have moe devotions than wee in our Religion.
            
            For the first of these: That they have moe helps for devotions, that is, moe such as which those of our common sort may have, understand and use, it is as true as that which he, who lately writ

the Gag for the new Gospeller, hath publishedLike that in the Gag for the new Gospeller. in print to the view of the world, and which he hath not beene ashamed to set in the verie fore-front of his booke, in the Preface to the Reader, within twelve lines of the beginning to the verie same end, which this delusion tends: viz. to help more easily to deceive all the simple, & to make them more to abhorre all our Bibles, and thereby our Religion, whereof the sacred Bible is the ground
                  •…
               : and so to take away the verie life of their lives, and indeed to prepare the way the better for the full effecting of their bloudie designes and desires against us all. Which I would therefore desire all (who would not willingly be so palpably abused by these murdering Iesuites, or who would but know these deluders and their Religion aright, and also the danger that wee stand in perpetually by it) to take notice of. His words are these, that hee would advise all of, That England hath brought forth within these few yeeres▪ past, to the number of▪
                
               This twentie is but one this two and fiftie yeeres, By this shamelesse lie judge all the rest. 
               twentie severall sorts of Bibles sarr
                     •…
                   different one from another. These are his owne verie words: for the truth hereof, let everie one enquire diligently, whether England ever brought forth any moe Bibles, since that translated by the Bishops, printed 1572. save that one appointed by our

Soveraigne Lord and King to be most carefully translated, and that to satisfie the Papists, and to take away all their calumniations against our Translations; and the same verie little differing from the former, but as may fall out with the best Translations. For mine owne selfe, I have enquired of the most learned, and can heare of none other.
            But to passe over this most intolerable & shamelesse untruth, together with that which they had devised in like manner for the present hiding their owne wickednes in the Powder-Treason, for the dispatching us all, as it were, at one blow, like as it hath beene generally reported, and received from thence till this day: to wit, That the Puritanes had blowne up the Parliament house; intimating thereby, that they therefore were well worthie to be destroyed out of the earth: and so under the name of Putitanes, to have taken occasion hereupon, to have murdered all who truely professed Christs. Gospell in all the Churches. And also together with that like faire pretense of a mariage, under which they effected that most bloudie, detestable, and mercilesse massacre at Paris, in butchering of a sudden so many of the Flower of the Nobilitie, Gentrie, and principall professours in France. And likewise to omit that intendment

88. in a like treaty, and all other their stratagems of the same nature, by which they have so much promoted the Catholike cause, as they call it, and still doe to this very day, and so farre surprized the Church of Christ, and prevailed against us all, all of them being of the same nature, and from the same Author.
            To passe over all these, and to leave them all, as rightly due to Popery; forIoh. 8. 44. that lying and murder, the two chiefe workes of the Deuill, are now well knowne to all the world (even to all, that will not wittingly put out their owne eyes) to be the t
                  •…
               o principall pillars, which have alwaies supported and promoted Popery and the kingdome of Antichrist, and must now specially, if ever heretofore, stand him in stead. And to come briefly to shew the palpablenesse of this first delusion, and that it is of the very same nature with all the former mentioned; namely when they say, That they have moe holy devotions,
               What is to be understood by Devotions. that is, moe bookes and helps for devotions, viz. moe holy directions for a true Christian life, for the right practise of Christianitie and piety, moe helps for holy meditations and contemplations, for examining our hearts and lives soundly according to the word of the Lord; so for true humiliation

& repentance, for holy praiers, thanksgivings, and the like, than we have, I refer all who are willing to know the truth, to that catalogue of our devotions, even of those which are extant in Print, and may be had by all, who will use or see them, as it is set downe in the end of this booke, as it is gathered out of Master Maunsels catalogue, dedicated to Q. Elizabeth, printed anno 1595. and of those which have beene since. Which Catalogue alone (to compare it with all the English devotions of the like kindes, that For their devotions wherewith they cozen the world and extremely oppresse the poore superstitious soules which will have them, see them in their Catalogue of their English bookes dispersed within these two yeeres last past with their prices, as they are in Mr GEES late discoverie, viz. Foot out of the Snare, p. 9
                     •…
                  . they have in the world much more of these which their common sort can come by and make vse of) will I hope quite smite off this first head of this killing serpent. And especially when the works of some one of our men there mentioned, alone, being well applied and practised, may afford sufficient matter in that kinde to any poore Christian, for his whole life, to make him a blessed man; yea much more blessed than all the devotions of Popery can, as will appeare after: and what may we thinke then of all the rest of them together?
            And thus much briefly may suffice for the cutting off this first head of this Hydra.
            But the second head of this subtleThe second part of the delusion. serpent may seeme more dangerous, as

it is indeed, and more full of deadlyThat the Popish devotions are holier than ours. poyson, to wit, that their devotions, viz. those commended most unto you by your Church and Iesuites, are more holy and better than ours. To cut off this therefore likewise, as it is a thing more necessarie, so it may seeme moreThe holinesse of devotions wherein. difficult. But that this may be as easily and surely effected, we are wisely to consider, wherein the holinesse and goodnesse of all true devotions doe consist. This we may doe specially, by considering the matter, ends, and fruits of true devotions.
            For the generall matter, those mustWhich devotions are best in regard of the matter and forme in generall. Ephes. 2. 20. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 1 Ioh. 5. 47. Mat. 16. 18. Mat. 24. 35. needs be the holiest and best, which are most directly grounded upon the sacred Scriptures, that sure foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, whereof Iesus Christ is the chiefe corner stone; upon which as all the true Church is built, so all her devotions; against which foundation the gates of hell shall never prevaile more than against Christ himselfe; they being holy as his owne Maiestie; and heaven and earth may passe, but not one jot or tittle in them, till all things in them be fulfilled; for that such devotions in regard of their matter are the Lords, so far forth as they are si
                  •…
               mely grounded upon that sacred word.In regard of the more particular, matter.
            
            For the more particular matter likewise,

those must needs be the best, which tend most to advance the glory of our God, and the scepter and kingdome of our Lord Iesus Christ; which most magnifie him, giving all our salvation to the rich mercy of our heavenly Father, in and through our Lord Iesus Christ alone; and so which are most powerfull and effectuall to pull downe all the pride of sinfull man, and to make us to renounce all, but Christ IesusPhil. 3. 8, 9. Rom. 3. 
                     •…
                  7. 4. 2. alone; to account all but losse and dung, in regard of any reioycing in our selves, of any iustification or merit, but onely in Iesus Christ, and to be found in him alone, not having our owne righteousnesse, but the righteousnesse of God in him. So those which most serve to cause us wholly to deny our selves, & thereby to be made fit to come unto and follow him, as his true subiects and disciples, and which make most to the saving of all his Church and chosen flocke, by him alone, and to leave all, who will not so receive and follow him, and heare his voice onely (as his enemies) more without excuse.
            And as these, so those in like manner which give most full assurance of Gods favour and love, and of true pardon of sinne and eternall life by Iesus Christ alone, and which thus give most strong and most abundant consolation onely in him.
            
               Those likewise which are most powerfull and effectuall to increase our faith in him, and therewithall our love, and all the rest of the graces of God, even all parts of true sanctification and repentance, which are nothing else but the fruits of our holy faith in him, wrought in us by his blessed Spiri
                  •…
                when that we truly beleeve in Christ.
            Or to speake all more shortly, those devotions must needs be best, which most frame all to the lively image of our Lord and Saviour, and so doe most forme Christ in us, to wit, which most fashion us to that absolute patterne of true holinesse, which is commanded in his blessed word, and not to superstition contrary to it and condemned in it.
            And also those, whereby we may be best assured to receive most power to prevaile with the Lord, and to obtaine all good things from him alone.
            Or yet more for the understanding of all: Those must needs be best, which doe best direct and help us to performe all our vowes & promises made to him, and so to walke with him all our daies, doing onely that which he requires in all things, that so we may be assured of all his promises, both for this and the better life, to be fully performed to us, for the saving our selves and all the people of the Lord.
            
               Or most briefly, according to ourA most evident triall according to our Saviours direction. Saviours direction, which stands sure for ever, in the three first petitions. Those which most tend to advance his glory and kingdome, with the accomplishment of all his heavenly will alone, and not the will of sinfull man, must needs be the best of all. The reason is, for that these three first being obeyed and sought first aright, will certainly bring the three latter petitions and blessings for our selves, both all things needfull for this and the better life, with forgiuenenesse of sins, deliverance from Satan, and from all the evils that he intends against us. That we shall see our Lord Iesus manifesting his kingdome, power and glory for us, and making us partakers of the same for evermore.
            For the ends and fruits, those mustTriall by the ends & fruits of devotions. of necessitie be the best, which as they doe most directly aime at all these things mentioned, so doe likewise serve as Gods instruments to helpe us to worke these things most powerfully and effectually.
            Finally (for the forme and mannerTriall by the manner. of sending them forth unto the Lord, or performing them any other way) those must needs be best and holiest, which are done with most understanding,1 Cor. 14. 9, 11, 14, 15. and so with the holiest and most

fervent affections rising thereon; andMatt. 6. 7. which are also uttered or performed in best order and with fewest vaine repetitions.
            And contrarily those must needs be the worst which are contrary to these, in regard of their matter generall or particular, and which conduce to contrary ends, and have most contrary effects and operations, and are done in a manner farthest differing from these.
            Now having set downe these generall rules and directions, which may serve for our discerning of the true and sincere holinesse and goodnesse of all devotions, and which are the best; we are in the next place to consider briefly, and in a generall manner, what is the most speciall and principall matter of our devotions; and then what is the chiefest matter of theirs; and after in the third place, to compare them more particularly together, and so leave the discerning and iudgement of them, to every conscience, as in the presence of the Lord.
            For our devotions they are such generallyOur devotions what in generall. as agree to the former rules. Both that we may so keepe his watch, and walke with him here, as wee may be sure to finde him God all-sufficient, to live and reigne with him eternally. And also that we may so pray, as we may be▪
               
certaine to be heard, and to prevaile with his heavenly Maiesty for our selves and for all his Churches and people, in all that he shall see best for his owne glory, and the saving of all his chosen flocke, and in whatsoever he hath promised to grant, even every thing in the due time, and especially whereby we may be sure to finde him a sanctuary, whatsoever come to passe.
            But for those devotions of theirsTheir devotions of what sort. (whereof they glory so much, and wherewith they seeke to inchant not you alone, but if it were possible, all the people of the Lord, and even to pull all from Christ to Antichrist) See their bookes of their chiefe devotions as they are called by Master G
                     •…
                  E, who was best acquainted with them. what are they for the most part, but either meditations of their Legend stories, as of that materiall Crosse whereon, and those nailes wherewith our Saviour was nailed; or concerning the Virgin Mary her milke and merit: or their Ladies Psalter, all full of blasphemies, and such like sluffe, as that is, which is in that booke so lately published See their Letanies to our Lady, in that booke, and namely, that sung at the intended 
                     •…
                  panish invasion. by the Spanish Monke; or tales of Saint Francis, of this Saint and that, of their Shrines, and the miracles done by them, or in the numbring and oft repeating upon their Beades, their Pater nosters, Creeds, Ave Maries, Rosaries and the like, many of them in an unknowne tongue, and in

a most superstitious and blasphemous manner; or praiers to the Saints, devotions to the Crosse, and to all their holy reliques, with innumerable other fearefull superstitions. All of them being to the great dishonour of the Lord, and the dreadfull provoking of his heavie wrath, in filling up the measure of their sinnes, in stead of any comfort that any poore soules shall ever finde in them.
            Or which is farre worse, what areTheir more profound meditations and devotions. their deeper and more profound meditations and devotions, I meane, of their holy Iesuites, and Iesuited Catholikes? but what meritorious works they may doe, for promoting the Catholike cause; how to hold up and to advance the throne of their holy Father, that he may be the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, opposing and exalting2 Thess. 2. 4. himselfe above all that is called God. Yea to advance their owne pompe and tyranny in all the world, that they may at their pleasure reigne over both soules and bodies of all, as they doe in all countries, where they prevaile and domineere.
            And thus are their chiefe meditations, how to take away whatsoever may be any hinderance hereunto, by murdering Kings and Princes, seeking to subvert whole states, so to bring all

againe to adore that Romish Antichrist,2 Thess. 2. 4. Apoc. 13. 11. &c. 14, 15, 16, 17. to cast Christ Iesus out of his Throne, and that that man of sin may seat himselfe every where as God; to destroy utterly all that will not worship him, and take his marke, yea all the people of the Lord, who truly worship Christ Iesus, and to root the remembrance of them from off the earth.
            So that whereas the scope and effectScope of all their d
                     •…
                  votions. of all our meditations and devotions is onely to save the soules and bodies of all men; theirs are in very deed for the most part to destroy all, either soules, or bodies, or both; intended chiefly by their Iesuites and Seminarie Priests, to worke that zeale in men, as may make them ready to ruinate their owne native countrey, to have their hands imbrued in the bloud of their mother that bred them, rather than to be hindered in their wretched designes. And not onely to take away the Lords anointed, with all his royall seed, and all not joyning to them, but even those of the same profession with them, and of the neerest of their kin, (so that they can doe it warily enough) if they be like to be any impediment to the accomplishment of their desires, as the powder furnace gave sufficient evidence. Yea the very best of their devotions (more than where they agree

with the word of the Lord, and so with ours) are such as concerning which, the Lord himselfe doth in his word, and will one day demand of them beforeEsa. 1. 13. the whole world; Who hath required these things at your hands? For, for those meditations of Lewes de Granado and others, so far as they agree with the word of the Lord and with ours▪ they are not properly Popish, but Christian devotions, & so in deed ours, reserved amongst them, as the Scriptures and other parts of Gods truth, for the cause of the true Church, the little remainder of Gods people hid amongst them, even in the midst of Rome.
            Now to take any of these devotionsComparing of them together. of theirs, as they are theirs properly, and the very meanest of ours, but even these whereunto this is the entrance, (prepared of purpose to helpe the poorest and weakest Christians in our Church, and euen all those who have not yet entred into this way of pietie, but are only desirous to offer their best service to our Lord Iesus and his poore Church, if they may be fitted and admitted hereunto) and to compare them to those of theirs in all or any of the former respects, I doubt not to refer them to any conscience, in all the world, if it be not altogether seared and starke dead: whether are more

agreeable to the former rules, and so the better. But to come more particularly,Particular comparing of them for more evidence. to set them opposite, that thus they may the better appeare, as when white and blacke are set to be beholden, light and darknesse both together; and to doe it so, as the simplest in all the land may see it plainly, and be able to iudge; and therefore with some little repetition.
            1. Ours directly grounded upon the word of the Lord, theirs more than for a shew grounded onely and professedly vpon the doctrines and traditions of men, yea in deed on the doctrines of that man of sinne.
            2. Ours tending wholly to advance the glory of our God, and giving all glory to him alone, excluding all rejoycing in our selves, that he that rejoyceth may rejoyce onely in the Lord; theirs robbing him of his honour, giving it to creatures.
            3. Ours tending onely to magnifie our Lord Iesus Christ and his merit alone, with the all-sufficiency of it, for our salvation, and for whatsoever else wee stand in need of, wee comming onely to our heavenly Father, as it were with his beloved sonne Christ Iesus in our armes, presenting him for us, as all-sufficient, that we may be accepted in and for him, so making him our

alone Saviour, Mediatour, and Intercessour: they come putting many other things in the place of him, and of his alone merit and intercession; as namely, the Virgin Marie and other Saints, with their Merits, yea Crucifixes, Masses, Indulgences, Reliques, and a number of other things, which being in any sort put in the place of Christ Iesus, of his satisfaction or merit, and having his honour given to them in whole or in part, make all 
                  〈◊〉
                devotions to be most abominable.
            4. Ours tending altogether to humble man in regard of any thing in himselfe, and wholly to beat downe all the pride of sinfull man; to make him utterly to deny himselfe, and all con
                  •…
               
               dence in himselfe; thus to make him fit to fall downe with the poore Publican, and with Marie Magdalen at the feet of our Lord and Saviour, to lay fast and lively hold on him, to present him only for us to God his Father; theirs tending to puffe and lift up sinfull man like Lucifer, to cause him to be utterly thrust downe to hell.
            5. Ours teaching and helping us in all things fully to vnderstand, yea to observe and keepe our Baptisme vow and Covenant made with our blessed God, according to his heavenly word; theirs to keepe all in blindnesse and ignorance

of that their Baptisme vow in regard of any true vnderstanding or holy performance of it.
            6. Ours teaching and assisting us to fight manfully under the banner of our Lord Iesus Christ, against sinne, the world and the devill, and so to continue Christs faithfull souldiers and servants, to our lives end, according as we have vowed and bound our selves; theirs to fight Giant-like, or as the Angels of the Dragon, under the banner of Satan and Antichrist, against our Lord and Saviour Christ Iesus, and against all his true Church; to maintaine all their abominable Idolatry and superstition, and all the bloudy and filthy sinnes of Sodome; To fight for all the worldly pompe and tyranny of their Popes and Cardinals, and of all the rest that persecute Christs Church. Thus to continue Sathan and Antichrists faithfull souldiers and servants to their lives end; to fight ever against us, untill they have utterly destroied us or themselves; and all indeed because wee will not falsifie our vowes and sacramentall oathes made to our Lord Iesus Christ, like as they themselves doe.
            7. Our devotions teaching and stirring us up all our daies, to observe

every particular part of our Covenant both for Law and Gospell; theirs not onely to hold all in ignorance of their Covenant, and so altogether in an unpossibilitie to keepe it, when they know it not, and every one of them necessarily liable to the wrath of God; but also in effect teaching the violating of all, both Law and Gospell, thrusting ou
                  •…
                some parts wholly, as the second Commandement in many of their bookes; adding and detracting at the Popes pleasure, and that nothing is to bee taken for Scripture and for Gods Word, but onely as it hath warrant and authority from him; in so much as a Papist dare not beleeve the Trinity from the infallible Testimonie of the written Word of God, without the authority of their Pope.
            8. Ours teaching & helping to walke in the narrow path that onely leadeth to life, prescribed by our Lord and Saviour; theirs drawing from this narrow path into by-paths devised by man▪ and so into the broad way leading to destruction; seeking to kill all, who resolve to obey our Saviour, in labouring to keepe the narrow way, and who will not runne those by-paths, and the broad way with them.
            9. Ours directing & helping us to live the life of faith, living onely by the

word of God, which together with the Spirit can alone give faith; theirs the life of unbeleefe, grounded meerely upon the word of sinfull man, for that they beleeve the word, not for it selfe, but onely so farre as it hath authoritie from the Pope, as was said, which in truth can never give any sound faith. Yea ours directing and assisting to live not onely the life of faith in generall; but of the true iustifying and saving faith, which is wrought onely by the particular applying of Christ and all his promises to our selves, from which particular applying of Christ proceedeth all true confidence, and every part of sanctification; theirs directing to beleeve, but without any such particular application; and onely in generall, and as the wickedest and the very Devils beleeve; for they beleeve there is one God, and quake and tremble. Now that this generall beleefe of theirs, and this implicite faith can never breed the true justifying, sanctifying and saying faith, I appeale to the consciences of all, any more than the most soveraigne plaister can heale, if it be not particularly applied and kept to the sore, or more than meat can nourish and strengthen, if it be not eaten and digested, and even turned into our nature: or yet any more than a graft can grow by the

stocke, if it▪ be not grafted into the stocke by speciall application, conjunction and union to take sap from it.
            10. Ours directing & helping to live the life of true godlinesse, being guided onely by his word and Spirit, which life alone hath all the promises, both for1 Tim. 4▪ 8. this and the other life; theirs for most part, in stead of this true godlinesse so guided by Gods word, directing to live the life of bodily exercises, as Paul cals them; in superstitious penance, fastings, whippings, with other willworships, devotions and workes devised 
                  •…
               eerely by man; which bodily exercisesCol. 2. 23. and devotions, have only a shew of wisdome from men vainely puffed up by their fleshly mindes, no promise at all; but contrarily all the threatnings in Gods booke for adding to his word, and detracting from it, in matter ofDeut. 4. 2. 22. 32. Prov. 30. 6. Apoc. 22. 18. his worship and service, and for rejecting his Commandements, setting up mans in stead thereof; and so placing sinfull man in the roome of our most holy, blessed, and glorious God; the creature above the Creator, yea in truth, Satan above God, like as in all1 Tim. 4. 1. their devillish and lying doctrines.
            11. Ours teaching & working by the practise of them full assurance of Gods favour and love in Iesus Christ, which onely brings with it joy unspeakable

and glorious; theirs teaching and bringing but onely hope, without any ground of true faith, and therefore teaching doubting continually, which when the conscience is awaked, brings the very flashing of hell fire with it.
            So that ours, in the right use of them, are heaven upon earth; theirs, when their consciences shall be awaked, or when they but see what they have done in them all, a very hell upon earth.
            12. Our devotions are in the end the sweetest in the remembrance of them, and of all the time before that ever we have spent in them, since we beleeved in Christ; so as every one of our devotions made in faith, as our Religion directeth, and every moment of time so spent in them, hath a certaine reward; theirs being done without warrant of the word, yea contrary to the word, and therefore superstitiously and sinfully, not onely wanting all such expectation of reward (for who required the best of those things at their hands) but also having an expectation of vengeance, when the conscience beginneth to be a little awaked. So that experience teacheth, that then they are faine to renounce all but Iesus Christ, and so all confidence in these things, and to wish then with Balaam, to die the death of the righteous; toward

which death of the righteous, we are alway going forward; and which life we striving to live, shall be sure to die the death thereof, and our last end to be like to our life.
            13. Our devotions in so many of us as practise them aright, are as our Religion, viz. that pure Religion and undefiled before God even the Father, which Iames speaketh of, directing andIam. 1. 17. helping to visit the fatherlesse and the widow in their adversitie, and namely those of them who are of the houshold of faith, and the members of our Lord Iesus Christ, and to keepe our selves unspotted of the world. So as we practising rightly out devotions, there cannot be a lying tongue found in our mouthes, nor a hand or heart defiled with bloud, but we shall seeke by all meanes to save both soules and bodies of all sorts, even of our wickedest enemies, and the most bloudily-minded against us. Their Devotions contrarily are in truth, as their Religion, to devoure widowes houses, under a pretence of long prayer, and to destroy all the innocent, the fatherlesse & widow, even al who are of the houshold of faith, & the members of Christ, which are indeed the Innocents that save all the rest.Iob 22.
            
            And by these, they make themselves notorious and infamous to all the

world, to be the most polluted with execrable lying and the murder of innocents, of all other religions, that ever were in the world before, as will further appeare after, whereby all their chiefe professours, and namely their bloudy Iesuits have made themselves odious even to all Nations.
            14. Yea and to passe by many other; our Devotions are as our Religion, to make us faithfull and loyall subjects, and not to be so bold, as to have an evill thought in our hearts against him, whom the Lord sets over us, but to be as David, whose heart smit him, for touching but the lap of Sauls garment, and so with that holy servant of God, and with the children of the Captivity, and with Daniel, yea with all the holy Martyrs to be content to endure whatsoever from them, and from all in holy and lawfull authoritie under them, that in our patient sufferings, Kings, Princes and Rulers may see the truth, and what is pleasing to the Lord, and also what they ought to maintaine and doe for their owne salvation, and of their Royall Progenie and Dominions; theirs in all these things, to make all to be contrarily affected, viz. to arme and flesh all to rebellion, and the murdering of Kings and Princes when they can do it cōveniently. After that those their

ghostly fathers have made them to drinke deepe enough of this cup, and to be truly devout in the manner of their devotions: though I hope better things of you, to whom I write, yet it cannot hurt you to be warned.
            15. Moreover for the māner & forme of our devotions; All our devotions which are agreeable to our doctrine, are sent forth from understanding hearts, and so with a holy zeale, inflamed by the spirit of judgement, and theEsa. 4. 4. spirit of burning, mixt with the sweet perfume of Christs merit, and so offered up to our heavenly Father, as they may be most pleasing, comming to him,Apoc. 8. 3. as out of the hand of our Saviour, yea offered also in order without any vaineMatth. 6. babling or idle repetition: Theirs contrarily are for most part and usually without any understanding at all; like as all the devotions of their ignorant sort are, especially those which are in an unknowne tongue; and so without all holy affection. For all holy affections must of necessitie be grounded upon knowledge, without which the heart cannot be good; neither canProv. 19. 2. there be any faith in such, nor anyRom. 4. end. thing but sinne, for whatsoever is not of faith is sinne. And not onely so, but also theirs are full of vaine and idle repetitions in that blinde manner, a matter

directly condemned by our Saviour asMatth. 6. 7. hypocriticall and heathenish, when men thinke to be heard for their much babling. Finally, for that theirs are usually sent forth in a proud opinion of their owne merit and worthinesse to be heard, or as they come out of the hand of some Saint or Angell; to whom therein they give this honour and prerogative, which solely belongs to our Lord and Saviour, viz. of presentingRom. 8. 34. 1 Tim. 2. 5. Apoc. 
                     •…
                  . 3. our praiers and supplications unto his Father alone.
            I might prosecute these comparisons in many other instances, as namely, that our devotions make us still better, the more they are practised by us, and more like to Christ Iesus; theirs as they are theirs properly, as those which I named, make them still and ever worse and worse, and more like to Satan, as he is transformed into an Angell of light; as namely in all their Iesuits, their chiefe professed holy men, being indeed deuils in carnate, and so accounted to all States, and specially for those chiefe works of their lying and murder, which are manifest to all, to be their principall studie: Ours (to repeat it againe, that it may leave the deeper impression in every soule) tending to save all both soules and bodies; theirs to destroy all, not onely us whom they

terme Heretiques, but themselves eternally, and all other whom they seduce by their delusions.
            But to omit all further comparisons, for that it would bee too long, and onely to content our selves with these, and to come to a conclusion of this second point, viz. That these things being so, as every one who professeth Christs Gospell, and holdeth the Religion of our Church, must needs acknowledge, and even the very consciences of our Adversaries will surely doe, when they shall be awaked to answer as before the Lords Tribunall; I now here appeale to every soule, whether are more holy and so better, their devotions or ours.
            And thus I hope this second headConclusion of this second point. of this monstrous destroying and devouring serpent, is utterly smitten off for ever hereafter hurting any of Gods people, who uprightly weigh these things, and to whom it is given to beleeve the Gospell of Christ, and withall to lay to heart that forewarning of Paul concerning the strong delusions2 Thess. 2. 11, 12. of Antichrist, amongst which these are not of the least. And for them to 
                  •…
               rag of the number of them being such, is to boast of their store of poyson and pestilent infection enough to destroy not only themselves, but even all the world

And thus much for the second head.The third part of the delusion: that they spend more time in their devotions than we in ours.
            
            To come therefore to the last head of this deadly Serpent, which is yet more perillous and full of mortall poyson than the former: viz. That they spend more time in their devotions than wee doe in ours, and therefore their religion is better. To cut off this likewise,
            1. I answer, that their devotions being such as those which wee have heard, viz. Idolatrous, superstitious, and against the direction of the Lord, yea against his expresse charge, (like as all theirs are, so farre as they are properly theirs) the more time they spend in them, the more they increase their sinne, and so the wrath of God against themselves, with their owne everlasting miserie, so that to glorie of their many devotions spent in that kinde, is but to glorie in their shame and in their sinne, even in the launcing of their owne soules, in a devotion like to the devotion of Baals Priests.
            2. Thus I answer, that a Papist, being a right Papist, holding their usuall tenets, and following their practice, can never make one prayer which can be acceptable unto God, nor doe any worke which can be pleasing, for thatRh
                     •…
                  m. on Rom. 3. vers. 22. sect. 7. they doe not onely condemne, but also scorne, yea persecute that true justifying

faith, which consists in a particular applying of Christ, and in a peculiar and full assurance of Gods favour and love through Iesus Christ alone; without which faith there can bee no sanctification, for that all our sanctification flowes from our justification, and our justification from this particular saving faith, thus applying Christ to us, and making him ours, and so making us flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones; whereby all our good works flow from him by his Spirit, when wee are so united and incorporated into him thereby.
            Now they denying and scorning that whereby they should bee made good trees, can never bring forth any goodMat. 12. 33. fruit pleasing and acceptable unto the Lord: For first, the tree must be good, and then will the fruit be good, & never before, but scorning that whereby they should be made good trees and living members of Christ, & have his Spirit, they can never do the works of Christ, or bring forth the fruits of the Spirit.
            3. Though they could make never so many prayers, and those good prayers in regard of the matter, yet none of those prayers can ever be accepted; but God threats to hide his face fromEsa. 1. 15. them, because their hearts and hands are full of bloud, all of them, at least

the most devout of them, wishing and seeking the bloud of all heretiques, and so of us whom they principally account to be such amongst all other.
            For their verie hating of us so mortally they are murtherers, and much1 Ioh. 3. 15. more, hating and seeling to root us all out, onely for our love to our God, even for his names sake, and for our cleaving fast to him alone; and therefore cannot have eternall life abiding in them, much lesse can any of their prayers be heard so long as they so remaine.
            4 Moreover, for all their canonicall and set houres, if they be either in such kinde of prayers as theirs are properly; or else if they bee with the neglect of that particular calling wherein everie one of them should walke, to eat their owne bread, and not to bee as Caterpillers and idle bellies, to live of the spoyle of the Church or Commonwealth; & much more, if they be to deceive and to delude poore soules in an opinion of me
                  •…
                it thereby; and most of all in putting their works so done in place of the merit of Christ, as in adding them to the treasure of the Church; though by them they afflict and humble their bodies never so much; yet all these the moe they are, the greater is their sinne and miserie, as

was said before: for who required anyEsa. 1. 12. Psal. 50. 16. of the best of them done in this manner at their hands? And much more any of those which are in themselves idolatrous or superstitious.
            5. For true and holy devotions, and which are pleasing and acceptable unto God, I doubt not constantly to affirme, but that the poorest and weakest true Christian in our Church (which rightly holding the doctrine of our Church, and justified by the bloud of Christ through a lively faith in him, makes conscience of all his wayes, and so useth to pray according to his will, in the name of Christ onely, both spends more time in true holy Devotions, and shall be more accepted with the Lord, yea shall have more power to prevaile with his Majestie for whatsoever hee seekes, and shall also bring more comfort to his owne soule, and finde a farre greater reward from the Lord, than the proudest Pharisaicall Papist in all the world.
            For that the prayers of such an one so made, are the prayers of faith, unto which all the promises are made; and contrarily all the prayers of the Papists, so farre as they are Papists, and so made, can be no other but prayers of unbeleefe, and so can looke to receive nothing, because indeed they are nothing

but sinne, and displeasing to hisIam. 16. 7. Majestie.
            And if the poorest Christian, and hee that spends least time doe this, what shall wee thinke of many thousands others, who have set themselves unfainedly to seeke and walke with God? Yea, what shall we thinke of all those, who knowing their owne sinnes and weaknesses, and the continuall endevours of Satan against them, with their owne necessities, and the necessities of the Churches, are driven to bee instant with the Lord day and night? And chiefly what shall wee judge of all those, who doe at this day truely take to heart the dishonours done unto his glorious Majestie, the oppositions against Christs Gospell, his crowne and dignitie, with the state of his poore Churches and people therein; the rage and furie of Satan and Antichrist? who have therefore set themselves truly to helpe our Lord Iesus in his members to pacifie his wrath, and for the restoring of his captives with the glorie of his Sion.
            Yet have we too just cause to accuseIust complaint against the greatest part of those who prosesse the Gospell. and condemne our selves herein, not onely all our Atheists and prophane sort, but also the multitude generally, that wee suffer our adversaries so farre to condemne the greatest part of us,

who professe the Gospell, that they should labour farre more in their superstitious devotions, to increase their sinne and judgement upon them all (though this have beene alwayes the nature of superstition) than we in our holy and true devotions to increase our owne happinesse, and for the saving of us all. Notwithstanding that whatsoever deadnesse and want is amongst us in this behalfe, it is not through the fault of our Religion, which teacheth and enableth us otherwise when it is rightly knowne and practised, but it is the want of true knowledge, and of a sound and conscionable practice of our Religion.
            Hence it hath beene, and is one principall end whereunto I have bent my studies in these poore labours, the better to awaken us, and to put more life into us, to begin more universally and joyntly, and also more incessantly to importune the Lord herein, being provoked by their ensample.
            That thus we may labour as powerfully and as earnestly with the Lord hereby, for the saving of our selves generally, and of so many of them with us as belong unto his eternall election, as they doe by theirs, to destroy both us and themselves together.
            And thus much also, for cutting offConclusion.
               
the third head of this subtill serpent, which I trust shall thus fall with the rest. And now that this Hydra is so laid inThe further manifestation of that assumption, which fully demonstrated, all must renounce Popery or be professedly of Sathans Religion. Se
                     •…
                   Watch, Part 3. pag. 340. the dust, and all his heads taken utterly from him, for so poysoning and destroying any more; let me once againe come unto the further demonstration of that assumption, concerning which that learned Gentleman (of whom I made mention in the Epistle Dedicatory) professed long agoe, that if it could be proved, viz. that Popery teacheth lying and murdering for the supporting of it, he would utterly renounce his religion and embrace ours. For that this doth in like manner, and as neerely concerne every Papist in the world, as it doth him. That they must needs every one either professe with him, that if it can be proued, they likewise will utterly renounce Popery, and embrace the Gospell, or that they are of that Religion which is of Sathan, and will so remaine, whatsoever the Lord shall manifest to the contrary. Which point, as all may see, doth fitly come in to be yet more plainly demonstrated in this place, and upon this present occasion.
            The Syllogisme whereby I endevouredThe Syllogisme grounded upon our Saviours owne words. to let him see the danger wherein himselfe and all the rest of them who are of that popish Religion doe stand

(because that Religion so farre as it is differing from ours, and properly Popish, holding their chiefe grounds, must needs bee of the devill.) was grounded upon the expresse words of our Saviour to the unbeleeving Iewes, who therefore sought by lies and all devices to kill him, even for the truth, which he declared unto them, as now they do
                  •…
                us all. The words are, Iohn 8. 44. Ye are of your father the Devill, and the lusts of your father will you doe; He hath beene a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth.
            
            This I framed in the plainest manner that I could, for the easier understanding and triall of it, as now I do
                  •…
               ; that every one may be better able to discerne of the truth and weight of it, thus:
            
               That Religion which teacheth lying and murder for the supporting and advancing of it, is of the Devill; But the Religion of the Iesuited Papist it a Religion which teacheth lying and murder for the supporting and advancing of it.
            
            
               Ergo the Religion of the Iesuited Papists is of the Devill.
            
            First the proposition I shewed to be strong from the expresse words of our Saviour, and not possibly to be gainesaied; for 
                  •…
               hat if liers and murderers are of the devill, then that Religion

which teacheth lying and murdering to support and advance it selfe, must needs be so likewise.
            He therefore being pressed with the Assumption, denied it, onely by distinguishing, that howsoever some of them had practised so, yet it was not their doctrine, and that if it could be proved to be their doctrine, he would utterly renounce his Religion, and ioyne himselfe againe to us.
            This I undertooke to prove unto him: but living some miles dist
                  •…
               nt from him, and having my calling to follow, which I was necessarily to attend; the Lord our faithfull and most gratious Father, seeing my unfained desire for his reclaiming and salvation, undertooke for me the proving of it, in such a manner, as whereby to give satisfaction for the truth of it to all the world, and for ever to stop his mouth, and the mouthes of all our adversaries, even of every one affected to that Popish Religion, and that two waies.
            First, this conference of ours, andHow the Lord manifested the truth of this Assumption, that this is their doctrine. so my promise being but a little before the powder Treason, it proved it selfe, or rather, his heavenly Majestie manifested it by themselves, leaving them up to themselves in that very powder Treason, wherein there was for the supporting and advancing of their Religion,

first such a murder intended as the world before that day never heard of.
            And secondly, a lie as great as it, devised not only to cover that bloudy fact, for the present; but by it to have destroyed all the rest, who had escaped that blow, even all truly professing Christs Gospell; in all countreys of the earth, under the name of Puritans; for that they had commited such a fact, viz. That the Puritanes had blowen up the Parlament house: like as when it was discovered, they gave it forth, that the Puritans had intended it. That which should have beene their owne most detestable act, they father vpon the people of the Lord, whom they would have butchered by it, and blowne up for ever.
            Now this whole act of this devillish and deadly preparation, we know, was proved to be done by the advice of Father Garn
                     •…
                  , and other their superiours. And therefore it being their doctrine, that they are to obey their Superiours and Ghostly Fathers, chiefly in all things which concerne the promoting of the Catholike cause▪ and therein to be ever ready to adventure their lives; I appeale to the conscience of this Gentleman, and the consciences of them and you all, whether it bee not

their doctrine by necessary consequence.
            2. His heavenly Majestie & goodnesse declared it thus further for me soone after, upon the same occasion of the Powder-treason; in causing Now L. 
                     •…
                  . of Lic
                     •…
                  field. Mr. Doctor Morton (a man meet for his learning and knowledge of their workes) to proue it against them, in his booke called, An exact discouerie of Romish doctrine in the case of conspiracie and rebellion, written by direction from our Superiours; together with his Defence thereof in his Encounter against Parsons. In which he doth manifest this to be their plaine and direct doctrine, setting downe their places out of sundry of their chiefe Authors.
            3. The Lord hath moreover caused it to be published not to our Nation alone, but as it were to the whole world, in that booke which is called, Revelatio Cons
                     •…
                  iorum qu
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Synod
                     •…
                   Tridentinae 
                     •…
                  ant inita, & in hunc usqu
                     •…
                   diem continuata: viz. I he revealing of Popish conspiracies, betweene the Pope, the Emperour, and other Popish Princes and States of the Christian world from the beginning of the Councell of Trent untill this day, for the utter rooting out of the Gospell of Christ, and destroying the professors thereof, either by fraud under

pretence of peace, or other leagues, or by open hostilitie and cruelty, whensoever their time and opportunitie serves; which booke hath sundry of the Popes Buls annexed to it to the same purpose. And likewise the Lord hath caused it to be thus divulged by sundry other bookes and meanes. But this I have already set downe in thePart 3. c. 11. p. 340, 341. third part of this Watch, and namely in the Idolatry of Iudah hastning the Captivitie; which matter (if ever heretofore) concernes our whole Nation, and even all the Churches seriously to lay to heart.
            Now this one very fact of their
                  •…
                alone, might have beene fully sufficient to have caused all of them to have acknowledged the truth of that Assumption; and thereupon to have utterly renounced Popery, and embraced the Gospell againe; if God had beene so pleased to have opened their eyes, o
                  •…
                touched their hearts to have considered of it as in his presence, and much more those mentioned bookes, and many such like discoveries.
            But sith that (notwithstanding all manner of convictions by such notorious practises formerly, such manifestations by writings, and even from their owne bookes) most of them in stead of renouncing Popery, and joyning

to us againe, are much more obstinate; and the number of them is increased, and that they doe daily grow in their induration against all the Lords most gracious warnings of them; and that all the Iesuits and Iesuited, doo set themselves as Pharaoh and Egypt, to pursue all his Israel at this once, into the very heart of the sea; and also seeing that all their simpler sort are so farre inchanted by their Iannes and Ia
                     •…
                  bres, those their Iesuits and other Seminarie Priests through their illusions, and hopes at length to prevaile, at least by these their practises of equivocations and murders, I have thought it my dutie yet once againe to manifest here still further the evidence of this Assumption, viz. That Popery practiseth and teacheth lying and murder to support and advance it selfe; and therefore is undoubtedly of the Devill.
            Who can tell if yet at length our blessed God wil not be pleased to awake that Honourable Ladie, and that devoted Gentleman, with others of them, (which I beg of his sacred Majestie even upon my knees) to consider better of their estate and courses, and get themselves out of the power and paw of Satan. At least my certaine hope in the Lord is, that it may bee a meanes to helpe to keepe many others

from ever so comming under Satans banner:
            And here I cannot but againe wonderThe Lord himselfe also daily more and more manifesting the truth of it, to leave all the obstinate more without excuse. at the goodnesse of our God, and of his speciall providence answering for me, and performing also my poore desire herein likewise, above all that I could ever expect, at this verie instant of time, now that this my hearts desire towards them, and our prayers to God for them, are to come into the presse, and into the publique view of all, and but even as it were immediately before. Which thing I cannot no
                  •…
                dare otherwise expound, but because hee would have all sorts to take notice of his love and care for us, and for all that are his people, to warne and save us all; and also of his infinite mercie, even to them, if any warning may yet serve to prevaile with them: or else of his most just vengeance, if they will suffer themselves still to be so wilfully blinded, and carried against him, his truth and servants in such a furious rage to their owne certaine perdition, and will not yet turne and betake themselves unto the colours of our Lord Iesus Christ.
            First, hee hath manifested it anew, in discovering againe, (even as it were to all the world) the wickednesse of

that Religion in this behalfe, in causing our whole nation, not onely to take more full and certaine notice of their dealing, and to bee enforced to seeke by all meanes to prevent the mischiefe and danger by it; but also all the Churches, even all the earth, to see how by delayes and faire pretences (which have indeed beene nothing, but meere untruths and guls, to speake plainly of them) they have devoured so great a part, and are readie presently to swallow up all, under pretences of mariages, of more strong leagues, and more firme peace, according to their ancient devices and practices, & agreeably to their holy Councels at Trent, in the booke mentioned before: so as even all the world rings and cries out of it.
            2. In the new French practice of theSe
                     •…
                   the book intituled, An admirable discoverie of an horrible attempt; standerously 
                     •…
                  hered upon them of Rochell. Iesuites, confirmed both in print, and also by letters to sundrie Merchants from men of credit, whereby they sought to make our Religion odious to Kings, Princes, and States, for treasonable plots: and so to set them all to band themselves to root it and us utterly out of the earth, and specially to make France once againe to flow with Christian bloud; for that such as they are, have not yet drunke bloud

enough, though all their Iesuited sort are made drunke alreadie, with the bloud of the Saints, and Martyrs of Iesus.
            3. By causing at this time their Art of equivocating and lying to come to light, and to bee published to the view of all sorts amongst us. How these Iesuites have beaten their braines, and even gone beyond Satan himselfe, in devising, maintaining, and practising this devillish Art, which wee may well call their new Blacke Art, for which I referre all to Mr. Masons booke of The new Art of lying, covered by Iesuites under the vaile of Equivocation. That all may see and bee for ever fully satisfied, that these are their doctrines, & the verie chiefest of them, in the refining and perfecting whereof, they bestow most paines.
            4. By that late and notable DiscoverieSee Foot out of the Snare, pag. 25. out of their owne bookes, by Mr. Gee, who was one of them; wherein he hath set downe such impious tricks and devices of their Priests and Iesuites, that (as hee there saith) all may justly hoot at them, for most abominable impostors and liars. The reading but of some of which will manifestly cleere whatsoever I have spoken in this behalfe, and this Assumption.

This likewise comming forth in Gods speciall providence at this verie instant, for the more full conviction of all, or leaving all more without excuse, and to stop everie mouth that shall plead for them.
            Yet to passe over all these, and this also; that all sorts doe know, that their Iesuites and Confessours are the chiefe contrivers and abettours of all their chiefe stratagems, and that nothing is done without them. And albeit wee are nothing to regard words, when their deeds, according to their Doctrines and Constitutions, are apparent to all the world. And that although they may delude little children, by affirming that these are not their doctrines (if any dare still deny it against the witnesse of his owne heart) yet men, having their braines in their heads, can never bee so besotted, unlesse they will wilfully joyne hands with them, or suffer their eyes utterly to be put out.
            For that which they say; That they are not their Doctrines, unlesse wee can shew them out of the Councell of Trent, or some of their chiefe Councels; can any man imagine, that the Councels would openly professe them to proclaime to all the world, that they

and their Religion is of Satan? or can wee thinke or imagine, that so many of their Iesuites should publish them unto the world, unlesse they were the advice of their Popes, and indeed their Doctrine.
            But to passe all these things over,All their Doctrines lies in hypocrisic. and to leave them to their further consideration, to worke better upon their consciences: what can they yet, or any other say to their Doctrines, which the Holy Ghost cals, Lies
               2 Tim. 4. 2. 
               through hypocrisie, devised to devoure us all?
            Such as this here discovered, That they have moe holy devotions than we, &c.
            And even for all their Doctrines joyntly to leave it to the consciences of all whether all of those wherein they differ from us, and for which they so contend, bee not Doctrines meerely devised to please the corrupt nature of man; to hold up that Hierarchie of the Pope, and tyrannie of that Sea of Rome, viz. of their Pope, Cardinals, Abbots, and the rest: And also for their bellies; and that they may keepe all the world in slaverie, and to hide their wickednesse. And more specially what their Doctrines are concerning Purgatorie, Masses, Indulgences, Pardons, even for the

time to come; Miracles done by this Saint and that, and by this Relique and that: and concerning their holy Reliques themselves, and so all their doctrines of Equivocation, mentall Reservation, and the like, whether they be not all (to speake as the thing is) notorious lies to keepe the poore people in ignorance, & in their blinde devotions and slavery to them; yea to muzzle them in their murdering zeale against the true Church. Which if it be so, then the Assumption is most manifest to all the world, even to children, and almost to sucking babes: That Popery teacheth lying and murder, or that which tends thereunto, viz. to the destroying of all either soules, or bodies, or both.
            
            Now for the truth of all these things,Appeale for the truth of the Assumption. I appeale first to the Lord Iesus, the Iudge of all, to iudge betweene us; and that I have written according to the perswasion of my heart, grounded upon the word of the Lord, and upon their writings and dealings.
            
               2. I appeale to the sacred Scriptures, by which we and they and all our doctrines must be judged.
               3. To the universall consent of all the true Church of Christ.
               4. To every one who professeth the

Gospell according to the doctrine of our Church, and our good lawes.
               5. To their owne hearts and consciences, I meane of all the learneder, and cunninger sort of them, and to the consciences of all, when they shall be so awaked, as to thinke that they are to appeare before Iesus Christ to give an account.
            
            For particular proofes of these and other disputes, I leave them to the Treatises mentioned before, and also to the more learned, and them who have better leysure. It may be sufficient for me to have made them manifest to all who professe Christs Gospell, and who judge indifferently, and to leave them and their consciences thus convinced unto the Lords Iudgement fea
                  •…
               .Appeale for the evidence of sundrie Consectaries.
            
            And now these things being so, I appeale againe to their consciences, and the consciences of all the world, concerning the evidence and necessitie of these Consectaries.
            1. Whether the Assumption being true, that Religion of theirs be not of the Devill, by our Saviours owne reason, and therefore that all of them must either renounce, and even abjure it, or else professe themselves to be of Satans Religion, to maintaine it, and

to fight for him against our Lord Iesus Christ, and that they will still doe it.
            2. Whether all sorts are not bound to seeke to save themselves from that lying and murdering Religion, and to use all warrantable and holy means, both to reclaime all from it, to the end to save them, both soules and bodies, and also to deliver all the Churches and people of the Lord, from the danger of being suddenly surprized, and murdered thereby; and so far as God inables them any way, to take away all the dishonour and provocations of his sacred Majestie, which may come thereby, as by all other such hainous sinnes. This I humbly submit to the judgement of all; seeing whosoever is not with ourLuk. 11. 23. Saviour is against him, and that whosoever saves not, destroyes. That the Magistrates and all in authoritie are the keepers of both the Tables, each according to his place: and for that the bloud of all must be required at the Pastors and Watchmens ha
                  •…
               ds,Ezek. 33. 7, 8. according to the charge committed to every one of them, if they be not faithfull in their severall places designed to them by the Lord.
            
               I could wish them & all other of the simpler sort to read such little treatises as shew how Popery is against the main groūds of Religion, and first principles of the Catechisme; as namely a little booke called a pill to purge out Popery, with the shifts of the Iesuits by Master MVLL
                     •…
                  N and the like. Request to all opponents. Wherefore I intreat them and all

others seriously to thinke hereof, as in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ, before whom I have written, in duty to his heavenly maiesty, for maintaining his glory, and holding up the scepter of our Lord Iesus, and in love and duty to all sorts, chiefly to all in high place, for the saving of all, or to leave the obstinate utterly without excuse.
            And thus much also for the proofe of the Assumption, and the shutting up of this inclosed Epistle.
            Unto which, if this Gentleman, or any one for that Honourable Ladie, will offer to reply, let me but crave this of him, whosoever he be, which equitie and wisdome will require.
            1. First, to doe it in love and with good advice, as in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ, without all shifts or devices against the light of his conscience, even as I have endevoured, and onely for the finding out and maintaining the truth, whereunto (God willing) I shall ever yeeld, if any one in any thing shall rightly shew mee my error, and I shall moreover acknowledge my oversight.
            2. And secondly, let me request of him, that hee will bethinke himselfe wisely, for what he pleades, and also

for whom, whether he doe it not even for Satan, and for the upholding of his kingdome by his chiefe workes of lying and murder; and also to consider against whom he doth it, whether it be not against our Lord Iesus Christ, and against all his Saints and people: and withall to thinke, how hard it is for him to kicke against the prickes, and that against the light shining clearely in his heart. And yetActs 9, 5. more also, to ponder wisely what it is to give Satan advantage, but by one lie only wilfully maintained, and especially such a lie, as tends but to the murdering of one soule. And how much more then, when it is to maintaine the Art of lying devised by and for the devill himselfe; to hold up his kingdome, and to overthrow the kingdome of Christ, and for the deceiving and destroying of innumerable soules, even of all bewitched by them; and tending to the destroying of all the people of the Lord, and the rooting them out of the earth. How dreadfull it will be to stand before Christ, to give answer but for the bloud of one soule alone; when Abels bloud, the bloud but even of his body alone, cries so loud from the earth, and makes Cain such a runnagate

all his daies, to be in hell whilst he was yet here in the earth; yea before hee came into that place of torment designed for him and for all other wicked men, and chiefly for all liers and murderers, to bee tormented there for ever.
            4. And finally, let mee wish him for his credit (if he respect nothing else) to answer all these books which I have mentioned, as well for the cause of the learned as the vnlearned, because they are (as it were sent of God) to manifest the truth hereof; and then I have no doubt, but he our most blessed and onely wise God, will both reply and answer for us still, and so maintaine his owne cause, as to put them all to silence, at least in the pit which they are digging for us, and that for evermore.
            Thus have I through the good hand of my God, made way to the satisfying of the holy desires of those worthy Personages, which wish so Honourably and Christianly unto you, & that we may match our chiefe Adversaries in our devotions; although we doe already (as all may plainly see) goe so far beyond them in this kinde; and also to the end that you who meane plainly, and have not

your hearts yet tainted with their bloud-thirstie desires, & all others, may perceive, how you have been and are deluded, and even inchanted in every one of these respects: by which scale, all may measure the rest of their lying doctrines and devices. And withall I hope that I have made it evident to the consciences of all, that all sorts must renounce Popery, and embrace the Gospell; or else professe themselves to be of their father the Devill, and that they will fight against Christ. To try if the Lord may be pleased yet to shew them mercy, to come out of the snares of Satan, either by the cleere manifestation of these delusions of his, or by the praiers and teares of many of his people, crying jointly for all, to hale andSee Peters enlargement, concerning the power of faithfull praier. pull them out of Egypt and Sodome, for what are not the joint praiers of Gods people able to doe?
            Now these things being so, this delusion so laid open, and the Assumption so plainly proved and demonstrated to the convincing of everie of your consciences, as I am fully perswaded before the Lord, give me leave in tender commiseration to turne my speech unto you all, who dare still stand out against his Majestie.
            
               Oh bethinke your selves in time, what it is to fight against the light of your owne hearts! what will follow the wounded conscience, when the Lord shall wake it and call it to an account, which hee will certainly doe, either in this life, or so soone as ever you shall depart hence. Remember the cases of Cain, Saul, Iudas, for fighting so desperately against the light, and so standing forth against the Lord and his most gracious offer of mercie.
            Oh bethinke your selves in time of his terrible and most glorious Majestie, against whom you have so fearefully sinned, as to provoke him not onely against your selves, but against this whole Nation, even against us all, for your causes, in departing from him and his holy Religion, to a Religion of such abominations, and so manifestly convicted and declared to be of Satan his sworne enemie!
            Remember the dreadfulnesse of his wrath, so declared in the irrevocable punishment of the Angels that so fell from him, of Adam, the old world, Sodome; and that which shall be so fearefully2 Thess. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. revealed when Christ shall come with thousand thousands of glorious Angels, in flaming fire, to render vengeance to all who know him not, and

who will not yeeld obedience to his heavenly Gospell, and much more to all his obstinate enemies.
            Consider well how your sinne is increased not onely being committed so contrarily to your Baptisme vow, but also by all the evictions of the abominations of that idolatrous, lying, and murdering Religion, especially in this Nation, since the time of the first casting it forth so publikely by Parlament, and even untill this verie day, and now last of all by this Discoverie of this forged delusion, wherein so many others of yours like unto it are included.
            Thinke what it is, not onely to bee barred out of Heaven, deprived utterly of all the joyes thereof, but moreover to be thrust into hell, to abide the torment thereof with Satan and his Angels for ever and ever: which must needs come upon you, if that Religion of Rome bee such, and have such supporters, as you have or may see set before your faces.
            If you will not reade this, but bee as the deafe adder stopping your eares, and in stead of Satan hiding away and blinding your owne eyes, yet I hope you have each of you some faithfull friends, who (beleeving the Gospell▪ and perswaded of your delusions as I am)

will play the parts of faithfull Physitians, & true loving friends towards such as are indangered by extreme distempers in burning fevers or the like, or in extreme perill of perishing by water or fire, or any way else; viz. which will make these things knowne unto you, & urge them upon you for your preservation and recoverie, so to declare their uttermost love unto you, to the end to convert you, and bring you to us againe, and to our Lord Iesus Christ, and so save you from hell: though for the present they adventure your displeasure, as I also must.
            Howsoever, this shall bee my rejoycing and my witnesse for me before the Lord, for my dutie towards his heavenly Majestie, and towards his Vice-Gerent our royall Soveraigne, & of my love and dutie towards this Church and Nation, and even you all in this behalfe. For which, entreating him in his rich mercie to make it effectuall, I commit it and you to his Grace, which works above all that wee can conceive, and shall rest ever striving with you,
            
               I. B.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO EVERIE TRVE CHRISTIAN Soule, rightly taking to heart the estate of Christs poore Churches and dispersed Flocke.
            
               CHristian Reader, if thou take to heart the dishonours done unto our most holy God, the trampling vnder foot the Gospell and Scepter of our Lord Iesus Christ in so many parts of his Church, the miserable estate of his people and servants professing his name, under the slaverie and tyrannie of Antichrist; or the wofull condition of the remainder of Gods elect not yet called & gathered forth, but remainining under the power of Satan; or if thou regard but the saving of thine owne soule, afford some assistance to him and his poore people, especially now that hee so graciously cals upon thee, and offers thee so much direction

and helpe thereunto, even in these meditations and prayers b
                  •…
               sides many others.
            Consider of them well; and so farre as thou findest him calling on thee, to put them in practice, set thy selfe forthwith to helpe in this blessed worke. If any of them, either meditations or prayers, seeme unto thee weake, as they must needs be, having beene written for most part when many others slept; and that because of the industrie of Satan and his instruments, that they might not bee any hinderance unto my calling, yet are they such as thy Christ expects at thy hands, so far as they are soundly grounded upon his sacred truth, and agreeable to his heavenly will. Give him thy heart and best affections, and better the forme in th
                  •…
               ne owne devotion, remembring ever for whom they are chiefly intended, viz to helpe the weaker sort, which are not able to pray of themselves, according to th
                  •…
               se occasions.
            If they seeme over long for thy occasions, yet are they so divided, as thou mayest leave off and begin againe wheresoever thou pleasest, onely fitting some generall beginnings and ends of the prayers, according to the other, or according to thine owne holy meditation.
            I
                  •…
                this offend thee, that they are s
                  •…
               t downe in a booke, remember the publique prayers, that in all ages have beene so in the Church, and yet most pleasing and available. Let the consideration of so many of thine owne nation, yea so many of the chiefe thereof,

so fearefully seduced, and even bewitched by Iesuites, and other Seminarie Priests, and everie day more and more falling away, to the indangering not onely of themselves, but of the whole Land continually, provoke thee to this dutie: and especially seeing they professe themselves to have beene drawne to that Romish Religion hereby chiefly; That they in their Church have moe devotions, and spend more time therein, than we in ours.
            
            Let this move thee to take some pitie of them, and to helpe by thy prayers, to pull them out of the fire of Gods vengeance, and likewise to keepe others from falling from him. Let their blinde zeale and superstitious devotions (which condemnes the coldnes and securitie of the greatest part of those, who professing Christs Gospell, yet pray so litt
                  •…
               e, and which is one principall cause of their stumbling, I speake upon certaine knowledge, both concerning high and low, noble and mean
                  •…
               ) let this, I say, provoke thee to more devotion in holy meditations and instant prayers, according to the word and will of thy God, and enforce thee hereunto, to spend daily some part of it, as God gives thee more 
                  •…
               it opportunitie; or as thou hast more neglected these. They (as is said) use some devotions daily to pull soules out of Purgatorie; be thou instant for them, to pull them from the power of Satan to Christ.
            Begin thus to redeeme thy time, so badly

mis-spent, and that so long, untill thou shalt see Gods glory recovered, the scepter of his Christ set up againe in all places whence it is removed; with the deliverie of thy brethren in all forraine part
                  •…
               ; and the dangers past which are so threatned towards all the Churches, and namely our ne
                  •…
               
               rest and faithfull neighbours, and even towards thy selfe. Suffer not these blinded soules to rise up in judgement against thee, that they have spent more time and paines in their devotion to serve Satan and Antichrist, and to hold up his throne, to their endlesse perdition; than thou to serve our Lord Iesus, to the saving thine owne soule, and the lives of all his people.
            If thou wouldst be ready to spend thy goods, and to adventure thy life for the glory of thy God, for thy Christ, and his Church, at his command; yea if thou wouldest bestow any labour or cost, to save thy native Countrey or Countreymen being in danger, and much more the Lords Anointed, with our Royall Prince, and that most illustrious Prince and Princesse Palatine, all of whom haue shewed so much love to Christs Gospell, and if thy heart be truly affected to that sweet and happy progen
                  •…
               , then be ready to helpe them all by thy prayers: especially sith thou maiest doe this without any cost or losse, and hast helpe offered from his Majestie, and the same also, not onely put into thy hands, but, as

it were, into thy mouth; and withall thy hands holden up by him to doe it. Doe it therefore as well as thou caust, if thou regard but thine owne case, either of soule or bodie, thy present or eternall estate.
            I have purposely in many of the praiers, followed the order in the first part of this Watch, which I have taken for a good direction, both for that it hath beene so oft tried by the learned to be according to the true Rule of Life, and for that the places for proofes are there quoted to auoid further labour: and that thou and all the weaker sort may learne together both to watch and pray for your selves and all the people of the Lord, and so be sure to prevaile with his heavenly Majestie.
            If thou shalt finde or suspect any errour, wherein thou darest not joyne, signifie it as in love and in the feare of the Lord; and I shall (as I have ever bound my selfe) be most ready either to give thee satisfaction, or to reforme it; and yet in the meane time proceed in the rest joyntly with thy brethren.
            Let us all joyne as being of one heart and soule, wherein we all agree, crying unto our heavenly Father, compassing him about at his feet for our selves and all his deare children, and he will surely heare our cries, and in his due time reveale every difference unto us, and wherein the errour lieth.
            I tie thee not to daies nor houres, but as thou observest the Lord offering thee fittest

opportunities, and as he shall move thee thereto: though because of Satans subtlety, and the falsenesse and corruption of our owne hearts, we shall finde by experience, that all the bonds whereby we can binde our selves to holy duties, especially of this nature and importance, are farre too little, so we
                  •…
                doe it in an holy wisdome and wise consideration, that we bring not a snare upon our selves.
            Wonder not that I so oft go
                  •…
                over that heavenly prayer of our Saviours, and so strictly tie my selfe unto it, for that I finde it the wisdome of God, and the power of God, ministring still now and most heavenly matter even to this our present purpose; and also am fully assured that all the true Churches & people of the Lord both do & shall so finde it, and that more & more, as we more labour according to it; having also such sure directions and such undoubted promises; every part and pecce of it containing promises to the prayer of faith, and to every true beleeving soule. Whereby we may have a certaine assurance from our Lord Iesus Christ the author of it, that he will accompanie it to every soule (that shall be so prepared, and so use it as be hath directed) with the power of his owne spirit, and be wonderfull in granting all things which we so beg according to his heavenly will, above all that any heart can conceive.
            Remember also for thy better incouragement, how every prayer herein tends to the

appeasing of the Lords heavy indignation, which hath beene thus far declared against his people: and this by our joynt seeking to give him his glory in helping to reclaime and reduce us all to the obedience of his blessed Covenant of Grace, wherein is our life, and thereby to the deliver
                  •…
               e and saving of all the Churches, the eternall salvation of all belonging to that his election of grace, be they now Atheists, Papists, wicked, profane, or whatsoever, and so to prepare the way in the universall repentance of the Churches to the comming of the new Hierusalem, and the eternall glory of Sion. So that every one of us striving to pray faithfully and fervently, and to put in practise whatsoever we thus pray for; so farre as it concernes us, shall in every prayer and petition be true helpers unto our Lord Iesus and his poore Church; and for every such a service, even every houre so spent, receive our pay, and in the end for all a rich and most full reward.
            Let every prayer be a
                  •…
                the Sunne, beginning at thy selfe in thy meditations, but diffusing and spreading the b
                  •…
               ames into all the Churches, chiefly to those which stand in most need thereof, and to every one of Gods chosen in all the world, so far as he shall inable thee and it concerneth them, and from them ever reflecting to thy selfe againe.
            Thou hast heard the sound of the cruell warres abroad, the late prevailing of the enemie, the overthrow of the Churches, the

new threatnings of those bloudy intendments against all the rest, and the increase of their rage daily. In these poore helps, and the like, the Lord offereth thee weapons, and directs thee so to use them, that thou maist helpe them in the remotest parts; calls upon thee loud to come and helpe them, assures thee of a blessed victorie in the end, that then thou and all the true Church and people of the Lord shall sing the songs of Miriam and Deborah, and of the 24. Elders, and triumph with Christ eternally, when all who have refused to helpe, shall weepe and waile for evermore.
            Thus intreating that the Lord may at length awake thee and all his people, that we may each give up a happy account, and escape the dreadfull doome and sentence, for neglecting his glory, kingdome, and people, and may hence forward carefully use all the meanes which his goodnesse affords unto us for our present and eternall happinesse, I commend thee to his grace, and rest
            
               Thy fellow-souldier in Christ thus striving with and for thee, I. B.
            
         
         
            
            The Contents in generall.
            1. AN Epistle to all the plaine and simple hearted people of our land seduced by Popery, or in danger thereof.
            2. A preparation to instant prayer, according to the necessity of the times, and the present estate of Gods poore Church.
            3. The prayer it selfe, divided into severall parts, according to the severall branches of that heavenly patterne which our blessed Saviour hath set before us all to follow; containing in it the principall part's of the Catechisme, and how to make right use of all, specially for these times; and so in praying, better to imprint and remember the whole.
            4. A continuall quickning and putting new life into our prayers, that we may never be weary, nor ever give the Lord over, untill we have prevailed with his heavenly Maiesty.
            
               In the preparative this is ever to be had in fresh memory.
            
            That all who are to helpe in this worke, are to labour to bring their hearts to a due consideration of all these things following, and to have a right feeling and practise of them, so farre as they concerne us.
            
               1. How the Lord hath bene wont to looke for some to helpe him, in all the great deliverances

and distresses of his Church: and how he expects the seruice of all his at this day.
               2. What necessity there is of servent prayer at this time, aboue all former times: in what neede the whole Church, and every particular member stands of our prayers: what a right feeling of the miseries and estates of our poore brethren each of us ought to have; and how we ought to seeke to helpe them herein to the uttermost of our power.
               3. What ones wee must be, and how qualified in all things, if wee looke ever to be heard in our prayers for the Churches, and hope to have our persons accepted.
               4. How our prayers must be framed, that they likewise may be sure to be pleasing and availeable with the Lord.
               5. What assurance we may have of the power of our prayers, so sent forth to prevaile with our God, and to overcome.
               6. How without these things, and much more if we be of contrary minds, and dispositions; our prayers are turned into sinne; and do helpe to kindle the wrath, and to draw downe the vengeance of the Lord more speedily and fiercely upon all.
               7. That every one must strive, to be of the

number of them, who are helpers in this worke or perish, and how graciously the Lord cals every one of us hereunto.
               8. Particular prayers for helping the Churches, framed according to our Saviours direction: and the present necessity of all.
            
            1 A Prayer that we may bee made fit and accepted into this service of prayer for the Churches.
            2 A prayer for increase of love to all Gods Children, and that we may keepe a continuall fresh remembrance & feeling of the miseries of all our distressed Brethren, without which we cannot pray for them as we ought.
            3 A prayer that we may know God to bee our gracious Father in Christ, and to grow in the assurance thereof daily, without which we cannot prevaile with him.
            4 A prayer that wee may not deceyve our selves in our imagination, that we are Gods children (as most do) & so remaine unfit for this service.
            5 A prayer that we may finde in us the particular marks of Gods children, for our

further assurance and boldnesse in prayer.
            6 A praier for knowledge and right use of the meanes, whereby we may be made Gods children, & so grow up in our confidence and power in prayer thereby.
            7 A prayer, that al may understand how deare Gods children are to him, that they may be to us likewise, and we therby able to pray more earnestly for them.
            8 A prayer, that we may be able to lift up our eyes to our heavenly Father, looking beyond all earthly meanes, in all the troubles and perils of the Church, without which we cannot pray as we ought.
            9 A thankes giving for the deliverie of the Churches from Egypt and Babylon, with an earnest prayer for the full accomplishment thereof, and that we may never looke backe to them againe, to provoke the Lord against us by the same.
            10 A prayer, that in token of our thankfulnesse for our deliverance, wee may all seeke to give him his glory in our unfeigned repentance, and walking conscionably in all his holy Commandements.
            11 A prayer that we may all give God the glory of his inward worship, according

to the first Commandement, to helpe to pacify his Majesty toward ye Churches.
            11 A prayer to bee able to discerne the sin of the Churches, whereby he is di
                  •…
               onored & provoked even by the transgression of the first Commandement.
            12 A humble confession of the sinnes of the Churches; and an acknowledgement of Gods righteous proceeding agaynst them, for our unthankfulnesse and transgression of his lawe
                  •…
               ; and for that though we have heard of the miseries of our Brethren, we have not beene humbled, nor made our supplications for them as vvee ought, according to Nehemiah.
            
            13 A humble confession of the sinne of our Land, so polluted by all the Popish sort, rejecting the Lord, and setting up the Pope of Rome, with his idolatry & superstition, in place of him, and his pure worship, to provoke his Majesty against us.
            14 A prayer for all the simple-hearted, seduced by the Iesuites, and other Seminary Priests, that they may see how they have bin deluded, to helpe thereby, to plucke them from sathan, and bring them to our Lord Iesus Christ.
            
               15 A humble Thankesgiving for our dread Soveraigne, with our gracious Prince and Princesse, and all the Royall Progeny; and for all our deliverances and preservations by them: with an earnes
                  •…
                Prayer, that our sinnes being forgiven, they may bee each in their times and places, the happiest heads of the most blessed people, that ever haue beene in the world before.
            16 A humble Thankesgiving, that God hath thus farre heard our prayers; with an earnest supplication, that he may goe on to perfect his worke; and that as we have made entrance into this service, so we may all proceede, vntill we shall see the ful deliverance of all his Churches, the new Ierusa
                  •…
               em, and the eternall glory of his Sion.
            
               The other Prayers, and that which (God willing) is to succeede, see in the end of all, after the Table of the particular Contents.
            
         
         
            
            Rules to be observed in the use of all the Meditations and Prayers.
            REmember throughout to expect not excellencie of words, but the power of God. Remember Da
                  
                     •…
                  
                Sling, and I
                     •…
                  suahs Trumpets of Rammes horne. Thine eye being on thy Booke, let the eye of thy soule be at thy Christ, making intercession at his Fathers right hand; labouring to feele all in thy heart, and especially to have a right sense of the necessities of all for whom thou prayest, and so praying in Faith thou shalt prevayle.
         
         
            Rules to helpe to keepe us from ever declining from the Lord, and from all delusions, cheefely by Popery.
            1 LAbour to walke with thy God, as Enech, making conscience of all thy wayes, specially of thy particular calling, and every holy dutie, in the due time; fearing all occasions of evill, watching and taking forthwith, all occasions of good▪
            
            2 Pray as he hath directed thee, respecting ever his glory and kingdome, and the generall state of his Church, before thine owne particular.
            3 Strive to live under the best meanes, and vvith the best company which GOD shall vouchsafe thee.
            4 Remember ever those strong delusions of Poperie, sent in Gods iustice for contempt of the Gospell,

in not receyving the love of his trueth, mentioned in the Epistle to the poore seduced people, and withall keepe ever in minde those principall supporters and pillars of Popery, (viz) lying and 
                  •…
               irther, the cheefe workes of Sathan, which shew that that Relig
                  •…
               on is of him likewise.
            5 Consider well, how Popery overthrowes many of the cheefe Principles of the Catechisme. For this
            
               See a Pill to purge out Poperie.
            
            6 Be affraid of conferring with the Serpent, viz. inticers to Popery, or any evill, & of reasoning with temptations.
            7 In all such doubts, first conserre with God, by holy Meditation and Prayer, as D
                     •…
                  niel & his compaaions, after, with thy faithfull Minister, or some of the worthiest servants of God, so farre as God offers thee any opportunity.
            8 Strive to reioyce in the Lord alway▪ and in thy happy estate through Christ▪ Pray continually, by lifting up thy heart through him. In all things give thankes whatsoever come to passe. So thou shalt see the event happy, and thy selfe ever to prevay
                  •…
               e vvith God, and more then a Conqueror.
         
         
            
            ¶ Places of Scripture to be ever in our hearts, to quicken us and stirre up in us the power of prayer.
            THe eyes of the Lord are uponPsal. 34. 15. the Righteous, and his eares [are open] unto their cry.
            Thou wilt prepare their hart:Psal. 10, 17. thou wilt cause thine eare to heare.
            To iudge of the fatherlesse and18. oppressed, that 
                  •…
               the man of the earth may no more oppresse.
            Yea, before they call, I willEsay 65, 24. answer: And whiles they speake, I will heare.
            But let him aske in Faith,Iames 1, 6. nothing wavering.
            The effectuall servent prayerIames 5, 16. of a righteous man avayleth much.
            Elias was a man subiect to17.
               
the like passions as we are▪ and hee prayed earnestly that it might not raine, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three yeares and six moneths.
            And he prayed again, and the1
                     •…
                  . heaven gave raine, and the earth brought forth her fruite.
            
               [Concerning him when he was rapt up into heauen, thus cryed Elisha after him:] My2 Kings 2, 12. father, my father, the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.
            
               [And for Elisha, the king of Israel comming downe to visit him in his last sicknes, wept over his face with the same words,] O my father, my father,2 King. 13, 14. the Chariots of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.
            
               [Of him that makes and keepes peace with God, thus saieth the Spirit:] Thou shalt make thy Prayer unto him, andIob 22, 21, 22. he shall heare thee, and tho
                  •…
                shalt pay thy Vowes, &c.
            
               The innocent shall deliver the3
                     •…
                  . Iland: and it is delivered by the purenesse of thy hands.
            
               [But as for the wicked thus he speaketh, which he would have all men take notice of & ponder well, having set a double note upon it.]
            
            The Lord is knowne by thePsal. 9, 16. iudgement which he executeth: the wicked is snared in the workes of his owne hands.
            What hast thou to do to take myPsal. 50, 16, 17▪
                Covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hatest to be reformed, and hast cast my words behinde thee?
         
         
            
            Errata.
            Amend these slippes following, with what is defective in this first draught through want of meete leysure, and our God will (I hope) bring it forth againe with all the rest of it, much more polished, for his owne glory
                  •…
               , and for the good of all his people: whereunto I trust, during life, I shall not be wanting, as his goodnesse shall vouchsafe to assist me.
            PAg. 7. l: 7▪ put out those 7 lines twice repeated. p: 8, l: 10. for our read this. p. 10 l, 16. & p. 91, l. 5. unto: p: 99, l, 3. but moreover: l 7, third general. p: 103. may. 109 l. 1. seeke all. p: 157, marg. for Deut reade Genes. p: 161. l: 2. for to do, 
                  •…
               : as. p: 164, l. 1. admitted. l: 4. these. pag: 189. l: 5. as at Marg▪ l. 17 Deut: 30, 29. p: 220. marg: lin. 1. That. p: 291, l. 15. not onely. p: 300. l. 20. for 
                  〈◊〉
                read may est. p: 306. l. 10. run on▪ p. 3
                  •…
               6. l. 18. for best, most. pag. 348. l 
                  •…
               9. and. p. 384. l. 2. have.
         
      
      
         
            
            A PREPARATIVE to instant Prayer, according to the necessity of the Times, by thinking day and night of these things following, untill wee have gotten them, or the summe of them into our hearts, and can have them ever as it were before our eyes; to cry instantly to our holy God, like as he hath directed vs.
            
               The first general Meditation; How our Saviour lookes for some to helpe him, in the delivery & saving of his Church.
               
                  FIrst, we are seriouslyTo meditate. to meditate, and to bring our hearts to a due consideration, how our blessed Saviour, likeEsay 
                        •…
                     9, 26, &c. 63. 3, 4, 5 a
                     •…
                   in the redeeming and saving of his chosen slocke from hell;

so in all the greatest extreamitiesHow our Saviour hath bene wont to look for some to helpe his Church in all her extremities. of his poore distressed Church, mentioned in his Sacred word, hath beene wont to looke long for some, that wold offer themselves to helpe it; and when he hath found none, to uphold or succour it, in his tender pitty and compassion, his owne arme hath saved it, his righteousnesse it selfe hath sustained it, in what sort hee hath seene it best.
               And although he hath sufferedHis usual maner then, to find out some to stand in the breach, and by whom he migat▪ shew himself gloriously for it. it oft-times to be greevously afflicted, yea somtimes almost utterly consumed, yet how evermore, when he would deliver and save it from the violence and rage of the wicked enemies, or other imminent calamitles, by some great and glorious deliverance, his usuall manner hath bene to seeke and finde out some one at least, that should stand up in the gap before him, in more special manner

for it, that he might not destroy it; & by whom he might shew himselfe wonderfull for his people and chosen Flocke. Thus he found out Ioseph, Moses,
                  As Ioseph. 
                  Samuel, Dauid, Iehosaphat, Ezekiah, Daniel, Hester, Mordecay, Ezra, Nehemiah, and others.
               Yea, how he hath moreouer euer sought & found out someSome to bee helpers by their prayers and teares. few, whom hee hath vouchsafed to be his helpers, at least by their prayers and teares, for saving the rest: such as of whom he hath saide, The innocent
                  Iob 22. 
                        •…
                     0. 
                  shall deliuer the yland.
               
               These he lookes and cals for at this day: And of this little number, every true beleevingThese henow lookes for. soule must needs desire to bee one, if hee love the Lord IesusEuery one must needes desire to bee of this little number. Christ, and his Church; yea, if he but love his native country, or his owne soule: or if he but onely feare that dreadfull curse denounced against Meroz,
                  
                  Curse ye Meroz, said the Angell
                  Iude 5, 23. 
                  of the Lord: curse the inhabitants thereof, because they came not to helpe the Lord against the mighty. And much more must hee needs contend for this, if hee rightly consider what a high honour and happinesse it is, to be one of that little number, chosen and singled out hereunto, to bee if it were but as any one of Gedeons three hundreth.Iudg. 7, 7.
               
               Howbeit, every one havingYet everyone is not fitted for this service. some few good desires, is not fit to serve under, and to helpe our Lord Iesus in th
                     •…
                   greatOur Saviour hath taught whom they 
                        •…
                     ust be. work. He himselfe hath taught and directed us plainely, both whom we must bee, and how we must be qualified and fitted every way, if we will bee his Souldiers, and so fight in this spirituall battaile, as that wee may hope to prevaile. That every one of us must learne, and have in our hearts these instructions and directions following,

which our Lord and Saviour hath in his infinite Wisedome set before our▪ faces, in that absolute forme & patterne of prayer, which for this end, and for every occasion of supplication to bee made to him, and to his Father in his name, he hath giuen as a perpetual direction vnto his Church: unto which patterne, as of all other the most effectuall, sufficient, and certaine to this purpose, I haue heerein still wholly tyed my selfe.
               He then that desires to bee any one of those whom hee lookes for, to helpe him heerein, and that will so pray, as that he may be sure to bee accepted and prevayle; must know, as first Gods usual manner of proceeding in the deliuerie of hisTo medi
                        •…
                     ate in the second place, of the necessitie of seruent prayer at this time, aboue all former. Church, so secondly, the necessity of servent prayer at this time, above all former times, in what need the poor Church,

and euery particular member of it stands thereof, and must labour to have a true and lively feeling in his heart, of the miseries and dangers which the Churches are in. Thirdly, what3. What a one hee must be. a one himselfe must be, & how qualified in all things, that his person may be accepted, if ever he looke to be heard. Fourthly,4. How his prayers must be framed. how our prayers must bee framed, that they likewise may be sure to be pleasing and avayleable with the Lord. Fiftly,5. The power of such prayers. what power and assurance our prayers so sent forth, have to prevayle with God, and to overcome. Sixtly, that all other but these are unmeete and6. All other unmeet. unable to help, and after a sort, excluded from this service, and much more all that are of contrary dispositions. Seventhly,7. How yet every one must endevour to be an helper how every one that lookes to bee saved by Iesus Christ, and to stand at his right hand, must endeavour by all possible

meanes, to be fitted for this seruice, to be a helper to Christes poore Church heerein.
            
            
               The second generall Meditation, concerning the present necessity of this worke, and the liuely feeling thereof, How euery one that lookes to be saued by Iesus Christ, & to stand at his right hand, must endeavour by all possible meanes to bee fitted for this service, to bee a helper to our Saviours poor
                     •…
                   Church heerein.
               THat wee may know theTo see the necessitie of this dutie by considering. present necessity of this duty, and bee able to cry more instantly, the Lord cals vs seriously in the second place, to meditate day and night, according to every part and petition of that heavenly prayer1. The estate of the Churches, of our Saviours, concerning the distressed estate of his poor

Churches at this day, and of all other poore soules belonging to his eternall election, living under the captivity & bondage of Sathan, and the tyranny of his cursed and crucll Instruments.2. How the Lord cals for our helpes, in teaching us to cry, Our Father▪
                     
                   And withall, he would haue us wisely to consider how he, even our Lord Iesus Christ himselfe, calles for our duty by this very prayer, amongst many other meanes: teaching us heere to cry unto him for the rescuing and delivery of all hi
                     •…
                   Children▪ 
                  Our Father▪ which art in heaven. And to this end, how we are to labour to bring our owne hearts, and the hearts of all other the people of the Lord, to a lively sense and tender feeling hereof, so farre as God enables us, and offers u
                     •…
                   opportunity.
               
                  
                  The first particular Meditation of this second generall point, concerning the calamities & dangers of our bretheren in all places, and those threatened towards our selves; and the chiefe meanes of deliverie and preservation from them.
                  FIrst wee are to lay to heart;
                        Our Father which art, &c. 1. To lay to heart the calamities aud perils of all the churches and people of God at this instant. how many of our Bretheren, the deare children of our heavenly Father (for whom our Lord and Saviour hath taught us thus to cry, as for our selves, Our Father) are now in grievous calamities of all sortes; that many others of them are in extreame perill, to bee forthwith utterly destroyed, and devoured by the rage and power of Sathan, and of his bloudy instruments. That we also our selves, with all the rest of the Churches and

sincere Christians in all the world, are in extreame danger every moment of time (as any of the designes of the Iesuits, or other mercilesse enemyes take place) if our heauenly Father doe not still protect and preserve us. And therefore as very many of our brethren abroad are in continuall feeling of their miseries, and of our heavenly Fathers most heavy displeasure against them for all their undutifulnesse, crying at his feet, for his Fatherly pitty, love, compassion to deliver and saue them; so we ought likewise to doe for them, even so many of us as are alreadie assured, or ever will assure our owne soules, that wee are his naturall children, and hereby2. Pet. 1. 4. doe desire to declare our naturall and childlike loue and feare, in seeking to appease his displeasure, that hee may spare his people.
                  
                     And much more are wee to2 To seeke to prevent or mitigate the displeasure of our heavenly father. seeke to prevent or mitigate, the same heavy displeasure kindled against our selves, and hereby to stay the 
                        •…
                     age of Sathan & Antichrist, all of us being hated and devoted alike to destruction, by the malice of the Serpent and his cruell instruments; & all of us having provoked our heavenly Father alike (yea we more then any other) to leave us into their hands, to be so tried by them, untill we be truely humbled, in feeling our disobediences, and be sensible of our provocations of him by our want of commiseration towards them, and of not taking warning by their example; That thus wee may lift up our cryes to heaven, that hee in the tender bowels of his compassion, may both succour and rescue them, and also save us from the li
                        •…
                     e miseryes, which seeme ready to rush upon

us for all our sinnes and provocations. Wee are withall to labour to bring our hearts to a right consideration, that our heavenly Father hath inTo consider how God hath ordained Kings & Queenes for nurses to his church. Esay. 49 23. the riches of his mercy ordained Rulers & Governours and all in lawfull and holy authoritie, especially Kings and Queenes to bee in his place, as nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers to his poore children, to deliver and pull them out of the iawes of the dragon; to carry them in their armes, and in their bosomes from the fury and violence of the Serpent, and to preserve and protect them that they may profess his name in peace and safetie; and that therefore Sathan must needs maligne them above all other, even for this especially. And likewise that hee hath ordained the prayers of his people and children to obtayne this at his hand, so to incline

the hearts of all Kings andAnd the praiers of his people so to incline their hearts. 2 Tim. 2. 1. 2. 3. 4. Princes and all in authority to pitty them.
               
               
                  The second particular Meditation of the second generall: How he hath beene wont principally to get himselfe glory in saving his Church by Princes and Governors.
                        Hallowed be thy name. As the Lord hath been wont to glorifie his name by Kings and Princes saving his Church, so we may now expect.
                  
                  SEcondly, wee are to labour to bring our hearts to a true understanding and feeling hereof, that as the Lord hath been wont to glorifie his great name in former ages, thus in his pittifull compassion saving his Church and Children by Kings and Princes, and other deliverers raised up for them, and like as hee hath magnified his power and Fatherly care so oft before our eyes in such miraculous and gracious preservations of us of this nation,

and other our brethren abroad unto this day, especially when wee were in the midst of the fire: so hee can and will magnifie it againe in a most wonderfull manner, if we thatIf we can give Christ glory in our repentance. are his children can but give him glory in being unfainedly humbled for our owne sinnes and the sinnes of his people, and can meete him in faith by intreaty of peace, crying instantly unto him; Glorifie Lord thy great name; & doing onely as he commandeth. And seeing all the bloody enemyes ofAnd the ra ther for that the enemie seeketh to trample his glory under feete Christ and his Church seeke to trample his glory under foote, he will therefore the rather get himselfe glory upon them, as upon Pharaoh, before all the world, when we shall be rightly prepared for the same.
               
               
                  
                  The third particular Meditation of this second generall, That as Sathan and Antichrist haue set themselves to fight against Christ his kingdome so our Saviour hath ordained Kings and Princes to hold up his Scepter, and to defend and protect his Subiects and Gospell.
                        Thy kingdome come. How the enemies set themselves against Christ.
                  
                  THirdly, wee are to bring our hearts to a due consideration and deepe pondering hereof; how as the Gyants before the floud: so Sathan, & his Souldiers haue set themselves to fight against heaven, and the hoast thereof, yea even against Iesus Christ our Lord & King, and how they have cast downe his Scepter, Throne, and Dignitie, and trample his crowne under their feet, in all the placesHow they have prevailed. where they have prevailed, and where they beare rule over Gods poore heritage. And

that as they haue begunne and fearefully prevailed in manie places; so they haue resolued toResolued to proceed. proceed throughout the earth, to set up Sathan and Antichrist in the very Throne of our Lord Iesus Christ, to defile again his Temple, to make his house againe a den of Theeves. ThatThat Antichrist may fit again as God in his Temple. Antichrist may fit againe as God, in the Temple of God; yea in those very places where he hath beene formerly long cast forth: so that the zeale of his house euen in this behalfe, should eate us up.
                  And also, wee are to bring our soules to a true sense hereof,That as they thus seeke to lead Christ & his armies captives. that as they thus seeke to tyrannize over his people and children, to leade in triumphes as captives, both our Lord Iesus himselfe, and his armies, and to keepe under all that belong to the Lord Iesus as slaves for ever; so our Saviour hath on the other side ordained and appointed

Kings and PrincesThat he hath ordained Kings to hold up his Scepter, under him to hold up his Scepter, even his heavenly Gospell; and that he hath likewise decreed and ordained, that even those of them which before had given their power unto the beast to fight against his Soveraigne Majesty, and against his people, should againe withdrawApo. 17. 16, 17 all their power from the beast, when they shall see his wickednesse fully discovered, and give it wholly unto his heavenly Majesty, to accomplish all his will, in making theAnd to make the whore desolate. Whore desolate, and for the aduancement of his euerlasting Gospell, when they shall truly behold the power and glorie thereof.
               
               
                  
                  The fourth particular Meditation of the second generall; How Sathan and Antichrist set up themselves to be obeyed, and to destroy out of the earth all that seeke to obey the Lord.
                  FOurthly, we are to endeavour4. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heauen. to bring our hearts to a lively meditation and weighing hereof; How Antichrist & How Sathan & Antichrist seeke onely to be obeyed all his limbes who persecute Gods Church, & all other wicked and vngodly men, are so farre off from obeying his heavenly wil and commandement, that they haue set themselves to satisfie onely their owne wicked lusts and willes, and to disanull all the commandements of our blessed God, both of his Law and Gospel, and allTo destroy out of the earth all who obey the lord his holy and blessed will revealed in the same; and with them, to destroy out of the earth, all those that desire to obey him

according to his heavenly word; or that make any true and right conscience of his wayes and wil: yea, to put out all the true saving knowledge of our Lord Iesus Christ, to set up their owne wicked inventions in place thereof, and how they are in a dreadfull manner proceeding heerein. That, as was touched before, there isNothing but the power of our Lord Iesus Christ, & of his Vicegerents, to hinder it. nothing but the mightie hand and power of our Lord Iesus Christ, and the holy care and vigilancie of his Vicegerents, whose hearts he shall in mercy raise up for himselfe, and for his poore Church, together with the prayers of his owne Children, to prevent the same.
                  And withall, we are to striveHow difficult for us to lay these things▪ to heart. to bring our hearts to a true feeling, how hard a matter it is for Gods owne deere people and children, being free from these trials, to lay these things to heart as they ought to doe,

and as his people haue beene wont; and also how difficult it is for them which are tryed by these greevous afflictions,And for them who are vnder the triall, to submit themselues. which they undergo, to submit themselves to Gods will, and to make a right use of them all, 
                        •…
                     nd to cry with our Saviour; Father, if it be thy will, let this cup passe from us, yet not our will, but thy heauenly wil be fulfilled. Blessed be thy holy name. That so we may the more commiserateThat we may more commiserate them. their estate, and help them crying heerein.
               
               
                  The fifth particular Meditation of the second generall, Concerning the innumerable miseries which our Brethren indure, deprived of the outward comforts of this & the better life, & how neere the like may be to us.
                  WEe are yet further in theGiue us this day our daily bread. fifth place by continuall

and serious pondering of thē,To bring our hearts to a feeling of their miseries. to bring our hearts to a more right fellow-feelling of those innumerable miseries mentioned before, which our poore bretheren, the deare children of the Lord, do indure in every place, where Sathan and Antichrist have prevailed, especially by this late bloody sword, wheresoever it hath come; how they have been, and still are in so many places deprivedBoth bodily. of all the comforts of this life, of food, raiment, harbour, libertie, meanes of health and peace, lying under famine, nakednesse, slavery, sicknesse, perill, sword, and all the miseries that follow upon them where the mercilesse idolatrous souldier is made drunke with the blood of Gods Saints, having none to flie to to succour them, but onely to cry unto the Lord. And more also enduring the famine▪ of

their soules, having none to feed them with the word of life, none to minister a word of comfort to refresh their fainting hearts.
                  And withall wee are wiselyTo thinke how neere the like may be to us. aforehand to lay to heart, how nere the like miseries may be unto our selves, how we haveHow we have deserved to drinke more deeply then any other. deserved to drinke of the same cup in a deeper measure; for that wee haue not knowne the day of our long visitation which hath been in so much mercie; but have abused these, and all other our Blessings, so as never Nation more. And finally, that wee are the fasterHow we hale on these. haling and pulling these evils upon us, for our want of commiseration; for that our bowels have not, nor yet doe earne over them for their innumerable miseries which they abide; and that we have and doe so generally by our impenitency and induration fat our selves as against

the day of slaughter.
                  How by those principallyHow the Lord hath hitherto preserved us by Kings and Princes. whom the Lord hath set over us for our foster fathers and mothers, wee have hitherto been preserved from these thus farre forth, through the tender mercy of our heavenly father, and may hope, that hee will so preserve us still, i
                        •…
                      we shall once be awaked, to make a true and right use hereof.
               
               
                  The sixt particular Meditation of the second generall, concerning the sinnes of the Churches, and namely, the generall abuse of the Gospell, and the blessings which accompany it, and that our sinnes are most heynous for our unthankefulnesse.Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespasse against us.
                  
                  SIxtly wee are moreover to travell with our owne hearts to bring them to a right sense and feeling of our owne

sinnes, and the sinnes of otherTo bring our hearts to a sense of the sinns so provoking the Lord. Churches, and chiefly the most heynous and crying sins thereof, which have provoked the Lord to so heavy displeasure, thus to begin to proceede against so many of his own deer children abroad, and amongstChiefly carnal gospeling▪
                      other, that carnall Gospelling of barely professing the name of the Gospell, but without any power or life thereof, so much complained of in all the Churches.
                  That our blessed God, having committed unto us the hidde treasure of his heavenly Gospell, wee have not esteemed of it accordingly: that we have onely professed it i
                        •…
                      word for the most part, but have not shewed forth any power of it as we ought. That wee have not caused our light to shine so before others, that yet sit in darknesse, and in the shadow of death, as that they seeing

our good works, might come from the kingdome of Sathan to God, and glorisie our Father which is in heaven. ThatThat the Lord hath, & is stil so fearfully proceeding for these sins▪ according to the denunciation in his blessed Law. Leuit. 26. Deut. 28. thus he hath now alreadie so fearefully proceeded against so many of our brethren in forreigne parts for these and other sinnes, according to the threatnings denounced in his Law, and is so still going on forward in the heighth of his displeasure, and yet wee for the most part, remain without any true sense hereof, and the best of us without that which we ought to have.
                  Then from them abroad, we are to come home untoOur sinne in not submitting our selvs and seeking to pacific the Lords wrath▪ who hath so 
                           〈◊〉
                         and so many 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         with 
                           〈◊〉
                        , that hee might spare us. our selves, and to our owne sinnes; and heerein to consider seriously, that our sinnes of this Nation, may justly s
                        •…
                     eme more heynous then theirs, or of any other people under heaven, and therefore cry lowder for vengeance,

both in that the Lord hath so long called us to repentance, not onely by the voyce of his Spirit in his heavenly Gospel, and by as many of his worthyBy his Messengers. Messengers, as euer he sent to any Nation before; but also so long warned us, and striven with us, that he might spare us, by all the other meanes that ever he used to reclaime any people, both by merciesBy mercies & iudgements. and iudgements, and by his fatherly rods & corrections; more especially by such wonderfull preservations of vsWonderfull preservation & deliverances. from our just feares, and so admirable deliverances, when we were in the middest of the fire, and when yet wee were without any sense or feare thereof, or power to helpe or save our selves.
                  Also, for that our outragiousThat our sins are so overspred & committed with so high a hand. sinnes and abominations are so generally overspred and committed with so high a

hand; yea, that wee are so much worse and worse for being smitten, that we seeme desperately incurable, falling away more and more, thoughWee worse notwithstanding so many tokens of Gods displeasure. we see so many tokens of the Lords wrath; the bloody enemies executioners of his vengeance on every side of us, and as we may justly fear, so many of these incendyaries the Iesuites, and Iesuited Papists in the midst among us. Whereupon all sorts, even meere naturall men, have and do dayly more and more feare some terrible scourge from the Lord, and wonder at our peace, especially considering the lamentable estate of so many other poore Churches,No warning serving us. and the restlesse plots of the enemy, and most dangerous stratagems against them, and us all, thorow the Lordes mercy discouered dayly, and that yet we have not beene

warned by their ensample; nor yet so much as in anyTo take their miseries o
                           •…
                         our owne perils to heart. meete measure as wee ought, take their miseries and perills to heart.
                  Yea, which is more thenTo labor for a feeling. all these, our gracious God would not have us to rest, untill we have a due feeling, and a right consideration heereof, that we principally above allThat wee are the men prin cipally devoted to destruction. other, have bene the men devoted to destruction, by the bloody designs of those most barbarous and merciless enemiesMost en
                           •…
                        yed by the enemies of the Church. of the Church, and have 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and are, most en
                        •…
                     yed and hated by them, for that from and by us heeretofore, God hath given them the greatest foyles, like as I trust, he will still do for euermore.
                  And which is a higher degreeOur sinne of carnall Gospelling, greater then of other Churches, not onely shewing forth▪
                      of our danger, that wee are not onely guilty of their sinne of carnall Gospelling, & carelesse profession in shewing

forth so litle power in the practise of true piety in our generall and particular callings and duties, which is the very life and true power of godlinesse; but contrarily, by our ungodlinesse, our prophanesse and abominations in every kinde, we haue in so many even utterly denied all theBut so much denying all power of godlinesse. true power thereof, which consisteth in the right performance of all holy duties; as being ashamed to bee notedAshamed to be noted for more carefull profession. for more sincere profession; yea, we have so scorned and trampled it under foot, as thatCausing gods enemies to blaspheme. wee have caused Gods enemies to blaspheme.
                  And which is yet also more to anger his heavenly Majesty, for that we so generally,Our sinne increased to the uttermost by our turning against Christ Iesus, as against our greatest enemy. not onely our Papists and Atheists, and all our notorious prophane persons, which swarme almost every where, but even all sorts of Laodicean

luke-warme professors are so farre turned even agaynst Christ Iesus himselfe (we may speake it with greefe & trembling) and that as against ourThough hee haue so ui
                           •…
                        ibly protected us. greatest enemy: although he hath hitherto so miraculously, yea so sensibly, and as it were visibly defended and protected us) and for that we do yet further dayly rise against him, still more and more.
                  That all this appeareth most manifestly heerein; in thatThis 
                           〈◊〉
                         apparent, that we so many of us seeme deadly to: hate all power of godlinesse. howsoever these can some of them a little indure the outward and common profession of his heauenly Gospell in word; yet the power of it, to wit, to submit themselves to live according to it (wherein chiefly his kingdom consists) they cannot indure, but rather seeme to hate it most deadly. And also, how this heynous and crying sin sheweth it selfe, as in the sight of

the Sunne, in all the odious names wherewith true godlinesseManifest in all the odious names wherewith it is branded. is branded, which are so frequent every where, & cast upon those that seek thus unfeignedly to turne away the vengeance, by endeavouring to walke in all things in all the commandements of our blessed God.
                  Wee are therefore euer to be considering, and never toNot to rest till we have brought our hearts to a seeling of our sins, and hovv they are encreased. rest, till we have brought our hearts unto a right feeling of those, and all other our most intollerable and lowd crying sinnes, and how they are every houre haling and pulling downe the vengeance of God upon us, as the like have done upon the other Churches, and do stil more and more, as they are thus dayly more and more encreased. And moreover, that there is nothing that keepeth backe his vengeance, but onely his infinite mercies, and

                     
                        •…
                     ndlesse patience and compassion,That noth
                           •…
                        g keepes b
                           •…
                        ck his vengeance, but his in
                           •…
                        init mercy, which we haue so much abused▪ as that wee may all iustly wonder, that it is not turned into burning furie to consume us at once, and togither with that his endlesse compassion, the lowd cries ofAnd the crie of his servant▪
                      his poore children ever sounding in his eares: even the cries and sighs of th
                        •…
                     se which are, and have beene so hated,Which are & haue bene so hated. contemned, greeved, and injuried by all possible meanes, which the Lord hath permitted to bee exercised and practised against them, chiefely by all the Popish sort in every place, & namely, against his Prophets and Messengers sent unto us, in as much mercie as ever his Prophets were sent to Iudah. For which yet when they were so mocked & misused, the Lord could spare no longer, there could be no further remedy, but brought upon

them the King of Caldea,
                     2 Chron. 36. and all other the miseries of their long and wofull Captivity.
                  And yet further, 
                        〈◊〉
                      LordNothing can give us any true security, but our unfeigned repentance. cals on us to bee
                        •…
                     ever pondering, how nothing can prevent this wrath to give us any true security of our further escaping, either generall on particular, but onely our sound and true repentance; not in any formall fashion, but unfeignedly humbling our selves, and rightly endeavouring to take away all our crying sinnes, and to stoope unto the Lord our heavenly father, doing in all things as hee requireth, that his wrath may be fully appeased towards us.Till this, nothing but expectation of some dreadfull scourge. That untill this time wee live but under a continuall expectation of the direfull execution of all his terrible plagues denounced in his holy word against us; either some such

sodaine blow of his vengeance to fall upon us, as was intended at the powder Furnace, or some cruell or bloody inuasion, as in 88. or some such ma
                        •…
                     acring as was in the yeare 72. at Paris, and lately at Nigripelles in France, and Heidelberg
                           •…
                        
                      in the Palatinate; or such cruell and mercilesse proceedings as in Bohemia, and sundry other parts of the Church: from all which evils, and the like, we are ever to cry that the Lord may evermore in his endles compassion, preserve and keepe us.
                  And yet to proceed one degree higher: The Lord calles lowd upon us, to be think our selves wisely of that judgement which is heavyer then al the former, if for our contempt of his Gospell, and all other our sinnes, hee should suffer us, as he hath done others, to have our Candlestick

removed, the blessed GospellThe remooving of our Candlesticke heavier then all other outward iudgements, & how we deserve it of his Sonne, the very life of our lives, to be taken from us, and the most abominable masse, even the abomination of desolation to bee set up in the place of it, with all the 
                        •…
                     abble of their cursed Idolatry,And to have their Idolatry set up. and all filthy abominations of that Strumpet of Babylon, and withal to have the bloody knives of outragiousKnives at o
                           •…
                         throats. and mercilesse Idolaters, at our throats every moment of time, which Iesuites, and others of them so affected, are so manifestly, yea so shamelesly and impudently plotting and practising day and night, against all the Churches, and whereof they have thēselves so gloried and triumphed long agoe, as if it had beene already fully effected and dispatched.
                  That some of these must of necessity come to pass (if wee

judge according to the word of the Lord, or but to commonSome of these to be feared, for want of performance of ou
                           •…
                         Co
                           •…
                        so oft renewed by vs▪
                      reason) wee haue just cause to fear; for want of performance of our promises of repentance. For that here unto we have so oft, and so solemnly bound our selves every one, at least by those in our places, I meane by our Magistrates and Ministers, as namely we did in those sundry and solemne Fasts by commandementAs in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      in the yere eighty eight, when therupon our God shewed himselfe from heaven to fight for us: as accepting our vowes and promises of true repentance and amendment, and upon that condition 
                        •…
                     aring us, to prove and t
                        •…
                     ie us what we would do; and still from time to time, yea, from yeare to yeare, and even from day to day expecting the true and unfeigned accomplishment thereof.
                  
                     And more also by renewingFasts since. our promises and vowes in all the Fasts which were after in the dayes of our gracious Deborah▪
                      while we lived in feare of the time, when she shold be taken from our head, and of the many evils to follow thereuppon, even that whereof our enemies were wont so to bragge, that there would come a day, and concerning which wee were still crying to our tender Father, to save us from the danger and dread thereof.
                  Yea, and yet more since thatThe peaceable bringing in of our gracious Soveraigne. time, when our God brought in our dread Soveraigne, and set him so over us, as if there had beene no change, but all had beene done for the perpetuall establishing of us & our posterity, at what time he cast such a feare upon all the enemies, that not a dogge wagged his tongue against any of

the Israel of God. What promises of thankfulnesse everie one of us did make, who in any sort layd these things to heart; by promising repentance and amendment of all our wayes, and for ever to honor and obey our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  And most of all, when of al other times hee did most apparantly shew himselfe from heaven, as reaching down his hand, and plucking us all outAt our deliverance from the hellish Furnace. of the very jawes of the devil, and out of the middest of the Furnace, where of all our holy and franke acknowledgments in our many Thankesgivings and Prayers extant in Print, and commanded to be used & practised generally, and most solemnly once every yeare, and all our good Lawes made thereupon, shall ever beareSo many wayes witnessed. witnesse against us before the Lord: besides, every one of

our Covenants at our Baptisme, wherewith we all stand obliged, and multitudes of other promises, whereby wee have also renewed our bonds unto this day.
                  So that wee are wisely toHow these must either worke the performance of our promises, or arme the Lord against us. ponder, how now at length all these must either worke to bring us to a sound and unfeigned performance of whatsoever wee have so promised, and to a true submission to our Lord Iesus Christ; or else arme him to come against us in his terrible vengeance, for all our falsi
                        •…
                     ying of our vowes & promises unto him, and thus dallying with him, and most heynously abusing his sacred Maiestie.Not to rest till we have brought our hearts to consider our dissimulation with the Lord.
                  
                  We are therefore never to rest untill wee have brought our hearts to a lively sence and true meditation of these things, and how wee have indeed dissembled with his

greatnesse and holinesse, as our forefathers did which the Lord so complaines of, so oft repeating it. Then they cryed
                     Psal. 
                           •…
                        07. 6. 12. 19. 
                           •…
                        3. 
                     unto the Lord in their troubles, and he delivered them from their distresse: but they kept not his great goodnesse in remembrance, but presently forgot his wonderous works, and with them all their vowes and promises, and did worse then their forefathers, yea then ever they had done before.
                  And yet more then all the former, this ought more deeply to pierce into our hearts, that as wee have alwaies thus dealt with his heavenly Majestie, so wee are now instead of repenting, farre worse in every kinde, and much further offThat we are now so farre further off from repentance. from any hope of repenting or turning unfeignedly, or so much as of humbling our selves in any such publick

manner any more; that the most godly and religious beginne to make doubt, nay extreamelyThat all begin to be almost out of hope o
                           •…
                         it. to feare, and to be as it were out of all hope of any sound humiliation, whereby to turne away the vengeance threat
                        •…
                     ned, and each almost, onely seeking to save his owne soule.
                  Together with all these and above all of them, we are seriously and wisely to lay this to heart, how the peopleHow Iudah went further then we▪
                      of Iudah went farre further in performing their vowes both in the daies of that worthy Hezekiah, and that holy Iosiah, and in taking away all the abhominations whereby the Lord was provoked, and also in restoring and performing all things which hee required in his Law, and which they had promised for pacifying of his wrath, even to a generall renewing the Covenant

amongst all the peopleEven to a generall renewing the covenant outwardly. outwardly at least consenting thereto; yet when the hearts of the people consented not so, as did the hearts of their Kings, and namely as did the heart of Iosiah which melted into teares for the abhominations and plagues, nor yet continued, but started backeYet starting backe. from the Lord ever & anon, and fell to their ancient sinne againe; the Lord after all their warnings, brought upon themThe Lord brought that Captivitie. that terrible Captivitie for 70. yeares, without any further sparing or remedy.
                  This he did unto them notwithstanding their goodNotwithstanding all other meanes of their security. Kings, and some worthy Rulers: yea all their holy Prophets, namely Ieremy; so importuning him day and night, Ezekiel falling upon his face, and even expostulating with his Majestie for Ierusalem his owne Citty, and for his people

(being as a brand pluckt out of the burning) and notwithstanding their mourners, mourning and crying for all the abhominations, and lifting up hearts and hands day and night unto the Lord, yea notwithstanding all his former indulgences and mercies, all their priviledges and prerogatives, and his covenant onely with them, and all his gracious promises made to them above all the people of the earth.
                  Finally, wee are ever to bee beating heereon, what justTo be thinking of the removing the Candlestick from other Churches. cause wee have to thinke, that he having remooved the Candlesticke from other Churches so sinning, wee cannot escape, but the longer his wayting and forbearing is, the severer his vengeance must needs bee when it comes.
                  And above all these, we are to labour to bring our hearts

to a due consideration and wise fore-sight hereof: that howsoever it goe for the generall,Though God spare the w
                           •…
                        ole at the 
                           〈◊〉
                         of 
                           •…
                        is deerest. that the Lord shall save us (which wee still and ever pray for) or doe still deferre his wrath, at the cryes of his owne deare children who stand in the breach; and though he may spare us in the bowels of his compassion, thus earning over us (as sometimes hee did over Ephraim in like case
                        •…
                     ) O my people, how should I leave thee up to so many miseries, as thine enemies are devising and practising against thee? how shall I leave my great name to be blasphemed amongst my proud enemies? or though he doe still save us like as hee so oft saved and delivered his people for Moses alone, thus importuning him (albeit hee have over-just cause to say to us as hee said to Iudah before her Captivitie, though Noah,
                     
                     Iob, and Daniel were amongst us, yet they should neyther save sonne nor daughter, but even their owne soules) yet I say, howsoeuer he shall deale in mercy for the generall, wee must notwithstanding know undoubtedly, that every particularYet everie particular soule not turning and helping, must perish. soule that turnes not to God by unfeigned repentance, and that prepares not himselfe to come thus to help by his prayers for pardoning the sinnes of the Land, and pacisying of the Lords wrath, must certainly perish.
                  And to conclude this point,Kings & Princes ordained and used, to bring Gods people to repentance. As by Moses, &c. wee are to meditate likewise seriously, how GOD hath principally ordayned and ever used, when he would save his people, and call and bring them to true repentance, to do it in like manner by Kings and Princes, or other Rulers, stirred up extraordinarily, and by the voyce of his true Prophets,

calling them, and his people by them thereunto, as by Moses, Ioshua, Iehosaphat,
                     As by Moses, &c. 
                     Hezekiah, Nehemiah, the king of Nineuy, and others, even when he wold but save them from the present temporall destruction.
                  And therefore as we are toTo pray therfore as for all of them, so chiefly for our d
                           •…
                        ead Soveraigne. pray instantly for all the Rulers in the severall Churches; so above all, for our dread Soveraigne, to whom hee hath given such excellent understanding of his heavenly will, and whom he hath bound unto himselfe by so many bonds of such great deliverances, & the like mercies and favours above all the Kings and Princes of the earth; that they may all yet, whilst there is time, now the Lord calles soThat all may inquire wisely into the causes of all 
                           •…
                        heir evils. lowd vpon them, set themselves to enquire wisely into the true causes of the evils already upon the Churches, and

of those which are further threatned.
                  That they may truly consider,That all is from the lord to bring us to repentance, that hee may spare us. that all this is from the Lord, in his everlasting commiseration and fatherly pitty, tendering us as his deere children, thus calling us all to a generall and unfeigned repentance, that he may spare us;And he may take our caus in hand. and that himself may take our cause in hand against his own and our bloody enemies. That they may with holy Iosiah, first inquire rightly into all the crying sins in every state and degree within their Dominions, and into all the provocations of the wrath ofBy seeing how our sin is increased. God, and see how the sinnes of our time, seem to be above the sinnes of Iudah before the Captivity; our glorious light and all other meanes which he hath used to reclaime us, being rightly weighed.
                  And secondly, that they

may consider wisely of the danger, which both themselvesAnd our dangers. and all theyrs, yea all their Dominions stand in for the same, according to all the Lords most terrible warnings and denounciations.
                  And thirdly that they mayAnd by inquiring the meanes to p
                           •…
                        isie the wrath. thinke seriously as in the presence of the Lord and inquire from his mouth of the meanes yet left to pacific and prevent the same.
                  And finally, that they may set themselves forthwith, to put all the same in executionAnd setting themselves to the speedy execution thereof. with holy Iosiah, and do in all things belonging thereunto, as the Lord himselfe directeth and commandeth; for that this alone can bring comfort and boldnesse to them and theyrs in assurance of the Lords mercifull love and favour, and that they and theirs shall abide still, and ever before the presence of the Lord.

Thus are we to labour to prevaileTo labour to prevaile for all herein, cheefly for our dread Soveraigne bringing thus the greatest deliverance by his hand. espcially for our Soveraigne Lord, and his, that our God may yet by him magnify the riches of his mercy above all former times, bringing thus to us & all his Churches a third greater deliverance and cause of rejoycing by his hand (through our unfeigned repentance, and the like repentance in all the Churches) then ever heretofore. And thus wee are earnestly according to our bounden dutie to stirre up our hearts by our due meditations to cry for him, and to doe what we can both by our prayers, and all other holy meanes, that all other may ioyne with us herein; and that we may never rest wrestling with him & weeping, untill he have heard us, even in this behalfe, for the pardoning and taking away our sinnes, in what sort soever

shall seeme best to his heavenly Maiestie to answere us. And thus much for this Meditation.
               
               
                  The seuenth particular Meditation, of the second generall: how Sathan exerciseth all his power and tyranny against all the Churches spiritually.
                  SEuenthly, wee are withallL
                           •…
                        ad us not into temptation b
                           •…
                        t deliver us from evill. to betake our selves to a serious Meditation, and to bring our hearts likewise to a right feeling hereof: That asTo Meditate how Sathan having gotten the Church into the wildernes there exerciseth his tyrany on it. the Lord hath in his iust and heavy displeasure left his poore afflicted Churches and children to be thus pursued by Sathan, and driven into the wildernesse; so Sathan having gotten them thither, he there principally exerciseth his power & tyranny against them,

even spiritually against their seules and consciences, so farre as God permits him, as well as against their bodies.
                  How hee thereby bestirres himselfe to bring them into allSathan seekes to cause all Gods people to fall away or to dissemble for fear
                           •…
                        , by their miseries. spirituall miseries, & to cause them either to fall away from the Lord Iesus Christ, and the soundnesse and sincerity of his heavenly Gospell, which they have received & professed, or to vse dissembling, even to deny the Lord Iesus, or other vnlawfull meanes for their reliefe and succour; thus to wound their weake cōsciences & 
                        •…
                     o get more advantage against them, both to accuse them before the Lord, and so to provokeTo provoke the Lord more against them. his Maiesty to leave them up into his hands; and even to drive many of them to utter and endless despaire of the Lords helpe & succour, which is the height of miseries, and the very entrance into the lake.
                  
                     Or at least (which is his usuallOr to doubt of Gods favor & soundnesse of their religion or faith. manner with every one of us, and wherein he can, and doth oft prevaile with manie of the deerest Saints and Children of the Lord) he settes on them day and night to cause them to doubt of the Lords favor and love, & of the truth of their Religion, the goodnesse of their cause, the soundnesse of their Faith and repentance; or whether they have any Faith or no, seeing hee soOr whether they haue any Faith. leaves them to so many miseries, which if hee loved them he would not doe. Then, hee makes them possess the verie sinnes of their youth, setting all of them before their faces, which ever they fell into in their whole lives, so much as he is able, and aggravating every least slip or fayling, as if it were the most heynous sin, that ever was committed.
                  Then, through melancholy

passions and distempers intoThence to melancholy distempers. which hee can driue thee best by long affliction, and by still urging his temptations & terrors) hee can, and useth to cause them to accuse themselvesTo accuse themselves falesly. falsely, and for those things wherein they are most innocent, or for ye best things that ever they have done, and so can increase their miseryes both bodily and spirituall. The right meditation of these and other like miseries whichThe effect of the right Meditation of these. he drives them into, m
                        •…
                     st needs cause us to commiserate their poore and wofull estate, and the due consideration of the present danger to our selves of the like, will make us cry loud day and night, both for them and for ourselves.
                  Yea moreouer, heerein weeHow iustly God may leave Sathan to stand up against us as against Israel. are to striue to bring our harts to a right and wise consideration; That as the Lord being displeased against Israel, gave

Sathan liberty to stand up against David, to move him to number his people, so to make a way to the just execution of his displeasure for their sinnes, and thereby to awake them, & bring them to repentance; so he might thus most justly for a long time have given him liberty to stand up against all the Churches, for our coldness and security, but against us especially of this sinnefullEuen against all the Churches, but us p
                           •…
                        ially. Nation, having so long greeved him by all our heynous prouocations, even these threescore yeeres and more; and much more may he doe it now most righteously, for our so unspeakeable impenitencie and senselesness at this day, & for that nothing els hath hitherto, or can yet awake us.
                  And withall, we are to labour to bring our hearts to a wise and right consideration of the extreame rage and fury

that Sathan now exerciseth,How Sathan roares uppon the Churches roaring upon all the true Churches of Christ, as if hee would devoure us at once, knowing he hath but a short time: and how he hath heereupon thus lately begun to cast out this floud of bloody persecution out of his mouth, to carry away all the Churches and Children of God at this once together, as he hath doneSee Statesmysteries of the Iesuites. some already. How he and his bloody Instruments haue decreed the certaine effecting heereof, as God hath made it manifest even by themselves, and that to all the world; I meane to every one whose eyes the God of this world hath not utterly shut up.
                  And to bee euer thinking heereof: That onely our blessedThe earth hitherto caused to helpe the Church. God & tender Father▪ hath caused the earth hitherto, to helpe his Churches and all of us his Children, in 
                        •…
                     o opening

her mouth and swallowing up the waters, albeit so very many of our Brethren abroad haue bin already carried away therby. That our course is now (as we haue just cause to feare)Iust feare left our course should bee comming thorow Sathans wonderfull prevailing. comming amaine like the raging Sea: Sathan standing up day and night against every one of us, to tempt us all, each according to our places, callings, & occasions to provoke him by our sinnes more and more, especially by our induration and security dayly increased; that so the Lord may leave us likewise into his hand, which wee haue just cause to feare; according to all his severe denunciations and threats so neerely executed, and that to as great miseries, as they or any other Churches or people euer indured before, as he had almost done.
                  The right Meditation of all these will make us cry aloud:

                     Lead us not into temptation but
                     The right Meditation heereof will make us to cry loude. Leade us not &c.
                      
                     deliver us from euill. Lord deliver us not over to the tempter for our sinnes, to bee thus indurate and prepared for destruction, but deliver us from him and from the innumerable evils which he so furiously seekes to bring upon us and upon all our Brethren, and which so many other Churches so groane under.
                  And yet more then all this,The fourih branch. wee are never to rest day nor night, till our heartes rightly understand and conceiue hereof, that as all the miseries nowAll the miser
                           •…
                        es of the Church chief ly from the Dragon. upon or towards the Churches, are wholly or principally from the Dragon, who hath thus inraged all those whom he hath deceiued to fight againstPastors and Watchmen ordained to preserve Gods Children to bee stirred up heer 
                           •…
                        unto at their cries. them; so our God hath also heerein ordained Pastors and Watchmen both spirituall and temporall to preserve his Children from him; and

those his Pastors and Watchmen to bee awaked and made more vigilant heereunto, by the instant Prayers and cries of his poore people committed to their charge.They that cannot cry to be delivered from the tempter, to helpe to deliver their brethrē, must endure all miserie with him.
                  
                  We are ever likewise to be thinking heereof; that he that cannot cry for himselfe, and for the Watchmen and Churches to be delivered from the tempter, and from all these evils. Especially, from the evill of sinne, that it reigne not over him, but suffers himselfe to be a servant, though it be but of any one sinne, and a slave of Sathan therein, must indure eternall evils and miseries with him in the Lake for ever and ever.
               
               
                  
                  The eight particular Meditation of the second generall: That the kindgome and glory are Christs, that Sathan and Antichrist fight principally against him, and against his Church; onely for his cause, and therefore are sure to be overthrowen.
                  8. ANd yet more still to awakenFor thine is the Kingdome, &c. us, & to prepare our hearts to this worke, wee are to f
                        •…
                     iue to bring our soules on further to a rightTo meditate. and due consideration: thatThat the Kingdome is our Christs. our Lord Iesus Christ is absolute Lord and King; that all the kingdomes of the world are our Lords, and his Christs,Apoc. 11. 15. and that he must reigne for evermore. That ▪Sathan and Antichrist his eldest sonne, & all their Souldiers in all these bloody warres which they

haue so dreadfully begun, and do so furiously pursue against all the Churches, doe fightSathan & Antichrist
                           •…
                         sight onely against him. onely against his glorious Maiestie, and even of hatred against him; howsoever these whom Sathan hath so enchanted thinke not so much, but ratherApoc. 16. 23. 24. imagine that they doe God good seruice in it. That Sathan & Antichrist haue sentHow they have sent forth their croāking frogs. forth these croaking Frogs the Iesuits and Seminaries to stir up all the Kings and great men of the earth, to give awayTo stir up all to battle against Christ Iesus. their power and authority from Christ Iesus, (to whom it is wholly due, and whose they and all their power is) to take part and to fight on their side against our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  That it is indeed our LordTo thrust him out of his throne. Iesus Christ against whom they fight, even to thrust him out of his throne and to destroyAnd to destroy all his people. his people; and therefore

that wee have just cause to thinke, that this same being thus eagerly pursued against him, and against all his true members in all the Churches, is the very battle of the greatWe may iust ly thinke this the battle of the great day day: for that it is so set as it was never in such sort before, all things being rightly considered.
                  And therefore we are wisely to Meditate, that howsoeverThat though the Lord thus permit them to prevaile to harden them to pursue his people into the Sea, to the end to harden them all, and all their Souldiers to their utter destruction, he hath permitted them to prevaile thus farre, and still raging to pursue his Israel into the heart of the Sea, yet we may haue good hope that there is the very place and time, where and when he will get himselfeYet there he will get himselfe the victory. the victory; even when once his owne people and Children (seeing and feeling their miseries upon them, and that there is nothing remaining in

regard of any helpe from man but present destruction) shallWhen his people shall cry unto him. cry aloud unto him as Israel at the Sea. That then hee will cause his owne people to stand still and see what he will doe. That then he will manifest his power, and get himselfe glory upon his owne and his Churches enemies, even upon Pharaoh and his hoast, and that by his owne right arme.
                  That howsoever there areThough there be mighty Kings against him, and for Antichrist. multitudes & nations, mighty Monarches and Kings against him, and these have all one minde to give their power and authority from him unto the Beast, untill the words of God be fulfilled; so that they shall thus fight with the Lambe; yet the Lambe shall overcomeYet the Lambe s
                           •…
                        all over come them. them▪ for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are on his side are called faithfull and chosen. And then, even those same Kings,

the remainder of y• ten hornes, (which have so long before, and some of them do still fight against the Lambe, some more furiously, others less) shall all in the time appointed, hateThat they shall give their power to the Lambe to make the Whore desolate. the whore, & make her desolate and naked, and eate her flesh and burne her with fire: for that God will put into their hearts, thus to fulfill his will.To provoke our selves to more instant crying for the full accomplishment of this.
                  
                  And yet more also for our further assurance of this, and to provoke our soules to loud and instant crying unto the Lord in this behalfe for the accomplishment hereof; wee are to bring our hearts to a ioyfull Meditation and remembrance,To consider how the whore is discovered to all how our blessed God hath discovered that scarlet-coloured Whore to all the world, and more now then ever heretofore, both in all this bloody rage against him, and against all his poore Churches

and Children, and their cruell intendments against all
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            mysteries of the Iesuits, Layed forth to be visibly beholden of all, to be of Sathan by his cheefe workes, viz. lying and murther. the rest, even against every soule of us truly professing his name. And also how he hath laide her forth to bee visibly beholden of all, in all her filthy whoredomes and inticements, to wit, all those abhominable doctrines, devices, slanders, and blasphemies against him, and against his heavenly word; and above all in the Powder-treason, wherein Sathan shewed himselfe in his cheefest workes both of lying and murther, in a speciallReceived her deaths wound by her owne hands in the Powder treason. manner to all the world, and above all former times; wherein wee are to hope that Antichrist received his deadly wound, which all the powerAnd will fall being spent by her owne violent and bloody rage. of hell shall never cure againe; and that in Gods due time, hee will fall downe of a sodaine, as a Deere, or other like beast, deadly smitten,

when he hath by his owne violence spent himselfe.4. branch. That our Saviour hath clearly foreshewed her destruction, & of all who receive her marke.
                  
                  That our Lord Iesus Christ hath clearly foreshewed the destruction of that Whore of Babylon, that childe of perdition, than man of sin, and of all his followers, yea of every one that receives his marke on his forehead, or in his right hand, or that is any way on his side to fight against him. That hee hath not onely made all the hoast of heaven, even al his holy Angels and Saints bothRevel. 19. Made the hoast of heaven to reioyce thereat. in heaven and earth, to reioyce and sing Hallelujah, for the condemning of the great Whore, & the victorie given unto the Saints, but also hath made proclamation with a loud voyce (by the Angell inMade proclamation to all to come to be inriched by her spoiles the Sunne) and this to all the Fowles that fly through the middest of heaven, viz. to all the Kings and Princes, Captaines and Souldiers, that shall

fight under his glorious Maiesty, and for him. That they should come & eate the flesh of Kings, and of great Captaines, and of all mighty men, and even of all those both great and small that followed the Beast, that is, to be enriched with their spoyles.
                  That he will destroy every5. branch. one that hath not his name enrolledThat he will destroy every one that is not on his side. in his booke, to bee on his side, that is, every one who is not of his called, chosen and faithfull flocke; yea every one that doth not so strive to prepare himselfe thus to fight for him, and under him, so as he may be sure to prevaile and overcome, and remaine with him faithfully fighting unto the death; untill hee have the crowne of life.
               
               
                  
                  The ninth particular Meditation of the second generall, how our Lord Iesus Christ is that everlasting Amen, and comming quickly.
                  FInally, we are never to restAmen. untill wee have broughtTo reioyce that Christ is that everlasting Amen. our hearts to a comfortable reioycing, that our Lord Iesus Christ is that everlasting Amen, that faithfull and true witness, who will performeWho will performe every word which he hath spoken. every word that hee hath spoken▪ in his due time, and in such sort, as he hath revealed the same, though the particular manner bee yet unknowne to us. That hee is commingAnd is comming quickly. quickly to render to every one according to his workes. That wee are not to give our hearts any rest untill we are able thus to cry in faithfulness with all the Saints, and all the hoast of heaven; Amen, Amen.

Our Lord Iesus Christ onely reigneth for evermore,
                  Amen, Amen.
               
            
            
               The third generall Meditation.
               Thirdly, what manner of ones we must bee, whom the Lord so calleth, and whome hee will admit and accept to bee his helpers herein, and whose prayers shall be available with him, according to the same heavenly direction in Lords praier.
               THus have wee done with these first points for our preparation, by bringing our hearts to a right consideration of the course which the Lord is wont to take in saving his Church, and a true feeling of

the necessity of our prayers at this time. Now whēby our due pondering of all these things and the like, and never resting untill by our deepe Meditation of them, we can have them as it were before our eyes continually, so to see lively the urgent necessity of these our Prayers, and that we can thereby heare the Lord crying loud unto us to helpe him and his Church herein; we are in theAfter our seeing the order which the Lord takes in saving his Church and necessitie of prayer: to be carefull we be such as the Lord calleth to helpe him. next place as carefully to see, that we be such as he calleth, being qualified in all things accordingly, if ever wee will get sound assurance to our owne soules to prevaile or to be accepted. And this wee may learne likewise out of our Saviours direction in that heavenly patterne for prayerOur certaine direction by the Lords prayer. then which, all the wisedome of the world, can never give us a more sure and plaine rule. To which end also, as for all

the other before mentioned, we ought the more diligently to looke unto it, and to Meditate of it: and that in this manner.
               
                  The first particular Meditation of the third generall, To make sure that wee bee the true children of our heavenly Father.
                  Here wee are to stirre upOur Father. our selves to this dutie.
                  1. That having the former view ever before our faces asThat having Christs call in our eares, much as we are able, and this true feeling ever also in our hearts; and withall this lively voyce of Christs loving call to helpe him and his Church stil,We make sure we be the true children of our heavenly Father, by the true marks thereof. 2. Pet. 1. 4. sounding shrill in our eares, wee labour day and night, to make sure that we be the true Children of our heavenly Father, full of Child-like and naturall

affections to his heavenly Majesty. That wee have thus put on the Image of our Lord Iesus Christ, and are hereby (as holy Peter speaketh) partakers of the divine Nature, not earthly but heavenly minded, burning in the love of his Majesty, of his word, ordinances, and Children, full of faith in Christ Iesus, and of all dutie and holy obedience, that in all fulnesse of assurance through our Lord Iesus Christ, wee can by the power and witnesse of his holy Spirit, cry unto him Abba, O Father, and seeke to bee as instant for all our Bretheren as for our selves, labouring ever to grow herein, and in the acknowledgment of our owne vilenesse by nature, and of our unworthynesse, either to bee called his children or to make any petition to his heavenly Majesty.
                  
                     
                     More particular Meditations hereof.
                     MOre particularly for theThe first branch of this meditation more particularly to make this sure. better help and direction of every yong and weake Christian (because this is that whereupon all our hope for our prayers doth principally relye) that we in the first place meditate and ponder carefully of these things.That we may not deceive our selves herein we are to thinke
                     
                     To the end that we may be able to cry thus in Faith, (O our Father which art in heaven) we must make sure, that we be his children indeed, & that we do not deceive our selves, as the greatest part do, even of those that live in the bosome of the Church. And therefore,
                     1. Wee must seriously bethinke our selves, what weeWhat ones we are by nature. were by our naturall estate from our first Father Adam,
                        1. Cor. 15. 47. not heavenly but all earthly,

wholly corrupt, both in ourEph. 2. 2. Iohn. 8. 44. Eph. 2. 3. nature, & in all our thoughts, words, and deeds, Children of disobedience, yea Children of Sathan, and even of the wrath of God.
                     2. What we are already,2. What ones we must be by grace. or must bee by grace, before we can have the favour of our heavenly Father, or can helpe in this worke; that wee must bee changed throughout, borne againe, made new Creatures, & so as was saide, Children of our heavenly Father, heavenly minded, that is, minding heavenly things, obedient Children, indeavouring to walke in all holy obedience before him, so declaring our selves hereby to bee ordayned not to wrath, but to the inheritance of the Saints in light.3. That we never rest in using the meanes untill we be such.
                     
                     3. If wee doe not fully and plainly finde our selves in this happy estate of Gods

Children, but still remaining as we were borne, and therefore Children of wrath, the Lord cals upon vs loud, that wee never rest day nor night, untill we finde our selves certainly delivered out of that fearfull and wofull estate; and that we are made by grace the very Children of our heavenly Father, and are received into his favour and love. And this cheefly he cals us to seeke to attaine, by a deepe and continuall Meditation of the miserable estate in which weeIn regard of our miserable estate we stand in till then. stand, even for the present, untill this time, as was saide before; and morespecially for that extreame horrour & miseryAnd more for the horror which will come o
                              •…
                            us when our consciences shall be awaked. which will certainly come upon us, when our consciences shall bee throughly and soundly awaked, which will be undoubtedly either in his life, or so soone as ever we shall be taken hence.
                     
                        And of the other side by aAnd our blessed estate of the contrary when can we finde our selves Gods Children. due and serious Meditation and consideration of that blessed estate, wherein every one is that findes himselfe indeed in this manner the true Child of his heavenly Father, and can thereupon by the spirit of Adoption cry thus unto him, Abba, O Father.
                     And to these ends that wee never rest seeking to be in this happy estate, and that wee finde wee are in it undoubtedly; by using conscionably and constantly all the meanesMeanes; chee
                              •…
                           y the word and prayer. which God hath ordained thereunto; chee
                           •…
                        y hearing of his blessed word, and earnest prayer for obtaining these two generall and principallFor obtaining the principall graces, Repentance, Faith. graces and 
                           •…
                        arkes of our regeneration, to wit: True repentance of all our sinnes▪ and a lively Faith in Christ Iesus.In ou
                              •…
                            repentance to 
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ a 
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            Change. And in our repentance that wee find a chang first in ou
                           •…
                        
                        
whole nature, and after a change of all our courses and conversation from earthly to heavenly, not walking thenceforth according to carnall reason, but by faith in the word of the Lord.
                     4. If wee finde our selves4. If such yet to labour to increase in our assurance in walking before him in more hprightnes. such, yet the Lord cals on us still to labour daily to encrease our assurance, by increasing in our conscionable walking before our heavenly Father, and as in his presence; that so wee may receive more favour in his eyes to bee accepted in our prayers for his Church, and to approach neerer and neerer unto him with faithfull Abraham.
                        Two lessons to be ever in memory to this end. Remembring ever these two lessons.
                     1. That there is but onely one narrow way of life, by our1. That there is but one narrow way of life. cōscionable walking wherein, we can onely assure our selves of Gods favour and love; butI
                              •…
                           numerable leading to destruction. almost ten thousand leading

out of the same; all of them tending to hell and destruction. The impenitent walking in any of which paths provokes his displeasure, especially if we walke in it wittingly or carelesly, thorow lacke of examining and trying our wayes.
                     2. That all this way is directed2. That one directed onely by Gods word. The generall whereof is comprized in the Catechisme. and chalked out for the generall in the doctrine of our Catechisme, both for our Faith and for our repentance or obedience to bee continually renewed and increased; more particularly for every step as it were, in the whole body of the Sacred Scriptures, the blessed word of the Lord.
                     1. For our Faith, by whichFor Faith. we must live and walke, that it is briefly comprized in the Articles of our Faith. 2. ForConuersation our life and conversation, and the ordering thereof in the

Ten Commandements written by the Lords owne finger; in each of which and every part whereof, wee must walke on forward in performing all duties to his heavenly Majesty, and also to our Brethren. 3. 
                           •…
                        or other helpesHelpes in ou
                              •…
                            iourney, the Sacraments. in this our journey and stayes to our Faith; the right use and knowledge of the Sacraments. 4. to the end to obtaine more strength so toFor more strength so to walke, earnest prayer. walke in Faith and obedience that wee are to use earnest prayer; the heavenly patterne whereof is set before us in that most exact forme, prescribed by our Saviour, called the Lords prayer. That wee may all learne to pray as with one heart and soule, according to that generall direction being used and applyed particularly, as occasions, times, and seasons require.
                     5. The Lord would haue

us all to know, and ever to keepe in fresh memory, that5. To pray thus for our Brethren as well as our selves, that they may have the same assurance, and so manifest themselves for their heavenly Father and for the good of all their Brothren as we doe. he cals on us continually in the use of this prayer, to strive not onely for our selves so to walke, but for all our Brethren, even all the Children of our heavenly Father, dispersed over the face of the whole earth, both already called, and also all other of whom wee may hope that they doe belong to Gods eternall election, whether of the Iew, or of the Gentile, Pagans, Turkes, or Indians. That these being gathered forth, he may speedily hasten the accomplishment of our happinesse by the glorious appearing of our Lord and Saviour.
                     And that wee never test vntill wee shall attaine heereunto, to remember all theseTo remember al ioyntly jointly in all our prayers, in some good measure, as being of the same mysticall body

of Christ with us, for that otherwise we cannot rightly pray. [Our Father.]
                     And further also amongst them, he would have us to6. To pray more specially for all in authority. pray in a more speciall manner for all those whom hee hath set in his owne place heere in the earth, for our succourAs in Gods owne place, and comfort, & the aide and the comfort of all the restFor the succour & comfort of all the rest of their Brethen. of these our Brethren, and for our joynt injoying of all these blessings which he hath promised to his Church and chosen flocke, and which he hath beene wont by them to performe unto it. To whom for this cause hee hath giuen his owne name, calling themBearing his owne name and ordained for this end. Gods, and hath promised that to this end; they shalbe made foster Fathers & nursing MothersEsay. 49. to his poore Church, when he will be gracious unto it, in delivering, restoring, and beautifying of it, like as

hee hath done in all former Ages.
                     And therefore wee are never to rest travelling with our owne hearts in this; untill we can principally labour with the Lord for them, that they of all other, and so all in their places may be indued with all excellent graces, not onely toThat they may chiefly be indued with all excellent graces. manifest themselves in the first ranke according to their high dignities, the true Children of our heavenly Father, thus shiningAs in the first ranke. before all the rest of their Bretheren, for the better prouokingBetter to provoke all the rest. and encouraging of all the rest, and the greater glory of the Lord; but also withAnd chiefly those peculiar to their places. those guifts which are proper and peculiar unto their places and callings. And that weeThat we may performe all duties to them of honour. likewise may all of us be very carefull to performe unto them the duties belonging to them, in regard of those high places and callings, like as

the honor and obedience ofObedience. right appertaining to them so with all true thankfulnesse forThankfulnes. all the blessings which wee injoy by them.
                     And in our thankfulnesse,Therein those three. we 
                           •…
                        e never to rest untill wee can from our soules performe unto them these three specially.Acknowledgment. 1. Acknowledgment of their authoritie from God, and that they are in his place. 2. Hearty affections, as toHearty affections. Gods Lieutenants for his cause. 3. Above all instantInstant prayers. prayers for them day & night. And in these our prayers, that we can cry for them not onely as for every common memberThat they may be able to walke in their particular callings as before the Lord & as living Lawes. (as was saide) to bee able to walke before all their people as living Lawes in all holy duties of Christianitie, but in those of their particular places and callings, and bee furnishedFurnished with all guifts for managing the same happily. with all excellent giftes and endowments of Gods

Spirit for their happy managing of the same.
                     As first and principally, that they may bee made able1. For promoting Gods religion. and resolute to promote the Religion of the Lord alone, and all true godlinesse, and that with all their power; defacing the contrary, and destroying all ungodnesse in all their Dominions, as did those Worthyes; David, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Iosiab, and Nehemiah; being thereby so renowned and set out for such blessed examples to all succeeding Ages.
                     And in the second place, that they may procure each2. Procuring the wealth of his people. way the good of the people committed to them, as tender Foster-fathers, repressing the wicked, being careful that all holy meanes be used every where, for the reclaiming and saving every soule in their Dominions, and of bringing

them in their armes to the Sion and Sanctuary of the Lord, and all hinderances thereof removed. And that to these ends, they may be all as 
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                        
                        Exo. 18. 
                              〈◊〉
                           . Magistrates, men of courage, fearing God, dealing truely, hating covetousnesse, no respecters of persons.
                     And next unto these, thatNext unto Magistrates to pray for all in any eminency. we rest not till we bee able to pray likewise for all excelling in any eminency, either outward or inward, wherebyWhereby they may doe any speciall service. they may doe any speciall service to our Lord Iesus Christ, to his Vicegerents, or to his poore Church and people: As namely, That their hearts bee not lifted up by theirThat their hearts be not lift up. guifts, favours, or places, as is ordinary in each estate, and so wrath come upon them, as it2. Chro. 32. 25. 26. did on that good Hezekiah for this very sinn
                           •…
                        ; but that contrarilyBut contrarily 
                              •…
                           hore humbled. they may both ever remember

and acknowledge all their preferments to be from his heavenly bounty, and so to be more humbled by them, as having more to answere & bee accountable for giving to his divine Majestie alone, all the glory thereof. And secondly, that they may bee inabled as thy deare Children to employ all those guifts carefullyThat they may imploy all carefully as their talents committed to that end. as their talents committed unto them by the Lord, to that end and purpose, as may make most for his glory, the furtherance of his Gospell, with the greatest benefit and good to our selve;, and to all the people of the Lord.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The second particular Meditation of the third general, That we can, and use to seeke his honor above all other things.
                  SEcondly, we must neverHallowed be thy name. give the Lord over, untill we have brought our harts in order, not to seeke our owneNever to rest untill we can onely seeke Gods honour honour or greatness: nor our selves, any way for our selves alone, but onely in all things to seeke the honour of our heavenly Father, being zealous of his glory. And that wee can pray earnestly, thatAnd be zealous for it to set it forth. our selves and all other, may studie to set foorth his glorie before all the sonnes of men, euen the glory of his Wisedome, Goodness, Mercy, Iustice, Power, and Truth, shining bright in all his workes: both in every creature, and also in all his judgements and mercies, and chiefely in his

heavenly word: admiring and extolling his great name in every one of them.
                  That we can mourne with holy Moses, for all the dishonoursAnd mourne for all the dishonours done unto him, as Moses. done unto him, and for all the provocations whereby he is provoked, choosing rather to have our names put out of his booke, then that hisExo. 32. 31. 32. great name shold be blasphemed by his malicious enemics, especially in their triumphes for the destruction orNum. 14. 13. 17. miseries of his people.
               
               
                  The third particular Meditation of the third generall: That we seeke his honour chiefely in the aduancement of the Scepter of Iesus Christ.
                  THirdly, we are never toThy kingdome come. rest untill we can rejoyce in the truth of our hearts, that we have se
                        •…
                      our selves to seek

by all our might, the advancementNot to rest till 
                           •…
                        e can most earnestly seeke the comming of Christs kingdome. of the Scepter of his heavenly kingdome, even of the heavenly Gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ, and so the comming of his kingdome thereby with power; first the kingdome of Grace, and after1. Of Grace. 2. Of Glory. the kingdome of Glory: desiring earnestly to that end the propagating and spreadingDesiring the spreading of his Gospell, &c. of his Gospel over all the world, the gathering forth of all his elect from al parts, with the saving of all his people, & seeking all other things onelyOnely for his honor. for him and for his honour, that he may reigne as Lord and King. That wee neverNot resting 
                           •…
                        ll we feele him reigning in our hearts. give him rest, until wee feele him reigning in our hearts by his blessed Word and Spirit:And can mourne for all the despight done to him. making us to mourne withall for all the despight done unto his heavenly Majesty in the contempt of that his gloriousAnd Sathans prevailings. Gospel, and chiefly for all the

prevaylings of Sathan and Antichrist, the setting up againe of their abhominable Idolatry in any place, and so for al the outragious wickednesseWith all the wickednesse committed against him. committed agaynst our Lord Iesus Christ, his crowne and dignity, and also agaynst his poore people.
               
               
                  The fourth particular Meditation of the third generall, That we seeke to honour him e
                        •…
                     er in the full accomplishment of all his heavenly will.
                  FOurthly, that our hearts beare us witness that weeThy will bee done. haue attayned to be such, as are wholly set not to seeke the execution of our owne lustesThat we are wholly set for the knowledge and execution of of God
                           •…
                         will. or will, but that the whole will and good pleasure of our heavenly Father may bee fulfilled by us and all other his Children; especially in all

things wherein he hath or shal reveale himselfe what his good pleasure is. And that we have begun earnestly to indevor our selves to be as chearful in the right execution and accomplishment thereof in all parts, as his holy Angels. Moreover, that we can withAnd receiuing thankfully whatsoever triall from his hand. all thankefulness receive from his hand, & yeeld unto whatsoever chastisements or trials it shal please his heavenly wisedome to exercise us by;Mourning to see his Commandements trampled under foote. and that we can mourne with the holy Prophet David, to see his blessed wil and Commandements, both Law, and Gospel, so scorned and trampled under foote. That wee have atrayned thereto at the least in our inner man (to wit) in the full desire and resolution of our soules, & are thereupon able thus to cry in truth and in the uprightness of our

hearts, Thy wil be done in earth as it is in heaven.
                  
               
               
                  The fift particular Meditation of the third generall, That we be such as looke into, and depend onely upon our heavenly Father for all good things.
                  FIftly, we must trauel withGive us this day our daily 
                           〈◊〉
                        . our owne hearts, never resting until wee bee such as feele our selves in some goodNot to rest untill we can in Faith whol ly depend upon our heavenly Father. measure able in faith to looke up unto him as to our pittiful, gracious, and bountiful Father, and to depend whollie upon him with faithful Abraham, for accomplishment of all our desires, and whatsoever else he hath promised, and for giving to us, and to the whole Church all things belonging heereunto, so farre as shalbe best. To trust in him onely for all, and to give him

the glory of al.
                  Also such as have attained in some good sort, a fellowfeeling with our Brethren, of al their wants and afflictionsAnd able to cry for our Brethren. both bodily and spiritual: and so are thereby able to crie for them, as for our selves, Giue us this day our daily bread.
                  
                  Such as are ready to communicate unto them in allReady to communicate unto them. things according to their necessities, of what kinde soeuer. And finally, such as strive to walke painfully and faithfully in our places & callings, that we may not be chargeable to the Church, but may better supply the wants of our Brethren; and so shew forth our right dependance on his fatherly goodness for our selues and for them al, for bread and all other comfortes for bodies and soules, appertaining both to this, and the better life.
               
               
                  
                  The sixt particular Meditation of the third generall, That we be such as feele our sinnes and infirmities as a heavy burden, and travelling under them, doe fly ever unto Christ.
                  SIxtly, wee are seriously toFor give us our trespasses as &c. stirre vp our soules that we never rest vntill we be such at least in the longing desires of our hearts, as doe see andThat we feele our sins a burthen feele not onely our owne sins, infirmities, and corruptions, as a heavy burthen, making usTo drive us to Christ. daily to runne to our Lord and Sauiour to bee eased of them: but withall, that weeHaving some true feeling of the sins of the Churches which have so provoked the Lord. haue some true feeling of the sinnes of all sorts in the Church, which have so farre forth already provoked the Lord to execute his fierce wrath upon so many of our Brethren, to leave them into their enemies hand▪ and so to

threaten all the Churches by the deadly malice and mischievous plots and prevailings of our bloody enemies. And also that we can and do begin to cry, That the Lord wouldTo try for forgivnesse & so for unfeigned repentance to all the Churches. forgive us our sins, our hainous crying sins, & grant unto us unfeigned repentance for the 
                        •…
                     ame, & hearts to do whatsoever hee hath commanded belonging thereunto; & for the pacifying of his wrath both privately, & publiquely. WeThat we he such as have a continuall heavinesse in our hearts for the sinne
                           •…
                         whereby our heavenly Father is so provoked. are withall to bethinke our selves, whether wee be such as unfeignedly wish with blessed Paul to have a continuall heavinesse in our hearts, for our owne sinnes, and for the sinnes of Gods people, whereby hee hath beene so provoked to so heavy a wrath, & so dreadfull proceedings even against his owne Children, which are so deere unto him; and for that his anger is daily more and

more kindled and incensed.Such as can forgive and pray for our enemies.
                  
                  Such as can freely forgive, and doe use to pray for our very enemies; that they, so many of them, as belong to the election of Grace, may likewise come to repentance and escape his wrath & vengeance due unto their sinnes, and bee made with us partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light.
               
               
                  The seuenth particular Meditation of the third generall, That we indeavour to pray continually. Lead us not into temptation.
                  SEventhly we are to meditateLead us not in
                           •…
                        o temptation. seriously, that if wee will be helpers unto our Lord and Saviour in this worke, weNot to rest untill we have brought our selves in awe. are never to give rest unto our soules, untill we have brought our selves to a true understanding

sense and practice of that counsell, yea that precept of our Saviour (with which so few Christians are indeed rightly acquainted) to wit,To watch & pray continually that we fall not into temptation. to watch and pray continually that we fall not into temptation.
                  That we be such as doe not onely see the danger, that weeThat we doe not onely see our owne danger: our selves stand in of Sathans temptations every moment of time, and of the many and fearefull evils which by our sinnes hee seekes without ceasing to bring upon us; and thence doe labour incessantly by watching and prayer to be preserved and delivered from the same: but doe also use toBut also mourne for the prevailing
                           •…
                         of Sathan and Antichrist. mourne and be in heavinesse day and night for the prevailing of Sathan and Antichrist, and of all their limbes and instruments, not onely against the poore people and children of the Lord, but also against

his blessed Gospell at this day, by their craft and subtilties, and for the innumerable miseries bodily and spirituall which they have and doe daily more and more seeke to bring upon them, and therefore we do use daily to cry for them as for our selues. Lord lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill.
                  
               
               
                  The eighth particular Meditation of the third generall, That wee can and doe use to sing the song of the 24. Elders, Glorie, &c.
                  SEventhly, wee are never toFor thin
                           •…
                         is the kingdome, &c. give the Lord over, untill wee bee such as ever acknowledging in our hearts and consciencesSuch as have learned the song of the foure and twenty Elders. the Soveraignty of our Lord Iesus Christ have attained hereto, to bow the knees of our soules, and fall downe upon

our faces before him, having learned the Song of the foure and twenty Elders, Glory, Honour, Praise, Dominion, Might,
                     Rev. 5. 13. 
                     and Majesty, bee to him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lambe for evermore; and doeAnd sing the same in our soules use to sing the same in our soules; and also doe desire that it may bee sounded out by us, and by all the Church eternally;Or mourne] for our faylings. at least such as can mourne for our continuall wants and failings herein.
                  Finally, that wee be such asAble to sound Amen in assurance of obtaining. use to stirre vp our hearts in faith to sound Amen, both begging and beleeving that through Iesus Christ, we shall obtaine whatsoever we have or shall desire, as our Lord and Saviour hath taught us, so farre as shall bee most for his glory, our salvation, with the good of all his Church; and herein can ioyfully repose our soules. And not onely that wee have

attained the beginnings, or asHaving not onely the first fruites in all graces, but indeavouring to grow continually. it were the first fruites in all these graces: moreover, that we indeavour to increase & grow in every one of them continually. And thus much also for the second generall meditation (to wit) what kind of persons we must be, if we will bee sure to be accepted, as saithfull Abraham and Moses, in regard of the high favour in which wee are in through Iesus Christ, and that wee are so qualified and fitted, as our Saviour requireth of them who are to helpe him in this worke.
               
            
            
               
               The fourth generall Meditation.
               Concerning the frame and order of our prayers, that they likewise may be well pleasing, and so we may bee more certaine to prevaile thereby: when wee follow in all things our Saviours direction.
               FOr the frame and forme of our prayers, that the want therein may not any thing hinder our certaine assurance, butTo Meditate. contrarily that our right manner, ordering & framing thereof may increase our strength and confident crying. TheyThat our prayers be framed according to our Saviours direction so neere as we can. must bee so framed as neere as wee can, at our great Master and Teacher our Lord Iesus Christ hath directed us; and then his Soveraigne Majesty

who hath saide Pray thus, willThen he will make them powerfull. make them powerfull according to his gratious promise. Aske and you shall have, and will set to his seale, first in our hearts, and after manifestly before the world.
               
                  The first particular Meditation of the fourth generall, That we pray onely to our heavenly Father in the name of Christ.
                  FIrst wee are carefully to1. That we pray onely to our heavenly Father in the name of Iesus Christ. see, that our prayers bee directed onely to our heavenly Father, and none other, and that in the name and mediation of our blessed Saviour; our hearts being lifted vp to heaven in confidence of faith through him, and in his name and mediation alone, and not by the mediation of any Saint or Angell; and also without the least looking at

our selves, for any excellencyWithout the least looking at our selves▪ or any other creature. in our selves, or any matter of merit, worth or desert in our selves, or any other creature, for which wee should looke any way to bee heard, whereunto our hearts are wonderfully prone; and wherein they are exceeding deceiptfull, and very hard to bee knowne, albeit wee have taken long paines to bring them thereunto.
               
               
                  The second particular Meditation of the fourth generall, That above all and in all wee ayme at Gods glory, and the advancement of Christs scepter.
                  SEcondly, as hee hathThat we ayme onely at Gods glory, not resting till our harts be inflamed with the zeale therof. taught us in the first place to pray, Hallowed be thy name; so in and above all things we must ayme at his glory, and

never rest till wee have a burning zeale thereof, so to seeke the advancement of his great name, and the comming of his kingdome, even that IesusThat Christ onely may raigne in all the world. Christ may raigne in all the world, all sorts stooping unto him, that thus his elect speedily bee gathered forth and saved; Sathan and Antichrist with all his enemies being utterly overthrowne and confounded. For seeking first his glory, kingdome, & righteousnesse, that is; seeking them cheefly and in the firstFor that then we have a certaine assurance of all other things. place, wee have a certaine assurance from his gracious and faithfull promise; That all other things shall be cast uponMat. 6. 33. us, as an over measure, concerning our selves or ours.
                  And herein specially weeThis is a chiefe fayling of all Gods people. are to bee warned, for that in this is usually the cheife failling of Gods people, and for which hee may justly send us

empty away; even for lookingIn looking more at our selves then his heavenly Maiesty. at our selves, more then at his Majesty and the things that concerne his kingdome and honour; preferring our selves and our owne particulars, and the care of them, before the things that concerne his owne glory, kingdome, and people. ThoughThough he hath directed us that this should be all in all. his wisedome hath in his goodnesse so plainly directed us herein, beginning and ending with this. The seeking of the advancement of his glory and kingdome, as being all in all, like as indeed it is, for that then (as was saide) when we can so seeke him in order, hee will undoubtedly give us our hearts desire, and more then wee can imagine; neitheir can wee ever assure our selves of any thing as a blessing untill this time. For this purpose, and the certaintie hereof, read carefully the

first of Haggai, and considerHag. 1. it well, how this selfelove makes us forget the first and great Commandement, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, soule,
                     Want of this deprives of many blessings. 
                     strength, and might, &c. and so to loose the obtaining of those things which otherwise we might certainly injoy.
               
               
                  The third particular Meditation of the fourth generall, That wee seeke the doing of his heavenly will, for his glory and kingdome chiefly.That we seeke the doing of his heavenly will chiefly for his glory & kingdome.
                  
                  THirdly, we are to labour to bring our hearts hereunto, That the accomplishing of his heavenly will▪ whatsoever he hath determined, chiefly i
                        •…
                      things that concerne his glory and kingdome, and the good of his Church and Children bee

sought by us in the first place, and afterwardes in all thingsThat for these ends we may do it as the Angels do
                           •…
                        . belonging to our selves. That to these ends, all his will and good pleasure, which he hath been, or shall bee pleased to make knowne unto us, may be done by us and all his people; and that as chearfully, wisely, faithfully, and couragiously, as the Angels doe it in heaven.
               
               
                  The fourth particular Meditation of the fourth generall▪ That we seeke all good things from God alone, chiefly that wee may have wherewith to honour him, and advance his kingdome.
                  FOurthly, in the fourth To seeke bread chiefly for these ends. place wee are to meditate how wee are to travell with our owne hearts to seeke our daily bread from him, not for

our selves, but for these ends principally.
                  That he will be pleased to feed us and to minister unto us from heaven, all things needfull and behouefull hereunto, both for our selves and for all our brethren, that weeThat we may live onely to his heavenly Maiesty. may not live to our selves, but to his heavenly Majesty alone, who hath redeemed and saved us for this purpose.
               
               
                  The fift particular Meditation of the fourth generall, and so of the sixt and seventh together.
                  FIftly, wee are seriously to5 consider how wee are to pray, That to these ends likewiseTo seeke forgivnesse of our sins to these ends, & that they may not hinder his mercies. chiefly, and for these causes, hee will forgive our sinnes, and the sinnes of his people; that they may not

hinder his mercy, nor these our prayers in any of the things which wee are taught to beg of his heavenly Majesty, nor yet provoke his wrath against us, but having put them away by his Christ, heeBut he may heare us in al things concerning his owne glory & our good. may for his sake tender us as his owne Children, and heare us in all things concerning his glory and kingdome, and also for our owne necessitie and happinesse, and the good of his people.6
                  
                  6. And finally, that for his glory sake, hee will saveAnd that he will save us from Sathan that we may live to honor him. us from Sathan and from all the evils which hee intends, and seeks to bring upon us for our sinnes, and whereby he seekes to dishonour the Lord & provoke him against us, and to hinder all these mercies, and to bring all contrary miseries and evils upon us, and upon the Church.7
                  
                  7. How in all these, still

wee are ever to seeke for hisAll still for his glory & for his Church. owne glory, and the merit of his dearly beloved Sonne, ever beginning and ending here with. And that our Lord Iesus Christ, may shew himselfe gloriously both Lord and King, exercising all his Soveraignty, Dominion, and Power, for vs all; that so hee may bee glorified by us, and by all the Churches, and alsoThat he may be glorified in us, & we with him. glorifie us with himselfe for evermore. And thus much also for the order, that wee are ever, as neere as we can, to keepe in the desire of our hearts, and in all the requests which we make unto his glorious Majesty.
               
            
            
               
               The fift generall Meditation.
               Fiftly the power and efficacy of our prayers made and performed in all things, according to the heavenly patterne.
               VVE are in this Meditation, to have a due consideration & pondering hereof:To Meditate how the foure former performed aright, we shal be assured of this, viz. to be heard. that the foure former things being performed according to the rule and direction of our Saviour, this fifth will follow of it selfe, that is to say; that our blessed God will give us a strong assurance to be heard; and so, that wee shall see the power and efficacy of our prayers in all accordingly; which wee are seriously to meditate of, untill wee can feele our hearts

to pray in faith, and in confident boldnesse of his goodnesse to grant our requests.
               
                  The first particular Meditation of the fift generall, That when we can so pray, he will manifest himselfe our tender Father.
                  FIrst, that when wee shallSo praying ioyntly he will give a witnesse to each soule and set to his seale that he is our Father. joyntly thus cry unto him, he will not onely give a witnesse to every one of vs in our soules, that hee is our Father, and set the seale thereof in our hearts (as was saide) making us able to call himRom. 8. 
                     Abba, O Father, which is ten thousand times more worth then all our labour herein can be; but will moreover shew himselfe to us so praying, not to each in particular alone,Shew him selfe to us all from heaven to be our Father. but also to all the Churches in generall, & that even from

heaven; to bee our gracious and tender Father, yea that hee will so shew himselfe to us, as ever he shewed himselfe to Israel, or to any of his in former Ages, howsoever heeThough he more humble us first. may first humble us, and dreadfully awaken us all, to make us more earnestly and joyntly to cry unto him.
               
               
                  The second particular Meditation of the fift generall, How hee will from heaven shew us his glory, when wee can so pray.
                  SEcondly, that then wee2. That he wil also shew us his glory for his Church more then ever formerly in this last age. may truly hope, that hee will from heaven once againe shew his glory for his Church, more then ever in this last Age of the world, now that his owne gloriousNow that it is so opposed. Majesty and Children are so furiously fought against, and

that so directly and manifestly, that all the world may take notice of it; chiefly by Sathan and Antichrist, and by all their forces. That he will then evidently declare the glorious riches of his Love, Wisedome, Mercy, Power, Truth, Faithfulnesse, and all his Goodnesse; both for the rescuing, the succouring, and saving of all his poore Church from the great red Dragon, the Beast and the false Prophet; and for maintainingFor maintaining his owne great name, his owne honour and great Name, which they doe so oppugne; and also in getting himselfe a gloriousAnd getting himselfe a glorious victory. victory & triumph vpon them all, as hee did vpon Pharoah, Senacherib, Haman, or any other of his proud enemies, or of the enemies of his Church. Yea, we may then expect thatThis we may expect he will do by themselves. hee will doe this, in fighting against them by themselves,

making their owne rage their ruine, their owne counselles their owne confusion, and the covering of their faces, and in turning all to his owne glory,To their confusion: happiness of his. with the greatest joy and happiness to his chosen flock and children for ever.
               
               
                  The third particular Meditation of the fift generall.
                  3. VVE are withall toHow he will then give us assurance of his kingdome to come with power. meditate infaith; How when hee hath prepared and set our hearts in order thus to pray, he wil then from heaven cause his owne Kingdome to come with power: how thē our Lord Iesus Christ whose the kingdome is, to whom the Father hath specially committed the governement of it, will then advance his owne Scepter, the true Scepter of righteousness, even his heavenly Gospell amongst

his very enemies; that then, his greatest enemies shall fall downe before him & lick the dust, in acknowledgement of their owne natural wretchedness, and of their willing submission to Iesus Christ, or perish for ever. How then ourRuinate the kingdome of Sathan and Antichrist. Lord and Saviour will once agayne cause Sathan to fall down from heaven like lightning,Luke 10, 18. ruinating his kingdom, and specially the kingdom ofConsume Antichrist. Antichrist; how he will consume that great Antichrist by the breath of his mouth, and utterly abolish him by the brightness of his comming. But the new Hierusalem heeCause the new Ierusalem to come from heaven, as a Bride prepared to meete her Husband. Apoc. 22. will cause to descend from heaven as a Bride trimmed & prepared to meete her Husband, and then will he set up and manifest before all the world the glory of his Majesty, and of the glorious Kingdome of his Son our Saviour,

with the felicity and glory ofAnd all in such sort as he hath foretold. all his Saints, in that manner which he hath foretold in his heavenly word; and in all things which are not yet accomplished concerning the same, every thing in their owne due time and season.
               
               
                  The fourth particular Meditation of the fift generall.
                  FOurthly, we are wisely toThy will bee done. &c. meditate in faith, How then he will accomplish andHe will then fulfill whatever not yet accomplished concerning his enemies, or his servants. fulfill all his holy will and counsell, even whatsoever he hath spoken by the mouthe▪ of any of his holy Prophets, which is not yet come to passe, executing both all his judgements upon all his and his Churches enemies, & performing whatsoever hee hath foretold and promised to his Saints. How then he wil certainly put into the hearts of

all, and namely of the Kings, which had formerly given their power vnto the Beast, to give all their power and authority to Iesus Christ, to fulfill his will, for the full executionAnd put new chearfulness into all the hearts of his, to do all his will. and performance hereof, and that cheerefully, wisely, & faithfully, like as i
                        •…
                      is done in heaven: and more specially to every one that can so call up on his blessed name; according to the measure of Grace and Power given to each in his place. Then he will effectually so encline our hearts as that this shall be our meate and drinke to do his will, and that wee shall never depart from him any more.
               
               
                  
                  The fift particular Meditation of the fift general: How hee will then deliver and feed his people.
                  FIftly, then we are withallG
                           •…
                        ve us this day our dasly bread. heere to meditate in faith, and in all confident assurance,How hee will deliver his people from all their miseries. how he will from heaven declare his fatherly and tender care for all his children thus crying to him, to deliver them from all their bondage, Famine, Sword, and other miseries, which they have endured by their merciless enemyes, whether bodily or spirituall: thus wiping away all teares from their eyes, so far as shall be most for his owne glory, and for their good. Then will he feed them with bread, asFeede them from heaven. from heaven, ministring abundantly al good things unto them, according to the dayes wherein they suffered

adversitie, recompensing thē double into their bosomes in all joy and heavenly felicitie,Recompensing them double. heere to be begun, and in an unspeakeable mannar to bee accomplished in the heavens.
               
               
                  The sixt particular Meditation of the fift generall: How then he will clense his people from their sinnes, and write his law in their hearts.Forgive us our trespasses as▪ &c.
                  
                  SIxtly, we are likewise seriously and ioyfully to bee pondering heereof: How thenTo meditate. he will forgive all the sinnes of his children according toHow then he will forgive the sinnes of all his people his gracious promise, and remember their iniquities no more, when they shall cry unto him by a lively Faith, as to their heavenly Father, burning with the zeale of his glorie and kingdome, and that all his divine wil may bee so accomplished.

That then he will open all our blind eyes to seeMake us see our pollutions our natural pollution and uncleanness, yea to beholde all out filthy sinnes, whereby we are defiled and loathsome in the eyes of our heavenly Father▪ and will withall make usAnd the fountaine open to u
                           •…
                         all. Zach. 13. 
                           •…
                        . to behold the fountaine of his Sonnes blood open to all the house of Israel for sin and for uncleanness. Then vvill he make all sorts that are his, even all his elect, as much toAnd to long after it. long after that Fountaine, as ever any did after the poole ofIohn 5, 3. 
                     Bethesda: and most gladlie to do whatsoeuer he hath apointed for the purging and clensing of themselves, and of all his Church from all her iniquities.How he w
                           •…
                        l then make our Repencance sound.
                  
                  And how to the end that our turning and repentance may be no longer formall (as it hath beene for the most part heeretofore, when wee

have cryed unto the Lord in our troubles, to be delivered from our distresse▪ and afterward have returned to our iniquities againe) but that it, and every part of it, may bee sound, and unfeigned, he will make every one of his owne cry with persecuting Saul,
                     Acts. 9. 6. 
                     Lord what wilt thou that I should doe? Then hee will putPut his Law in our minds &c. Icr. 31. 33. his Law into our minds, and write it in our hearts, according to his most gracious and blessed promise, when hee intendes to save his Church in such sort, as wee have just cause to hope hee is about to doe. Hee will cause us tenderlyCause us to forgive and pitty one another. Esay. 11. 6. to forgive and pitty one another; the Wolfe to dwell with the Lambe, and to desire to make all our very enemies partakers of the same mercies, and will keep us all that are his, that we may no more depart from him.
               
               
                  
                  The seuenth particular Meditation of the fift generall, How wee shall see him delivering his flock from Sathan, and dissolving all his cursed workes.
                  SEuenthly, wee are moreoverLea
                           •…
                         us not into temptation. to Meditate in faith, how then he will restraine the rage and power of the Tempter,To meditate how then he will restraine the tempter. reseuing his poore Lambs out of the jawes of the roaring Lyon. How he willDissolve his workes. then destroy and dissolve all the cursed workes of Sathan; discover his depthes, and allDiscover his depths of wickednesse. the wickednesse of his Inchāters, Sorce
                        •…
                     ers, Charmers, Witches, aud of all the rest of his crafty, malicious, and accursed instruments; making their madnesse manifest to all, and what practises they have used against all▪ even against

Christian Kings andAgainst all nations. Princes, Nations and people, to harden & turne them from the faith, as Iannes and Iambres
                     2. Tim. 3▪ 
                        
                           •…
                        . did to harden Pharaoh, and as Elimas against the Deputy, and Simon Magus againstHow the Kings of the earth who have given their power to the Beast have been deluded. Apo. 9. 3. 4. &c. 16. 13. 
                           •…
                        4. 
                     Samaria. How these and the Locusts comming out of the bottomlesse pit, have caused them to give their power to the Beast, and to fight against our Lord Iesus Christ.
                  And furthermore how thenHow he 
                           〈◊〉
                         then cause their inchantments to 
                           〈◊〉
                        . hee will cause all their witchcrafts & inchantmēts to cease, as they began so to cease at y• first comming of our Saviour in the flesh, and chiefly at the comming downe of the holy Ghost, and at that powerfull and effectuall▪ spreading of the Gospell, in every countrey wheresoever it so came▪
                  
                  Yea, how then all such deceivers shall curse their Gods,

and gnaw their tougnes forHow all deceivers shall curse their Gods, and g
                           •…
                        aw their tongues. sorrow, being inforced with that wretched Balaans, who loved the wages of iniquity, to acknowledge, that there is no sorcerie against Iacob, nor any divination againstNumb. 23. 23. 
                     Israel. How then wee shallHow Christ will be then wonderfull in saving his Church. see him whose name is Wonderfull, to shew himselfe wonderfull in the saving of his poore Church and Children from the power and fury of the great red Dragon, and in delivering us all in an admirable manner, from all these innumerable evils, which he & all his instruments have so long practised, & so maliciously & dreadfully intended & do still intend against his poor Church; whereupon he so castethout of his mouth all this huge flood of waters after her, to cause her to be carried away of the same at once; and by which the proud

enemies, have so cast lots uponHester. 3. 7. all that truly love and beleeve in his name, and as certainlyState mysteryes. determined and set downe our day, so soone as ever their opportunity shall serve, as Haman had against the Iewes.
                  
               
               
                  The eight particular Meditation of the fift generall, How then hee will declare himselfe sole Monarke, and to whom all glory belongs.
                  EIghtly, we are yet furtherFor thine is the kingdome, &c. to Meditate according to this heavenly direction, howTo meditate how Christ will then declare his Soveraignety. then he will declare himselfe before all the earth, to be the onely absolute Soveraigne Lord and King, the sole and mighty Monarch of all the world, that all power▪ is his, and to him alone belongs all glory and honour, when hee

shall thus shew himselfe so gloriously for his Church, in such a wonderful deliverance, in such unexpected and even incredible mercies to her (IAnd get himselfe glorie upon his proudest enemies. mean incredible to all humane reason) and when hee shall so get himselfe glory uppon his proudest enemyes, and make all the world to see, that hee hath overturned all their wisdome,Making all their counsels & power to serve him. power, and furie, making it to serve hereunto; and finally, that hee hath in all things so farre forth, accomplished whatsoever hee hath spoken ever since the beginning.
                  And likewise wee are earnestlyHow he will then maniseft that all the enemies have fought against him. to meditate, & to comfort our selves heerein▪ That then he will make it manifest, that the greatest enemies of the Church, have in all their 
                        •…
                     age not fought agaynst his Children, poore wormes, dust and ashes, for then they had

surely prevailed long agoe, to have destroyed his whole Church out of the earth; but that they have fought even against our Lord Iesus▪ Christ, this great King of kings, andThis will cause all to acknowledge his Soveraignty. Rom. 14▪
                      Lord of lords. Thus will hee cause all, both men and deuils to acknowledge and 
                        •…
                     say▪ 
                     For thine is the kingdome, power, & glory: and all the Children of God to sing with all the holie Angels, and all the hosst of Heauen, Halleluj
                        •…
                     h. Praise yeHis Angels & Sa
                           •…
                        hts to sing Halle
                           •…
                        . Apoc. 19, 6. the Lord: for the Lord▪ God omnipotent reigneth, ye
                        •…
                     , to fall upon their faces before the Throne, and to worship our God▪ saying Am
                           •…
                        n. Blessing, glory, wisedome, thanksgiving, honour, power▪ andApo. 7, 11, 
                           〈◊〉
                        . might be unto our God for ever and ever.
               
               
                  
                  The ninth particular Meditation of the fif
                        •…
                      generall: How we are never to rest, till wee can reioyce and triumph in the assurance of Faith, crying 
                        •…
                     oyntly, Amen.
                  
                  AND to conclude thisAmen. poynt, wee are ever to meditate seriously hereof, andNeuer to give over our Meditations and prayers untill we can by them 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •…
                        n Faith, Amen: reioycing & triumphing in our assurance to bee heard in all. never to give our hearts any rest, untill we can through the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of our Faith, rejoyce and even triumph continually with the Holy Angels: That how impossible soever these things may seeme to flesh and blood, and how incredible in the eyes of the world yet he will certainly accomplish thē all, in what time measure, and manner shal seeme best to his wisedome, accordingly as he hath foretold. And that, even then, when so many of us, as have, or can but unfeignedly

begin to set our selves in all things to walke hvmbly with him, shall likewise bee stirred up by his blessed Spirite, thus joyntly to cry unto him: for that, hee having taught andReasons of our assurance from his 1. Commandements. 2. Promises. 3. Inclining & preparing our hearts. commanded us thus to pray, and having given us so many assurances, that being such, & praying thus, he wil heare us: and finally, hee enclining and setting our hearts as with one accord, thus to importune him heerein, we can make no doubt of gracious audience, and a happy answere from his heavenly Majesty, even when we can joyntly crie in Faith, Amen. Euen so come Lord Iesus, come quickely,
                  
                  Amen, Amen.
               
            
            
               
               The Sixt generall Meditation.
               How all but those that are thus qualified are excluded from helping the Lord, and doe rather pull downe his wrath upon his Church.
               SIxtly, we are to bring our hearts yet further to a seriousTo meditate, How al other are excluded Meditation hereof likewise; That all other who are not so qualified, at least in the earnest desire and constant resolution of their hearts: and much more all who are contrarily affected in any of these things thus necessarily required in our preparation: and so all that beleeue not the word of the Lord in such manner, as to be fully perswaded of the truth of his promises and

threatnings, are excluded by the Lord himselfe, from being any meete helpers in this worke.
               
                  The First Meditation hereof, to be seriously pondered.
                  1 THat all such as live securely in theyr owneFirst: As All living securely excluded. wayes, without any due regard of the Lord, and of his poore Church, are excluded hence; even all such, as who albeit the Lord shewe such manifest token
                        •…
                      of his heavy displeasure agaynst his owne people and children for their sinnes; and although they see his Glory, Gospell▪ & People, to bee so generally trampled under foot, our lord Iesus Christ to be ready utterly to be thrust frō his throne, and his members in such miserable distress, or imminent perill▪ yet they care for none

of these things, but only mind their owne courses, and seeke to satisfy their owne wils and desires, as all our worldlings▪ and all the prophane sort in generall do.
                  Yea, all such are shutte2 All who do not in commiseration come to help him, and his poor church. out as unmeete, who are not now in a tender commiseration of the wofull estate of all the Lords people, de
                        •…
                     irous to obey our Lord Iesus Christ, comming to helpe him and them all, in what thing soever he shall make knowne unto them, that he stands in need of their helpe, and so calls for it at their hands; and who endeavour not unfeignedly to doe whatsoever he requireth, tending thereunto. And that this must needs be so for these reasons following, which are therefore every one of them to be seriously meditated of, and pondered, until we know our selves to have passed the

danger of them.
                  
                     The first reason to be seriously meditated of.
                     1 FOr that al such who regardReasons. him not in his poore and needy members,All such must be separated at the last day. must be separated from these whom our Saviour calles, The blessed of his Father, and must stand at his left hand among the Goats, and must then hear the wofull doome at that last dreadfull day; Go ye cursed into everlasting f
                              •…
                           re prepared for the Divell and his Angels, when I was an hungrie you gave mee no meat: when I was thirsty you gave me no drinke; when I was s
                              •…
                           ke and in prison, you visited me not; when I was naked, you cloathed me not; when I was a stranger and harbourlesse, you tooke me not in, &c. And therefore if it shall be so with these at that day, then certainely

they must needs bee rejected by him, as utterly unmeet for this service; who now that he calles for these duties at theyr hands, and that so lowd, as all the world doth ring thereof; yet are deafe in all, in regard of any commiseration. For what King▪ General, or Commander, will ever willinglie have any admitted into pay to fight under them, but onely such as they know to be loyally and faithfully affected towards them; and which doe lay to heart, their honours, causes, and quarrels, as if they were their owne: much lesse then can we thinke, that the Lord of heaven & earth (who needes none of our helpe, but can get himselfe the victorie over his enimies by the breath of his nostrils when it pleaseth him) will admit of any other to be with him, and to helpe him in this great work,

wherein he will so highly honour them; but onely so many as shall bee loyally and heartily affected towardes his Majesty, his causes, and children.
                  
                  
                     The second reason to be seriouslie thought of.
                     SEcondly, we are seriouslie to lay to heart, and to bethinke2. All excluded living in any one gross sinne impenitently, for that they are both blinde and deafe. our selves in time if we would be helpers herein, That all such who live in any one gross sinne impenitently, and much more in any one of those notorious abhominations which broght that dreadfull Captivity upon Iudah; & which the Lord hath caused to be set so lively before the face of all by y• holy Prophets themselves, together with the vengeance denounced for them, are also utterly excluded; especially, if they live

therein scandalously, to the slander of the Gospell, or the offence of others, to harden them in their courses; for that all such are both blinde and deafe, and make others so.
                     Such cannot see the wrathThey see not Gods wrath rushing on themselves, much lesse can they see it rushing on others. and vengeance of GOD, certainly rushing upon thēselves for their owne sinnes wherein they lye, much less can they see that which is rushing upon all the Churches for theyr security, and abuse of the gospell; and least of all can they discerne of any wrath conceived agaynst our selves: forThey perceyve not our sinnes. that they consider onely, that we yet live in peace, but perceyve not at all the multitude and heynousness of our most odious and lowd-crying sins, agaynst which the Prophets so thunder out the vengeance of the Lord, and for which all who are wise-hearted indeed and whose eyes GOD hath

rightly opened, doe feare and tremble.
                     They can neyther see anyNor any tokens of Gods displeasure. Nor the furie of the Churches Enemies. tokens of the Lords displeasure, nor yet discerne the enemies raging so furiously agaynst all the Churches abroad, as by their most deepe and bloody practises, threats, and intendments they daylie manifest to all the world; no not those enemies which bee in our very bosomes, such as all those are, who beare evill will against Sion. They perceiueNor the multitude of Locusts sent out of the bottomless pit. not the multitude of Locusts with such stinges in their tails, sent out of the bottomelesse pit to all the Kings of the earth, to draw them all if it were possible, & certainly every one of them, so farre as ever the Lord shall permit them) to take up arms against our Lord Iesus Christ, and his poore Church.
                     They are deafe, and cannot

heare the cry of their pooreNor heare the cryes of Gods poore children, much lesse his call to repentance. brethren, though sounding daily in their eares, so as to take any true pitty of them; how then should they heare the cry of the Lord, calling to themselves and all other to repent, so to prevent and pacifie his wrath.
                     Concerning these so continuing,Gods wrath upon all such in blinding their eies, & hardening their hearts. the holy Ghost oft declareth the heavy wrath of God that is upon them. That he hath blinded their eies, and made their eares dull of hearing,Esay. 6. 9. 10. hee hath hardened their hearts; least they should seeRom. 11. 8. with their eies, and heare with their eares, and convert and be saved. And yet more, for a further execution of his just and most heavy displeasure upon such as so harden and fatte themselves against his most terrible threats, thus dreadfully doth the holy Ghost bring in the Prophet

                        David, denouncing Gods vengeance against them, saying, Let their table bee a snare
                        Rom. 11. 9. 
                        and a net▪ and a stumbling block for a recompence unto them.
                     
                     These therefore, especiallyEsay. 56. Esay. 22. all blind watchmen, crying Peace, Peace, and all is well,Especially upon all blind watchmen calling for all the beasts to destroy. and so lulling themselves and all others asleepe, call for all the Beasts of the forrest to destroy; even for all the cruell enemies of Christ, & his true Church, to invade and make havocke of all the rest of the Churches, as of some others they have done before. How then should these pray for the Churches, when they cannot either see or heare any token of Gods wrath, so as to cause them to seeke to appease it, or pray for themselves; how should they then pray for others, especially for those whom in their hearts they scorne, onely because theyPsal. 14. 6.
                        
feare and put their trust in the Lord alone.
                  
                  
                     The third particular reason hereof to be throughly meditated of.
                     THirdly, wee are in feareAll the threatnings in the booke of God against such sins & sinners are against them. and trembling to Meditate, How all the threatnings in the booke of God, which are against those sinnes, wherin they live impenitently against the light of their owne hearts, & against such sinners, are against them; and particularly those which are against such, as will not submit themselves to walke in obedience to all the Commandements and ordinances of the Lord, but will walke stubbornely against him, though it bee but in any one sin; That he will walke stubbornly against them, and the like denuntiations; a
                           •…
                         those,

Levit. 26. 14. 15. 23. 24. Deut. 28. 15. 21. &c. 47. 48. Deut. 29. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. &c. But not soNot any one promise untill they repent. much as any one promise from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelation, which they can take hold of, as belonging to themselves, so long as they continue so to walke. They are manifestly excluded from medling with the Covenant of God. Psal. 50. from verse 16. to the end of it. But unto the wicked, said God, what hast thou to doe to take my Covenant into thy mouth, seeing thou hatest to bee reformed, and hast cast my Covenant behind thee? When thou sawest a theefe, thou didst runne with him, and thou hast beene partaker with the Adulterers, &c. Where he reckoning up some particular sinnes, sheweth plainly, that every such sin lived in obstinately, and with

delight, utterly excludes from all comfort in the Covenant of Grace and mercy in Christ. And that they onely who offer to God praise, and unfeignedly indeavour to pay their vowes unto him, that is, to yeild to him a perfect & intire obedience, have the promise and comfort of the Covenant.
                     These may call upon him in the day of trouble, commingPsal. 50, 14. 15 with confidence to the Throne of Grace, and lifting up pure hands without staggering or doubting; and hee will hear them, that they may glorifie him accordingly. But otherwise, be they never so forward in profession, and let them never so much thereupon flatter themselves, yet they shall heare this insteed of any comfort, I know you not, depart from me ye that worke iniquitie. How then can they imagine

to be accepted in this worke, or that God should vouchsafe so much as to heare others praying for them, that they may be saved, until they turne and submit themselves wholly unto him. We ought therfore to labour to bring our hearts, to be able with feare and trembling, to heare and receive that sweet counsell of the Lords, Psal. 50. 22. Oh consider this; ye that forget God, lest I teare you in peeces, and there be none that can deliver you. He that offereth me praise, shall glorifie me, and to him that disposeth his way aright, will I sh
                              •…
                           w the salvation of God: That is, onely to such a one.
                  
                  
                     The 4. particular Reason hereof, to be thorowly laid to heart.
                     FOurthly, wee are in feare4. Reason. and trembling to lay this further to heart, How everie

notorious sinner, though it beEvery notorious sinner helpes to pull downe the vengeance on all. but in one onely sinne, helpes to pull downe the vengeance of God upon all, and to hinder the prayers of all the rest, so much as the sin of one man can do, as was noted before. Like as Achan did by his Sacriledge: yea, if it bee but in flying for feare, from his office injoyned by the Lord, for the saving of his people, or neglecting it, as Ionah: for whose sinne the storme could not be stayed, untill hee vvas cast into the Sea. And much more all they who wallowing in their wickedness, doe callEsay 5. good evill, and evill good; light darkness, and darkness light. For that these, as they hale on iniquity as with cartropes, so they violently draw downe the vengeance of God upon all, as much as such sinners can. Eyther the Waters of the old world, as did the

Gyants before the Flood, if they be such, or fire & brimstone, as did the filthie Sodomites, if they live in those sins of theyrs; as namely, in Pride, fulness of Bread, aboundance of Idleness, not regarding to strengthen the handes of the poore. Or finally, if they be but any way Oppressours or Spoylers of Gods people and Children, their sinnes crye for other Oppressors & Spoylers in Gods just vengeance to be sent to oppress and spoile them and theirs, as it came fearefully to pass in the Captivitie. And therefore thus haling down vengeance, how can they pray to turne it away.
                  
                  
                     The Fift reason heereof to be seriously meditated of.
                     FIftly, wee are to strive to bee thoroughly touched

with the right understanding5. All excluded who have no compassion of their Bretheren in their miseryes. & lively feeling hereof, That they who have no mercie nor compassion on their Brethren in their miseries bodily or spirituall, can looke for no mercy nor compassion. And much more, they who add affliction to the affliction of them whom God hath wounded, whereas they should affoord comfort to them as lively feeling members of ye same true mysticall body of our Lord Iesus Christ: yea all who do but stand on the other side in the day of their Brethrens miseries, and doe not at least with faithfull Abraham, pray earnestly for them, as hee for them of Sodome. Yea, which is more dreadfull, if they doe not to the uttermost of their power, as God cals them, and offers them opportunitie andIf they doe not adventure themselve▪ for their brethrē
                         meanes) adventure thēselves for their Brethren carryed away

captives, to the dishonor of the Lord, and the shame of his whole Church and Gospell, they can looke for no commiseration, no not in their owne extreamest calamities; though they howl upon their beds in the feare or feeling of their miseryes; or roare and tumble as wilde Bulles taken in nets; much less can they hope to be admitted to this holy worke thus to helpe the Lord, before they have bene truly humbled for this sinne, and haue brought their hearts to such a lively sense and feeling of the miseryes of theyr Brethren, as that their bowels can earne over them for the same.
                  
                  
                     The sixt Reason to be rightly considered of.
                     SIxtly, we are seriously to
                           
                              •…
                           . Reason. thinke heereof, and not to

rest before we have brought6. None can be right helpers but onely those vvho can more lay to heart the causes of God and his people, then their owne. our hearts to a right consideration of it, That none but onely those who can so lay to heart the dishonors done unto his Majesty, in the blaspheming of his great and glorious name; the trampling under foot his Gospell and people, as that they can at least unfeignedly desire and labour to bee more troubled for the same, and more humbled in themselves for them, then for any private evill that can betide thēselves or frends, can possibly be meete for this worke. For that if we do not so highly esteeme and prefer his glory and Gospell, as that in regard thereof, we can even neglect and despise our selves we do exceedingly dishonour and despise him, and therefore must looke to bee despised of him, and so have all our prayers, and all service in this behalfe

untill that time utterly rejected.
                  
                  
                     The senenth reason to be seriously Meditated of, That none can be admitted, who will not cest away their sinne, though as deere as their right eye.None m
                              •…
                           ete but they who indeavour to turne from every evill way.
                     
                     THis is above all (though touched in part before) to bee deeply and duely pondered, to bring our hearts to a true beleeving and feeling of it: that not any but such as now harken to his loud cry to repent and turne from all their evill wayes, even in every particular can bee meete for this, though their sinne be as deere unto them as their right eye, if they love i
                           •…
                         more then the Lord Iesus, they cannot bee worthy of him.Mat. 5. 29. Therefore sith God hath threatned all such, that they must be cast into hell fire, and

so perish eternally from his presence; how can they ever imagine to bee admitted to this worke, seeing they cannot stand before him. Or ifAnd to receive the love of every part of Gods truth. 2. Thess. 2. 10. they be such as have not, no
                           •…
                         yet will receive the love of the truth, so as to obey it in what they know, that they may be saved; or such as whenRom. 1. 21. they know God, they will not set themselves to glorifie him as God; but contrarily will more and more dishonor him by going on obstinately in their sinnes; or such as haveEzek. 14. 3. set up any stumbling block of their owne wicked imagination to worshipe it; how can they thinke to bee helpers herein unto the Lord for all others.Though they flatter themselves God will not be mercifull to them. Deut. 29. 19.
                     
                     Howsoever they flatter themselves that they shall do well enough, though they live in that sinne for a time, or at least a little, and that they

shall have peace, that God will bee mercifull unto them, notwithstanding all that hee hath denounced to the contrary: yet the Lord hath toldDeut. 19. 20. us plainly, that he will not be mercifull to any such but will make his wrath smoake against then, untill they bee consumed. Hee hath declaredBut will give them up to be deluded. 2. Thess. 2. 11. to all the world, that such shall be either given up to be strongly deluded by Antichrist, or by some other like delusion; that they shall beeAnd in the end to a reprobate sense. Rom. 1. 28. given up in the end to a reprobate sense▪ as hee gave up the very Gentiles for abusing but the light of Nature; yeaEzek. 14. 14. That Gods owne Prophets shall helpe to deceive such. that Gods owne Prophets shall helpe to deceive such, to sooth them in their evill way; answering them according to their owne evill heart. That thus the stumbling block which any one hath set up to worship, and wherein he hath

preferred the obeying & serving of his owne lusts before his obeying & serving of the Lord Iesus, shall be his ruine and destruction. And therefore no such man so long as hee continueth obstinately in his sinne can hope to bee admitted, or to have any hand or part in this holy worke.
                  
                  
                     The eighth reason hereof, That but inclining to any fin, God will not heare us.
                     ANd more then all this to awake our consciences yet more fully, the LordIohn. 9. 31. would have us further to thinke of this deeply, that hee which inclineth to any wickednesse in his heart; but to any one sinne, desiring to have hisProv. 28. 9. corrupt lust satisfied in it, contrary to the light of his conscience, his prayer even for that is a bhominable, soPsal. 66. 18.
                        
that God will not heare him, as David professeth of himselfe.
                  
                  
                     The ninth reason hereof to bee ever in our hearts, That whosoever is not with our Saviour is against him.
                     TO shut up all briefly,None but they who in all things indeauour to be with our Saviour are true disciples this is never to be out of our hearts. That whosoever is not with our Saviour, is against him; whosoever indeavoureth not to bee so with him, so to follow and helpeMat. 12. 30 him, as a true Disciple and souldier, to be furnished with every of the former qualities; to bee armed with every part of the compleate Armour of a Christiain; to be in all things such a one as hee hath so prescribed; yea, who will not bind & set himselfe constantly to keepe his watch, but sometimes give liberty to his

owne euill heart, hee cannot have any true hope to bee admitted to this worke, but inOur danger in approaching neere to our God with out a warrāt. 2 Sam. 6, 7. pressing in, to helpe without a warrant, as Vzzah did to stay the Arke-tottering, is in danger of Gods heavy displeasure, and to have his prayer turned into sinne. That it shal so come to pass unto him, as unto those who would go toNumb. 24, 40, 41, &c. Deut. 1, 41, 45. fight without y• Lord. He may looke for a curse in stead of a blessing, & to have the Lords hand stretched out agaynst him, to fall and flye before his enemyes. Till this time, every such a one may be afraid ofExod. 19, 24. comming neere the Mountaine, of putting his hand to the Arke; of rushing into the battle without Armor, & may look to speed as he that came to the marriage, without hisMath: 22, 11, 12, 13. wedding Garment.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The second particular Meditation of this sixt generall, Who may with hope and confidence offer themselues.
                  NOW upon all these and the like grounds, we are to labour yet further to bring our hearts to a right understanding, and a more thorovv apprehension of that second generall Meditation, togither with this which followeth:Onely they who are so qualified as the Lord requires, are the men whō he cals. to wit, That those and they alone who are so qualified, and every way so fitted as are before described, are the men whom indeed the Lord at this day looks for: and which can say with the Prophet Esay,
                     Esay 6, 8. 
                     Lord heere I am, admit me for one of those whose help thou wilt accept. For Lord, thou knowest, that to my poore power, and that measure of grace which thou hast vouchsafed

me, I have in all things unfeignedly desired to be prepared and fitted to helpe thee and thy poore Church. Accept of my feeble desires, and supply that which is wanting. Thy grace is sufficient for me.
                        
                           •…
                        . Cor. 1
                           •…
                        , 9. Thy power is seene in the greatest weakness. Lord thou that seest all hearts, hast tryed my heart and my 
                        •…
                     eynes, how unseignedly I have sought thee heerein, contending to walke before thee, and as in thy presence continually, and to bee kept undefiled, from whatsoever might any vvay offend thy most holy eyes. Though I be weake and unworthy, and have had exceeding many slips, wants, and faylings, yet for the worthyness of thy Christ, admit of those (though so feeble) desires which thou hast vouchsafed me. Giue me my pressmoney, the earnest and seale

of thy holy Spirit. My heart is prepared to doe thee the faithfullest service that ever thou shalt enable me. Lord, by such poore weake Wretches, and at their praiers, thou hast bin wont to get thy selfe the victorie, that no flesh should rejoyce in thy presence, but that all glorie, honour, and praise may be given to thee alone for evermore.
                  
                     Reasons to be seriously weighed; that onely such can looke, or hope to have acceptance here.
                     1. THat these onely are in a true League & Covenant with God; and thereuponThese only in a true league with God. Deut. 16, 17, 18, 19. are such as his heavenly Majestie doth not disdaine to call his Friends, as Abraham was called the Friend of God. And therefore they (though they be but dust and ashes) may presume through

the merit of the Lord Iesus to intreat even for filthy Sodom; yea, to importune his heavenly Majesty, and expect to obtaine of him, that if there bee but ten righteous persons in five wicked cities, he wil spare all for ten sake.
                     These onely are fit men toThese fit to helpe to rescue their Brethren from Sathan. helpe by their prayers, to rescue their Brethren out of the hands of Sathan, and of all their cruell enemyes, vvhich have carried them away Captives, and who do so insult & triumph over all, and over the Lord himself, as thinking that they have already made a conquest of all. These are theTo stay the Lords hands. Exod. 32. 20. 
                              •…
                           4. men, and these alone vvhich can with Moses stay the lords hands, that he should not destroy his people. These areTo whom he can deny nothing. they, to whom God can deny nothing. Onely these, who having thus put their shooes off their feet▪ are fit with that

holy Moses to stand before the Lord▪ to be sent to fetchThese fit to fetch Gods people out of Egypt. his people their brethren out of Egypt from the Tile-killes, and to pull them out of the middest of the fire.
                     These are with Aaron, thorowThesemeet to pacific the Lord and to stand betweene the living and dead. the continuall intercession of our great High-Priest, meete to helpe to pacifie the Lords displeasure towards the remnant of his people, to stand betweene the living and the dead. These being supportedTo hold up their hands against Amalek. by Aaron and Hur can holde up their hands, till God have got himselfe a glorious victory against Amalek.
                     These, and these alone, areTo make all creatures to be for his people untill he haue got himselfe the victory. able with Iosuah to cause the Sunne to stand still (so farre as the Lord shall see it best for his owne glory) until he shall be avenged of all his enemies; and therfore much more may they be confident in matters of less moment. For, vvhat

cannot the prayer of FaithHeb. 11. bring to passe? These men are able with Eliah, to moove the Lord (so farre as in his divine wisedome he shall see it best)1. King. 18, 38, 39. to send fire from Heaven to consume their Sacrifices, and to make knowne to all, that he hath accepted them. And moreover to move the Lord,To move the Lord to manifest the truth of his religion. to manifest to all the World (and that as clearely as if hee spake from Heaven) who is the Lord, which is his true religion, and which the false:1. King. 18, 36, 37, 38, 39. Dan 3, & 6. who they are that are the true children of Iesus Christ, and who they are of the otherside that are the Servants of Sathan and Antichrist: who are with him, who against him.
                     These are they▪ who vvith Mordokey and Hester, and the rest of the faithfull amongestTo reuerse Hamans dedecree. the Iewes, are able to obtain the reversing of that most bloody decree procured by

wicked Haman against GodsHest. 8, 5, 6. people, although it be to doe all the decrees of the Medes & Persians, such as to man seemeth impossible euer to beeHest. 7, 8. reversed; and to cause Haman to be hanged upon his owne Gallowes. To turne the plot devised agaynst Gods people to their joyfullest day, a day to be remembred for ever; a day of shame and confusionHest. 8, 18. to all Gods enemies.
                     These are they whose praiersThe prayers of these ever come up before the Lord and they may surely expect an answere in his due time. Acts. 10, 10, 11, 12, &c, 30. Dan. 9, 20, 23, 24. come up before the Lord, as the prayers of holy Daniel, Cornelius, and Peter, and who may looke for an answer from heaven at the evening Sacrifice, above all that they can imagine; even by the ministery of Gods blessed Angels so farre as shall be best.These may hope with Paul to save themselues and all in the ship.
                     
                     These are they that in the greatest perils of the Church, may hope through their praiers, with holy Paul to saveActs. 27, 24.
                        
themselves and all in the Ship with them, in such sort as the heavenly Wisedome shall see it best, that at least they may swimme out, though for not hearkning unto the Lord in time, they may all first suffer shipwracke, and be 
                           〈◊〉
                         into the Sea.
                     These are they, with whomWith these will Christ Iesus be in the fiery Furnace, and the Lyons den. at their cryes, our Lord Iesus will be, as he was with those three Worthies of the Captivitie, in the middst of the hot fiery Furnace, and in the verieDan. 3, 24, 25. Dan. 6. 22, 23. Lyons den with holy Daniel, to stop the mouthes of those hunger-bitten Lyons, that the least hurt shall not come unto them, more then shal be for his eternall glory, with theAnd in their greatest tryals make their innocency, & his religion knowen. Dan. 3, 29, 30, 31, &c. Dan. 4, 33, 34 Dan, 6, 22, 23. greater good of his Church & People; and by whose trialles our blessed God and tender Father, hath made knowne the truth of his Religion, and of his causes, with the innocencie

of his people, to Kings, Princes and Rulers, and to cause it by them to be published, as it were to the world, like as he did when it was commanded by them to bee spred and divulged in all the Dominions of the mightie Monarchs, and so from them to goe to all other Nations with whom any of them had any trafficke or familiaritie. And by whom he hath beene wont to effect & accomplish his owne glorious workes as he hath foretold, above all that any of his owne deerest Servants could ever imagine, o
                           •…
                         could have beene perswaded of by any humane reason, that they could ever haue bin brought to pass.
                     And thus much for this generallConclusion of this generall Meditation. Meditation; viz: who they be that exclude themselves; and also who they are, and who alone, that can everWho meete.
                        
looke to be committed as approved of the Lord for this blessed and glorious worke. And how wee must strive toHow we must strives heereto. passe thorow all the difficulties, before wee can approach with any true confidence and assurance to put our hand hereto, and much more so as to bee able to preuaile with our God to bee made as his Israel: and what confident boldnesse we may houe herein;And what confident boldness we may then have. for that if wee bee such as these, our God is stil the same, hee is not changed, neither is there with him any variablenesseIam. 1, 7. or shadowing by turning.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The seuenth generall Meditation.
               That the Lord notwithstanding graciously cals all sorts to be his helpers herein, and therefore every one who will not strive to bee of this number, and come to bee on his side must perish, and doth iustly bring upon himselfe swift damnation.
               IN this seuenth place, theThe blessed estate and honour of all admitted to this worke and contrarily. Lord would have us seriously to lay to heart out of all these Meditations, the blessed estate and honour of them, who are called and admitted to this great imployment; and of the contrary, the miserable and wofull condition of all who any way exclude themselves; yea of all who do

not seeke to helpe herein. And withall, how notwithstanding all these things, the Lord excludes none, save onlyGod excludes none but who exclude themselvess. But cals all. those who (as was saide) exclude themselves; but that he cals to all, and would have all to addresse themselves, and to be meete and ready to assist & joyne with him herein▪ and that therefore all those who will not doe their uttermost indeavour to prepare and fit themselves, are justlyThat all are iustly damned who come not to helpe. damned even for this, for refusing to come to helpe him and his poore people in their distresse, when hee so cals on them to come; and for joyning with Sathan and Antichrist his sworne enemie, even against his heavenly Majesty. To make it plaine to every soule, that he cals every one hereunto, 
                     •…
                  ach is to consider well these reasons following.
               
                  That hee cals all to everySome reasons shewing that he cals all to helpe if ever they will see his face with ioy. one of these dutyes mentioned, in all these Meditations before, and especially to these which now follow.
               1. That he cals all to beeHe cals all to be with him. on his part in the earth, that ever will bee with him in glory.He cals all to regard him in his members.
               
               2. That hee cals all to regard him in his poore members to the end of the world,Mat. 25. as when he is hungry to feede him, &c. To shew mercie, if ever they will find mercy.
               3. Hee cals all to repentance,To repent & turne from all their evill wayes that they may live every one to turne from his evill way in every kinde, and much more from all those notorious abhominations, which brought the wrath of God uppon Iudah, and upon other impenitent sinners in former Ages. and for which hee denounceth his vengeance; and likewise hee calleth all to awake forth of

all their security wherein they sleepe; if ever they hope to scape his heavy indignation, & so to meete him with intreaty of peace, y• they may be fit to helpe to stand in ye breach. That he cals to this end, even Publicans, Harlots, Scorners of all sorts; hee stretcheth out his hands, to gaine-sayers andRom. 10. 20. 21. rebels, yea to the most notorious sinners that live upon the earth, thus protesting to every particular soule. As I
                  Ezek▪ 18. 21, 22, 30, 31, 32, &c. 33, 11. The Lords protestation. 
                  live I delight not in the death of a sinnor, but rather that hee repent and live.
               
               4. Hee cals all to walkeHe calls all to his Covenant. Lev. 26. Deut. 28. humbly in his Covenant, that he may performe all hts promises unto them, and turne away all his heavy denuntiations. Of which Covenant these are the very principall parts, to love him above all, and our neighbour as 
                     〈◊〉
                   selfe.
               
                  3. Hee cals every one soHe calls all to pray as he hath directed to pray as hee hath directed and commanded, and that for all his owne causes chiefly, as namely, the causes which concerne his glory, kingdome, and people; and therefore every one should labour to be such a one as can so pray, whereby hee makes it manifest to all, that hee 
                     〈◊〉
                   none at all, but would have all learne so to pray and to bee fitted thereunto.
               6. That every generallGod calls all to lay hold of all the promises of mercy. promise of mercy in all the booke of God cals us hereto: as the promises of forgetting our sinnes, and not remembring our iniquities any more and this without limitationWithout limitation of time. Ezek. 18. 21. 22. Psal. 95, 7. of time, but at what time soeuer it be, that a sinner converts, or without any exceptiof any sinne (save only of that vnpardonable sinne, the maliciousOr exception of sinne. Ezek. 
                        •…
                     8. oppugning, & persecuting

of all the knowne truthEsay. 55. 3. Or person. Numb. 21. 8. 9. of God) and without exception of any person; and bids all but harken, and their souleIohn. 3. 14. 15. 18. shall live; if they can but see ye brazen Serpent, beleeve in our Saviour, hunger, thirst, and cry after him.
               7. So doth every exampleAnd calls all to behold all the examples in his booke of receiving poore sinners Luk. 15. 10. of Gods mercy in receiving repentant sinners, as of Manasses, Saul, Mary Magdalen, the repentant Thiefe upon the Crosse; the joy that is in heaven for the conversion of a poore sinner; the high favourThe favour such are in upon their repentance. Luke. 7. 47. that upon their unfeigned repentance such poore wretches may know themselves to bee in with God.Never any such a one reiected. Rom. 5. 20. 
                  That where sinne hath abounded, there grace abounds much more: and never any so comming rejected.
               
                  
                  Three more speciall Meditations to this end. That the wise consideration of them may never go forth of our hearts untill we be of this number.
                  ABove all the former, theThree things to be thought of ever untill we be of this number. Lord would have every poore soule to meditate most seriously, and in their most secret thoughts, of these three things following, that ye wise consideration of them may never bee from before their eies, nor the sound of them out of their eares, untill they be of this number.
                  
                     The first Meditation to this end to be seriously pondered That our Lord Iesus stands continually at the heart of every impenitent sinner to enter in.
                     
                        1 HOw our Lord IesusThat the Lord hath ever stood & still stands knocking at the heart of every impenitent sinner. Christ, hath stood at the doore of their hearts all the daies of their life, calling them to repentance, to know, feare, love, obey, & beleeve in him; and that by the loud voyce, both of every one of his Creatures, of his mercies, and iudgments. And more specially, at the hearts of allChiefly of all in his Church. in his Church by his heavenly word, which he hath sent unto them; by all the admonitions,By his word▪
                         exhortations, reproofes, threatnings, promises, & the like; that ever he hath vouchsafed unto them by the ministry of his Servants, grounded upon the same word, and alsoAnd Sacraments. by the holy Sacraments, as namely by their Baptisme, byAs Baptisme. which hee hath beene still teaching and calling upon them even from their cradles, to beleeve in him and to

serve him only, according to his blessed Commandement: to fight under his banner, for that they are such as hee hath Redeemed with a great priceAnd the Lords supper and are not their owne: and also by the holy Communion of his body and blood; wherein as our Saviour gives, or at least offers himselfe wholly to them, so they give againe themselves wholly untoAnd by the good motions of his Spirit. him. And not onely so, but by the good motions of his blessed Spirit, and that so oft as they have felt in themselves holy purposes of amendment and turning unto the Lord.And now at this time louder then ever.
                     
                     How now at this very time he still stands & knocks louder and louder then ever heretofore, by all the tokensBy all the tokens of his displeasure. of his heavy displeasure against ye severall Churches; & Rage of the enemie. all the rage and malice, which is against the whole true

Church of Christ; yea, against every soule professing his name sincerely as they ought. And so by every of those speciallOur favours. favours which wee injoy, or which wee hereafter looke for from him; and even by this very helpe, and all othersThis helpe. which he offers unto us for our right and unfeigned meeting him, before his wrath bee wholly powerd out upon us, and for our true humiliation under his hand, and stooping to him in all things.
                     
                        More particularly.More particularly.
                        
                        THat hee stands at thy
                              
                                 •…
                              e stands at the heart of every one reading this or the like admonition. heart whosoever thou art, that readest or hearest this or the like admonition, crying unto thee that thou wouldest now repent unfeignedly of each thy fearefull sinnes, & namely of thy hardnesse

of heart and impenitencyThat they would repent of their impenitencie. in them, whereby thou hast so long kept out thy Lord and Saviour, and onely made thy heart an habitation for Sathan, and as a den of Dragons. And that thouTo have their soules clensed. wouldest seeke now to have thy soule & conscience wholly clensed and purged in the blood of the Lambe, and to wash the feete of thy deere Saviour with Mary Magdalen, by the teares of thy unfeigned sorrow, for all thy former unkindness, and for thy ungraciousness, in keepingChiefly of ungraciousnesse in keeping out the Lord Iesus. out thy Lord and Saviour so long; giving unto Sathan the whole possession of thy heart, and so the very chiefe roomes thereof, & not vouchsafing unto Christ Iesus so much as entertainment within thy threshold. Then will heChrist will come to such a one. Rev. 3. 20. come in to thee, how unworthy soever thou art, and Sup

with thee, and thou with him.
                        This shall be the joy fullest day that ever shone upon thee; for hee being in thy heart, will by his blessed Spirit not onely teach thee thus to pray, but will certainly make thy prayers to pi
                              •…
                           rce the very heavens, and finde happy audience at the throne of Grace, chiefly in all these causes which so highly concerne his Majesty, his poore Church and people. He will then bring unto thee that joy with him, that goes beyond all the joy of all worldly men, and farre beyond that which all things here belowe can ever bring unto thee: That
                           2. Cor. 3. 9. 
                           which eye never saw, nor eare heard, nor entered into mans heart to consider of. Yea, that which shall never be taken away from thee, but be a continuall feast for evermore.
                        And contrarily, if yet thou

wilt not harken unto him, butAnd contrarily to them who harden their hearts against Christ Iesus. still harden thy heart against him, the time shall come, that every call of his which ever thou heardest before, and hastThe sound of his calls shall ever be in their eares affrighting them. contemned, shall sound so shrill in thy eares, when it will be too late, as thou shalt have it affrighting thee perpetually. That thou never shalt have rest day nor night, for the dreadfull noyse of these many cals, because thou wouldest not harken in time, but didst put off ye day of thy repentance; and so of harkening to his sweet voyce of mercy, thus calling thee stilto bee partakers of his mercy, and even of this high favour, and now at day in these dangers of the Church in a speciall manner above all other.
                        Wherefore let the counselExhortation to all to heare now. Dan. 4. 24. of the holy Ghost be now acceptable unto thee, breake off thy sinnes by repentance: be

not as the deafe Adder anyPsal. 95. 7. longer; But whilst it is now called to day, heare his voy
                                 •…
                              . Contemne it not now; little knowest thou, whether ever thou shalt heare it any more thus in mercy, but onely in wrath and vengeance for despising his long suffering, and all the riches of his compassion.
                     
                  
                  
                     The second Meditation, To thinke what it is for a man to forsake his owne happinesse▪ in refusing Christs gracious call, and to joyne with Sathan against him, to his endlesse perdition.
                     SEcondly, the Lord calsTo thinke what it is to refuse Christs call, to ioyne with Sathan and the damned. loud to every soule to bethinke him seriously in time, what it is for a man, not onely to refuse and contemne the gracious call and service of our Lord Iesus Christ, yea all

his favours, all his sweet promises and mercies concerning both this and a better life; all the glory and happinesse of the Celestiall Canaan, the heavenly Ierusalem, where is fulnes of joy in the presence of the Lambe and at the right hand of our heavenly Father, pleasures for evermore; but of the contrary, to choose to joyne himselfe with Sathan and with all the damned, to serve under him against our Lord and Saviour.Such to bethinke themselves what they will doe when Christ comes.
                     
                     Likewise to thinke aforehand what such a men will doe, when hee must appeare before his glorious Majesty, when all the greatest & proudest of the earth, that have so set themselves against him, shall cry to the Hils & Mountaines to fall upon them and cover them from the presence of the Lambe: so terrible shall his very presence be unto

them then (though a Lambe to all beleevers whoApoc. 14, 4. have heere followed him in true obedience, & to all who yet shall harken to his voyce) yea, so dreadfull shall it bee, when whatsoever tormentWhen all threatned against them shall be fully executed. and misery is denounced against them in the booke of God, to bee inflicted upon them hereafter, shall be most certainly, and fully executed, in that lake burning with fire and brimstone.
                     For the unfallible truth andFor the evidence hereof undoubted certainty hereof, the Lord cals every soule alwaiesTo behold the fearfull spectacles. to behold with the eies of their minds, not only those fearfull spectacles mentionedOf men tormented with horror of conscience in the Scriptures. in his word, of that wofull horror of conscience, which hath so surprized and overwhelmed so many of the wicked, whom God hath left for ensamples to all posterity, even for their malicious wickednesse,

though but against some one of his Servants, as namely, in Caine, Saule, Achitophel, Iudas, and others; when they did but onely consider the wrath of the Lord, and his vengeance due unto them, and which would overtake them, or felt it beginning to seize upon them for this sinne; but moreover heeIn daily examples. cals them to thinke aright of the continuall examples that hee daily seteth before their faces in the miseries of so many of his deerest Children.
                     How they are tormentedHow they are tormented in conscience for particular slips or failings. when their consciences are awakened with a right apprehension and feare of the wrath of the Lord for their sinnes, wherein they have served Sathan; though not taking part against his Majesty and Children; no nor so much▪ as in forsaking him, or them, or any his causes; but onely for

some particular sl
                           •…
                        ps, failings and infirmities, as either for some spirituall pride, or timerousnesse in fearing men more then God; and thereupon omitting some necessary confession, or other good duty; or for doing some small thing against their conscience; or for some unbeleefe, in not being able to rest upon the Lord his love and care in the failing of outward meanes, as it was with Moses at the waters of strif
                           •…
                        ; or for spirituall security, for decaying in their first love, neglecting the conscionable use of meanes of grace and saluation, or the like.
                     How even these, I say,How these 
                              〈◊〉
                            indure the flashings of hell fire. when their consciences are throughly awaked, doe indure, as it were, the very slashings of hell fire; and this so dreadfully, as their miseries astonish all that behold them,

and that they themselves doe account all outward tortures nothing in regard thereof: so that many a time with holy Iob, they wish an end wereIob. 7. 15. made of them; being oft ready through Sathans malice, to lay violent hands upon themselves. Also for that they indure this so long, as that Gods hand pursues some of them, throughout their whole life: that they are usually uncapable of any comfort (though the same be sent by a messenger of God even one of a thousand) except it bee a little before their death, wherein the Lord commonly vouchsafeth unto them much heavenly assurance and consolation.
                     And if it be so with theseIf it be so with these heere. here, while yet the day of salvation remaines, and the accepted time, and also whilst they have the most excellent

meanes to comfort them, yea, though they bee such as have felt formerly the assurance of Gods love & favour in Christ, and many lively▪ evidences thereof; & which is the chiefestThough they be most deer unto the Lord. of all, though they▪ be such as are deere and pretious unto the Lord, and who have his holy Spirit for their earnest, (albeit onely for a time they want the sense & feeling of it, as it hath beene in many a soule in our memory, and is at this day: whereupon they have bene, & are so usually prayed for in many of our best Congregations, from whence they looke for some helpe & comfort by the praiers of Gods people:) if I say it bee so with them, what canWhat shall become of all impenitent sinners. wee thinke shall become of the ungodly and impenitent sinners; & especially, of thoseAnd chiefly of all Christs enemies▪
                         enemies of Christ and his Servants▪ when their consciences

shall bee throughly awaked, and much more after this life, when their case in regard of any comfort, shall be contrary to the estate of these poore Servants of the Lord. If the1. Peter. 4. 18. 19. If the righteous be scarsly saved how they. righteous shall scarsly bee saved (as Peter speaketh, and as wee see how hardly it goes with these last mentioned) where shall the wicked and ungodly appeare? If the paineIf paine of a tooth be so great, what shall their totall torment be. of one tooth (alone) be oft so extreame, that it permits no sleepe nor rest day nor night, when wee have all kind of other comforts to mitigate and ease it, what can wee thinke the torments of all the parts both of soule and body must needs be, in the Lake burning with fire and brimstone for ever, where the very hope of all other comforts shall be utterly taken away, which notwithstanding we are certainly assured must come upon

all impenitent and ungodly sinners, because the word of the Lord doth tell us so most plainly, and so oft warnes us of it. The Lord cals from heaven continually upon all who doe not repent them of their sinnes, & come to helpe him, to thinke seriously hereof, as which alone shall beeThese sufficient to convince all. sufficiently able to convince and condemme all that ever have heard the holy Scriptures, or but these fearfull examples alone.
                  
                  
                     The third Meditation, How God herein sets before us all, life and death, blessing and cursing.
                     FInally, we are to bethinkeDeut. 30. 19. 20. How God sets before us life and death, blessing & cursing. our selves, in our deepest and best Meditations, how the Lord here sets before every soule, life and death, blessing and cursing. Life if

we will but now set our selvesLife if we will harken to his call. seriously with all our hearts to seeke to pass all these difficulties; never giving rest to our soules, untill by our Meditations and prayers, and the right use of all other holy meanes, which in his word he hath prescribed us, wee have attained so to beleeve, and so to obey, yea in all things so to doe as hee requireth at our hands, that wee may be fit to helpe him and his poore Church. Then we shall have boldnesse whatsoever comeThat we shall not need to feare to passe; we shall not need to feare, though all our enemies were so many Divels; weeNor be dismaied for loosing all. Mat. 19. 27. Mat. 10. 37. 38. Luke. 14. 26. But contrarily have boldnesse. Prov. 28. 1. Rom. 8, 35. 36. shall not be dismaid, for the adventuring and loosing of all, Houses, Goods, Friends, Parents, Children, no nor Life it selfe: but contrarily, in the middest of death, wee shall be bold and couragious as Lyons for our Lord and

Saviour, knowing that nothingRom. 8. 35. 36. can separate us from Gods favour; and in the losse of all, we shall gaine all, bee in all, even in the middest ofBe more then Conquerours. Ron. 
                              •…
                           , 37. death more then Conquerors, thorow him who hath so loved us, and hath given himselfe for us, and shall with him triumph over all our enemies eternally▪
                     
                     Death and cursing he likewiseDeath and cursing in not yeelding to him. sets before us, & threatneth them unto us undoubtedly, without unfeigned repentance,Deut. 30. 19. 20. whereof wee can have little hope, if he now calling upon us thus earnestly to helpe him, by the offer of so many mercies, and such blessednesse on the one side, we will not shew our true obedience and uttermost indeavour therunto; and if hee denouncing so many miseries on the other side; wee still refuse to harken, living securely

and doe not regard this gratiousOur estate when feare▪ shall come on 
                              •…
                           s of a sodaine. Prou: 1, 27. Prou: 28, 1. Iob 15, 20, 21, 22. Deut: 28, 63, &c. offer of mercy. That when our feare shal come upon us like a whirlewind, wee shall fly at the shaking of a sword, even at the very report of our enemyes prevailing, & much more of their approching so neere unto us. Our hearts shal be then as Nabals,
                        1 Sam: 25, 37, 38. as dead as a stone, and so wee shall live in a perpetuall expectation of the just wrath and vengeance of God, to seize upon us everlastingly, so that we can never expect any comfort after.
                     Yea, withall we are wiselyGod bids us choose life. Deu: 30, 25. 20 and deepely to meditate hereof, how he bids us to chuse life, that wee and ours may live, by loving him, obeying his voice, & cleaving fast unto him, because he is our life, and the length of our dayes. And also how hee bidding us, will also thereby give us strength to doe it, so

farre as we shall be accepted. If we but beleeue his blessed Commandement, and his Covenant of grace, shall set our selves in the name, and by the power of our Lord Iesu Christ to do what we can, in and by the use of all the means which he hath ordained, for obtayning this strength and grace so to helpe him: and if we wil be as earnest▪ as vigilant and industrious for attaining of this honour, as we would be for the attaining of any earthly honour or riches.
                     For we cannot thinke, that ever any man who sought this after this manner was rejected,We cannot thinke that any one was ever reiected who sought life as they ought. to wit, if hee sought it as for treasure, that is early, earnestly, and constantly. And therefore all who wil not thus set themselves to obey & help the Lord, have their mouths for ever most justly stopped, being left altogether without excuse.
                     
                        And thus much also forHow we may all be prepared in some good measure to helpe the Lord & his Church. this last generall Meditation, and how we may in all things be in some good measure rightly and fitly prepared to helpe in instant and powerfull prayer for the poore Churches of Christ, according to all whereunto the Lord now calles us, thereby to have good hope to prevayle with him. To wit, when wee shall finde our hearts so affected towards his heauenly Majesty, as to preferre him, his glory & causes before our selves, so truly shewing that we love him with all our heart, soule, strength, and might, and our neighbour as our selfe, as hee commandeth; being so affected likewise towardes them, and doing so to them, as we would have them do to us, if wee were in their estate and case.
                     All which, we must everie

one strive unto, or perish; ifAll must perish if they but stand on the other side Obed. 10. 11. wee but onely as wee saw before, stand on the other side in the day of our Brethrens affliction: and much more, if we will not bee moved by any one meanes, nor all the meanes together, whereby the Lord calls us,Iudg. 5. 23. thus to come to helpe him; now I say that hee, even our Lord and Saviour proclaimes to all our consciences, before all the world, that hee stands in such need of our helpe, and so expects it hourely at our hands.
                     And this may suffice toConclusion, to be thorowly layd to heart, to put some more life into every soule, & to each of these meditations. prepare us all, to this happy worke of true humiliation, and of instant prayer for the Churches: onely let mee put you in minde, that our Lord Iesus Christ, to the end that hee may yet put some more life into all these Meditations, and quicken us in our

crying to him according to all the prayers following; hee calls upon us all, to have this specially ever in our hearts; and his voyce in it sounding incess
                           •…
                        tly in our eares; which was in part touched before. That as the Spirit, and theHow all the distressed Parts of Gods Church cry to us to come and helpe them. Bride, doe call to our blessed Saviour to come; so first, all the distressed Churches; yea, all the members of Christ, and all the elect of God, which are under the power of Sathan, or of any cruell Tyrants, or under other miseries, doe call and cry to every oneActs. 16. 9, 10. of us, as the man of Macedonia did to Paul, come & helpe us. Come helpe us by your prayers, helpe us by your teares.
                     And secondly, as the AngellAnd all accursed who come not. Iudg. 5. 23. of the Lord said, Curse ye Meroz, because he came not to helpe the Lord; so now hee saith, Curse ye all and every

one of them, who come not to helpe our Lord Iesus Christ; who come not to helpe him in his poore members. And tell every one who wil not set himselfe at least in the full purpose of his heart to come; that hee hath noExcluded from the priv
                              •…
                           idges of God
                              •…
                            poeple. part in that heavenly prayer of our blessed Saviour; nor of the glorious priviledges and promises conteyned in it; that hee hath no part or portion in the Brother-hood, Inheritance, Glory, Kingdome, Rewardes, Promises of this and the better life, Remission of sinnes, Deliverance from Sathan, & from the evils which hee seeks to bring on all▪ that hee can have no comfort in that everlasting & everliving Amen; to whom all Kingdome▪ Power, and Glory, do onely appertaine; but that he is contrarily stripped of each of these, and that our Lord

Iesus is comming quickly inHow Christ is comming to reward every one according to his works▪
                         all Majesty and Glory, to give to every one according to his workes; to all that come, the happinesse of all these blessings; to all now refusing to come when he calls, the misery of all contrary curses.
                     Wherefore hee saith to allHow our Saviour cals to all to come, notwithstanding all obiections of unfitnesse. Come. Come every one, thou though be in thy filth & loathsome ragges, & all Leprous, worthy to be thrust out of y• campe of Israel▪
                         & excluded for evermore, yet come; strip off those rags by repen
                        
                           •…
                        ance; wash in ye fountaine of my blood, which is opened to all the house of Israel, and be thou cleane. Put on the garmentEph. 6. 13. of the righteousnesse of thy Saviour, and be glorious; put on all the compleat Arm our of my Spirit, in the full resolution of thy soule & be valiant, & come & helpe me.
                     
                        Though thou have no strength but meere desires, yet come, and thou shalt bee accepted; I will not quench the smoaking flax, therefore come. Though thy desires be never so weake, yet come; my power shall bee manifested and perfected in thy weaknes. Therefore come, yea, though thou have no grace at all, yet come; hee tels thee from heaven, his Grace is, and shall be sufficient for thee. And finally, though thou have no faith to apprehend this Grace of his, but art full of unbeleefe, yet ever remember him that said, I beleeve Lord, Lord helpe my unbeleefe, and how he sped, and then thou wilt come. Yea, though thou get others to carry thee, thou wilt certainly doe it, if thou canst butMar. 2. 3. Luke, 
                              •…
                           . 18. set before thy face, the Palsyman, thou wilt bee glad th
                           •…
                        s to come.
                     
                        Finally, be thinke thy selfe, if ever thou canst name but one, who thus desired to come to our Saviour, in the uprightnesse of his heart, neglecting no meanes thereunto, who was rejected of him; but contrarily, how every one so comming hath beene graciously accepted and imbraced of him: as the Prodigall Son was of his Father; and then try, whether his blessed Spirit will not give thee Davids
                        Psal. 27. 8. Psal. 40. 8. Zac. 13. 9. Eccho to answer to him in thy soule, Lord I come, I come, I come to doe thy will; Thy will is within my heart. Accept the worke of thine ownegrace, Amen, enen so Lord Iesus, I come, I come.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            Prayers according to our Sauiours direction, chiefly for maintaining and advancing of his glory and kingdome, against the r
                  •…
               ge of Sathan and Antichrist, and for helping his poore distressed Churches, with all the members of Iesus Christ, scattered over the face of the whole earth; and that the whole number of Gods elect may be speedily gathered forth.
            
               
                  I. A prayer for our preparation, that wee may bee made meete to bee admitted, and may bee accepted as helpers, in this so great a worke.
               
                  AH Lord, our mostTo pray. gracious and tender Father in Christ Iesus, wee thy unworthy children heere prostrate,

beholding how thy heavenlyThat beholding the evils against the Lord & his people. Majesty is foughten against, thy honour trampled under foote, thy kingdome & people sought to bee destroyed out of the earth, and that by Sathan & Antichrist, & other thy cruell enemies; who carrying a mortall hate against thee, and against thy Sonne Iesus Christ, and so against thy Gospell, and people for thy cause alone, do seeke that they alone may raigne over us, and over all the world in thy place; & seeing also howThe prevailing of the enemie. thou hast suffered them fearfully to prevaile, and still to proceed because of our sins, and the sinnes of all other that professe thy name; andAnd hearing the Lord calling as to h
                        •…
                     lpe him. hearing withall, how thou now callest us all who are thine, and in any favour with thy Maiesty, to helpe thee, and the rest of our Brethren and Sisters, thy poore children,

in these their extreame miseries, by our prayers and teares, doe humbly intreatWe may be prepared & be admitted to this service. thee, so to prepare and fit us, that through our Lord and Saviour, wee may be accounted meete to bee admitted to this so great a service.
               Lord open our blind eies,To pray to be rightly touched and affected with all these things. that we may have a right view of all these things; open likewise our dease eares, that we may heare thee calling us unto this duty; and touch our dead hearts, that they may be truly affected herewith: inable us, that thus seeing, hearing, and seeling, we may cryThat we may be able to cry uncessantly, untill the Lord shal shew himselfe from heaven for his great name, kingdome, and people. unto thee uncessantly, untill thou shalt shew thy selfe from heaven to come downe▪ maintaine, and defend thine owne causes and children to rescue all thine every where both from that bodily and spirituall tyranny, and from all other dreadfull miseries,

under which they groane; and so to judge betweene them, & betweene thine and their enemies, and to get thy selfe a gloryous name and victory in thy due time, to thine owne everlasting prayse and glory.
               Oh deere Father, perswadeTo be perswaded how the Lord seeks out a man. our hearts effectually, how now at this very day, in these fearfull times and extremities of thy poore Church (as thou hast beene wont in all former Ages) thou seekest out a man, that may stand in the breach, and how thou lookest for some, that may specially bee singled out hereunto; to helpe thee and thy poore people.
               Vouchsafe (good Lord)To strive to be if not that one man, yet as one of Gedeons three-hundred. that every one of us may strive to bee, if not that one man, yet as some one of Gedeons three hundreth. And to this end, that all these holy Meditations following, and

the like, may be in our heartsTo have these meditations in our hearts. continually. That we may never rest untill, hereby wee may know assuredly, that thou hast called us hereunto: that thou acceptest us and our service; and that wee may never give thee over, untill wee see the deliverance and felicity of thy Sion. Grant, that so many of us as unfeignedly desire to bee with thy Majesty, may never give any rest unto thee, nor unto our owne soules, untill wee finde ourTo be so qualified as Christ requireth in his prayer. selves so qualified in all things, as thou requirest of all such, in taking to heart the dishonours done unto thy heavenly Majesty, & the oppositions against thy most glorious Gospell, and also in feeling the necessities of thy Church & people; more specially in considering aright, and sensibly feeling, the miserable estate of all them that

are under the spirituall bondage & Captivitie of Sathan, worse ten thousand times then the Captivitie and slavery of the Turke, or under the cruellest Tyrants in all the earth.
               Grant likewise, that wee may be such, in all holy faith and obedience, and so frame our prayers, that heerein wee may thus farre prevaile with thy holinesse, that thou maiestThat we may prevaile that God may raise up some Iosephs or Daniels. raise up for thy poore Church and Children, in every part of the world, some Iosephs, or some that may be as Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah, or Hester, which may obtaine favourBy whom the hearts of all Kings and Princes may be inclined to become nursing Fathers to his Church. with the Kings and Princes of the earth, and by whom thou maiest prepare and incline the hearts, of all Monarks, Kings, and Princes, that they may all become Nursing-Fathers, and Nursing-Mothers, to thy religion and people; and that

all those of them, who in thy mercy are such already, by the power of thy heavenly Spirit, may bee wholly delivered from all the power and delusions of Sathan and Antichrist; and daily more and more inflamed with all holy zeale for thy glory and kingdome, and all tender affection towards thy children and chosen flocke: as the rage and malice of the Dragon is greater against them, knowing he hath but a short time.
               Vouchsafe (Oh greciousThat these all considering how God hath set them up. Father) that these all considering aright, how thou hast set them up, and given them all their dominions, authority and power, chiefly to this end; and the great and dreadfull account they must all certainly make for the same, they know not how soone: may forthwith se
                     •…
                   themselves as thy faithfull Servants, Moses,
                  
                  Iosuah, David, Iehosaphat,
                  May set themselves as all worthy rulers have do
                        •…
                     e, for his glory and kingdome. 
                  Hezekiah, and holy Iosiah, for thy glorious Majesty, Gospell, and people, onely according to thy heavenly word and will.
               Grant (good Lord) thatThat thus his great name may be magnified. thus thy great name may bee magnified, by the powerfull comming of thy kingdome in all the world, and by the full accomplishing of all thy heavenly will, and good pleasure, which in thine eternall counsell thou hast decreed, for the speedy gathering forth of all thine elect, and finishing of these daies of sin, and so for preparing the way to thy glorious comming.
               Good Lord perswade myThat every one may be perswaded of the present necessity of this worke. poore heart, and the hearts of every one of thine owne faithfull people, of the present necessity of this worke; because of the danger of the sodaine approching of thy vengeance,

ready each houre to rush upon u
                     •…
                  , (like as it hath done upon others which have so professed thy name as we
                     •…
                   doe) for all our fearfull sinnes: and above all, for our hai
                     •…
                  ous contempt of thy heauenly Gospell; and that, notwithstanding all thy Fatherly warnings and mercies, wee have beene worse and worse unto this day. And therefore vouchsafe me this grace, that I may not deferre it one day,Not to de
                        •…
                     er it one day. nor houre, but now presently whilst thou my Lord and Saviour dost so graciously call me, and offer me this mercy, I may seeke to bee every way prepared and fitted for it, like as thou hast so plainly 
                     •…
                  aught me, & so lively se
                     •…
                   it before my face in y• heavenly prayer of thine, so as the simplest may read and understand.
               Oh Lord Iesus, perswade my heart, that refusing or deferring

now to come to helpeTo feare the curse upon Meroz. Iudg. 5. thee, I cannot escape the curse of Meroz, howsoever I may escape the present and temporall vengeance, at theThat otherwise escaping the temporall, yet we cannot the eternall vengeance. instant cryes of all other of thy deerest servants and children, yet I can never escape the spirituall and eternall wrath. Open mine eies that ITo have our eyes open to see against whom we are to wrastle. may see, y• I am not heerein to wrastle against flesh & blood, but against principalities and powers, and the Princes of darkness of this world, which have wrought all these evils chiefly, and doe seeke the utter destruction of all thy people; and that I am not nowNot for our selves onely, but for all the Church. to enter the lists with Sathan for my selfe alone, but for all the Church: that so I may putTo put on all the compleat Armour of God & f
                        •…
                     and fast. on all thy compleat Armour, to quit my selfe valiantly as one of thy worthyes, and ever be carefull to looke to my watch and stand fast, expecting

Sathans extreamest rage and fury against me, especially if hee get never so little advantage.
               Grant unto mee to knowTo know our honour setting our selves aright to this service, & our safety. undoubtedly, that being thus armed, and setting my selfe with all speed and cheerfulnesse unto this worke, to bee rightly fitted to helpe thee in this greatest service; I shall have this high honour to bee of their number, of whom thou hast spoken, & to whom thou hast promised. That the innocent shall deliver the land; or at least, that thou wilt bee to mee a Sanctuary whatsoever come to passe; and though I should neither save Sonne nor Daughter, yet I shall bee sure to save my owne soule. Heare me therefore (Oh gracious Father) & all thy poore children, in this our humble suite, and in all other things needfull for us, or for any

member of thy whole Church, for the Lord Iesus Christ, whom thou hast given for our grand Captaine, our onely Mediator and Advocate,
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  II. A prayer for increase of our love to all the Children of the Lord, and for keeping a continuall fresh remembrance and feeling of their estate.Prayer to be humbled that we have not learned our first les son, to have a true feeling of the estate of our brethren.
               
               [Our] HVmble us (Oh gracious Father) that whereas thou hast long taught us this, as one of our first lessons in our prayers, to cry [Oh our Father] to keep therby a continuall and everfresh remembrance & feeling of the estate and necessities of all thy children, our Brethren and Sisters, wheresoever dispersed and distressed in all the

world; and so to binde our hearts togither in the bond of love, to rejoyce with them that rejoyce, & mourne with them that mourne, and in all things to seeke the same good unto them, which wee do vnto our selves; yet so many of us notwithstanding, do never or very seldome, thinke of them or of their miseries: and the best of us, have so little true feeling and commiseration of their estate, how wofull soever it bee, to cry unto thee for them as wee ought, so long as wee our selves are at ease, and in prosperity.
               Good Lord perswade ourTo be perswaded that if we love our heavenly Father, we must needs love his children. hearts, that if wee truly love thee our heavenly Father, we must needs love thy children for thy cause, being as deere and precious unto thee as ourselves are, even all those that appertaine to thy eternal

election, wheresoever they be in all the earth. Lord IesusIf we love Christ we must needs love his members. make us know, that if wee unfeignedly love thee, wee must of necessity likewise love thy members, even every one of that mysticall body whereof thou art the head: and whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, as well as o
                     •…
                  r selves.
               Make us to conceive aright,That without this we can never assure our hearts that we are true children & members of Christ. that without this love, which is the badge of thy Disciples and Children, wee can never assure our owne hearts, that we are either the true and naturall children of our heavenly Father: or lively members of thy mysticall body, and thy very Disciples indeed, and that we deceiveBut deceive ourselves. our owne hearts, untill wee become thus truly affected, at least in the inward longing of our soules, and that wee can unfeignedly mourne for

the want of the lively feeling heereof.To know that their sinnes are ours in some sort, and so their whole estate.
               
               Lord cause us to know, that their sinnes are in some sort, our sinnes; their miseries, our miseries; as being of the same mysticall body of our Lord Iesus Christ: that both their sinnes, their calamityes, and their afflictions, may bee matter of heavinesse & mourning unto us: and their prosperity, both bodily and spirituall, may be our continuall rejoycing.To have this fellow-feeling of their estate wheresoever they are.
               
               Cause us to have this fellow-feeling of their estate, wheresoever they be; though amongst the Indians, or in any of the remotest and barbarousest places in all the earth, and much more as thou hast united them unto us by neerer bonds, of profession, place, kinred, and the like: and hast made their estates more knowne unto us. More

specially, make us to have aAnd as they are more neerly 
                        〈◊〉
                      unto us. more sensible feeling of the estate of those who are of our owne nation and stocke, and as they are yet linked unto us by neerer bonds.
               Above all (good Father)And above all a
                        •…
                      they are more specially ordained to be nursing Fathers and Mothers to Gods Church. make us to bee most loyally, and hartily affected, towards those in all quarters & countries, whom thou hast ordained in thine owne place, to be Nursing-Fathers & Nursing-Mothers to thy Church, either presently, or in their due times, to succour and provide for all thy children committed to them, as the faithfull Nurse for her tender Babes. And amongst them, for allChiefly who are such already. those of them, yet in a more speciall manner▪ whom thou hast already vouchsafed this high favour, to bee such unto them▪ and to whom thou hast made knowne thy heavenly will in this behalfe, what thou

lookest for at their hands; andAnd bound thereto by most bonds. whome thou hast bound unto thee by so many bonds of thy heavenly and earthly favours.That their hearts may be inclined to all Gods Children, chiefly to all committed to their charge.
               
               Oh grant, that at our instant cries, their hearts may bee inclined accordingly towards all thy Children, especially to all those whom thou hast to this end specially committed to their trust, that they may shew forth before men and Angels, their tender affection towards all of them, chiefly all those of them, who in all unfeigned study of true holinesse and righteousnesse doe most livelyAnd that as they more resemble their heavenly Father. resemble thee their heavenly Father, and most visibly carry upon them▪ the true Image of our Lord Iesus Christ.To have like affections to the Lord.
               
               Oh give them like affections, to thy heavenly Majesty in this behalfe, that thy people

and children may bee soTo give that which is deerest unto them for Gods people. precious unto them, that like as in thy tender love, thou gavest thine owne deere Son, and with him all good things also; yea, thine owne selfe for the saving and happinesse of thy Church; and namely of all blessed Kings, Princes, and Governours: so they againe, may not onely be willing to imploy all their thoughts and endeavours, but also be ready to spend & offer themselves, and also to bee offered up; so to give themselves, and all theirs most willingly for the saving and happinesse of thy people.
               Lord perswade their andTo have all theirs and our hearts perswaded of the happines hereof, and contrarily. our hearts, that the lively evidence hereof, will upon our death-beds (if our consciences shall thorowly bee awaked) and so ever after bee more worth unto us, then ten thousand worlds, and the contrary

more bitter and dreadfull then all the evils of this present life can possibly bee unto us. These things we humbly intreate thee to grant for thy Sonne our Lord Iesus Christ his sake, our alone Saviour and Advocate.
            
            
               
                  III. A prayer that wee may be able to seeke and finde this first, that God is our gracious and tender Father in Christ, and that we may grow in this assurance daily.
               [Father] OH deere Father,To pray to be perswaded, that the assurance that God is our Father, is first to be sought, next his glory. and most blessed Lord God, perswade all thy people, that this is that which is first to bee sought of every one of us next thy glorie, & aboue all other things; to bee assured that thou art our gracious and tender Father,

that so each of us may in faith call upon thee, saying truly as our Saviour hath taught us, Abba, Oh Father. That this assurance alone being rightly considered of, that thou art our heavenly and loving Father, will quiet ourThat assurance alone will quiet the heart, & fill it with ioy unspeakable. heart, or the heart of any beleever in all the world, & will fill it with unspeakeable joy in the middest of the greatest troubles & temptations, that can possibly befall us.
               And contrarily, make everyAnd the contrary will fill it with extreame horror. one of thy people to know for certaine, that the very doubting and want of assurance, whether we bee in thy favour and love or no, and much more, whether we bee thy Children, will worke extreame disquietnesse and horror in our soules, when once our consciences shall bee awaked, and will bee unto us as the unspeakeable torments

of hell fire: and that this willAnd be a
                        •…
                      the beginnings of the flashings of hell. fall upon all the ungodly, most of all when their consciences shall tell them (as one day the conscience of every wicked and impenitent sinner will doe) that they are not thy Children, but thine enemies, and the Children of wrath, yea, of Sathan himselfe:Iohn. 8. 4
                        •…
                     . and therefore that they are hated of thee, as Sathan their Father is, whose Image they have borne, and whose worke they have done.
               To this end, good Lord, worke upon our hearts, and the hearts of all that belong to thy eternall election, whosoever, and wheresoever they be in all the earth, that we all may truly understand, and rightly know, our owne miserableTo this end to know first our owne miserable condition by nature. condition by nature; that wee are thorow the first Adam. by naturall generation, and by the whole course

of our lives, none other but the Children of disobedience, and so vessels of wrath, andThus we are but firebrandes of hell untill we be true members of Christ. fire—brands of hell, untill such time as we are, or shall be regenerated and borne againe, and by a lively faith ingrafted into Iesus Christ the second Adam, and so made thy Children, and heires of thy kingdome, by thy grace in him.
               Cause us all to knowThat we cannot attaine to this assurance untill we feele these two graces, repentance and faith. moreover, that we can never attaine heereunto to bee thy Children, much lesse to any certaine knowledge or assurance heereof untill wee feele these two graces of thine, wrought in our hearts by thy blessed Spirit, and the preaching of thy heavenly Gospell unto us; to wit, an unfeigned repentance for all our sinnes, and a lively faith in Iesus Christ: and likewise that wee have the same daily increased, or at least continued with

a true and earnest desire & indeavour of the increase thereof; for that these two areFor that these are lively evidences of our being in Christ. lively evidences to any man that hee is regenerate and in the state of grace, and that of a Child of wrath hee is made thine owne deere Child, 
                     •…
                  cceptable to thee his heavenly Father by Iesus Christ alone. Grant to us therefore, and to all thy Children, these lively evidences of thy favour, in our unfeigned repentance, and also our effectuall faith increasing daily, for Iesus Christ our onely Lord and Saviour.
            
            
               
               
                  IIII. A prayer that wee may not deceive our selves in vayne conceite, that we are Gods Children, when wee are nothing lesse, as the greatest part doe, but that wee may come to strong assurance heereof▪ by feeling a totall change in our lives and conversations.
               OH most holy, and most gracious Father, we intreate yet further of thy divine Majesty, that neither we nor any other of thy people and Children, may deceiveThat we may not deceive our selves in a vaine imagination of faith and repentance. our selves in a vaine & counterfeit show and imagination of repentance and faith, as the greatest part of those do, who living under the sound, and in the light of the Gospell, doe imagine therefore that they have repentance & faith, and are well enough; when as aalas

they have nothing lesse, then any part of true, sound, and unfeigned repentance, or any power of a lively faith. Grant to this end, that neither we nor they, may rest untillThat we may never rest untill we finde the new birth in our whole man & in all our conversation. wee finde in our selves, the new-birth begun, and increasing daily, by a totall change wrought in us, since the time that we beleeved in Christ, as a speciall fruite thereof, and that in every part both of our soules and bodies, and also in the whole course of our life and conversation.
               Stirre up all our hearts (Oh holy Father) to this purpose, that wee may never give thee rest, untill wee finde this thorow change and alteration, both in our mindes andIn our minds understandings, from ignorance and blindnesse, to the true knowledge not onely of our selves, but also of thy heavenly Majesty, and so of

thy Sonne Iesus Christ; likewise in our memories, that insteadMemories. of remembring vanities, we may be able to keepe a holy remembrance of the things which concerne thy glory, and our owne salvation, with the good of our Brethren. Good Lord workeWils. the like change in our wils, from following and obeying the will and lusts of our flesh, to bee ever pliant and obedient to thy heavenly will.
               Perswade our hearts that we may never give thee over, untill wee likewise finde the same change in our affections,Affections. that therein wee are conformed daily more and more to the holinesse of Christ, both in our love & hatred, our joy & our greefe; in child-like feare & holy security, resting on
                     •…
                   selves onely in thy love and favour.
               Make us to labour to finde

also the same in our Consciences,Consciences. that wee may never give any rest to our soules, untill wee finde our consciences quieted in this assurance, that we are washed from our sinnes, in the blood of our Lord Iesus Christ; and that our owne hearts and consciences doe beare a continuall witnesse unto us of our upright conversation, at least begun in us; with a settled resolution ever to walke with thee our God, all our daies.
               Good Father, never suffer us to bee at quiet, untill wee truely finde the same alteration, wrought by thy holy Spirit in like manner in our whole body; making everyIn our whole bodies. sense and member thereof instead of the service of sinne, to become servants of righteousnesse, even thine owne servants.
               Lord perswade us all, that

all these parts being thine, Created, and Redeemed to these ends, thou dost not only require this holinesse in everyTo be perswaded that God both requires and workes this holinesse in all his elect in some measure. one of them, but that thou likewise workest it effectually in all thine, whom thou hast ordained to life and salvation, according to that measure of grace, which thou ar
                     •…
                   pleased to bestowe upon every one, causing every one of them to strive forwards towards perfection; & that untillThat untill this change in some measure never can any attaine this assurance. such a change bee begun in us in some measure, never any one of us, can have any true comfort that wee are thy Children, or in thy favour and love; and that onely as this change and comformitie to Christ Iesus our head increaseth,As this increaseth, so our assurance so doth our comfort likewise increase in thee: and contrarily, as it decreaseth, so doe we decay in our comfort and assurance. Hearken unto

us therefore (Oh tender Father) and worke mightily by thy holy Spirit in us, & in all thy Children, that wee may never give thee any rest in our prayers, untill wee shall attaine this full assurance, for our Lord Iesus Christ his sake, our onely Mediator and Advocate.
            
            
               
                  V. A prayer that wee may finde in our selves, not onely the generall, but even all the particular markes of Gods Children, namely, those which our Saviour hath taught us to beg in his prayer.
               OH Lord, who art the only true perswader and se
                     •…
                  ler of the hearts and consciences of all thine elect, perswade effectually both us and all other thy people, that besides

a whole change in ourTo pray to finde in our selves, not onely this change, but the peculiar markes of Gods children. selves, in all the qualities and faculties of our soules & bodies, thou hast given sundry peculiar markes and properties, whereby thy Children may both certainly know themselves to bee thy Children, and also by which they may be so knowne, & ought so to be esteemed amongst all thy people; and that so much the more, as they more lively and evidently have these markes upon them.
               And namely (good Lord) perswade us of those which thou in this praier hast taughtChiefly those which our Saviour hath taught us to cry for daily, & whereby we most lively beare his Image. all thine to pray, and to cry for daily, whereby wee carry most lively the Image of our Lord Iesus our elder Brother. Vouchsafe that we may bee most zealous of the gloryTo be most zealous for Gods glory. of thee our heavenly Father, and that with a holy zeale, having the Spirit of burning,

and the Spirit of judgement joyned together, which worldlings regard not, being little or nothing at all acquainted with it.
               Grant that wee all may2. To seeke the kingdom of God, and his righteousnesse first. seeke thy kingdome and righteousnesse first, before all the things of this life; whereas they that are of this world, seeke onely, or at least in the first place, the things of this world.
               Helpe and inable us (good3. To seeke onely knowing & doing the will of our heavenly Father, & not our owne. Father) heerein, to these ends, that, whereas carnall and unregenerate men, seeke onely the satisfying of their owne lusts and pleasures, and by all meanes to have their owne wils fulfilled, little or nothing regarding to know, or to do thy heavenly will; we contrarily may seeke to know and fulfill the will of thee our heavenly Father, as thou hast expressed it in thy holy and

sacred word; and that this we may make our very meate and drinke, preferring it (as did our Saviour) before his daily foode.
               Vouchsafe us thy holy Spirit, that whereas carnall and worldly men are wont commonly for whatsoever they desire, onely to use andTo use onely such meanes for obtaining all good things, as God himselfe hath ordained. seeke worldly meanes; such as like themselves best, whether warrantable from thee or no, they make no matter, seldome or never using to seeke and beg them, as they ought, from thy heavenly bounty▪ onely in and by the meanes which thou hast appointed: and doe as seldome unfeignedly returne thee thankes & prayse, when they have received their desires, but are like the swine under the Acorne trees, never looking up from whence the Mast falls, sacrifising unto

their nets, ascribing all to their owne wits and strength; wee contrarily may looke up unto thee our heavenly Father. Lord grant that we mayBegging and returning all thankes to him for all. first begge all from thy heavenly bounty, using onely the meanes that thou hast appointed to accomplish our ends, & after returning praise and thankes for all unto thy divine and sacred Majesty.
               Teach and perswade us,To be ever mindfull of the rest of our brethren as of our selves. and all thy people, that wee may bee truly mindfull of the rest of our Brethren thy deere Children▪ wheresoever dispersed, and that wee may bee rightly touched with a true and lively feeling both ofAnd as well touched with their estate as our owne. their bodily and spirituall estate, and therefore like as thou ha
                     •…
                  t taught & commanded us to pray for all other thy Children as for our selves, O our Father: And, give us this day our daily bread, and

                  forgive us our trespasses. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evill, &c. Grant that wee may not onely thus pray for them, with the lips alone, but sigh and groane unto thy Majesty for them in all these respects, and desire earnestly to seeke and to use all meanes for them in every one of these kinds, as lively feeling members of the same mysticall body of Iesus Christ with them. Make us to consider,To consider how the carnall worldling hath little or no sense of any of these things, how the carnall worldling, hath little or no sense or feeling of any of these things, nay almost no understanding at all, as appeareth daily by all his carriage and affections towards thy deerest servants; whom for this cause hee principally hates, and makes a mocke of, even for their piety, their care, and conscience, to feare and please thy heavenly Majesty.
               
                  Make us all to have a trueTo have a lively sense of our sins. sense and feeling of our sins, and of the vilenesse of them, in regard of the nature of sin it selfe, and that it is so displeasing, and so odious to thy holinesse. Inable us therefore by thy holy Spirit▪ to groaneTo groane under the burden of them. under ou
                     •…
                   sinnes, as a burden heavier then the earth: yea, to bee oft-times grieved inwardly and 
                     •…
                  ejected, in regard of our new and many slips and failings, & for them all to cry, Forgive us our trespasses: and that we may neverNever to rest untill we be assured of the remission of our sinnes. give any rest unto our soules, untill wee bee fully assured of the pardon of them all, and that thou our heavenly Father ar
                     •…
                   fully reconciled unto us in Iesus Christ, and thy displeasure wholly appeased towards us. Whereas the unregenerate and carnall man hath usually no feeling of his sinnes at all, whereupon hee

commonly makes but a sport of sinne, and drinke in iniquity as water, so heaping uppeWhich the carnall man makes bu
                        •…
                      a sport of. wrath against the day of wrath, making a scoffe at all the godly who are troubled with their sinnes, as at fantasticall and melancholly fools.
               Teach and perswade our hearts, that whereas carnall men can hardly or never forgiveThat we may be able to forgive wrongs, and to pray for our enemies. wrong: done unto them, untill they bee revenged, or their corrupt mindes some way fully satisfied; wee contrarily may labour to bee so farre off from reuenge, as we may be able to pray with our Saviour, and with Stephen, Father forgive them, they know not what they doe; and that if ourThat if our enemies hunger, wee may feede them. enemyes hunger, wee may feed them as thou 
                     •…
                  hast commanded, yea, perswade our hearts, that wee may by allAnd seeke their conversion and salvation. meanes seeke the conversion and salvation of our greatest

enemyes. And if thou shalt be pleased to convert any of them soundly, that wee may rejoyce therein, even as the heauenly Angels, and delight in such, above our owne naturall brethren or sisters.
               Lord worke so uppon us,6. To be alwayes afrayd of Sathans temptations. that whereas the Worldling is seldome or never affraid of Sathan, and of his temptations, or of sinning against, and provoking thy holiness, and therefore doth continvally or most commonly whatsoever Sathan and his owne sinnefull heart moves him unto, without any checke or controulement, or looking at thee, or without any feare or regarde of the evill which will follow upon that which he doth: we contrarily may desire to feare thee evermore.To stand alwayes in awe of the Lord, least for our securitie, he leave us up to him.
               
               Make us alwayes to stand in awe of thy Majesty with a holy reverence, least for our

security, or for other our sins thou shouldest leave us to be tempted by Sathan and overcome; and therefore in the sense and privity of 
                     •…
                  ur 
                     •…
                  eserts by all our sins, our 
                     •…
                  aylings, weaknesses, and for the corruption of our sinneful natures, with our inclination to hearken to the Serpent, 
                     •…
                  o be overtaken and circumvented by him, and in regard of the danger which thereby wee stand in continually, we may cry day and night, Leade u
                        •…
                      not into temptation, but deliver us from euill; yea, that wee may strive, as our SaviourTo strive to watch and pray that we fall not into temptation. hath taught us, To watch and pray continually, that wee may not fall into temptation.
               
               Good Father graunt, that7. To looke ever 
                        •…
                     o the Lords absolute Soveraignty. whereas the carnall and unregenerate man in his actions lookes onely at the command and authority of man, and at his countenance and power,

and what he can doe; and so gives to men the glorie due unto thy Soveraigne Majesty, or secretly takes it to himselfe; wee contrarily may looke higher, even unto thy Highness▪ and to thy absolute Soveraignty over all Kings and Princes, and at thy divine power, and so give unto theeAnd to give him the glory of all. the glory of all abhorring all imagination of any excellency, that we may any way conceyue to be in our selves; & therefore that wee may in all things desire ever with all thy holy Angels thus to acknowledge thee & thy Soveraignty alone, and to give thee all the glory, and to crie evermore, For thine is the kingdom, power, and glorie.
                  8. To be ever and chiefely thinking of eternity.
               
               And whereas the worldling lookes commonly, & thinkes onely of this present life, and seldome or never thinkes of eternity, but rather labors to

put the remembrance thereof out of his heart, having his portion and so his meditations onely heere below; grant that we contrarily may be alwayes thinking and meditating of eternity, even of that life which is eternall, that so we may live with thee, and fully behold and enjoy thy kingdome, power, and glorie for evermore.
               Finally, perswade us and all9. That we may not pray looking at any thing in our selves, or any other creatures. thine, that whereas the unregenerate and carnall Worldling hath usually in all his prayers and dealings with thee, some eye unto himselfe, and his worthiness, for his de
                     •…
                  otion and service, or for some other matter in himself, being little or nothing at all acquainted with thy Son our Lord & Saviour Iesus Christ and his intercession, and how to come and appeare before thy holiness, who art onely

our father, in, and thorough him, and how to make his requests onely thorow him, and in his name alone, wee may come clea
                     •…
                   other wise. Grant that we contrarily may in allBut stripping our selves, may come only in Iesus Christ. our supplications, prayers, & our giving of thankes, strip our selves of all such opinion of our owne merit or worthiness: and as wee account all but losse and dung, so that we may be found in Christ, not having our owne righteousness, but that which is of Christ; so likewise wee may make all our prayers and supplications with giving of thankes onely in and thorowOur everlasting Amen. him, who is that everlasting Amen▪
                   and thorow whom alone all thy promises are Yea and Amen; who alone hath deserued this honor, and hath this office to make us and our prayers to be accepted; and therfore that we may in faith

cry unto thee evermo
                     •…
                  e thorowThat we may in Faith, cry Amen. him, Amen, Amen▪
                  
               
               Good Lord helpe us and all thy people, that by all theseThat we may never give the Lord over till wee find all these in our selves. markes and the like, wee may thoroughly try and examine our selves whether we be thy children, or no; and that wee may never give ouer crying unto thee, untill we finde every one of these lively and sensibly in us. Cause us rightlyThat we may know our selves hereby to be thine, and in thy favour as we finde them. to understand, and to bee fully perswaded heereof, that in what measure we finde the former change wrought in us and every one of these marks, in the same we may know our selves like wise to bee in thy favour, and accepted of thee, and that contrarily vvithoutAnd contrarily, every one of these at least begun in us in some measure, & a sound resolution with an earnest desire and longing of our soules to increase and grow heerein, vvee cannot

assure our selves to bee any better then Hypocrites; andThat we can never finde sound comfort. that wee shall never finde sound comfort, that thou wilt acknowledge us for thine, untill we finde these evident markes upon us. Grant unto us therefore, Oh tender Father, all the peculiar marks of thy Children, and all other, that hereby, we and all thine, may know our selves infallibly, to bee thine owne deere Children, for thy beloved Sonne our blessed Lord and Saviour,
               Amen.
            
            
               
                  VI. A prayer for knowledge and right use of the meanes, whereby wee may bee made Gods Children, and grow up in the assurance thereof▪ and so b
                     •…
                   established in grace continually.
               
                  OH most gracious God,To pray to know the right meanes of getting Gods favour & growing therein. and mercifull Father, the onely fountaine of wisedome and grace, forsomuch as every one who hath any sparke of grace or true wisedome, desires to bee in the blessed estate of thy Children, to have thy love and favour, to grow up in the assurance thereof, as the chiefest happinesse in this world; perswade us and all thy people aright, what are the ordinary meanes whereby thou begettest thy Children to a lively hope: That thou dost it ordinarilyAs in the daies of our Saviour and the Primitive Church. and usually, even by the same meanes, whereby thou diddest first gather thy Church in the daies of our Saviour: and after that, so wonderfully and speedily spreadBy the sincere preaching of his Gospell. it over the face of the earth, even by the sincere preaching of thy heavenly word, and

namely of thy sacred Gospell.
               That howsoever the worldThough the world count it foolishne
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                   accounts that foolishnesse, yet thou hast ordained it to be the immortall seede, wherebyThe immortall seed. thine are begotten anew, and thus made thy Children by grace, and to be thy mightyGods mighty power to salvation. power unto salvation, to make all thine to beleeve, and in beleeving, to make them partakers of thy favour and love, and so to give them eternall life. And that thisThat this stands not in the inticing speech of mans wisedome, but in the plaine evidence of Gods Spirit. saving kinde of preaching stands, as the preaching of Paul did, not in the intising speech of mans wisedome, but in the plaine evidence of thy Spirit, & of power. ThatA
                        •…
                     d why. so our faith may bee apparant to bee wrought, not by the wisedome of men, but onely by thy divine and mighty power alone.
               Perswade all thy people

moreover, that as thou doest beget all thine a-newe by this thy heauenly voyce,That God nourisheth his children by the same meanes of the word. the sincere preaching of thy Gospell, and in calling them makest them thy Children; so thou feedest and nourishest them, and all thy Graces in them by the same principally; and next therunto by the right use of thy holie Sacraments,Sacraments. the reuerent readingGood books. of the same blessed word, and other holy bookes groundedMeditations. thereupon, with sacred Meditations,Prayers. conference with the godly, practise of all holy duties, carnest supplications and prayers, for a right and sanctified use, & for thy blessing upon everie one of these meanes, and the like, to make them all effectuall heereunto.
               Good Father, perswade 
                     •…
                  ll who thus desire to bee thy Children, and in thy favour;

and to have all others likewise,To seeke to this end the establishing & advancement of thy sacred Ministery, and to depend thereon. partakers with them of the same mercy, to seeke by all holy meanes the establishing and advancement of thy sacred Ministery, & that them selves, and all others may depend upon the conscionable, faithfull, and sincere Ministers, Pastors, and Teachers, whom thou hast ordayned in this respect, to succeed in the place of holy Paul, and the other Apostles for the gathering together of the Saints,Ephes. 4. 11. for the worke of the Ministry, and for the edification of the body of Christ, and bee wholly affraid of all Anaba ptisticall fancies or separations, or of any way vvithdrawing themselves from under the meanes ordayned by thee for their salvation, to lye open to Sathan, and his delusions.
               Oh gracious Father, who so tenderest thy Children and

chosen flocke, as thou hast setTo stirre up the hearts of Kings and Princes to this holy care. Kings & Princes in thy place for the care and comfort of them above all other of the earth; perswade, and move effectually the heartes of all those whom thou hast appointed to be thus as Fathers to thy children; as namely, all Governours, and principally the cheefe whom thou hast specially ordayned to bee the prime foster-Fathers unto those thy deere Children, in al the parts of the world. That they by all the meanes & power that thou shalt ever vouchsafe to put into their hands, may looke to see thyTo see their people furnished with holy & conscionable Ministers. people committed to their charge, to be furnished with such conscionable, sincere, & faithfull Pastors and teachers, as by whom they may be first begotten, and after nourished and fed, so as they may grow up to the measure of the age

of the fulness in Christ, and be provided likewise for all other gracious meanes & helps belonging hereunto.
               Thus in like manner, weeThat the Ministers may study to make all the people the Children of God. humbly intreate thee most mercifull God, and tender father, that by the mighty operation of thy heavenly Spirit, thou wilt thorowly perswade and move all those, whome thou hast in a peculiar manner separated unto this worke of winning of soules unto thee, or who have or shall any way enter heereupon; that they may wisely consider, that principall part of their Vocation and Function, namely, to endeavour to make al their. Congregations to bee thine owne Children, carrying lively thy image, and bearing upon them the markes of thy Children.
               Cause them to seeke tenderlyTo nourish them as in his place. to nourish and comfort

them as in thy place and presence, and ever to preserve & To keepe them from Sathan and all his agents keepe them from Sathan, and all his cursed agents and instruments; as from all seducing Iesuites and Seminaryes, who compasse sea and land to make all sorts the children of the divell, worse then themselves; and so from all other deceyvers, and all the delusions of this evill world. Grant that thus they may study to be able, each according to their places, at all times whensoever thou shalt call them to an account, and chieflyTo be able to present them with all confident boldness before his Maiesty. at the great day, to present them with all confident boldness and joy before thy heavenly Majesty, saying vvith the Prophet, Lord heere am I, and the children thou hast given me, by my Ministry, or any way cōmitted to my charge. Hearken unto us, Oh gracious Father in these our humble

supplications, & all other things which thou knowest to be needfull for us, or thy whole Church, or any part thereof, for Iesus Christ our Lord, and onely Saviour.
            
            
               
                  VII. A Prayer, that all may understand how deere Gods Children are unto him, that they may be so to us likewise.
               OH Lord, most merciful, most wise, and tenderTo pray that God would make all to know how deere his children are unto him. Father, make all sorts to understand and know in time, especially all those who so furiously rage agaynst thy Church and people at this day, how deere and precious every one of thy Children is unto thy heavenly Majestie, that they are unto thee as the apple of thine owne eye, and that therefore their blood is

precious in thy sight: That they perishing for lacke ofThat theyr blood will cry for vengeance as the blood of Abel. care to save and succor them, & much more being destroyed by them to whom thou hast committed them, as to their nursing Fathers in thy place, their blood will cry for vengeance, like as the blood of Abel did, and wil cause the murderers one day (without unfeigned repentance) to crie out when it is too late, My sin
                  That God can no more beare with wrongs done to them then to Abraham. 
                  is greater then I can beare. Yea, cause all to know, that thou canst no more beare with wrongs done unto these thy Children (and especially to those of them, whom thou hast manifested by their child like obedience, and by the glorious image of our Lord Iesus thy deere Sonne, printed visibly upon them, to bee so deere and precious unto thee) then thou couldst beare with the wrongs done unto

thy servants, Abraham, Moses, David, or any other of thine. That if for Abrahams cause, thou wast so severe agaynst Abimelech and hisThat if God was so ever against Abimelech, hee will be more against them all, who shall hurt them, cheefely for his names sake. house (though hee was but a Heathen King, & that which he did agaynst Abraham hee did ignorantly, and with an upright heart as he sayth; yea and thorow Abrahams weakness, in saying of his wife, she was his sister) thou wilt then be much more severe agaynst all those, who being convinced in their consciences of the innocency of thy poore children (as all must needes be in a very great measure, in this most glorious shining light of thy heavenly Gospell) and ye
                     •…
                   doe so vexe and mollest them, yea, and seeke to destroy them out of the earth, onely for thy names sake, for cleaving fast unto thee, and to thy sacred truth.
               
                  Lord perswade the heartsTo perswade all that these are as Noahs to the places where they are. of all sorts, that these, while they are in any place, are in some sort as Noah was to the old world, and as Lot to Sodome for keeping off the vengeance from all the rest. Yea (good Lord) make all sorts understand and know, and especially set this ever before our eies, and the eies of all thy people every where, that thou madest poore Ioseph who wasAs Ioseph to his brethren. scorned and hated of his Brethren, for his religion and pietie, & for seeking to reforme their evill behaviour, to bee yet the preserver of his Brethren; yea, of all his Fathers house, and of the whole Church; and causedst his Brethren in their greatest extremity, and in the very anguish of their soules, to acknowledge how they had sinned against the Lad, chiefly in their lack of commiseration,

and moreover to come and to stoope unto Ioseph, and humbly to seeke unto him that he would not remember the wrongs and evils that they had done to him.
               Cause us all to consider well, how thou madest himGods instruments to save all from many temporall iudgments. to save them all, even him whom (for his dislike of their evill manners, for his care for their good, and for thy speciall favour manifested towards him) they accounted the dreamer, plotted against, cast into the pit, sold to the Ismalites, thinking thereby they should never have bene troubled with him, no
                     •…
                   have heard of him any more.
               Grant good Lord, seeingThat he brings plagues for the wronges done unto them. thy Children are so deere unto thee, that for their causes, and the wrongs done unto them, thon callest for a dearth upon the lands where they are, thou plaguest even KingsPsal.
                  
for their sakes; that thou wiltAnd will not spare any who hurt them, no not Miriam. not spare their owne Brethren or Sisters, if they wrong them, no not Miriam her selfe, though she be beloved of thee, a Prophetess, and Sister of Moses, but wilt make her feele her sinne, and her shame, if she dare but speake against thy servant Moses, especially for doing as thou hast commanded him; that they may be likewise, asThat they may be so deere to all as they are to the Lord. deere and precious unto all thy people.
               Grant (Oh tender Father) that all sorts thus esteeming of them for thy cause, as thine owne deere Children, and so highly beloved of thee, mayThat all may acknowledge their si
                        •…
                     nes concerning them. all joyntly acknowldge their wrongs against them, & their haynous sinne against thy Majesty for them, in all the rebukes, scornes, and taunts, cast upon thee, and thy sacred religion, thorow the evils

done unto them. Vouchsafe that heereby all these may with faithfull Abraham, Moses, and Samuell, pray for allThat they may helpe to make the attonement for Israel. thy people, and so helpe to make the attonement for them by the blood of the Lord Iesus, that all their sins may bee pardoned, thy anger appeased, thy people turnedAll the people of the Lord may be turned to him againe, to thee againe, thy hand may bee turned against thine obstinate and implacable enemies, and the enemy mayAnd the enemie given for their ransome. once againe bee given for the ransome of thy Children and people, as thou diddest sometimes give Aegypt for thine Israel.
                  To perswade this chiefly to all his Vicegerents that these being so deere unto the Lord, may be so unto them.
               
               Lord, perswade this principally, to all thy Deputies, and Vicegerents, wheresoever in the earth, that even for this cause alone, for that these are so beleved of thee, they likewise may in all tender affection, set themselves, as

in thy place, to rescue, succour,To rescue & succour them and protect them, from the rage of all thine and their cruell enemies; and that they may seeke withall, the unitingSeeke the uniting of them in Christ. of the hearts of all thy Children, in that firme bond of brotherly love, which is in Christ Iesus: that those of them, who most excell in vertue,And may be more de de
                        •…
                     re to them as they more excell in vertue. as they are most de
                     •…
                  re unto thy heavenly Majesty, may bee so likewise unto them, that they may respect and tender them, their welfare and prosperity, above all others.
               That they may seeke toTo prevent whatsoever may dissolve this brotherly knet. keepe all thine in this bond of holy love, and wisely to prevent whatsoever may dissolve this brotherly knot: or but breed any hatred, envy, grudgings, heart-burnnings, or unbrotherly censurings amongst them; or whatsoever may hurt or annoy them any

way. That heereby all suchThat so they may get this seale to their consciences, thy Vicegerents may get this testimony and seale to their Consciences, that they themselves are as thy first borne, and amongest the deerest of thy Children, and of all otherThat they are unto him as his first borne, and that hee will be a Father and protector to them and theirs. of the earth most precious unto thee, and that thou wilt shew thy selfe a Father and Protector unto them & theirs for evermore; when as thou wilt declare thy selfe full of vengeance against all of them who have any way wittinglie wronged or intended evill agaynst them.
               Oh unite all the hearts ofTo unite the hearts of all Gods Children to them and theyrs. thine owne children unto them and theyrs in all loyall affection, as to their foster-fathers and mothers, whome thou hast in so much mercie to this end raised up for them, and committed them unto: as the hearts of all thine owne servants were united into thy

faithfull seruant David, whom for this cause they accounted better then ten thousand of themselves, as the Candle of Israel; and as they were knit to that holy and melting harted King Iosiah, whose death they so lamented, as for the taking away of theyr shelter, and even the verie breath of their nostrils.
               Heare us (Oh tender Father) and let the bowelles of thy fatherly compassion earn over thy deere children, in thus inclining the hearts of all unto them to favour and succour them, especially those of them who have alreadie suffered so much adversity, & bene so long humbled under thy hand, for thy deere Son our Lord Iesus Christ his sake our onely Mediator and Aduocate,
               Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  VIII. A Prayer that we may all bee able to lift uppe our eyes and hearts unto our heavenly Father alone, and to look beyond all earthly meanes in all the troubles and perilles of the Churches.
               OH heavenly Father, whoWhich art in heaven. over ruledst the counsels of Herod, Pontius Pilate, andThat God who overrules al counsels to bring to pass his own decrees, all the people of the Iewes, and madst them all to serve for bringing to passe thine owne eternall decree, for thine owne everlasting praise and the comfort of thine own chosen flocke. Lift vppe theWould lift up the eyes and hearts of all his faithfull people to him. eyes and hearts of all thy Children now in this extreme rage and fury which is against us, and especially the eyes & hearts of all those of us, who have endevoured to be faithfull with thee in these sinfull

times, and to walke humbly before thee, as Enocke, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and Daniel.
               
               Grant that wee may lookeThat we may looke to him onely. up to thee onely, who though thou art so gloriously exalted in the highest heavens, yet lookest upon all the Sonnes of men, and seest all theWho seeth all the wrongs done to his Children. wronges that are done unto thy Children, and hearest every of their sighes and groanes, writest them in thy booke, & puttest their teares in thy bottle, and in thy dueAnd will one day make it manifest. time wilt make this knowne before all the world; howsoever the wicked and ungodly thinke not so, but have removed thee farre out of theirTo begge pardon for this sin specially that we have all made flesh our arme, & with drawne our hearts from the Lord. sight.
               Good Father, pardon this sinne unto all thy Children, that in the daies of our peace we and all thy Churches have amongst other sinnes, made

flesh our arme, & withdrawn our hearts from thee the living God; we have so much looked at our earthly fathers of all sortes, and to earthly meanes, as that we have sayd as they did of Iosiah, that under the shelter of those great trees, we should be safe from all the violent stormes which could be raised vp by Sathan, and from all scorching heate of persecution; so that in regard of them, we have thoght we should never be removed, thou Lord hadst of thy goodness by them, made vs to stand so strong. Lord make us toTo see how iustly for this sinne some are taken 2▪ way from the Churches, others weakened. see, how justly for this sinne thou hast taken away these earthly Fathers from some of the Churches, weakned them in others; and mayest now most justly even for this verie sinne alone, so infeeble the armes of all the rest, as that they cannot helpe thy Children:

yea, that thou mayest contrarily so turn their hearts agaynst thy deerest ChildrenVntill wee shall all see▪ our sinne, & turne our eyes onely to our heavenly Father. for it, that insteed of helping them, they may rather joyne hands against them, until such time as we shall see our sinne even in this behalfe, amongst all other our heinous transgressions, and turne our eyes agayne onely to thee our heavenly Father, and cheefe Protector.
               Oh grant unto us, that weeThat we may not rest il by our prayers and teares, we have caused him to relent towards us. may never rest before that time, that by our unfeigned repentance for this and all other our sinnes, and by our Prayers and teares, crying all about thy feete, we have caused thee to relent towards us, & thy bowels of compassion to earne over us, in hearing our sighes and cryes, and in seeing so many of us so lef
                     •…
                  e unto the hands of all thine, & our bloody & merciless enemies.
               
                  Lord make vs all able toThat by faith we may see him sitting at the great wheele looke up thus to thee, and by faith to behold thee sitting in heaven, laughing to scorne all the devises of thine enemies, guiding there the great wheele, and by it, ordering, turning, and over-ruling, all these inferiour & less wheeles heere below; that though they seeme to be carried violently in a contrary motion, yet wee may see all of themMaking all to serve to the accom plishing of his owne eternall decree, for the saving of his Church. serve, and by thy infinite wisedome and power, made to helpe to accomplish thine eternall decree, in whatsoever thou hast appointed, concern̄ing the gathering in of all the remainder of thine elect, both Iewes and Gentiles; the comming downe of the new Ierusalem, the present and eternall glory of thy Sion;The destructi on of his enemies to his eternall glory. with the vtter ruine & downfall of Babel; the endlesse condemnation and destruction

of that Whore of Babylon, and of all thine enemies for evermore.
               Lord, make us rightly to understand▪ & fully to know, that as Herod, and Ponti
                        •…
                     s Pilate, and all the people of the Iewes, did not, nor couldLike as all was which the enemies did against our Lord and Saviour. doe any other thing, against our eldest Brother, thy deere Sonne our onely Lord and Saviour, then that which thine owne counsell had determined;The benefits & blessings thereby. for his highest advancement at thy right hand, for thine owne eternall praise, the sending downe of thy holy Spirit in that wonderfull manner, the publishing of thine heavenly Gospell, the calling of the Gentiles, the inlargement of the Church, and spreading it over the wholeSo now at this present. earth; so at this present time, neither Sathan, nor Antichrist, Mahomet, nor all the mighty and subtilest enemies

of the world can doe any other thing against thy Church or Children, then that which long before, even from before the foundation of the world was laid, thou hast ordained; and that forFor the full accomplishment of all things foretold. the full accomplishment of whatsoever thou hast foretold, concerning both thy Church and Children, and alsoFor preparing the 
                        •…
                     ay to Christs glorious comming. concerning thine enemies, and for preparing the way to thy glorious appearing.
               Lord helpe us in this, that looking over all things heere below, wee may not onely stand still to see what thou wilt doe, but that we may rejoyceThat we may by faith be able to reioyce herein. in faith, beholding thee thus ordering and disposing all things to these blessed ends; and that thou art making, all Angels, Principalities, Powers, yea, Sathan, and all his instruments; with all their rage, malice, might, and

subtilty, in the very extreamest butchering & slaughtering of thy Saints, to worke together for the effecting heereof; that so wee may rejoyce even heerein with joy unspeakable & glorious, and in this our blessed estate.
               Lord make us to glorifieThat in all we are more then Conquerours. thee in this confident assurance, that though we should be killed all the day long, as many of our Brethren thy deere Children lately have bene, for thy name sake, and as wee are indeed in the designes of thine and our enemies, accounted as sheepe for the slaughter, yet that in all wee shall ever bee more then Conquerors thorow that blessed one in whom thou hast loved us.
               Yea (deere Father) makeThat no thing can separate us from his love. Rom. 8. 35. us to triumph in this, that whatsoever wee shall, or can suffer in the meane time, for

thy names sake, as other our Brethren do at this day, and Sathan threatneth us; that yet neither tribulation, anguish, persecution, famine, nakednesse, bonds, imprisonment, perill, or sword, can ever seperate us from thy love in Christ Iesus our Lord, if once we have the full evidences in our soules, that wee are thy Children in him, being so begotten by that lively word, and having upon us all the evident markes of thy Children.
               Grant us therefore (Oh graciousTo this end to make this sure that we are his Children. Father) now in these our daies of peace, & whilst thou vouchsafest us the meanes of thy heavenly Gospell, to give all diligence to make it sure, that we are thy Children, thy deere Children, yea, thy Children to whom thy heavenly kingdome appertaineth, having and bearing upon us, all

the lively markes and badges of thy Children.
               Above all, grant us thisTo have this▪ heavenly mindednesse. heavenly mindednesse, that our chiefe thoughts may bee upon thee our heavenly Father, our care may bee above all things how to please thee, doing in the meane while only the things which thou requirest, casting all our cares, for those daies, and for whatsoever the enemie can do, upon thy Majesty alone, and into thy bosome; learning every day more and more to waine our affections from this world, and the things of this world, and to set them wholly above, where thy Sonne sitteth at thy right hand.
               Lord perswade our hearts,To perswade us, that in all the troubles of the 
                        •…
                     hurch, God 
                        〈◊〉
                      preparing 
                        •…
                     is 
                        〈◊〉
                      meete him, as obedient children, with intreaty of peace. and make us able to perswade one another, that by all the power and liberty that thou hast permitted unto Sathan,

& to all his instruments, and by all the persecutions, and afflictions, that are upon all the Churches; and also by whatsoever threatnings of thine against thy Children, yea, whatsoever mischievous designes are intended against thy poore Church, or what danger soever it is in, thorow that extreame fury of Sathan and Antichrist, and all their instruments, thou art yet still preparing all thy Children to meete thee, in a sound humiliation, with strong cries and teares, for all our offending thee, and for grieving thy holy Spirit, by all our former security, and neglect of thee, and of the riches of thy favours vouchsafed unto us.
               Grant us all this grace therefore, as thine obedient and loving Children in all things, to submit our selves under thy Fatherly hand, to

turne joyntly to thy CovenantSubmitting our selves ioyntly to his Covenant. and renew the same in all faithfulnesse, to take away all the divisions that haveAnd having our hearts united in brotherly▪ love. bene amongst us; which thorow our long peace and wantonnes, Sathan hath wrought to the destroying of us all, if it were possible.
               Vouchsafe (good Father)That God may be as much pleased herein as ever displeased in our divisions. that we may doe this so effectually, that thou maist be as much pleased, in reuniting us againe, and in our Brotherly love and agreement, as ever thou hast beene displeased, in our divisions, and dissentions: and Sathan and his instruments,And Sathan and his instruments as much dismaid hereby. in seeing our holy unity and agreement, may bee as much dismaied, and put out of heart, for ever prevailing against us: as by the contrary, and by all their prosperous successe (as they imagine) they have bene animated and incouraged, to our ruine and

destruction. That so weeThat we may all sing, Behold how good &c. Psal. 133. may all sing, with one heart and voice, Behold how good and happy a thing it is, Brethren, to dwell together in unity. Lord manifest thy glory, even the glory of thy▪ wisedome, power, mercy, and truth heerein, in making us joyntly to looke and cry to thee, for all these things, and whatsoever thou in thy infinite wisedome knowest necessary for us in this behalfe, or for any member of thy whole Church, for Iesus Christ his sake, our only Lord and Saviour.
            
            
               
               
                  IX.
                  A thanksgiving for our deliverance from Babilon. A Thanksgiving to God, according to the first petition of the Lords prayer, for causing his glorie to breake forth so wonderfully now in this last Age of the world, in delivering his Churches, thus farre out of Egypt and Babilon, with a confession of our unworthinesse; and an earnest prayer, that wee may never dishonour him, by locking thither againe; nor provoke him by our sinnes to give us up to that heavie iudgement: and likewise for the diliverie of all the rest of his Israel in his due time, and that he may never leave us untill hee have brought us all into his heavenly Canaan.
               OH Lord, most holy andHallowed be thy name. most glorious, open our blinde eies, & touch our hard

and stony hearts, and theTo pray to see our honour to be called forth to be Gods peculiar people. hearts of all thy true Churches and people in all the world, whom thou hast called forth to bee thy people, that wee may bee able to see and consider aright the exceeding honour and dignity, which thou hast laid upon us, and to shew forth our thankfulness to thy heavenly Majesty accordingly.
               Make us able to consider, show thou hast vouchsafed to take us so nere unto thy selfe, as to make vs thine owne peculiar people of all the people of the earth, to set andTo set and confirme his Covenant with us. confirme the Covenant with us of life and glory; and how to this end thou hast broughtHow he hath brought us out of Aegypt & Babilon. us out of that spirituall Aegypt and Babilon, from that bondage and tyranny of Sathan and Antichrist.
               Make us to consider, and rightly to understand, how

by great deliverances and iudgements, thou hast carriedHow he hath carried thorow the sea & wilderness. us thorow the sea and thorow the▪ wildernesse, and shewed thy selfe unto us in thy gloriousLeading us by his statutes. ordinances, leading us by thy statutes and commandements, and by the workes of thy providence, protection, direction, chastisement▪ blessings, as thou diddest thyAs he did Israel by the piller of fire and the cloud. people Israel, by the pillar of the fire, and the pillar of the cloud.
               Give us hearts ever to remember,How hee hath sought for us from heaven. how thou hast sought for us from heaven; so as all the earth hath s
                     •…
                  ene and heard of thy glory; and hast carried us as upon EaglesBrought us to the frontiers of the heavenly Canaan. wings, and now brought us to the very frontiers of thy heavenly Canaan, and made us to see & tast of the riches, happinesse, and glory of it in thy sacred Gospell.
               Oh our blessed God, most

gracious, and most dreadfull,To be a fraid of having a thought of looking back towards Aegypt, towards Popery or Popish superstition. make us and all thy people, to bee afraid of ever having any thought of turning backe, so much as in our hearts, or of ever having a looke towards Aegypt, or Sodome againe, towards any part of that Popery or Popish superstition and Idolatry, that abhominable drudgery, under Sathan and Antichrist, from which thou hast so graciously delivered us.
               Oh never suffer us to admitThat we may never admit of any comparison of their leekes with our Manna▪
                   of any imagination, or so much as one motion, of comparing the Leekes, Onions, & Garlicke of Aegypt, with the hid Manna, of thy sacred Law, and heavenly Gospell. Albeit we heare and see theirThat notwithstanding all their rage we may never distrust the Lords presence or power. 
                  
                     •…
                  age and fury, and the power of all their armies, banding themselves against us, either to swallow us up at once, or els to persue us into the heart

of the sea; yet keepe us that wee never rebell against thee, thinking to turne backe from thee, to goe into Aegypt againe, distrusting thy truth, thy presence, and power.
               Cause us, Oh gracious Father,That God can least indure this sin. wisely to consider of, and ever to have this as before our eies, that of all dishonors done unto thy heavenly Majesty, thou canst least indure this, chiefly after so long triall and experience, which thou hast given us of thy power, goodnesse and mercy towardsThat this may make him sweare in his wrath we shall never enter into his rest. us. That this sinne alone, may justly make thee sweare in thy wrath, that wee shall never enter into thy rest.
               Make all them that haveTo make all such to know that this sin without repentance will cut them off from ever entring the heavenly Canaan. dishonoured thee in this high kinde, sinning thus against thy glorious Majesty, to know for certaine, that without speedy and unfeigned repentance

thou wilt cut them off
                     •…
                   from ever seeing thy celestiall Canaan; and much more,Chiefly them who as the ten spies have brought an evill report upon this good land. make all them to know this specially, who with the tenne spyes, after they have not only searched out the good land, tasted, and brought to others, the fruite of it, but filled them selves, at least with the outward blessings, and daynties thereof, have yet either turned backe, or brought an evill report upon it, even upon thy sacred religion and Gospell, to discourage their Brethren thereby, to cause them to be faint-hearted, and as much as 
                     •…
                  veth in them, to turne into Aegypt againe.
               Oh Lord most holy, mostTo remember that of all who tempted the Lord by their unbeleefe never any could enter into Canaan. dreadfull, and most terrible, make us all ever to remember, that of all those hundreth thousands, who so tempted and dishonoured thee, by their unbeleefe, in the way towards

the earthly Canaan, never any one could enter in, but thou causedst their catkasses to fall in the wildernes, untill they were utterly consumed; and for those thatAnd those who brought that slander died by a fearfull plague. brought that vile slaunder upon the good land, thou causedst them to die by a terrible plague, and that therefore these may justly expect aThat these
                        •…
                      may expect a more heavy vengeance. more heavy wrath and vengeance from thy Majesty.
               Oh gracious Father, give all thine owne faithfull peopleTo have the sound hearts of Caleb & Iosuah. and children, the same hearts of Caleb & Iosua, especially all them, who as those thy two worthy servants, have unto this day constantly stucke unto thy sacred Majesty, in the conscionable profession of thy heavenly truth,To give constant testimony to the holinesse of his religion. that we may all couragiously and boldly give testimony, unto the happinesse of this good land, into which thou

hast brought us, & this good way of life, wherein thou hast set us: that this indeed, to wit, the sincere profession of thy name, according to thy sacred word, and as it is confirmed by our good Lawes, is a land that floweth with milke and hony: and the Lord, if he love us, will continue it unto us, and increase the glory and happinesse of it, untill he have brought us into his heavenly Canaan.
               Inable us (good Father)To incourage our hearts & perswade our brethren that none of us ever rebell against the Lord, nor feare the proud enemye. thus to incourage our owne hearts, and the hearts of all our faithfull Brethren; and for all other to perswade them by all meanes out of thy blessed word, that they rebell not against thee, the Lord of hoasts, neither feare the proud enemies of the Church; butBut onely be humbled before him for all our sins. onely that we may joyntly be truly humbled before thy glorious Majesty for all our

sinnes, whereby we have thus provoked thy greatnesse, and holinesse, & thus caused thee to muster thine armyes, and to strengthen thine and our enemies against us, to cause thine owne people in so many places to fly before them.
               Oh Lord inable us by thyTo pray that we may never leave wrastling with the Lord, untill he have inclined all our hearts, chiefly of all in authority for saving his Church and appeasing his wrath. holy Spirit, that wee may never leave wrastling with thee, untill we have prevailed with thy Majesty thus farre, that thou shalt incline the hearts of all, especially all those, whom thou hast set in thy place, for the saving of thy people, that they and all their dominions, even all the Churches, and every soule of thine, may seeke thee, in sack cloth and ashes, in fasting, weeping, and mourning, never giving over crying to thee, through thy Christ, untill thine anger be appeased, and thou bee reconciled to thy people againe;

for that then undoubtedly (as thou hast bene wont to doe in former Ages) thou wilt make thine, and thyFor that then his enemies shall be but bread for his people. Numb. 14. 9, Churches enemies, to be but bread for thy people, that all the world shall see, that their sheild is departed from them, and that thou the Lord ofThat we shal not neede to 
                        •…
                     eare them any more. hoasts art with us, and that wee shall not need to feare them any more.That we may know that God hath spared us hetherto of his rich mercy. Numb. 14. 13. 19.
               
               Oh gracious God, & most tender Father, cause all the Churches to know, and especially us of this sinfull nation, that hitherto we, and so many as have beene preserved, thou alone hast spared and saved us, of thy rich mercy, and at the instant requests & importuningsAnd at the cryes of his faithfull servants. of thy Moseses, which have bene amongst us.
               And more specially, cause all unbeleevers to know, that thou now speakest to them, as thou diddest to thy people in

the wildernesse. That notwithstanding thy great mercies, and the sparing of us at the cries of thy faithfull ones, yet all the earth shall be filledPsal. 21. with the glory of the Lord.That none who still tempt him shall ever see the heavenly Canaan. that all those who have seene thy glory, the good land, and great deliverances, which thou hast given to thy people, and yet have so oft, and doe still tempt thee, not obeying thy voyce, shall never see that thy heavenly Canaan, which thou hadst so promised and offered unto them, nor any other that so provoked thee by their unbeleefe. ThatOnely those who remaine constant with the Lord shal enter in. onely thy faithfull servants, who as Caleb and Iosuah, having another Spirit, doe follow thee still, remaining still more constant and faithfull, even in the greatest timerousnesse and backsliding of the multitude, these onely thou wilt bring into the heavenly

Canaan, and they alone shall inherit it for evermore.
               Heare us, Oh most graciousTo pray that remembring Gods mercies & our estates, we may strive fast forward towards the heavenly Canaan. God. and loving Father, and keepe us by the mighty power of thy blessed Spirit, that alwayes remembring what thou hast done for us, and considering aright of the miserable estate of all under Sathan and Antichrists tyranny, and our owne happy estate and condition, under our Lord & Saviour Iesus Christ, we may all joyntly strive fast forward towards the full fruition of thine owne glorious Majesty in the heavenly Canaan; and in the new Ierusalem eternally.
               Grant, that in the meaneThat the unfeigned repentance of all the true Churches. time, the unfeigned repentance of all thy true Churches and people, for all our sinnes, may bee one of thy effectuall and principall instruments, for the pulling of the

remainder of thy people forthMay helpe to pull all out of Sodome and Aegypt and to cause them to fly speedyly out of Babilon. of Sodome, and of Aegypt, and to cause all thine, to fly speedily and get themselves out of Babilon, that by escaping her sins, they may likewise escape her plagues: and finally, that it may thus prepare the way to the calling and conversion of the Iewes,And to prepare the way to Christs glorious comming. the gathering in of all thy Israel, the speedy comming of our Lord and Saviour for our eternall deliverance, the everlasting glory of thy Sion, and of us all for evermore. Heare us, Oh most gracious Father, in these our requests, and accept of this our poore thanksgiving, for this inestimable favour, even for Iesus Christ his sake, our onely Lord and Saviour.
            
            
               
               
                  X. A prayer, that wee and all theA prayer that we may glorifie God by walking more conscionably in all his Lawes & Commandements. Churches in token of our thankfullnesse to our blessed God, for our deliverance from Babilon, & for making us his people and Children, and his Covenant with us, may set our selves to honour him more then ever wee have done, especially in a more conscionable and chearefull walking in all his holy Lawes and Commandements, that hee may alwaies keepe us from that bloody tyranny.
               OH Lord, most holy, mostHallowed be &c. great and glorious, who hast made all things for thine owne sake, even the wickedProv. 16. 4. for the day of evill. Perswade the hearts of all thine owneThat God would perswade all that he hath created all for his owne glory. people, that thou hast thus created & formed all things, for thine owne honour, that

thy great name might ever be magnifyed in all the world: and especially by thine owne children; and to this end, thou hast caused the glorie of thyCaused his glory to 
                        •…
                      s
                        •…
                     ine in every creature. wisedome, power, and goodness to shine in all thy works, even in every creature of the world, to convince all theThat all may give him his glory, or be left utterly without excuse. earth, that every soule that will not give thee thy glory, may bee left utterly without excuse, and all the disobedient may have theyr mouthes stopped, and be forever confounded before thy Tribunall.
               Above all, make all thyThat this glory is more visibly upon the Churches rescued and delivered from Sathan and Antichrist. people to understand and know, that thou hast caused this thy glorie to be more visibly uppon the Churches, (which thou hast so mightily rescued and delivered from the power of Sathan and Antichrist, and whom thou hast taken into so neere a Covenant,

as to bee thy onely people, to whom thou hast committed thy heavenly word and ordinances) then it is upon all other people andThat we may set forth his glory by keeping his S
                        •…
                     atutes. places of the world besides; and that this thou hast done chiefly to this end, that wee might set forth thy glory in this, by keeping all thy Statutes, and observing all thy Lawes.
               Lord cause all to know moreover, that to this end,To this end he hath set before us life & death. thou▪ hast not delivered us, & set us out of that bondage, to serve thee in holiness, but hast set before us also life & death, blessing and cursing, and hastDeut. 30, 19. bidden us to choose life, thatBidden us to choose life. we and ours may live, and hast assured us heereof, and that onely by loving thee, the Lord our God, by obeying thy voice, by cleaving fast unto thee, because thou (thorow thy Christ) art unto us

our life, and the length of ourHow we may do it. dayes, and whatsoever thou bidst us, thou wilt enable us to doe, we onely beleeving in thy beloved Sonne, and usingIos. 1. 8. the holy meanes which thou hast appointed.
               Make us all to this purpose, ever to remember, how thou hast charged us all, thatCharged us that the booke of the Law shall never depart out of our hearts. the booke of thy Law, thy sacred word should never depart out of our mouthes, but that we should meditate in it day and night; that wee may all observe and doe, according to all that is written in that booke: for that then thou wil
                     •…
                   make all our wayes (in this our journey) prosperous; no enemy shall bee ableThen no enemy shall be able to withstand us. Ios. 1. 5. to withstand us, much lesse to surprize us of a sudden, but thou wilt bee with us, andWe shall in all have good success. thou wilt then give us good success.
               Yea good Lord, let this

ever be before our faces, how to incorage
                     •…
                  s better h
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   to, thou hast assured us, that if wee will thus thinke and meditate of thy Lawes and Commandements day and night, to observe & do them, and honour thee thereby; thou wilt honour us herein, that wee shall bee a blessedBe a blessed people. Psal. 1. 2. 3. people, and like the trees plainted by the rivers of water; that we shall bring forth our fruite in due season, and that so, as our leafe shall not fade, but looke whatsoeverProsper in all we do, shal prosper. How thenBe wiser then our enemies. we shall be wiser then our enemies; yea wee shall havePsal. 119. 98. 99. 100. more understanding then our teachers, and then all the auncient; when wee can set our selves thus to honour thee, by keeping all thy Commandements, like as thou diddest veryfie thy gracious promises in this 
                     •…
                  alfe, to thy faithfull

servant David, to Daniell,
                  Like as David, Daniell, and others. Dan. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. to those worthyes of the Captivitie, whom thou diddest so highly honour, for that they so honoured thee, as that they would rather chuse to bee cast upon all miseries, yea▪ the cruellest death, then voluntarily to defile themselves, by transgressing but the very least of all thy holy Commandements.God will be with us as we are with him. 2. Chro. 15. 2.
               
               Make us all therefore that are thi
                     •…
                  e, rightly to understand, that whilest wee thus honour thee, in being thusEzra. 8. 22. with thee (in faith and all holy obedience to these thy blessed Commandements) thou wilt likewise honour us (in being with us in mercyHeb. 10. 38. and truth) thy good hand shal bee so sensibly upon us, that we shall live by faith, in assuranceWe shall be able to live by faith and experience, that thou wilt accomplish unto 
                     •…
                  s every one of thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   promises,

and that thus persevering in faith and obedience, we shalbe saved eternally.
               Make us to know for certayne, that so long, & so long onely as we watch and strive heereunto, seeking cheerfully to receyue the Law of thy mouth, and to lay uppe thyIob 22. 21. 22, 23, &c. words in our soules, we shall be able to lift up our heartesTo lift up hearts and hands in assurance to be heard. L
                        •…
                     m. 3, 39, 40, 41, 42. with our hands, in undoubted assurance, that wee shall be heard, in whatsoever shall be best for us, and for thy Church.
               Cause us to know and beleeueOnely such as wholly endeavour to walke with God, are the innocent that shall deliver the Iland. for certayne, that so many of us, and so many onely as thus seeke to make & keep peace with thy Majesty, in turning and submitting ourselves thus wholly to thy Covenant, as holy Noah, Moses, and Abraham did, are those whom thou accountest the innocent, and to whom thou

hast promised that they shall deliver the Iland.Iob 22, 30.
               
               Lord at length perswadeTo be perswaded that all Gods promises are made to an endeavour of an intire obedience. us all that are thine, and make every one of us to seeke to perswade all others, that unto this intire endeavour of obedience to all thy Commandements both of thy Law and Gospell, are all thy promises made: and that contrarily against all contempt and despisingAnd contrarily. of the heavenly Commandements, yea against every wilful disobedience, thogh it be but to one Commandement, thy cursings and th
                     •…
                  e t
                  
                     •…
                  ings are denounced, which thou dost dreadfully execute accordingly, because men will not thus give thee thy glory.
               Good Lord awaken all the Churches, and open the eyes of all thine own people rightly to conceyue & understand these things, and how SathanHow Sathan knowing this,
                  
that old Serpent, that arch & bloody enemy of thy Church knowing all this wel enough, hath sought in all the prosperityHath labored to make all to content themselves onely with a bare outward profession, destroying all the power of godliness, to the Lords dishonour. of thy Churches, to cause thine owne people to dishonour thee, by making onely a bare outward profession of honouring thee, by receyuing and setting up thy heavenly Religion & Commandements to obey them in word, but trampling them all under foot generally, according to the evill customes and manners of the Countries and places where they live; that thouThat he might leaue all into his hand. mightest leave thy people into his hand, & into the hands of all his cruell instruments, as thou hast most righteously done in so many parts of thy Church already, and threatnest all the rest of thy people for the same.
               Oh deere Father, how many of thy faithfull servants;

who have lived in those partsThe acknowledgement of Gods righteousnes heerein, by many of his faithfull servants. of thy Church, which are now left into the enemyes handes, do heerein iustifie thy proceedings, acknowledging thy righteousness in all that thou hast brought upon them, even for this very cause of carnall Gospelling, and loose profession.
               Oh tender Father, make usTo pray, that we may be able likewise to iustify the Lord, and never to rest until he give thee all unfeigned repentance for it. all able likewise to iustifie thee in this behalfe; and never to rest crying unto thee for them, untill thou shalt open their eyes to see and acknowledge thy righteousnes, and that they shall unseinedly repent of their most heynous dishonour done to thy sacred Majesty herein, in causing thy name heereby to bee blasphemed amongst thine enemyes.
               Yea cause us (good Lord)That we may be warned by their ensample. by their fearfull ensample, even us specially of this sinfull

Nation, to meet thee speedily by our unfeigned repentance for this dreadfull sinne, whereof we are generally no less guilty then any of them, co
                     •…
                  dering the gracious meanes which wee haue so long time enioyed above all. Oh make us to doe it foorthwith,To do it forthwith. before it be too late, & that thy wrath be powred on us as upon them, and that there bee no remedy. CauseTo be warned heereof by the very Heathen. 1 Sam. 6, 5, 
                        •…
                     . us at least to be warned by the very Heathen, who acknowledged this giving glory thus to thee the God of Israel, to be the onely meanes to appease thy wrath, and prevent thy further judgements.
               Lord smi
                     •…
                  e the hearts of all thy Lieutenants, and of all toTo smite the hearts of all Gods Lieutenants with a true sense heereof. whom the charge of thy honour, the saving of thy people, are specially committed, that they may be thorowly awaked and touched with a right

Meditation and sense hereof, and of their account to be given even for this dishonour before thy heavenly Majesty, that thy people should thus fall away, or thus flye before thine enemyes. And for allTo perswade us that our Adversaries are raised up to humble us to walk with our God. thine and our proud aduersaries perswade our hearts, that thou hast raised them up thus against us all, as thou diddest Pharao against Israel, that when thou hast humbled us by them, so as to turne us to thee againe, by causing us to submit and humble our soules to walke lowlily with thee▪ in all these thy blessed Commandements, and so to honorHow then he will get himselfe glorie on them. thee, thou wilt then get thy selfe glory uppon their pride and furie, and in our finall deliverance from them, giving them for our ransome.
               Yea (good Father) for every particular soule of us, make us to know in our very

hearts, that thou as thou hastTo know, as we are made for his glory, so he will be glorifyed in each of us. made us for thine owne glory; so thou wilt be glorifyed in us and by us, and that in endless mercy and eternallIn mercy, compassion upon so manie of us, as thou having ordayned to be vessels of glorie, givest hearts unto, thus to humble our selves, to seeke to walke obediently in all thy blessed Lawes and commandements: & of the other side, that thou wilt bee glorifyed in declaring thy wrath and everlastingOr vengeance. vengeance, which thou wilt in thy due time execute upon all thy disobedient and stubborne enemyes, who shal declare themselves manifestly by rebelling against thee, to be vessels of wrath prepared for destruction.
               Lord; by the due meditation and consideration heereof, awaken and rowze up all thy people to learn to make more

true conscience of all thy blessed▪ Commaundements, then ever we have done heretofore, for the appeasing of thy Majestie; that thy glorieThat his glory may shine in our deliverance. may shine in all the world, in pardoning the sinnes of thy people, delivering us from our cruell enemies, and getting thy selfe honour upon Babylon,And getting himselfe honour upon Babylon. who hath chiefly for this bene, and is, the staffe of thy wrath and indignation.
               Heare us therefore heerein, and cause us at length, even in token of our thankfulness, & in the zeale we have for thy glory, yea in a vehement desire, that thy glory may bee set uppe, and thy great name may by us be magnified in all the world, thus to seek to renew and performe all our vowes, to walke more obediently in all thy blessed Commandements then ever heretofore, even for our Lord Iesus

Christ his sake, our onely Redeemer & Saviour,
               Amen,
            
            
               
                  XI A Prayer that Gods glorie mayA praier that we may give God the glory of his inward worship according to the 1. Commandement, and so helpe to pacifie his Maiestie towardes the Churches. breake forth more and more, then ever heeretofore, in causing us and all his people in all the Churches, to set him up alone as our God, and make him great in our hearts, by having our hearts first soundly replenished with all the parts of his inward worship, commanded in the first Commandement, without which, we and all our outward worship, and whatsoever we do in his service are utterly in vain That thus all the Churches, and euery soule, may seeke to pacifie his Maiestie, by giving unto him his due glorie.
               OH Lord God, who art most glorious in thy 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
Majesty 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  To pray that we may set up God in our hearts, giving him there his inward worship. in all thy Attributes, and hast made this glorie of thine to shine bright in every one of thy workes, and chiefly in thy heavenly word, that thou mightest bee glorifyed accordingly by all thy people, and chiefly by them, whom thou hast redeemed from Egypt and Babylon to this end and purpose; set up this thy glory in the hearts & consciences of everie one of thine elect, that all of us may know and acknowledge theeIn knowing and acknowledging him. such a one as thou hast revealed thy selfe in thy most blessed word.
               Lord graunt, that all of us may be knowen heereby, toIohn 6, 45. be taught by thee, and that the earth may be filled with the
                  Heb. 2, 
                        •…
                     4. 
                  knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea, according to thy grācious promises made unto thy

Church in the flourishing estate thereof: yea, perswade us good Lord, that without the true knowledge of thee, and thy heavenly will, our hearts cannot be good, howsoever wee may deceive our selves, as the world doth generally.
               More specially, inable us to set thee up in our hearts, not onely by knowing thee in a generall manner, but by beleeving that thou art our God; that wee may bee ableIn faith beleeving him to be our God. Iohn. 20. 28. in faith each of us with Thomas▪
                   to call thee▪ 
                  My God, and my Lord, and so to beleeve every thing, contained in thy heavenly word, as that this power of our faith in thee▪ may shew it selfe, in each part and action of our whole life, both in readily obeying every one of thy blessed Commandements, as thy servants, Abraham and Noah
                  
did, and also in fearing every one of thy threatnings and jvdgements, & finally in laying lively hold of every one of thy gracious promises made unto us in the same word; that so wee may alwaies cheare up our hearts, and incourage our selves, and also one another, to run out more joyfully in all the narrow way of life.
               Lord perswade all ourTo be perswaded that this peculiar faith was the faith of Abraham & all the faithfull. Rom. 
                        •…
                     3. hearts, that this particular and powerfull faith (howsoever it be scoffed at by all thine and thy Churches enemies) was the very faith of our Father Abraham, and of all the faithfull recorded, in thy booke, even that whereby allHeb. 11. 2. the Fathers, received good report; and that without this lively working faith, it isHeb. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 6. impossible for any one ever to be pleasing, or ever to doeRom. 14. 23. any thing acceptable to thy

heavenly Majesty.
               Good Lord, make vs all able upon th
                     •…
                   our right & saving knowledge of thee, that thouVpon this our faith to hold fast the Anchor of our hope. art faithfull and true, and this our faith in thee, that thou art our God, to hold fast the Anchor of our hope, and to manifest it, by our wayting and looking stedfastly, for the full accomplishment of every promise that thou hast made, either cōcerning thy Church in generall, or els any of us particularly: & also of whatsoever thou hast denounced, concerning thine and thy Churches enemies, and that thou wilt doe every thing in thy due time, for thy Church, and against thy enemies, howsoever for the present, all things may seeme to goe against thy Church and people.
               Yea, inable us withall (good Father) ever to honour

thee, by shewing forth thisTo honour the Lord by manifesting our faith by our confidence. our faith, by the confidence which wee have in thee, even then when wee may seeme to bee most forgotten, and forsaken of thee, both by casting all our burdens upon thee at all times, and also by our rejoycing alwayes in thee as in our good God, that thou takest care for us; and by being heereby full of Christian chearfulnes and courage, against all the oppositions and feares, that ever wee shall, or can mee
                     •…
                  e with, in this our journey towards Can
                     •…
                  an, as thy worthiest servants have bene wont to be.
               Oh magnifie thy powerTo manifest our faith by our love to the Lord, his Commandements and ordinances. and goodnesse, in shedding out thy love so aboundantly upon all thy Churches, and every member thereof, and so manifesting it before the world, that in the true sense and feeling of it in our hearts,

and our lively faith in thee, wee may all joyntly manifest the fervent love wee returne unto thy Majesty, by our unfeigned love of every one of thy blessed Commandemēts, and our fervent desire to thy statutes, to walke in them all without reproofe, yea, by our ardent affection towards all thy ordinances and servants, onely for thy cause.
               Good Lord, cause the ferventBy our zeale for his glory. zeale that wee have towards thy name, to appeare before the world, in the vehement griefe and indignation, that we have for all y• dishonors done unto thy heavenly Majesty, by trampling under feete thy blessed Commandements, thy religion, and servants, and the injuryes and contumelyes done against any of them; and so likewise by our study and holy indeavour, by all meanes to, promote

thy true religion and causes, and by our vehement hatred, of whatsoever is offensive to thy holinesse; that we may set up nothing in our heartes but thy Majesty, and those things which thou lovest, accounting all other as drosse and dung, in regard of thy holinesse, yea, even life it selfe, if it hinder us from injoying or obeying thee.
               Cause thy glory to rest herein, upon all the Churches,That we may honour him shewing forth all holy patience. and upon all thy poore afflicted servants, that upon the assurance of thy love, and that thou art our gracious God, we may honour thee in shewing forth all holy patience, with all cheerfullnesse, even in the middest of all our tryals; that howsoever▪ thou maiest seeme to be displeased with us, and to frowne upon us, yea, to favour our enemies in all their proceedings,

and to give us up into their hands, to let them to be lords over us, and make us a prey to their teeth; yet our eye may bee still at thee, at thy love, wisedome, and faythfulness knowing that whatsoeuer thou doest to us, thou doest it but to humble us for our security, and for all other our greevous sinnes, and to prove us, that thou art certainely disposing all to our greatest comfort in the end: and thus to prepare our way unto thy heavenly Ierusalem.
               That thus we all may ever possess our soules in patience, and waite for the happy issue,That we may possess our soules in patience, wayting for the happy yssue. Iob 13, 15. both of all our owne trialles, and of all the trialles of thy Church and people, and bee alwayes able to say with holy Iob, though thou shouldst kill us, or leave us utterly and wholly unto the pleasures and lustes of our enemyes; yet we

will still trust in thee, approoving our wayes in thy sight, that heereby we may make it manifest to the faces of all our enemyes, that we are certainly assured, that nothing can separate us from thy love, and that thou canst not forsake, faile, or forget us, whatsoever 
                     〈◊〉
                   the present thou doe unto us.
               Ye
                     •…
                  , oh most blessed God,That we may give him glory in our childlike fear cause thy glory yet to shine more clearly uppon all the Churches, and upon everyone of us that are thy true servants and children indeed, in this behalfe, that though the wicked feare thee not, but seek to drive all the true feare of thy Majestie even out of our hearts likewise, as out of their owne, and do therefore hate and persecute us, so farre as thou permits them, onely because we feare thee, and put our tru
                     •…
                  t in thy mercy: yet we

may feare thee so much more with a true, holy, childe-like feare; that we may ever, and especially now in these evill dayes, labour to live alwaies as in thy presence, and as in the verie eye of thy all-seeing Majestie.
               Grant good Lord, that weWalking constantly withou
                        •…
                      God in holy feare. may bee able thus to walke with thee constantly, until we shall be translated hence, and with holy Noah, to endevour to be still more righteous in our generation, and to be daily building our Arkes to save our selves and Families, and all other that we can get into the same, from the floud of thy vengeance, that is rushing upon al the world of the wicked.
               And albeit the world scornAlbeit the world scorne and hate us for it. and deride us dayly for it, and though we be the onely talk and hatred of the wicked, and as men appointed and designed

to death onely for this our feare of thee, in the bloody hopes of thine and our proud enemyes, yet cause us heerein to honour thee, that we may not feare the faces of them while we walke in thy blessed Commandements, and do onely as thou requirest of us, but that by the might and power of thy heavenly Spirit, we may bee more full of all Christian corage, as the three worthy Children of the Captivitie, & as good Daniel and holy Nehemiah.
               
               And yet more also enable us heerein likewise to honourTo shewforth our honour towards the Lord by our Humility. thee before the world, and to shew openly before men and Angels, that we have set thee uppe in our hearts to be our God, even by walking humbly with thee, that thogh the world regard thee not, but thou art farre above out of their sight, and though they

doe band themselves agaynst thee, against thy heavenly word and servants; yea thogh they scorne al thy judgments and threatnings, as the Gyants before the flood, and as proud Pharao and Herod did, yet we may all walke ever in all humility and lowlinesse of Spirit before thee.
               Make us ever to have beforeTo this end, to have ever before our eyes Gods excellency & our own vileness and danger by Nature, and Sathans malice. our faces thy glorious excellencie, and our own vilenesse; thy holinesse, and our sinnefulnesse, and that not only by the fall of our first Parents, and by the whol course of our sinful lives, and also the power, subtilty, and malice of Sathan against us to destroy us each moment, without thy speciall preservation & mercie; but even for the very corruption of our sinfull natures which still dwell in us; that bodie of death which would carrie us to destruction▪ yea▪
                  
even to hell it selfe every minute, if thou in the riches of thy mercy shouldest not restraine it, and shouldest not cover all our sinnes, yea, keep and uphold us.
               Oh give us hearts, thatThat we may give to the Lord all the glory of our standing and perseverance in grace & of each good thing. herein wee may all magnifie thy great name, in giving unto thee, as is thy due, all the glory of our standing & perseverance in grace, and of every good thing that ever we enjoy, acknowledging from our soules, that they are all the free gifts of thy rich mercy, and that we are not worthy any of them, nay that we are much lesse then the least of them, as thy deerest servantsThat we may withall give him his glory mourning continually for all the dishonours done unto his name, & all provocations against the Churches. have beene wont to do.
               And good Lord, heerein make us specially able to give thee thy glory, in being thorowly humbled, and in mourning continually for all the heynous sinnes, whereby thou

hast bene, and art still, dayly more and more provoked against the Churches, for all the dishonours done unto thy great name; that we may bee every one as righteous Lot in Sodome, and as the mourners before the Captivitie, and as those worthy servants of thine, both Ezra, Nehemiah, and Daniel, untill we shall see againe the setting up of thy glory and Gospell▪ thy gracious countenance shining upon all the Churches, and the full delivery of thy deere Children, out of the hands of their most mercilesse & bloody enemies.
               Oh grant, that hereby ourTo pray to be able to see hereby who they are that truly honour the Lord▪ & have set him up for their God. eyes may bee open, to see aright both who they are, that truly honour thee, by having thee their God, as they ought, in setting thee thus up in their hearts, in every one of these respects, and who are

heereby truly thankefull for their great deliverance from Aegypt and Babylon; yea, from Sathan and eternal damnation. Heare us for Iesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Saviour.
               
                  Another Prayer, according to the first Commandement.
                  OH Lord, most glorious,To discerne of the greatnesse of the sinne of all the Churches, whereby he is dishonored & provoked. and most blessed, as we intreate thee to manifest who they are which truely honour thee, having set thee uppe in their harts as their God: make us able by these likewise, to discerne of the greatnesse of the sinne of all the Churches, when after so long a time, there yet appeareth so little true saving knowledge of thy Majesty; but that such aBy palpable ignorance & blindness in them. grosse and palpable darkness is upon the most congregations

and places, that the people are ready to receyue any errors broached amongest them, and that so great a part of thy people seeme now much more ready to receyve Popery and superstition agayne, then to stand forth for the maintayning thy heavenly Gospell, with the losse of any thing for it; and so verie many thereby so forward, to put their neckes under the yoake of Antichrist againe, rejecting the sweete yoake of Iesus Christ.
                  When there is also such aBy Atheisme world of Atheisme, as that so many both in Court & Countrey live as if there vvere no God, no heaven, no judgement, no place of torment. Such multitudes perishing daily for lacke of this knowledge, living as without Christ, being ignorant of all saving knowledge of him, and

so goe hoodwinked to hell: worse then the Oxe that knoweth his owner.
                  Make us able heereby, toVnbeleefe. consider aright, how justlie thou mayest bee provoked agaynst the Churches for our wonderfull unbeleefe, and mayest even give us up into our enemies hands for the same, when there are so meruailous few to be found in all the Churches, who shewe forth their saving knowledge of thy Majesty, and faith in thee, by their conversations, by making a right conscience of every one of thy blessed Commandements to obey them; or of thy judgements or threats to restrayne them from sinne; or of thy sweete promises and mercyes to bee encouraged thereby to runne more cheerefully in the narrow way of life; but all sorts, except the small remnant, full

of prophanenesse, or extreme licentiousnesse.
                  Oh make us to behold, that carnall confidence, which soCarnall confidence. possesseth all almost generally that (in steed of honouring thee, by having set thee up to bee our onely confidence and strength) we do trust in vanity, making flesh our arme; either relying upon our wit, our policy and counsell, or other like meanes; by all which, as our hearts are withdrawne from thee, so we have and do bring a fearefull curse uppon our selves, making these our gods.
                  Lord make us able to consider of this more seriously, & of the truth heereof by this one thing, that in all our straites and feares, we so little run unto thy Majesty to seeke thy face and helpe in the first place, by humbling our souls before thee, and seeking to

pacifie thy wrath as wee ought; but only looke to the outward meanes, as relying uppon them alone or principally.
                  And Lord we intreat thee to shew us in our harts, and to set plainly before our faces, how in all the rest of these holy duties, we have provoked thee alike; how in steede of taking to heart the dishonors done unto thy heavenly Majesty, and being zealous for thy glory, we have bene, and are so generally, either starke cold, or luke-warme as theLukewarmnesse. 
                     
                        •…
                     odicean, that thou mayest justly spewe us out of thy mouth, or at least, that wee are so mervailously decayed and falne from our first love.
                  Lord give us harts to consider of our most heynous sin in this behalfe, that in steede of so loving thee, thy truth, and servants as we should do,

if we had set thee up truely in our soules and consciences, as our God; we have almost everieLoving other things more then Gods Maiesty. one set up some other thing, which wee manifest plainly, that we have, and do love, and preferre before thy glorious holinesse, as having our affections set thereon much more, then on thy heavenly Majesty, and for obtaining or injoying whereof, we are not afraid to indanger our selves to loose thy favour, as some of us our children and friends to make them great; others, our pleasures to take our delight, and satiate our selves in them; others of us, and that very generally, the riches, pompe, honour, and wealth of the world; and all of us, except some little remnant, preferring our owne selves, our owne honor, 
                        •…
                     ase, peace, and safety, and whatsoever is most pleasing unto us,

before thy glorious Majestie, and thy heavenly Commandements.
                  Lord make us able to see, how we have and do prouoke thee generally, to powre out thy wrath upon us all: some of us by grosse disobedienceDisobedience and obstinacie against some one or other of these thy Sacred Commandements, if not all of them (wherein soever they crosse the corruption of ou
                        •…
                      owne hearts) and that against the verie light of our owne consciences; although thou hast told us plainly, that this hath bene, and is, nothing els but rebellion against thee,1 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪ 15, 22, 23 and as the sinne of witch craft in thy eies.
                  How others of us, dishonour thee by our timerousnes,T
                           •…
                        ousnes. fearing the faces of men more then thy glorious face; and thereuppon doing or forbearing good or evill onely, for

feare of man; wherein wee have and do commit manifest Idolatry, making Gods of men, and setting them up in thy place. How others of us tempt thee by presuming uponPresumption. thy mercy, to bee bold to sin, because thou art so mercifull; though thou hast told us directly, that thou wilt notDeut. 29, 19, 20, 21. be mercifull to such.
                  Yea, which is yet a higher degree (good Lord:) Make us to see how many amongst us, in 
                        •…
                     teed of having so set thee up as our God in our hearts, & of being continually humbled before thy glorious Majestie, for all our sinnes and provocations, have added fuell to the kindling and inflaming thy wrath against us; asPride against God. all amongst us, who have set our selves against thy Word, thy judgements, or servants, even with an high hand, as if it were in despight of thy Majesty,

and even in defiance of thee.
                  O
                        •…
                      make us to see and acknowledgeTo see that as the Popish sort have set up their false Gods outwardly▪
                      all our sinnes, and withall, that as the Popish sort in every place, have set up other Gods to anger thee, as chiefly their holy Father the Pope (whose word and ordinances they reverence above thine; rejecting thy word utterly in regard of their Popes decrees and traditions) and with him have set up all their Saints and Idols, to whom by their invocation of them, they give his glory; so every one of us, who albeit in words wee professe thee our God, have yet in ourSo we in our hearts. hearts set up other things, which wee preferre before thee, and on which we spend moe of our thoughts, & more of our love and care to enjoy them, then on thy Majesty; even wee likewise have set up

so many false Gods in our hearts, to provoke thee to the uttermost.
                  And finally, good Lord,To see even by this first Commandement how few doe truly honour the Lord. make us all able to see by this first commandement of thine, how wonderfull few they are, so farre as we are able to conceive, who by the light of their good workes, doe indeed and truth glorifie thee their heavenly Father, by shewing forth before men and Angels, that they have so set thee up in their 
                        〈◊〉
                      as their God: and those few thatAll wicked men maligning all who have so set him up, so to glorifie his great name. doe so indeed, are the men principally maligned of all the people of the world, even for this cause principally, because they shew in their lives, that they have thus in their hearts set thee up to bee their God, although that they be ye onely blessed people, having thee their God, all other being in a most miserable estate;

and that they are therefore the onely men in honour and favour with thee, and by whom chiefly, as by Abraham, Noah, and Moses, thou saves
                        •…
                      and preservest▪ all the rest of us.
                  Make us Lord to understandTo be able to conceive aright hereo: and conceive aright hereof, and that for this very 
                        〈◊〉
                      alone, whereby we haveThat we may wonder how even for this sinne God hath spared us so long. so generally se
                        •…
                      our selves, not onely to maligne and dishonour the
                        •…
                     , but even to fight against thy heavenly Majesty; wee may wonder how thou hast spared us of this nation hither to, and not left us up as the other Churches, untill we shall see and acknowledge what wee h
                        •…
                     e done against the
                        •…
                     , our most gracious and out most blessed God in this behalfe.That we may never 
                           •…
                        est untill we have so set up the Lord in our hearts.
                  
                  Heare us, Oh tender Father, 
                        •…
                     nd suffer us never to 
                        •…
                     est, untill wee have repented

particularly, of this our most heynous and crying sinne; and that all of us, that ever looke▪ to have a strong assurance that we belong to thy eternall 
                        •…
                     lection, have thus truly se
                        •…
                      the
                        •…
                      up in our hearts, as our Lord and God. That so by our unfeigned repentance, thou maiest once againe manifest thy selfe in the deliuerance of all thy Churches and people, in a more glorious manner, to bee still our God graciously reconciled to vs againe in Iesus Chrst, & maiest so renew thy Covenant to remaine our God, and the God of our posterity, through him, and for his sake alone, for evermore,
                  Amen, Amen▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  XII. A humble confession of the sinnes of the Churches, and an acknowledgment of Gods righteous proceeding for our unthank fulnesse and transgression of his Lawes: and for that though wee haue heard of all their miseries, and knowne our owne dangers▪ yet we haue not beene humbled, nor made our supplications as we ought, according to the 1. of Nehemiah.
               
               OH Lord God of heauenAn importuning of the Lord by his iustice and mercy. and earth, who art the great and terrible God, proceeding most fearfully in thy dreadfull judgements, even against thine owne deare people and children, as thou diddest against thy people of Israel, for their unthankfuluesse, & for their despising, & transgressing thy blessed Lawes

and Commandements: and yet art withall full of mercy and tender compassion to thy people, repenting of their sinnes, and truly humbled for their provocations; thou, who keepest, Covenant and mercy for ever, for all that truly love thee, and who desire unfeignedly to observe all thy Commandements: heare us and alTo heare his people crying ioyntly to him. thy poore Churches and people in all the earth, at this day looking up to thee alone and crying loude unto thee.
               We pray thee (Oh tenderTo behold the miseries and dangers of all his poore people Father) that thine eyes may be open, and thine eares may bee attent, both to behold the miseries and dangers, and to heare the prayers of thy poore servants which wee all joyntly poure out before thee day and night, for our brethren thy servants and children which are in such great affliction; and doe now uncessantly

confesse all our sins, and the sinnes of all thy people, which we have sinned against thee. Both we, and our Fathers, all of us have grievously provoked thee now this threescore yeares and aboue, even since thou first tooke us by the hand to bring us forth of Egypt & Babilon; and diddst also carry us out as uppon Eagles wings by thy▪ mig hty hand and o
                     •…
                  t-stretched arme.
               Oh Lord, wee have heardA humble confession, how hearing the miseries of our brethren and, their perils, yet we have not bene humbled for them. long, & do dayly heare more and more, of the innumerable miseries which thou broughtest uppon our brethren and sisters in the Palatinate, it being a principall member even of our owne selves; Aud so in Bohemia and the Countries adioyning to it, though further remote from vs, yet our deare brethren and sisters in Christ Iesus; and so likewise

in the Churches of France, hard at our doores, in all the direfull slaughters, and butcherly cruelties, which thine & our merciles enemies haue executed upon them in their bloody rage, without any pitty. We have also heard, and do still daily heare ringing in our eares, the miserable state and condition of the residue of them that have escaped the bloody sword: some of them induring all kind of violence and calamities of all sorts, living in all reproach, the wall of their Ierusalem being broken downe, the gates there of being burnt with fire, all the rest of them living in continuall feare, because of the deadly fury, and hellish plots against them to destroy them all. And yet though wee have long heard, & do dayly heave of these things, and of the rage of thine and our enemies still

increased against them all and against our selves, have wee not with thy holy servant Nehemiah,
                  Neh. 1. 4. sit downe, wept, and mourned for them; muchlesse fasted and prayed before thee the God of heaven in their behalfe, in any such manner as we ought.
               Oh thou our most holyA further confession how we have all sinned in our extreame unthankfulnes & breach of our Covenant with the Lord. God, and pittyfull Father, we humbly confesse and acknowledge, that wee have all grievously sinned against thee, wee have not kept thy great goodnesse in remembrance, which thou shewedst unto us in delivering our fathers and us so wonderfully from Aegypt & Babilon by so mighty a hand; nor the many great preservations and deliverances, which since that time our eares have heard, and our eies have seene; how thou hast rescued us from their jawes, nor yet have we kept in memory

how thou tookest us to bee thine owne peculiar people of all the people of the earth; made thy Covenant with us to bee our God, and that wee should be thy people, so that wee would but walke in this thy Covenant.
               But this our Covenant with thy Majesty, though all of vs who professe thy Gospell, have solemnly entred into, for our selves, our children, and posterity, and every one bound our selves by thy holy Sacraments, chiefly by our Baptisme vow; yet wee have all heynously transgressed, wee have cast it behinde o
                     •…
                  r backes, trampling under foote thy blessed Commandements, thy statutes & judgments.
               Hereby (good Lord) have wee most justly brought all this thy fierce wrath upon so many parts of thy Church,

and also provoked thee to threaten most righteously the like, or more heauy, to come upon us all, untill wee all see our unthankfulnesse and our breach of Covenant: and that we do all joyntly humble our selves under thy most mighty and most fatherly hand, to give thee thy glory, by renewing and confirming this our Covenant in our true and our unfeigned repentance.
               Wee therefore doe most freely acknowledge, that wee have all most grievously and fearfully transgressed, even in all the Churches, against that first and great Commandement; yea indeed, against every one of thy most sacred Commandements, in a high degree, in one kinde or other, and that in a speciall manner, and (as it were) with a high hand.
               For concerning thy inward

worship, and givingHow concerning Gods inward worship, multitudes amongest us have set up Sathan to adore. thee thy due glory, by setting thee up as chiefe in our harts, to adore and worship thee as our glorious God. We humbly confesse for our selves and brethren, even against us all, that all of us who in the middestAs all living in blindnesse or any heynous sinne. of this shining light of thy heavenly word, doe still content our selves to liue in ignorance and blindnesse, or in any heynous sinne, and especially in Athiesme or prophannesse, have set up Sathan the God of this world, in our hearts to be our God; and that hee it is that ruling there, so blindes the eyes of all such, least the light of thy heavenly truth should shine unto them, and they should be conuerted and saved thereby.
               Multitudes of vs (O LordAll who have set up the world in any kinde. thou knowest) have set up the world as our God, very many of us the riches, other the

pleasures, and others of us the honour and pompe of it to adore; many other, that Antichrist the Pope of Rome, as al who are Popishly affected in all the Churches, who all preferre his decrees and ordinances before thy heavenly word; for that all these, and likewise all others, who adore or honor any creature with that honour which is due to thy heavenly Majesty alone, or above thee, have and do preferre all these before thee, and set them up in thy place.Very few who have set up the Lord as we ought.
               
               But very few there are amongst us (Oh most holy Father) who have so set thee up as wee ought to doe our most glorious Lord and God; that is, so as to set our whole heart upon thee, and to put our whole affiance and confidence in thee, to love thee with all our heart, soule, strength, and might; to bee

zealous for thee, for thy sincere worship and truth; but we are rather (good Lord) very generally as the Laodicean luke-warme, worthy to bee spewed out of thy mouth. Yea Lord, wee have in verie many of us increased our sin in this, in hating and scorning all such, as have beene more zealous for thee and for thy truth, then our selves are: & in that so many of us have sought utterly to destroy all power of true godlinesse, in whomsoever it hath appeared, yea that so very many of us have opposed our selves, as it were fighting even against thine owne sacred Majestie, like the Gyants before the Flood.For his outward worship in the second Commandement, how we have 
                        •…
                     inned.
               
               And for thy outward worship, the sinne of multitudes of us (Oh Lord) hath beene, and is no lesse to prouoke thy holines, as in all those in each

of the Churches, who insted of worshipping thee onely, according to thy blessed word in Spirit and truth, have and do worship and do adore thee by Images, Crucifixes, & the like Idolatrous or superstitious devises, or by any willworship whatsoever, devised by man, without ye warrant of thy sacred word: although those worships have beene most goodly in shew, and pretended to most faire and holy ends. And much more, in and by all those who have or doe worship Sathan, thy sworne enemy in thy place, using divellish Arts, to effect their desires, and to bring to passe strange things by his helpe. This wee confesse likewise, what multitudes there are in the Churches, who have and doe worship thee hypocritically, meerely in outward ceremonies and bare shewes of

religion, and also of those who halt between thy pure and sincere religion, and the religion of Antichrist.
               And so likewise of such as worship mereely as the Pharifes, being forward in small matters, in tithing Mint and Cummin, omitting in the meane time, the most weighty; and namely, all true faith, and unseigned repentance, and true turning unto thy Covenant.
               But for those (Oh gracious Father) who by their conscionable walking, doe manifest to the world, that they sincerely worship thee in spirit and truth, when we consider of them aright how few they are, wee may wonder at thy goodnesse in sparing us for their sakes; seeing they have beene not onely so few, but also so hated, scorned, & abused, for thy sake alone.
               
                  Moreover, for taking thyConfession how we have increased our guiltines by taking Gods name in vaine. glorious name in vaine (Oh holy Father) we acknowledge againe to our owne shame, that we have made our selves extreamly guilty, and worthy of all thy plagues, for that besides all the fearfull oathes and blasphemies, daily belched out against thy greatnes, thou hast so sensibly spoken unto us by thy blessed word, and by all thy glorious workes, chiefly by threatnings and judgements, upon our selves more mildly, and upon our brethren in a more fearfull manner, and yet wee have not hearkned unto thee. And moreover for that besides all these, thou hast spoken unto us, by the voyce of thy mercies in all thy great deliverances and miraculous preservations of us in this Nation specially, and through the incredible continuance of

all thy blessings; still by them all calling us all to know thee and to meete thee, by an unfeigned humiliation, before thy vengeance be poured out upon us for all our sinnes. And for that yet we have not heard to tremble before this glorious name, The Lord our GOD, and unfeignedly to turne unto thee by our unfeigned repentance, but have hardned our hearts, to increase and hasten thy wrath by all our blasphemies and sinnes, whereby wee have caused thy great name to bee blasphemed amongst the enemies unto this very day.And principally for prophaning his Sabbath, which might iustly make all our countryes to rest and keepe Sabbaths to him in that dolefull manner, that some do already.
               
               And finally, for our Sabbaths, Lord wee have and do
                     •…
                   confesse againe to the covering of our faces, that we have so polluted them in all the Churches▪ as that all of us do
                     •…
                   and must needs acknowledge, that even for this sinne alone,

had wee no other, wee have most righteously deserved, that thou shouldst so begin to kindle such a fire of thy vengeance in the gates of all our chiefe Cityes, as should not be quenched; like as thou hast so fearfully done in forraine parts, & so often threatned us our selves heere at home. Yea (holy Father) we have made our selves worthy, that thou shouldest thus proceed in thy fierce wrath, to cause all our lands to keepe such dreadfull Sabbaths, being possessed by thine and our enemies, as so many of them doe already, and seeing wee would not serve thee in our owne good lands, under thine owne servants with cheerfull & glad hearts, that we should serve thine and our enemyes, not onely in our owne, but even in forraine Countrye
                     •…
                   with heavinesse and terror all

our daies. And as wee have sinned, rebelling against thee in every one of these: so likewise against all the rest of thy holy Commandements: and even against thy heavenly Gospell and ordinances, as that wee have justly forfitted them all, and all other our priviledges and promises.
               Wee therefore acknowledgeAcknowledgment of Gods righteousnesse in all that he hath done to the Churches & threatneth. in the behalfe of all thy people, that thou art righteous in all that thou hast done unto us: and if thou still further execute whatsoever thou hast denounced in thy blessedNeh. 1. 8. Law against us. And yet notwithstanding we do humbly beseech thee, to remember the word, that thou commandedst by thy servant Moses, saying, Ye will transgresse and I will scatter you among the people. But if you turne to mee and keepe my Commanddments, and doe them,
                  
though your scattering were to the ut
                     •…
                  ermost part of the heaven▪ yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring you to the place, which I have chosen to place my name there.
               Now these (deere Father)A humble prayer for them and for us all. are thy people, yea, thy servants and children, our owne brethren and sisters, whom thou hast redeemed by thy great power, & by thy mighty hand as well as our selves, & some of them of the chiefe of us all, any one of whom is worth many thousands of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of us. Therefore (Oh good Lord) we beseech thee, let it be enough to awaken us all, that thou hast so far stretched out thy hand against these our brethren, being thine owne children and inheritance, and let thine eare now at length hearken to the praiers of thy servant, and to the

fervent supplications and loud cryes of all thy servants, who desire to feare thy great name, and give us favour in thy presence, and in the presence of all those, whom thou hast set in thine owne place, to bee nursing-Fathers and nursing-Mothers to thy poor Church and people.
               Grant that their first care may bee, to bring us all to unfeigned repentance for our sinnes, that thou mayest bee pacified towards us: and then (good Lord) put into their hearts a holy submission to cast downe their crownes before thy deere sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, and to give all their power and authority unto him, to helpe by all holy meanes to redeeme and restore his Captives, that they may againe serve thee in their owne places, each under their owne vine and fig
                     •…
                  ree, & under

the authority and command of thy de
                     •…
                  re servants, as ever they did before. Oh let this prevaile with us all, to make us all to remember our vowes, to 
                     •…
                  urne to the obedience of thy blessed Commandements, and especially to turne heereby to keepe thy Sabbaths, and to reuerence thy Sanctuary; y• thou mayest as much lift them and us al up in mercy, as thou hast formerly cast them downe: and that thus wee and all future Ages may learne to feare thy great name, and evermore sound out thy praises, both in word dn
                     •…
                   deed, expressing our thankfulnesse in all holy and new obedience, that so thy glory may shine in all the world. Heare us most mercifull Father, in these our humble requests and al others, &c.
            
            
               
               
                  XIII. A humble confession of the heynous sinne of our lande, and namely in all the Popish sort, who have so fearfully polluted it, in reiecting the Lord and his pure religion, casting it forth of theis hearts, and setting up the Pope of Rome with his abhominable Idolatry and superstition in place thereof, to provoke his heavenly Maiesty against us: with prayer for pardon, and that they, and all other may in due time, see this fearfull sin, that casting out Sathan and Antichrist, they and all of us may againe set up our Lord Iesus Christ, to the pacifying of his sacred Maiesty, and the saving of us all▪
               
               OH Lord, most holy, and most glorious, who canst not beare with any kind

of impuri
                     •…
                  y or other wickednesse in thy people which professe thy name, & whom thou hast chosen to set thy Tabernacle amongst, and much lesse that they should reject thee, and cast thee forth from r
                     •…
                  igning in their hearts, & should set up Sathan and Antichr
                     •…
                   to obey them in thy 
                     •…
                  lace: open
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      that God may 
                        〈◊〉
                      pen out eyes to se
                        •…
                      what we have done▪ in so 
                        •…
                     arre returning to Po
                     
                        •…
                     ery againe especially of 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   the eyes of all them, who are superstitiously minded, and even the eyes of us all, to see what we have done in suffering that religion to th
                     •…
                  ive▪ and so farre to grow up againe, thrusting thee out with thy sacred truth, as in all who obey the Pope of Rome, receiving and reverencing hi
                     •…
                   word and ordinances above thy heavenly word▪
               
               Oh grant to all them, who
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . have so fallen away from thee rejecting thy glorio
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  
                  sty, and also to all who 
                     〈◊〉
                   in a mammering; and much

more all those who have soTo dote so upon it againe after such notorious discoveries of the vilenes of it. begun of late to dote after Popery, to bethinke themselves seriously, what they will answer unto thy sacred Majesty, for their so casting thee off, and thy Religion after the time that thou hast so lo
                     •…
                  g, so clearly, and fully discovered the basenes and vilenesse of Popery, and so to cast it out of our land, by such a generall consent of our Princes, Nobles, and Commons, and so good Lawes made against it▪
               
               Cause them, and all sorts,How all sorts had seene before how they had bene deluded by i
                        •…
                     . wisely to weigh and consider well with themselves, that this our whole state did not so cast it out at once, without iust cause, nor our whole land so renounce it, without a most palpable discovery of the filthynesse thereof. How before that time, even very Idiots and little children saw how

all had beene deluded and rob'd by it, through all their Masses, Purgatory, Pilgrimages, Pardons, with all kinds of their jugling 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ and how all was but to get money, to make themselves fa
                     •…
                  , and Lords of all, both bodies and soules of men; that all might be their slaves and vassals, like as it is in all the Popish Countryes at this day. Make them all to understand and know, how all those, whose eyes thou hast not shutHow Gods vengeance was most iust
                     
                        •…
                     y co
                        •…
                      upon those their 
                        〈◊〉
                      us houses. up, did tken plainly perceive and acknowledge thy vengeance most justly uppon all those places, called their religious houses; as their Abbeyes, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , Nunneries, and the like, in their ruines & desolation, for all the abhominations committed in them. How notorious this filthynesHow 
                        •…
                     
                     ous 
                        〈◊〉
                      were for filthynesse. of them was, even more loathsome and abhominable then

the sinne of Sodome, through their fulnesse of bread and aboundance of idlenesse. HowBlood. they we
                     •…
                  re al red with blood, with the cruell and unnaturall murder
                     •…
                   of Infant
                     •…
                   to hide those their odious sinnes.
               Cause them all at length 
                     •…
                  o understand and lay to hart, that those houses wherein was the chiefe practise of their religion, were nothingBeing nothing else but dens of theeves. else but dens of theeves, couzening and robbing the whole land, and every day by their new devises fetching in new spoyles. How all this which is charged upon them in this behalfe, was most apparant in this one thing, that heereby they had got into their hands, most of the pleasantest & fartest things of the Land to uphold their kingdome, and to support their wickednesse, and so all other their delusions evident by

most notorious discoveries, remayning uppon perpetuall record to all posterity.
               Lord at length make them,That all may know what their religion wa
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , b
                        •…
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . and all sorts wisely to understand, before it bee too late, that if the continuall practise of Sodommy, Whoredome, Murder, Lying, Robbing, swallowing up whole Nations, and all under a cl
                     •…
                  ake of devouon and pi
                     •…
                  y, could demonstrate a religion most abhominable and accursed, then surely Popery must needs bee it.
               That this was then a chiefe
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ere was then one part of that Babylon the mother of whoredomes and abhominations. part of that Babylon, which is called the mother of whoredomes and abhominations of the earth, and that in the f
                     •…
                  ll hereof was a part of that vengeance verified. That BabilonApoc. 
                        •…
                     7. 5. is falne, it is falne, and is becomeAnd 
                        〈◊〉
                      the ruine 
                        •…
                     f it a part of the fall of Babylon verified. an habitation of devils, a hold of all foule Spirits; when as the most of them

were afterwards hanted with devils in one roome or▪ other of them.
               Good Lord, cause themHow God hath as from hea
                        •…
                     en proclaimed the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of his approbation of his religion professed amon gest us. moreover to bethinke themselves how evidently of the contrary (as if it were from heaven (and how mightily thou hast maintained & proclaimed thy sacred truth, and convinced them all, and all the whole land, concerning the evidence of thy religion professed amongst us, by the blood of so many learned and most faithfull Martyes; yea, by so many of thy Prophets and worthy Preachers in every part of our land, so many learned writers unanswerable.To thinke what they can answere for not being warned by so many & such notorious discoveries of their bloody rage and practises.
               
               Make them, and all of us, to lay to heart at length, what they can answer: into thee, who 
                     •…
                  ast discovered frō time to time, such, & so many most barbarous and unnaturall-
                     〈◊〉
                  ,

eyther done or intended by their Iesuites and Seminary Preists, and other of that religion, and especially
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      of their 
                        •…
                     ligion to be the fruits of their religion, and the practise of their owne grounds and principles. Such continuall plotting, attempting, and practising of murdering of Princes, 
                     •…
                  
                  sion of States, butchering even their owne friends and kinsmen▪ desolating their owne native Countryes, mercilesse massacring old and young, noble and ignoble, men, women, and children.To keepe ever in 
                        〈◊〉
                     , memory▪ that insolent invasion of our nation. Lord cause them and all sorts ever to keepe in memory▪ that which was so much triumphed of by them before the victory, that outragious insolent and most savage invasion of this our Nation, and at the time of a treaty about a marriage and amity, chiefly managed by her owne children

and native subjects, deluded by the principall Fathers and spreaders of that religion.
               Oh let that hellish PowderThe hellish powder Treason discovering the cursednesse of that religion. treason, ever be before our faces▪ that wickednesse, unto which no name can ever bee found out meete and sufficient to expresse it, or able to set forth the nature of it. That which was so compact of all the principall workes of the devill, both lying, murdering, and all kinds of cruelty, that thou (Oh Lord) madest them themselves, to be trumpeters and publique proclamers by it, of the abhominable iniquity of that accursed religion, whereby it was contrived and managed; and that they themselves should shew to all nations, that it is come out of the bottomlesse pit, and the very principall religion of Sathan in all the world, under

such a 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of holinesse. Lord give all thy servants grace, wisely to consider of these things, and to thinke how fearfull it is, not onely for them, who adjoyne themselves, or turne to a religion of such abhominations, but even for us all (who have bene so warned thereof so many waies, and that from thine owne Majesty▪ in such aboundant compassion, and by so many infallible evidences) that wee through our negligence in our severall places have suffered it so to grow up againe, 
                     •…
                  s thus to indanger us by it, and our whole Nation, yea, even all the Church and people of the Lord, besides the dishonouring and provoking thy heavenly Majesty to the uttermost.
               Oh gracious God, makeTo consider the 
                        •…
                     
                     nies granted to the Gospell in the miraculous continuance of it, and preservation of our Princes. them and u
                     •…
                   all, wisely to consider the wonderfull Testimonyes

which thou hast contra
                  
                     •…
                  ly granted to thy Gospell, in the miraculous continuance of it, preservation of our Princes, and us; with all our peace, notwithstanding so innumerable stratagems to have taken them away for so many yeares together, & how these have beene as infallable arguments of thy favour and love towards us for thy Gospell sake, and for thy faithfull servants amongst us, as the like were tokens of thy favour towards Iudah or Ierusalem.
               
               Oh make us to call to mind, how many a time thy people amongst us have even wondered at our incredible deliverances and preservations, with the defeating of their new hopes and long expected daies, and also the new and almost continuall discoveries of their wicked intendments, which even they themselves

at this day, so many as i
                     •…
                   whom 
                     〈◊〉
                   the light of nature 
                     〈◊〉
                   do
                     •…
                   acknowledge, and wonder at the miraculous o
                     •…
                  turning of all the
                     •…
                   counsels, to wor
                     •…
                   for us, and against themselves 
                     〈◊〉
                   this 
                     •…
                  ery day, so 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   and watchfull eye over us, & hatred of their wicked
                     •…
                  . Wherefore (Oh blessed Father)To beg true repe
                        •…
                     tance for this and all our loud crying sinnes. we humbly in-treat thee, to great unto us al, true repentance for this amongst all other our fearfull and crying sinnes, & daily 
                     〈◊〉
                   up more and more, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of thine Anoyn
                     •…
                   our 
                     〈◊〉
                   Soveraigne, with all other in high place and chiefe authority under him, and all thy faithfull Ministers, and whomsoever it specially concernes, to labourThat our land may be purged of it and the evils threa
                        •…
                     ed prevented. that our sinfull Land may be fully purged of it, and the evils prevented, which thou threatnest against us, by

the increase and spreading of it. Grant that thus wee all joyntly and generally, setting thee up in our hearts to worship and adore, and to receive thy sacred religion alone, may utterly extirpate and abolish all conceite of giving thy honour and soveraignty to that man of sinne, or setting up his Idolatry or superstition in place thereof. That so wee may remayne thine owne obedient people, that thou mayest likewise continue our most gracious God and loving Father, and so our most watchfull protector for ever; and mayest never repent of the good that thou hast done, or further intended towards us; but mayest thus make us a most blessed and happy nation and people, amongst whom thou alone mayest solely relgne, untill thy blessed Sonne shall come

in the clouds, that then all we who are thine, may reigne with thee in the highest heavens for 
                     •…
                  vermore. 
                     〈◊〉
                   us oh most gracious God, h
                     •…
                  erein, and in all other things needfull for us, or for any member of the whole Church for our Lord Iesus Christ,
               Amen, Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  XIIII. An earnest prayer that the Lord would open the eyes of our brethren and sisters, seduced by the Iesuites and other Seminary Priests▪ that they may plainly see, how palpably they are, and have bene deluded by them: in what a fearfull estate they all stand under Sathan and Antichrist, and may speedily get them from under their Tyranny, and betake themselves to the banner of our Lord Iesus Christ, to escape the 
                     •…
                  orment which they must otherwise indure with them for evermore.
               OH Lord God, most holy, and most righteous, thou hast said thou wilt bee sanctisied in all that draw nee
                     •…
                  e unto thee; and therefore as thou ar
                     •…
                   infinite in mercy towards all those who

unfeignedly feare thy holy name, and 
                     •…
                  mble at thy word; and w
                     •…
                  t 
                     •…
                  eale thy secrets unto them, and make them of thy privi
                     •…
                   counsell; so thou art most dreadfull & terrible unto all other, who regard thee not, in any such holy manner as to 
                     〈◊〉
                   thee, and to receive the lo
                     •…
                   of thy most sacred truth.
               Awaken we beseech t
                     •…
                  ee,To pray for all 
                        〈◊〉
                      with t
                        •…
                     e wine of popery and 
                        〈◊〉
                      other 
                        •…
                     
                     gered by i
                        •…
                     . all those who are drunke with the wine of Popery and superstition; that 
                     •…
                  t length they may behold in what 
                     •…
                   fearfull and desparate state they stand under the power of Sathan and Antichrist, ready to bee 
                     •…
                  st into hell every moment of time. Make themTo consider of the righteousnesse of God 
                        〈◊〉
                      upon th
                        •…
                     . able to consider aright of the just 
                     〈◊〉
                   which thou hast threatned to follow the contempt of thy Gospell, chiefly in the dayes of Antichrist, and whether for that

very 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   have not deserved it to come upon them.2 Thes. 2. 10. 11. 12. That therefore thou wilt send upon them strong delusions, that they shall beleeve lyes and be damned; because they would not receive the love of thy sacred truth, so as to obey it that they might be saved.
               Make them to bethinkeTo bethinke themselves what it is so so renounce thei
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     other and their Baptisme 
                        〈◊〉
                     . themselves wisely, & seriously, and as 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   presence, what iniquity they have found in thee, 
                     〈◊〉
                   in our way of life▪ or 
                     •…
                  n 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ow they 
                     •…
                  de in Baptisme, that they have so 
                     〈◊〉
                   renounced and abjured it, and depar
                     •…
                  d from the bo
                  
                     •…
                   of their mother to ca
                     •…
                  t her 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and with her 
                     •…
                  hine owne 
                     •…
                  jesty 
                     •…
                  o fearfully 
                     •…
                  o 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   of their 
                     〈◊〉
                   blindnesse and 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , through 
                     〈◊〉
                   strong 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; where
                  
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  o many 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
bene, and are dayly so carried away to that Idolatrous religion.
               Go
                     •…
                   Lord, make them able
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Epistle prefixed to our sed 
                        •…
                     eed bro
                     
                        •…
                     
                     ▪
                   to discerne, how grosse & palpabl
                     •…
                   those lyes are, wherby the 
                     •…
                  cers doe bewitch them; as 
                     •…
                  amely, that so lately divulged, of the Twenty severall sorts of Bibles, which within th
                     •…
                  se s
                     •…
                  w yeares past▪ England hath brought forth▪ Cause them by this one, toTo 
                        〈◊〉
                      of their intoil 
                        •…
                     able ly
                        •…
                      devised to deceive the simple. discerne of all the rest of their delusions, when they dare proclai
                     •…
                   such notorious lyes before al
                     •…
                   the world, as every poore simple body may understand & see, an
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ust needs 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   them all t
                     •…
                  t 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  nto 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   conceive in due time, that this is 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   all other, their most deep
                     •…
                   and 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  entions, whereby they seek
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  o raise a sland
                     •…
                  r upon thine owne Me
                  
                     •…
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   truth, and people

to make their poore seduced Pros
                     •…
                  lites to abhor
                     •…
                   them, and so to roote out both the remembrance of thy great n
                     •…
                  me, of thy Religion, and people, from the face of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Make them to weigh well,How they abuse all the simple in perswading them that they have mo
                        •…
                      holy devotions, then w
                        •…
                     . how they have & do deceive, and most shamefully abuse them all, in perswading of them that they have moe devotion in their Church then we in ours, and that therefore they are to joyne themselves to t
                     •…
                  em; when as they have hardly the tenth part of the bookes of devotion, and others tendi
                     •…
                  g thereunto, viz: to 
                     •…
                  orther Religion and god
                  
                     •…
                  , which the ignorant 
                     •…
                  ort can come by, which w
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ours, and much less of 
                     〈◊〉
                   S
                     •…
                  mons tending to
                     
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     
                     ding them that their devotions are more 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      better th
                        •…
                      ou
                        •…
                     . the 
                     •…
                  ame.
               Cause them to have a true sense of that delusion, that

they tell them that their devotions are more holy then ours: when as ours are grounded directly upon thy most blessed and eternall word;1 Tim. 4. 
                        •…
                     . theire upon doctrin
                     •…
                   and traditions of men; 
                     〈◊〉
                   the doctrines of 
                     〈…〉
                    of sinne, 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .  thy glory, th
                     •…
                  t 
                     〈…〉
                    may 
                     〈…〉
                   thee; their 
                     •…
                  o 
                     〈…〉
                    thee of thine honour▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   giving it to 
                     〈…〉
                    tend onely to 
                     〈…〉
                    Lord Iesus Christ, 
                     〈…〉
                   and 
                     〈…〉
                   many other thing 
                     〈…〉
                    place of him, 
                     〈…〉
                    which 
                     〈…〉
                    wholy to 
                     〈…〉
                    pride of m
                     •…
                  n,

theirs 
                     •…
                  o 
                     〈◊〉
                   him up like Lucifer.
               Make them to concelve aright how ours helpe us to understand and keepe our Baptisme vow & Covenant with our God; theirs to keepe them in ignorance of it all their dayes. Ours teach us to sight 
                     •…
                  anfully under the banner of our Lord Iesus, and for him o
                     •…
                  ely; theirs to sight desparately against him, and all his armies: ours teaching and helping us to walke in the narrow path prescribed by 
                     •…
                  hee our blessed Lord and Saviour; theirs to kill all who will not runne with them into by-paths and the broad way leading to hell.
               How ours instruct and guide us to live onely the life of faith, directed by thy heavenly word▪ theirs the life of unbeleefe; having nothing for the ground, but the meere

word of sinfull man; how ours teach and direct us to live the life of faith by a particul
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  
                  plying of Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                   his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , so truly ingrafting 
                     •…
                  d in co
                     •…
                  
                  porating us into Christ 
                     〈◊〉
                   by his holy Spirit▪ and thereby making us good trees, 
                     〈◊〉
                   wee may bring forth good fruite; 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   to beleeve in generall, and as the Church beleeves, without any such particular application: which 
                     •…
                  aith of theirs can neuer bring forth the 
                     •…
                  ound fruites of 
                     •…
                  anctification, and true righteonsnesse, especially when they scorne and persecute this true and saying faith as fantasticall and vaine.
               Good Father, 
                     〈◊〉
                   these poore soules to understand and know, how ours directe us to live the life of true godlinesse; guided by thy word and Spirit, which alone 
                     〈◊〉
                   all the promises, for this and

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   life; theirs teaching chiefly to live ye life of superstition by bodily exerci
                  
                     •…
                   themselves in such works 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   never required in any such manner.
               O
                     •…
                   perswade them all how our
                     •…
                   bring to y• true practisers of them, full assurance of thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   and love; and thereby 
                     •…
                  oy unspeakable & glorious; theirs bringing nothing but onely a 
                     •…
                  aggering hope, & so still doubting whether they be in thy favour or not; which very doubting, when the conscience shall bee thoroughly awaked, will bring ye very flashings of hell fire upon them. How ours are heaven upon earth, theirs hell upon earth; ours the sweetest in the end, when as each of them done in faith hath a reward promised thereunto; theirs the bitterest in the end, when instead of reward, thou wilt

demand concerning the best of them▪ done without warrant of the word, who hath required these things 
                     〈◊〉
                   your hands.
               Good Lord, 
                     〈…〉
                    hearts according 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , that our devotion
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   our Religion, to 
                     〈…〉
                    
                  
                     •…
                  oly and un
                     •…
                  , 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the widdow and the 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ;
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . theirs to make them polluted with lying and all filthy 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; (as in their 
                     〈◊〉
                   and other chiefe perswa
                     •…
                   to that Idolatry) yea, with the blood of Innocents; to destroy the widdow and the fatherlesse out of the earth, even all truly professing Christe name▪ 
                  
                     •…
                  o that their religion i
                     •…
                   the most polluted with lying and murder of 
                     •…
                  nnocents, of all other Religions that ever 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the world, whereby their 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  ▪
               
               
                  Lord bring to their understandings, and cause them to thinke of it, and ponder it wel, that all our devotions, as our Religion, 
                     •…
                  end wholly to 
                     •…
                  ke us faithfull and loyall subjects, to pray for our Kings & Princes, and to have them in our hearts, to dye and 
                     〈◊〉
                   live with & s
                     •…
                  r them; and that we dare not have an evill thought against the Lords Annoynted; but y• in our patien
                     •…
                   sufferings they may see their duties; their devotions 
                     •…
                  ending through the subtilty of Sathan and the Iesuites, to make them cleane contrary, and to carry false and tray to
                  
                     •…
                   hearts against the Lords Annoynted, unlesse the Lord 
                     〈◊〉
                   wondefully over-rule 
                     •…
                  hem by his holy Spirit. For they must of necessity bee so 
                     〈◊〉
                  , for maintaining 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   devotions, and obeying their directors, and

ghostly fathers, as to 
                     〈◊〉
                   to destroy whatsoever 
                     〈◊〉
                   hinder it, & to acco
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   a most meritorious act, to destroy all 
                     〈◊〉
                  , & principally the chiefe of them.
               Make them to weigh this with themselves, how our devotions are made with understanding, and so in faith, and with a holy zeale without vaine repititions; theirs without all understanding, in a blinde devotion, with 
                     〈◊〉
                   babling, & repetition, which thou condemnest and 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               Finally (Good Lord) cause them all at length, in mercy to understand, how our devotions are such as helpe us to live a true Christian life, in the practise of all the duties of piety and righteousnesse, in examining our spirituall groweth in grace, in heavenly meditations and contemplations,

praiers, thanksgivings, and the like, all directing us to place our whole confidence for our salvation, and whatsoever else, onely upon thy rich mercy in Iesus Christ: ascribing all our salvation to him, and his merite alone; theirs instead of these workes of piety,See the Spanish Monke. are in their Masses, Dir
                  
                     •…
                  , and Letanies, even to Saints, numbring and repeating upon their beads, their 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Nosters, Creeds, Ave Maries, and such other, and that in an unknowne tongue, without any understanding, or right edification.
               So likewise (good Lord) make them to see and consid
                     •…
                   withall, how they set their confidence in these and other their superstitions workes, & namely and principally, in the merite of the virgin Marie, and of other Saints; in Indulgences and Pardons, even for

th
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   a num ber of such 
                     〈◊〉
                   lying vanities; whereupon when they come to their death 
                     〈…〉
                   beth 
                     •…
                  ke themselves a 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  H
                        •…
                      
                     
                        •…
                     omming to 
                        •…
                     ve 
                        •…
                     eir eyes 
                        〈◊〉
                      they are in forced to cast away al these with 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •…
                     ion, and he of our Religion in their death: Then Christ onely. more se
                     •…
                  ously they are f
                     •…
                  igne to c
                     •…
                   away all 
                     〈…〉
                   all these, and to accoun
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   losse and dung▪ & 
                     〈…〉
                   onely upon 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christ; if then they 
                     •…
                  y 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ercy by him.
               Yea, 
                     〈…〉
                   to consider well 
                     〈◊〉
                   tim
                     •…
                  
                  ▪ 
                  
                     •…
                  w if ever thou open 
                     〈◊〉
                   eyes & 
                     〈…〉
                   they 
                     〈◊〉
                   then cast all these away 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ detestation, as 
                     〈◊〉
                   i
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ▪ and rest onely upon Christ, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Christ 
                     〈…〉
                   ever thou 
                     〈…〉
                   that me
                     •…
                  y.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   all (good 
                     〈◊〉
                  ) 
                     〈…〉
                   more time they 
                     〈◊〉
                   o
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   spend in these 
                     〈…〉
                   more they ha
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  nd 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  
increase their sinne, and make their condemnation the heavier; and that one houre, yea, one minute, spent in true devotion, onely in the name ofLuke. 
                        •…
                     3. 
                        •…
                     . Christ, calling upon him, or thee the Father through him, with the repentant Theefe upon the crosse, shall bee better unto them, then a thousand yeare spent in their superstitious manner.
               And for this cause (O
                     •…
                   
                  
                     •…
                  ere Father) seeing by their doctrines and devotions, they can neuer have that true iustisying and saying faith, whereby they might bee made partaker
                     •…
                   of 
                     •…
                  esus Christ, and so 
                     •…
                  e thy children, having thyRhem. upon Rom. 3. 22. Sect. 7. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and love, and doing such workes as are pleasing & 
                     〈◊〉
                   unto thee: but 
                     〈◊〉
                  , they doe by all 
                     〈◊〉
                   scorne and persecute 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •…
                  aith▪ make them all which belong to thy eternall

election, to know their wofull estate, how they must all needs still remaine in the estate of nature, and so of damnation, untill they repent and turne to our Church againe.
               Cause them (Oh most holy
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . and gracious Father) to apprehend this, and to bee warned in time, that seeing their Religion cannot stand or continue, 
                     〈◊〉
                   it bee supported and holden up▪ by lying and murder and that these two, are, and have beene ever the principall ad
                     •…
                  ancers of it i
                     •…
                   a
                     •…
                   Ages and Countryes, & that this is notoriously knowne to all who will not sh
                     •…
                  t their eyes. And moreover, 
                     •…
                  eing th
                     •…
                   this is also their doctrine, so to promote and advance it: That, that Religion is undoubtedly of the devill, and that our Saviour himselfe hath in mercy so forewarned them of it, that they may get

them out of Babylon, and stand farre from it; for feare of her burning, and that they may escape her torment.
               Lord, make them able toThat they must of necessity renounce it, or professe them selve
                        •…
                      to be of Sathan their father. conc
                     •…
                  , that these things being so (as their owne hearts must needs beare witnesse, if they will suffer their eyes to be opened) they must of necessity renounce that Religion; or else prosesse themselves to bee of their father the devill;Iohn. 8. 44. as much as ever were the Iewes who sought so to kill our Saviour, and that they will 
                     〈◊〉
                   his workes wittingly and obstinately, fighting against thee our blessed Lord and Captaine, and against all thy armyes, to their utter perdition.
               Good Father, make themTo thinke what they will do when Christ shall come to take vengeance of all his enemies. able to thinke what they will do at that day, when thy Son Christ Iesus, shall come to take vengeance of all his enemies,

when all the Kings and greatest Monarchs of the earth, who have not helped him, and his 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪ to the advancement of his heavenly Gospell, shall 
                     •…
                  ry to 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and mountaines to fall upon them, and cover them▪ fromApoc. 6. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                        •…
                     7. the face of the Lambe, and of him that 
                     〈◊〉
                   upon the throne; 
                     •…
                  hen the 
                     〈◊〉
                   their 
                     •…
                  ther, 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , and all his children that have bene deceived by him: 
                     •…
                  nd especially they w
                     •…
                  o ha
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   forApoc. 20. 10. him, against ou
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Iesus Christ▪ and his 
                     〈◊〉
                  , must be
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   and bo
                     •…
                   and 
                     •…
                  ast 
                     〈◊〉
                   him into th
                     •…
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   that 
                     〈◊〉
                   with 
                     〈◊〉
                   and brimstone, to bee 
                     〈◊〉
                   with him for evermo
                     •…
                  e.
               Lord, make them to considerTo weigh & 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      way and the
                        •…
                      in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . of all these things in time, to weigh well our 
                     〈◊〉
                   of life, and their way of life; our rul
                     •…
                   of 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
devotions, and their rule of prayers and devotions; to weigh and try them in the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the Sanctuary, whether will outweigh, and whether are more agreeable to thy holy word, whereby they and wee all must bee weighed and judged.
               So vouchsafe this grace to all other, who are wavering or doubting, to thinke seriously of all these things, to try them all by thy blessed word, by that true weight, that heavenly fire, which will consume2 Cor. 3. 2
                        •…
                     
                   all their timber, hay, & stubble. Make them to bee afraid of conferring with, or hear
                     •…
                  ening to the Serpent, their Iesuites, or other Semi
                  
                     •…
                  ary Prests, who all holding the same head, their holy Father the Pope, must needs bee 
                     •…
                  ll l
                     •…
                  d and inspired by the same spirit, whatsoever sh
                     •…
                  wes they make of the contrary.

Give them grace to be warned by the example of our first mother; and keeping thy watch, to goe to thee first by instant praier, in all doubtsDan. 9. 2. & 2. 17. 19. and difficulties, as Daniel did, and after to conferre with thy heavenly word, and with thy faithfull Ministers & servants for resolution therein.For all to be alwaies growing in grace, for feare of being given up t
                        •…
                      their delusions.
               
               Above all, grant unto all of us who yet stand by thy mercy, to labour to growe dayly in the love of thy truth, and in a conscionable obedience to thee in all thy waies: watching and praying continually, that we may never bee given up with them to these strong delusions; but that contrarily by our faith and obedience, we may have boldnesse to draw neerer and neerer unto thy holinesse, withThat we may have more power in prayer to helpe to pull every Lot out of Sodom. that thy faithfull servant Abraham, and may helpe by our prayers, though not to

save that filthy Sodom, which thou wilt have burnt downe to hell, yet to pull out all thy Lots before, even all amongst them, that belong to thy eternall election, before the fire and brimstone rayne downe from heaven upon them, to consume all the wicked scorners amongst them eternally.
               Make us all likewise, toTo consider who they are that are carried away to them thinke with our selves, whether we can name a man, that was first truly grounded in the principles of our Religion, and after coutinued to make conscience of his wayes according to the same, that ever the devill or the Iesuites have bene able to seduce: but only such, as either were never well grounded, or never truly made conscience of their waies: or such at least, as having fallen by little and little from their first conscience and

childlike feare, and so from the love of thy truth, having yeelded to bee overcome by uncleannesse or some notorious sinne, and so given way to Sathan to bee deluded by him.
               Cause all to understand, how by this meanes they lye open to Sathan, and are hereby made fit for a Preist to absolve them, and make them as cleane as when they were first borne, as they will beare them in hand; and thus to be reconciled to the Church, which hath this holy power, and can thus pardonand acquit them whatsoever they doe, or howsoever they live, and that without any paine or trouble: especially if it bee so, that they have money enough to purchase their pardons and the like.
               Grant us therefore this grace, to use all meanes for

our selves and all ours, and evenTo use all meanes for our selves & all others that we may be kept. for all those whom wee would save from hell, that we may all first be soundly instructed in the grounds of the Catechisme, & in every principle and part of thy sacred truth; & after learne to make such a conscience of all thy blessed wayes and Commandements that thou mayest never give us or them up to these delusions; but wee may for ever remaine under thy safe protection, untill thou shalt translate us into the heavens, from all the danger of the Dragon.
               And for these our seducedSo for all seduced by any sinne. brethren, and all others deluded dy Sathan through impenitency in any fearefull sin; make us able, first to consider wisely of their estate: secondly, of the meanes how to save them, and to pull them from it: and lastly, never suffer us

to rest, till wee have shewed our uttermost love unto them to bring them to our Lord Iesus Christ.
               Oh open our eyes, andThat they may be able to see in what estate they stand. helpe us, that we may see how they are under the power of Sathan, and thine enemies; every moment of time ready to bee cut off in thy just vengeance, and to bee cast into hell.
               Make us able to have the like tender commiseration of each of them, as of a Captive under the cruelleft tyrant; and as of one in a dead sleepe, in the middest of a dreadfull fire, ready each minute to seize upon him; or in a deepe water sinking downe: or as of a poore Lambe in the mouth of a roaring Lyon, ready to bee devoured each moment: cōsidering that the case of never a one of these, can possibly bee the thousand part so bad, as of

them that are ready each moment to bee cast into the lake of fire, and there to bee tormented for evermore.
               Inable us withall, to thinkeHow they are deluded. ever of their estate, and to keepe in memory these things and the like, which demonstrate to all the world, how palpably they are deluded & bewitched: and so to use them and all other helpes, wherby they may be rescued.
               Assist us so with thy heavenlyThat we may not rest untill we have awaked them or used all holy meanes, for them. grace, that wee may never rest, till wee have awaked them out of that dead sleepe, and convinced their consciences some way, of their wofull case and estate, and after used all holy meanes, which thou hast, or ever shall reveale unto us, to pluck them out of the fire; at least thus praying and crying unto thee our blessed and gracious God for them, as the Christians did

for Peter in prison.
               Lord, make them to knowThat the Lord will pluck them forth if he haye ordayned to save them. for certaine, that if they bee thy Lambs thou wilt rescue and pull them out of the Lyons mouth; if thou have ordained to save them, thou wilt pluck them out of the fire, and out of the water; thou wilt make all the chaines & fetters of the devill to fall off from them: no doores shall keepe them, no sorcery shall preuaile against them, beyond the time that thou hast appointed.
               Cause us all to know, andThat all that seek not to save them are g
                        •…
                     y. fully to vnderstand, that hee that saveth not, destroyes; so every one of us, that doth not according to our places and callings, seeke thus by all holy meanes to save them all▪ and to preserve all thy Churches, from the dangers threatned by thee, are guilty of the neglect hereof, and

so of the blood of all before thy heauenly Majesty, and so much more, as wee are more neerly tyed, by any more speciall bon
                     •…
                   of place, calling, or otherwise.
               Heare us (Oh tender Father)That all may herein shew our loves. for them all, and all so bewitched, and deluded by Sathan, and that heerein wee, chiefly all our Pastors, and watchmen, according to their places, may shew all love, and holy obedience to thee: and to all thy tender Lambs which belong to thy fould; even all thy deere and precious ones, committed to their trust, never leaving thee, till thou hast rescued and recovered them: for the full assurance of all our owne soules heereby, that wee are indeed truely thine, filled with thyFor our full assurance. holy Spirit, the Spirit of faith and love, and thereby sealed against the day of our Redemption:

and that thou maiest shew thy selfe stronger then Sathan, and that hee is but thy vassall, and also that thou art more mercifull to save, then he can be malicious to destroy, for thy infinite pitty, and endlesse compassion, through our blessed Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ:
               Amen, Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  XV. A humble thanksgiving for our dread Soveraigne, our gracious Prince, the Prince and Princesse Palatine, and all their royall progeny, and for all the great deliverances which our blessed God hath given unto them, and to us all by them: with an earnest praier, that hee may make them (each in their times and places) the happiest heades of the most prosperous and blessed Nations and people, that ever have bene in the world.
               OH. Lord our God, infinite inithy mercy, and endlesse in thy compassions, who by thy wonderfull providence, orderest all things in heaven and earth, disposing all to the right ends, which before the world thou hast ordayned to thine owne glory,

and the good of thine elect; wee doe with all thankfulnesseAn acknowledgement of Gods mercies in our dread Soveraigne & his royall progeny, with all our blessings & ho
                        •…
                     es continued by them. of heart, humbly acknowledge before thy sacred Majesty, how wee especially in this sinfull Nation, & with us many other, and namely, all thy chosen flocke among us are bound unto thy sacred Majesty, for the admirable setting up, and the wonderfull preservation of thine Annoynted servant our dread Soveraigne, & of all his Royall progeny, with every of thy deliverances and mercyes, which thou hast heeretofore vouchsafed by them, or as yet dost through them, most graciously offer unto us all, upon our unfeigned repentance and true turning to thee. Lord make us ever to bee wisely pondering, of thy divine and Fatherly providence, even in every one of these (which hath bene so sensible that our

very enemies have taken notice of it) and so give thee glory, acknowledging thy hand in them. Diddst thou not (Oh good Lord) at the very naming of thy Royall Servant toAs namely our deliverances at his entrance. be our Lord and King, deliver us all from the hand of our Brother Esau, even from all those who had long vowed our death, and thirsted after our blood? Diddest thou not thereby, cast such a terror upon all thine, and all thy Churches enemies, as that the feare of him, and of thy people fell upon them all, that not so much as adogge wag'd his tongue against any of thy servants: though our sinnes had long before cryed for such a vengeance as they had threatned.
               And afterward, when weeAt the Powder Treason from Nebuchadnezzars furnace. had so provoked thee againe, by our impenitency, and by al our unthankfullnesse, manifested

in the breach of our renewed vowes and Covenants, as that wee were indangered to bee consumed at once by that fiery furnace, made like Nebuchadnezzars, large and wide, or much more terrible, by thine and our most mercilesse enemies (stirr'd up against us in thy wrath:) yet diddst not thou againe deliver us and pluck us forth, even as the three children of the Captivity, and cast in sundry of our enemies for us? Diddest thou not also principally, worke this as by the hand of thine Annoynted, not suffering him to rest, untill all our deliverance was wrought? And hast thou not both before and since thatAnd all others. time, given unto him many great deliverances: and in all his preservations still preserved us all, especially us of this Nation, together with all our

blessings of so much peace and prosperity, as wee still injoy, in the middest of the calamities of the other Churches.
               And above all, hast thou not thus continued thy heavenly Gospell, the life of our lives, which hath bene so removed from other Countries, together with their outward blessings: so as thou hast made him to this day the very breath of our nosethrils, and that through him wee injoy all these our mercies, as under our vine and figtree, and by him givest us new and most blessed hope, that wee shall injoy them perpetually. Lord these are mercies and favours never to bee forgotten of us: Good Lord set them ever before our eyes.
               And for our gracious Prince, besides all his and our former deliverances, & hopes

in and by him, hast thou notPreservation of our gracious Prince, & us all with him, and the reioycing of all 
                        〈◊〉
                      soules through him. made him to bee to us as Ioseph▪
                   and disposed of all his journey and of his dangers in it, to the greatest discovery of the devices of our adversaries, and overturning the hopes of all our wicked enemies. Never suffer us to forgett, how thou revivedst the hatts of us all, making us to breake out into joyfull Triumphes & praises, when thou hadst caused us to see his face againe, delivering him from so many perils, as our sins had brought him and 
                     •…
                  s into: and those dangers of all sorts, both by sea and land, yea both bodily and spirituall.
               Lord make us able to giveThe disposing of all that iourny to so preat ioy to all Gods Church and people. thee thy due glory heerein, that thou sitting at the sterne, hast disposed of all that journey, and all those adventures, to the admired improvement of all thy rich guifts and graces

in thy Royall servant: caused him to see the vilenesse of that most odious superstition and Idolatry, which thy soule so much abhorreth, and which hee otherwise had never so well understood. That thou hast taught us all to know by most happy experience, what the power of the prayers of thy people is, when they are sent up with an united force; that they are able to open the Iron doores,The experience therein of the power of prayer. and to breake in sunder the gates of brasse, to make way for thy children and chosen clocke, to passe through the middest of all thine and their mortall enemies. Lord make us to lay it wisely to heart, how thou hast made him so much more hereby, the future expectation and rejoycing of Israel, under thine Annoynted servant.
               And likewise for that perelesse

Princesse, Lord make usFor our peerelesse Princesse the crowne of glory renewed upon her head. all able wisely to consider, what another crowne of glory thou hast set upon her head, even in her lowest abasement (which thou hast brought her unto for the sins of thy people) that she should thus excell in al true renowne and fame, of all Christian and truely Heroike vertues, above all the Princes of the earth: that thou hast made her a Mirrour to all of her sex, at this day in all the world.
               Oh suffer us never to forgetFor her delivery from the Nimrods of the earth. that wonderfull preservation of her, when thou deliveredst her
                     •…
                   at the Powder Treason, from those cruell Nimrods the bloody hunters, the reedifiers of Babell, who had in their account, made a prey of her in a speciall manner, by her to have accomplished all their hellish ends, and most mercilesse designes against

our whole Nation, and against all thy poore Churches and people. Let it never slip out of our minde, that howsoever thou hast suffered her againe to be chased, and pursued, as a Doe before theHer preservation in the second pursuite, together with that illustrious Prince & all their
                        •…
                     . hunters, yet thou preservedst her in a miraculous manner, with that illustrious Prince, and all their Royall seed, and hast made them most fruitfull in the midst of all their trialsTheir fruitfulnesse in thir greatest trvals, to the astonishment of all their enemies. and temptations; to the terrour and astonishment of all thine, and thy Churches enemies, and the greater securing and comfort of thy people: to cause all thine to lift up their heades, in an expectation of a more glorious Age & time yet to come in all the world then ever heretofore.
               And above all, let this ever be before our faces, how thou hast thus wonderfully kept them all alive, against

all the plots and layings in waite of Sathan, and all his instruments, by all their stratagems, devises, and bloody pursuites, and hast preserved those thrice happy pawnes & pledges of our peace and safety, though out of their owne Countryes and people, and in forraigne parts.
               And finally, how thouOur wished and happy 
                        •…
                     ion begun. hast begunne this wished and happy union, amongst thy Churches and servants, & the cutting off the long wished hopes of the enemies of thy Church, under their pretended leagues of peace and amity, whereby they had so much undermined us, and expected our surprizall of a sodaine, whilest we remained yet most secure.
               Not unto us (Oh Father) not unto us, but to thy great name, wee give all the glory, humbly consessing, that by all

our impenitency, and breachConfession of our deserts, that both they and we should have bene left into the hand of the enemy. of vowes and Covenants, which we have so oft renewed, and that neyther judgements nor mercyes could prevaile with us, and especially for making flesh our arme, & withdrawing our hearts and confidence from thy heavenly Majesty, wee had long agoe deserved, that both they and wee, with all our blessings, should have bene wholly left into the hands of thine & our enemies, which have and doe so eagerly thirst after our blood; and that nothing at all hath kept us to this day, but onely thy endlesse compassions, and the yearning of thy bowels at the cryes and sighes of thy poore Saints and children in all the Churches, looking up to thee alone, and lifting up their hands unto thee.
               Awaken us therefore graciously

now at length (OhPrayers to be awaked to understand the thing; which concerne our peace. thou that hast kept thy Israel, and neither slumbrest nor sleepest) and cause us yet in time, to understand the things that concerne our peace, and whereby thou mayest bee wholly pacified towards us in this Nation, with all thy Churches and people.
               Oh grant unto us (most tender Father) to know and throughly to conceive aright, that, 
                     •…
                  hat which wee have so oft and so many a time promised unto thee, and so bound our selves unto, in all our perils, and which thou hast so long expected▪ thou now expectest at our hands above all former times: now that thou hast added this above all former mercies, thus farre to deliver us from our feares, and to vouchsafe unto us such hopes for all future times; & every day to renew the same,

in that heavenly union and harmony of thy Annoynted, and his whole most honourable Parliament, for thy Church & causes, and against thine enemies.
               Oh give us all such hearts,To performe truely whatsoever we have formerly promised. that wee may yet now at length performe whatsoever thou requirest of us, to make our repentance unfeigned & sound, and our full reconciliation thereby: in being humbled before thee, both publiquely and privately, and in taking away all our abhominations and crying sinnes, and in doing whatsoever may tend to the giving of thee thy due glory, with the greatest advancement of thy heavenly Gospell, and doing whatsoever thou requirest of us; for the ratifying and confirming all thy mercies towards us, and our making a firme union with thy Majesty, & amongst

us all in Iesus Christ, according to the right tenour of thy sacred truth.
               That thus, as thy handThat as the Lords hand hath bene stretched out against us, so how it may be as apparantly for us. hath formerly bene stretched out against us, and against thy Churches, and that the enemies have so sarre prevailed in their designes; so now at last their joy may he as the joy of an hypocrite, and that they may see their confidence as a spiders web. Oh grant such hearts unto us all, that thou seeing ou
                     •…
                   true repentance, maiest give to us, and to thy people, the upper hand; that we-may be above and not beneath, that we may not onely stand valiantly, as one man of one hart and soule, for thee, & for thy heavenly Gospel, with thine Annoynted, his royall progeny, and Dominions, and each for our selves and ours, our children & posterity, and for the true liberty of us all:

but also that all of us may be as bold as Lyons, and beingFilling us with heavenly courage. strengthned by thee, and the power of thy might, five of us thy servants, may chase a hundreth (according to thy promise made to the true turning of thy people to thee) and a hundreth of us, may put tenne thousand to flight.
               That thus thine Annoynted, and all his Royall Progeny and posterity▪ may become the happyest heades of the blessedest progeny and dominions, that ever were formerly in all the earth: and all theirs, and our sinnes, and the sinnes of all the Churches may be freely forgiven, never to be remembred against us, or against any of thy true Churches any more, according to thy heavenly promise,Ier. 31. 34. and that for thy endless glory and praise, & the everlasting triumph of us all; that

wee may for ever sing praises unto thy great name, through Iesus Christ, that King of Kings, our only Lord and Saviour,
               Amen.
            
            
               
               
                  XVI. A humble thanksgiving, that the Lord hath already, begunne so graciously to heare our praiers: with supplycation, that as we have made entrance into this service, to helpe our Lord Iesus, and his poore Churches, by our prayers and teares; so wee may bee every day more fitted and inabled hereunto; untill wee shall see, not onely the deliverance of his Churches and Captives, but also the new Ierusalem, and the glory of his Sion, and inioy the full happinesse of them for ever in the heavens.
               OH Lord God, most holy, and most gracious, most faithfull and true; who remembrest alwaies all thyA giving glory to God for remembring his promises. gracious promises, which thou hast ever made to thy Churches and people in thy

blessed word, and wilt in thy due time performe every one of them, even to all of us who are thine, when thou hast first truely humbled and prepared our hearts to pray, and importune thy sacred Majesty, seeking thee in order. We magnifieSo declaring himselfe to us. thy great name, that thou hast so visibly begunne to declare thy selfe to bee mindfull of thy promises, in so graciously inclining thy care unto our cryes.
               We praise thee, and blessProclaiming his mercy before us. thee, that as thou diddest proclaime thy name before thy servant Moses, to bee The
                  Exod. 34. 6. 
                  Lord, The Lord strong, mercifull, gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodnesse and truth: so thou hast done it before us all, especially us of this sinfull Nation, that thou herein hast made it manifest, to the convincing of every conscience amongst us, in sparing us, at

the praiers of some few of thy people unto this day.
               We glorifie thee (Oh good Lord) that as thou hast caused it to bee registred in thy booke, for all the Ages of thy Church, how according to thy gracious promises, thou ever diddest heare thine auncient people of Israel in their miseries, and when they cryed to thee in their troubles, thou then deliveredst them fromCausing his gracious favours towards us in our deliverances to be registred for all posterity. their distresse; so thou hast heard us of this sinfull Nation, delivering us not onely at our publike humiliation, from the mercilesse intended invasion, but also pluckt us from Nebuchadnezars furnace, at the private sighes & groanes of thy secret ones, and that so as that thou hast made these deliverances to bee recorded for all succeeding times.
               Yea, we praise and magnifieFor still renewing his mercies. thee, that thou still renewest

these thy wonderfull and fatherly mercies, to us a people so vnworthy of any mercie, that thou hast hitherto continued, and evidently declared the riches of thy compassion in saving us from all our feares, first so graciouslie preserving and bringing backPreserving and bringing backe our Prince. our most Royall and hopeful Prince, disposing of all his dangers, and our feares, as thou diddest to Ioseph▪
                   to the greatest comforts and hopes of thy Church: and that thou hast since so lately manifested such riches of thy love and kindnesse, in such a heavenlyConfirming such a heavenly union, for the advancement of his glorie▪ Gospell, and people. union, among thy worthyest servants, our Soveraign Lord and King, with all his faythfull Peeres, and true-hearted Nobility and Commons, for the advancement of thy glory and Gospell, and the saying of thy people, with the frustrating

the hopes, and daunting the hearts of all thine, & thy Churches Adversaries: and in beginning to grant all things according to the cryes of thy poore people, and even above our expectations, considering the heynousnesse of our sinnes.
               Oh Lord, who are we▪ thatSith he hath bin so gracious at the prayers of a few. even at the prayers of a few of us (in regard of the multitude that know thee not, and therefore do not, nor can seeke thy face) thou shouldest be so gracious to us. Lift upWhat hopes we may have when we shal more generally & ioyntly cry unto him. our hearts (good Father) that we may conceive aright what thou wilt doe at our generall cries, when we shal be joyntly humbled before thee, and all seeke thee as thou hast appointed.
               Grant specially this grace to every one of us (who have already, or shall heereafter

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
give our names unto thee, to serve thee heevein, and helpe thy poore distressed Church and people) that uppon this happy experience, wee mayTo pray for more integrity & sound nesse of hart to be more able to persevere and prevaile with God. labour every day to attayne unto more integrity & soundness, in walking uprightly and constantly before thee, in all thy holy commandements. Vouchsafe, that heereby wee may get more boldnes, wherby we may approach neerer unto thee, and even to importune thee with holy Abraham, Moses, Ezra, and Nehemiah, untill wee have obtained the pacifying of thy Majesty, by the taking away all the abhominations & crying sinnes out of the Churches, the delivering of thy Captives, the restoring and re-edifying of thy Ierusalem; and that all the hopes of our wicked enemies shall bee at

an end, and our dreadfull dangers▪ and feares past, and that we shall visibly beholde thy glory therein, and also injoy thy glorious presence for evermore.
               To this end (deere Father)To use all meanes hereof more conscionably. enable us by thy blessed Spirit, to use all the meanes furthering heereunto, and that much more carefull & conscionably then ever wee have done▪ for confirming our weake hands, & for strengthning our wearie knees. Make us all ever to keepe a fresh remembrance of thy goodness and mercy, how readie thou art to heare the cryes of thy people, and of the power of our prayers, thorow our Lord and Saviour; how farre they have already prevayled with thy Majesty. Cause us ever to have a 
                     •…
                  arefull and watchfullTo look ever at the word. eye to thy blessed Word, that

in all things we may have that for our guide, and our direction.
               Worke in each of us a holy resolution, to cleave fast unto thee, without any departingTo have a holy resolution. or staggering, walking continually in all thy blessed Lawes and Commandements for ever, even unto the end.
               Teach and helpe us to feareTo feare alway. alway the offending of thy Sacred Majestie, and thatFor the Iords eye. with a true childe-like feare, because of thy holinesse, who canst not abide any iniquity, no not in thy deerest Children, and because of the extreame rage and subtiltie of Sathan against all thine, doggingFor feare of Sathan. us continually at the heeles, to provoke us to sinne agaynst thee, that hee may accuse us, and incense thy Majesty against us, if it may

bee, to leave us unto his malice, or at the least, to hinder thy love and blessing;For our selves And also, because of our owne vile corruption, which is ready alwayes to hearken unto him, and to betray us into his hand.
               Assist us to watch ever againstTo watch against all occasions, and over all parts all occasions of temptations, keeping strict watch over all our senses, our thoughts, motions, wordes, and actions. Make us everieTo grow better dayly. day to waxe better and better, still growing on toward that perfection, which we doe dayly waite for in the Heavens.
               Cause us ever to keepe in fresh memory, that wee are thorow our cursed Natures, and the industrie of Sathan, like him that is in a boare vppon a strong streame, that if wee bestirre not our selves

constantly to go forward, we certainely goe backeward; if wee but forget our selves, or withdraw our hands never so little.
               Make us able to observe wisely, all our slippes and faylings; and euer to be carefull forth with to seeke the recovery of our selves by unfeyned repentance, and by dooing our first and best workes. Graunt unto us this grace,To look well unto our particular calling
                        •…
                     , that sathan take us not out of our wayes. that every one of us may have our owne particular & warrantable callings, that wee may know them well, and what speciall duties thou requirest of us in them, and that we may labour to walk faithfully therein that thy blessed Angelles may rejoyce to attend upon us, and protect us alwayes, and Sathan may neuer take us out of our way, to get any advantage against us thereby.
               
                  Lift up our eyes evermoreTo have an eye to the recompence of reward. to the recompence of reward, that therein wee may cheerefully follow our Lord and Saviour, running fast towards the marke, untill we shall attaine the Crowne, which hee ever holdeth forth unto us in his right hand.
               Helpe us to set thee ever beforeSetting God at our▪ right hand. our faces, and at our right hands, as thy seruant David, that we may never sin against thee; but that we may go on couragiously with holy Moses▪
                   as seeing thee with us ever that art invisible.
               Make us able to rejoyce alwayes in our happie estate,To goe on reioycing in the happines of our estate. thorow Iesus Christ, by comparing it with the estate of the greatest Princes and Monarkes, who are enemies vnto thee, and whether vvee wold change with the mightiest of them▪ Cause us to

goe 
                     〈◊〉
                   cheerefully, not onely contented with our condition, but also rejoycing heerein, that the lines are fallenPsalme 16, 6. unto 
                     •…
                  s in so fair a ground and that we haue so goodlie an heritage.
               Make us able in prayingIn praying to 
                        •…
                     ive thankes for that which 
                        〈◊〉
                      we have. continually for what we stand in neede of▪ for our selves, and for all the Churches and people of the Lord, ever withall 
                     〈◊〉
                   give thankes for that measure which we have alreadie, and for whatsoever deliverances, hopes, or other 
                     〈◊〉
                  , which we have formerly 
                     〈◊〉
                  ; or do 
                     •…
                  ow injoy
                     •…
                  .
               And finally, enable us inIn 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Gods▪ glo
                        •…
                     y. whatsoever▪ we beg, to ayme 
                     〈◊〉
                   a
                     •…
                   the advancement 
                     〈◊〉
                   glory, and of the kingdom of thy▪ Sonne, with the saying of thy people▪ that thus going on in the zeale▪ of thy glorie▪ and in the 
                     •…
                  owels of commiseration

towardes thy poore Ioseph, in a tender feeling ofConstant in the meanes. his affliction, and in the constant use of all holy meanes, we may be assured, that wee shall be as Caleb, everie dayAs Caleb, Ios. 14, 10, 1
                        •…
                     0 stronger and stronger, in all grace, and in the power of prayer; and as the greene Olive in thy house, bringing forth more fruite to our olde age and last dayes, that our last daies may be our bestLast dayes best. dayes, & our last breath may be spent for thy Majesty, that so we may see the sel
                     •…
                  citie of thy chosen, and may reigne and triumph with thee in heaven for evermore.
               Perswade all thy people,To perswade all of the necessitie of this comming to helpe. that every one vvho comes not thus to helpe thee & thy poore Church by their prayers, must perish; & that none can helpe indeede, but they onely who seeke to attayne

this integrity, and to abideIntegrity in Gods 
                        〈◊〉
                     . aud grow therein perpetually. Hearken unto us (O most tender Father) in these our humble suites, and in whatsoever else thou knowest needfull for us, for thy poore distressed Churches, or for any member of thy whole vniuersall and Catholike church, even for the Lord Iesus Christ his sake, thy most beloved Sonne, our onely Mediator and blessed Redeemer and Saviour,
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            Protestants helpes for Deuotion, and matters belonging to the stirring up of the same.
            
               A
               AVgustines Meditations.
               Allisons Meditations.
               Art of happinesse.
               Abba Father.
               Abrahams Tryall.
               Alphabet of Prayers.
               Anatomy of the Soule.
               Andersons prayers.
               Anker of Faith.
               Art of meditation.
            
            
               B
               Bradfords Meditations.
               Bezaes Prayers.
               Banes Letters.
               Banes his holy helper.
               
                  Banes his spiritual Armour.
               Bifields Marrow.
               Bifields signes of Saluation.
               Bifields signes of a Wicked man.
               Bound, of Fasting.
               Banes on true Happinesse.
               Banes his direction.
               Bifields Treatises.
               Bifields Principles.
               Burning bush.
               Boaring of the Eare.
               Benefit of Affliction.
               Battell between Vertues and Vices.
               Beautifull Baybush.
            
            
               C
               Christian dayly Sacrifice.
               Crashewes prayers.
               Crowne of life.
               Christian watchfulnesse.
               Chaine of Graces.
               Christian mans walke.
               Christian Combat.
               
                  Christian Sacrifice.
               Contemplations, 7. parts.
               Converts Catechisme.
               Couenant betweene God and Man.
               Christians Touchstone.
               Conquest of Temptations.
               Combate betweene Man and Death.
               Christian prayers and meditations.
               Conduite of Comfort.
               M. Cusuerwe
                     •…
                   of 
                     •…
                  aith.
               Christian Armour, by M. Gouge.
               
               Caluins prayers.
               Castle of the soule.
               Conawayes prayers,
               Cases of Conscience.
               Cases of Conscience.
            
            
               D
               Dauids Sling.
               Diamond of Deuotion.
               Daily exercise of a Christiā.
               
                  Deerings prayers.
               Delights of the Saints.
               Discourse of true happinesse.
               Dauids Key.
               
                  D. Duns Deuotion.
               Death subdued.
               Dialogue betweene the Lord and the Soule.
               Dike on the deceiptfulnes of mans heart.
               Dike of repentance.
               Dike of Conscience.
               Dauids Cast.
               
                  M. Dod on the Commandements.
               
                  M. Dod on the Lords Supper
               
                  M. Dods houshold gouerment
               Dents pathway to Heauen.
               Dents sermon on repentance
               Dauids Vow.
               Defiance to death.
               Dauids repentance.
               Directions to the waters of Life.
               
                  Directions in our dutie to God and man.
               Diuine Meditations.
            
            
               E
               Euery dayes Sacrifice.
               Eye to heauen.
               Enemy to Security.
               Enemy to Atheisme.
               Estate of a Christian.
               Exercise for Christian Families.
               Exercise of the faithful soule
            
            
               F
               Fields prayers.
               Foot-path to Faith.
               
                  Lady Fane her Meditations
               Fountaine or Well of life.
               Flower of godly Prayers.
               Fruite of Faith.
               Freemans Comfort.
            
            
               G
               Glasse of Vainglory.
               Grounds of Diuinity.
               Grounds of Religion.
               
                  Granadoes Meditations.
               Godly Garden.
               Godly mans assurance.
               Garland of godly Flowers.
               Garden of spirituall Flowers
               Gods Husbandry.
               Growing in grace
               Golden Chain, by M. Rogers
               
               Gouernance of vertue.
               Garden of Felicity.
            
            
               H
               Helpe to Deuotion.
               Hundred heavenly thoughts
               Heavenly progresse.
               Heavenly Mansion.
               Handful of wholsome hearbs▪
               
               Harbour of Christianity.
            
            
               I▪
               
               Imitation of Christ, 3. parts.
               Iewell for Gentlewomen.
               Ioy of a good Conscience.
            
            
               K.
               Kings Bath.
               Key of Knowledge.
               
                  Kings Psalmes.
            
            
               L
               Linacars Consolations.
               Life & death of M. Stubbs.
               Learne to liue.
               Learne to dye.
               Load starre of life.
               Love of God.
               Life of Religion.
               Lampe of Virginity.
            
            
               M
               Manuel of Prayers.
               Markes of Salvation.
               Meditations and Vowes.
               Martyrs Prayers.
               Melancthons Prayers.
               Marlorats Prayers.
               Markes of Gods Children.
            
            
               O
               Oyle of Scorpions.
            
            
               P
               Practice of Piet
                     •…
                  .
               Practice of Christianity.
               Practice of Quietnesse.
               
                  An Inuitation to prayer, and the practice of Piety.
               Poore mans rest.
               Poesie of Prayers.
               Pensiue mans practice.
               Princes Prayers.
               Pilgrimes profession.
               Pathway to Paradise.
               Practice of the faithful.
               Pathway to Salvation.
               Pathway to Felicity.
               Pearle of the Gospell.
               Preservatiue against sinne.
               M. Perkins his Treaties.
               Pars Grounds.
               Perfect path to Paradise.
               Path to penitency▪
               
               Progresse to piety.
               Poore mans Pater nostey.
               Pomander of Prayers.
               Paradise of the Soule.
               Pathway to please God.
               Precious Pearle.
               Poore mans Staffe.
            
            
               
               Q
               Queene Katherines Prayers.
            
            
               R
               Righteous mans evidence.
               Reward of Religion.
               Rocke of Religion.
               Resolves divine.
               Rogers seven Treatises.
               Right godly rules.
               Rosary of Christian Prayers.
            
            
               S
               Sicke mans Medicine.
               Sanctuary of a trobled Soule.
               Supplication of Saints.
               Seaven helpes to heaven.
               Scudder on the Lords prayer
               Spirituall detraction.
               Simpson on the Psalmes.
               Simeons Sacrifice.
               Suttons Meditations.
               Safegard of the Soule.
               Sicke mans Salve.
               Solace of the Soule.
               Soules watch.
               
                  Spirituall Garden.
               Samuels encounter.
               Samuel Smiths Workes.
               Saints by Calling.
               Ship of Salvation.
               Sacrifice of a Christian soule.
               Seven sobs of a sorowful soule
               Shield of Salvation.
               Sampsons Prayers.
               Sicke mans Comfort.
            
            
               T
               True Watch.
               Twines prayers.
               Topsels Meditations.
               Treasure of Gladnesse.
               Triall of Faith.
               Trumpet of the Soule.
               Lad: Tirwits prayers.
               Troubled mans Medicine.
               Treatise of Conscience.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               ¶ See more concerning all these following in M. Maunsels Catalogue dedicated to Queen Elizaebeth, imprinted An. Dom. 1595 and sundry others since, not mentioned.
            
               HElpes for suffering adversity and affliction. Pag. 2.
               Preparatiues against Apostacie. 4. Col. 2
               Catechismes▪ Pag. 28. Col. 2
               Treatises and helpes for keeping the Ten Commandements. Pag 35. Col. 2
               Confessing of Christ. Pag. 37. Col. 2
               Treatises of Conscience, with comforts for an afflicted Conscience. 37. col. 2
               Treatises of the Creed, for helpes for our faith. Pag. 40. Col. 2.
               Helpes against the feare of death, & how to dye well. Pag. 42
               Helpes against desperation. pag. 43
               Directions for a Christian life. 44
               Of the end of the world, and the second comming of Christ. 47
               
                  Exercises for a Christian Family, and a Christian life. pa. 48
               Helpes for true Fasting. 49
               Spirituall preservatiues against the Pestilence. 59
               Imitation of Christ. 62
               Prayers. 83
               Of Repentance. 90
               Helpes for preparation vnto the Sacraments of the▪ Lords Supper. 93
               Holy Sermons in print, a multitude. 96
               Comforts for the sicke. 107, 108
               True Confession of sinne. 108
               Restitution of a sinner. ibid.
               Of good workes, and exhortation to them. Pag. 113.
            
         
         
            
            ¶ A Table of the particular Meditations of each of the seuen generals.
            
               1. Generall Meditation.
               
                  HOw our Saviour looks for some to helpe him in the deliverie and saving of his church: and what things are necessary for euery such a helper to know. Pag. 12.
               2. Generall Meditation.
               2 Of the present necessitie of this worke, and of the lively feeling thereof, and how the Lord cals all sorts thereunto. 7

                     Heere in these particular Meditations.
                     1. Concerning the calamities

and dangers of our Brethren in all places, and those which are threatned towardes our selues, with the chiefe meanes of delivery and preservation from them. pag. 9
                     2 How God hath beene wont to get himselfe glorie in saving his Church, by Princes and Governours. pag. 13.
                     3 How as Sathan & Antichrist have set themselves to fight against Christ and his Kingdome, so our Saviour hath ordained Kinges and Princes to hold up his Scepter, and to defend and protect his subiects & Gospell. pa. 15
                     4 How Sathan and Antichrist set up themselves to bee obeyed, and to destroy all out of the earth, who seeke to obey Christ truely. pag. 18
                     5 Concerning the innumerable miseries which our Brethren indure, being deprived of the outward comforts of this and

the better life, and how n
                           •…
                        e the like may be to us. pag. 20.
                     6 Concerning the general sinnes of the Churches, so provoking the Lord, and namely the generall abuse of the Gospel, and blessings accompanying it, and that our sinnes are of all others most heynous for the same. pag. 23
                     7 How Satan exerciseth all his power and tyranny against the Churches spiritually, like as he doth outwardly. pag. 50
                     8 How the Kingdom and Glory are our Christs: how sathan and Antichrist fight against him, and his Church, for his cause onely and therefore are sure to be overthrowne. pag. 59
                     9 How our Lord Iesus is that everlasting Amen, and comming quickely, for the reioycing of his Church. pag. 67
                  
               
               
                  The third generall Meditation.
               3 What manner of ones wee must bee, whom the Lord now calleth, and whom he will accept, and adm
                     •…
                  t to bee his helpers, in this Worke, and whose Prayers shall be avayleable with him, according to our Saviours direction and warrant. pag. 68

                     Heerein these particular Meditations and marks.
                     1 To make sure, that we be the true Children of our heavenly Father, and the meanes thereunto. pag. 72.
                     2 That we be▪ such as can, and use to seeke Gods honour, above all other things whatsoever. pag. 86
                     3 That we use to seeke his Honour chiefely, in the advancement of the Scepter and Gospell

of our Lord Iesus Christ. pag. 87
                     4 That we seeke also to honour him 
                           •…
                        ver, in the full accomplishment of all 
                           〈◊〉
                         Heavenly will. pag. 89
                     5 That we bee such as looke unto, and depend upon our heavenly Father alone, for all good things. pag. 91
                     6 That wee be such as feele our sinnes and infirmities, as in heauie burthen, and travailing vnder them, do flye ever unto Christ. pag. 93
                     7 That wee endeavour to pray continually, Leade us not into temptation. pag. 95
                     8 That we bee such, as can and doe use to sing the song of the 24 Elders: Glory, Honor, &c. pag. 97
                  
               
               
                  The fourth generall Meditation.
               4 Concerning the frame and order of our Prayers, that they may be well pleasing as wel as our persons, and so wee may be more certaine to prevayle thereby, when we follow in all things our Saviours direction. pag. 100

                     Heerein these particular Meditations.
                     1 That we pray onely unto our heavenly Father, in the name of Christ. pag. 101
                     2 That above all, and in all, we ayme at Gods glorie, and the advancement of Christs scepter. pag. 102
                     3 That we seeke the dooings of his heavenly will, for his glory and kingdome chiefly, not for our selves. pag. 105
                     4 That we seeke all things from

him alone, chiefely that wee may have wherewith to honor him, and advance his Kingdome. pag. 106
                     5 That wee seeke forgivenes for the same ends, viz. for his glory and Kingdom, and that our sinnes doe not hinder his mercies, and so likewise deliverance from Sathan, and from all evils. pag. 108
                  
               
               The fifth generall Meditation.
               5 The power and efficacy of our Prayers made and performed in all things, according to the heavenly patterne. pag. 120

                     Heerein these particular Meditations.
                     1 That when wee can so' pray, he will manifest himselfe our father, setting his seale to our

soules, that hee is our tender father. pag. 111
                     2 How hee will from Heaven, shew us his glory, when we can pray so, and that more then ever in this last Age. 112
                     3 How hee will then cause his Kingdome to come with power, and ruinate the kingdom of Sathan and Antichrist. pag. 115
                     4 How he will then fulfill whatsoeuer is not yet accomplished concerning his enemies, or his servants, and put new chearfulnesse into our hearts, to doc his wil. pag. 116
                     5 How he will then deliver his people, feede them from Heaven, and recompence double unto them. pag. 118
                     6 How then hee will cleanse his people from their sinnes, and write his Law in their harts. pag. 119
                     7 He will deliver his stocke from Sathan, and dissolue all his

cursed works, discovering the depths of all his wickednesse. pag. 122
                     8 How then he will declare him selfe sole Monarch, to whom all glory belongs, and cause all to acknowledge his Soveraig
                           •…
                        ty. pag. 125
                     9 How we are never to rest, till wee can trium
                           •…
                         in the assurance of faith, crying ioyntly, Amen. pag. 128
                  
               
               The sixt generall Meditation.
               6 How all but those who are so qualified as is mentioned, are excluded from helping the Lord, and do rather pul down Gods wrath upon his Church.

                     Herein these particular Meditations.
                     1 How all living securely, are excluded hence, and so all who

doe not in commiseration strive to come to helpe him, and his poore Church. 131

                           Reasons heere of to be seriously thought of.
                           1 All such must be separated at the last day.
                           2 All living in any grosse sinne, impenitently are excluded hence, for that they are blind and deafe. pag 1
                                 •…
                              5
                           3 All the threatnings in Gods Book against such sinnes and sinners are against them, not any prom
                                 •…
                              se to them untill they repent: and therfore they are excluded. pag. 140
                           4 For that every notorious sinner helpes to pull down wrath on all. pag 143
                           5 All excluded, who have not so much compassion of theyr Brethren in their miseries▪ as to be re
                                 •…
                              d to adventure them selves for them. pag▪
                               145
                           
                              6 All but those, who can more lay to heart the causes of God and his people, then their own. pag. 148
                           7 All reiected who will not cast away their sinne, though as deere as their right eyes, and receive the love of every part of Gods truth pag. 150
                           8 All excluded from this service, who but incline to any evill in their hearts. pag. 152
                           9 All but they who endevour in all things, to be with our Saviour, for that none else can be his true disciples. pag. 153
                        
                     
                     2 The second particular Meditation of the sixt general, who may with hope and confidence offer themselves, onely they who strive in all things to bee so qualified as hee requireth. pag. 155
                     Reasons, that onely such can hope to have acceptance heere. pag. 157
                  
               
               
                  The 7. generall Meditation.
               
                  7 That the Lord notwithstanding, g
                        •…
                     ciously calles all sorts to helpe herein, & therefore every one who will not strive to bee of this number, must perish. pag. 165
                  Reasons shewing, that he cals all to helpe, if ever they will see his face with ioy. pa. 167
                  Three speciall Meditations to be ouer in our hearts, untill wee be of this number. pag. 172
                  
                     1 That the Lord Iesus standes at the heart of euery impenitent sinner, to enter in
                           •…
                        knocking lowder now, then ever heeretofore. pag. 172
                     He knockes at the heart of everie one, reading or hearing this or the like admonition, offering mercy to them who will admit him in, and having infinite wrath against all who will still repel him, 175
                     2 To thinke what it is for a man

to forsake his owne happinesse, in reiecting Christs gracious call, and to ioyne with sathan against him, to his endlesse perdition, Pag. 178
                     3 How God sets heerein before the faces of all, life & death▪ blessing and cursing: life to each one hearkning to his call, and comming to helpe: death to euery one still hardning his heart. pag. 188
                  
               
               Conclusion.
               
                  
                     How all the distressed partes of Gods Church, do cry to euery one of us to come and helpe them. pag. 192
                     How our Saviour himselfe calls each to come, notwithstanding all obiections of vnfitnes, or disability, with the answer of euery true Christian heart to his call: Lord, I come, I come. pag. 195
                  
               
            
            These with the prayers mention'd before in the generall Contents, are the sum
                  •…
               e of this first Part.
         
         
            
            The Second Part, to succeede in the next place; containeth Prayers likewise for all the Churches and people of God, scattered thorough the whole world: that wee may all seeke to pacifie the Lord, by giving him his glorie, in returning and submitting our selves wholly unto his Covenant; and that we may obtaine by our instant prayers, that w
                  •…
               e may ioyntly honour him; so walking and beleeving as his heavenly wisedome hath appoynted. For this is a thing notoriously observed and acknowledged by all, who rightly under stand the state of forraigne parts; that as it 
                  •…
                amongst

us▪ for the most part; so it hath beene very generally amongst them in all the Churches, that they have had onely a bare forme of godlinesse, a naked outward profession of the Gospell in word, but almost without any power or life thereof, more then for a fashion. And that this hath not onely thus fleshed our Adversaries to the destruction of the whole Church (as dooing a thing meritorious unto God heerein▪ for that they conceyve us to bee but a company of Heretiques in professi
                  •…
               n, very Atheistes in our lives) but also provoked our blessed God, so farre aire
                  •…
               die to leave so

many of the Churches into their hands, and thus to threaten all the rest, even us our selves, seeing his kingdome is not in word, but in power. And therefore, so many of us as have made such a carnall profession, have not onely shewed foorth a manifest contempt of his heavenly Maiesty, and his holy Covenant; but put a Scepter of Reede into the hand of our Lord Iesus Christ; smitten him uppon the face, and trampled his Crowne under our feete, and indeede made his and our enemies to blaspheme and thus farre to prevayle and insult over us.
            Whereupon, hee hath iustly begunne, and threatned

us all, to take his kingdome from us, to give it to another people, which would bring foorth the fruite of it; and to leave us all to bee trampled under foote by these our Enemyes, untill we know by wanting, the blessinges which wee have formerly inioyed, and the difference betweene his service, and the slaverie of his Enemyes.
            As these prayers therefore, according to our Saviours direction, may serve to prepare the way for all other our prayers, and our right accesse unto his glorious Maiestie, to come with confident assurance, and do proceed un

to the first petition of the Lords Prayer, and the end of the first Commaundement, that we may all give him his due glory, performing unto him his inward worshippe, which is the fountaine of all true obedience; so those that are to follow in the second part (the Lord assisting) are to go according to the tenour of the same heavenly rule of our Saviour; thorow the whole Covenant made with our God, both for all his Law and Gospell, beginning at the second Commandement, & so thorow the Law, and thorow all the Articles of faith, with the doctrine of the Sacraments, and other

things belonging thereunto. That thus all, even the poorest servants of God, may have matter enough of prayer to be exercised in continually, and all to this very end for appeasing the Lordes wrath, and reconciling him to all his Churches and Children againe. First, every one for himselfe, and his owne particular, to be assured of his own reconciliation to the Lord by the blood of his Son, when he can so pray and obey in truth. And secondly, that every one having attained to this assurance and favour with the Lord, may bee exercised dayly, as those worthy servants of God, Nehemiah,
               
               Ezra, and Daniel, in confessing their owne sinnes, and the sinnes of all the Churches and people of the Lord, and in so crying unto him, and importuning him▪ untill wee shall see the ful deliverance and restoring of the Churches in Bohemia, Palatinate, & the rest: yea the enlargement of them, by the gathering in of the Iew, and the remainder of his Israel from the uttermost partes of the earth, with the utter razing of Babel: and untill we obtaine whatsoever else the Lord hath eyther promised to his people, or denounced against his enemies. And finally, untill we shall everie one

see the heavenly Ierusalem, and the eternall glory of his Sion. The third & last part, is (God willing) to containe principally Prayers for this our sinfull Nation, that we may first all see, and lively apprehend the danger wherein wee stand every moment, of drinking at the Lords hand, after those other Churches, which have tasted so deepely of the cup of his displeasure, seeing our sinnes are no lesse, but farre greater then theyrs; and that specially sith their ensample hath no more prevayled with us. Secondly, that we may all in time wisely understand the meanes which in his wisedome

and mercie hee hath yet left unto us to prevent the execution ready to come forth against us. And thirdly, that we may euery one use all the meanes thereto, each according to our place and calling, by turning unfeignedly to the Covenant of our God, not onely to prevent, and for ever to turne away all the calamities deuised against us by our deadly & bloody enemyes; but also so to reconcile the Lord unto us, that insteede of those miseries which our Enemies so long for, to rush upon us, hee may make us the happiest and blessedst Nation that ever was, in this last Age of the world▪
               
so to remaine to his eternall glory, the comfort & example of all the other Churches for evermore.
            To these are also to bee added some speciall Prayers for our particular purposes and ocsions.
            FINIS.
         
      
   