
      
         
            
            
            LVDVS LITERARIVS:
OR,
THE GRAMMAR
SCHOOLE;
SHEWING HOW TO PROceede
from the first entrance into learning,
to the highest perfection required in the
GRAMMAR SCHOOLES, with ease, certainty and delight
both to Masters and Schollars; onely according to our
common Grammar, and ordinary
Classicall Authours:
            BEGVN TO BE SOVGHT OVT AT THE
desire of some worthy fauourers of learning, by searching
the experiments of sundry most profitable Schoolemasters
and other learned, and confirmed by tryall:
            Intended for the helping of the younger sort of Teachers,
and of all Schollars, with all other desirous of learning; for
the perpetuall benefit of Church and Common-wealth.
            It offereth it selfe to all to whom it may doe good, or of whom it
may receiue good to bring it towards perfection.
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . 
               Theognis.
            
            Nullum munus Reipub. affere maius meliúsue possumus, quam sidoceamus
at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                erudimus iuuentutem.
Cic. 3. de Diuin.
            
            Quaerendi defatigatio turpis est, cum id quod quaeritur sit pulcherrimum.
2. de Finibus.
            
            LONDON,
Printed for THOMAS MAN. 1612.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE HIGH
AND MIGHTY PRINCE,
Henry, Prince of Wales; and to the
most Noble and excellent Duke, Charles,
Duke of Yorke; I. B. vnfainedly wisheth all
grace and glory, and humbly commendeth
the Patronage of his Labours.
            
               SEeing that all of vs of this
Nation (most Gratious and
Excellent) doe aboue all
people, owe vnto the
Highest, our liues and Religion,
with all our blessings;
and next vnder him, to his Anoynted,
your most royall Father, our drad Soueraigne;
to whom he hath giuen vs, by whose
hand he hath so miraculously saued vs, and
doth still preserue vs aliue in the midst of our
enemies: we are therfore euery one alwaies

bound (in what thing soeuer he shall inable
vs thereunto) to testifie our acknowledgement.
Pardon then the desire of your deuoted
and most affectionate poore seruant, if
he shall endeauour in all humility, to witness
his thankefulnesse vnto the Lord of heauen,
and to his Annoynted, by seeking to adde
somewhat vnto the Honour, and deserts of
his royall progenie: euen of you, who are the
rich gifts of the heauenly bountie, and the
flourishing branches, of that happy spreading
Cedar. And what is it, which might
still more aduance you in the eyes and hearts
of all the people of your most noble Fathers
Dominions; then if now from your first
yeares, you might beginne to be the blessed
instruments of the Almighty, of an euerlasting
benefite to the present and all succeeding
generations? whereby you might knit
all hearts more surely vnto the holy God,
and his supreame deputy here amongst vs; as
also to your selues his Regall issue, and vnto
yours for euer. Accept therefore, to this
purpose (I beseech you) this weake labour
thus begun, of searching out, and inquiring
of all the speediest, surest and most easie entrance
and way to all good learning in our

Grammar schooles. To the end, that those
rare helpes of knowledge, which the Lord
hath graunted to this last Age (some of the
principall wherof haue been scarce knowen,
or very little practiced, so farre as I can find;
and most of the rest haue bin only knowen
amongst some few) might by your Princely
fauours, be made common vnto all, for the
publique good of the present Age, and of all
times to come. The Lord God hath giuen
vnto your Highnesse and Excellency, to be
born, and to liue in the time of most glorious
light, and knowledge; in which, if the experiments
of sundry of the learnedest, & most
happily experienced Schoolemasters and others,
were gathered into one short sum, all
good learning (which is the chiefest glory of a
nation) would daily flourish more & more,
and be conueyed to all places & times; that
not only this age present, but also al posterity
should haue iust cause euermore to magnifie
the God of glory for you: for how must
this needes oblige all sorts, if this heauenly
gift of learning, might thorough you be attained
with much more ease, delight, & certainty;
and also in shorter time, with lesse
charges to Parents, without that extreame

sharpnes vsed ordinarily in schools amongst
the poore children? How shall it increase
your lasting comfort & honour, if by your
Highnesses fauours, the work thus entred into,
shall soone come to an happy end! For as
some very learned and of much experience,
haue begun already to help herein; so others
of the chiefest gifts and imploiments in this
kind, shall not disdaine to lay-to their hands
to bring it in time to some perfection. Why
should wee the liege subiects of IESVS
CHRIST, and of this renowned kingdome,
be ouergone herein, by the seruants of Antichrist?
many of whom bend all their wittes
and ioine their studies, for the greatest aduantage
of their learning, euen in the Grammar
schooles, onely to the aduancement of
Babylon, with the ouerthrow of this glorious
nation, and of all parts of the Church of
Christ; to bring vs vnder that yoake againe,
or else to vtter confusion. Or why should
we omit any time or opportunity, which the
Lord offereth hereunto? The hope therfore
of your poore seruant is, that your Highness
and Excellency will not impute anie presumption
to this indeuor, (though thus vndertaken
by me the vnablest of many thousands)

but that you will accept it, according
to the desire that hath bin in me, to do good
thereby to this Church and Nation. And the
rather, for the vndoubted assurance of the
exceeding benefit, which must needs come
in time, by the best courses once found out
and made publick: and for that though such
a work haue bin long talked of and wished,
yet it is still generally neglected. The experience
also which the Lord hath shewed,In the true Watch and Rule of life, made farre more perfect and plaine in this 5. Editiō. in
the readinesse of sundrie very learned, in a
worke of not much lesse difficulty, to helpe
most louingly, with their best aduices, to
bring still to better perfection, dooth giue
your seruant certain hope of the like cheerfull
assistance herein. Howsoeuer; yet it shall
remaine for a further testimony of duety to
the heauenly Majesty, of thankfulnesse and
loyall affection towardes our Liege Soueraigne,
and you his Royall Progenie. That
as you are the worthy sons of a Father most
renowned of all the Kings of the earth, for
singular learning, and for holding vp, and
aduauncing by all meanes the glorious light
therof; and as you are not inferior to anie of
the Princes of the world in your education
and first yeeres: so all sorts may thorough

you receiue an increase of the same shining
light, and all hearts may be still more firmly
bound by your perpetual benefits. To you
thrice happy Prince, I offer it most humbly,
as the poore Widowes mite, amongst the
great gifts presented vnto your Highnesse:
And to you right noble Duke, the study of
your seruant, if he might but in any one thing
further you in that sweet and pleasant way of
learning, wherin you are so graciously proceeding.
Finally, I trust that it shal euer stand
as a true witnesse of an vnfained desire towardes
the perpetuall flourishing of this
Nation, with all the Church of CHRIST.
And in this humble desire, I commend
your Highnesse and Excellency vnto him
who aduaunceth and setteth vp Kings in
their throne, and hath sayde that he will honor
those who honor him. The whole successe
I commit to that Supreame Grace, who
looketh at the heart, and accepts the will:
whom you desiring to follow shall reigne
with him in that most blessed light eternally.
            
               Your Highnesse & Graces
humbly deuoted in all loyall and
faithfull obseruance,
IO. BRINSL
                        •
                     .
               
            
         
         
            
            A COMMENDATORY
Preface.
            
               ARts are the only helpes towards humane
perfection. Those therfore which are
the helps towards the easinesse, maturitie,
perfection of Arts, deserue best of
mankinde. Whence it is, that God would not suffer
the first deuisers, so much as of shepheards tents, of
musical instruments, of Iron-works, to be vnknown
to the world:Tubal-cain. the last wherof euen heathen Antiquitie
hath in common iudgement continued, without
much difference of name, till this daie; although I
cannot beleeue that anie of the heathen gods were so
ancient. Yea, hence it is, that the holy Ghost challengeth
the faculty euen of manuary skill, to his
owne gifte; as beeing too good for Nature, and too
meritorious of men. That Bezaleel and Aholiab
can worke curiously in siluer and golde, for the materiall
Tabernacle, is from Gods spirit, and not
theirs: How much more is this true, in those sciences
which are so essentiall to the spirituall house of
God? As Arts are to perfection of knowledge; so
is Grammar to all Artes. Man differs but in speech
and reason (that is, Grammar and Logicke) from

beasts: wherof reason is of Nature; speech (in respect
of the present variation) is of humane institution.
Neither is it vnsafe to say, that this later is the more
necessary of the two: For we both haue, and can vse
our reason alone; our speech we cannot, without a
guide I subscribe therfore to the iudgement of them,
that think God was the first Author of letters (which
are the simples of this Art) whether by the hand of
Moses; as Clement of Alexandria reports from Eupolemus:
or rather of the ancienter Progeny of Seth
in the first wotld; as Iosephus. Hee that gaue man
the faculty of speech, gaue him this meanes, to teach
his speech: And if he were so carefull to giue man
this helpe, while all the world was of one lip (as the
Hebrews speak) how much more, after that miserable
confusion of tongues? wherein euery man was a
Grammar to himselfe; & needed a new Grammar, to
be vnderstood of others. It is not therfore vnworthy
of obseruatiō, that God (knowing languages to be the
carryage of knowledge) as in his iudgement he diuided
the tongues of those presumptuous builders; so
contrarily hee sent his spirit in clouen tongues vpon
the heads of those master-builders of his Church.
What they were suddainly taught of God, we with
much leasure and industry learne of men; knowing
the tongues so necessarie for all knowledge, that it is
well, if but our younger yeeres be spent in this study.
How seruiceable therfore is this labor, which is here
vndertaken, and how beneficial, to make the way vnto
all learning, both short, and faire! Our Grandfathers
were so long vnder the ferule, till their beards
were growen as long as their pens: this age hath descried

a neerer way; yet not without much difficulty,
both to the schollars, and teacher: Now, time, experience,
and painfulnesse (which are the meanes to
bring all things to their height) haue taught this author
yet further, how to spare both time and paines
this way vnto others; and (that which is most to bee
approoued) without any change of the receiued
groūds. It is the cōmon enuy of men, by how much
richer treasure they haue found, so much more carefully
to cōceale it. How commendable is the ingenuity
of those spirits, which cannot ingrosse good experiments
to their priuate aduantage? which had rather
doe then haue good: who can be content to cast at
once into the common Bank of the world, what the
studious obseruation, inquisition, reading, practice
of many yeeres haue inriched them withall: That,
which this Author hath so freely done; as one that
feares not, least knowledge should be made too easie,
or too vulgar. The Iesuites haue won much of their
reputation, and stollen many hearts with their diligence
in this kinde. How happie shall it be for the
Chnrch and vs, if we excite our selues at least to imitate
this their forwardness? We may out-strip them,
if wee want not to our selues: Behold here, not feete
but wings, offered to vs. Neither are these directions
of meere speculation, whose promises are commonly
as large, as the performance defectiue; but such as
(for the most part) to the knowledge of my selfe,
and manie abler Iudges, haue been, and are daily answered
in his experience, and practice, with more
then vsuall successe. What remaines therefore, but
that the thankfull acceptation of men, and his effectuall

labors should mutually reflect vpon each-other?
that he may be in couraged by the one, and they by
the other benefited: that, what hath been vndertaken
and furthered by the graue counsell of many,
and wise; and performed by the studious indeuours
of one so well deseruing; may be both vsed and perfected
to the common good of all, and to the glorie
of him which giueth, and blesseth all.
            
               IOS. HALL. Dr. of Diuin.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CONTENTS
IN GENERALL, OF
the chiefe points aimed at, and
hoped to be effected by this
WORKE.
            
               1 TO teach schollars how to be able to reade
well, and write true Orthography, in a
short space.
               2 To make them ready, in all points of
Accedence and Grammar, to answere any necessary
question therein.
               3 To say without book all the vsual and necessary rules,
to construe the Grammar rules, to giue the meaning,
vse, and order of the rules; to shew the examples, and
to apply them: which being wel perfomed, will make
all other learning easie and pleasant.
               4 In the seuerall fourmes and Authours to construe
truely, and in propriety of wordes and sense, to parse
of themselues, and to giue a right reason of euery
word why it must be so, and not otherwise; and to
reade the English of the Lectures perfectly out of the
Latine.
               
                  
5 Out of an English Grammaticall translation of their
Authours, to make and to construe any part of the
Latine, which they haue learned; to proue that it
must be so: and so to reade the Latine out of the
English, first in the plaine Grammaticall order; after
as the wordes are placed in the Authour, or in other
good composition. Also to parse in Latine, looking
only vpon the Translation.
               6 To take their Lectures of themselues, except in the
very lowest fourmes, and first enterers into construction;
or to do it with very little helpe, in some more
difficult things.
               7 To enter surely in making Latine, without danger
of making false Latine, or vsing any barbarous
phrase.
               8 To make true Latine, and pure Tullies phrase, and
to proue it to be true and pure. To doe this in ordinary
morall matters, by that time that they haue bin
but two yeares in construction.
               9 To make Epistles imitating Tully, short and pithy,
in Tullies Latine and familiar.
               10 To translate into English, according to propriety
both of wordes and sense: and out of the English to
reade the Latine againe, to proue it, and giue a reason
of euery thing.
               11 To take a peece of Tully, or of any other familiar, easie
Authour, Grammatically translated, and in propriety
of wordes, and to turne the same out of the
translation into good Latine, and very neere vnto
the wordes of the Authour; so as in most you shall
hardly discerne, whether it be the Authours Latin,
or the schollars.
               
                  
12 To correct their faults of themselues, when they
are but noted out vnto them, or a question is asked of
them.
               13 To be able in each fourme (at any time whensoeuer
they shallbe apposed of a sudden, in any part of their
Authors, which the haue learned) to construe, parse,
reade into English, and forth of the translation to
construe and to reade into the Latine of their Authours;
first into the naturall order, then into the
order of the Authour, or neere vnto it.
               14 In Virgilor Horace to resolue any peece, for all these
points of learning, and to doe it in good Latine;
               
                  
                     In

                           Construing to giue propriety of wordes and
sense.
                           Scanning the verses, and giuing a reason thereof.
                           Shewing the difficulties of Grammar.
                           Obseruing the elegancies in tropes and figures.
                           Noting phrases and Epithets.
                        
                     
                  
               
               15 So to reade ouer most of the chiefe Latine Poets, as
Virgil, Horace, Persius, &c. by that time that by reason
of their yeares, they be in any measure thought
fit for their discretion, to goe vnto the Vniuersity: yea
to goe through the rest of themselues, by ordinary
helpes.
               16 In the Greeke Testament to construe perfectly, and
parse as in the Latine; to reade the Greeke backe againe
out of a translation Latine or English: also to
construe, parse, and to proue it out of the same. To
doe the like in Isocrates, or any familiar pure Greeke
Authour; as also in Theognis, Hesiod, or Homer, and
to resolue as in Virgil or Horace.
               
                  
17 In the Hebrew to construe perfectly, and to resolue
as in the Greeke Testament; and to reade the Hebrew
also out of the translation. Which practice of
daily reading somewhat out of the translations into
the Originals, must needes make them both very cunning
in the tongues, and also perfect in the textes of
the Originals themselues, if it be obserued constantly;
like as it is in daily reading Latine out of the
translation.
               18 To answere most of the difficulties in all Classicall
schoole Authours; as, in Terence, Virgil, Horace, Persius,
&c.
               19 To oppose schollarlike in Latine, of any Grammar
question necessary, in a good forme of wordes; both
what may be obiected against Lillies rules, and how
to defend them.
               20 To write Theames full of good matter, in pure Latine,
and with iudgement.
               21 To enter to make a verse with delight, without any
bodging at all; and to furnish with copie of Poeticall
phrase, out of Ouid, Virgil, and other the best
Poets.
               22 So to imitate and expresse Ouid or Virgil, as you
shall hardly discerne, vnlesse you know the places,
whether the verses be the Authours or the schollars:
and to write verses ex tempore of any ordinary
Theame.
               23 To pronounce naturally and sweetly, without vaine
affectation; and to begin to doe it from the lowest
fourmes.
               24 To make right vse of the matter of their Authours,
besides the Latine; euen from the first beginners: as

of Sententiae and Confabulatiunculae Pueriles, Cato,
Esops fables, Tullies Epistles, Tullies Offices, Ouids Metamorphosis,
& so on to the highest. To help to furnish
them, with varietie of the best morall matter, and
with vnderstanding, wisedome and precepts of vertue,
as they growe; and withall to imprint the Latine
so in their minds thereby, as hardly to be forgotten.
               25 To answere concerning the matter contained in
their Lectures, in the Latine of their Authors, from
the lowest fourmes and so vpward.
               26 To construe any ordinary Author ex tempore.
               
               27 To come to that facilitie and ripenesse, as not onely
to translate leasurely, & with some meditation, both
into English and Latine, as before in the Sect. or Article,
10. and 11; but more also, to reade any easie Author
forth of Latine into English, and out of a translation
of the same Grammatically translated, to
reade it into Latine againe. As, Corderius, Terence,
Tullies Offices, Tullie de natura Deorum, Apthonius.
To doe this in Authors and places which they are
not acquainted with, and almost as fast as they are
able to reade the Author alone.
               28 To write fayre in Secretary, Romane, Greeke, Hebrue;
as they grow in knowledge of the tongues.
               29 To know all the principall and necessarie Radices,
Greeke and Hebrue; and to be able to preceede in all
the learned tongues of themselues, thorow ordinarie
helps, and much more by the worthy helps & meanes,
to be had in the Vniuersities.
               30 To be acquainted with the grounds of Religion, and
the chiefe Histories of the Bible. To take all the substance
of the Sermons, for Doctrines, proofes, vses,

if they be plainely and orderly deliuered: and to set
them downe afterwards in a good Latine stile, or to
reade them ex tempore into Latine, out of the English:
To conceiue and answere the seuerall points of
the Sermons, and to make a briefe repetition of the
whole Sermon without booke.
               31 To be set in the high way, and to haue the rules and
grounds, how to attaine to the puritie and perfection
of the Latine tongue, by their further labour and
practice in the Vniuersitie.
               32 To grow in our owne English tongue, according to
their ages and growthes in other learning: To vtter
their minds in the same both in proprietie and puritie;
and so to be fitted for diuinitie, lawe, or what other
calling or faculty soeuer they shall bee after imployed
in.
               33 Finally, thus to proceede togither with the tongues
in the vnderstanding and knowledge of the learning,
or matter contained in the same. To become alike expert,
in all good learning meete for their yeares and
studies; that so proceeding still, after they are gone
from the Grammar schooles, they may become most
exquisite in all kinds of good learning to which they
shall be applied.
            
            These things may be effected in good sort, thorough Gods
blessing, in the seuerall formes, as the schollars proceede,
by so many in each forme as are apt and industrious,
onely by the directions following, if they be
constantly obserued; If the Maisters being of any competent
sufficiencie, will take meet paines; and if the
schollars being set to schoole so soone as they shall be
meete, may bee kept to learning ordinarily, hauing

bookes and other necessary helps & encouragements.
That so all schollars of any towardlnesse and diligence
may be made absolute Grammarians, and euery
way fit for the Vniuersitie, by fifteen yeares of age;
or by that time that they shall bee meete by discretion
and gouernment. And all this to bee done with delight
and certaintie, both to maisters and schollars,
with strife and contention amongst the schollars
themselues; without that vsual terrour and cruelty,
which hath beene practiced in many places, and without
somuch as seueritie amongst good natures.
            How greatly all this vvould tend to the furtherance of
the publique good, euery one may iudge; which yet it
will doe so much the more, as the Lord shal vouchsafe
a further supply, to the seuerall meanes and courses
that are thus begun, by adioining dayly the helps and
experiments of many moe learned men, of whom wee
conceiue good hope, that they will bee ready to lend
their helping hands, to the perfiting of so good a
Worke.
         
         
            
            
            To the louing Reader.
            
               CVrteous Reader, who tenderest the
poore Countrey schooles, for which
this labour hath beene vndertaken, or
didst euer feele or know the wants in
many of them, accept my vvilling
minde for their good. And take this first impression
as not set forth: but chiefely to the end, to haue store
of copies, to goe to many learned wel-willers to the
Worke, for their help: like as it hath heretofore, to
sundry much reuerenced for their learning and wisedome.
Of all whome, I humbly intreat their kinde
assistance, for amending that which is amisse; by
adding what is vvanting, cutting off whatsoeuer is
superfluous, changing what is vnbefitting, and reducing
euery thing into the right order: That it may
speedily come forth more plaine and perfect; and
thereby, if not themselues, yet their friends may
reape some benefit of their labours. For the liberty
and boldnesse vsed in it, consider that it is but a Dialogue
to incite and encourage others; as, I tooke it,
farre more profitable and delightsom to reade, then a

bare narration. All who are friendly and vnfained
fauourers of good learning, will I hope thinke so
of it. It shall wrong no man willingly: farre be that
from mee. I will right them againe, so soon as I know
it. Be the faults neuer so many, thorough my weaknesse
and want of meete leasure (as they must needs
bee the moe, by my absence from the Presse) yet
time, I trust will reforme them. In the meane while,
let my trauell and the good things weigh against the
rest. For the length of it, remember for whome I
write, euen the meanest teachers and learners: with
whom though I sometime vse repetitions, I cannot
bee ouer-plaine; sith they commonly get so little
of short Treatises, be they neuer so learned. Consider
also that I would hide nothing, which GOD
hath vouchsafed mee in my search: that out of all,
the most profitable may be selected, and in the meane
time the best onely vsed. And for the matter of the
Dialogue, take it as that which is desired to be effected
in time; and which I hope all shall finde, when
once the helpes belonging hereunto, shall bee supplied
and perfected.
            Account this, but as a meere entrance into the
worke: which if seuen yeares shall bring to perfection
fully to accomplish that which is wished, I shall
thinke my paines most happily bestowed, if GOD
so farre forth prolong my daies. I seeke not my self:
if I may do some little seruice to God and my Countrey,
I haue enough. I oppose my selfe to none.
Shew my ouersight in loue, and I will amend it. I
prescribe to none: no, not the meanest; but onely
desire to learne of all the learned, to help the vnlearned.

In the worke I take nothing to my selfe, but
the wants. What I receiued of others, I receiued to
this ende; after full triall made of them to publish
them for the common good. This I haue professed
from the beginning of my trauell. I would also giue
euery one his due particularly, what I haue had of
him; and will, if it shall bee thought meete. I haue
promised nothing but my labour: that I haue and
doe desire to performe to my abilitie and aboue.
The vveaker I am, the fitter shall I bee to apply my
selfe to the simplest: and the more honour God shall
haue, if hee shall giue that blessing vnto it, which I
doe humbly begge. If any man shall oppose, and
detract from these my labours; forasmuch, as hee
shall therein (as I take it) shew himselfe an enemie to
the common good of the present Age, and of all posteritie
(the benefite whereof, as God is my witnesse,
I haue intended principally in these my endeauours)
I can but be sory, and pray for him.
            
               Thine in Christ,
I. B.
               
            
         
         
            
            FOr the manner of proceeding vsed in this worke,
it is prescribed in the Preface to the Reader, which
is set before our common Grammar: where it, hauing
shewed the inconuenience of the diuersitie of
Grammars and teaching, doth direct thus;
            Wherefore it is not amisse, if one seeing by triall
an easier and readierway, then the common sort of
Teachers doe, would say that he hath proued it, and
for the commoditie allowed it; that others not knowing
the same, might by experience proue the like,
and them by proofe reasonable iudge the like: not
hereby excluding the better way when it is found;
but in the meane season forbidding the worse.
         
         
            
            OF GRAMMATICALL
Translations.
            
               THere is a way (saith Mr. Askame)
touched in the first booke of Cicero
de Oratore,
               Mr 
                  Askame 1. Booke page 1 which wisely
brought into Schooles, truely
taught, & constantly vsed would
not onely take wholly away that
butcherly feare in making Latines,
but would also with ease and pleasure, and in
short time as I know by good experience, worke a
true choise and placing of words, a right ordering of
sentences, an easie vnderstanding of the tongues, a readinesse
to speake, a facilitie to write, a true iudgement
both of his owne, and other mens doings, what
tongue so euer he doth vse.
            This way, as he sheweth, is by causing the Schollar
first to vnderstand the matter which he learneth:
secondly, to construe truely: thirdly, to parse exactly:
fourthly, to translate into English plainely: fiftly, to
translate out of the English into the Latine of the

Author againe: and so after to compare with the Author
how neere he came vnto it. Finally, by much
translating both wayes, chiefely out of the English
into Latine, as hee setteth downe in the beginning of
his second booke; and hereby hee saw those strange
experiments of the increase of learning, which hee
reporteth of Mr. Iohn Whitney, and others. Now,
whereas these things are very hard to bee performed
in the common schooles; especially for lacke of time
to trie and compare euery schollars translation, and
euer giuing them new peeces to translate, and those
such as are meete for euery forme; by the meanes
of these translations of our first schoole Authors, all
these things may bee performed in euery Author
and forme, most certainely and constantly, and with
much ease and delight both to Maister and Schollars;
as I trust will be found. The manner hereof I haue
set downe in the 8. Chapter, and others following.
Therfore since the time that God made these knowne
vnto mee (which was about some foure yeares agoe
or not much aboue, vpon the occasion of a late worthy
experiment related vnto mee, confirming the testimonie
of Mr. Askam) I haue laboured in these
translations aboue all other things, First, to finde out
the Grammar rule of construing truely and perfectly,
whereby to guide these translations, and wherevpon
they chiefely depend: Secondly, to finde out
the parricular vses and benefits of them: Thirdly, to
finde out and set downe such directions, as whereby
to frame the translations to serue for all the vses most
plainely: Fourthly, to translate so many of our first
Authors after the same manner, as since that time I

haue had occasion for my schollars in each forme to
reade: Fiftly, to haue certaine triall and experience of
euery thing, so much as in this time I could; and vpon
triall to commend them to Schooles, to help hereby
to bring into Schooles that excellent way of learning,
which hee so highly commendeth, and whereof I
haue very great hope; and so by them a perpetuall
benefit to all schooles and good
learning: which I vnfainedly
wish and pray for.
(⸫)
         
         
            Aduertisement by the Printer.
            CVrteous Reader, whereas in the later end of this Booke
it is signified in what forwardness the Authors translation
of Sententiae Pueriles and Cato, are; take notice also
that his booke entituled, The Poasing of the Accedence, is
since come to my hands, and likely to come forth at the
same time with Cato.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Ludus Literarius:
OR
The Grammar Schoole.
            
               CHAP. 1.
               A Discourse between two Schoolemasters, concerning
their function. In the end, determining a conference
about the best way of teaching, and
the manner of their proceeding
in the same.
               SPOVDEVS. PHILOPONVS.
               
                  Spoud.
                  
                     GOd saue you, good Sir: I am glad to see
you in health.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  What mine old acquaintance, M.
Spoudaeus?
                  
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  The very same, sir.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Now, I am as right glad to see you
well: you are heartily welcome to this my poore house.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, I giue you many thanks.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  But how haue you done these many yeares?
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I thank God I haue had good health,The Schoolemasters place ordinarily wearisome, thankelesse. euer since wee
liued in the Colledge together: but for my time, I haue
spent it in a fruitlesse, wearisom, and an vnthankfull office; in
teaching a poore country schoole, as I haue heard, that your

selfe haue also beene imployed in the same kinde of life; and
am therefore perswaded, that you haue had some experience
of my griefe.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Experience, say you? yea indeed I haue had so much
experience of that whereof you now complaine, that if all other
things were according thereunto, I might bee able to
teach very many. But I pray you sir, what good occasion
hath brought you into these parts? It is a wonder to see you in
this countrey. I should hardly haue knowen you (it is so long
since we liued together, now aboue twentie yeeres, and also
for that you seeme to me so aged) but that I did better remember
your voice then your fauour.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, you see the Prouerbe verefied in me; Cura facit
canos.
                     They who haue felt the euils of labouring without fruit in their calling, wil neither spare labor nor cost to help the same. Cares and troubles haue made me aged long before
my time. As for my iourney, a very great and necessary occasion
hath driuen me into these quarters, to come euen vnto
you, to seeke your helpe and direction, in matter wherein
(I hope) you may exceedingly pleasure me, without hurt
any way, or so much as the least preiudice vnto your selfe.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  You might thinke mee very vnkinde, and forgetfull
of our auncient loue, if I should not be readie to shew you anie
kindnesse; especially sith you haue taken so long a iourney
vnto me.If for to gain a little politick experience or to see fashions, many will aduēture both by sea and land, into enemies countries, to the hazarding ofttimes both of body and soule; how much more ought we to trauel at home, amongst our friends, to gain lasting comfort in our labours? But I pray what is the matter?
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  The matter (if you will giue mee leaue) is this. I
haue heard that you haue long taken great pains in teaching;
and that of late yeares▪ you haue set your selfe wholly to this
happy kinde of trauell; to finde out the most plaine, easie,
and sure waies of teaching, for the benefit both of your selfe
and others: whereby you haue attained much happy knowledge
in this behalfe. Now my long iourney hath bin for this
same very purpose, to desire some conference with you, and
to intreat your louing fauour and helpe. I should thinke my
selfe for eu
                        •
                     r bound vnto you, if you would vouchsafe to impart
vnto me some of those experiments, which I haue beene
certainely informed, that by your trauels you haue obtained.
For, I my selfe haue so long laboured in this moyling and
drudging life, without any fruite to speake of, and with so

many discouragements and vexations insteede of any true
comfort,Many honest and painefull School-masters weary of their places, liue in continuall discontent, thorow lacke of knowledge of a good cour
                           •
                        e of teaching. that I waxe vtterly wearie of my place, and my life
is a continuall burden vnto me. Insomuch as that it causeth
me to feare, that God neuer called me to this function, because
I see his blessing so little vpon my labors; neyther can
I finde any delight therein: whereas, notwithstanding, I
heare of some others, and euen of our old acquaintance,
whom GOD blesseth greatly in this calling; though such
bee verie rare,Some few God much blesseth in this calling though they be very rare. some one or two spoken of almost in a whole
countrey.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Indeede I haue trauelled in this too vnthankefull a
calling (as you doe most iustly complaine) and that in all
this time, since we liued together▪ In the greatest part whereof,
I haue beene well acquainted with your griefes and vexations;
which are no other then doe ordinarily waite vpon
this our function: yet this I thankefully acknowledge
(according to your former speech, and to giue you likewise
some reuiuing) that now of late, since I set my selfe more
conscionably and earnestly to seeke out the best waies of
teaching, by inquiring, conferring and practicing constantly
all the most likely courses, which I could heare or deuise,
God hath graunted vnto mee, to finde so great contentation
and ioy of this same labour in my schoole, that it hath
swallowed vp the remembrance of all my former grieuances.
For I doe plainely see such a change,More true contentment may be 
                           •
                        ound in this calling rightly followed, then in any recreation whatsoeuer. that now I doe not only
labour in my place vsually without griefe, or any wearinesse
at all, but that I can take ordinarilie more true
delight and pleasure in following my children (by obseruing
the earnest strife and emulation which is amongst
them, which of them shall doe the best, and in the sensible
increase of their learning and towardnesse) then anie
one can take in following hawkes and hounds, or in any
other the pleasantest recreation,The fruit of this trauel is euer the sweetest in the remembrance of it after. as I verely perswade my
selfe. And the rather because after my labour ended, my
chiefest delight is in the remembrance thereof; and in
the consideration of the certaine good, that I knowe shall
come thereby, both vnto Church and Common-wealth:

and also that my labour and seruice is acceptable to the Lord,
though all men should be vnthankfull. So that now I am neuer
so well, as when I am most diligent in my place. Yea I do
seeme to my selfe to finde withall so great a blessing vpon my
labours,Knowledge & practi
                           •
                        e of the best courses will much augment the blessing of our labours, and fill our liues with contentment. aboue all former times, that if I had knowen the
same courses from the beginning, I doe assure my selfe that I
had done ten times more good, and my whole life had beene
full of much sweete contentment, in regard of that which it
hath bin. Although my labours haue neuer been vtterly vnprofitable,
but that I haue still sent forth for euery yeere,
some vnto the Vniuersities, and they approoued amongst the
better sort of those which haue come thither: yet this hath
been nothing to that good which I might vndoubtedly haue
done.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir,Feeling of the griefe and want of others, will make vs more compassionate. I am perswaded that you speake as you thinke:
and therefore I doe grow into greater hope, that you hauing
had so much experience of the griefe in the one, and
ioy in the other, will be more compassionate of me, and more
ready also to impart your experiments with me, to make me
partaker of your comfort.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For communicating vnto you, for your helpe and
comfort, what God hath made knowne vnto me, I take it to
be my dutie.Wee are but stuards of Gods gifts & to bee accountable for euery talent. We all of vs know the danger of hiding our talent,
or keeping backe our debt, when the Lord hauing giuen
vs abilitie, doth call vpon vs to paie it.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I thank God vnfainedly (good sir) for this harty affection,
which I doe finde in you, and for this readinesse
to communicate with mee the fruites of your trauells.What our affection and resolution should be in receiuing any speciall blessing from the Lord: as namely direction how to walke more fruitfully in our calling. You
shall see. I hope, that I shall receiue them, with like alacritie
and thankfulnesse, and bee as ready to employ them to the
best, to doe my vttermost seruice in my place and calling
hereafter. So that although my first beginnings haue been
small, through ignorance of better courses, yet I trust my
after fruits shall much increase. Hereby my last dayes shall
prooue my best, and make some amends for that which is
past: and also my newe comforts shall sweeten all the remainder
of my life, and make mee likewise to forget the

daies that are past. How true is that Prouerbe of wise Salomon,
that heauinesse in the heart of man doth bring it down,
but a good word doth reioice it? You haue reuiued my heart,
and put new spirits into mee, by that which you haue alreadie
saide.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The Lord will reuiue you,How the way of all good learning may be more easie then euer in former ages. I hope, and all of vs also
who labour in this toyling kinde; by causing vs to finde
more 
                        •
                     ound fruit, and pleasant content in our teaching, then
euer yet we felt; if wee will but set our selues to seeke of him,
and readily impart our seuerall experiments for the good of
all: if withall we will receiue thankfully, and cheerefully put
in practice those gracious helpes of so many learned men,
which he in this last age of the world hath afforded aboundently,
aboue all former times, very many whereof lie vtterly
hid and vnknowne to the greatest sort,Many most worthy helps lie vtterly hid from the greatest part, only thorow neglect. vnto this day. And
that partly thorow lacke of care and conscience, to doe that
good which we might, and ought in our places; partly thorow
extreame vnthankfulnesse, neglecting the rich giftes of
the Lord, so plentifully powred downe from heauen vpon vs,
to leaue the world more without excuse. But as for mine own
selfe, all that I can promise is, onely my studie and desire, to
doe you and all other the greatest good that euer I shall be able;
and hereunto we haue all bound our selues. If I knowe
anie thing wherein I haue, or you may receiue benefit, I acknowledge
it wholly where it is due, euen to him who giueth
liberally to all who seeke him aright, and casteth no man in
the teeth. And resting vpon his rich bounty for a further supply,
if you shall propound in order the particular points,
wherein you would wish my aduise, I shall very willingly goe
on with you; and acquaint you with all things which hitherto
I haue learned in all my search, and more hereafter as his
wisdome shall adde vnto me.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I reioice in your confidence and wish that so it may
bee. In the meane time I like well of your motion, of going
through in order the principall matters of difficultie. If therfore
you shall thinke meete, I shall reduce all to certaine
heads, which a friend of mine shewed vnto me of late, set

downe in a certaine Table, which it may bee that your selfe
haue seene.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Let mee heare what was contained in it, and then
I shall soone answere you, vvhether I haue seene it or no.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  There was contained, in it, a briefe summe of sundrie
particular benefits, which may bee brought to Grammar
Schooles, to make schollars very perfect in euerie part of
good learning meet for their yeeres; and that all both Masters
and Schollars may proceede with ease, certaintie and
delight, to fit all apt Schollars for the Vniuersitie euerie waie,
by fifteene yeeres of age. Concerning which seuerall heads,
although it were a most happie worke if they could be attained
vnto (all of them beeing in my minde verie excellent,
and indeede the whole, such a worke as must needes bring a
perpetuall benefit, both to Church, and Common-wealth,
and that not onely to the present but to all succeeding ages)
yet that I may speake freely, what I conceiue of them, many
of them seeme very strange vnto me. And, although I
will not say that they are vtterly impossible: yet indeede I
take them to be altogether vnlikely; considering the continuall
paines and vexation that my selfe haue vndergone, and
yet could neuer come in many of them, neere vnto the least
part thereof.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  By that little which you haue mentioned, I take it
that I haue seene the very same: and for them I do not onely
thinke it,All the things mentioned in the contents may be effected through diligence, constancy & Gods blessing. but also do know assuredly, that by the Lords gracious
assistance and blessing, through constant diligence
they may be all effected; for that I haue knowne so much
trial of al of them, as is sufficient to induce any man therunto:
besides that they do all stand vpon plain & sure grounds, as I
trust I am able to make euident demōstration in each particular,See the particulars in the contents set before the booke.
so as any man of vnderstanding may perceiue cleerly, that
they may be done. Neither doe I doubt but to satisfie you in
euery point, and to cause you to yeelde vnto the euidence
hereof, before wee part, if you will but onely aske and still
shewe mee wherein you are not satisfied. Moreouer, I am so
verie confident herein, not onely vpon mine owne reason

and experience, but because I haue knowne the iudgements
of sundrie verie learned and experienced both Schoolemasters
and others, who haue beene acquainted with these selfesame
heads, which you haue mentioned: who, though at the
first reading of them, they haue beene of your iudgement,
and haue thought as you doe, yet within a quarter of an
hower after that they haue taken a little triall, in some of
the most vnlikely, and seene the reason of them, haue rested
fully satisfied and assured of the whole, that all might bee
done, as standing on the like grounds. And therefore I
haue no cause to distrust the like successe with your selfe.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, if you shall doe this for mee, I shall acknowledge
my selfe to haue receiued a very great benefit, and be
thankfull vnto the Lord, and to your selfe as his instrument;
and do my vttermost indeauour to put them all constantly
in practice, that I may confirme them by mine owne experience,
and finde the same happie comfort, that your selfe
haue done.
                  I will therefore begin in order according vnto those heads,
& so propound the questions, how each thing may be done,
and desire your answere vnto them seuerally.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Nay rather,The most easie and profitable manner of procee
                           •
                        ing in this conference▪
                      for the manner of proceeding, I take this
to be far more easie and commodious to vs both, and whereby
God may direct this conference so, as to profit manie others
besides our selues: To go through all the whole course
of learning, from the first step, beginning at the verie first
Elements, euen at the A. B. C. & so to ascend to the highest
top of learning, which can be required in Grammar schooles;
to make a schollar each way fit for the Vniuersity. Thus to run
through all the necessarie points appertaining to the same, as
neere as we can remember; To make hereby the whole waie
easie and readie to all good learning, and to ranke euery
head in the right order and proper place, according to the
due manner of proceeding in Schooles. So wee may insert
these points which you haue spoken of; diuiding the whole
into s
                        •
                     uerall chapters, for the full distinguishing & plain setting
down of euery matter. To the end therfore that I may be

the better guided and occasioned to impart all things vnto
you, I shall request you, first to propound all the seuerall
points of learning in order, from point to point as we proceed.
Secondly, in the propounding of them, to shewe me
in euery one, what course you your selfe haue taken, wherein
you haue found so little fruite or comfort, as you complaine,
and which you thinke to be most ordinarie in the
countrey schooles. Wherein you shall faile in omitting any
necessary head or chapter, or in misplacing any, I shall afford
you my best direction.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I will accomplish your desire so well as I can. I
doubt not of your patience, seeing you take me thus of a
suddaine; and that you who haue better thought of these
things, will guide me continually, vntill wee haue gone thorow
the whole.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I trust you are so perswaded of me. Therefore I pray
you begin.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               When the Schollar should first be set to the
Schoole.
               
                  Spoud.
                  THat I may begin at the very first entrance of the
Schoole:The first point. How soone the childe is to bee set to the schoole. let me inquire this of you, how soon you
would haue your childe set vnto the Schoole; for
I thinke that worthie to be first knowen, if so bee,
that you purpose to haue your schollar fitted for the vniuersitie
by fifteene yeeres of age.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I like your reason well, to enter there. But to the intent
that I may more fully make knowen vnto you, what I
thinke and haue found in this behalfe, let mee heare first of
you, as I wished in generall, at what age you vse in your countrey,
to set your children to begin to learne.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  For the time of their entrance with vs, in our
countrey schooles,The time of the first entrāce in countrey schooles, at 7. or 8. it is commonly about 7. or 8. yeeres
olde: six is very soone. If any begin so early, they are rather
sent to the schoole to keepe them from troubling the
house at home, and from danger, and shrewd turnes, then
for any great hope and desire their friends haue that they
should learne anything in effect.The childe of any ordinary towardlinesse, to begin to learne about 5. yeere olde. Reasons.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I finde that therein first is a very great want generally;
for that the childe if hee be of any ordinary towardnesse
and capacity, should begin at fiue yeere olde at the vttermost,
or sooner rather. My reasons are these:
                  1 Because that then children will begin to conceiue of
instruction,1. Because they are then meete to conceiue of learning and to delight in it. and to vnderstand; and bee able not onely to
knowe their letters, to spell and to reade, but also to take a
delight therein, and to striue to goe before their fellowes.
Experience heerein will quickely teach euery one, who
shall make triall of it, if so be that they doe follow a right
course.
                  2 Verie reason must needes perswade euery one of this.2. For that they are apt much sooner to learn shrewdnesse, & those things which are hurtfull.
For, if they bee apt much before fiue yeeres of age, to
learne shrewdnesse, and those things which are hurtfull,
which they must 
                        •
                     ee taught to vnlearne againe; why are
they not as well fit to learne those things which are good
and profitable for them, if they bee entred and drawen
on in such a manner, as they may take a delight and
finde a kinde of sport and plaie in the same. This delight
may and ought to bee in all their progresse, and
most of all in the first entrance, to make them the better
to loue the Schoole, and learning, as wee shall see after.
                  3 Many of them,3. To auoide much rudeness, and that too much sweetness which they feel in play and idlenesse. doe learne so much vntowardnesse
and n
                        •
                     ughtinesse amongst other rude children, in that
time before they come to schoole, that they are worse for
it continually after: and also they feele such a sweetnesse
in play and idlenesse, as they can hardly bee framed to
leaue it, and to take a delight in their bookes without verie
much adoe.
                  
                     
4 This first age,4 This age is most easily bē
                        ded, and ac
                           •
                        ustomed to good things. is that wherein they are most plant, and
may bee bended and fashioned most easily to any good
course. And being thus accustomed to good things from
their infancie, and kept so much as may bee, from all
practice and sight of euill, custome becomes vnto them another
nature. So great a thing it is (according to the old
prouerbe) to accustome children, euen from their render
yeeres; and so vndoubtedly true is that common verse,
Quo s
                           •
                        mel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem testa diû
                  
                  5 Aboue all these,5 Two or three yeeres may be gained by this meanes, to fit thē sooner for the Vniuersitie or other imploiments, which is no small benefit. this is a principall benefit, that by
this meanes two or three yeeres may well be gained, to fit
your Schollar so much sooner for the Vniuersity or for any
honest trade or calling. So that a child thus entred rightly,
shall doe much more at eight yeeres olde, then an other
so neglected can doe at tenne, or it may bee at eleuen
or twelue. Also many such shall bee meete for trades and
like imployments, when they haue no learning to fit them
thereunto. This must needes bee a great griefe to the Parents
of such, whose children haue so lost their time, as it
is a ioy to others whose children haue been so well brought
vp, when they see their children compared together.
                  6 Lastly,6 Parents ought to labour to see their childrens good educatiō before their eyes, so soone as may be. our time being so short▪ it much concerneth
euery parent, to see their children to haue the best education
and instruction, which is the chiefe patrimonie, and the
greatest comfort & hope both of the Parents and children,
and also of their houses and posteritie. And this so soone as
euer may be, to fit them for some profitable imploiment for
Church or Common-wealth.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But they will say with vs,
                        Ob. It will hinder their growth. that it will hinder the
growth of their children to bee set to schoole so young.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Let the schoole be made vnto them a place of play:
                        A. The schoole being rightly vsed will not hinder any more thē their plaie.
and the children drawne on by that pleasant delight which
ought to be, it can then no more hinder their growth then
their play doth, but rather further it, when they sit at their
ease; besides that continuall experience doth confute this
errour.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Bee it so as you say:
                        Ob. 2. It will cause them to hate learning. yet this is a receiued opinion,

that it will cause them to hate the schoole, when they should
be set to it in good earnest.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Nay rather it is clean contrarie:
                        A They will rather loue it better. for being acquainted
with the schoole so young, and with the sport and pleasure
which they finde amongst other children there; and
also being kept from feeling the ouer much sweetnesse in
play, it shall cause them to loue & to delight in the schoole
continually, and to goe on without any repining, or so
much as thinking of being away from the schoole: wheras
they being nuzled vp in play abroad, are very hardly reclaimed
and weaned from it, to sticke to their bookes indeede.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But yet it is thought that they can get but little
learning then,
                        Ob. 3 It is a small matter to lose a yeere or two then. being so very young, and therefore there is
the smaller losse of a yeere or two, at that time.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The losse will bee found in the end, although it be
indeed in the beginning.
                        A The losse of a yeere or two will be found in the end. For looke how many yeeres they
lose in the beginning if they bee apt, so many in the end
they will be shorter, of such of their fellowes, who are but
of their owne age, and applied all alike being of like capacitie.
Therefore, as wee will not let them lose a day, when
they growe towards the Vniuersitie, so neither should wee
when they are young; but preuent this losse, and take the
time in the beginning.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  We see notwithstanding some very long ere euer
they begin,
                        Ob. 4. They will learn the faster. who then goe forward with it the fastest of all.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is true in some pregant wits, and who are industrious:
                        A So in higher learning at those yeeres.
but you shall 
                        •••
                     ue others as blockish and dull. Also,
for those, if they goe so fas
                        •
                      in the rudiments and first
grounds, how much more would they doe so at the same
time in better studies? Neither can they haue halfe that
learning in all things, which others of like age and aptnesse
haue, who haue been well applyed from their first yeeres.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I yeelde to all which you haue saide in this behalfe;
and I doe see plainely the exceeding benefites, that
must needes come hereby, especially in gaining of time;
if they may bee entred in that playing manner, and go forwarde

with alacritie and contention; and moreouer so,
that they be not any way ouerloaded or discouraged, nor
yet in dangered, by the ouer charging of their wits and memories.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For that take you no feare; you shall (God willing)
see the euidence of that, and a plaine direction in euerie
Chapter how to proceede in that easie and playing kinde.
Therefore, if you be satisfied in this, let vs come vnto the
next point.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Very gladly sir: for I long to heare this, how you
would teach your childe being so young to read so soone
and readily.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I like the point well: proceed according to your
order.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               How the Schollar may be taught to reade English
speedily, to fit him the sooner and better
for the Grammar schoole.
               
                  Spoud.
                  BEfore we enter into this question, yet let me put you
in minde of one thing,The inconuenience of hauing the Grammar schooles trobled with teaching A. B. C which doth much trouble
mee concerning this very matter. That it seemeth
to mee an vnreasonable thing that the Grammar
schooles should bee troubled with teaching A. B. C. seeing
it is so great a hinderance, to those paines which wee
should take with our Grammar schollars, for whom wee
are appointed: Because it dooth take vp almost one halfe
of our time, and thereby dooth depriue vs of a chiefe
part of the fruite of our labours; especially when our
mindes are so distracted, and our thoughts carried so manie
wayes, to doe good to all. The very little ones in a
towne, in most countrey townes which are of any bignesse,

would require a whole man, of themselues, to be
alwaies hearing▪ poasing and following them, so as they
ought to bee applyed: for continuall applying in a right
course,Continuall applying in a right course is aboue al means is in this and all other parts of learning, aboue all
other meanes. And young ones, by a little slaking our
hands, run faster backe, then euer they went forward; as
boates going vp the streame.
                  Besides, it is an extreame vexation, that wee must bee
toyled amongst such little pettyes, and in teaching such
matters, whereof we can get no profit, nor take any delight
in our labours.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I am well inured with this grieuance, which you
speake of, and doe knowe by long experience your complaint
to bee too iust in this behalfe. I my selfe haue complained
of it manie a time. For it were much to be wished,
that none might be admitted to the Grammar schooles, vntill
they were able to reade English: as namely that they
could reade the new Testament perfectly, and that they
were in their Accidences or meet to enter into them.How this might be remedied by some other schoole in each towne for this purpose. There
might bee some other schoole in the towne, for these little
ones to enter them. It would help some poore man or woman,
who knew not how to liue otherwise, and who might
do that well, if they were rightly directed. Also it would be
such an ease to all Grammar Schoolemasters, as they might
doe much more good in their places.The redresse of it to be sought. Wherefore, all such
Schoolemasters who are incumbred with this inconuenience,
are not onely to wish, but also to labour to haue it reformed
in their seuerall schooles.To be borne with patience where it cannot be remedied. Yet notwithstanding,
where it cannot be redressed, it must be borne with wisdome
and patience as an heauy burden. Patience shall make it
much more light. And therefore euery one is to doe his
best indeauour, to know how to make it most easie, if it do
lie vpon him. Moreouer, seeing we purpose, God willing,
to goe through all the whole course of learning, and also
sith our labour is to finde out the meanes, whereby to
make the way plaine, to traine vp euerie childe from
the verie first entraunce into learning, (as was sayde)

vntill wee haue brought him vnto the Vniuersitie, we cannot
omit any point, which may tend vnto the same, much
lesse the first steppe of all. For, a child well entred is halfe
made:The first entring of children to be looked to carefully. according to that Prouerbe, Principium, dimidium
totius. The foundation well layd, the building must needs
goe forward much more happily. This is specially true in
learning; wherein children feeling a sweetnesse in the beginning,
are very much incouraged, as daily experience
will manifest to euery one.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I see well the necessitie of vndergoing this burden,
in those places where remedie cannot be had, without
greater inconueniences. And therefore, sith that necessity
hath no lawe, nor for my selfe I knowe no meanes h
                        •
                     w to
be freed from it; I pray you let vs returne againe vnto the
point, and let mee still intreat of you your best direction,
to make this burden so light as may bee.To teach to read well in a short time is of great profit This is a thing
worth the diligence of all, who must be imploied amongst
little ones: to wit, to teach children how to read well, and
to pronounce their letters truly; as also to spell right, and
to knowe how to write true Orthography in a short space.
For (that I may acknowledge the truth, and which hath bit
no small discredit vnto me in this behalfe) I haue had some
who haue beene with me, two or three yeeres, before they
could reade well.Griefe & discredit of the want of this. And that which hath yet bin much more
grieuous to mee, I haue sometimes been so abashed and ashamed,
that I haue not knowen what to say, when some
being a little discontented, or taking occasion to quarrell about
paying my stipend, haue cast this in my teeth, that
their children haue been vnder me sixe or seauen yeere, and
yet haue not learned to reade english well. I my selfe haue
also knowen, that their complaints haue been true in part;
though I haue taken all the paines with them that euer I
could deuise. Therefore good sir, set downe as plainly and
shortly as you can, how this may be helped. Both my selfe
& many others shall be much beholden for your direction
in this first entrance. For my maner of en
                        ••
                     ing them, it is
that which I take to be euery where: to teach & heare them

so oft ouer vntill they can say a lesson, and so to a new.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I likewise h
                        •
                     ue been well acquainted with this your
trouble: and therfore I will indeuor, to afford you so much
as I haue yet learned, how to auoide these clamors; and
how any poore man who will imploy his paines, may learn
to teach children to read well in a short time, though this
may seeme vnbefitting our profession.
                  First the ch
                        ••
                     de is to be taught,1. To teach children how to cal and pronounce their letters right. how to call euery letter,
pronouncing each of them plainely, fully and distinctly;
I mean in a distinct and differing sound, each from others,
and also naturally, from the very first entrance to learning.
More specially to bee carefull, for the right pronouncing
the fiue vowels,And first the 5. vowels. in the first place, as a, e, i, o, u. Because
these are first and most naturall, and doe make a perfect
sound, so that they may bee pronounced fully of themselues;
and they being rightly vttered, all the rest are more
plaine. After these vowels▪ to teach them to pronounce euery
other letter:The Consonants. which are therefore called Consonants,
because they cannot make a perfect sound of themselues,
without a vowell.
                  This may be done,Right calling the letters before the children doe know them. and also the teaching of children to
spell any syllable, before the childe do knowe any letter on
the booke; and that, some wise and experienced do holde
the surest and best course. But they are, at least, to be taught
to pronounce their letters thus, as they doe learne them; to
preuent the griefe and wearisomnesse of teaching them to
forget euill customes in pronouncing, which they took
                        •
                     
vp in their first ill learning. And so euer in teaching to read,
the teachers are to continue the like care of sweete and naturall
pronun
                        •
                     ia
                        •
                     ion.
                  Secondly,2. How to teach children to know the letters the soonest. for the knowing of the letters (besides that
common manner practiced in Schooles, which is by oft
reading ouer all the letters forwards and backwards vntill
they can say them) they may be much furthered thus; That
is,To cause them to finde out any letter. by causing the childe to finde out, and to shew you which
is a, which b, which c, which f, and so any other letter. First
to finde them in the Alphabet, then in any other place.

Or if you will let them learne but one letter at once,The surer way is to learne but one letter at a
                           •
                         once. vntill
they can readily know or finde out that letter in any place,
and after that an other in the same manner; This is holden
the surer and more easie waie: But this at your owne iudgement.
                  3 You may helpe them to spell thus,3. How to teach to spell. besides that course
which is vsuall. Let so many as are beginners, or who
cannot reade perfectly, stand together, and then poase
them without booke, one by one. First in syllables of two
letters, as they are set downe in their A. B. C. and where one
misseth let his next fellow tell,M. Coots English Schoolemaster might bee profitable to this purpose, in which booke are syllables & words of all sorts. if he cannot then som other.
Then examine them in syllables of three letters, after in
moe. And euer what syllable they misse, marke it with a
dent with the nayle, or a pricke with a pen, or the like: and
when you haue marked out those wherein they so misse,
poase them oft ouer, not forgetting due praise to them
who do best. One halfe howre would be spent daily in this
kinde of examining,To make children to take delight in spelling. vntill they bee perfect in any syllable
or worde. To make children to take a delight in
spelling, let them spell many syllables together, which
differ but onely in one letter, as hand, band, land, sand,
&c. These syllables and words following, I haue obserued,
to be of the hardest for children to spel: I will set you them
downe together in this short briefe. They may serue for
spelling, reading, or writing, and may soone be gotten by
being often poased, read or written ouer.
                  Ac,Some of the hardest syllables to practice children in the spelling of thē. These would be written in some little table to poase them oft. ec, ca, ce, ci, co, cu, ag, eg, ah, az, ae, ai, au, ga, ge,
gi, go, gu, va, wa, we, wee, bac, bace, bag, bage, gage, badge,
bau, baye, dawe, dewe, iawe, rac, race, rosse, rose, yell, you,
gua, cha, cla, dwa, gla, pha, tha, sca, sha, swa, wra, chra,
phra, spha, thra, twa, thwa, able, abs, ach, adge, afle, apt,
ath, own, blowe, browe, chrou, dregg, dredge, dwarfe, frogg,
gnash, gnaw, plowe, snowe, stewe, slugge, they, thom, throne,
twaine, twigge, schoole, cockle, puddle, pegle, good, golde,
gogle, balme, fallen, stolne, scalpe, false, thumbe, couple,
pearce, charme, chapt, moth, mouth, nymphes, vnkle,
tenth, strength, height, depth, breadth, weight, ioint, laude,

beautie, deede, language, guide, feede, feude, vowe, braue,
dou, dove, knife, kniues, yeoman, ynough, ayre, heyre,
doubting, Island, yle, buye, league, hatchet, laugh, yeugh,
bough▪ publique, quishon.
                  These are some of the hardest syllables,Note in spelling. as I sayde: your
selfe may adde moe as you meet with them. Also this is to
be obserued in spelling; that before (on) you spell or write
commonly (ti) not (ci) as saluation not saluacion, though
we pronounce it as (ci.) But this is to be knowen chieflie, by
the latine words from whence they come.
                  Right pronuntiation of words,Right pronoū
                        cing makes right spelling. & continuall practice in
spelling, are the surest way to come to spell truely.
                  If you pronounce the word false, which you would haue
your childe to spell, hee spelleth it false: for hee spelleth
according as it is pronounced to him, or as he vseth to pronounce.
As for example; aske the childe how he spelles
a strea, (as in many places the countrey manner is to pronounce
it) hee will spell strea or stre: but aske him how hee
spels a strawe and so pronounce it, and he will spell strawe.
                  To direct further how to come to perfection in spelling
or writing right,Further direction for spelling after. I shall haue occasion to speake after.
                  In ioining syllables together,4. Ioyning syllables together. they must bee taught, to
vtter euerie syllable by it selfe, truly, plainly, fully, and distinctly,
as we heard of the letters before; and so also as that
others who heare may vnderstand;Vnderstanding the matter. euer sounding out the
last syllable: as sal-ua-ti-on.
                  Thus they may goe through their Abcie,Bookes to bee first learned of children. and Primer.
And if they reade them twise ouer, that they may bee very
perfect in them, it will bee the better for them. For, the second
reading of any booke dooth much incourage children,Abcie, Primer. Second reading of a booke.
because it seemeth to bee so easie then; and also it
doth imprint it the more. Besides that they will run it ouer
so fast at the second time, as it will be no losse of time at all
vnto them.
                  After these they may reade ouer other English bookes.Psalmes in metre.
Amongst which, the Psalms in metre would be one, because
children wil learne that booke with most readinesse and delight

through the running of the metre, as it is found by
experience.Testament. Then the Testament, in which the discreete
Master may keepe his schollar lesse or more, vntil he think
him meet to enter into the Accidence.
                  If any require any other little booke meet to enter children;Schoole of Vertue.
                     the Schoole of Vertue is one of the principall, and
easiest for the first enterers, being full of precepts of ciuilitie,
and such as children will soone learne and take a delight
in, thorow the roundnesse of the metre, as was sayde
before of the singing Psalmes: And after it the Schoole of
good manners,
                     Schoole of good manners, called, the new Schoole of Vertue, leading the
childe as by the hand, in the way of all good manners.
                  By these meanes,5. In what time children well applyed, may easily learne to reade English. children if they be well applied, and
continually kept vnto it, may be taught so to read within a
yeere or little more, as they may be meet to enter into their
Accidence, by that time that they bee six yeere olde at the
vttermost; especially if they bee in any measure apt, and
much practiced in spelling the hardest syllables.
                  For diuiding or distinguishing of syllables this one obseruation
is to be remembred;Diuiding and distinguishing syllables. That what consonants are vsually
ioined in the beginnings of words, those are not to be
disioined and separate in the middest of words, except in
Compound words. But of this wee shall speake more fitly
after. And thus much may suffice for the present, for the
speedy reading of English; for heereof I haue had much
certaine experience.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I cannot iustly dislike of any thing which you
haue sayd herein, it standeth all with so great reason: chiefly,
to make children so perfect in the hardest syllables. For,
they being perfect in these must needs attaine all the rest in
a short space. Except onely one thing which you vttered;
which indeede seemes a strange Paradox to me: Namely,
that some wise & experienced, would haue children taught
to call and pronounce all their letters, and to spell any syllable
before they know a letter on the booke.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This is very true which you say; it may seeme a
Paradox to them who haue not tryed it. I my selfe was of

your minde when I heard it first.6. To teach little ones to pronounce their letters, and to spell before they know a letter, is the pleasantest way Yet setting my selfe to
make some triall of it, for the reuerence I bare to him of
whom I heard it, and for that he shewed me experience of it
in a child not fowre yeeres olde; I found it the easiest, pleasantest
and shortest way of all, where one would begin in a
priuate house with little ones playing. The manner is thus▪
1. You must teach them, as I sayde, to call their fiue vowels,
and to pronounce them right: Which they will presently
learne,How little ones will presently pronounce their fiue vowels. if you do but only cause them to repeat them
oft ouer, after you, distinctly together thus; a, e, i, o, u.
after the manner of fiue bels, or as we say; one, two, three,
fowre, fiue.
                  2 Then teach them to put the consonants in order before
euery vowell,To put the cō
                        sonants in order before the vowelles pronoūcing them. and to repeate them oft ouer together;
as thus: to begin with b, and to say ba, be, bi, bo, bu. So d.
da, de, di, do, du. f. fa, fe, fi, fo, fu. Thus teach them to
say all the rest, as it were singing them together, la, le, li, lo,
lu; The hardest to the last, as ca, ce, ci, co, cu. and ga, ge,
gi, go, gu. In which the sound is a little changed in the second
and third syllables. When they can do all these, then
teach them to spell them in order,To teach to spell these thus, putting the consonants first. thus; What spels b-a? If
the child cannot tell, teach him to say thus; b-a, ba: so putting
first b. before euery vowell▪ to say b-a ba, b-e be, b-i bi,
b-o bo, b-u bu. Then aske him againe what spels b-a, and
he will tell you; so all the rest in order. By oft repeating before
him he will certainly do it. After this if you aske him,
how he spels b-a, he will answere b-a ba. So in all others.
                  Next these teach them to put the vowels first, as to say,
ab, eb, ib, ob, ub. Then thus, a-b ab, e-b eb, i-b ib, o-b ob,
u-b ub. After; what spelles a-b, e-b, &c. Thus to goe with
them backward and forward, crosse, in and out vntill they
can spell any word of two letters. Then you may adioine
those of three letters: Afterwards, all the hard syllables, to
tell what any of them spels, til they be perfect in al, or as you
shall thinke meete.Repeating th letters of thee Alphabet, by roate. By this meanes, and by a little repeating
of the letters of the Alphabet ouer before them, by
three or fowre letters together, as they stand in order, so as

they may best sound in the childrens eares, they will soone
learne to say all the letters of the A. B. C. if you will. As to
repeat them thus. A. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. i. k. l. m. n. o. p. q.
r. s. t. u. w. x. y. z. &. To say them thus by roat will nothing
hinder but further them.
                  Then they may presently be taught to know the letters
vpon the booke,To teach them to know their letters as before. either one by one, finding first which is a,
in the Alphabet; and after in any other place. Then to
finde which is b, and so through all the rest as you will.
                  Then when they are cunning in their letters, and spelling,To cause them to knowe the matter by questions or oft repeating to thē.
if you make them to vnderstand the matter which they
learne, by questions, for a little at the first, they will goe on
in reading, as fast as you will desire. The easier and more
familiar the matter is to them, the faster they learne.
                  Thus may any poore man or woman enter the little ones
in a towne together;Any one who can read, may thus enter children for reading english and make an honest poore liuing of it,
or get somwhat towards helping the same. Also the Parents
who haue any learning, may enter their little ones playing
with them, at dinners and suppers, or as they sit by the fire,
and finde it very pleasant delight.
                  So they may helpe to gaine their children a yeere or
two in learning at the beginning, and also the Grammar
Schooles of this labour and hinderance.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  You haue perswaded me very much concerning
this doubt also. Surely sir howsoeuer thus may seeme but
a toye, yet all tender parents will much reioice in it, and acknowledge
it an exceeding benefit, to haue their children
so entered; and this time beeing got
                        •
                     en in the beginning,
will bee found in the end as you truely sayde. Yet there
is another matter that comes vnto my remembraunce, about
which I haue taken no small griefe and discouragement
manie a time, concerning this point of reading English.
I will mention it here, and desire your iudgement how
to redresse it, although it might happely come-in-fitter afterwards.
                  The trouble is this. That when as my children doe first
enter into Latine, manie of them will forget to reade

English,8. The inconuenience of childrē forgetting to reade English, when they enter first into latine, and how to auoid it. Complaints of Parents for childrē forgetting English. and some of them bee worse two or three yeeres
after that they haue been in construction, then when they
began it.
                  Now if you could teach me how to helpe this likewise,
that they might as well goe forward still in reading English
as in Latine, I should account this a very great benefit. For,
some of their Parents, who vse me the kindliest, will bee at
mee that their children may euerie daie reade some Chapters
of the Bible, to helpe their reading of English. Now
this I cannot possibly doe, but they must needes bee hindred
in their latine, in some lessons or necessarie exercises;
and eyther be behinde their fellowes, or else trouble
all their fellowes very much, that they cannot goe so fast
forward as they should, but stay for these readers. Others
being more ignorant or malitious, vpon euery light occasion,
are readie to rage and raile at me, for that their children
as they say, doe get no good vnder mee, but are worse
and worse. For, wheras they could haue read English perfectly
(it may be) when they came to mee, now they haue
forgotten to do it. Thus am I grieued on euery side, and
vexed daily, let mee labour neuer so much, and spend my
heart amongst them for to doe them good.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Sir, herein I can say, as she in the Poet;
Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco.
For I haue tasted deeply of the same griefe vntill verie lately,
within this yeere or two. Yet now I seeme to my selfe,
to find as sensible and continuall a growth amongst all my
Schollars, in their English tongue as in the Latine. And not
only for the reading of it, but also for vnderstanding it, and
abilitie to vtter their minde
                        •
                      of any matter, wherewith they
are acquainted, or which they learne in Latine; and also
how to express the meaning of the latine in prop
                        •
                     iety▪ and
puritie of our owne tongue:Complaint of want of care in our schooles for growth in our owne tong is in the latine. so that I am quite d
                        ••
                     uered
from that clamor.
                  But to tell you what I thinke, wherein there seemes
vnto mee, to be a verie maine want in all our Grammar,
schooles generally, or in the most of them; whereof

I haue heard som great learned men to complain; That
there is no care had in respect, to train vp schollars so, as
they may be able to expresse their minds purely and readily
in our owne tongue,Our chiefe indeauor should be for our own tongue. and to increase in the practice of it,
as well as in the Latine or Greeke; whereas our chiefe indeuour
should bee for it, and that for these reasons.Reasons. 1. Because
that language which all sorts and conditions of men
amongst vs are to haue most vse of, both in speech & writing,
is our owne natiue tongue. 2. The purity and elegancie
of our owne language is to be esteemed a chiefe part of
the honour of our nation: which we all ought to aduance
as much as in vs lieth. As when Greece and Rome and other
nations haue most florished, their languages also haue
beene most pure: and from those times of Greece & Rome,
wee fetch our chiefest patterns, for the learning of their
tongues. 3. Because of those which are for a time trained
vp in schooles, there are very fewe which proceede in learning,
in comparison of them that follow other callings.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This complaint is notwithout iust cause:Few Scooles which haue any regarde for our English tongue for I do
not know any schoole▪ wherein there is regard had hereof to
anie purpose; notwithstanding the generall necessitie and
vse of it, and also the great cōmendation which it brings to
them who haue attained it: but I thinke euery minute an
howre, vntill I heare this of you, how my trouble & shame
may be auoided, and how I may obtaine this facultie to direct
my children, how they may goe thus forward, not
onely in reading English perfitly, but also in the proprietie,
puritie and copie of our English tongue, so as they may vtter
their mindes commendably of any matter which may
concerne them, according to their age and place.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I will but name the meanes vnto you now: for I
shal haue occasion to shew them all more particularly hereafter.
                  Besides the daily vse of distinct reading ouer their English
parts to get them perfectly,Meanes to obtaine this benefit of increasing in our English tong, as in the Latin. and of right reading all other
things which they learn in latine, as your self do know;
these means following, by the blessing of God wil accōplish
your desire.
                  
                     
1 The continuall vse of the bookes of construing of
Lillies rules,1. Daily vse of Lillies rules construed. by causing them to learne to construe, and to
keepe their Grammar rules, onely by the helpe of those
translations. This I find one very good vse of these books,
besides some other which I shall mention after.
                  2 The daily vse,2. Continuall practice of English Grammaticall translations. and practise of Grammaticall translation
in English, of all the Schoole Authours, which the
yonger sort doe learne; causing them each day out of those
to construe and repeate, whatsoeuer they learne. This I
also haue proued by happy experience, to be a rare helpe
to make young Schollars to grow very much, both in
English and Latine. But of all these, for the manner, benefites,
and vse of them, I shall haue occasion to speake at
large.
                  3 Besides these,3. Translating and writing English, with some other Schoole exercises. they would haue euery day some practice
of writing English heedily, in true Orthography; as also
of translating into English; or, of writing Epistles, or familiar
Letters to their friends, as wel in English as in Latine.
Amongst some of them, the reporting of a Fable in English,
or the like matter, trying who can make the best report,
doth much further them in this. And generally, amongst
all those that can write, the taking of notes of Sermons,
and deliuering them againe, or making repetitions,
is a speciall meanes. Also striuing to expresse whatsoeuer
they construe, not onely in propriety, but in variety of the
finest phrase, who can giue the best. This chiefly in the
higher fourmes: So reading forth of Latine into English;
first in propriety, then in puritie. By these, and some vse of
the History of the Bible, and the like, which I shall be occasioned
to mention after; you may finde their growth, according
to your desire, and much aboue your expectation.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Vndoubtedly sir, these must needs be very auaileable;
because schollars may haue hereby, so much vse of the
English euery daie, aboue that which is practiced in anie
Schoole which I haue knowne. But for anie such translations
of the Schoole Authors, I haue not heard of them,

Onely I haue seen the bookes of construing Lillies rules,
and some of my children haue them, though I feared that
it would rather make them idle, being but a truants booke.
Indeed I neuer conceiued so much of them as you say: I shal
better thinke of the vse thereof.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  There is not the best thing but it may bee abused.
But for that booke as the others, I shall shewe and proue
vnto you the cōmodities of them, aboue all that you would
imagine.The chief fault of the children going backewards in reading English, when they first learne latine, is in the Parents themselues. Experience makes me confident: Yet to returne
vnto your selfe, concerning the complaint of the Parents,
for their children going backward in reading English, when
they first learne latine; the chiefe fault in truth is in the Parents
themselues; although we poore schoolemasters must
be sure to beare all. For if such murmuring Parents, would
would but cause their children, euery day after dinner or
supper, or both, to reade a Chapter of the Bible, or a peece
of a Chapter, as leasure would permit, and to doe it constantly;
therby to shew their loue to the Lord, and his word,
and their desire to haue the word dwell plentifully in their
houses, to haue their children trained vp in it, as young Timothy
was; then I say, this complaint would soon be at an
end: for they should either seethen, their children to increase
in this, or else they should discerne the fault to be in
their childrens dulnesse, and not in our neglect. Notwithstanding,
sith that they are so very fewe of whome wee can
hope, that they haue any care of this duetie in their houses,
in respect of all the rest who omit it, and yet all the blame
must surely rest on vs, it concerneth vs so much as we can
to redresse it; and therefore vse all good meanes, to cut off
all occasions of clamours, and of discrediting our selues,
and our schooles, and to contend for the greatest profiting
of our children, aswell in this, as in any other part of
learning; the vse of this being, as we heard, most generall
and perpetuall.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  You haue directed mee very rightly how to aunswere
such Parents: now I shall be able to shew them where
the fault is, and bee calling vpon them to redresse this at

home. I shall also indeuor to put all this in vre, and more as
you make the particulars more fully known vnto me; and
as I shall finde by triall the fruit heereof. But now, that you
haue thus satisfied me in all these my doubts; I cannot but
demand yet one other point, wherein I finde another great
want, though not comparable to the former; because there
is not so much vse of it: which is about the ordinary numbers
or numbring. For I am much troubled about this, that
my readers and others aboue them, are much to seeke in all
matters of numbers, whether in figures or in letters. Insomuch,
as whē they heare the chapters named in the church,
many of them cannot turn to them, much less to the verse.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This likewise is a very ordinary defect,An ordinary fault, that most schollars are to seek in matters of common numbers, which they may bee taught in an hower or two. & yet might
easily be helped by common means, in an howr or two. I
call it ordinary, because you shall haue schollars, almost ready
to goe to the Vniuersity, who yet can hardly tell you the
number of pages, sections, chapters, or other diuisions in
their books, to find what they should. And it is as you say,
a great & a fowle want; because, without the perfect knowledge
of these numbers, schollars cannot help themselues
by the Indices, or Tables of such books, as they should vse,
for turning to any thing of a sodaine: although it be a matter
wherof they should haue vse all their life long. And to
conclude, it is a great neglect, because it is a thing so easie, as
that it may be learned in so short a time, only by most vsuall
meanes, as by these following. For numbers by letters, vse
but only to appose them,Numbers by letters knowen easily, yet oft neglected. according to the direction in the
latine Grammar at Orthographia, & they will do them presently.
As if you aske what I. stands for, what V. what X.
what L. &c. And back againe, what letter stands for one, so
what for fiue, or forten. But specially if you desire to haue
them very ready herein, cause them to haue these written, &
then to practice to read them ouer often, vntil that they can
answer any of them perfectly. Warn them also to remember
alwaies▪ that any number set after a greater, or after the same
nūber, doth add so many mo, as the value of that later nūber
is. As, I. set after X. thus, XI. doth make eleuen. XV. fifteen▪
                     
XX. twentie. But being set before, they doe take away so▪
many as they are: as I. before X. thus, IX. nine.
                  If you wish an example more at large this may serue; let
each of them that should learne haue a briefe of these, after
this maner, to shew them all the chiefe numbers. I. one,
II. two, III. three, IIII. or IV. fowre, V. fiue, VI. six, VII.
seauen, VIII. eight, IX. nine, X. tenne, XI. eleuen▪ XII.
twelue, XIII. thirteene, XIIII. fourteene, XV. fifteene,
XVI. XVII. XVIII. XIX. XX. XXI. XXV. twenty fiue, XXX.
thirtie, XL. fortie, L fifty, XC. ninetie, C. a hundreth, D.
fiue hundreth, M. a thousand. And thus much shortly for
numbring by letters.
                  For the numbers by figures,Numbers by figures. this rule must also be obserued;
That the figures do signifie in the first place so much
o
                        •
                     ly, as if they were alone, or one time so many. In the 2.
place tennes, or tenne times so many. In the third place,
hundreths, or a hundreth times so many. In the fourth
place thousands, or a thousand times so many. In the fift
place ten thousands. In the sixt place hundreth thousands;
the places being reconed from the right hand to the le
                        •
                     t.
As for example, 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
18. 19. 20. twentie. 21. 22. 23. &c. 30. thirtie. 31. 32. 40.
fortie, 41. &c. 50. fiftie 51. 60. sixtie, 70. seauentie. 80.
eighty. 90. ninetie 100. a hundreth. 101. a hundreth & one,
102. 110. a hundreth and ten. 120. a hundreth & twenty. 130,
&c. 200. two hundreth, &c. 1000. a thousand. 10000. ten
thousand. 100000. a hundreth thousand.
                  These beeing learned backewards and forwards, so that
your schollar be able to know each of them, to call them
or name them right, & to find them out, as the child should
finde any letter which he is to learne: in a word, to tell what
any of these numbers stand for, or how to set downe any of
them; will performe fully so much as is needfull for your
ordinarie Grammar schollar. If you do require more for
any; you must seeke Records Arithmetique, or other like
Authors and set them to the Cyphering schoole.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This is a defect that I see is most easily supplyed

by a very little paine and care in examining. I haue troubled
you ouerlong in this, beeing in it selfe so very a trifle,
though the want generally be to bee blamed. Now therefore
let vs hasten vnto our profession for the Grammar
Schoolemaster. For I desire earnestly to be in our owne element,
as more befitting and beseeming our place.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I am very willing to make all the haste that we can:Why this Dialogue is so long
for this I see, that though wee neither vse digressions, nor
needlesse words; yet this our conference will proue verie
long, before that I can make my mind plain vnto you. Vnlesse
I should be so short, as either to be obscure, or to omit
many things which I take to be very necessarie: But yet
before we come to make entrance into the Latine, if we doe
keepe order, wee are to goe through the way of writing, as
being more generall, and which chiefly appertaineth also
to our English tongue; in respect of our more frequent vse
of it: I meane chiefely for the writing of our ordinarie
hand called the Secretarie hand, which is almost wholly in
vse amongst vs.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               How the Master may direct his Schollars to write
verie faire, though himselfe be no good
Pen-man.
               
                  Spoud.
                  TO come therfore vnto writing,Faire writing a great benefit & ornament to Schooles. and the manner of
teaching it; That which you affirm may be done
herein, cannot but bee a very great benefit, and a
notable grace to schooles, and also to all learning,
if it can be so effected. That all Schollars in generall, may
be directed to write cōmendably, and a great part of them
which are more apt to write very faire; and that in the seuerall

hands of the learned tongues, as they doe proceed in euery
one of them. For many of the best Schollars, haue
beene wont to write very ill;It hath beene a receiued opinion a 
                           •
                        ong many, that a good Schollar can not be a good writer. in so much, as it hath beene a
receiued opinion, as you know, amongst very many, That
a good Schollar can hardly be a good pen-man. Moreouer
you shall finde very fewe good writers in Grammar
Schooles; vnlesse eyther they haue been taught by Scriueners,
or be themselues maruellous apt hereunto, and very
rare, or where the Master doth apply himself chiefly to
teach to write.
                  The want of this, hath bin another part of my griefe: for
besides the complaint and grudging of the Parents;The trouble of Schoolemasters, for the want of this faculty to teach Schollars to write. I haue
also seen, after they haue bin a great while with me, that they
haue not bin able to write so, as to be fit for any trade; but
they must after be set to learne of the Scriuener: much lesse
haue they bin able to write a letter to their friends, or to perform
any such business with their pen, in any commendable
maner. You shall therefore do me no lesse a pleasure, then in
the former, if you can direct me, how to help all these euils,
and to attaine to that dexterity, whereof you speake.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I hope to satisfie you herein also. But first relate
vnto me, what courses yourselfe haue taken, to teach your
Schollars to write; whereof you haue found so little profit:
and after I shall adde, as in the former, what I haue learned,
to the better effecting hereof.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Surely I haue done this:The ordinary course in Schooles to teach to write. I haue daily set them copies,
so well as I could; which hath bin no small toile vnto
me: or else I haue caused some of my Schollars, or some others
to doe it. Also I haue made them now & then to write
some copies; and it may be, I haue corrected them for writing
so badly, or guided some of their hands, or shewed them
how to amend their letters. This I take to be the most that
is done in Schooles ordinarily; vnlesse any doe procure
Scriueners, to teach in their townes: whereof we finde no
small inconueniences.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I take it to be as you say, that this is all which is
done in most Schooles: and hence so many of vs haue experience,

of the like murmurings against vs. Now I will let
you see plainly and as familiarly as I can, how to helpe this
euill, and to attaine this so great a benefit.
                  1. The Schollar should be set to write,1. When Schollars should begin to write. when he enters
into his Accidence; so euery day to spend an houre in writing,
or very neere.
                  2. There must be speciall care,2. To haue all necessaries. that euery one who is to
write, haue all necessaries belonging thereunto; as penne,
inke, paper, rular, plummet, ruling-pen, pen-knife, &c.
                  3. The like care must be,3. Inke and paper, of what sort. that their inke be thin, blacke,
cleere; which wil not run abroad, nor blot: their paper good;
that is, such as is white, smooth, and which will beare inke,
& also that it be made in a book.Writing books kept faire. Their writing books would
be kept faire strait ruled, & each to haue a blotting paper to
keep their books for̄ soyling, or marring vnder their hands.
                  4. Cause euery one of them to make his own pen; otherwise
the making,4. Euery one to learne to make his owne pen. and mending of pens, will be a very great
hinderance, both to the Masters and to the Schollars. Besides
that, when they are away from their Masters (if they
haue not a good pen made before) they wil write naught; because
they know not how to make their pens themselues.
                  The best manner of making the pen,The manner of making the pen. is thus:
                  1. Choose the quil of the best and strongest of the wing,
which is somewhat harder, and will cleaue.
                  2. Make it cleane with the backe of the pen-knife.
                  3. Cleaue it strait vp the backe; first with a cleft,Cleft of the penne. made
with your pen-knife: after with another quill put into it,
riue it further by little and little, till you see the cleft to be
very cleane: so you may make your pen of the best of the
quil, & where you see the cleft to be the cleanest, & without
teeth. If it doe not cleaue without teeth, cleaue it with your
pen-knife in another place, still neerer the backe: for if it be
nor strait vp the backe, it will very seldome run right. After,
make the nebbe and cleft both about one length, somewhat
aboue a barley corne breadth, & small; so as it may
let downe the inke,The neb of the pen. and write cleane. Cut the nebbe
first slant downewards to make it thinne, and after strait

ouerthwart. Make both sides of equall bignesse, vnlesse
you bee conning to cut that side, which lieth vpon the long
finger, thinner and shorter; yet so little, as the difference can
hardly be discerned. But both of equall length is accounted
the surest.
                  The speediest and surest way to learne to make the pen,The surest way for making the pen.
is this. When your Shollar shall naue a good pen fit for his
hand, and well fashioned; then to viewe and mark that well,
and to trie to make one in all things like vnto it. It were
good for the learner to procure such a penne made, and to
keepe it for a patterne, to make others by vntill he be very
perfect in it. A childe may soone learne to make his pen;
yet, fewe of age do know how to make their owne pennes
well, although they haue written long and very much: neither
can any attaine to write faire without that skill.
                  Next vnto this,How to holde the pen. cause your schollar to holde his penne
right, as neere vnto the nebbe as hee can, his thumbe and
two fore-fingers, almost closed together, round about the
neb, like vnto a cats foote, as some of the Scriueners doe
terme it.
                  Then let him learne to carry his pen as lightly as he can,To cary the pen so lightly as to glide on the paper.
to glide or swimme vpon the paper. So hee shall write the
cleanest, fayrest, and fastest, and also his pen shall last the
longe.
                  Insteede of setting of copies and to saue that endlesse
toyle,Copies. In stead of setting copies to haue copie bookes fastened to the top of their books. let euery one haue a little copie booke fastened to the
top of his writing booke, with a strong thread of a spanne
long, or thereabout; that alwaies when he writeth, he may
lay his copie booke close before him, and that the side of
the copie, may almost touch the line where he writeth, that
his eye may be vpon the copie, and vpon his letter both together.
And also, to the end that euer when he hath done
writing, he may put his copie booke into his writing booke
againe; so that the copie may neuer bee out of the waie,
nor the Schollar write without it.
                  The fittest volume for their writing a booke is, to haue
them in quarto.
                  
                  
                     
Moreouer, the copie bookes would be made thus.Maner of the copie bookes. Not aboue
two inches in bredth; fowre or six copies in a booke,
halfe secretarie, halfe Roman. The copie bookes might be
made thus most fitly as I take it.
                  1 One line of small letters, of each letter one, except
in those which haue letters of diuers kinds, and therin both
kinds to be set downe: as i. j. s. 8. u, v.
                  Vnder the line of small letters, would be set a line of great
letters, after the same manner; and vnder them both a line
or two of ioyning hand, containing all the letters in them.
                  Examples of both sorts for the present vntill better can
bee found may be these. I meane copies both of Secretary
and Roman, containing all the letters in them.
                  For Secretary thus:
                  Exercise thy selfe much in Gods booke,Examples of copyes contayning all the letters in one line of ioyning. with zealous
and feruent prayers and requests.
                  For Roman thus:
                  Aequore cur gelido zephyrus fert xenia kymbis?
                  Respect not the verse, but the vse.
                  Vnder all these, may be fitly set in very little room those
characters or letters, out of which all the rest of the letters
may be framed: as in the small letters in Secretarie, m. i. t.
v. z. s. In the great letters, 
                        〈◊〉
                     . So vnder the Roman
copies after the same manner.
                  In the end of the copie bookes, in a page or two, might
be set down all the hard syllables mentioned before.The hardest sylables and principall numbers to be set in the end of the copy bookes. That
by oft writing them ouer they might be helped to spel, & to
write true Orthographie. And after those, the numbers
mentioned, to be able to write or totel any of them vpō the
book without it. Then what schollar so euer were not able to
tell any of them, after a little poasing,The copy books to bee printed & how, with the benefit of them. were well worthy to
be corrected. If such copie books were finely printed, being
grauen by som cunning workman, & those of the most
perfect and plaine forms of letters, that could possibly be
procured, in a strong and very white paper, one book or two
of them would serue a schollar neere all his time, that hee
should neuer need to change his hand.
                  
                     
The often change & following of diuerse hands,Inconuenience of following diuers hands. doth asmuch
hinder writing, as often change of schoolemasters
doth hinder learning. Therfore, the best is to be chosen at
the first, and euer to be stucke vnto without alteration, if it
may be.
                  In the meane time,The best written copies to be procured. vntill such copies can be had, some
would be procured of the master, to be written by the best
Scriuener who can be gotten, after the manner aforesayde,
for each schollar to haue one to fasten to his booke, and to
vse as before.
                  Otherwise when for lacke heereof,Inconuenience of the lacke of such bookes. the Master, or Vsher,
or some other Schollar is compelled euery day, to write
each schollar a new copy; it is both an endlesse toile, and also
an extreame losse of time: besides the inconuenience
mentioned, of change of hands, and that few Masters or Vshers
are fit pen men, to write such copies as were necessary.
                  Lastly, because thorough want of such copies, schollars
do write ordinarily without direction or pattern, in all their
exercises; whereby they either grow to very bad hands, or
do profit in writing,Faire writing to be practiced by all the schollars once euery day. little or not at all.
                  This exercise of writing faire, would be practiced by all
the Schollars thorow the Schoole, at least once everie day,
for an howres space or neere; and that about one of the
clocke: for then commonly their hands are warmest and
nimblest.
                  Now those that write exercises, may take the opportunitie
of that time,General rule in writing; To make all like vnto the copy. to write them so faire as they can.
                  In al writing this general rule would be obserued streightly,
to cause them to striue to make euerie letter, as like to
the copie letter in all proportion, as the one hand is to the
other. And that they neuer thinke a letter good, vntill no
difference can bee found betweene it and the copie letter;To keepe euen compasse.
that it cannot be discerned whether is the better.
                  Great care would bee had withall, to make euery
writer to keepe euen compasse in the height, greatnesse,
and breadth of his letters; that no one letter stand either

too high or too lowe, be ouer long, or ouer short, nor anie
way too bigge, or too little, too wide, or too narrow.
                  To the end,How to write of euen height. that they may write of euen height; cause
them to rule their bookes with a ruling pen, and then that
they make the body of each letter, to touch their rules on
both sides, I meane both at the tops and bottomes of the
letters; but not to go one hair bredth higher or lower. Thus
by practice the schollar will in time attaine to write very
faire of himselfe without any ruling pen.
                  That euery one may rule their bookes thus,Each to haue his ruling pen, and what on
                           ••
                        . cause them
to haue each his ruling pen, made of a quill, somwhat like
vnto a pen; but onely that it is to be made with a nocke in
the neb or point of it, like the nocke of an arrow, the nebs
of the nocke standing iust of the bredth of their copie letters
asunder, that they may rule their rules meete of the
same compasse with their copies.
                  The points of the nebs of the ruling pennes,The neb of the ruling pen, and how to rule with it. must not
be made ouer sharpe, nor pressed downe ouer hard in ruling;
because they wil then race the paper, and make it that
it will not beare inke. They are moreouer to rule but a few
lines at once: because the lines being drawen but lightly,
will soone go out, and not be seene before that the learners
come to write in them.
                  Also this care must be had in ruling, to cary the ruling
pen so euen and straight forward,☜ that both the lines which
are drawen by it, may be seene together; or els to drawe the
lines so oft ouer with the same, vntil that both the lines may
be well seene.Euen writing to be streightly looked to, by the help of a ruling pen. This would be obserued carefully, vntill that
time that they can begin to write euen & streight of themselues:
for the euen compasse doth especially grace a hand,
and the faire shew of it will cause children to take a delight
in writing faire.
                  Euery schollar who writeth Latine should haue two of
these ruling pens: one for Secretarie, and an other for Roman;
or else to haue one made of iron or brass, the one end
for the one, the other end for the other.
                  Moreouer, the bookes of all the new beginners or enterers,

whilst they write letters, would be ruled wel with crosse
lines, with the ruling pens on this manner: It is found to
direct them very much.Ruling the bookes of the young beginners with crosse lines thus.
                  
                  
                  Thus their bookes shall be kept faire.Benefit of this ruling. The compasse or
the space within the crosse lines, serues to keep & guide the
body of each letter to make it of a iust proportion. The
straight lines direct and guide the childe to make euery
stroke straight forward, or vp and downe, and also how to
frame the head and taile of each letter.
                  Thus much for the compasse of the letters;The compasse in greatnesse or neernesse of the letters. chiefly in the
tops and bottoms of the letters.
                  Now that the letters may not be ouer bigge or ouer little,
set too neere one another or far off, this may bee one
good direction;
                  Cause your schollar to drawe his lines, on which hee
wil write his copies, of the very same length with the length
of the line of his copie: and then if he write iust so much
in his line as is in the copie, it is very like that he makes his
letters of a good proportion, not too bigge nor too little,
and the compasse euen, not one ouer neere, or far off from
an other. But if hee write more in a shorter space, then is
in like space in the copie, he either makes his letters too little,
or sets them too neere one another; letters, or words, or
both. And so on the other side, if he write lesse in a line,
then is in his copie in the same space, and length, then hee
makes his letters too bigge, or too wide asunder.
                  The letters would bee ioined in euery word: yet so as no
one be set ouer neere another, but iust as the copie, obseruing

blacks and whites, as the Scriuener tearmeth them.
And each word in a sentence, would be set about the bredth
of an a, or an o, from one another.
                  For writing straight without lines (after that they haue
practiced this a good while,Writing straight without lines. to write with double lines, ruled
with the ruling pen, and after with single lines) this may
helpe to guide them wel;☜ to cause them to hold their elbow
so close to their side and so steadily, as they can conueniently:
for the elbow so stayd, will guide the hand as a rule,
especially in writing fast. Afterwards, looking at the end of
the line, as we vse to trie the straightnes of an arrowe, they
shal see easily where it is crooked. Practice wil bring facility
                  These also may bee speciall furtherances for the first enterers:Speciall furtherances for the first enterers in writing. When they cannot frame a letter.
When the young schollar cannot frame his hand to
fashion any letter; besides the guiding of his hand, and also
the shewing where to begin each letter and how to draw it,
some do vse to drawe before them the proportion of their
letters, with a peece of chawke vpon a board, or table, or
with a peece of blacke lead vpon a paper; and then let the
childe trie how he himselfe can draw the like vpon it; and
after this to let him to do it with his pen, following the letter
of his booke.
                  Or thus;To follow a letter with a dry pen. Let him take a drie pen, that cannot blot his
booke, and therewith cause him to follow that letter in his
copie, which he cannot make, drawing vpon the copie letter
very lightly, & a little turning the side of the pen, where
the letter is smal; but leaning harder vpon it where it is ful,
and there also turning the broad part of the pen. Onely
warne him to be carefull, that hee doe not hurt the letter in
the copy, by his hard leaning vpon his pen, or by the ouermuch
sharpness of it▪ Thus let him follow his copie letter,
drawing his pen so oft vpon it, vntill he think his hand will
goe like vnto it. Then direct him, to trie with another pen
with inke, whether he can make one like to that of his copie.
If he cannot, let him goe to it with his drie pen again,
vntill that he can fashion one like vnto it.
                  This also is a speciall obseruation: That the more leasurely

the childe draweth at the beginning,Leasurely drawing as the Painter. as the Painter
doth, and the more lightly, the sooner a great deale he shall
learne to frame his hand to write faire.
                  This likewise some good Scriueners obserue;To learne to make one letter wel first, then another. to suffer
the child to learne to make but one kind of letter at once,
vntill they can make that in some good sort, then another:
as first a, then b. But especially to beginne with those letters,
out of which all the rest may be framed, to make them
perfectly, as m, c, t, v, z. For so all the rest will bee the easier.
                  To helpe to write cleane,To helpe to write cleane, fast and faire together. fast and faire together, call oft
on your schollars to exercise their hands in making of f
strokes, that is, dashes of f, and s thus 
                        〈◊〉
                     ; and the stroake of
the great C, and B, thus, 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Also some vse to cause the learners,Making florishes, gliding vpon the paper. to practice their
hands to run vpon the paper, either with inke or without,
vntill they be very nimble and cunning to glide vpon the
paper; and namely, to make certaine rude florishes.
                  
                  Call on them in all exercises,To obserue ornaments of writing. to bee carefull to obserue
the graces of letters: as the keeping of great letters, accents,
points, as comma, colon, period, parenthesis, and whatsoeuer
may serue for the adorning of writing; and euermore
to take a delight in writing faire: which delight is in each art
the one halfe of the skill;☞ but to flie all long tailes of letters,
and to make all their letters so plaine as they can:To make the letters most plaine. the plainer
the better. Beware that you suffer no one to learne a
bad hand,☞ or to make any bad letter, so neere as you are able
to preuent it.Mischiefs of getting a bad hand. For it will be found much harder to teach
such to forget their bad letters and hands, then to teach other
which neuer learned, to write the good.
                  
                     
So that if you teach such, a better hand, after that they haue
learned and been long inured to the worse; although they
seeme to haue learned to write well, yet vnlesse they be holden
continually to practice their good hand each day a little,
they will fall vnto their bad hand againe: so great force
hath any euill custome.
                  This therefore must be our wisedome,☜ to procure from
the beginning the most excellent copies,To procure the most excellent copies from the beginning. for our schollars,
whatsoeuer they cost; and to keepe them constantly to
them: they will soone quite the cost both to Master and
Schollar.
                  To the end that any Master may bee the better able to
teach thus;That the Master may teach his Schollars to write faire, what to be don. let him eyther trie to attaine this faculty of writing
faire (which much commends a Master) or at least, let
him labour to be well acquainted with these directions, or
the like: and also let him cause his Schollars to obserue
them constantly; or so many of them, as neede shall require.
                  And to this end,☜ let him vse to walke amongst his Schollars
as they write all together;To walke amongst the schollars, to see they obserue these directions▪
                      and see that they do practice
these things duely: but chiefly that euery one haue his copie
booke layed close before him; and to marke well wherin
any one of them misseth in any letter or stroke, that it is not
like to the copie, there to point him to the copie, and to
shew him where they differ, or to cause him to compare
them himselfe: so to appoint them to bee mending their
faults, vntill their letters be in all things like the copie letters.
And what letters they make the worst,To obserue all the bad letters and faults in writing. to make them
so oft ouer, in some voyde place of their booke, or some
waste paper, vntill those be as good as any of the rest, and
like the copie, as was said. Amongst others, to look specially
to these three letters together, f. g. h. and to m. which being
well made, do grace all the rest, & yet are commonly made
the worst of all.
                  Thus any one of the schollars,Any Schollar may helpe the Master. chiefly one of them who
write the best, may helpe the Master to direct the rest.
                  By these meanes the Schoole-master may bring many of

his Schollars to be very good pen-men,The meanest writers may bring many of their schollars to be good pen-men. and all generally
to some competent sufficiencie, to the credite of the
Schoole, the good contentment of the parents, and the
great benefit of the Schollars, though he cannot write well
himselfe, if hee can but onely thus farre forth direct, as to
cause his Schollars to follow these obseruations.
                  Hereby the Schooles also may be freed from hauing any
need of the Scriueners, which go about the country; at least,
which go vnder the names of Scriueners,To auoyde the euils by wandring Scriueners. and take vpon
them to teach to write; & do ofttimes very much hurt in the
places where they come. For they draw away the mindes of
many of the Schollars from their bookes; euen of all such
as cannot indure to take paines, nor haue any great loue of
learning and cause many, of good hope to leaue the school
vtterly. Besides that, very often, so soone as euer these Scriueners
are gone, the Schollars whom they haue taught,
doe forget what they seemed to haue gotten by them, vnlesse
they be kept to practice their writing daily.
                  So that all that cost and time is commonly lost; besides
the former inconueniences, that sundry by them lose
all the learning which they had gotten. Also most of the
younger sort, who seeme to write faire, and so leaue the
Schoole in a conceit of that which they haue gotten by the
Scriuener; yet doe write so false Orthography, as is loathsome
to see, and ridiculous to reade.
                  For these properties should be ioyned together in euery
pen-man,Things necessarily required in commendable writing. who would haue any approbation; to be able as
well to write a good stile (I meane to indite, and to expresse
his mind in some good forme of words, and true Orthographie)
as to write faire.
                  As for the vse of Scriueners in the common schooles, it
would be this (if any);The vse of Scriueners in the Grammar Schooles, what. eyther to make euery schollar his
booke of copies, to vse after the manner prescribed, vntill
such printed ones can be had: or else to set all the schollars
in a good way of writing for right framing their letters, and
the like. To do it onely at such times as the Master shall appoint;
that it may be without any great hinderance to the

schollars for their learning, & warily preuenting al the former
inconueniences. For schooles and good learning being such a
singular benefit, and so great a gift of God to Church & Common-wealth,
all hinderances would be wisely foreseene, and
heedfully preuented.
                  These are the speciall helps, which hitherto I haue learned,
for the direction of schollars in writing: and by these I am assured
vpon triall, that what is promised in this behalfe, may bee
effected through Gods blessing.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, these must needs be very profitable: yet my memory
being weake, and they many, I shall hardly thinke of
them to put them in practice. I pray you therfore repeat vnto
me againe in a word or two, which of them you take to be
the principall and of most continuall vse.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These I take to be the principall,☜ & almost the sum of
all;The sum of the principall and most necessary directions for writing, to be euer remembred: and therefore here shortly repeated that we may haue a briefe notion of them. & which would euer be had in memory: that the schollars
haue good pens, thin inke, faire & good copie books; & those
made fast to their bookes, to haue them euer laid close before
thē when they are to write fair; which wold be once euery day;
& then all of them together. That they haue their books ruled
strait & lightly, & that with ruling pens amongst al the yonger
sort: and that therein a care be had, that they euer touch both
the lines of the ruling pen with the bodies of their letters. Also
that they haue their faults shewed them, by pointing them to
the copie letters; and where their letters are vnlike to the copie,
thereto cause them to be amending them continually,
vntill they attain to write as faire as it. To call on them euer to
haue an eye to the copie, & to haue the fashions of the letters
in their minds. To take a delight in writing; striuing who shall
do the best: to this end, to let their hands glide lightly on the
paper; to striue to write very clean; to make minimes, and such
like letters sharp at tops & bottoms, or iust to the proportiō of
their copies: to hold their pens very low: their elbow somthing
neer their side: to keep their copies & books fair, vnblotted &
vnscrauled: to haue void places or waste papers for assaies, &c.
                  Most shortly, these three are almost all in all; good copies,
continual eying them wel, a delight in writing: although

I thinke it very necessary, that you bee acquainted with all the
former directions, as they are set downe at large, to vse them as
neede shall require. You may soone attaine the knowledge of
them, when you haue them written downe: the labour of learning
them will be nothing to you in regard of the benefit; and
much lesse in regard of the long search and obseruation, which
I haue vsed to finde them out.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It is true indeede; and I am the more beholden vnto
you: but giue me leaue this one word; that which you said euen
now, may seeme to make very much against the Scriueners.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Not at all;This maketh nothing against the honest Scriueners, but to preuent the abuse of shifters, and hurt to Schooles. it onlely helpeth to redresse the great abuse
by som shifters, who go vnder the name of Scriueners: for all
good Scriueners haue their callings and imployments, wherein
to serue to the profite and good of the Common-wealth, and
not vnto the hurt thereof. This onely may teach vs to preuent
and auoyde those intollerable abuses, & hurts to schooles
mentioned; whereof there hath beene, and is daily, so much
experience.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, I cannot but like of your answer; I my selfe haue
had some experience of the truth of the complaint: it is very
necessary that such euils should be preuented. Now therefore
that you haue thus shewed me how to make my schollars good
pen-men, and that they may grow therein, as in their schoole
learning; and thus prepared the way to our Grammar schoole:
let vs at length come to that which hath beene the speciall end
of my iourney, and wherin our chiefe trauell and imployment
lieth. A first let vs begin with the rudiments of the Grammar, I
meane the Accedence; wherein our first entrance is.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Very willingly: but first let me acquaint you with certaine
generall obseruations, which concerne our whole course
of teaching, and whereof we shall haue almost continuall vse;
lest we be troubled with repeating them often after.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It is well aduised, that wee may doe all things the
most shortly, and in the best and easiest order that wee can: I
pray you therefore shew vnto me what those generall obseruations
be.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               Of certaine generall Obseruations to be knowen of
Schoole masters, and practiced carefully in all
Grammar learning chiefely. And first
of causing all things to be done
with vnderstanding.
               
                  Phil.
                  FOr the generall Obseruations the first may be this.Schollars are to be taught to do all thing, with vnderstanding, and to know the matter before in generall.
1. That Schollars be taught to do all things with
vnderstanding; and to be able to giue a reason of euery
matter which they learne. And so in euery lecture
which they learne in any tongue, first to vnderstand
the matter of it, and the lesson will bee learned presently.
                  But before I speake any more of this, I pray you let
mee heare of you what course you haue taken in this point.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This first obseruation seemeth strange vnto me,The common course to doe all things without vnderstanding the reason of them or how to make vse of any thing.
at the very naming of it. I my selfe haue vsed onely this
course, and I thinke it to bee all that is done in most of
our countrey schooles; To giue Lectures to the seuerall
formes, or cause some schollar to doe it. And therin first
to reade them ouer their Lecture, then to construe them,
and in the lower formes to parse them. So when they come
to say; to heare them whether they can read, say without
book, construe and parse. More as I take it, is not much
vsed, for the vnderstanding and making vse of them.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I know it to be as you say; and do hold it to bee a
verie great defect in schooles generally:The defect hereof exceeding great. yea a farre greater
hinderance to learning, then that of letting them to
lose so many yeeres, before they begin to learne. For this
is a matter which of all other concerneth the credite of
schooles, and furthereth learning wonderfully; to teach
schollars to vnderstand whatsoeuer they learn, & to be able

to giue a reason of euery thing why it is so; and to doe this
from the lowest to the highest. My reasons are these:
                  1 Because if it were rightly knowen,To doe all things by reason, brings almost double learning. & constantly practiced
in schooles, it would bring forth very neere double so
much good and sound learning, as is now gotten cōmonly.
                  2 It would bring withall, so much ease, pleasure and delight,
both to all teachers & learners and also so much certainty,
& cause them to go forward with such cheerfulness,
boldness and contention, as will hardly be beleeued vntil it
be tried by experience. In a word; It would cause at things
to be gotten much more speedily, layed vp more safely, and
kept more surely in memory. Therefore, that olde rule is
true;
Legere & non intelligere negligere est.
                  
                  To read and not to vnderstand what wee read,To read without vnderstanding and knowledge how to make vse, is a neglect of all learning. or not to
know how to make vse of it, is nothing else but a neglect of
all good learning; and a meere abuse of the means & helps
to attaine the same. It is no other thing but a very losse of
our pretious time, and of all our labour and cost bestowed
therin, in regard of that which is read with vnderstanding.
                  We may see triall hereof sundry waies.
                  1 Let children be examined together;Triall of the difference between learning with vnderstanding & without 1. In schollars examined together, whereof one vnderstandeth, and can giue reasons of things, the other not. I meane such as
of whom one of them alone hath beene taught to do all
things by reason & with vnderstanding; so that he is able to
giue you a plaine reason, and make the right vse of euerie
thing, which he hath learned: the other haue learned only
to say without booke, to construe and parse; then mark the
difference. Although all these learn one and the same Author;
yet when they come to the triall, you would thinke
that one to haue all learning, when you heare him to giue a
reason of euery thing, and that he can make vse of al things;
all the rest to haue almost nothing at all, or at least nothing
in regard of that one so taught.
                  2 Proue it thus in getting learning:2. In getting a lesson, how to do it soonest, & in the best manner.
                  
                  Teach your schollar one lesson which you cause him to
vnderstand perfectly before; another of the same matter,
whereof hee vnderstandeth little or nothing: and then trie

whether he will not doe that, whereof he vnderstandeth the
meaning and reasons, almost in half the time, which the other
will require. And this also so, as you may euidently discerne
it, that hee will doe it with much more ease, certainty
and boldnesse, then he can do the other.
                  3 Wee our selues may make triall of it by our owne experience,3. In our owne experience construing or studying out any difficult place in any Author or tongue.
in construing any difficult peece of Latine, Greek,
or Hebrewe, or committing any thing to memorie; whether
if so be that we doe but vnderstand the matter of it before
perfectly, wee shall not do it in halfe the time and with
one halfe of the labour, that otherwise it would require.
                  Or if we would write or speake of any thing, let vs proue
it but thus: If we first vnderstand the matter wel and haue
it perfectly in our head, whether words to expresse our
mindes will not follow as of themselues.
                  To this very purpose, for confirming the truth hereof,
and to keepe a continuall remembrance of this point;
these three verses of Horace were worthie to be written in
letters of golde, and to be imprinted in the memorie of euery
one who is desirous to get the best learning: for so they
would indeed proue golden verses, and make vndoubtedly
golden times;

                        Scribendirectè sapere est & principium & fons:
                        Rem tibi Socraticae poterunt ostendere char
                              •
                           ae;
                        Verba
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            prouisam rem non inuita sequentur.
                     
                  
                  The meaning of the verses, I take it to be this: To attaine
to this facultie, to bee able to write or speake of anie
matter, and so to come to all excellent learning, the verie
first and chiefe fountaine, and that which is all in all, is to
vnderstand the matter wel in the first place. As for store of
matter, the writings of learned men (such as Socrates was)
will furnish you aboundantly therewith.
                  And when you haue the matter throughly in your head,
words will follow, as waters out of a fountaine, euen almost
naturally, to expresse your mind in any tongue, which you
studie in any right order.
                  
                     
This will be found to be true in Latine, Greeke, Hebrew,
and by a like reason in euery other tongue, and in euery facultie:
whether wee would write, speake, learne, resolue, or
remember and lay vp for euer.
                  This was a principall cause that made Tully,One chiefe cause why Virgil and others writ so eloquētly, because they were so ripe in vnderstanding, and had such store of matter. Ouid, Virgil,
and some others so to flowe in eloquence; and especially
Virgil, whom men worthily account the chiefe of all
latine Poets, because they did vnderstand so fully whatsoeuer
they writ of. I might instance this also in Preachers,
by our daily experience; of whom some are better able to
preach powerfully in two daies warning, and hauing words
at will, then other in two moneths; and all because the one
sort are so full of vnderstanding and matter, the other are
so barren thereof.
                  Thus in all these examples, euery man may see a plaine
demōstration of the truth of these verses of Horace, which
he no doubt did write vpon his owne experience, as euerie
man shall find, who will set himself to make triall. Proue &
confirme what tong soeuer your schollar learns,Trie. euen from
the first reading of English, if he can repeat you the matter,
or the sum of it, or haue it in his head, trie whether hee will
not haue the words presently. The plentifull experience
which I haue seene,They who find experience will be desirous to make others partakers. of the sweete delight and fruite of this
course, of causing children to doe all things with vnderstanding
and reason, compared with the fruitlesse toiles and
griefes of former times, do make me not only confident for
the thing, but also desirous to make all other partakers of
the benefit.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I do fully see the euidence of all that which you
haue said, and therfore I must needs be perswaded of it. I do
heartily thank God for it, and will indeuor my selfe to put it
in practice continually.It seemeth great difficulty for masters to teach their schollars to do all things with vnderstanding. Only here is the difficulty, how a
schoolemaster may do this, to teach his schollar so to proceed
with vnderstanding, and how to giue a reason of euery
matter which they learne, to make vse of all their learning.
                  Aboue all, how hee may beginne to fraught young

Schollars with all store of matter, as they goe on: this very
much passeth my skill. I should thinke my selfe most happy,
to obtaine this knowledge, if it possibly can be done.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Attend to those things which I shall relate, and I
haue no doubt, but I shall very much accomplish your desire
in this: for our whole conference, doth tend chiefly to
this end. As all learning is grounded on reason: so in euery
Chapter, I shall endeaur my selfe to manifest the reasons
of euery thing, and how you may teach others; so farre
forth, as hitherto the Lord hath made them knowne vnto
me. And more hereafter, as I shall learne more. The principall
meanes for their vnderstanding, is, by asking short
questions of the matter: for so they will vnderstand and any
thing, which they are to learne. But of that more hereafter
in the particular examples; and chiefly, Chapt. 24.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  If you haue done then with this, let vs goe forward
to your next generall obseruation; and so through
them all, as briefly as you can.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  My next obseruation is this:The second generall obseruation. that as I would haue
them to doe all things with vnderstanding; so to learne only
such bookes and matters, as whereof they may haue the
best vse,To learne only such things, as whereof they may haue good and perpetuall vse. and that perpetually in all their learning, or in their
whole life. For this is well knowne to euery one; that things
well learned in youth, will bee kept most surely all the life
long; because in that age they are most easily imprinted,
and sticke the longest in fresh memory. And for that cause,
children should spend no time vnfruitfully, in such books,
as whereof they cannot haue both very good and continuall
vse. This cannot be but a great folly, to mis-spend our
pretious time in such studies, whereof neither our selues
nor others can haue benefite after; or else in such, as the
knowledge whereof will vanish for want of practice: and
much more in those, which will corrupt and hurt in stead
of doing good.Filthy places in Poets omitted. And therefore all filthy places in the Poets
would be wisely passed ouer, or warily expounded. It were
well if there were an Index Expurgatorius, to purge out all
the filth out of these, by leauing it out, or changing it.
                  
                     
Third rule,3. To note all hard words, or matters worthy obseruation. and that generall for all Students, is this: that
whatsoeuer difficult words, or matters of speciall obseruation,
they doe reade in any Author, be marked out; I meane
all such words or things, as eyther are hard to them in the
learning of them, or which are of some speciall excellency,
or vse, worthy the noting: or which, after that they haue
beene a certaine time in construction, they haue not eyther
learned, or at least they knowe not where they haue learned
them.Manner of marking. For the marking of them, to doe it with little lines
vnder them, or aboue them, or against such partes of the
word wherein the difficulty lieth, or by some prickes, or
whatsoeuer letter or marke may best helpe to cal the knowledge
of the thing to remembrance; yet so much as may be,
without marring of their books. To doe this, to the end that
they may oft-times reade ouer these, or examine and meditate
of them more seriously, vntill that they be as perfect in
them, as in any of the rest of their bookes: for hauing these
then haue they all.
                  This would be vniuersall,This general in getting all learning. in getting all kind of learning;
after that children do grow to any discretion to marke such
things rightly: you will maruel (if you haue not made triall
of it) how much they will go through, & what sound knowledge
they will come vnto in any kinde of study; and how
soone by this helpe, more then they can do without it. And
when they haue once gotten it they may as easily keepe it, &
as surely, by oft-times running ouer those things, which are
so noted, aboue all the rest. This is the reason that you shall
haue the choysest bookes of most great learned men,The bookes of the best students thus noted. & the
notablest students all marked through thus, in all matters
eyther obscure, or of principall & most necessary vse. And
this is one chiefe meanes, whereby Schollars may haue the
difficultest things in their Authours so perfectly, as that
whensoeuer they shall be examined of a sudden, they shall
be very ready, to their great praise, and to the iust commendation
of the Schoole.To note books of dailyvse with inke. For the manner of noting, it is best
to note all schoole books with inke; & also all others, which
you would haue gotten advnguem, as we vse to say, or wherof

we would haue daily or long practice; because inke will
indure: neither wil such books be the worse for their noting,
but the better,Others with blacke leade thrust into a quill. they be noted with iudgement. But for all
other bookes, which you would haue faire againe at your
pleasure; note them with a pensil of black lead: for that you
may rub out againe when you will,How to rub it for
                           •
                        h againe. with the crums of new
wheate bread.
                  The very little ones, which reade but English, may
make some secret markes thus at euery hard word; though
but with some little dint with their naile: so that they doe
not marre their bookes.
                  Of this I shall speake more particularly in the manner
of parsing, Chapt. 9.
                  A fourth obseruation,4. To learne all so perfectly, as the former may be in stead of a Schoolmaster to the later. is this: That whatsoeuer books
or matter Schollars doe learne, after they beginne to learne
without booke; that they learne them so perfectly, and
holde them so surely, by daily repetition and examination,
that they may haue in their mindes such an absolute knowledge
of al the words, and matters which they haue learned;
as wheresoeuer they shall meete with the same againe, or
shall haue occasion to vse them, they may not neede to bee
driuen to learne them anew; but that they may tell of a sudden
where they haue learned them, or can repeat the place:
and so make their vse and benefit of them.
                  To teach the same things twise,Not to neede to teach the same things twise or thrise ouer. or thrise, is a double labour
and griefe: but to haue all things which they haue
learned, euer in readinesse is a singular benefit, and a rare
commendation. For besides the preuenting of all losse of
labour and time, it shall be to the great delight of all who
heare them tried, and the exceeding furtherance of their
continuall growth in all good learning.
                  And to effect this yet more fully;To tell where they haue learned euery hard word. acquaint them in all
their Lectures and exercises, some one of them or other,
who can tell first, to repeat where they haue learned euery
hard word: and that chiefly in their Grammar, if they haue
learned it there, to haue that exceeding perfect; and to
marke surely euery new word, according to the direction
which I haue before giuen.
                  
                     
A fift generall obseruation,5. That the whole Schoole be diuided into so few fourmes as may be. and which is not inferiour
to any of the former, for the good both of Masters and
Schollars, and the very great benefite of Schooles, is this:
that the whole Schoole be diuided into so few fourmes as
may be, of so many as can any way bee fitted to goe together:
though they be sixteene, or twenty, yea, forty in a
fourme, it is not the worse.
                  The reasons of it are most cleere.
                  1. In most things it is almost the same labour,Reasons: to teach
twenty,1. It is for most part the same labour, to teach twenty in a fourme, as to teach two. as to teach two: as in reading all Lectures and rules
vnto them, in examining all partes and Lectures. Like as it
is in Sermons, and Catechisings, where it is the same labour
to teach one, that it is to teach a thousand, if all can heare alike.
This is very generall, except in exercises of writing;
wherin also great aduantage may be gotten by this means,
if right order be obserued, as we shall shew after.
                  2. Secondly,2. The fewer fourmes, the more labour may be bestowed in examining euery title. the fewer fourmes there are, the more time
may be spent in each fourme; and more labour may be bestowed
in examining euery title necessary. Which worke
of continuall examination, is a notable quickner and nourisher
of all good learning; helping maruellously vnderstanding,
audacity, memory, and prouoking emulation of
the Schollars:Examination, a quickner of learning. and therfore a principall part of the Masters
labour, and of the time in the Schoole, would be imployed
in this.
                  3. By this meanes,Euery one of a fourme shall some way prouoke the others by this means. euery one of a fourme shall some way
prouoke, or incourage the rest of their fellowes. If they be
but dull, the rest will thinke to goe before them; but if they
be more pregnant and witty, or more painfull and diligent,
they shall put spirits into all the rest, and be as a spurre vnto
them. For there is in our nature an inbred desire to ayme
at the best, and to wish to equalize them in each commendable
quality; if there be right meanes of direction and
incouragement thereunto.
                  Also euery one of a fourme may some way helpe the rest:And euery one may helpe others.
for none are so dull, but they may happely remember some
thing, which none of the rest did.
                  
                     
This I haue seene by experience,Those who but reade, to be put together so many as can be. to be the very best way;
euen for those who but reade the Accedence, to put so many
of them into a fourm together, as may be: they wil both
further one another very much, in reading it quickly (each
helping and teaching others) and also they may sooner be
heard, when euery one need but to reade his piece of the
same lesson, the rest helping. Thus they will goe through
very fast, and be all ready to enter without booke together.
Trie, and finding the benefite, you will not alter.
                  6 A sixt generall obseruation,6, To haue a great care that none be discouraged. and of no lesse worth
then any of the former, may be this: That there be most
heedfull care, chiefly amongst all the youngest, that not
one of them be any way discouraged, eyther by bitternesse
of speech, or by taunting disgrace; or else by seuerity of
correction, to cause them to hate the Schoole before they
knowe it, or to distast good learning before they haue felt
the sweetnesse of it:But all to be prouoked by emulation and desire of praise. but in stead heereof, that all things in
Schooles be done by emulation, and honest contention,
through a wise commending in them euery thing, which
any way deserueth prayse, and by giuing preeminence in
place, or such like rewards. For that adage is not so auncient
as true; Laus excitat ingenium.
                  
                  There is no such a Whet-stone,Commendation the Whet-stone of the wit. to set an edge vpon a
good wit, or to incourage an ingenuous nature to learning
as praise is, as our learned Master Askam doth most rightly
affirme.
                  To this purpose that sentence of Tully were worthy to be
written in euery Schoole,A sentence of Tully worthy to be euer before the Masters eye. and to be set vp in such places,
where it might euer stand in the Masters eye, if it were possible;
that so euery teacher might at length be brought to
the continuall practice, of the good policy contained in it:
to wit, to bend all his endeauours to prouoke all his Schollars,
to striue incessantly, which of them shall carry away
the worthiest praise & commendation. The sentence is this;
                  Pueriefferuntur laetitiacum vicerint,Cic. 5. de finib. & pudet victos: vt
tamse accusari nolunt, quam cupiunt laudari: quos illi labores
non perferunt vt aequaliumprincipes sint?
                  
                     
Besides this also,This strift for Masteries is the most commendable play, and a chiefe meanes to make the Schoole Ludus literarius.
                      this same strift for these Masteries, and
for rewards of learning, is the most commendable play,
and the very high way to make the Schoole-house to bee
Ludus literarius, indeed a Schoole of play and pleasure
(as was said) and not of feare and bondage: although there
must bee alwaies a meete and louing feare, furthered by
wise seueritie, to maintaine authority, and to make it also
Ludus à non ludēdo, a place voyd of al fruitless play & loytering,
the better to be able to effect al this good wch we desire.
                  7. To the end that euery thing in the Schoole may be
thus done,7. All to haue their aduersaries, and so to be matched and placed, that all may be done by strift. by emulation and contention for praise; there
would be a carefull sorting, and matching euery one with
him, who is next vnto him in learning: for this is also a most
true prouerbe; Marcet sine aduersario virtus: Vertue looseth
the vigour and decayeth, where it hath no aduersarie.
So they would be placed as aduersaries, that they may contend
in all things, whether of them shall doe the better, and
beare the bell away. Thus the whole fourmes through the
Schoole, should be diuided also into two equall partes; to
striue alwaies, whether side of the fourme should get the victorie:
like as it is in games, at shooting, or the like. Experience
sheweth how this will prouoke them, to be preparing
and fitting for the victory. Euen as Archers will prepare
themselues by exercising, getting the best bowes & arrowes;
and then making first their choyse so equall as they can, afterwards
directing their fellows; thus striuing by all means,
whether side shal beat: so will it be here. But of this I shall
haue more fit occasion, to tell what I thinke, when we shall
speake of the manner of diuiding of the fourmes.
                  8. That we vse euer to appose the worst and most negligent
of each fourme aboue all the rest;8. To vse euer to appose the most negligent. though euery one
somthing, yet them principally. This wil make them more
carefull, & cause all to come on together in some good sort.
                  9. That from the first entrance they be taught to pronounce
euery thing audibly,9. Continuall care of pronunciation. leasurely, distinctly, & naturally;
sounding out specially the last syllable, that each
word may be fully vnderstood. But of this wee haue spoken

somwhat; & shal speake more in the due place, what a
grace sweete pronunciation giues vnto all learning, and
how the want of it doth altogether mar, or much deforme
the most excellent speech.
                  10. That they haue daily some speciall exercise of the
memory▪ by repearing somewhat without booke;10. To haue some exercise of the memory daily. as a part
in their rules the foure first daies in the weeke, the Lectures
of the weeke, or some part of them on the Friday, al the rules
of the weeke on the Saturday: besides matters of reports as
Apologues or fables, theames, disputations, and the like.
                  The reason is, because the daily practice hereof, is the only
means to make excellent memoryes;Reason of it for making excellent memories. so that the memory
be not ouerloaden. But for this matter of saying without
booke, how farre it is to be vsed, and what helpe may be had
to preuent the ouertoyling, & terrifying of Schollars with
it, and to supply some things better otherwise; I hope I shall
take a fitter place to speake of it hereafter.
                  11. That for whatsoeuer exercises they are to learne,11. To haue the best patternes, of all sorts.
they haue the best patternes to follow, which can be procured:
as in writing so for all kinde of learning, how to do
euery thing; because all learning is principally gotten by
a kinde of imitation, and arte doth imitate the most excellent
nature. The patternes being singular, so shall their work
proue in time, eyther to expresse their patterne very liuely,
or happely to go beyond it. Of this also we shall haue occasion
after to speake.
                  12. The Masters to be alwayes vigilant,12 The Masters continually to incourage themselues, and their Schollars. as good leaders;
to labour to a liuely cheerfulnes, to put life & spirit into the
children; & to incourage themselues in wel doing, by amending
whatsoeuer is amisse, & supplying each thing, wherein
they are defectiue (obseruing the daily growth of their
Schollars, remembring stil that worthy counsel, Tu ne cede
malis, sed contra audentiorito; and also euer calling to minde
whom they serue, and how their reward is with the Lord.
                  13. Constancy in good orders,13. Constancy in good orders, with a continuall demonstration of loue to the Schollars, to do all for their good. & exercises ought euer to
be kept inuiolable; with continual demonstration of loue
in the Masters towards the Schollars, & a desire to do them

the vttermost good. This shall ouercome the most froward
in time; and vsed with the rest, shal vndoubtedly bring
forth the fruit of their desires.
                  Though many moe directions might be added, yet we
will content ourselues with these for the present; as being
most generall and belonging to all which follow. Others
we shall adde, as we shall finde the fittest occasions.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Certainly Sir, these rules doe very much affect
and delight me, at this hearing of them; neyther can I easily
discerne which of them is most to bee preferred.
If you had giuen mee so many crownes, you could not
haue gratified mee more: I purpose to put them in practice
presently, that I may finde that sweete and pleasant
fruite of them, which I fully conceiue may bee attained by
them.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  If you take so much delight in the hearing of
them, I trust you shall doe much more in the proofe: and
therefore hauing finished these, we will now at length come
vnto the Accedence.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               How to make children perfect in the
ACCEDENCE.
               
                  Spoud.
                  FOR the Accidence then, I pray you acquaint mee
what you haue learned, how children may get it most
speedily; and how they may be made so very perfect
in it, as to answere so readily to any question thereof,
as you did affirme that they may; and to make the right
vse of it.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  You must euer first let me heare of you, what course

you haue taken, and what you thinke to bee ordinarie in
Schooles, and then I will supply whatsoeuer I haue learned;
for that all shall be the better conceiued.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  For reading ouer their Accedence,The vsuall mā
                        ner of learning to reade the Accedence. this is all that I
haue vsed; To let them reade it ouer euery one by himselfe
by lessons, as in reading other English: and so to heare
them one by one, as they can say. In the harder lessons to
reade it ouer before them. Thus I make them to reade ouer
their Accedence once or twise within the book, before they
doe get it without booke.
                  Secondly,The ordinarie manner of getting the Accedence without booke. for getting it without booke, I cause them to
doe likewise, and to say as oft as they can. To keepe that
which they haue learned, by weekely repetitions, and by
saying parts. And for the meaning, to teach it after by practise.
Now I pray you shew me your iudgement, and vouchsafe
me your help.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  My iudgement is, according to my experience,
that though this be the ordinary course,The wants in this course. yet it may be done
with farre greater ease, in lesse time and with much more
profit, to effect your desire: yea, to teach ten or twelue as
soon and readily as you shall teach one. Also to make them
more full of vnderstanding, that they shall be able to make
right vse of their rules, to enter into construction, and goe
forward readily together in construing, parsing & making
Latine. Whereas otherwise they must be taught the vnderstanding
and vse of it after: which shall be another labour,
and bee as if they had not learned it at all before. Now th
                        •
                     
meanes how all this may be effected are these:
                  1 For reading the Accedence.
                  So soone as they enter into the Accedence,The best means for learning to read the Accedence. put so many
of them into a fourm as you can well, to enter together; as
was shewed before. And therein first, reade them ouer
their lesson, telling them the meaning shortly, to make
them a little to vnderstand it: and so they will learne it much
sooner. Then let them one helpe another, as they will doe
learning together,Euer one to be reading, all the rest marking & helping. and euery one will draw on another; one
of them euer reading ouer the lesson, that all the rest may

heare, and the rest telling where he misseth; and so neuer idle
till all can read it. When they come to say, cause euerie
one of the fourm to read his peece in order, in like manner
the rest to help where he sticks.
                  By this meanes there will not bee much more labour
with twelue, then with one alone. Experience also wil shew,
that they will all goe forwarde more fast and surely then any
other way. And although that they goe faster forward,
and not so very perfectly as they thus read it first, yet they
will soone reade most readily, when they come to get without
booke.
                  When they haue once gone through it within booke,☞ let
them begin to learne it without booke.Learning the Accedence without book, to take but a little at once. Or else if they can
reade well before, you may let them learne to reade thus, as
they get without booke, and so doe both vnder one. But
then some howre or two would bee spent daily in the afternoon
in reading,This rule must be generall of all learning that seemeth hard & of things to be gotten perfectly; but here specially. or som day of the week separate therto: els
they will somewhat forget to read, because they reade but so
little on a day; which must be carefully preuēted. Therfore
it will not bee amisse to reade it ouer speedily once or twise
before. When they learne without book; let them vse this
Caueat especially; That they take but little at a time, so as
they may be able to get it quickly and well, and so go on to
a new lesson: for this will harten them exceedingly to take
paines, in reioicing how many lessons they haue learned
and how soone they haue learned each lesson; Wheras giuing
them ouermuch, it will put them out of heart, so that
they will either doe nothing at all, or with no life.
                  2 Before they goe in hand with a lesson, doe what you
can to make them to vnderstand the summe of the lesson
first, and the meaning of it: thus. 1. Reade them ouer
their lesson.☞ 2. Then shewe them the plaine meaning of
euerie thing so easily,To make them first to vnderstand their lectures & how. shortly and familiarly, as possibly
you can, and as you thinke that they can conceiue. After
propound all vnto them in short questions, and ask the questions
directly in order as they lie in the book answering
them first your selfe. Then if you will you may aske them

the same questions,☜ and let them answere them as you did
before,To let them answer the questions vpō their bookes. still looking vpon their bookes, when they aunswere.
                  To require them to aunswere so, will much incourage
them; because they shal find themselues able to doe it. The
moe the questions are, the shorter and plainer arising naturally
out of the words of the book, the sooner a great deale
will your children vnderstand them.
                  And therefore any long question is to be diuided into as
many short ones as you may, according to the parts of the
question. Hereby the dullest capacities will come to conceiue
the hardest questions in time, and proceed with more
facility; so that the masters doe enter them thus from the
beginning, stil causing them to vnderstand as they learne.
                  Here the masters must not be ashamed,Admonition to masters desirous to doe good, to be as the Nurses with little children. nor weary, to do
as the nurse with the child, as it were stammering and playing
with them, to seeke by all meanes to breede in the little
ones a loue of their masters, with delight in their bookes,
and a ioy that they can vnderstand; and also to the end to
nourish in them that emulation mentioned, to striue who
shall doe best. Neither is the wise master to stand with the
children about amending the Accedence, if he thinke anie
thing faulty or defectiue; but only to make them to vnderstand
the rules, as they are set downe in the booke: for this
they wil keep.Exāple how to make the child to vnderstand by shewing the meaning. To make this plain by example. To begin at
In Speech be, &c. First, read them over the words: Then
tell them for the meaning after this manner, or the like as
you please. The meaning is this; That in Speech which
men vtter, there is nothing but words to cal or know things
by, and setting or ioyning of words together. Like as it is
in our English tongue, so in the latine, & so in other tongues.
And of these words which make this speech, are not manie
parts or kindes, but onely eight parts of speech. For whatsoeuer
can be spoken belongeth to one of these eight parts.
They are either Nownes, or Pronowns, or Verbs, or one of
the rest. More shortly thus; There is not any word in any
language whatsoeuer, but it is either a Nown or a Pronown,
Verbe, &c.
                  
                     
Also of these eight parts, the fowre first onely are such
as may be declined. That is, such as each of them may bee
turned or framed diuerse waies, and haue diuers endings:
as Magister, magistri, magistro. Amo, amas, amat. The other
fowre last are vndeclined; that is, such as cannot bee
so turned, and haue but onely one ending: as, Hodie, cras,
&c.
                  
                  Then ask them questions according to the same,How by asking Questions. following
the words of the book, in this manner of the like, as you
thinke good.
                  
                     Q. How many parts of speech haue you? Or how many
parts are there in Speech?
                  
                     A. Eight.
                  
                     Q. Of these how many are declined, how many vndeclined?
So, which are declined, which vndeclined?
                  Afterwards to aske the same questions backe againe, the
last first. As, which parts of speech are vndeclined? Or how
many are vndeclined? So in the next.
                  
                     Q. What is a Nowne?
                  
                     A. A Nowne is the name of a thing.
                  
                     Q. Of what thing?
                  
                     A. Of such a thing as may bee seene, selt, heard, or vnderstood.
                  
                     Q. Giue me some examples of some such things?
                  
                     A. A hand, a house, goodnesse.
                  
                     Q. What is the name of a hand in Latine? Or what is latine
for a hand? what is latine for a house? and so forth.
                  Then aske the questions as it were backward thus:
                  
                     Q. What part of speech is that which is the name of a
thing, which may be seene, felt, heard, or vnderstood?
                  
                     A. A Nowne, &c.
                  Thus to goe forward in euery rule. 1. Reading it ouer
to the children. 2. Shewing the plaine meaning in as fewe
words as you can. 3. Propounding euery peece of it in a
short question, following the words of the booke, and answering
it your selfe out of the words of the booke. 4. Asking
the same questions of them, and trying how themselues

can aunswere them, still looking vpon their bookes.
Then let them goe in hand with getting it amongst themselues,
vntill they can say and answer the questions without
booke readily; the highest of the fourmes poasing the rest
vntil they can say. By this means it wil seem so easie to them,
that they will go to it most cheerfully, and get it much sooner
then you would imagine, both the vnderstanding and
the words: for the vnderstanding of the matter will presently
bring the words, as we sayd.
                  As they go forward,☞ striue to make them most perfect in
these things specially:In what points of the Accedence the chief labour would be bestowed with the children, to make them perfect in them.
                  
                  1 In knowing a Nowne, and how to discerne the Substantiue
from the Adiectiue. After in the signes of the Cases.
                  Then in declining the Articles, Hic, haec, hoc; euerie
Article by it selfe: as Nom, hic, Gen. huius. Dat, huic. Accus.
hunc. Ablat. hoc. &c. So in the Feminines. Nom. haec. Accus.
hanc. Abl. hac. &c.
                  
                  By beeing perfect in these Articles thus,Articles. they shall both
bee able to decline any Nowne much sooner, and to know
the right Gender for making Latine.
                  Also let them learne to decline both Latine and English
together;Declining English before Latine, Latine before Eng
                           •
                        lsh. I meane Latine before English, and English before
Latine, both in the Articles, and other examples
of Nownes, Pronownes and Verbes. As in the Articles
thus: Hic this Masculine, haec this Feminine, hoc this Neuter.
Gen. huius of this Masculine, Feminine, Neuter. Dat.
hui
                           •
                        , to this Masculine, Feminine, Neuter. Accus. hunc this
Masculine, hanc this Feminine, hoc this Neuter, Voc. caret.
Ablat. ab hoc from this Masculine, ab hac from this Feminine,
ab hoc from this Neuter. Or hic this Male, haec this Female,
hoc this Neuter, &c. or hoc this thing.
                  So the English before, if you will: Though in these Articles
it may suffice to decline the Latine first▪ so as before,
and in (is) and (qui) or the like.☜ This kinde of declining in
all examples following,Benefit of this declining. will be found such a helpe, as it will
hardly be thought, vntill it be tryed, both to speedie construing,

parsing, and making Latine, howsoeuer it may seem
at first childish, or but a toy, and of no moment. The Latine
before the English for construing. The English before
the Latine,Genders. for making Latine true. Then make them as
p
                        •
                     rfect in their Genders forwards and backwards. As what
Gender is hic, and hic what Gender? or what is the Article
of the Masculine Gender? so in the rest.
                  After these,☞ make them as ready in their Declensions, not
onely to knowe what Declension euery word is of;Seuerall terminations of the Declensions. but also
the seueral terminations of 
                        •
                     uery case in euery Declension,
both as they learn thē one by one, according to the booke,
and after to giue them together, when they haue learned
them all, and that in this manner as followeth.
                  The Genitiue case singular of the first in ae dipthong
                        •
                     as,
musae, the second in i, as Magistri, the third in is, as lapidis
&c. so thorough: and backward; the Gen. of the fift in ëi,
as meridiëi, of the fourth in us, as manus; the third in is, as
lapidis, &c.
                  
                  Then to decline perfectly euery example in each Declension,Declining the examples in each Declension.
in manner as the Articles: as for example;
                  
                     Musa a song, musae of a song, musae to a song, musam the
song, ô musa ô song, ab hac musa from a song, or from this
song. So in the Plurall number, musae songs, musarum of
songs, &c.
                  After, English first. A song musa, of a song musae, to a song
musae. &c. To giue them these signes, because they signifie
thus most commonly, though not alwaies. Then appose
them vntill they can giue readily any case either English to
Latine,☞ or Latine to English: which they will soone doe.
So in each Declension.Declining all the examples of all the Declensions together. After you may acquaint them
to decline all the examples of the Declensions together,
putting in Regnum also, because it differeth from Magister;
as Nominatiuo Musa, Magister, Regnum, Lapis, Manus,
Meridies: Gen. musae, magistri, regni, lapidis, manus,
meridi
                           ••
                        , &c. This will helpe them presently to ioine anie
Substantiues as they fall in the same case, or the Substantiues
and Adiectiues together.
                  
                     
So if you please, you may cause them to decline them so
with the English adioined, either before the latine or after.
The moe waies they are thus declined, to make them each
way perfect,Giuing th
                           •
                         bare terminations, the shortest way. the better they wil be learned, if time wil permit.
                  Of all other this is the shortest, and wherby they may be
most easily kept by them, who haue anie vnderstanding, to
giue the bare terminations alone together, as thus. Terminations
of the Genitiue singular. ae. i. is. us. ei. Datiue. ae. o.
i. ui. ei. &c.
                  
                  And those vsuall signes of the cases, as a, of, to, the, ô,
from. Thus to plie continual poasing, each day a little, vntill
they can giue you any termination, or 
                        •
                     ase in these examples.
English to Latine, or Latine to English.
                  After to doe the like in bonus;
                     The like i
                           •
                         
                        bonus.
                      thus: Bonus a good Masculine,
bona a good Feminine, bonum a good Neuter, &c. We
may English it after this manner, for the better vnderstanding
of the children: Or as wee can finde any more easie
waie.
                  After all these when they wex perfect in them;Declining of Substantiues and Adiectiues together. the declining
of Substantiues and Adiectiues, of all sorts together,
is of very great profit, either Latine alone together,
or Latine and English both together if you will.
                  And first the examples of the booke. As musa bona
a good muse, musae bonae of a good muse, musae bonae to a
good muse, &c.
                  
                     So Magister bonus, Magistri boni, &c. So Regnum bonum.
And lapis bonus, a good stone, lapidis boni, of a good
stone▪ or lapis durus, lapidis duri, &c. So manus foelix, manus
foelicis, manui foelici
                        •
                     , manum foelicem.
                  
                     Or meridies tristis, meridiei tristis, meridiei tristi, meridiem
tristem. &c.
                  And in which you obserue them to miss most ply those
vntill all be perfect.
                  When they are very cunning in these, then they are to be
acquainted with declining other words like their examples,
still keeping them to those patterns, where they miss. And
first the words set downe in the margents of their books against
each example.
                  
                     
Then other Substantiues and Adiectiues together. As
sylua s
                           •
                        nans, syluae sonantis, syluae sonanti, &c.
                  
                  
                     L
                           •
                        o magnus, a great lion, Leonis magni of a great Lion,
Leoni magno, to a great lion, &c.
                  Or English before. A great lion, Leo magnus, of a great
Lion, Leonis magni, &c.
                  Vnto these adioine the daily forming of comparisons:
as Gratus, gratior, gratissimus. Bonus, melior, optimus. So,
Foelix, foelicior, foelicissimus: first regular, then irregular or
out of rule.
                  Then do the like in the Pronownes,Chiefe examples in the Pronownes of most common vse. to make them to be
able to decline and giue them readily, English to Latine,
and Latine to English; like as the Nownes. As Ego, I. mei
of mee, &c. So backe againe. I, Ego. of mee, mei. to me,
mihi. Tu thou, tui of thee, and thou tu, of thee tui, &c.
Sui of himselfe or of themselues, sibi to himselfe, or to
themselues, se himselfe or themselues. Is he, ea shee, id
that thing, eius of that man, of that woman, of that thing, or
that matter.
                  
                     Qui which man, quae which woman, quod which thing,
cuius of which man, of which woman, of which thing; like
as you may say, hic this man, haec this woman, hoc this thing
&c. or hic this Masculine, &c.
                  In these two and (hic) it may suffice onely to decline Latine
before, as was sayd.
                  So to be very readie in the persons of the Pronouns,Persons of the Pronownes. both
to shewe what person euerie one is of: and to giue euerie
one both English to Latine, and Latine to English. As
when I say, giue your first person singular, Latine and English;
The child answereth Ego, I. or I, Ego. &c. so what person
euerie one is.
                  But in the Verbes aboue all, is your diligence to be shewed
in making them not only perfect in declining euery example
to be able to decline any Verb by thē; but more specially
in coniugating, and being readie to giue you the Latine
to the English, and English to the Latine in any person,
of any Moode, or Tense.
                  
                     
To effect this most speedily,How to come most speedily to be perfect in the verbes, which are a meane foundation▪ and wherin the greatest difficulty lyeth. teach them to say first the first
persons of one cōiugation alone, throgh the Actiue voyce,
both Latine before English, & English before Latin, thus:
Amo I loue amabam I loued or did loue, amaui I haue loued;
so through the Indicatiue mood. Then English first, thus: I
loue, Amo: I loued or did loue, amabam &c.
                  
                  And after withall to be able to run the terminations in euery
tense: as in amo, o, as, at, amus, atis, ant. In Amabam, bam,
bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant. And likewise the persons in English,
I, thou, he, we, yee, they, according to the terminations;
and then by apposing, they will presently answere any
of them.
                  As thus; aske the childe, I loue: he answereth amo: then
aske, they loue; he cannot tell. Bid him to runne the terminations
of Amo; he answereth o, as, at, amus, atis, ant:
then I say, giue now they loue: he answereth amant: so yee
loue, or we loue, &c.
                  So aske, I loued or did loue; he answereth Amabam: then
we loued or did loue: if he cannot tell, bid him to runne his
terminations, and he will answere, bam, bas, bat, bamus, batis,
bant. Then aske, How say you, we loued or did loue: he answereth
Amabamus. Afterwards in Doceo: so in the
rest.
                  When they come at the Passiue, let them doe the like:
and when they haue learned it through, then let them practice
to repeate Actiue and Passiue together thus: I loue,
Amo: I am loued, Amo
                           •
                        : I loued or did loue, Amabam:
I was loued, Amabar: I haue loued, Amaui: I haue beene loued,
amat us sum vel fui, &c.
                  
                  Then by posing the first persons, and running the terminations,
they will very soone giue any of the verbes in any
person.
                  They will by this meanes goe through all the coniugations,
and with this perfect readinesse, as soone as they
will learne to say them without booke, without any vnderstanding
at al if not sooner; so that they be wel applied. Yet
if this preuaile not as you desire, you may exercise them

to repeat al the persons through euery moode,These may be added if we wil
                           •
                         to make them more ready. and person,
by themselues, but chiefly the first persons: as, Amo, amabam,
amaui, amaueram, amabo: Am
                           •
                        m, amarem, amauerim,
amauissem, amauero: amare, amauisse, amaturum esse: amandi,
amando, amandum, &c.
                  
                  So in the second persons, Amas, amabas, &c.
                  
                  Or thus to coniugate those tenses together, which doe
come one of another: as Amo, amabam, amabo, amem, amarem,
amare.
                  
                  
                     So, Amaui, amaueram, amauerim, amauero, amauissem, amauisse.
                  This is accounted the speediest way; in examining here,
to appose the same tenses,The manner of apposing here. of the seuerall moodes together:
as the present tenses, I loue, Amo: Graunt I loue, Vtt
                           •
                        am
amem: I may or can loue, amem: when I loue, cum am
                           •
                        m.
                  
                  So in the Preterimperfect tenses.
                  To make them most perfect in this, practice them that
they can giue readily,Knowledge of the terminations. the terminations of the first persons,
first in the Indicatiue moode, in each tense; then how the
same tenses differ in the rest of the moodes,Comparing them together for memory sake, though they come not one of another. except the Imperatiue,
together with the signes of the tenses in English.
As for example: the termination o, in the Indicatiue mood
present tense, is in the three other moodes turned into em or
am; as amo is made amem, doceo doceam lego legam, audio audiam.
In the Preterimperfect tense, bam is turned into rem:
Preterperfect tense, i into rim: Preterpluperfect tense, ram
into sem: Future tense bo, or am, into ro.
                  
                  So in the Indicatiue moode, the terminations are these:
o, bam, i, ram, bo or am. In the other three are these answerable;
em or am, rem, rim, sem, ro.
                  
                  Though these be not one formed of another; yet comparing
them thus together, wil make the children to learne
them sooner by much.
                  Generall signes of the fiue tenses actiue, are; Doe, Did,
Haue, Shall or will.
                  Of the Passiue present tense, Am, Is, Are or Art. Imperfect
tense, Was, Were, Wert. Preterperfect tense, Haue beene.

Preterpluperfect tense, Had beene. Future tense, Shall or
Will be.
                  Signes of the moodes are set downe in the booke; the
Indicatiue hauing no signe: the other three hauing their
seuerall signes in English.
                  
                     
                        This little Table well thought on, makes
all most easie.
                        
                           Actiue voyce.
                           Passiue voyce.
                        
                        
                            
                           Signes
of the
tēses in
English.
                           Terminations
in latine
without
a signe.
                           Terminations
with a
signe.
                           Signes of
the tenses
in English.
                           Terminatiōs
in lat.
wthout
a sign.
                           Terminations
in latin
with a sign.
                        
                        
                           Present tense.
                           Do.
                           o.
                           em or
am.
                           Am, is,
are, art.
                           or.
                           er, (or) ar.
                        
                        
                           Preterimperfect
tense.
                           Did.
                           bam.
                           rem.
                           Was, were,
wert.
                           bar.
                           rer.
                        
                        
                           Preterperfect tense.
                           Haue.
                           i.
                           rim.
                           Haue
beene.
                           sū vel
fui.
                           sim vel
fu
                                 •
                              rim,
                        
                        
                           Preterpluperfect
tense.
                           Had.
                           ram.
                           sem.
                           Had been.
                           rā vel
fuerā.
                           essem vel
fuissem.
                        
                        
                           Future tense.
                           Shall or
will.
                           bo
am.
                           ro.
                           Shall or
will be.
                           ber.
ar.
                           crov
                                 •
                              i
fuero.
                        
                     
                  
                  For to make the childe to vnderstand this Table,For vnderstanding this Table. first
shew him these things vpon his booke, by comparing the
Actiue voyce with the Passiue, and the Indicatiue moode in
both, with the other moodes. After pose thus:
                  
                     Q. Do, without a signe of the moode, how must it end in
Latine?
                  A. In o.
                  
                     Q. Do, with a signe, how?
                  A. In em or am.
                  For example:
                  
                     
                     Q. I doe loue, or I loue?
                  A. Amo.
                  
                     Q. Graunt I loue.
                  A. Vtinam amem.
                  
                     Q. I may or can loue?
                  A. Amem.
                  
                     Q. When I loue?
                  A. Cum amem.
                  So in the Preterimperfect tense.
                  
                     Q. How say you Did, without a signe?
                  A. bam.
                  
                     Q. With a signe.
                  A. rem, as Amabam, amarem: Docebam, docerem. Haue,
without a singe. i. With a signe, rim; as Amaui, amauerim:
Docui, docuerim, &c.
                  
                  The shortest way of all,☞ and most easie for all of vnderstanding,The shortest way of all to repeat and keepe these.
is, oft to repeat the bare signes and terminations;
specially at such times, as when the younger sort are to
make Latine: and this daily then, vntill they be perfect, or
as shal be requisite, thus: Actiue signes, Do, Did, Haue, Had,
Shall or will. Passiue, Am, Is, Art, Was, Were, Wert, Haue bin,
Had bin, Shall or will be.
                  Terminations in Latine Indicat. or terminat. without a
signe, o, bam, i, ram, bo and am.
                     
                        Termin. with a signe,

                              em.
                              am.
                              rem, rim, sem, ro.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  So Actiue and Passiue together.

                        o, or. bam, bar. i, sum vel fui. ram, eram vel fueram.

                              bo, bor.
                              am, ar.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Em, er.
                        Am, ar.
                        rem, rer. rim. sim vel fuerim. sem, essem vel futissem. ro,
crouel fuero.
                     
                  
                  These gotten, all will be plaine; if you vse withall to cause
them to runne the tenses, as was said, with the signes of the
persons, thus: I, thou, he, we, ye, they: o, as, at, amus, at is,

ant. bam, bas, bat, bamus, batis, bant: so in any. And withall
to remember in what letters, or syllables euery person
ends, both in the Actiue and Passiue: as the first persons
Actiue, signifying (I) doe end commonly in o, am, em; im, or
i. as amo, amabam, amem, amaui, amauerim. The second
persons (or thou) in as, es, is, or sti: as amas, doces, legis,
amauisti. (hee) in at, et, it. (wee) in mus. (yee) in tis. (they)
in nt.
                  
                  So in the Passiue, (I) in or, ar, er, (thou) in ris, or like the
Actiue. (he) in tur. (we) in mur. (ye) in mini. (they) in ntur.
                  
                  By these the learners may haue a great light: and though
some of them be both in the Actiue and Passiue, and the
Imperatiue moode doe differ so as no certaine rules can be
giuen: yet they may be soone discerned and knowne. And
the perfect knowledge of the Terminations beeing the
speediest way to the getting the full vnderstanding, both
of Nounes and Verbs in euery tongue; these would be learned
first, and euer kept most surely.
                  The benefite also of this exquisite perfection in
Nounes and Verbes,No paines can be too great for perfect getting Nounes and Verbes. is so singular, for the speedy attayning
of the Latine tongue, as no paines in them can be
too great.
                  First, the very difficulty of the Latine tongue, is in these.
                  Secondly, these examples set downe in the booke, are
such liuely patternes of all Nounes and Verbes; that Schollars
being perfect in these, will soone be perfect in any other.
And for the other parts of speech, the very words are
most of them set downe in the Accedence; as Pronounes,
Aduerbes, Coniunctions, Prepositions: Participles, like the
Adiectiues.
                  So that these being gotten perfectly, the Latine tongue
may soone be attained in good maner; euen by the meanes
following: whereas without this perfection it is very difficult.
So that the learners shall still goe incertainly and fearefully.
                  Also by these meanes and helpes named, this readinesse
in them may be very speedily obtained; whereas

onely to be able to say them without booke, without this
vnderstanding, is to little purpose: and to learne them by
practice in construction, and in writing exercises alone, is
most long, hard and wearisome, both to Master and
Schollar.
                  My former toyle and griefe in these, aboue all other
things in Grammar (though I tried all wayes which I could
heare or deuise) with the ease and benefite in this way, maketh
me confident. For I haue found more profite by this
course in a moneth, then by all other in halfe a yeare. By
this practice also, it is most soone recouered when it is lost,
and most easily kept.
                  Yet my meaning is not to haue Schollars to stay ouerlong
to be so exquisite in them,Yet children not to stay ouerlong in these. before they go any further;
but to go on so fast as they can well, and to make them so
ready by daily practice; spending each day a quarter of an
houre, or more, in them, vntill they come to perfection.
                  This were not amisse, to be practiced sometimes also amongst
the elder schollars, which are not ready in them; as
also those comming from other Schooles, till they grow
perfect: here should be the beginning.
                  If yet a shorter way can be found out, we shall haue more
cause to reioyce thereof.
                  In the Participles, the chiefe care would be to make them
perfect▪
                     Participles. to know the seuerall tenses by their signes, and endings
English and Latine, as they are in the booke: for declining,
they are the same with the Nounes.
                  In the Aduerbs, Coniunctions, Prepositions & Interiections,Aduerbs, Coniunctions, Prepositions, Interiections.
they would be made so ready, as to giue English to Latine,
& Latine to English, and to tell of what kinds they are;
and also to what cases each preposition serueth: and these
specially.
                  Here it were to be wished (as I take it) that all the rest of the
Aduerbs,A want in the Aduerbs to be supplied. Coniunctions, & Interiections were also set down
in the Accedences; except only such Aduerbes as are deriued
of other words: by which words they may be knowne,
or by their accents or terminations.
                  
                     
Also that some rules were set downe for framing of these
deriued Aduerbes;Rules of deriuing Aduerbs necessary; and of the Latine in the Accedence Englished. and that all the rest of the Aduerbes
and Coniunctions, with all other wordes and sentences
through the Accedence, were Englished, like as the Prepositions
are.
                  Hereby all these Latine wordes would soone bee learned
perfectly, and proue a very great helpe, when children
come to construction: for then they should haue but onely
Nounes and Verbes to trouble them withall, as was said;
and those most easie to be knowne, by the meanes aboue
mentioned, and after.
                  For the English rules great care would bee had likewise,English rules.
to make Schollars very ready in them: for these rules of
themselues with a few other,Benefit of them well gotten. might serue for construction,
or making Latine. The perfect knowledge of them also,
will make the Latine rules easie, when your Schollars come
at them.
                  In teaching these rules, these two things would be obserued
generally:Generall obseruations in the English rules. first, That the Schollars learne to construe
each ensample; and that without booke. Experience teacheth,
that those which art apt, wil construe almost as soone
without the booke,1. To construe the examples. as vpon the booke, or as they will learne
them construed: here by they shal get so much Latin; beside
that it wil be a great helpe to the perfect vnderstanding, and
applying of them.2. To tell in what wordes the force of the examples doth lie. The second is, to marke out with some
speciall markes, those wordes in which the force of the examples
doth lie; as the words agreeing, or the word gouerning,
and the word gouerned, and to cause the children to
be able to tell them:See this more plainly, in examining the Syntax in Latine. and so euer in saying their rules without
book, to repeat ouer those wordes againe, in all the longer
examples. The rules or examples otherwise shall doe
them little good, because they know not how to make vse
of them.
                  But hereby they shall haue perpetuall and sure patternes
and warrants for parsing, making and trying Latine. I
shall shew this more plainly, when we come to the Syntax in
Latine.
                  
                     
These two things being obserued,To make them most perfect in the rules of the principal Verb. Concordes. haue a chiefe regard
in the rules, first, to make them perfect in the rule of finding
out the principall Verbe; secondly, in the Concords,
as being of continuall vse; thirdly, in the rules of gouernement.
                  And amongst those, to looke specially to the two first
rules,Relatiue Qui.
                      of the case of the Relatiue Qui: and namely, the latter
of them, viz. But when there commeth a Nom. case; for in
it Schollars most faile.
                  Also in all rules of gouernment, to make them able to
tell you presently where any rule is,Gouernments. Manner of examining in them and what cases such
wordes gouerne: as, Where beginnes the construction of
Substantiues? What cases they gouerne? How many rules
there are of them? Or asking thus; What case must your
latter of two Substantiues be? What case will such a word
gouerne? As Opus or Vsus, What cases doe they gouerne?
Where is the rule? So in the rules of the Adiectiues, and all
the rest throughout.
                  In posing, remember that which was first directed: to
marke carefully the drift of the whole rule, and so to propound
your question; or else to propound the whole rule
in a question. As thus: when two Substantiues come together,
betokening diuers things; what case must the latter
be? and why? or by what rule?
                  Furthermore, to the end to make your Schollars so very
ready in the Accedence,Other helpes to make Scholars ready in the Accedence. and to keepe it perfectly; besides
the learning all things so well as may be, there must be also,
first, daily repetitions and examinations; because of the
weaknesse of childrens memories:
                        
                           •
                        . Daily repetitions and examinations. that so by long custome
all may be imprinted in them.
                  Heerein cause your first enterers to repeate ouer
euery day, all that they haue learned; as they proceede
to learne more,☞ to diuide it into partes, to goe ouer all so oft
as time will permit. For them who haue learned all their
Accedence, I holde it best (according to the manner
of most Schooles) to diuide it into foure equall
partes, except the examples of the Verbes; and

to cause them to say a part euery of the fowre first dayes
of the weeke, to say ouer the vvhole each weeke once:
for the Verbes, how they specially would be parsed daily, I
spake before.
                  In hearing parts,Manner of hearing parts. aske them first the chiefe question or
questions of each rule in order; then make them euery one
say his rule or rules; and in all rules of construction, to answere
you in what words the force of the example lyeth,
both gouernour and gouerned; saying the gouernour
first. Where helpe is wanting, to doe it only in the hardest
and most necessary rules and questions, or where we know
them most defectiue: Or else only to repeate the rules and
examples in such sort as was shewed, without further examination.
                  Though, where there is helpe and time enough, it is far
the surest, to cause them to repeate the whole part, and to
examine each peece of it daily, though they say the lesse at
a time.2. The spending of a moneth or two to make the Accedence perfect, after it is learned ouer. Secondly, the spending of one moneth or two, after
they haue first learned ouer their Accedence, to make
them perfect thus euery way, will be time as well bestowed
as they can bestowe any; to preuent both the griefe and anger
of the Master after, and also the feare and punishment
of the Schollar.3. Some time separate daily to examine Nownes and Verbs. Thirdly, euerie daie some time would bee
separate, to the examining Nownes and Verbes; chiefely
the Verbes, vntill they could not be set in declining, coniugating,
giuing any termination, case or person.
                  This continuall practice of parsing,Constancy in poasing till vse bring surenesse. would bee constantly
kept as neede shall require, vntill by long vse children
growe to perfection and surenesse: Because the Accedence
thus gotten perfectly; and after in like maner the
rules of Nownes and Verbes in Propria qua maribus, Heteroclits
and in As in praesenti; the difficulty of learning is
past: so that verie children, with a little practice, will goe
forvvard vvith much cheerefulnesse, in construing, parsing,
making and proouing Latine, by the helps following.
                  Thus haue I set you downe so plainely as I can, how

the Accedence may be gotten most speedily and profitably,
to make all learning a play. Trie, and you will acknowledge
Gods blessing herein.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I acknowledge your kindnesse: I can make no
doubt of the courses; because, besides your experience,
I see so euident reason in euery part.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Put them in vre, and so you shall haue more full assurance,
and daily be helping to find out better, or to confirme
the pricipall of these.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               How to make Schollars perfect in the
Grammar.
               
                  Spoud.
                  I Intend to put them in practice forthwith: but in the
meane time as you haue thus louingly gone with mee,
to direct me, how to make the Accedence so plaine and
easie to my little ones; so I intreat you to point me out
the way, how they may proceed in the Grammar with like
happy successe.What is done ordinarily in Schooles in teaching Grammar. As for mine owne selfe, I haue onely vsed
to cause my schollars to learne it without booke, and a little
to construe it; and after, to make it as perfect as I can, by
oft saying Parts: Finally, in parsing their lectures to giue
the rules. This hath been all that I haue done.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I knowe that which you mention, to bee the most
that is done ordinarily: but to say without booke and construe
a little,What things are requisite to be done in learning Grammar. are smally auaileable, vnlesse your schollar be
able to shew the meaning and vse of his rules. Yea, it is very
requisite, that here also they should bee able to giue the
seuerall examples, and in what words the force of each example
lyeth; and so to apply the examples to the rules, to
the end that they may doe the like by them, in parsing, or
making Latine. And moreouer, in Nownes and Verbes, to

bee able not onely to decline them, and to giue English to
the Latine words; but the Latine words also to the English.
Grammar being made perfect in this manner, will make all
other their learning more easie and delightsome, and be as
a Dictionary in their heads, for many chiefe words: neither
will there any losse of time in it; especially this beeing
done as they learne it, and still gotten more perfectly by
such continuall repetitions and examinations. I haue had
experience in both.
                  To the end that they may thus get the Grammar with
most fruite and ease;To get the Grammar with most ease and fruite.
                  
                  1 Let them learne euery rule (I meane) those which are
commonly read in Schooles,To learne euery ordinary rule perfectly. and that perfectly as they goe
forward, together with the titles set before the rules, and the
summes of the rules which are set in the margents.With titles and summes.
                  
                  The manner of it I finde to be most direct thus, for all
the younger sort of enterers:Manner for enterers.
                  
                  Where you haue time enough,1. Reading their rules to them. in giuing them rules, do
as in the Accedence.
                  1. Reade them ouer their rule leasurely, and distinctly.
                  2. Construe it,2. Construing and shewing them the meaning. and then shew them the plaine meaning
of it, by applying the examples, as teaching them to decline
the words or the like. As I shall shewe after.
                  Or else for most ease and speedinesse in construing,☜ and
for lacke of leasure,How they may soonest learne to construe them. cause euery one of your Schollars to
haue a booke of the construing of Lillies rules, and each
to reade ouer his rule, so oft vpon that booke vntill he can
construe without it;Each Schollar to haue his cō
                        struing booke, and learne to construe by that. or else after a time, to trie how hee can
beate it out of himselfe, and be helped by that book where
hee sticketh.
                  By the helpe of these bookes, I finde that they will
learne to construe their rules much sooner, then they can
without,Benefit of the vse of Lillyes rules construed I take it by almost one halfe of the time; and
thereby gaine so much time, to bee imployed in other studies,
because they shall haue it euer before their eie without
any asking or searching:1. To gain one halfe of time in cōstruing them. wheras otherwise either their
Master or some other must tell them euery word, which

they cannot tell, or else they must turne to it in their Dictionaries,And free their Masters from much trouble, and the Schollar from much feare and toyle. Also some recouer their selues hauing forgot.
vntill they can construe: and that so oft as they
forget; which, what a toyle and hinderance it is to the Master,
and feare to the Schollar, euery one knoweth. From
all which they may bee freed hereby; and when they haue
forgot they may soonerecouer themselues againe. Finally,
they shall hereby increase daily in reading English, and
be furthered to write true Orthography in English, as they
grow in Latine. And so the Masters shall also be freed from
feare of that mischiefe,Increase in reading English. Masters freed from clamors of these little ones forgetting to
read English, when they first learne latine; and from the
clamours and accusations of their Parents in this behalfe,
spoken of before.
                  But here it were to be wished,Wherein the construing bookes, vnder correction, may be much helped & made more profitable. that those books of construing
Lillies rules were translated euer Grammatically;
the manner of which translation I shall shew after, with the
benefits of them: And also that not onely the Substantiue
and Adiectiue, Preposition and his case were euer construed
and set together, wheresoeuer they are to be taken together;This I thinke is in hand or finished.
but withal that euery word were Englished in the first,
proper, natural, and distinct signification. In which things
they oft faile,Necessary words to bee Englished in their proper significations. as in the Verbes chiefely: though of all other
things, that be more necessary, for Schollars, to know the
first and naturall signification; for the other then will soone
be learned, by reason and vse: or else som of the other most
vsual significations might be put in, in other letters, or with
notes to know them.
                  Thus the childe might goe surely forwarde, and haue a
certaine direction for the right and proper vse of euery
word, to bee more sure to him then any Dictionarie, all his
life long, either for construing or making Latine: Whereas
beeing set downe in generall significations not distinct,
they shall euer goe doubtfully & abuse the words: as when
traho, promo, haurio, are set downe euery one of them to
draw, without further distinction.
                  The benefit would be much more, if it were thus translated:
for then they might learne thereby not only to construe

truely, to vnderstand and goe truly; but also to make
and speake the same Latine: I meane, to answer easily to all
the rules, with the other benefits of Grammaticall translations.
                  When they can construe in some good sort,Learning the rules without booke. and vnderstand
(as was sayde) then let them get without booke perfectly.
                  In getting without book,☜ when they can read it perfectly,Helps for getting without book all things which they learne in verse.
they may bee much helped thus, in all things which they
learne in verse; to reade them ouer in a kinde of singing
voyce, and after the manner of the running of the verse;
oft tuning over one verse vntil they can say that, then another;
and so forward: which they will do presently, if the
Master do but reade them so before them.
                  Also,So repeating the Rules in verse. to say these rules at parts sometimes, after the same
manner of scanning, or running as a verse, shall make them
both more easily kept, and bee a good helpe for right pronuntiation
of quantities, and to prepare them the more easily
to make a verse, for authorities and the like.
                  When they can say perfectly without book,Construing without book. then (if you
please) you may cause all those who are any thing apt and
pregnant, to learne to construe also without booke: which
they will do very quickly, with a little reading ouer and ouer,
vpon the construing booke; and almost as soone as
they will construe vpon the booke.
                  By this meanes they will bee able presently to giue not
onely the English to the Latine,Benefit of construing without booke. but also the Latine to the
English, of any word in the rule, to be perfect thereby, and
to keep all more firmly.
                  Or where leasure is wanting,Where leasure is wanting how to doe. among the elder sort,And in the elder which☜
are well entred in the rules; they may first learne without
booke, then to construe, both vpon the book and without:
Or to construe first. It is not very materiall: but, as
themselues doe finde that they can get it most easily, at the
Masters discretion.
                  Although for all the first enterers and younger sort,The surest way for young beginners.
I finde it the surest vvaie, vvhere the Maisters leasure

will serue, to cause them first to vnderstand the rule and the
meaning of it, by a short opening or expressing the sum of
it, and then by questions in English, as I directed before:
All of the learners looking vpon their bookes as hee readeth
vnto them; that they may see the questions and answeres
in their books, eyther wholly, or the most part therof.
                  And when they can aunswere in English, looking vpon
their books, or do vnderstand the rule; then to learne to
construe it of themselues, and to get it without booke.
                  After,☞ ar the saying of their rules, when they haue sayde
without booke and construed;At saying of rules how to examine, to cause them to answere any question. to labour especially to
cause them to be able to aunswere, without book, each part
of the rule, and that both in English and Latine together,
after they are a little entered; that with the meaning and
English, you may beate the Latine into their heads also, to
helpe to prepare them to speake and perse in latine.
                  Let the manner of the appoasing be here,Manner of appoasing. as in the Accedence,
viz. by short questions, propounded vnto them,
arising directly out of the words of the booke, either out
of the summe and title of the rule set before it, or set in the
margent euer against it, or out of the very words of the
rule; and withall, the examples of the rule, and how to apply
them to the seuerall rules.
                  I will set you downe an example or two more at large,Exāple of making the rules 
                           〈…〉
                        .
that you or any may doe the like the more easily. To begin
at Propria quae maribus:
                     Propria quae maribus. first, you haue the Title before
Regulae generales propriorum. Out of which, you may
shewe them thus;Title of it. That according to the order of their Accedence,
as the first part of speech is a Nowne, so here are
rules first of Nownes: And as their Accedence hath first
the Substantiue then the Adiectiue, so here begin rules first
of the Substantiues, after of the Adiectiues. Againe, as the
Substantiue is either Proper or Cōmon; so here the rules of
Proper Nowns are first set downe, wherby to know the Genders
of them; and after of the Common Nowns called Appellatiues.
You may also point them in their book, where

each of these begin: they will presently conceiue of them,
being first perfect in their Accedence.
                  Then that the rules of Proper names, are of Masculines,
or Feminines: Or all Proper Nownes are either of the
Masculine or of the Feminine Gender, vnlesse they be excepted.
                  Also all Proper Nownes which goe vnder the names of
Males or Hees (as wee call them) are the Masculine Gender.
Then teach them according to the margent, that of those
there are fiue kindes, which goe vnder the names of Males
or Hees. As names of Gods, men, floods or riuers, moneths,
windes.
                  So all proper Nowns or names of Females or Shees, are
the Feminine Gender. And of those are likewise fiue
kinds: That is; names of Goddesses, Women, Cities, Regions
or countreys, Islands, &c.
                  Then appoase after the same manner,Appo
                           •
                        sing after the same manner, to help the weakest teacher: for whom I haue set down the moe examples. keeping strictly
the words of the booke, as was sayd; onely putting in here
or there, a word or two, to make the question; which by
oft repeating, they will easily vnderstand. As thus, out of
the words set before the rule: Or in the like manner;
                  
                     Q. Where begin your generall rules of Proper Nownes?
Vbi incipiunt regulae generales propriorum?
                  
                  
                     A. Propria quae maribus.☜
                  
                  
                     Q.
                     This poasing in Latine if it be ouer-hard to the enterers at first, may be vsed after a time in examining their parts. How many generall rules are there of proper Nowns?
Quot sunt regulae generales propriorum?
                  
                  A. Two: Duae.
                  
                     Q. What is your first rule? Quae est primaregula?
                  
                  
                     A. Propria quae maribus. &c.
                  Then out of the margent thus:
                  
                     Q. How many kinds of Proper names are there of the
Masculine gender? Quot sunt gener a propriorum nominum
masculinigeneris?
                  
                  
                     A. Quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fiue: Diuorum, virorum, fluuiorum, mensium,
ventorum.Examining out of the margent. 
                     Or as they are set in the margent. Mascula sunt
nomina Diuorum, virorum, fluuiorum, mensium, ventorum.
Names of Gods, men, floods or riuers, moneths, winds.
                  
                  
                     
After,Examining out of the words of the rule. out of the words of the rule, Propria quae maribus
tribuuntur, &c. you may propound your questions thus;
                  Q. Cuius generis dicas, Propria quae maribus tribuuntur?
What Gender are all Nownes, or names of Hees, or of the
Male kind. R. Mascula, or masculini generis.
                  
                     Q. Cuius generis sunt nomina Diuorum? R. Masculini.
                  Q.Manner of appoasing the examples of the rules. 
                     Quomodo dicis latinè, The God of Battaile?
                  R. Mars, hic Mars, Martis.
                  Q. The god of wine, quomodo dicis?
                  
                     R. Bacchus, hic Bacchus Bacchi, &c.
                  
                     Q. Per quam regulam? R. Propria quae maribus.
                  In the fewer words you can do it,☞ for breuitie, is the better,Fewest words best.
and that you may go ouer the more. Or if you think it
to be too hard for children, to answer in Latine at first, and
that it is best to do it only in English;☞ you may do it following
the same order.To oppose only in English if children be too weak to answer in Latine. As in the next rule, Propria Foemineum,
onely asking thus;
                  
                     Q. What gender are proper names of Females, or Shees?
How many kindes are there of them? Where is the rule for
them?Manner of the questions in English, at Propria Foemineum.
                      What exceptions are there from that generall rule?
Or, how many Masculine Cities haue you? How many Neuter
Cities? How many Masculine and Neuter Cities?
                  So in the next rule,Appell, Arborū. 
                     Appellatiua Arborum, to ask thus or
the like;
                  Where begin your rules of Appellatiues, or Common
Nownes?
                  How many kinds of Appellatiues haue you? Or how many
sorts of rules haue you for Appellatiues?

                        A. Three: of

                              Trees,
                              Epicenes,
                              The rest.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  What gender are names of trees? What exceptions? Or
how many Masculine trees haue you? How many Newters,
trees? So of Epicens.
                  Where is your rule of words of the Epicene Gender? How
many kindes haue you of words, or Names, of the Epicene
gender?

                        
                        A. Three: of

                              Birds,
                              Beasts,
                              Fishes.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  How know you the Gender in the Epicens?
                  What Gender is euery Noune that endeth in um?
                  
                  How know you the Gender in all Appellatiues?
                  Then the speciall rules,Examining of the speciall rules. thus, or the like: How many speciall
rules of Nounes Appellatiues haue you? Ans. Three:
The first, of Nounes not increasing; the second, of Nounes
increasing acute, commonly called long; the third, of
Nounes increasing, graue or short, as wee call it.
                  What Genders each of these are of? Where are the rules
for them? What examples haue you of them? So to giue the
meaning, and applye the examples. How many exceptions
there are from euery one of these rules? As, how many
rules of Masculines except; so of Feminines or Neuters except.
Or thus: Of what Genders are all Nounes, not increasing
in the Genitiue case, as Capra, caprae: Or all Nounes like
Musa, musae? So what Genders are all Nounes of the second
speciall rule? or all Nounes increasing acute, as Pietas, pietatis.
What Gender are all Nounes increasing, graue, or flat,
or short? as Sanguis, sangumis. And how many rules haue
you of Masculines except from the first speciall rule? or of
Masculines not increasing in the Genitiue case? How many
rules haue you of long Masculines, or Masculines increasing
acute, excepted from the second speciall rule? Or of Feminines
increasing short, except from the thrid speciall rule?
Or yet more plainly thus: Where is your general rule of all
like Capra, caprae: or musa, musae? Or of all like Magister,
magistri: or Dominus, domin.: venter ventris. Or of wordes
ending in er, os, us, not increasing. Or where is your rule of
all like Virtus, virtutis? Or like Sanguis, sanguinis? And
of what Genders they are of.
                  For the exceptions,Examining the Exceptions. you may appose thus: Where is your
rule of Neuters not increasing? Of Neuters increasing, acute
or long? Of Neuters increasing, flat or short? Thus of
Doubtfuls, Commons.
                  
                     
Or posing the examples,Posing by asking first the examples. to aske what is Latine for any
word, which is in any of the rules; and then to cause them
to decline the word, the Nom. and Genit. case, and to tell the
rule, as was shewed before: as,
                  What is Latine for a cloude?
                  A. Nubes, haec nubes, nubis, &c.
                  
                     Q. By what rule?☞ What is the meaning of that rule?The shortest course. Thus
you shall receiue diuers benefits together
                  Or thus only; when they haue said any rule, to aske them
what is the meaning of that rule, and to giue the examples.
                  So in the Adiectiues, to aske thus or the like:Examining the Adiectiues.
                  
                  Where begin the rules of the Adiectiues?
                  Where is the rule of all like Foelix? Adiectiua vnam. So of
all like Tristis? Sub gemina, &c. Of all like Bonus? At si tres
&c. Of Adiectiues of two Articles like Substantiues? At
sunt quae flexu. &c. Of Adiectiues of a strange declining?
Haec proprium quendaem &c.
                  
                  For all declining to make them very perfect in the Genitiue
case,How to make Schollars perfect in the Genitiue cases. you may practice them thus; sometimes to repeate
the Nominatiue & the Genitiue case together; as in Propria
qua maribus to run, thus: Mars, Martis, Bacchus, Bacchi, Apollo,
Apollinis, Cato, Catonis: So in euery rule when time will
permit.
                  And chiefly appose them often in the most difficult,To appose the hardest ofttimes. being
noted with some marke: as, Opus, Opuntis, Persis, Persidis.
Barbiton, Barbiti. Senex, senis. Var, viri, Bes, bessis. Cres.
Cretis. Pres, predis. Semis, semissis, and the like. The rest they
will doe readily of themselues.
                  In the Heteroclites to do the like,Examining in the Heteroclites. first to shew them what
they are, viz. Nounes of another kinde of declining: and
then the three seueral kinds of them according to the titles,

                        Variantiagenus.
                        Defectiua.
                        Redundantia:
                     
                  
                  Eyther such as change their declension, or want some
thing, or haue too much. And so the seuerall rules of euery
one.
                  
                     
Then the seuerall rules to be examined particularly; like
as in Propria quae maribus: to vnderstand euery peece: and in
them speedily to looke to the Margents: to be able readily
to giue the rules to them.
                  And to make them able to repeate the Sums and Margents
in order.
                  So to giue any rule thereby: as when I aske, Where is
your rule
                        •
                      of Ap
                           •
                        ots, Monoptots, Diptots, Triptots? Of those
which want the Vocatiue case, or Defecta vocatiuo, or propria
defecta plurali? or the like.
                  In the Verbes likewise shew them the order,Making the Verbes plaine. that the
rules are of Preterperfect tenses and Supines: and those
first of simple Verbes in o. Then compounds after of Verbs
in or. Last, of those that differ in their Preterperfect tenses,
or Supines.
                  In the simple Verbes, first are rules of the first Coniugation,
then the second, so in order.
                  After cause them to tell by the summes and Margents,Examining in them.
where euery rule standeth: as where are verbes of the first
Coniugation, so in the rest.
                  Practice them also to answere thus:☜ The Present tense,
Preterperfect tense, Infinitiue moode and first Supine together.
As if I aske, How say you To swim? he answereth, No.
No, naui, nare, natum. So To wash, Lauo, laut, lauare, lautum.
Because these being known al the rest are presently known;
and to do it also for breuity sake: especially examine those
Verbes often, which haue two Preterperfect tenses, or two
Supines, or moe; and would therefore haue speciall marks:
as vello, velli, & v
                           ••
                        lsi vellere, vulsum.
                  
                  For the Syntax in Latine,☜ though the English rules, with
a few moe ad
                        •
                     ed to them,Good vse of the Syntax in Latine. might serue for resoluing any
construction, or for making Latin; and so many do thinke
them needlesse altogether; others do vse to teach only the
rules thereof, and one example only in each rule; yet there
may be very good vse of them all, rightly vnderstood, and
specially of the seuerall examples rightly applied: that
Schollars by them may goe surely, hauing seuerall examples

to warrant almost euery thing in construction; which
by the bare rule, and one example they could not but goe
very doubtfully. Besides that, therby they also get so much
good Latine of the best Authours, and be helped much for
parsing by the wordes of the rule.
                  In examining the Syntax,Examining the Syntax for help of the weakest likewise. it is the best to doe it in Latine:
for by that time they will be well able to doe it so, if they be
rightly trained vp.All who wish well to poore countrey-Schooles, will pardon my indeauour to be so plain, thogh in so many examples. And it will much helpe them, as was
said, to speake and to parse in Latine: yet still asking the
question also in English, and answering both in English and
Latine, so farre as neeede is; as thus, out of the words:
                  
                     Q. Quot sunt Concordantiae?
                  
                     R. Tres.
                  
                     Q. Quae est concordantia prima?
                  
                     R. Nominatiui & verbi.
                  
                     Q. Verbum personale cum quo cohaeret?
                  
                     R. Cum Nominatiuo.
                  
                     Q. In quibus cohaeret Verbum personale cum Nominatiuo?
                  
                     R. Numero & persona.
                  
                     Q. Daexemplum.
                  
                     R. Nunquam sera est adbonos mores via.
                  
                  
                     Q. Applica hoc exemplum: vel, Ostende voces, in quibus est
vis regulae.
                  R. Via est.
                  
                     Q. Da aliud exemplum.
                  
                     R. Fortuna nunquam perpetuò est bona.
                  
                     Q. Applica.
                  
                     R. Fortuna est.
                  
                     Q. Repete regulam.
                  
                     R. Verbum personale cohaeret cum Nominatiuo, &c.
                  Q. Dic Anglicè. R. A Verbe personall agreeth, &c.
In the next rule, Nominatiuus primae vel secundae personae
&c.
                  
                  
                     Q. Vtrum exprimitur Nominatiuus primae vel secundae
personae?
                  
                     R. Rarissimè.
                  
                     Q. Quibus de causis exprimitur?
                  
                     
                     R. Causa discretionis, aut Emphasis gratia,
                  
                     Q. Da xemplum vbi exprimitur causa discretionis.
                  
                     R Vos damnastis.
                  
                     Q. Quid intelligis per vos?
                  
                     R. Vos damnastis, & nemo praeterea, &c.
                  So likewise in the rules of gouernment:Examining in the rules of gouernement. as at Adiectiua
quae desiderium, &c.
                  
                  
                     Q. Adiectiua quae significant desiderium, notitiam, memoriam,
&c. quem casum adsciscunt?
                  
                     R. Genitiuum.
                  
                     Q. Da regulam.
                  
                     R. Adiectina quae desiderium, &c.
                  
                     Q. Da exemplum.
                  
                     R. Est natura hominuus nouitatis avida.
                  
                  
                     Q. Applica.
                  R. Auida nouitatis.
                  To helpe the examining the Syntax the better,Helpes to speedie examining and applying the force of the examples. those
wordes also (in euery example throughout the Grammar)
would be marked, in which the force of the example lieth;
as was aduised in the English rules; The word gouerning,
or more principall, with two marks, or with a double mark:
the word gouerned with one; or at least the chiefe word or
gouernor with some letter or marke distinct frō the gouerned.
And then euer in saying the ensample,In saying their rules, after each example repeated, to repeate those words, in which the force of the example heth. to repeate again
those wordes onely, in which the force of the example lyeth;
the gouernour or principall first: as in the English
rules, so here. As thus; in saying, Est natura hominum nouitatis
auida; to repeate againe, auida nouitatis. Mens futuri
praescia; praescia futuri. Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa
pecunia crescit; amor nummi, &c.
                  
                  By this kinde of repeating,Benefit of this kinde of repeating. or continuall apposing where
they misse, by asking thus, Da exemplum, vbi est vis regulae;
They will become exceeding cunning to vnderstand and
apply rightly any example of the Grammar, so fast as they
can repeate it; or to apply any other thereunto; or else to
make the like: that so they may euer haue sure patternes for
all parsing, making and trying Latin.
                  
                     
Though this may be though an easie matter,Difficulty hereof, vnlesse they be thus taught. and that
euery Schollar can doe it; yet trie it, and it will be found
cleane contrary almost throughout, and to trouble many
weake Masters to apply many of them aright. It is a matter
most necessary: because the very life of the examples is
in these; and the profite will doubly counteruaile the
paines.
                  With a little practice, they will almost as soone say their
rules this way, applying each example, as without.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I discerne euidently the great benefite and furtherance
to Schollars, to be able to repeate the examples
of euery rule, in such sort as you haue shewed, for continuall
vse both in parsing, and in making and writing Latine
surely; as also to haue the summes of the rules which are in
the Margents, and before the rules, perfectly: but children
cannot possibly get these, vnlesse their bookes bee
marked so, as you directed.
                  And for the Masters to marke all their Grammars so, it is
an infinite toyle,The trouble and inconuenience in marking the books, chiefly by Schollars. and hinderance to him: to marke some one,
and to cause the Schollars to marke theirs thereby; they
will doe them so falsly, as will oft more hinder then further,
besides the trouble in it: also the summes of the Margents
are very defectiue.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For the supplying of all this,The Grammars are procured 
                           •
                        o be thus printed, as to be most easie and profitable for schooles, without inconuenience. and the auoyding
of all these inconueniences, and other like, and for making
our Grammar farre more easie and profitable to the
Schollars, without any alteration; the Grammars are
procured to bee so printed, as to be most plaine herein: all
the words wherin the force of the examples doth lie, being
printed in differing letters; that the least childe may bee
able to discerne them, and so to apply and repeate them:
and also the Margents made more perfect. What is missed
or defectiue herein, shall (as I hope) bee supplyed hereafter.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, al Schooles must needs hereby receiue an exceeding
benefit; as I see plainly by that which you haue shewed
for the vse of them. But I pray you proceede, and let

me heare what other helpes you haue, for examining your
Schollars, so as they may fully vnderstand their rules.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Other helpes for the examination and vnderstanding☜
the rules,Other helpes to examine and vnderstand the rules. are these;
                  1. Where they cannot vnderstand any question, or answere;
remember that, to teach them to vnderstand, by repeating
English and Latine together,How to make them to vnderstand and answere any question in Latine. vntill they fully vnderstand
it. For, as was said before, if they haue the meaning
in their heads, wordes, with oft repeating, will easily bee
gotten to vtter their minds, especially hauing them in their
bookes.
                  2 Also this may further to vnderstanding,To giue English rules to the Latine. to cause them
to be able to giue the English rules, answering to euery Latine
rule, of those which haue English rules; to set markes
vpon those Latine rules, which haue no English: and to answere
to them that they haue no rule, but to be able to giue
the meaning.
                  3 These meanes may also much profite to the easie getting,☜
full vnderstanding,Other helps to get the rules easily, and to keepe them perfectly; repeating the Titles and Margents in a continued speech. and perfect keeping of the rules;
oft to reade ouer, and keepe perfectly the summes of the
rules, which are eyther set before them, or in the margents;
as was noted so to repeate them in order. Thus to be able to
report all the summe; like as of the Accedence, so of the
Grammar, as in a narration or continued speech, as thus:
                  Regulae generales propriorum, Mascula sunt nomina Diuorum.
Virorum, Fluuiorum, Mensium, ventorum. Foeminina.
Dearum, Mulierū, Vrbium, Regionum, Insularum. Exceptio.
Regulae generales appellatiuorū. Arborū. Epicoena. Volncrum,
ferarum, piscium. Exceptio generalis. Vsus trium regularum
specialium. Prima regula specialis, &c.
                  So to know to giue readily the beginning of euery rule in
order;☜ as,To repeate the beginnings of the rules in a continued speech. 
                     Propria quae maribus. Propria foemineum. Excipienda
tamen quaedam sunt, &c. Appellatiua arborum crunt, &c.
                  
                  By these meanes they will be able both to answere the
questions in Latine, with a very few other words: and also to
giue any rule presently when but the sum is demaunded or
any word belonging vnto it,Benefits of these. to tell where the rule is, and to
begin it.
                  
                     
To hauean Idaea or generall notion of all in their heads,Idaea.
as if it were before their faces; which Idaea doth make any
learning most easie, eyther to be gotten or kept.
                  Hereby also that shorter examination and repetition of
parts,☞ may sometimes serue where time or helpe is wanting;Shorter examination and repetition.
and in parsing their Lectures, to rid twise so fast, when they
can in a word signifie a rule, eyther by the word in the Margent,
or before the rule, or by the beginning of the rule.
                  As to say in parsing, It is so, by the rule of the first concord:
or per concordantiam Nominatiui & Verbi &c. Per
regulam Accusatiui ante verbum infinitum, &c. Or to repeate
onely a word or two of the beginning of the rule; as Verba
infiniti modi, &c. or the like.
                  To this end it were to be wished that the summes of the
rules were set more perfectly in the margents,Summes to be perfected. in a word or
two in all the Syntax,This is reported to haue his Master Bruns-words order. as they are in the Nounes, to haue
some speciall name to be called by: as, Adiectiua desiderij,
verbalia in ax. Nomina 
                           •
                        artitiua; & the like.
                  In hearing parts in straights of time,☞ thus we may examine
only in those places where we most suspect their negligence:Helpe in hearing parts in straights of time.
asking first the summe of the rule, with an example
in it; and then to cause him whom you examine, to say
that rule. Or to aske only an example of the rule, and cause
them to apply it, and to giue the rule.
                  I haue set down all these,To vse the most profitable that we may take and vse which
we finde most profitable. The shorter the better, as was aduised;
so that we make sure that they doe fully vnderstand
the rule, and can make vse of it.
                  One rule, so learned with vnderstanding, is more profitable,The profite of rules thus learned.
then if they could say euery word in a hundreth; and
could but onely repeat them ouer as parats, without any
knowledge to make the right vse thereof.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir▪ I do like very well of these things which you
haue said; yet for the helping of my memory and practice,
tell me againe shortly, which you account to be the principall:
wherein chiefe care would be had, to the end to make
all easie; also to keepe all, and to make right vse thereof.
               
               
                  
                  Phil.
                  This I account and finde the chiefe;☜ to haue them
perfect in the order both of the whole,The summe of all: wherein chiefe care would be had. and also of all the
parts in Grammar, as I shewed; and also to be able to repeat
the Titles, with those margents which are necessary; the beginnings
of the rules; and to haue the vnderstanding of
them, and examples; and also to be able to apply the examples
for the seuerall words wherein the force is: and so to
giue any rule of a sodain, either the beginning or the sum of
it; and the words wherein the force of the rule is.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Oh, but this is a matter, that is most accounted of
with vs; to haue them very perfect in saying all their Grammar
without booke, euen euerie rule; and wherein I haue
found much griefe and vexation: because I haue not been
able to cause my schollars to get their rules so perfectly;
and much lesse to keepe them: and hereby, euer the saying
parts hath been the greatest fretting to me and feare to
my schollars, for the negligence of most, in them; so that
do I what I could, yet I haue neuer been able to bring most
to any commendable readinesse in them.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  To this I answere you;Difficulty of keeping the Grammar rules perfectly without booke. that this indeede is one principall
thing, that makes our calling the more vncomfortable:
and I doubt not, but that the griefe, which the best doe
finde therin, is a means to humble them, and to keep them
that they be not too much lift-vp in the rest. And indeed it
were to be wished that the rules were much shorter: but sith
we see not how that may possibly be helped, without much
greater inconuenience; we must in this, as in the rest of our
inconueniences, vse all the wisdome that wee can, to make a
benefit of necessity, and the burden so light, as we may. And
that,How helped. thus. 1. Making our schollars to learn them so perfectly
as we can. 2. To keep chiefly the things last learned, by
oft repetition. 3. Continuall care for parts; and so much as
may be, to let them haue som little time ouer night, to read
them ouer, against morning. 4. to cause them at least where
time wil not serue, to repeat the summes of the rules: and by
daily examining to make them able to giue you the sum or
beginning of any rule, with the meaning of it, and to apply
the examples.
               
               
                  
And therin to content our selues,☞ if we can but obtaine so
much of many,Such a perfect saying euery rule, not so absolutely necessarie. as to be able to vnderstand and make vse of
the rules, or to turn to them, though they cannot say them
readily: for we see most Schollars, when they come to the
Vniuersities, to forget that perfectnesse in their Grammars,
and most learned men cannot say the rules; yet so long as
they haue a full vnderstanding and remembrance to make
vse, in resoluing, writing, or speaking, this sufficeth.
               Lastly,☞ this shall much helpe, to cause them in preparing
their lectures in construction,Other helpe to haue the Grammar perfect, to turne to each rule as they parse. to turne to euerie hard
rule as they parse, and then to get these rules readily; and so
euer to come to say, with their Grammars vnder their arms.
               And also in examining lectures, to cause them to tell you
where they haue learned the seuerall harder words, at least
in their Grammars.Note in examining lectures. For this I find, that the most ordinary
words are in some part of their Grammar, or the words
whereof they come, or some very neere vnto them, wherby
they may remember them.
               Thus may they becom very exquisite in the Grammar,Grammar to be made as a Dictionary.
in time; and haue it (as I said) as a Dictionary in their minds,
not to need to seek here or there for euery word.
               In the higher fourmes,Seldomer repeating rules in the higher formes may serue. where daily repeating rules hindereth
much other learning, if they repeat them but sometimes,
and can answere in a word or two, giuing the sum of
each rule, it may suffice; although it is a great commendation
to haue the Grammar ad vnguem, and to giue an example
of each thing belonging vnto Grammar.
               Thus haue I shewed you what I haue yet learned concerning
making Schollars perfect in the Accedence,Readinesse of schollars in Accedence and Grammar, will helpe to make the Schoolemasters life most pleasant. & Grammar:
wherin as you see, I haue been much longer; because
I finde this by experience, and therefore dare constantly affirme
it, that if this bee once archieued in a school, to haue
the schollars thus made perfect in Accedence & Grammar
as they proceede, the life of a Schoolemaster may be made
as full of ioy and contenment, without wearisomnesse, only
in obseruing the fruit of his labours, as I touched, as the
life of any in any other calling whatsoeuer: whereas of the

otherside, much of our fretting toile, ariseth only for want
of this.
               
                  Spoud.
                  I would therefore thinke it a most profitable labour,
to set downe this maner of examining the Accedence
and Grammar, by Question and Answere particularly; that
not onely the weakest Schoolemaster amongst vs, but euen
our schollars themselues might bee able so to oppose
and whet one another. I my selfe haue seene diuers books
of questions of our Accedence and Grammar, beeing gathered
by learned men; yet in none of them haue I obserued
(so far as I remember) sundry of the principall of these
points.
                  Besides, that no man can so wel examine the Accedence
and Grammar by them; because, first the words of their
Question and Aunswere, doe not arise so out of the words
of the rules as you direct: neither doe they euer keepe
the order of the rules; and they haue moreouer sundry other
hard questions intermixed, and sometimes many together,
that my schollars haue not beene able to make vse of
them, nor my selfe very little, in regarde of that which I
might if they had been so framed.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I my selfe haue had experience of the same in them:
insomuch as though I haue greatly desired and tried to vse
some of them in my schoole, in regard of the profit which
I haue conceiued might come by them; yet I haue not bin
able without further inconuenience. And euer as new schollars
haue come to any schoole, so they haue beene alwaies
to seeke in those new questions, as that I haue been inforced
to leaue them off vtterly.A most plaine m
                           •
                        nner of examining Accedence & Grammar, collected, to help to make al schollars perfect therein; called, The posing of the parts. In consideration whereof, and of
the generall want herein; as also of the publique benefit,
which I am certainly assured, may come by such a labour
as you speake of; I haue indeauored by the helpe of all
such bookes of Questions and Answeres, of Accedence
and Grammar, as are extant, which I could procure; as likewise
of some written, togather one in this sort, hauing all
the Questions & Answers arising most directly out of the

words of the rules. In which, I haue chiefely followed the
order of the Quest. of that auncient Schoolemaster▪ Master
Brunsword, of Maxfield, in Cheshire, so much commended
for his order and Schollars; who, of al other, commeth
therein the neerest vnto the marke. This I haue studied
to make so plaine, as euery childe may by it both presently
vnderstand the meaning of each rule; and, if he can
say the rules, may as soone be able to answere these questions:
and wherby they may also poase one another (as you
wish) to make all rules and parts most familiar. I haue in it
tied my selfe strictly to the order and words of the rules,
as it may serue for continual poasing, and speedy examining
Parts: and that from what schoole soeuer they come, if they
can say the Accedence, they may presently answere these
questions. Other questions which I haue thought needful,
I haue set in the margents, directly against the questions, to
be learned after, if you will, without troubling the learner,
and that nothing may be wanting. But, for this book, I referre
you you to the Epistle Dedicatorie before it, and the
questions themselues.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, I see well you haue spared no labour, to seeke
to draw-on the little ones with ease & delight, and to make
schollars most perfect Grammarians; which all the learned
do so highly commend. I trust I shall be partaker hereof.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is and hath been my desire, to hide no part of my
talent; but to imploy all to the best, and communicate it to
euery one to whom it may doe good: and especially the
little ones, in whome is the chiefest hope of most of our
countrey schooles, and of the age to come.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of Construction; how to make all the waie
thereof most easie and
plaine.
               
                  Spoud.
                  WEll then (good sir) now that you haue thus
farre forth directed mee, how to lay so sure
a foundation, for my schollars to build vpon;
I doubt not but you can indeed guide
me forward, how they may build vpon it as speedily & happily,
both for their construing, parsing, and making Latine.
                  To begin therfore with construction, which is the first
thing that our children enter into, after their Accedence,
and Rules: I desire greatly to heare of you those things
which you affirme may be done by schollars;Things seeming difficult in cōstruction. and wherby
all the way of construction may be made so easie. As namely,
that children should bee able to take their lectures of
themselues, truely and perfectly; and likewise with vnderstanding
vpon sure grounds: or at least to do it with a very
little help of their Masters, in such places where they doubt.
So the rest which were mentioned in the note: as that they
should be able to construe, both in propriety of words, and
also according to the right sense and meaning. To do this
at any time, in all that which they haue learned, to construe
out of a translation in English, as out of the Latine it
selfe.The ordinary toile of m
                           •
                        sters about giuing lectures, and to cause their schollars to const
                           •
                        ue.
                  
                  These things, doe iustly seeme strange vnto mee; because
I am faine to giue euery lecture my selfe: or if I appoint
the fourmes aboue to giue them; yet I am compelled
to heare the giuing of them. And so I haue as great a trouble,

when they construe false to direct them right; That
it were as much ease to mee to giue them, myselfe; and
so I should bee freede from the griefe that I haue, when
they cannot doe it, and from other inconueniences.
                  Besides, to reade the lectures in proprietie of words,Difficulty in taking lectures in proprietie of words & sense.
phrase, and sense also; this seemeth to mee a matter of
some difficultie for many poore countrey Schoolemasters;
and not onely for the younger and weaker sort, but also for
some of the more ancient and experienced; and requireth
reading and iudgement; that I do not see how schollars can
possibly do it.
                  Moreouer,Hardnesse for schollars to remember how they were construed, and the trouble therein. when I haue giuen my schollars their lectures
or haue heard them giuen, vnlesse they marke very well;
yet they w
                        •
                     ll commonly mis
                        •
                     e in some part of that which I
haue read. And if the chiefe of the fourme mistake or goe
false, all the rest of the fourme likewise construe false, because
they depend on them: and so oft as they doubt I am
sai
                        •
                     e to t
                        •
                     ll them▪ what businesse soeuer I haue; which
dooth exceedingly trouble mee. They also are afraide to
aske mee so manie things, and it may bee the same things
againe and againe: wherby it commeth to passe that when
they come to say, fewe of them can construe, or hardly any
of them perfectly: which increaseth oft my passion,
and their feare.
                  Finally, this I account the worst of all, that when I haue
taken a great deale of paines,Griefe of the Masters for their schollars forge
                           ••
                        ing of that which they haue learned. and haue made my schollars
very ready in construing & parsing; yet come and examine
them in those things a quarter of a yeer after, they will be
many of them as though they had neuer learned them,
and the best farre to seeke: whereby, when gentlemen
or others come in and examine them, or their friends try
them at home, in the things which they learned a quarter,
or halfe a yeere b
                        •
                     fore; they are ordinarily found so rawe,
and to haue so f
                        •
                     rgotten, that I do receiue great reproach,
as though I had taken no paines with them, or as they had
profited nothing.
                  And for that of beeing able to reade, construe, and

parse lectures, or whatsoeuer they haue learned, out of an
English translation, I haue not made triall; though I know
they cannot doe it, being harder, then the construing and
parsing of the Authors themselues: albeit it cannot be, but
a matter of exceeding profit, and must needes helpe to
make schollars very soone.
                  Therefore, if you can direct mee, how to doe all these
things, which you haue mentioned in this behalfe, so to
construe and parse of themselues, and that out of the bare
English translation, and also that they shall bee able to goe
certainely, and vppon sure grounds; I must needes acknowledge
my selfe to haue receiued an incomparable and
a perpetuall benefit: and you shall indeede euen heer
                        •
                     in
helpe to make my burden far more light, and my whole
life much more comfortable; besides, that my schollars
shal be beholden vnto you 
                        •
                     or euer, for deliuering them
from so much feare, and setting them to go so fast forwarde
with such alacritie, as should appeare.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Surely, sir, all this may bee done, by the perfect
knowledge of their Accedence and Grammar rules first,☜
and then the practice of that golden rule of construing,All th
                           •
                        s may be done by the practice of the rule of construing & of Grammatical translations.
together with Grammaticall translations of the first ordinarie
schoole Authours, framed according to the same rule,
if they be translated rightly in propriety of words, phrase
and sense.
                  By these I dare be hold to affirme vpon sure experience,
and the trials of many very learned, that all these things
may bee effected amongst th
                        •
                     se who are apt, without any
inconuenience at all, if they be rightly vsed▪ as I shall direct
you the manner after. But without them, I cannot finde
how possibly the inconueniences, which you haue recited,
can be preuēted, or these benefits can be attained in any like
measure; chiefly in the greater schooles, where many schollars
are.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  For that golden rule of construing and the
Grammaticall transl
                        •
                     tions which you mention,The rule of 
                           〈◊〉
                         vnheard of to the most. I knowe
not vvhat you meane: N
                        •
                     yther haue I euer heard of

any such. Haue you any other rule of construing, then
our Grammar teacheth? or any such translations made
according to it, in this propriety which you speake of?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes indeede sir, there is a speciall rule, and such
translations also: by the constant practice whereof, not
onely the former euils may bee auoided, and the benefites
mentioned may bee obtained; but also the way to all construing,
parsing, examining, making, writing, speaking, and
also trying Latine, may be made most easie and plaine; So,
as children may proceede vpon sure grounds, and doe all
things herein with vnderstanding, and right reason, and far
more speedily, and with more delight, then vsually.
                  And howsoeuer this rule bee vnknowen of most, who
neuer heard of any such particular rule of construing, but
only of such directions, as may be gathered here and there,
out of our Accedence and Grammar, where they are dispearsed
thorough all,This rule is set downe by sundry learned Grammarians. very hardly to be discerned; yet it is
set downe by sundry learned Grammarians. As by Susenbrotus,
Crusius, Cosarzus, and our ancient Schoole master
Master Leech, in his little questions of the Accedence and
others, as also lately by learned Goclenius; though in all
of them imperfectly, and differing somewhat each from other,
through the diuers exceptions in the Grammar rules
and varietie of Grammars. Crusius hath also examples of
the practice of the rule handled at large. It would be ouertedious
to set them downe all, or what each of them hath
written thereof.
                  Yet because the rule hath some difficulty, and that wee
may consider the better of it, I will rehearse it briefly out of
one or two of them. And seeing we are to deale for the first
enterers into construction,The rule, as M. Leech hath it, I will set it downe first, as Master
Leach hath it, who is the plainest.
                  His words are these;
                  
                     Q. What order will you obserue in construing of asentence?
                  
                     A. If there bee a Vocatiue case I must take that first:
then I must seek out the principall Verbe & his Nominatiue

case, and construe first the Nominatiue case: and if there be
an Adiectiue or Participle with him, then I must English
them next, and such wordes as they gouerne; then the
Verbe: and if there follow an Infinitiue moode, I must take
that next; then the Aduerbe; then the case which the
Verbe properly gouerneth: and lastly, all the other cases in
their order; first the Genitiue, secondly the Datiue, &c.
                  
                     Q. What if there be not all these words?
                  
                     A. Then I must take so many of them as be in the sentence,
and in this order.
                  
                     Q. Is this order euer to be obserued?
                  
                     A. No: it may be altered by Interrogatiues. Relatiues,
Infinitiues, Genitiues of partition, and Coniunctions.
                  
                     Q. What speciall things must bee obserued in construing?
                  
                     A. That the Nominatiue case be set before the Verbe,
the Accusatiue case after the Verbe, the Infinitiue moode
after another moode: the Substantiue and the Adiectiue
must be construed together; except the Adiectiue do passe
ouer his signification vnto some other word, which it gouerneth.
                  The Accusatiue, before an Infinitiue moode, must haue
the word (that) ioyned with it.
                  The Preposition must be ioyned with his case.
                  Afterwards he giues a short example hereof.
                  Crusius,The rule, according to Crusius.
                      from whom I receiued the first light heereof
long agoe, he hath it something otherwise; though for the
substance it be the same: whose wordes also, because hee is
but short, I will set downe; and the rather, for that there are
so many learned, who haue not so much as heard of the
rule. The words of Crusius are these:
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           De ordine verborum in construendo &
interpretando.
                                 Crusius in his Latine Grammar, pag. 382,
                           
                           QVotuplex est ordo verborum?
                           Duplex. Naturalis & Artificiosus.
                           
                              
Quid est naturalis?
                           Est Grammaticus ordo docens quid primo, secundo, aut postremo
loco ponendum sit.
                           Quid artificiosus?
                           Quo Oratores, Historici, Poëtae & Philosophivtuntur.
                           Quid est ordo verborum naturalis?
                           1. Sumitur Nominatiuus Substantiuinominis, qui dicitur
subiectum aut quicquid vim Nominatiui habet.
                           Huic additur Adiectiuum, aut quicquid Nominatiunm explicat.
Saepe sententiam inchoat Vocatiuus, aut particulae Qrationem
connectentes, aut Ablatiui absoluti, aut Relatiua.
                           2. Verbum finitum personale, quod vocatur Praedicatum.
Impersonalia constructionem sine Nominatiuo inchoant.
                           3. Casus obliqui, inter quos dignior praecedat.
                           Saepe Infinitinus: quem antecedit Accusatiuus cum adest.
                           Saepe Aduerbium, aut Nominatiui gestuum ac similes: quae
statim verbo subijciuntur.
                           Interdum Gerundia, aut Ablatiui absoluti.
                           Praeterea,
                           Praepositiones cum suis casibus.
                           Deni
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              , Coniunctiones quae superioribus alia attexunt, in
quibus idem ordo seruandus est.
                           Sic in quauis lingua.
                           
                              Comprehende ista mihi regula quam
potes breuissima.
                           
                           DIctio regens praeponenda est ei quae regitur:
                           Quae declarant postponenda sunt ijs quae declarantur.
Thus farre Crusius, of the rule.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Sp
                        •
                     ud.
                  I pray you expound it somewhat more at large,☞
that I may conceiue of it yet more fully.The rule expounded more 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I will endeauour to doe as you say; although for
the more curious handling of it, I will leaue it to some other
or else referre it to a farther time,The 
                           •
                        urious. 
                           〈…〉
                        . because of the difficulty
of it, through the manifold exceptions, as I noted,
especially in the longer and more intricate sentences: wherin

I take it very hard, to set down any direct rule particularly.
                  Therefore for the better vnderstanding of the rule,Generall obseruations for the better vnderstanding of the rule. we are
to obserue,
                  1. That the Schollar must reade the sentence, before he
construe; and in reading, that he doe it distinctly, reading
to a Period or full point, and there to stay.1. That the Schollar reade before he construe.
                  
                  2. To marke the sentence well, and to obserue all the
points in it, both Commaes and Colons; or lesse distinctions,2. To mark the sentence well, and all the points in it.
and middle distinctions: that so hee may see and
consider both the beginning, middest, and end of the
sentence together; and also each clause in it.
                  3. That if there bee any wordes in the sentence,
                        
                           •
                         To marke words beginning with great letters, and included in a Parenthesis. beginning
with great letters, except the first wordes of all;
to remember that those are proper names: and also if there
be any wordes included within a Parenthesis, or two halfe
Moones, as they are tearmed, that they are to be construed
by themselues.
                  4. That hee seeke to vnderstand what the matter is about:4. To vnderstand the matter.
and so in continued speeches, to marke what went before.
                  5. To obserue if there be a Vocatiue case.5. To marke if there be any Voca
                           •
                        iue case.
                  
                  6. To seeke out carefully the principall Verbe, by the
rule in the Grammar of finding out the principal Verb,6. To seeke out the principall Verbe, and obserue that wel, as directing all. viz.
If there be moe Verbes then one in a sentence, the first is
the principall except it be an infinitiue moode; or haue before
it a Relatiue, or a Coniunction as vt, cum. si, &c. Which
principall Verbe being found out, doth commonly point
out the right Nominatiue case: which Nominatiue case is
that, which agreeth with it in number & person; and it doth
also direct all the sentence very much. So that this may be
accounted as the load-star, guiding all.
                  7. To marke the clauses which haue no Verbs in them,7 To giue euery clause his right Verbe.
to fit them with their owne right Verbes, expressed or vnderstood:
for no clause can be without a Verbe.
                  8. To supply all such wordes as are wanting,8. To supply all words wanting. to make
perfect sense and construction.
                  9. To giue euery word his due signification and proper9. To giue each word his due signification and proper signe.
                     
signe, so farre as sense will beare.
                  10. To ioyne the Substantiue and Adiectiue together
in construing,10. To ioyne Substantiue and Adiectiue, also Preposition and case. except the Adiectiue doe passe ouer his signification
into some other word, which is gouerned of it.
Also to ioyne the Preposition with his case.
                  11. To marke whether the sentence haue not an Interrogatiue
point:11. To marke if the sentence haue not an Interrogatiue point. then to reade it as asking a question; and
then the Nominatiue case is to come after the Verbe, according
to the rule of the Accedence: or otherwise to bee set
directly before it, if our English phrase will beare it.
                  These things obserued, then the order proceedeth thus
vsually:
                  1. If there be a Vocatiue case,The order of the rule: to take to take that first and whatsoeuer
dependeth of it,1. The Vocatiue case, or whatsoeuer is in place of it, or hangeth of it. that is whatsoeuer agreeth with it;
or is gouerned of it to expresse it; or in stead of a Vocatiue
case, an Interiection of Calling or Exclamation, or an Aduerb
of Calling, Wishing, Shewing, Exhorting, or Swearing,
Affirming, or the like; which haue the nature of Interiections,
if there be any such.
                  2. The Nominatiue of the principall Verbe,2. The Nominatiue case, or whatsoeuer is in place of it, or dependeth of it. or whatsoeuer
is put in stead of the Nominatiue case, and such words
as depend on it; as namely, an Adiectiue or Participle, and
such wordes as they gouerne: or a Substantiue, being the
latter of two Substantiues.
                  3. The principall Verbe,3. The principall Verbe, and whatsoeuer dependeth on it. and whatsoeuer hangeth or
dependeth on it: as if there follow an Infinitiue moode, to
take that next, and the Aduerbe, which is ioyned commonly
to the Verbes, to declare their signification.
                  4. The case which the Verbe doth properly gouerne
next vnto it selfe,4. The case which the Verb properly go
                        
                           •
                        erneth. which is most commonly the Accusatiue
case, and whatsoeuer hangeth on it; or an Accusatiue case
before an Infinitiue moode in stead hereof.
                  5. Then follow all the other cases in order;5. All the other cases in order. first the
Genitiue, then the Datiue or Ablatiue, with a Preposition,
or without.
                  This is the sum of the rule, as it is most generall and naturall.
                  
                     
Yet here these things must be remembred:Other cautiues in the rule.
                  
                  1. If all these words be not in the sentence which is to be
construed,1 To take so many words as there are in the same order. to take so many of them as there are, and in this
order.
                  2 That the order is changed by the Relatiue Qui quae,
                     2 The order is changed by Relat. Interrog. Indef. Partit. wordes of dependence and Connexion.
                     quod: also by Interrogatiues, Indefinites, Partitiues; because
these (according to the Grammar rule) follow the rule of the
Relatiue; going before the words wherof they are gouerned.
So likewise Aduerbs of likenesse (as, Quemadmodum, vt, veluti,
sicut) when they haue sic or ita answering to them in the
second part of the sentence, doe vse to goe before. As also
Coniunctions Copulatiues, Rationals, Aduersitiues, hauing
their Redditiues following, answering vnto them: so Expletiues,
and certaine others:
                  Finally, all such wordes as these mentioned (which wee
may call wordes of dependence, because they depend on
something going before or comming after in the same
sentence) or else wordes of Connexion, seruing to knit new
sentences to the former (as these Coniunctions) are to bee
placed next the Vocatiue case: or in the first place, where
there is no Vocatiue case.
                  3 That in stead of the Nominatiue case,3 To take for the Nominat. case whatsoeuer is put in place of it, or includeth it. we take whatsoeuer
is in place thereof, as a whole sentence, a peece of
a sentence, an Infinitiue moode, an Aduerbe with a Genitiue
case, two Nominatiue cases singular or moe, ioyned
with a Verbe plurall, or sometimes a letter set by it selfe,
or moe, or any word put for it selfe; which we call a word of
arte: as Amo est verbum. Amo is here taken for the Nominatiue
case: for all such wordes or sentences are supposed to
bee the Neuter Gender vndeclined.
                  So whatsoeuer includeth the Nominatiue case; as, a
Verbe Impersonall, an Ablatiue case absolute; Gerunds
and Supines put absolutely with this Verbe est: as Orandum
est vt sit mens sana in corpore sano. I
                           •
                        um est in
viscera terrae: because these stand for Verbes Impersonals,
and haue the Nominatiue case included in
them.
                  
                     
4. The Participles with Gerunds and Supines follow
the order of those Verbes wherof they come,4 Participles, Gerunds and Supines, follow the order of the Verbes. in gouerning
thesame cases, as in the rules. Also that Gerunds and Supines
are commonly put for the Infinitiue moode.
                  5. Coniunctions or other wordes of dependance in new
clauses of the sentences,5 New Coniunctions and wordes of dependence serue to ioyne new sentences. serue to ioyne together the later
parts of the sentences to the former; wherein the same order
must be kept againe as before.
                  6. That the Aduerbs be placed before or after the Verb;6 Aduerbs to be placed to the best sense. as the sense will most conueniently beare.
                  7. That the Latinismes bee obserued,7 To obserue Latinismes, and ioyne phrases. to ioyne the
whole phrases together, so much as may be, and to expresse
them by as elegant and fit phrases as wee can in our
tongue.
                  The reason also of the rule, that euery one may conceiue
each thing,The reason of the rule. is this:
                  1 That the wordes must bee placed in order,1 The wordes to be placed in naturall order. as they
should stand; according to the plaine and proper nature
of the speech, in which they are vsed to expresse any matter:
which is the very order which Grammar teacheth, and as
one gouerneth another.
                  2 The word gouerning or directing,2 Gouernours before the gouerned. to be placed before
those which it gouerneth or directeth.
                  3 Those words which do declare others,3 Declarers to follow the declared. are to be set after
those which they doe declare or make plaine.
                  So the principall word going before, doth commonly
direct the wordes following;4 The principall words going before, direct the wordes following; except the Interr. Relat. Ind. Part. eyther in agreement or gouernement:
that is, it causeth the word following to agree
with it, or to be gouerned of it; except in oblique cases of
Interrogatiues, Relatiues, Indefinits, Partitiues, which doe
commonly goe before together with the Substantiues or
Antecedents, with which they agree; and are gouerned or
guided by the word following after: as, Quem librum legis?
Quarum rerum vtram minus velim non facilè possum existimare.
                  
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I perceiue the rule most plainely, and doe see an
euident reason of euery thing; yet neuerthelesse I desire

you further to giue me a little briefe of it, as my schollars
may best remember it.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The summe is this;The summe of the rule of construing. to reade ouer the sentence distinctly
to a full point; obseruing carefully all the points
and proper names, with the drift and meaning; but
chiefely to marke the principall Verbe, because that pointeth
out the right Nominatiue case, and directeth all the
sentence: also to marke if there be any Vocatiue case. Then
the order goeth thus:
               
               1 If there be a Vocatiue case, to construe that first,
with whatsoeuer agreeth with it, or is gouerned of it, or
whatsoeuer is put in the place of it; as an Interiection
of Exclamation or calling, or an Aduerbe of calling.
               2 To take the Nominatiue case of the principal Verbe,
or whatsoeuer is put in steede of it, and to adioyne to it
whatsoeuer hangeth of it: as the Adiectiue or Participle, and
such words as they gouerne.
               3 To take the principall Verbe, and whatsoeuer hangeth
on it, each in the right order; as if there follow an Infinitiue
moode, to take that next: then the Aduerbe; after, the
case which the Verbe properly gouerneth (which is commonly
the Accusatiue case) & whatsoeuer hangeth on that.
Lastly, all the other cases in order: first the Genitiue, secondly
the Datiue, and lastly the Ablatiue.
               4 If there be not all these Verbes, to take so many of
them as are in the sentence, and in this order.
               5 That this order is changed by Interr. Relat. Indefinites,
Partitiues, & som Coniunctions with Aduerbs of likenesse:
as Quemadmodum, vt, sicut &c. hauing sic, or ita, to answer
them in the second part of the sentence; because those
wordes vse to goe before.
               Lastly, to take the Substantiue and Adiectiue together,
vnlesse the Adiectiue passe ouer his signification vnto some
other word, which it gouerneth; and so likewise the Preposition
with his case.
               Most briefly thus: that the principal Verb be first sought
out; then
               
                  
1. Take the Vocatiue case,A briefe of the rule of construing for euery childe to be able to answere. or whatsoeuer is in stead of
it, or hangs vpon it seruing to make it plaine.
               2. The Nom. case of the principall Verbe, or whatsoeuer
is in stead of it, or depends of it to make it plaine.
               3. Then the principall Verbe, and whatsoeuer hangs of
it, seruing to expound it: as an Aduerbe, or an Infinitiue
mood.
               4. Lastly, the case which the Verbe properly gouernes,
and all the other cases after it, in order.
               Note that the order is changed by Interrog. Relat. Partit,
certain Aduerbs & Coniunctions: al which vse to go before.
               Obserue, specially for the enterers, to put them in minde
of this often: the Nom. before the Verbe: the Accus. after
the Verbe: the Substant. and Adiect. to goe together; vnlesse
the Adiect. passe his signification into some other
word: the Preposition and his case together.
               This is the briefest, plainest, and most generall forme,
that (after long practice and considering of it) I can conceiue,
though it haue some exceptions, as I said.
               
                  Spoud.
                  I pray you giue me an example hereof.An example of construing, and of Grammaticall translations according to the rule.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I will take the very example which Crusius hath set
downe out of Tully de Senectute.
                  
                  1. Aptissima omnino sunt,1 The artificiall placing, according to T
                              •
                           lly. 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Senectu
                           •
                        e Scipio & Laeli, arma senectutis, artes
exercitationes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      virtutū: quae in omni aetate cultae, cum multum
diu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vixeris, mirificos afferunt fructus: non folum quia
nunquam deserunt, ne in extremo quidē tempore aetatis, quanquam
id maximum est: verum etiam quia conscientia benè ac
                     
                        ••
                     
vitae, multorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      benefactorum recordatio, iueundissima est.
This is Tullies order in placing this sentence.
                  
                  2. The naturall or Grammaticall order of it is this:2. The Grammaticall placing.
                  
                  Scipio et Laeli, artes exercitationes
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      virtutum sunt omnin
                        •
                     
arma aptissima senectutis: quae cultae afferunt fructus mirificos
in aetate omni cum vixeris multum diu
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     : non solum quia
deserunt nunquam, ne quidem in tempore extremo aetatis,
quanquam ad est maximum: verum etiam quia conscientia
vitae actae benè, recordatio
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      bene factorum multorum est iucundissima.
                  
                     
3. The Translation is after this Grammaticall order
thus:3. Translation according to the 
                           〈…〉
                         Grammaticall order.
                  
                  
                     O S
                           •
                        ipio & Lelius, arts & exercises of vertues,Are the very fittest weapons, Verb aptest. are altogether
the (verb) fittest weapons of old age: which being (verb)
exercised in (verb) euery age do bringWonderfull fruits, or benefits.
maruellous fruites,
when you haue liuedVery long much and long: not onely because
theyNeuer leaue vs. forsake neuer,Not indeede. no truelyIn our last age. in the extreame time of
age,
                        Verb loued or adorned. although that isThe chiefe. the greatest; but also becauseThe inward testimony. the
conscience of a life well done [or well passed ouer] and the
                        Verb in all age.
remembrance of many good deeds is most pleasant.
                  4. The construing is directly according to this translation.4. Construing according to the Grammaticall translation. Or, que cultae afferunt, &c.
                     
So that the translation leadeth the schollar as by the
hand, or insteed of his Master; so, as he cannot erre, if he be
of any vnderstanding: as thus;
                  
                     Scipio ô Scipio, et and, Laeli ô Lelius, artes arts, exercitationes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
and exercises, virtutum of vertues, sunt are, omnino
altogether, arma aptissima the fittest weapons, senectutis of
old age: quae which, cultae being exercised [or vsed] in aetate
omni in euery age, [or in all our life] afferunt doe bring,
fructus mirificos maruellous fruits, cum when, vixeris you
haue liued, multum much, diu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      and long, &c.
                  
                  5. This translation directeth to parse,5. Parsing according to this translation. chiefely for all
the Syntax; Euery principall word in the Latine, going
before others, commonly gouerning, or directing & guiding
some way that which followeth after. It helpeth very
much for the Etymologie; that children well entred, shall
goe very neere to tell by the English alone, what part of
speech euery word is: of which I shall speake after.
                  The manner of parsing by it, is thus shortly for the Syntaxe:
                  Scipio] is the first word to be parsed,Scipio. because it is the first in
construing; for that we begin commonly of a Vocatiue case
if there be one. It is the Vocat ue case, knowne by speaking
to, and by the Interiection O vnderstood; gouerned of
the Interiection O, by the rule O Exclaman
                           •
                        is Nominatiuo,
Accusatiuo, & Vocatiuo 
                           •
                        ungitur. In English, Certaine a Vocatiue &c.
                  
                  
                     
Et] the next word a Coniunction Copulatiue,Et. seruing to
couple words or sentences; here coupling Scipio and Laeli
together.
                  Laeli] the next word,Laeli. the Vocatiue case knowen also by
speaking to, and put in the same case with Scipio by reason
of the Coniunction et; by the rule, Coniunctions Copulatiues
and Disiunctiues couple like cases, &c.
                  
                  Artes] is next,Artes. in construing according to my rule
of construing. The Nominatiue case, comming before
the principall Verbe sunt, by the rule of the first Concord.
                  Quae] next,Quae. a Coniunction Copulatiue, coupling artes and
exercitationes together.
                  Exercitationes] is the next,Exercitationes. the Nominatiue case coupled
with artes, by the Coniunction Enclyticall, que, which is set
after exercitationes in the booke; by the rule of the Coniunctions
Subiunctiues, or which are put after.
                  Virtutem] followeth next,Virtutem. the Genitiue case, gouerned
of the Substantiue exercitationes: and is the later of tvvo
Substantiues; by the rule, When two Substantiues come
together.
                  Sunt] is next,Sunt. agreeing with the Nominatiue case artes exercitationes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        ;
by Verbum personale cohaeret cum Nominatiuo
&c. It is expressed to the one Nominatiue case, and vnderstood
to the other, by the figure Zeugma.
                  
                  Omninò] the next word,Omninò. an Aduerbe ioined to the Verbe
to declare the signification.
                  Arma] the Nominatiue following the verbe sunt.
                     Arma. 
                     Sum,
forem, fio &c.
                  
                  
                     Aptissimathe Nominatiue case of the Nowne Adiectiue,Aptissima.
agreeing in all things with arma, by the rule of the second
Concord. The Adiectiue whether it bee Nowne, &c. It agreeth
with arma, because it expresseth the qualitie of arma,
&c.
                  
                  Senectutis] next,Senectutis. the Genitiue case gouerned of arma,
because it expresseth arma, the weapon of olde age, the later
of two Substantiues.
                  
                     
And so forward, in all things giuing the reason according
to the rules of Grammar, and this rule of construing compared;
the later word, still declaring the former. So much
shortly for parsing by this rule.
                  6 This translation directeth the schollar also for making
Latine,6. Making latine according to this rule. to proceede easily; and likewise the master to teach
and guide the schollar both to make true Latine and pure
Tully, or what Author he will follow: so that he cannot miss
so long as he followeth this and looketh on the Author: also,
it guideth to giue a reason of euery thing, or to prooue
the Latine thus, in the very same order as they parsed.
                  As. the Master to aske thus according to the order of the
translation:
                  How say you Scipio, or ô Scipio?
                  
                  The Schollar answereth;Example. 
                     Scipio, as it is in the booke.
                  Aske why not Scipionis nor Scipioni but Scipio; he answereth:
because it must be the Vocatiue case, knowen by speaking
to, and gouerned of o vnderstood, as o Magister, o
Master.
                  And] et.
                  
                  Laelius] Laeli. If it be asked, why not Laelius, nor Laelij, nor
Laelium; he answereth, because it must be the Vocatiue case;
and therfore Laeli: because, when the Nominatiue endeth in
ius, the Vocatiue shall end in i. Also, that it must be the Vocatiue
case, because et coupleth like cases.
                  So in all things, iust as the childe parsed; but only asking
the English first, and making the childe to giue it in Latin,
and to giue a reason of euery thing more particularly.
                  The causing the childe to construe and to parse,☜ looking
vpon the English onely; especially the parsing so, is contitinuall
making Latin, and prouing it.
                  So that we may see by this sentence,Vse and benefit of Grammaticall translations, set downe in generall. how this translation
serueth to direct the younger schollar: first, to resolue or
cast each sentence in Latine into the naturall or Grammaticall
order: secondly, to construe directly according to the
same: thirdly, to parse as it is construed, by marking the
last chiefe word: fourthly, to make the same Latine as it

was parsed, and to proue it by reason and rule. Fiftly, by
comparing the order of the translation and the order of the
Author, to compose the Latine againe into the order of the
Authour. And so by daily practicing these translations,
young schollars must needs come on very much, for that
it makes all the way to learning so plaine.
                  One principall reason is,☞ for that this is nothing else but
a continuall practice of Analysis and Genesis;
                     Chief reason of the benefit of translations according to the rule, for the cō
                        tinuall vse of Analysis and Genesis.
                      that is, of resoluing
and vnmaking the Latine of the Author, and then
making it againe iust after the same manner, as it was vnmade.
Or if we may so tearme it, the vnwinding, and winding
it vp againe; which is generally acknowledged to be
the speediest way to all good learning. Now of either of
these there may be three parts.
                  1. Of the Analysis or resoluing a sentence; first the resoluing
it out of the Rhetoricall order of the Author,Three speciall parts both of Analysis and Genesis.
                      into the
first proper, naturall and Grammaticall order.
                  2. Construing, turning or translating it into English, according
to thesame order; giuing the true sense and force
of each word and phrase.
                  3. Parsing as we construe.
                  So of the Genesis or making vp againe are three parts.
                  1. The making thesame Latine againe, according to the
order of the translation and the words of the Author; that
they may goe surely.
                  2. To proue it to bee true Latine, after the manner of
parsing, by the same order.
                  3. To compose all againe for the Rhetoricall placing of
the words, according to the order of the Author, by the
helpe of a fewe rules, and by comparing with the Author;
that a childe may haue a confident boldnesse, to stand against
the most learned, to iustifie that which hee hath
done.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This stands with all reason, that if the way of vnmaking
or resoluing be so plaine, thorough this rule; the
waie of making vp againe must needes bee as plaine and
readie: for there is the same waie from Cambridge to London,

which was from London to Cambridge.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  You say as it is: Hence you shall finde by experience,
that as children will soon learne to construe and parse
their Authors thereby; so they will as soone learne to make
them into latine againe: yea they will come by daily practice,
to reade the Latine almost as fast out of the English
translation, as out of the Author it selfe, and proue that it
must bee so: and in short time to doe the same in things
which they haue not learned; especially, where they shall
haue occasion to vse the same phrase, to doe it readily whether
they shall write or speake.
               
               
                  Particular benefits of the vse of Grammaticall
translations, and of the Rule.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     IT is apparant by that which you haue sayd,Benefits of the translations and the rule set downe particularly. that you take
the benefit to bee very great, which may come by such
translations rightly vsed.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I do indeed; and that for all these things following,
which seem most strange and hard to be done by children.
                     1 Teaching to resolue Latine Grammatically:1. Resoluiug Grammatically which is
the foundation of the rest.
                     2 In construing,2. Construing. to direct to do it artificially by rule, and
also in propriety of words, and in true sense.
                     3 For parsing to do it of themselues:3. Parsing. as reading a lecture
without any question asked, vnlesse some which they omit:
which maner of parsing gaineth half the time which is spent
therin commonly, when otherwise each question is asked
and stood vpon.
                     4 For making latine,4. Making latine. to be able to make the very same latine
of their Authors vpon sure grounds; & therby to be incouraged
to go on boldly & certainly, with cheerfulnes and
confidence: when little children shall see, that they are able
to make the same latine which their Authors do, as was said,
& haue also the Author to iustify that which they haue don.
                     5 For prouing latine,5. Prouing▪
                         specially for the Syntaxe, when

each principall word going before, directs th
                           •
                        se which follow,
except in some few.
                     6 For composing artificially,6. Composing. by continuall comparing
this Grammaticall order, to the order of the Author, and
marking why the Author placed otherwise; and by being
helped by a few rules, which I will shew after.
                     7 To helpe the younger schollars to vnderstand their
lectures,7. Vnderstanding. so farre as need is; of the benefit of which vnderstanding
we haue spoken before.
                     8 Also to take their lectures for most part of themselues,8. T
                              •
                           king lectures of themselues.
as was sayd; to get and bring their lectures more surely and
sooner then by the masters teaching alone, as a little experience
will shewe.
                     9 To construe and parse their lectures,9. Construing and parsing out of the English. out of the English
as out of the Latine (which is a continuall making latine,
as we heard) and so to read their lectures first in the naturall
order, then as they are in their Authors.
                     10 To bee able to correct their Authors of themselues,10. Correcting their Authors.
if they be false printed.
                     11 To keepe all which they haue learned in their Authors
so perfectly,11. Keeping all learned in their Authors perfectly. as to be able in good sort to construe or
parse at any time, in any place out of the bare translation,
onely by reading them oft ouer out of the translation.
                     12 To saue all the labour of learning most Authours
without booke,12. Saue getting Authors without booke. as all Authors in prose; which labour in
many schooles is one of the greatest tortures to the poore
schollars, and cause of impatience and too much seueritie
to the Masters, though with very little good for most part:
to be able as it were by playing, only reading their Authors
out of the English ouer & ouer,Ten notes more 
                              〈◊〉
                           . at meet times, to haue them
much better for all true vse and each good purpose, then
by all saying without booke; to trouble the memorie onely
with getting rules of Grammars and the like, and such other
of most necessary vse, as the Poets: which also are exceedingly
furthered hereby.
                     13 To helpe to proceed as well in our English tonge as
in the latine,13. To proceed in English as in Latine. for reading, and writing true orthographie; to

attaine variety and copie of English words, to expresse their
mindes easily, and vtter any matter belonging to their Authors.
And so in time, to come to proprietie, choise, and
puritie, aswell in our English as in the Latine.
                     14 To learne the propriety of the Latine tongue,14. To learne the propriety of the latine tong, to iustify words and phrases, and also to attaine the purity of the latine tongue. as
they goe forward; to bee able to iustifie each phrase, and in
time to remember words and phrases, for almost whatsoeuer
they haue learned, and where. Also by reading Tully,
and other purer Authors constantly out of such translations,
first Grammatically, then Rhetorically, to attaine to
make a more easie entrance, to that purity of the Latine
tongue, wherof sundry great learned men haue giuen precepts,
then by precepts alone; and much more by ioining
precepts and this practice together.
                     15 By the translations of the Poets,15. To enter & traine vp schollars iu Poetrie with ease and delight without bodging. as of Ouid, and Virgil,
to haue a most plain way into the first entrance into versifying,
to turne the prose of the Poets into the Poets owne
verse, with delight, certainty and speed, without any bodging;
and so by continuall practice to grow in this facilitie,
for getting the phrase and veine of the Poet.
                     16 To be (as was noted) not only insteed of Masters,16. To be insteed of M
                              •
                           ster or Vsher amongst the schollars for giuing and preparing lectures. or
Vshers, to giue each lower lecture perfectly, for all the substance;
but also to be after insteed of their owne presence,
or of Dictionaries in euery one of those fourmes continually,
to direct them, vntill euery one of the fourm can construe,
parse, make the same latine, and proue it. Heereby
both to free the children from that feare which they will
haue ordinarily,To free children from feare of so oft asking, and the Masters from that trouble & hindrance. to go to their Masters for euery word; and
also to free the Masters from that trouble and hindrance to
tell them euery word, so oft as they forget, and the vexation
and fretting to see the childrens dulnesse and forgetfulnesse.
For the helpe of the Master, or Vsher, in the meane
time what it ought to bee, wee shall see after in the vse of
these.
                     17 Hereby schollars hauing been well entered,17. To be able to proceed in other Authors of themselues by some helpe of Master and Cōmentaries. and exercised
in their lower Authors, shall be able to proceede to
their higher Authors, ex tempore; and goe on with ease, by

the assistance of the Master, where they need, and by the
helpe of Commentaries; that they may be thus inabled to
construe any Author, and bee fitted for the studies of the
Vniuersitie, at their first entrance thither.
                     18 These will be also a helpe to many weaker Schoolemasters,18. A helpe to weaker masters.
for right and certaine construction, without so
oft seeking Dictionaries for English, and proprietie of
words; and so for parsing, and all sorts of the former directions.
                     19 A
                           •
                        so,19. To helpe weaker schollars, to proceed in latine in their priuate studies in the Vniuersities. weaker schollars in the Vniuersities, who haue
not been so well grounded in the Grammar schooles, may
proceed in their priuate studies, by the vse of some of these
translations, either one alone, or two or three together;
and increase both for construing, vnderstanding, and
writing latine. Also they may haue continuall vse of translating
both into English, and Latine; whether reading
out of the Authour into the translation, or out of the translation
into the Author, or doing it by pen; and euer a direction
to trie all by, and as a priuate helpe: which continuall
translating both waies is a most speedy way to learning,
as M. Askam proueth at large.
                     20 Likewise,20. So to helpe any who haue lost their latine or haue but a taste. any who haue lost the knowledge of the
Latine tongue, may recouer it hereby within a short time;
and they who haue had but a smattering, or some little beginning,
may soone come to vnderstand any ordinary Author,
and proceed with pleasure and certaintie.
                     21 Finally,21. To haue daily much practice of Analysis and Genesis; which is all in all, in getting all learning. hereby schollars may haue daily much sure
practice both of Analysis and Genesis; that is, resoluing and
making Latine: which as was noted, all the learned doe acknowledge
to bee almost all in all, in getting all learning:
for all this practice by them is nothing else but Analysis and
Genesis, as we shewed before.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Things more specially obserued in the Translating
of the Schoole Authours.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     THese benefits are indeede very great, and
worthy the labour of euery childe, or other
who would attaine them, if it be as you say: yet by your fauour,
many of them cannot be obtained by bare Grammaticall
Translations alone; as to get the propriety of both
the tongues, both of Latine and English together, with variety
of phrase, the sense, and the like. Therefore what course
haue you obserued in your Translations, to make them to
serue to all these purposes?
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I haue obserued these things following,Things obserued in the Translations of the Schoole Authours. so neere
as I haue beene able for the present: I shall amend them after
God willing.
                     1 This naturall or Grammaticall order throughout.1 Naturall order.
                     
                     2 That the English Translation is set downe alone,2 English alone. without
the Latine adioyning, to auoyde the inconueniences of
hauing the Latine and English together; as of making
Truant, or the like: whereof I shall speake after.
                     3 The propriety of the English words,3 The English answering the Latine in propriety. answering to the
Latine, in the first and naturall signification, and expressing
the force of the Latine words, so neere as I could, is set down
in the first place.Where any phrase is somewhat hard, how it is expressed. And where the Latine phrase is somewhat
hard or obscure to bee expressed in our English tongue,
word for word; there I haue also expressed that by a more
plaine phrase, sometimes included within two markes, almost
like a Parenthesis, with [or] thus. Or else I haue set it
euer in the Margent: where also I haue oft placed the meaning,
with variety of other phrases ouer against the word,
and noted them with a character or letter, answering to the
word in the Text.
                     Moreouer,Where any phrase seemes ouer harsh in our English tongue. where any phrase is ouer-harsh in our English
tongue, to expresse the Latine verbatim, viz. word for word,
or in good propriety; that harsh phrase is also placed in the
Margent, ouer against the Latine phrase, with this marke,

                        (Verb) or (ver. (or v.) signifying verbatim, word by word, or
word for word, and the more easie phrase set in the Text.
                     Likewise where there may be two senses or constrctions,Where there may be two senses.
I haue commonly expressed both: the more likely and naturall
in the Text, the other in the Margent. This I haue
done, to the end that the Schollar may see both construction
and meaning together; with the propriety of the tongue,
whereunto I haue chiefly laboured.
                     So that there is no varying from the propriety,No varying but on necessity. saue
where necessity inforced, for the impropernesse of the
phrase in our speech▪ or in some few places, where the construction
is easie and familiar; and there is set in the Margent
(Verb) as was said before.
                     Lastly,The order of some wordes changed. where in the Grammaticall order in Latine, the
Substantiue goeth before the Adiectiue, the gouernour or
guider first; in our English Dialect, the Adiectiue is most
commonly set before: as vir bonus, a good man; not a man
good: vnlesse the Adiectiue be diuided from the Substantiue;
as where it passeth the signification into some at
                           •
                        er
word gouerned of it: as vir praestans ingenio, a man excelling
in wit.
                     So in the Aduerbe Non: as Non est, It is not; wee doe not
say, Not it is. Also in the Enclyticall Conjunctio
                           •
                         
                        
                           
                              •
                           quen, and
the like; as id
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , and that.
                     In the first and lowest Authours is commonly translated
Thou,Obseruation in the lowest Authours. Thee, Not you; because of the difficulty for children,
to distinguish betweene Thou, and You.
                     Thus I place ordinarily the Accusatiue case before the
Infinitiue moode, in plaine wordes, for the ready and easie
making the Latine out of it: as Multum eum praeuidisse dicimus,
we say him to haue foreseene much: and in the margent
vsually thus; We say, that he foresaw much: according
to our English phrase.
                  
               
               
                  
                  How to vse these Translations so, as to attaine
the former benefites.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     THese things diligently obserued,The manner of vse of the Translations. must needes
be very auaileable to the purposes, which
you haue mentioned: the very propriety alone, I meane
the knowledge of words, in their first and proper signification,
is a singular helpe to learning. For reason will commonly
teach, both the change of the signification by the
circumstances of the place, & also the cause of the change.
But I pray you, how might my Schollars vse these Translations
so, as that I might finde the benefits of them.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     You may cause them to vse them after these directions
following:
                     1 First,1 To see that euery one can giue the summe of the rule of construing. you are to see that euery one who is to vse them,
can repeate the rule of construing, and answere the questions
thereof, according to the briefest forme of it at least.
And if your leasure will serue, to heare your selfe how they
can take their Lectures of themselues, according to the
same.
                     2 Where your leisure will not well permit you to see all
Lectures giuen,2 In the lower fourmes one to reade ouer the translation, to giue some light, and look on the Translation. you may appoint at the taking of the Lectures,
that some one or two of the best of each fourme, doe
looke vpon the Translation; and in the lower fourmes doe
first reade ouer the Translation once, onely to giue them
some light, for the meaning and vnderstanding of their
Lectures; the rest looking on their Authours, or onely
harkening to the meaning: although in the higher fourms
which vse them, they will not neede so much as once reading
ouer before, vnlesse in some difficult places: onely he
who looketh on the Translation, may reade the Translation
after, for their more full vnderstanding of the Lecture, and
more easie remembrance of it.
                     3 After that to appoint another,3 To construe according to the rule, of themselues. first, to reade ouer
their Lecture in the Latine distinctly, as it is in the Author,
and to trie how he can construe; beating it out according

to the rule.He who hath the Translation onely, to direct where they goe false. In the meane time cause him who hath the
Translation, to be in stead of your selfe amongst the rest, to
see that they goe right; and where the construer sticketh,
or goeth amisse, to call him backe to the rule, and wish the
rest to helpe to finde it out by the same rule.
                     And when al the fourme are at a stand,To doe as the cunning Hunts-man. and none of them
can beat it out, then onely he who hath the booke, to do it;
as the cunning Hunts-man, to helpe a little at the default, to
point and to direct them where to take it: and thus so many
to construe ouer, or so oft, vntill all of them can construe.
                     In the mean time your selfe or Vsher,☞ in the middest, both
to haue an eye to them,The assistance of the Master or Vsher herein that they take this course; and also
to helpe yet further, where neede is: And after the taking
of the Lecture, to note out vnto them al the difficult or new
wordes in their Lecture, to examine and direct them, for the
parsing of them: and also to cause each of the fourme to
marke out those wordes, to take speciall paines in them; to
make them perfect aboue all the rest: because they haue
learned the rest before, and haue but so many new wordes to
get in that Lecture.
                     4 According to the order as they construe,☞ cause them
to parse,To construe & parse out of the Translation, is the surest and most profitable way. as we shewed; eyther looking vpon the Authour,
or vpon the Translation alone. But I finde it farre the surer
and better, in al who are able, both to construe and parse
out of the Translation: because thereby they are learning
continually, both to make and proue their Latine; and so
doe imprint both the matter and Latine, more firmely in
their memory. So also all of ability, to construe and parse
onely out of the Translation, when they come to say; and
out of it to giue the reason of euery thing. This they will doe
most readily, with a little practice.
                     5 To the end that they may may keepe all their Authors
perfectly,How to keepe all their Authors perfectly. which they haue learned (which is thought
of many almost impossible, and doth indeed so much incourage
young Schollars, and grace the Schooles when
they can doe it) let them but vse this practice:☞ Euery day

after that they haue said their Lectures,To construe or reade oft all which they haue learned, out of the Translations; to make and keepe all perfect, by oft repetions. cause each fourme
which vse these translations, to goe immediately to construing
ouer all which they haue learned, each day a peece,
euery one a side of a leafe, or the like in order, vntill they
haue gone through all; construing it only out of the translation:
to spend an houre or more therein, as time will permit:
one or two who sit next vnto the construer, to looke
on the Translation with him,Manner hereof. to helpe where hee sticketh;
the rest to looke on their Authours. Appoint withall some
of the Seniors of the fourme, to examine shortly the harde
wordes of each page as they goe; I meane those wordes,
which they marked when they learned them.
                     And when they become perfect in construing out of the
English,☜ cause them for more speedy dispatch, but onely to
reade their Authours into Latine, forth of the Translation;
first in the Grammaticall order: after as they are in the Author.
They will thus soone runne ouer all which they
haue learned, without the least losse of time: for this will be
found the best bestowed time, to keepe perfectly that which
they haue gotten. And what they can so construe or reade
out of the English into Latine, they can also doe it out of
the Latine into English ordinarily.
                     Then,To reade ouer other Authours after the same manner. as they waxe perfect in that which they haue learned,
and grow a little to vnderstanding; they may practice
of themselues by the same meanes, to reade ouer the rest of
their Authour, which they learned not, or some easie Authour,
which they haue not read; as first Corderius, or the
like, by the helpe of the same translations: first to construe
ex tempore amongst themselues, after to reade out of the
Translations; according to the same manner as they did in
that which they haue learned:☜ wherein they will do more
then you will easily beleeue, vntill you see experience.So in higher Authours translated.
                     
                     After this, as they come to higher fourmes, and more
iudgement,Practice will make them very prompt, both in English and Latine. they may be appointed likewise to reade ex tempore
some other Authour, whereof they haue the Translation
to direct them; and that both out of the Authour into
English: first, after the Grammaticall manner, and then in a

good English stile: afterwards out of the English into Latine,
both wayes, both in Grammaticall order, and after in
Composition, according to the Authour. And within a time
that they haue beene thus exercised, they will be able to doe
this, almost as easily and readily, as that which they haue
learned. I finde Tullies sentences, and Tully de natura Deorum,
with Terentius Christianus, to be singular books to this
purpose for the best vses.
                     By this meanes it must come to passe by daily practice,The fruit hereof.
that they shall attaine to the phrase, stile & Composition of
any Authour which they vse to reade oft ouer, & to make it
their owne; euen of any peece of Tully himselfe (as was said)
& much sooner then can be imagined, vntill triall be made:
though this must needes require meet time. For what thing
of any worth can be obtained, but by time, industry, & continuall
practice? much lesse such copy, choyse, propriety,
and elegancy, as Tully doth affoord.
                  
               
               
                  Obiections against the vse of Translations in
Schooles answered.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     AS you haue shewed me the benefites which
may come by Grammaticall Translations;
and also how to vse them, that Schollars may attaine the
same: so giue me leaue to propound what doubts I may suspect
concerning the same for the present; and moe hereafter,
as I shall make triall of them.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     Very willingly; for I doe desire to finde out all the
inconueniences that can be imagined, which may comeby
by them: but for mine owne part, I can finde none, if they
be vsed according to the former direction; and yet I haue
done what I could, to finde out whatsoeuer euils might be
to follow of them. Obiect whatsoeuer you can, I thinke I
am able plainly to answere it, and to satisfie you fully in euery
point.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     I will therefore deale plainly with you, in what I
can conceiue for the present.
                  
                  
                     
                     Obiect.
                     1. Translations in Schooles haue not bin found
to bring any such benefite, but rather much hurt; and therfore
the best and wisest Schoole-masters haue not beene
wont to suffer any of them amongst their Schollars.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I will first answere you for the benefites:These vses and benefits cannot be made of any other Translation of the Schoole Authors, but the Grammatical, and why. That it is
true indeede, that these vses and benefites cannot bee made
of any other Translation of any one of our Schoole Authours.
The reasons are euident: first, because none of the
Translators haue followed, nor so much as propounded to
themselues to follow this Grammaticall rule in Translating:
which you see is the meane foundation of all true
construing, parsing, making and trying Latine: and of all
these benefites, to keepe Schollars to goe surely. Secondly,
none of them which I know, haue laboured to expresse the
propriety and force of the Latine, in the first and natiue signification;
which this intendeth continually: and how
much lieth vpon the knowledge of the propriety of the
wordes for the certaine getting of any tongue, euery Schollar
knoweth. Thirdly, none of them haue indeauoured by
a double Translation to make all things plaine, as these do
euery where; labouring to expresse with the wordes, and
Grammar, the sense and meaning also in all obscure places,
with variety of English wordes or phrase: to the end to
teach children thereby, Grammar, propriety, sense with
variety of phrase to expresse their mindes in English, as wel
as in Latine: and all vnder one, that nothing bee wanting.
                  
                  The Translators haue seemed to ayme eyther onely or
principally,What the translator, haue aymed at. at the meaning and drift of the Authour,The Translations of our Schoole Authors extant do perform
                           •
                         none of the benefites which these Grammaticall Translations doe aime at chiefly. which
benefite alone they doe in some sort performe: but for the
rest of the benefits and vses, or for the most of them (as for
true construing▪ parsing, making and trying Latine, which
are the chiefe things here mentioned) they eyther set the
learner at a non plus, or carie him ordinarily cleane amisse.
And therefore there is no maruell, if in that respect they be
vtterly disliked. Triall in any of them, compared to the
rule and the other limits, and especially how in construing,

parsing, and the like, they carry the learner vtterly out of
the way, will presently shew the truth hereof, and commonly
in the very first sentence of them. I will set downe the
words in one or two.
                  Esops Fables construed thus:
                  
                     Dum whilst,Examples of the Translations extant, to manifest the truth hereof. 
                     Gallinaceus the dunghill, Gallus Cocke, Ver
                        
                           •
                        it
scratched, Stercorarium in the dunghill.
                  Tullies Offices translated thus:
                  Marci Tullij Ciceronis
de officijs ad Marcum
filium liber primus.
                  
                     Marcus Tullius Ciceroes
first booke of dueties
to Marcus his sonne.
                  Trie in any one of these, whether a childe can construe
one sentence right and surely,Try all to construe by these. according to Grammar,
or in any certainety of the propriety of the wordes, or
be able to parse or make Latine, or the rest: though some
of these Translatours were learned▪ and gaue the sense; yet
you may perceiue that they aimed not at these endes here
mentioned, or few of them.
                  Thus you see what I haue answered concerning the benefites:
now let vs heare what you say concerning the hurt
comming by them.
                  
                     Obiect. 2. Spoud.
                     Besides that they leade Schollars amisse
very ordinarily in construing, almost in euery sentence;
they are found also to make Schollars Truants,
or to goe by rote (as wee commonly call it) which is
worse.
                  
                  
                     A. Phil.
                     For the first part, that they leade Schollars amisse,
I haue answered; that, that is onely in such Translations,
which respect the sense alone, but doe not respect the
Grammar.
                     
                        
Secondly,Grammaticall translations separate from the Latine, cannot indanger any to make them truants, if they be rightly vsed. for making truants, I aunswere; that these
Grammaticall translations being thus meerly English, and
separate from the Latine altogether, can neuer indanger
any waie to make truants, if they bee vsed according
to the directions prescribed. For first, for construing latine,
there can bee no likelihood hereof, if the translation bee
onely vsed; first to giue some light and vnderstanding of
the lecture amongst the younger; after, to bee onely in
place of the Master, where he cannot be himselfe.
                     Also, where all of the fourme cannot beat out the construing
by the Grammaticall rule, there to direct and point
it out how to take it. Likewise, to giue propriety of English,
and to guide the schollars in place of the Master (who
cannot bee alwaies with euery one) to the end, that in all
things they may goe surely. Secondly, for construing and
making the Latine out of the translation, it chiefly consists
vpon vnderstanding and conceit; and shall more stirre vp
the wit and memory to get propriety and copie of words
and phrases, then all getting without booke can possibly
doe. In getting without book alone, words and sentences
may bee learned, as by Parats, without any vnderstanding:
hereby children must needes vnderstand them: For, hauing
nothing but the bare translation, they must be driuen
of necessitie to beate out the latine, by learning and by reason,
with diligence; and so stirre vp their memories continually.
Also, hereby whensoeuer they shall haue againe the
same English words or phrases to make in Latine, to write
or to speake; the verie same Latine words and phrases,
which they learned in their Authours, doe come straight
wayes to their memories to expresse their mindes. And
in what things they can giue Latine to the English, in
that, as was sayd, they can ordinarily giue English to the
Latine.
                     Indeede,There is great difficulty to vse an interlineall translation, or latine ioined to the English▪
                         where the translation is ioined with the Authour,
and so they are set together answerably word for
word, eyther as the Interlineal set ouer the head, or the English
word or phrase set after the Latine; there the eie of the

childe is no sooner vpon the one, but it will be vpon the other:
and so the memory is not exercised, neither can this
mischiefe be auoided. Yea, where the Author is of the one
page, the translation is on the other ouer against it (like as
it is in Theognis, and some other Greeke Poets) there must
be much discretion for the right vsing of them; otherwise
many inconueniences must needes follow amongst children.
But in these bare translations so by themselues, these
surmised daungers are preuented; if they bee vsed as
hath been shewed. Although for them who are of full discretion
to vse them (as those who would study priuately
for the reoouering their Latine, or increasing therin) it may
bee the most profitable of all, to haue the translation ouer-against
the latine, directly on the other page, after the manner
as Theognis is printed; that folding the booke, they
may looke vpon the one, when they would finde out the other;
and yet haue the other euer at hand, as a master, to
helpe in an instant, where they need.
                  
                  
                     3. Ob. Sp.
                     But the schollars may be idle, when they seem
to be construing, when as one only construeth, and the rest
looke on their bookes.
                  
                  
                     A. Phil.
                     So they may be idle in whatsoeuer exercise they
do amongst themselues,How to preuēt idlenes or negligēce in the vse of the translations, so that one cannot be idle while they are in hand with these. vnlesse the Master be vigilant: but
let the master vse any diligent circumspection, and they
cannot possibly be idle in this, of all other; no not one in
any fourme. For, let but the Master or Vsher haue an eye to
all in generall, though they bee in hand in hearing any
fourme; and where they do marke or but suspect any one
of all the fourmes to bee carelesse, or not to attend; there
let them step to such a one of a sodaine, and bid him set his
finger to the last word which was spoken: and so if any bee
idle, he may bee catched presently. Prouided alwaies, that
no one keep his finger at the book, lest by them the truants
see where it is; but euery one to vse only his eye and his eare.
Some of the most negligent and stubborne so ouertaken
now and then, and sharpely corrected for ensample, will
continually keepe all the rest in order and diligence, at this

time specially. This practice may serue for whatsoeuer they
construe,☜ parse, or examine together, to keepe them fro
                           •
                        
loytering or carelesnesse.
                  
                  
                     4. Ob. Spoud.
                     Wel: you seeme to haue answered the euils
which I feared for the schollars; I shall thinke further of
them. But there may bee greater inconueniences in them
concerning the Masters: as 1. These may bee a meanes to
make the Master idle, by freeing them from giuing lectures,
and much other imployment about the same, which
they are wont to be exercised in.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     The best things may be abused some waie: but otherwise
there cannot be any such danger of idlenesse to the
Master,These, no means to make Masters idle, but contrarily to incourage them to take all paines. who makes conscience of this dutie, or hath any desire
to see his schollars to profit; but an incouragement hereby
to take all possible paines, by seeing the ease and fruite
of his labours. Also, besides the continuall eye that hee is
to haue, that euery one be painfully exercised by them in euery
fourme, and his marking out all the difficult words,
that they may labour those aboue all, and helping in each
fourme where neede is, the Master may bestowe the more
time with the higher fourms; and in poasing & examining,
which is the life of all learning, as hath bin & shall be shewed
further in due place. As before lectures, he may spend
more time continually in examining parts, and in more
exquisite reading lectures in the higher formes, or hearing
them to reade their owne lectures, which is farre the best of
all; or taking paines with the first enterers for euerie tittle:
so in examining and trying exercises and lectures after.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     You seeme to bee maruellous confident in all
things, for the vse and benefit of these translations; and to
make a principall reckoning of them.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I do indeed make a principall account of them very
iustly;The account to be made iustly of these translations. and doe acknowledge my selfe bound vnto God
chiefly for them, aboue al other things which he hath made
knowne vnto me in all my search and trauell.
                     For these are for me insteed of mine owne selfe, hearing

and directing in euery other fourm which I cannot be withall,
or as so many helpers. And by the help and benefit of
these, all my younger Schollars doe seeme to attaine
almost double learning to that, that by mine owne paines
being farre greater, and my griefe much more, I was euer able
to bring them vnto before. For, before the time that I
came to the knowledge and vse of these, as I taught at one
end, my children would forget at an other; and bee as rawe
in that which was learned a quarter or halfe a yeere before,
as if they either had not learned it, or neuer learned it well;
which was no small griefe vnto mee whensoeuer they were
examined: but now take them where you will of a sodaine,
in all the Authors which they haue learned; and they shall
be able in good sort, not onely to construe or parse, but also
to reade out of the English into the Latine and proue it:
at least so many of them as are apt, and the rest in better
maner then I could haue expected of them, vnless the fault
be in my selfe; and that without any losse of time: and to
goe faster forwarde in their Authors then euer they were
wont to do; and without any such fretting or vexing to my
selfe, though I haue but some one written copie in a fourm.
Now trie this amongst your schollars, whether they be able
to doe the like at any time of a sodaine, by all your labour.
For mine owne part, I could neuer by all meanes attaine
vnto it in any measure, especially hauing many fourmes:
neither can I see how I could haue done it, vnlesse I had had
so many bodies, or so many to haue bin continually in my
place, in each fourme one.
                     A small triall will soone make this euident;Triall to make all this euident. proouing
some schollars with them, others learning the same things
without them, in some quarter or halfe yeeres space, whether
haue learned more and the surelier. And therefore I
dare bee bolde to commend this vnto you vpon most vndoubted
experience.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     I do not doubt then, but vpon this so happy an
experience you haue thus translated many of our schoole
Authors.
                  
                  
                     
                     Phil.
                     I haue indeed taken paines in translating so many
of them,Schoole Authors translated Gramatically. as I haue had occasion for my schollars to vse,
since God made knowne vnto me the benefit of them; and
haue either finished them wholly, or some part of each of
them; and hope in time to go thorough them wholly, if the
Lord vouchsafe me life. As namely, to begin at the lowest:

                           Schoole
Authors
translated
or in
hand.
                           Pueriles confabulatiunculae.
                           Sententiae pueriles.
                           Cato.
                           
                              Corderius dialogues.
                           
                              Esops fables.
                           
                              Tullies Epistles gathered by Sturmius.
                           
                           
                              Tullies Offices with the books adioind to them;
de Amicitia, Senectute, Paradoxes.
                           
                           Ouid de Tristibus.
                           Ouids Metamorphosis.
                           Virgil.
                        
                     
                     Also these books following,Other bookes also translated Grammatically for continuall helpes in schooles. wherof I find great benefit:
                     1 Tullies Sentences for entring schollars, to make latine
truly and purely in steed of giuing vulgars, and for vse of
daily translating into latine, to furnish with variety of pure
latine and matter.
                     2 Aphthonius for easie entrance into Theames, for vnderstanding,
matter and order.
                     3 Drax his phrases, to helpe to furnish with copie of
phrase both english and latine, and to attaine to propriety
in both.
                     4 Flores poëtarum, to prepare for versifying; to learn to
versifie, ex tempore, of any ordinary Theame.
                     5 Tully de Natura Deorum; for purity, easinesse, variety,
to helpe to fit with a sweet stile for their disputations in
the Vniuersities.
                     6 Terentius Christianus.
                     Of the further vses of all of which I shall speak in their
proper places:Translations as other things defectiue. though this I must needs confesse vnto you,
that I know them all to be very imperfect, and to haue many
defects: which I euery day obserue, and am continually amending,

hoping to bring them to much more perfection,
as either my selfe, or you, or any other good friend, to whose
hands they shall come, shall obserue the slips, and God
vouchsafe life & his gracious assistance. In the meane time
I intreat you to suspend your iudgement, vntill you haue
seene some triall, if you haue any further doubt concerning
the benefit of them; and then to let me heare plainly as you
finde.
                  
               
               
                  Of construing ex tempore.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     I Rest in these your answeres, which you giue vpon
your experience, for the doubts which may bee
made concerning the Grammaticall translations, and so for
the vse and benefits of them; and also for the construing
of those lower Schoole Authors, which are so translated.
But when your schollars haue gon through these Authors,
what helpes may they vse for the higher Schoole Authors?What helpes to be vsed for higher Authors.
as Horace, Persius, and the like; and so for all other things
to be construed ex tempore.
                     
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     By this time they will do very much in construing
any ordinary Author of themselues, ex tempore; thorough
their perfect knowledge and continuall practice of the rule
of construing,Remembring euer to cast each sentence into the natural order. and by that helpe of their reading in the
lower Authors: I meane the help of the matter, words and
phrase which they are well acquainted with, and of being able
to cast the words into the naturall order.
                     Yet besides these, and the assistance of the Master where
need is, they may vse also these helpes following:
                     1 The best and easiest Commentaries of the hardest
and most crabbed Schoole Authors;1. Commentaries of the hardest Authors. as M. Bonde vpon
Horace: who hath by his paines made that difficult Poet
so easie, that a very childe which hath been well entred, and
hath read the former Schoole Authors in any good manner
may go thorough it with facilitie,Bonde vpon Horace. except in very few places.
Of him, it were to be wished, for his singular dexteritie
in making that difficult Poet plaine in so few words, that he
would take the like paines in the rest of that kinde: as in

Persius and Iuvenall, for the great benefit of Schooles. Or
that som other would do it, following his example.
                     Next vnto him, of those which I haue seene are these:
Murmelius & Buschius vpon Persius,
                        
                           Murmelius printed at Paris 1531. a double Commentarie;
the one shortly expressing the matter, and beating out
the sense & meaning, the other the words. Lubin also vpon
Persius, and Iuvenal,
                        
                           Lubin on Persius and Iuvenal. Helps for Virg. Virg. with Melancht. annotations printed at Witeberg. 1598. is much commended. For short comments
and annotations of Virgil, there may be vsed Ramus
vpon the Eclogues & Georgicks. Also the Virgils printed
with H. Stephens annotations; and with Melancthons.
                     2 Where they haue no help but the bare Author, & that
they must cōstrue wholly of themselues cal vpon them oft,
to labour to vnderstand & keep in fresh memory the Argument,
matter & drift of the place,☜ which they are to cōstrue:
which matter,2. Vnderstanding the Argument, matter & drift in general. they may either find prefixed generally before
the beginning of the treatises, or chapters, in the Argumēts,
or else they are to demand the vnderstanding in general,
of the Master or examiner, what the matter of the place
is, or what it about. Otherwise many places may trouble
the greatest schollars at the first sight.☜
                     
                     3. To consider wel of all the circumstances of each place,3 To consider the common cirrcumstances of places.
which are cōprehended most of them in this plaine verse:
                     Quis, cui, causa, locus, quo tempore, prima sequela.
                     That is, who speaks in that place, what he speaks, to whom
he speakes,This verse comprehending the chief circumstāces of places to be euer in mind. vpon what occasion he speaks, or to what end,
where he spake, at what time time it was, what went before in
the sentences next, what followeth next after. This verse I
would haue euery such schollar to haue readily; and alwaies
to thinke of it in his construing.It is a principal rule for the vnderstanding of Authors or matter. It is a very principall rule
for the vnderstanding of any Author or matt
                           •
                        r whatsoeuer.
                     4 In all hard words or phrases let them first call to remembrance
where they haue learned them, or the primitiue
word whereof they come,4. To search out euery hard word & phrase. or some words neere vnto
them: or otherwise to search them out by inquiring of the
Master, Vsher, or som follow; or of the Dictionaries, which
they ought to haue euer at hand.
                     And in construing their own Authors, let them remember

that generall precept, to marke the newe words with a
line vnder them, as was aduised before; that they may oft go
ouer them: or if they feare they cannot so remember them,
to write them in their books ouer the word, or in the margents
ouer against the words, in a fine small hand, it will not
hurt their bookes: or for sauing their books, let euery one
haue a little paper booke,Or to haue each a little paper booke to note all n
                              •
                           w & hard words in. and therein write onely all the
new and hard words as was obserued generally, to bee very
perfect in those each way, by oft reading ouer; and so they
shal come on very fast: hauing those (as I said) they haue all.
So that these things obserued shall accomplish your desire.
                     1. Consider and way wel the generall matter & argument.The sum of all, for construing without Commentary or or helpe.
                     
                     2. Marke all the hard words in their proper significations.
                     3. Keepe in mind that verse of the circumstances of places;
Quis, cui, &c.
                     
                     4. Cast and dispose the words in the proper Grammaticall
order.
                     5. See that nothing bee against sense,☞ nothing against
Grammar: but if either the sense be absurd, or construction
against Grammar, cast it, and try it another way vntill
you find it out.
                     Finally,Seuerall kinds of construing or expounding. giue me leaue to adde this, before wee end this
matter of construing; That all these kinds of construing, or
rather of expounding and expressing their minds, may be vsed
by schollars of ripenesse, and with much profit.
                     1 According to the bare words in their first signification,
and in the naturall order plainly.
                     2 According to the sense to expresse the mind of the Author
with vnderstanding.
                     3 More elegantly, in finenesse of words and phrase.
                     4 Paraphrastically, by exposition of words and matter
more at large, to make as it were a Paraphrase of it. And
to do this last in good Latine, where they are of ability.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     Sir, you haue satisfied me at large for all this matter
of cōstruing: now I pray you let vs come to parsing, and
the manner of it, which followeth next; that I may haue

your helpe therein. For this hath beene no lesse wearinesse
and vexation vnto me, then the construing hath beene.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     Before we come to parsing,☜ let me also tell you
this one thing:A most profitable exercise, to cause the Schollars, daily to construe some things ex tempore, besides their ordinary Lectures. That besides my Schollars ordinary Lectures,
and repeating daily some part of that which they
haue learned in the lower fourmes; I finde very great good
in causing them euery day in each fourme to construe a
peece of their Authours where they haue not learned; and
that ex tempore, aside, or a leafe at a time, as leisure will permit:
hearing them eyther my selfe, or by some other very
sufficient, how they can doe it; and posing onely some hard
things as they goe forward: noting also the harder wordes
and more difficult places, as was shewed. Also in those
bookes, where of they haue Translations, I cause them by
course sometimes to construe or reade the same, out of the
Translations: as at other times to reade out of the Authour
into English; according to the maner of the Translation.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     This must needes bee exceeding profitable: I
likewise will put it in practice forthwith, if God will; and do
heartily thanke you for imparting it vnto me. But now if
you haue done, to the matter of parsing.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     Let me heare of you, what course you haue vsed
therein, and I will supply whatsoeuer I can.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Of Parsing, and the kindes thereof; and how children
may parse of themselues
readily and surely.
               
                  Spoud.
                  FOr parsing, I haue followed the common course;
which is this,The vsuall manner of Parsing. so farre as I haue seene or heard: viz.
To parse ouer, all my yongest, euery word; and euen
in the same order as the words doe stand in their Authours:

teaching them what part of speech euery word is,
how to decline them; and so all the questions belonging
thereunto: and what each word is gouerned of; the rules for
euerything, and the like.
                  Herein,How to teach children to parse of themselues most surely and readily. after long and much labour, I haue found very
little fruite, through the hardnesse of it, and the weakenesse
of the childrens memories to carie away that which I tolde
them: much lesse haue I beene able to make my litle ones,
no not in the second or third fourmes, so to parse of themselues,
as to giue a true reason of euery word why it must be
so; according to that which I saw in the note, what might
be done in parsing. Now if you haue seen the practice therof,
let me heare it of you, I intreate you; and that in so few
wordes as you can.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes indeed, I haue seene the practice hereof & do
know it, that children will doe very much, to ease & delight
both the Master and themselues exceedingly. Besides some
of the best of those which you mention (as the shewing the
youngest how to parse euery word) I haue learned to obserue
these things following,The certaine direction for parsing. and finde maruellous light,
easinesse, surenesse and helpe of memory by them:
                  1 To cause the children euer to parse as they construe,To parse as they construe, euer marknig the last word.
according to the Grammaticall rule of construing and the
Translations; alwayes marking the last principall word
which went before in construing: wherein (as I shortly shewed
you before) the very childe may see euery principall
word going before, gouerning or ordering that which followeth;
and so he hath therein a guide leading him by the
hand for all the Syntax at least: except in the exceptions
mentioned in the Grammaticall rule; as of Interrogatiues,
Relatiues, &c. which they will soone know: and where one
word gouernes diuers things; as in that example.
Dedit mihi vestem pignori, tepresente, propria manu.
where the word Dedit gouernes most of the rest in a diuers
consideration.2 To remember if they haue not learned the words before.
                  
                  2 To aske among them euery word of any hardnesse,
whether they haue not learned it before: & if they haue, to

repeat where. As it was before, so it is there for the most part.
                  3 For the Etymologie;3 To marke in Nounes, Verbs, Participles, what examples they are like, The rest are in the booke. al the difficulty is in these three
parts of speech, Nounes, Verbs, and Participles; the rest being
set downe in the Accedence, or easily known, as was shewed
before. And in all words of these three parts, do but tell
them what examples they are like in the Accedence: which
examples being knowne, will presently bring to their vnderstanding
all the questions depending on them and their
answers. As, of what part of speech the words are; of what declension
or Coniugation: so the declining, Case, Gender,
Number, Person, Mood, Tense, &c. Also with a litle practice
they wil soon ghesse at them, themselues; & that very right,
to shew what examples they are like, eyther by the English,
or Latine, or both. The same would be also for the Syntax,
both in agreements and gouernements,Paralleling by examples in the Syntax likewise An example of parsing set downe at large, to direct the rudest. euer to shew what
examples they are like. The example makes the rule most
plaine, and imprints all in the childes memory.
                  To make this plaine to the capacity of the simplest,
I will adde one only example, particularly examined out of
the two first verses of Qui mihi discipulus puer es, &c.
                  
                  First,First construe truely. be sure that the childe know the meaning of them,
and can construe them perfectly, as thus:
                  
                     Puer Oh childe, qui who, es art, discipulus a Schollar, mihi
to me, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      and, cupis dost couet (or desire) doceri to bee
taught; ades come, huc hither: concipe conceiue (or consider
well) dicta haec these sayings, animo tuo in thy minde.
                  In this sentence,Parse as they construe. parse the childe after the same manner;
and examine him accordingly. As aske, where he must begin
to parse;Examining in parsing. he answere that Puer, Oh boy, because he began
to construe there. And if you ask why he began to construe
there; he answers by the rule of construing, which biddeth,
If there be a Vocatiue case to begin commonly at it. Then
aske what Puer is like; he answereth, like Magister: which
being knowne of him & he perfect in his examples can tel
you by Magister,
                     Puer. what declension it is, how to decline it, and
the number; and also by the increasing of it short in the Genitiue
case, he can tell you, it is the Masculine Gender by
the third speciall rule.
                  
                     
For the case; that it is the Vocatiue, knowne by calling,
or speaking to the childe. And if you aske, why it may
not be pueri not puero, but puer; he answereth, because it is
the Vocatiue case, which is like the Nominatiue.
                  Afterwards,Qui. demaunding what must be parsed next; hee
answereth qui; because qui is next in construing: and also
that qui is a Pronoune Relatiue, set down in the Accedence,
and there declined. Also that it is the Nominatiue case,
comming before the Verbe es, following it next, by the rule
of the Relatiue; When there commeth no Nominatiue
case: as, Miser est qui nummos admiratur, qui admiratur
So qui es. For the Gender likewise; that it is the Masculine
Gender, because so is his Antecedent puer going next before
in construing: with which the Relatiue agreeth, by the
rule of the Relatiue: The Relatiue agreeth, &c. as vir sapit qui
pauca loquitur: vir qui. So puer qui. Also hee can shew it,
to bee the Masculine Gender, because in wordes of three
terminations, the first is the Masculine, the second the Feminine,
the third is the Neuter. Likewise he can tell why it
must be qui, not cuius, nor cui, nor any other; because it
must be the Nominatiue case to the Verbe, by the rule of
the Relatiue; because no other Nominatiue case commeth
betweene them. So all other questions. For Person; it is
made the second person here, by a figure called Euocation,
because it agreeth with puer, which is made of the second
person; and by the same figure Euocation, as euery Vocatiue
case is, by reason of Tu vnderstood.
                  Then followeth es,
                     Es. art: of which word the childe can
giue you all the Questions; because hee hath learned it in
his Accedence, and is perfect in it. If you aske why it must
be es, and not est, nor any other word; he answereth, because
it is Thou art, not He is, nor I am: and also because in that
place qui his Nominatiue case is of the second person, as
was said.Discipulus. If you then aske what is parsed next; he answereth
discipulus, because hee construed so: and discipulus is like
Magister. Which being knowne, the childe can tell the
questions of declining, Gender, Case, Number, and the rest

appertayning thereto. If you demaund further, why it
must be Discipulus and not Discipulum; why it must be a
Nominatiue case after the Verbe, and not an Accusatiue
according to the rules, The Accusatiue followeth the
Verbe; and also that rule, Verbes Transitiues are all such,
&c. He answereth, because this Verbe Sum es, is a Verbe
Substantiue intransitiue, not a transitiue; and therefore will
haue such case after it as it hath before it: as Fama est malum,
est malum. And that other rule for the Accusatiue
after the Verbe, is of Transitiues, whose action passeth into
another thing. So to proceede throughout for shortnesse,
thus:
                  Mihi] is parsed next, because it it next in construing.Mihi▪
                      It
is a Pronoune set downe in the booke. All the questions
are plaine in it, except why it must bee the Datiue case:
which is, because it is gouerned of es, the principall gouernour
going before, by the rule of the Datiue case after
sum, Also sum with his compounds, except possum, &c. and,
for that, one word may gouerne diuers cases; or it may
be gouerned of Discipulus the Substantiue, by the rule of
the later of two Substantiues, turned into a Datiue: wherein
the English rules are defectiue. The rule in Latine, is
Est etiam vbi in Datiuum, vertitur, &c.
                  
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     ] is next in construing;At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        . and therefore in
parsing. It is a Coniunction Copulatiue, set downe in
the booke. It is also a Compound Coniunction; compounded
of at and que. It is put here to couple these members
of the sentence together, viz. Cupis doceri, with that going
before.
                  Cupis] is next:Cupis. It is like Legis, Thou readest. Which
being knowne, the childe can tell you what Coniugation,
Moode, Tense, Number, Person, the word Cupis is; and
why it must be so, and not cupiunt, nor any other worde;
because at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                      couples like Moodes and Tenses: and it is,
Thou couetest. Other questions which fall out in declining,
the childe can tell; as, why it is Cupiui, by the exception
of the rule Fit pio, pi. And why Cupitum, by the

rule of the ending of the Preterperfect tense in vi. Vi
                           •
                        it
tum.
                  
                  
                     Doceri] is parsed next,Doceri. because it is construed next: it is
in my booke, saith the childe, and it signifieth to be taught.
Thus hee can answere all the questions, why it must
bee doceri, not docere: also why it must come next; because
an Infinitiue moode doeth commonly follow another
moode.
                  
                     Ades] is next in order,Ades. and is in all things like es in sum,
compounded of ad and sum: and it must be so, because it is
Come thou, not adest not adsunt.
                  
                  
                     Huc] is next in construing,Huc. because Aduerbes are vsually
ioyned to the Verbs, to declare their signification. It is an
Aduerbe of place signifying hither, or to this place.
                  
                     Concipe] is like Lege,
                     Concipe. Reade thou. This being knowne, the
part of Speech, Moode, Tense, Number, Person, and
most questions of it are knowne; except two or three of the
compounding it with a Preposition, and of changing of the
letters a, into i. Which are to be learned after by the rule in
their booke.
                  
                     Dicta] is next,Dicta. because the Substantiue, which is more
principall, and to which the Adiectiue agreeth, must goe
before the Adiectiue in parsing; though in our English, Adiectiues
goe before. It is like Regna. The Accusatiue case,
Neuter Gender, Plurall Number, following the Verbe Concipe,
by Verbes Transitiues. And the Neuter Gender by my
rule of all wordes like Regnum. Omne quod exit in um. And
Neutrum nomen in e. It must also end in a, in the Accusatiue
case Plurall number, because all Neuters do end so in three
like cases. It is deriued of the Supine dictu, by putting to m.
                  
                  
                     Haec] is a Pronoune demonstratiue,Haec. agreeing with dicta,
by the rule of the Relatiue: and it must bee so by that rule.
                  
                     Animo] followeth next,Animo. the Substantiue to be set before
the Adiectiue; it is like Magistro in all. The Ablatiue case,
because it signifieth in the minde, and not into the minde:
because, in, without this signe, to, serues to the Ablatiue
case, and is a signe thereof. It is also by the rule, Sometime

this Preposition In, is not expressed but vnderstanded.
                  
                     Tuo] A Pronoune possessiue,Tuo. like bono or meo, but that it
wants the Vocatiue case. It is set downe in my booke, and
doth agree in al things with animo; by the rule of, The Adiectiue,
whether it be Noune, Pronoune or Participle, agreeth
with his Subst. &c. And so on for the rest.
                  In this first kinde of parsing,Manner of hearing their Lectures. you may at the first entrance,
aske them the English of each word, and cause them
to giue you the Latine, and so to parse, looking on their
Latine bookes, to incourage them; iust in the manner as is
set downe.
                  After a little time cause them to doe it, looking onely
vpon the English Translation.
                  Then (which is the principall,☜ and wherein you will take
much delight) cause them amongst themselues to construe
and parse out of the translation vntill they can say, or out
of their Authours, whether they can sooner: but when they
come to say, cause them to say each sentence, first in English,
then to construe and parse them; and all with their
bookes vnder their armes: what they cannot repeat so, they
will doe it if you aske them questions of it. You shall finde
by experience, that with a little practice, all who are apt will
do this as soone, readily, & perfectly, as looking vpon their
books (if so that they but vnderstand the matter wel before)
and so they will make all their owne most surely. Thus I
would haue them to do in Sententiae, Confabulatiunculae and
Cato if you will. After in the middle fourmes, as in E
                           •
                        ops Fables,
Ouid de Tristibus, or Ouids Metamorphosis, &c (because
eyther the matter is not so familiar and easie to remember,
or the Lecture longer) I would haue them to parse thus,
looking vpon their translation; but then to parse wholly in
Latine: and I can assure you by some good experience, that
through Gods blessing▪ you will admire their profiting.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Surely Sir▪ this way of parsing is most direct and
plaine; and the benefits must needes bee exceeding great:
but giue me leaue yet to aske one thing of you, concerning
this parsing amongst the younger. I haue heard of some,

who would teach their enterers to know by the very words,How to know by the wordes what part of speech each word is.
what part of Speech each word is. How may that be done?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This may very well be done, euen according to this
ensample aboue, when euery thing is examined at large.
As for example, Cause your Schollar to doe this:
                  1 To marke out all those wordes, which they haue learned,
being set downe in their Accedences; as Pronounes,
Aduerbes, Coniunctions, Interiections: that they knowe
all those. Then haue they nothing to trouble them with;
but they may know that all the rest are eyther Nounes,
Verbes or Participles, or else Gerunds or Supines belonging
to the Verbes, or some other Aduerbs.
                  2 For those partes of Speech, when your Schollar can
construe perfectly, they may bee knowne by their Latine
and English together, whether they be Nounes, Verbs, Participles,
or such Aduerbes; chiefly, when they are very cunning
in their parts of Speech in their Accedence, and questions
thereof.
                  1 The Noune Substantiues, that they are names of things,
to which you may put to a,
                     Substantiues, and how to know them. or the, as was said; as A boy, A
Schollar: but cannot put to the word Thing, in any good
sense. And morefully, when the Latine is put to the English;
as puer A boy, like Magister: discipulus a schollar, like Magister.
                  
                  The Noune Adiectiues contrarily,How Adiectiues. though they signifie
a thing; yet they cannot stand by themselues in sense, vnlesse
you put to (Thing) or some other word expresly or vnderstood;
nor you cannot in proper speech put to a, or the.
As we cannot say properly, A good, An euill: but wee may
say A good man, A good house, An euill thing. And when
they are put Substantiuely, yet Thing is properly vnderstood:
as bonum a good thing, summum bonum the chiefest
good thing; though wee call it the chiefest good.
                  These Adiectiues also may be more fully vnderstood,By the Latine adioyned. In us or er like bonus,
                      by
the Latin words: as if they end in us or er, they are like bonus;
except those expressed like Nounes, and some few strange
Adiectiues, which are partly Substantiues partly Adiectiues

set downe in the Rule, At sunt quae flexu &c. as Pauper, puber,
&c. And in the Rule, Haec proprium, &c. as Campester,
&c.
                  
                  Adiectiues ending in ans or ens (though they be Participles)
and also in x,
                     
                        In ans, ens, x, rs, like foelix. and rs, as concors, are declined like foelix;
and some in or, as memor.
                  
                  Adiectiues in is,
                     
                        In is, ior, ius, like tristis. 
                     ior, [or jor] and ius signifying the Comparatiue
degree, that is to say, more, are like Tristis: as Dulcis,
dulcior, maior, dulcius.
                  
                  Finally, if the childe but knowe his word to be like any
of the examples of a Nown Substantiue, as Musa, Magister,
Regnū, Lapis, Manus, Meridies, he knoweth it to be a Nown
Substantiue. If like bonus, vnus, foelix, tristis, a Nown Adiectiue.
                  Verbes also may be knowen most plainly by the English
and Latine together.How Verbes may be known. As, the words signifying, doing,
suffering or being, and like Amo, doceo, lego, audio, or amor,
doceor, legor, audior, or any person comming of them in any
Moode or Tense, and signifying like to them, are Verbs.
So by the signes of the tenses; do, did or didst, haue, hast,
hath, had or haddest, shall or will. By the signes of the
moods; Or signes of the Passiue: as am, are, art, was, were,
wert, be or beene: where any of these signes are, are commonly
Verbes.
                  And finally, this is generall for the Verbes, as for the
Nownes; that if either the childe can tell of himself, or you
but shewe him what person in a Verbe it is like, hee can tell
presently that it is a Verbe, and most questions belonging
to it▪ As, knowing that cupis thou couetest, is like legis thou
readest, he knoweth presently, that it is a Verb of the third
Coniugation, and the Mood, Tense, &c.
                  The like may bee sayde for Gerunds of Verbes,Gerunds. and
Supines,Supines. in all things, as for the Verbe before.
                  ParticiplesParticiples. also may bee plainely knowen by the verie
same manner; and chiefly by their endings in English and
Latine both together. As, the words that ende in [ing]
in English, and in Latine in ans or ens, are Participles

of the Present tense.Present tense Preter tense. Words in d, t, or n, and their Latine in
tus, sus, xus, are Participles of the Preter tense. So those
words ending in rus in Latine, and signifying to doe or about
to doe,Future in rus.
                      of the Future in rus. And in dus, signifying to
be done like the Infinitiue moode Passiue,Future in dus.
                      are Participles of
the Future in dus.
                  
                  Aduerbes (besides those in the booke,How to know other Aduerbes besides those in the bookes. or which
should bee set downe in the English Aduerbe as they are in
the Latine) are but either Aduerbes of Comparison or of
Qualitie.
                  Those of Comparison end in us,
                     Of Comparison. and signifie more; or
in e, and signifie most.
                  Those of Qualitie end in è,
                     Qualitie. or in er commonly; and all
of these haue their English vsually ending in ly: as doctè
learnedly, doctiùs more learnedly, doctissimè most learnedly.
                  To conclude, they are also marked commonly in all
bookes which are well printed, with graue accents ouer
them, to distinguish them from other parts of Speech,
and that they may be knowen to bee Aduerbes: as doctè
learnedly, to bee knowen from docte the Vocatiue case of
the Adiectiue: so doctiùs. And thus are all Aduerbes of like
nature; as quàm then, to be distinguished from quam which,
the Pronowne.
                  And also sundry Prepositions are so marked: as ponè,
propè.
                  
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I approue and see the reason of all this, that the
parts of Speech may bee knowen or neerely ghessed at:
and I doe still go on with you, reioycing in this our conference.
                  Notwithstanding, there is one thing I haue heard, that a
child may not only be taught to know what part of Speech
each word is, but also of what Coniugation any Verbe is,
if hee heare but onely the first person of the Indicatiue
Mood; that is, if he heare but onely the Verbe named. Now
this seemeth to me vnpossible; there being so many hundreth
Verbes all ending in o, and they so like one another;

and especially those of the first and third Coniugation, so
hard to bee distinguished,A child may know of what Coniugation any Verbe is. that this may oft trouble a learned
man, and much more a young schollar.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This which seemes to you so impossible, may bee
likewise easilie done by a childe, by the helpe of this direction
which I shall heere set downe before your face, and by
one obseruation or two arising there from.
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           A direction how to know the Coniugation of any
Simple Verb (and so of the Compounds which
may be knowne by the Simples) although
the learner neuer heard the
Verbes before.
                           ALl Verbes in ëo,
                              A direction to know the Coniugations of Verbs. as doceo, are of the second Coniugation:
except a fewe of the first Coniugation; and eo,
queo, veneo, which are of the fourth.
                           So Deponents also in ëor are of the second: as fateor,
tueor,
                              Verbs of the second Coniugation easily knowen. 
                              mereor, vereor, misereor, liceor, with their Compounds.
                           And onely these sixe, so farre as I remember. So also
Verbes in ëo alone.
                           All Verbes ending in ïo as audio,
                              Verbs of the 4. Coniugation. and in ïor, as audior,
and they onely, are of the fourth Coniugation, except a
fewe which are of the third, and some of the first noted
after.
                           All the Verbes of the third Coniugation are set downe
in the rules of the Verbs,Verbs of the 3. Coniugation. at Tertia praeteritum formabit, &c.
Except these which follow in this Table, which are also of
the third.
                           
                              
                              üo

                                    acuo, arguo, exuo,
imbuo, induo, minuo,
sternuo, suo,
tribuo, delibuo,
indè delibutus.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              bo

                                    glubo.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              co

                                    ico.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              do

                                    cudo, pando, pindo,
idem quod pinso,
prehendo, contractè
prendo, accendo,
succendo,
incendo, à cando
obsoleto, defendo,
offendo, infendo,
à fendo obsoleto.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              go

                                    cingo, clango, fligo,
frigo, mergo,
mungo, plango,
sugo, tego, tingo,
vngo.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              guo

                                    distinguo, extinguo,
restinguo, instinguo,
à stinguo
obsoleto, indè instinctus,
instinctor
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              lo

                                    
                                       consulo, molo, to
grinde: but immolo,
as: promello,
an old word, signifying
to stir vp
strife, or to make
delay.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              mo

                                    fremo, gemo, tre
                                          ••
                                       o
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 
                                    〈◊〉
                                 
                                 
                                    dispe
                                          •••
                                       , to
stretch abroad▪
                                       
                                          〈…〉
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              po

                                    clepo, repo, serpo,
sculpo.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              pso

                                    
                                       clepso, pro clepo to
steale or take awaie.
                                    
                                       depso, to kneade.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              to

                                    beto, quasi bene
ito, to goe.
                                    
                                    Varro.
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              sco

                                    All in sco, except
conisco, as, to push
with the head, as
Rams do. lucret.
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           
                              These old words
                              clingo.
                              cludo.
                              lido.
                              geno.
                              pago.
                              tago.
                              spicio.

                                    for

                                          cingo.
                                          claudo.
                                          laedo.
                                          gigno.
                                          pango.
                                          tango.
                                          specio.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           These following
are of the first and
third coniugation
in the same signification.
                           
                              la
                                    •
                                 o, sono, tono, piso
to stamp out the
huskes of corne.
                           These also of the
first and third, in a
diuerse signification.
                           
                              
                                 appello, as, to call.
appello, is, appuli,
to bring to, to approach,
to arriue,
to apply.
                              
                                 caluo, as, to make
balde.
                              
                                 caluo, is, to deceiue.
                              
                                 colo, as, to
straine.
                              
                                 colo, is, to worship.
                              
                                 como, as, to trim
or lay out.
                              
                                 como, is, to
kembe.
                              
                                 consterno, as, to
trouble in mind,
consterno, is, to
strewe or scatter.
                              
                                 dico, as, to vow,
offer, dedicate.
dico, is, to say.
                              
                                 duco, as, as educo,
as, to bring vp.
duco, is, to leade.
                              
                                 euallo, as, to cast
out of the dores.
euallo, is, to vanne
or to make clean
corne.
                              
                                 
                                 fundo, as, to
found, establish▪
                                 fundo, is, to poure
out.
                              
                                 iugo, iugas, to
yoake.
                              
                                 iugo, is, to cry
like a Kite.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       •
                                    ego, as, to send
Embassador, or
to bequeath.
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       •
                                    ego, is, to read, to gather,
steale, or
to strike sayle.
                              
                                 mando, as, to command,
mando, is, to eate.
                              
                                 nicto, as, to winke
often.
                              
                                 nicto, is, to open
as a hound, or
quest as aspaniel.
                              
                                 pedo, as, to prop.
pedo, is, to breake
winde.
                              
                                 sero, as, to locke.
sero, is, to lay
in order or to
sowe.
                           
                           These are of the
second and third;

                                 pendeo, pendo.
                                 tergeo, tergo.
                              
                           
                           
                              These old words,
                              feruo.
                              cauo.
                              fulgo.
                              olo.
                              cluo.
                              frenlo.

                                    for

                                          ferueo.
                                          caueo.
                                          fulgeo.
                                          oleo.
                                          clueo.
                                          frendeo.
                                          excello and excelleo.
                                       
                                    
                                 
                              
                           
                           Of the first Coniugation,
There are some in

                                 
                                    •
                                 o, as, beo, meo,
screo.
                           
                           And al other verbs
in ëo deriued from
Nowns in ëus, & ë
                                    •
                                 ,
as calceo: of which
also is calcio, of calceus;
nauseo, of nausea.
                           
                           Some also in ïo, as
frio, h
                                    •
                                 o, pio to
please God by sacrifice.
                           
                              Trauìo.
                              gargaridio

                                    olde.
                                 
                              
                           
                           And al other verbs
in ïo and ïor, deriued
from Nownes
in ï
                                    •
                                 s, iae, ium, and
ies: as nuncio, of
nuncius.
                           
                           
                              saucio,
                              à scio.
                              somnio,
                              calumnior,
                              auxilior,
                              glacio à glacies.
                              satio à saties.
                              meridior.
                           
                           And so all other
like; except these
which are of the
fourth Coniugation;
as, ineptio,
                              
                                 insanio,
                                 vesanio,
                                 lasciuio.
                                 balbutio,
                                 fastidio.
                                 munio à maeniae.
                              
                           
                           Finally all other
Verbes besides
these, are of the
first Coniugation;
and are infinitely
moe then of all
the other three
Coniugations
iointly.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  I see that to bee true, which is said of a Parable;
that before it be expounded, nothing seems more hard and
obscure; but when it is once made plaine, nothing is more
cleare: so is it in this, and in the way of construing and parsing,
by the helpe of the rule, and in diuers other things,
which you haue shewed vnto me.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is most certaine which you say. I my selfe haue
so thought, this matter of knowing what Coniugation anie
Verb is of, to be impossible: but you see what things, paine
and diligence may find out.This direction for finding out the Coniugation receiued frō M. Coot
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                      As for this direction, I acknowledge
it wholly to that painfull M. Coot; who writ the English
Schoolemaster. And by this one, it may euidently appeare,
what further benefit the Latine tongue might haue
hoped for by his labors, if God had vouchsafed him life to
haue brought them to perfection; or if others had bin carefull
to haue afforded him that helpe that they might haue
done.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It is great pitty that he, or any other, should want
any help or means, in so profitable a work; and a token of
Gods displeasure, that we should be depriued of such profitable
labors. But, to return again to this matter of parsing;
you haue very well satisfied mee concerning the younger
sort & their parsing: yet there is one thing concerning this
Grammaticall parsing amongst the younger, which I must
craue of you.Much time and toile in parsing thorough examining each word by the Master, how helped. That there is so much time spent in examining
euery thing; the Master asking each question particularly,
and the schollar answering: which besides the losse of
time, is a very great wearinesse to the Master. I pray you
shewe mee the very shortest and speediest waie which you
knowe.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Some very learned would haue this parsing to be
by pen,The surest shortest and speediest way of parsing. and by characters for shortnesse: But howsoeuer
this may be done among 2. or 3. schollars taught by themselues;Some account to be by pen and characters. put this will be found most short and easie.
yet this seemeth to require farre more time (both
for writing to set euery thing down, and also for examining
by the Master) then can bee performed in the common
Schooles.
                  
                     
But the shortest, surest, most pleasant & easie waie both
to Master and Schollar, I touched before, if you marked it:
and it is this. After that they haue been entred, and trained
vp some twelue-month in the lowest fourme by questions,
as the example was shewed out of Qui mihi; then, when
they goe into the next fourme,To parse euerie one his peece, as reading a lecture. as into Cato, to begin to
parse euerie one of themselues, as reading a lecture, each
his peece. I meane chiefly, when they come to say their
lectures.
                  For example:Example. To take those two first verses of Qui mihi,
because they are parsed before.☜ First let them construe
perfectly in the Grammaticall order, as was sayd: then let
each parse his word or two, as they construed, euer marking
the last word, and in all things iust in the same manner, as is
set downe before; but only to doe it of themselues without
any question asked, for the sauing of time: Onely the Master,
or he who heareth them, is to aske where they do omit
any necessary question in any word, or where they misse.
                  As thus:Example. The childe hauing construed, beginnes of himselfe,
                  
                     Puer oh child: It is to be parsed first because it is first in
construing. Puer, is like Magister. A Nowne Substantiue
common of the second Declension; and so he declines it,
so farre as the Master thinkes meete, at least giuing the Genitiue
case; for if they be wel entred in the Accedence, they
will easily decline any regular word, when they knowe the
example. After he shews the rule when he hath declined any
Nown or Verbe. As Puer pueri, is a graue increaser; and
therfore of the Masculine Gender. Nomen cresentis penultimasi
Genitiui sit grauis &c. Also the Vocatiue case knowen
by calling or speaking to, as ô Magister, ô Master. Qui is
next, a Pronowne Relatiue, &c. So euery thing in the same
order as before.
                  To help your schollars to do this:☜ Remember first when
you haue vsed for a time to parse them ouer euery word so,To help to prepare the children for parsing, at taking lectures▪
                     
before them, that by your example they may do the like;
then for speediness, when they haue taken their lectures of

themselues, that they can cōstrue to cause only som one of
them to read ouer their lecture, to see that they pronounce
it right, and to construe if you will, if time so permit, or
to reade it ouer to them: And what words you obserue to
be hard, which you thinke they know not, you may aske
them what those words are like, and how they are declined,
or where they haue learned them,To marke out hard words. as was sayd. Where they
cannot tell any, or haue any newe word which they haue
not learned, to make that plaine vnto them, and to cause
euerie one of the fourm, as was directed in the third generall
obseruation,See more of this marking before in the 3. generall obseration. to make a line vnder that word, or vnder
that part of the word, that letter or syllable wherein the
difficulty lieth; for a little helpe will bring the whole to remembrance.
Or to note them with some marke or letter
ouer the head of the word.
                  As in the enterers, to note the Declension with a d, ouer
the head, and a figure signifying which Declension.
                  The Coniugation with a c, and a figure.
                  Heteroclites with an h; lame Verbes with an l.
                  
                  For example, to take that which was parsed before
                  
                     
                        Example of marking hard words amongst the first enterers.
                        Qui mihi discipulus2. d. puer2. d. es cupis3. c. at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            doceri,
                        Huc ades haec animo concipe dicta tuo.
                     
                  
                  Here discipulus and puer are noted for the second Declension,
cupis the third Coniugation, ades for the Composition
of ad and sum, concipe for changing a into i.
                  
                  Or you may marke Declensions and Coniugations, by
setting downe but onely the first letters of the examples,
which they are like, as discipulusmag., puermag., cupisleg., &c.
                  
                  The former is the shorter, after they are acquainted with
it, and can make their figures.
                  And euer what rules they are not well acquainted with,☞
turne them,To cause them to turne to the rules. or cause them to turne to the places in their
Grammar, and to shew them to you.
                  
                     
As they proceede to higher fourmes,Noting in the higher fourm. and are more
perfect, marke onely those which haue most difficulty;
as Notations, Deriuations, figuratiue Constructions,
Tropes, Figures▪ and the like: and what they feare they
cannot remember by a marke, cause them to write
those in the Margent in a fine hand, or in some little
booke.
                  In the lower fourmes, you marking one booke your selfe,
all the rest may marke theirs after it, vntill they can doe it
of themselues.
                  The ends of this marking,The ends of marking their bookes. are, as I said, that they may take
most paines in these; for the rest they can doe easily, and
almost of themselues. And also that when they construe
and repeat ouer their Authors, they may oft pose ouer those
hard wordes. And thus they shall keepe their Authours,
which they haue learned, to the credite of the Schoole, with
the profiting and incouragement of the schollars, that
they shall goe farre safer forward, then by any other
meanes.
               
               
                  Spou.
                  But this marking may indanger them, to make them
Truants, & to trust their books more then their memories.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I answere no,Marking the hardest wordes for remembrance, is no meanes to make them Truants, but helpeth and preuenteth many inconueniences. not at all; but to performe a necessary
supply vnto the children. For childrens memories
are weake: and they are soone discouraged by the difficultie
of learning and by the hastinesse of their Masters. And
therefore they had neede of all helpes at the beginning. It
is also the oft repeating ouer of any thing, which imprints
it in their memory for euer.
                  Of the contrary, trie amongst children of the sharpest wits
& best memories, if they haue not some such helps, whether
they will not be long in learning to parse a Lecture:Euils of the want hereof. & when
they can parse it very perfectly, proue them within a month
after, whether they will not haue forgotten, at least most of
the hardest & chiefe matters. Then think what a vexation it
is to the honest minded Mast that would be alwaies ready to
giue an accoūt of the profiting of his schollar; & withal whē
he must teach him euery thing anew, wch he hath forgotten:

neyther his leisure will any way serue; hee hauing many
fourmes▪ and being to goe forward daily with his Schollars
in some new construction; besides many other like discommodities.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But there is another kinde of apposing, which I
remember in the note, and which you mentioned; how to
teach children to make right vse of their Authours, euen
of euery sentence: which I conceiue not of.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes truely:How to appose so as the children may get both the matter, words, and phrase of each Lecture. and that which I account the very principall,
and as it were the very picking out of the kernell, and
the life of euery Lecture; to get both the matter and also
the Latine wordes and phrases, that they make them their
owne, to vse as neede or occasion requireth.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  That must needs be of excellent vse: for though
it be commendable to construe, & to parse perfectly; yet it
is nothing in regard of this, if they shall not know how to
make their vse and benefite eyther of matter or phrase.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This is onely by apposing them, as I shewed you
the manner in the Propria quae maribus, to make them to vnderstand;
and that first in English, then in Latine: and to
cause them to answere both wayes, both wordes and sentences,
as time will permit.
                  For example;Example. Take a sentence or two in the beginning
of that little booke, called Sententiae pueriles: which is well
worthy to be read first vnto children, because it hath beene
gathered with much care & aduice to enter younger schollars,
for Latine and matter euery way meete for them: but
of it and others, what I finde best to be read, I shall shew you
my experience in another place. Out of it you may examine
thus, for making vse, as in the these first sentences of it:

                        Amicis opitulare.
                        Alienis abstine.
                        Arcanum cela.
                        Affabilis esto, &c.
                     
                  
                  1 If you will,☞ you may aske them by a question of the
contrary,Manner of propounding the questions. Must you not helpe your friends? The childe answereth,
Yes. Then bid him giue you a sentence to proue it;

hee answereth, Amicis opitulare.
                  
                  Or aske by a distribution thus; Whether must you helpe
or forsake your friends? The childe answereth, I must helpe
them. Then bid him to giue you a sentence; he answereth,
Amicis opitulare.
                  
                  Or thus by Comparison; Whether ought you to helpe
your friends, or others first? or friends or enemies, &c.
When the childe hath answered, euer bid him to giue his
sentence. So on in the rest.
                  The more plainly you can propound your question, that
the childe may vnderstand it, and may answere in the very
wordes of his Lecture, the better it is: so to examine the
wordes seuerally: How say you Helpe? he answereth Opitulare.
Friends, Amicis. But of this more after.
                  After the childe hath beene a while thus practiced,Example of examining English and Latine together. then
vse to examine both in English and Latin together: I mean
propounding the questions first in English, then in Latine;
and so let him answere, that the matter and English may
bring the Latine with them: which they will certainly doe.
The manner I shewed in examining in the Latine rules: I
will set downe one other example, in the sentences of three
wordes; Amor vincit omnia.
                  
                  Out of this sentence I examine thus:
                  
                     Q. What is that, that will ouercome all things?
                  
                     A. Loue.
                  Then bid him giue the sentence.
                  
                     A. Amor vincit omnia.
                  Or thus: Is there any thing that can ouercome all
things?
                  
                     A. Yes; Loue.
                  Or thus more particularly, to put delight and vnderstanding
into them;
                  
                     Q. What is that which will ouercome learning, & make
it our owne?
                  
                     A. Loue of learning, or louing our bookes.
                  
                     Q. Giue me a sentence to proue it.
                  
                     A. Amor vincit omnia, &c.
                  
                     
Then examine in Latine the very same things; but vttering
them in Latine and English together, as thus:
                  
                     Quid vincit omnia? what will ouercome all things?
                  R. Amor.
                  
                  Or thus: Est ne aliquid quod potest omnia vincere? Is there
any thing that can ouercome all things? R. Imò.
                  
                  
                     Q. Quidest? What is it?
                  R. Amor.
                  
                  
                     Q. Da sententiam.
                  
                     R. Amor vincit omnia.
                  
                     Q. Or thus: Quid vincit amor? What wil loue ouercome?
                  R. Omnia, All things.
                  So in Cato,
                     Examining for the vse in Cato. to aske, as in the first Verses,
                  
                     Q. What thing ought to be chiefe vnto vs?
                  
                     A. The worship of God.
                  
                     Q. Dasententiam.
                  
                     R. Cultus Deipraecipuus.
                  
                     Q Dacarmen.
                  
                     R. Si Deus est animus nobis, &c.
                  Then to examine the Verses by parts if you will: as Si Deus
est animus, &c. Aske,
                  
                     Qualis est Deus, What is God, or what a one?
                  A. Animus, A spirit, or spirituall nature or being.
                  
                     Q. Qui ita nobis dicunt? vel, Quae nobis ita dicunt? Who
or what things tell vs so?
                  
                  R. Carmina, Verses, or Poets who write Verses.
                  
                     Q. Quomodo tum co
                        •
                     endus est?
                  
                     R. Pura mente.
                  
                     Q. Dacarmen.
                  
                     R. Si Deus est animus, &c.
                  Thus throughout, onely where they vnderstand not, to
propound the question, as well in English, as in Latine, and
so to answere.
                  Also you may examine thus: What Verses in Cato haue
you, to proue that the worship of God must bee chiefly regarded?
A. Si Deus est animus.
                  
                  What against sleepinesse and idlenesse?
                  
                     A. Plus vigila semper, &c.
                  
                     
So in Esops Fables,Examining the Fables in Esop for the vse. besides the examining euery peece of
a sentence in the Lectures, as thus:
                  Gallus Gallinaceus dum vertit stercorarium offendit gemmam,
&c.
                  
                     Q. Quid offendebat Gallus dum vertit stercorarium?
                  
                     R. Offendit gemmam, &c.
                  Cause the children to tell you, what euery Fable is about
or against, or what it teacheth, in a word or two. For example,
thus:
                  
                     Q. What Fable haue you against the foolish contempt
of learning and vertue, and preferring play or pleasure before
it?
                  
                     A. The Fable of the Cocke, scratching in the dung-hill.
                  Or after this manner:
                  
                     Q. What Fable haue you against the foolish neglect of
learning?
                  
                     A. The Fable of the Cocke, scratching in the dung-hill.
                  2 Cause them to make a good and pithy report of the
Fable;Making a report of their Fables. first in English, then in Latine: and that eyther in the
wordes of the Authour, or of themselues as they can; and as
they did in English. For, this practice in English to make a
good report of a Fable, is of singular vse, to cause them to
vtter their mindes well in English; and would neuer bee omitted
for that and like purposes.
                  In other bookes the vse is according to the quality of
them:The vse according to the quality of the bookes. as in Confabulatiunculae pueriles, the vse is for the
children to talke to one another in the same words.
                  In Sturmius Epistles, and others of Tully, the phrase principally
is to be regarded: as also in the Poets, the Poeticall
phrase.
                  For the further vse of them for imitation both in Epistles
and Verses, I shall speake after in their place.
                  But for the Latine and matter to make it our owne,☜ I finde
the chiefe benefit to be in oft reading them out of the Grammatical
translations,The surest way to make both Latine and matter our owne. ouer and ouer, vntill the Latine be as
familiar to the schollar, as the English: as I noted in the benefits
of the Translations. And also in saying and repeating

of Lectures (I meane the weekes worke) to construe without
booke: and then repeare them in Verse, or as they are
without booke.
                  For the vse in Tullies Offices and Ouids Metamorphosis,
                     Vse in Tullies Offices, and Ouids Metamorphosis. I
haue set in the Margents of the Translations, the sum of all
the matter; which is very notable and full of delight.
                  For parsing in the highest fourmes:☞ to obserue onely for
breuity sake the difficulties of Grammar or Rhetorick,Parsing in the higher fourms. speciall
phrases, or the like; the Master onely to examine what
things they omit, or wherein he suspects them negligent. In
parsing they may vse these or the like speeches:
                  Hae sunt difficultates Grammaticae. Hae elegantiae Rhetorices.
Reliqualcuiora, trita, puerilia, &c.
                  
                     In Poetry also, Phrases hae: Epitheta ista.
                  Let all this examination be onely in pure Latine,☞ from
the very lowest fourmes,All in Latine in the higher fourmes. except the first or second at the
most. For they will do it with ease if they be rightly entered
from the beginning; and that the Master euer do it before
them where they are not able: and to obserue wherein they
are most defectiue, therein to take the most paines.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Although these things cannot but be very profitable;
yet being so many, they can hardly be put in practice
in the greater Schooles. I pray you rehearse me the summe
of those which you take most necessary for daily vse.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These are they;The summe of all, principally necessary for parsing. Cause your schollars to reade first
their Lecture distinctly and construe truly: to parse as they
construe, euer marking the last principall word: to shew
where they haue learned euery hard word: what example
euery hard word is like; so to giue rules & examples of
them, both for Etymologie & Syntax, as after for the Rhetorick,
as need is. To parse of themselues, as reading a Lecture,
and that only in Latin when they come to say, except in the
very lowest fourmes: to make some marke at euery hard
word, which you note vnto them, to take the most pains in
those: amongst the younger specially, to examine each Lecture
for the vse; wherby they may get matter, wordes, and
phrases, all vnder one. In the highest, for speedines to examine

onely the difficulties, as you see requisite; to let
them name the rule in a word or two; to obserue phrases
and Epithets. In all repetitions amongst themselues, and
construing ouer their Authours, to examine ouer also the
noted wordes, as time permits.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Of making Latine; how to enter children therein,
with delight and certainty, without danger of
false Latine, barbarous phrase, or any other
like inconuenience.
               
                  Spoud.
                  NOw that you haue thus louingly ledde me by the
hand, through the way of laying a sure foundation
amongst my children, for all the grounds
both of Accedence and Grammar; and also of
construing and parsing: let me still intreate you to goe on
before me; and next to shew how I may enter my children
for making of Latine: and then through the seuerall exercises
thereof.To enter children to make Latine, a matter ordinarily extremely difficult, and full of toyle both to Master and schollar. This I haue found extreamely difficult. For
although it hath beene a matter of continuall vexation and
paine vnto my selfe, and of feare vnto my poore schollars;
yet haue I found as little profiting therein, as in any other:
but that my children will still write false Latine, barbarous
phrase, and without any certainty, after a very long time of
exercise.
                  If therefore you can guide me the way, how I may do
that which you spake of before, that I may enter my children
with ease and delight, both to my selfe and to them;
and also surely without danger of making false Latine
or barbarous phrase; I shall further acknowledge my
selfe, to haue receiued yet a greater benefite then in all the
former. And aboue all, if you can direct me how by that

time that they haue beene not two yeares onely, but three
or foure yeares in construction, they may be able to make
true Latine, and pure Tully in ordinary morall matters. For
I my selfe haue hardly beene able to cause my children to
doe this at fourteene or fifteene yeares of age; nor then to
warrant that which they haue done: neyther doe I thinke
that it is much otherwise in our ordinary Schooles.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I shall willingly satisfie your request hereein likewise,
and shew you what I haue found: onely let me see, as
before, what course your selfe haue taken, to enter your
children.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I haue taken that course which I thinke is commonly
practiced in Schooles:The ordinary manner in countrey Schooles, to enter Schollars to make Latin. I haue giuen them vulgars,
or Englishes, such as I haue deuised, to be made in Latine:
and at the first entrance I haue taught and heard them, how
to make euery word in Latine, word by word, according to
their rules. After a while I haue onely giuen them such
vulgars, and appointed them a time, against which they
should bring them made in Latine: and at the perusing
a
                        ••
                      examining of them, I haue beene wont to correct them
sharply, for their faults in writing, and for their negligence;
and so haue giuen them new Englishes: and it may bee I
haue told them the Latine to the hardest words. This is the
course that I haue followed.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Our learned Schoole-master M. Askam,
                     The butcherly feare of making Latines. doeth not
without cause tearme this the butcherly feare of making
Latines. For to omit the trouble to the Master, and that it
will require a ready wit, to giue variety of such vulgars to
the children; and also that it will aske good learning and
iudgement to direct them, to make not onely true Latine,
but pure phrase withall; what a terrour must this needes
be vnto the young Schollar, who feares to be corrected for
euery fault,The shortest way to enter Schollars to make Latine easily and surely. and hardly knoweth in any thing, what to make
vpon sure and certaine grounds? But for the way, this I finde
the shortest, surest, and easiest both to Master and schollar;
and which will certainely effect whatsoeuer hath bin said:
and that Master and Schollar may proceede cheerefully

and boldly, to iustifie what they doe.
               
               1. See that your schollar be very cunning in his Accedence,1. To be exceeding perfect in their rules; chiefly in Nownes and Verbes.
and Grammar as hee goeth forward: and chiefly in
Nownes and Verbes, to be able to giue each case of a Nown,
and euery tense and person of a Verbe; both Latine to English,
and English to Latine, as I wished you, and shewed the
manner before; at least by the perfect knowledge of the terminations
of them.
               2. Besides the construing and parsing their lectures
without booke,2. Each day to make the Latine of their lectures, and giue a reason why each word must be so. in the lowest fourmes, or out of the English
translation, accustom your selfe, in examining the lectures
of your first enterers, to do all after the manner of making
Latine; as it were causing them euery day to make the Latine
of their lectures, and giue a reason why each word must
be so, and not otherwise, their bookes being shut. I set you
downe the manner before, in the vse of the Grammaticall
rule for making Latine, in that example; Aptissima omnino
sunt, &c. Yet to repeate you a word or two for your little
ones; take that first sentence, Amicis opitulare: when you
haue made them to vnderstand the meaning, and examined
it,Example repeated. so as was shewed; Aske but thus:
               How can you make this in Latine; Helpe friends? How
say you, Helpe thou?
               A. Opitulare.
               Q. Opitulare like what?
               
                  A. Like Amare amator, be thou loued.
               So all the questions for parsing: Then aske, why is it
helpe thou, and not, be thou helped, as Amare amator, be
thou loued. He answereth because it is a Verbe Deponent,
and signifieth Actiuely, to help; and not, to be helped.
               After aske the next word:
               Q. Whom must you help?
               
                  A. Our friends.
               Q. How say you friends?
               A. Amicis.
               Q. What is Amicis like?
               A. Magistris.
               
                  
So the questions of declining and the like. Then aske,
why not amici nor amicos, the Accusatiue case after the verb.
               
                  A. Because the Verb Opitulor, to help, wil haue a Datiue
case, by that rule of the Datiue, To profit or disprofit, &c.
               These may be insteede of all vulgars or Latines, both for
ease,These insteede of all vulgars. delight and certainty to your selfe and the childe: and
so you may euer haue the Author to warrant both Latine,
and phrase.
               3 Next vnto this,3. Continuall reading lectures, and repeating what they haue learned out of the Grammaticall translations, is continuall making Latine, to cause children to come on very fast. that continuall beating out and reading
their Authors, both lectures and repetitions, out of
the translations, is continual making Latine thus, (as I said,
in the vse of the translations) that children will come on
very fast for propriety, choise, & variety of the best words,
phrase, matter, and sentences of their Authors, to begin to
haue a store
                     •
                   house in themselues of all copie, as I haue obserued.
               4 After the former practiced for a time, you may chuse
some sentences which they haue not learned,4. Shewing fit sentences to turne into Latine out of the booke which they learne, or others. and cause
them to make those, either some out of this booke of Sentences,
or any other of like easie morall matter; and then
let them begin to write downe that which they make in Latine.
               This manner I find to be most easie and speedy for children
at their first entrance:The manner of their entrance to write Latine, to profit in English, Latine, writing faire, & true, and all vnder one. wherby they may profit in English,
Latine▪ Writing true and faire, and all vnder one labor.
               Let them haue their paper books in octauo, of the one
side to write the English which you giue them; on the other
to set the Latine directly ouer against it, and word for
word.
               To this end cause them to rule their bookes both sides
at once,Their bookes how ruled. or at least the lines of one side directly against the
other: their lines a good distance asunder, that they may
interline any thing, if they misse any word; or for copie
and varietie, to be set ouer the head if you will. On the first
side toward the right hand, in which the English is to be set,
to leaue a lesse margent: on the other side for the Latine a
greater margent; because the Latine may bee written in a

lesse space then the English; and also to write all the hard
words in the margent of the Latine, the Nominatiue case
of the Nowne and the first person of the Verbe, if so you
please. Then cause so many as are to write Latine together
(hauing books, pen, inke and copie before them, and euery
thing so fitted) to write as you speake, so faire as possibly
they can.
               Herein you are to dictate▪ or deliuer vnto them word by
word,Manner of dictating the English which they are to turne into Latine. the English of the sentence, which you would haue
them to turne into Latine; & to do it according to the manner
of the Grammaticall translation, euery word in that order
& in propriety of English, answering the Latine as neer
as you can. Also, you are to vtter each word leasurely and
treatably; pronouncing euery part of it, so as euery one
may write both as fast as you speake, and also faire and true
together.
               And to the end to helpe for writing true Orthographie,A principall practice for writing true Orthography both in English and Latine.
besides the former knowledge of spelling; as they are writing,
cause euerie one in order to spell his 2. or 3. words together,
speaking vp, that all his fellowes may heare, & may
goe on in writing, as fast as he spels and you speake. Those
who can write faster to take paines to write fairer; your
selfe also to walke amongst them in the meane time, to see
that euery one of them write true & faire, and to shew them
their faults by pointing them to their copies, and vsing like
directions mentioned in the helps of writing, of which I
spake before.
               After; when they haue thus set down the English, cause euery
one in the like order to make his word or two in latin,
after the maner which was shewed before for making latine
the very words of the Author in the natural or Grāmatical
order: & cause them al to write the same words, as he speaks,
vnless any of them be able to make it before of themselues;
who may correct, as they heare their fellowes to make it.
Cause also euery one to spel the words which he hath made
in Latine, like as they did in English, so as all may heare, &
go surely in writing true Orthography in Latine likewise.
               
                  
And when they haue done a sentence,Repeating or construing without booke that which they haue written. or so much as you
thinke good for a time, then cause them to the end to commit
it the better to memorie, to trie which of them can repeate
the soonest without booke, that which they haue
made. First saying the English sentence; then giuing it in
Latine, or construing it without booke: which all of them
who are apt, will doe presently, or with a very little meditation.☞
Or, which is shortest of all, appoint them folding their
bookes, to looke only on the English, and read or construe
it into Latine: Or on the Latine, to reade or construe it
into English. Thus as time will permit.
               By this meanes you shall haue a certaine direction in all
things,Benefit heereof for certaine direction to Master and schollar, and to get Writing, English Latine, all at once. both for your selfe and your schollar, to goe truely
and surely, both for propriety, Latine, phrase, and whatsoeue
                     •
                  
you can desire. By this exercise also your schollar shall
get both Writing, English and Latine, all vnder one. And
therefore an howre may bee well imployed daily in this exercise.
               And to imprint this,To imprint it by repetition the next morning together with their euening exercise. yet better; you may cause them the
next morning at shewing their exercise made that night, to
repeate together with it, that againe which they thus made
the day before (if time permit): Either some one to repeate
all, or moe, euery one a peece, or as time will permit; but
all to be able to do it as they are called forth. Through this
also they shall from the first entrance, get audacity and vtterance,
with good matter which will bring the Latine with it.
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how shall they doe for composing, or right
placing of their words? which you know is a principal matter
in writing pure Latine.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I would haue them first for a time exercised in this
plaine naturall order;How to enter young schollars for composing, or right placing their Latine. for this is that which Grammar teacheth:
and then to compose or place finely; which belongeth
to Rhetorick, after. As first to write well in prose, before
they beginne in verse: so in prose, to goe vpright and
strongly before they learne to go finely; and as M. Askam
speaketh, first to goe, before they learne to dance. But for
entring them into composition, thus you may do.
                  
                     
1 When they haue made it in the naturall order, onely
reade vnto them how Tully, or the Authour, whom their
sentence is taken of it, doth place it, and some reason of his
varying, and cause them to repeat both wayes, first as they
haue written, after in composition.
                  2 After that they haue beene practiced a while in the
former plaine manner, you may make them to doe thus:
Cause their bookes to be ruled in three columnes; in the
first to write the English, in the second the Latine verbatim,
in the third to write in composition, to try who can come
the neerest vnto the Authour.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Although I take it that I do conceiue your meaning
in all, and do see an euident reason of euerything: yet
because examples do most liuely demonstrate any matter;
I pray you set me downe one example hereof, and shew me
what Authour you thinke most fit to gather the sentences
forth of.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  In stead of your Authour,Tullies sentences the fittest to dictate sentences out of. I thinke and finde
Tullies sentences the fittest; and of those sentences, to
make choise of such in euery Chapter, as are most easie
and familiar to the capacity of the children. This booke
I doe acount of all other to bee the principall; the
Latine of Tully being the purest and best, by the generall
applause of all the Learned: and because that
booke is as a most pleasant posie, composed of all the
sweete smelling flowers, picked of purpose out of all
his workes; that one booke, together with the bookes
which the children haue or doe learne, shall also helpe
to furnish them with some sentences, contayning some
of the choysest matter and wordes, belonging to all
morall matters whatsoeuer; whether to vnderstand, write,
or speake thereof; that they shall bee able to goe forward
with much ease and delight; first in it, and then in the other
sentences adioyned to it, or what exercise you shall thinke
fitte.
                  For an example; take these little sentences, which
heere follow, as they are set downe in the first Chapter of

                     Tullies sentences, De Deo eius
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         natura, dictating the words
to them plainly, as the children may most readily make
them in Latine. In their little paper bookes they may write
the English on the first side, with the hard Latine wordes in
the Margent, the Latine on the other ouer against it, in two
columns; the first plaine after the Grammar order, the later
placed after the order of the Authour: your selfe may make
the wordes or phrases plaine to them, as they are set in the
margent.
                  
                     
                        An Example of Dictating in English, and setting
downe both English and Latine; and the
Latine both plainly and elegantly.
                        
                           Dictating according
to the naturall
order.
                           Ordo Grammaticus.
                           Ordo Ciceronianus.
                        
                        
                           No manHath euer bin. hath
beenAt any time (verb) inspiration some diuine euer great
without (verb)
some diuine
                                 afflatus, breathing into. inspiration.
                           Nemo fuit vnquam
magnus sine
afflatu aliqu
                                 •
                               Diuino.
                           Nemo magnus sine aliquo afflatu diuino
vnquam fuit. 2. de
Natura Deor.
                        
                        
                           There is nothing
which God
cannotBring to passe. effect,
and truely without
any labour.
                           Est nihil quod
Deus non possit
efficere, & quidem
sine labore
vllo.
                           Nihil est quod Deus
efficere non possit, &
quidem sine labore vllo.
3. de Nat. Deor.
                        
                        
                           GOD cannot
Ignoro. be ignorātIn what mind or with what minde. of
what minde euery
one is.
                           Deus non potest
ignorare,
qua mēte quis
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                              
sit.
                           Ignorare Deus non
potest, qua quis
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               mente
sit. 2. de Diuinatione.
                        
                     
                  
                  In these examples all is very plaine; except that in the

first sentence we say, & so translate in our English tongue,
some diuine inspiration; according as it is more elegantly
in Latine, the Adiectiues vsually before the Substantiues;
and not inspiration some diuine, which would bee very
harsh; and so likewise after [without any labour] although
in the Grammaticall order in the Latine, the Substantiue is
to be set before the Adiectiue; as the childe is to beginne to
make the Substantiue in Latine before the Adiectiue, and
to make the Adiectiues to agree vnto, or to bee framed according
to the Substantiues; as we haue shewed in the rules
obserued in the Grammaticall translations.
                  If you thinke this course ouer tedious to write both waies
in Latine;☜ then let them turne it only into the naturall order,How to learne to compose the Latine otherwise.
thus verbatim by pen: & afterwards in the repeating that
which they haue made, ask of them how Tully would place
each word, and to giue you reasons thereof: and then to
reade the sentence in the booke vnto them; so by the book
and some rules to direct them how to proceede.
                  For further practice in translating amongst all the higher,Translating into pure Latine, and composing it of themselues; trying who can come neerest vnto Tully.
after they grow in some good sort to write true Latine
verbatim, according to the former kinde of translating;
let them still write down the English as you dictate it, or
out of a translation; and trie who can come neerest vnto
Tully of themselues, composing at the first; and then after
examine their exercises, bringing them to the Authour.
                  For preuenting of stealing,For preuenting stealing. or any helpe by the Latine
booke if you doubt thereof, you may both cause them to
write in your presence, and also make choise of such places
which they know not where to find.
                  If you catch any one writing after another,And writing after one another. and so deceyuing
both himselfe and you, correct him surely, who
suffereth him to steale.
                  For going on faster,☜ & dispatching more in translating;
beside their writing so,How to go o
                           •
                         faster, and dispatch more in making Latin. you may only aske them the words
or phrases in English, how they can vtter them in Latine;
and then let them giue them in Latine, euery one his piece:

first naturally, after placing each sentence. Thus to goe
through daily a side, or a leaf at a time, or as leasure wil serue.
                  Besides these,☞ this may be a most profitable course as they
proceed to cause them to translate of themselues Esops Fables,Translating into English after M. Askams manner.
or Tullies sentences, or the like, into plaine naturall
English, so as was shewed; and to cause them the next day,
for their exercise,Vse hereof. to bring the same thus in English, & to be
able without book, first to make a report of it (striuing in the
Fables,Here you must be sure that they haue no translation to help them secretly. who shall tell his tale in best words & manner) & then
to reade it into the Latin of the Author out of the English,
and be able to proue it, and where they haue read the hard
words. And after all these to trie (if your leasure will serue)
how they can report the same in Latine, eyther in the words
of the Authour, or otherwise, as they can of themselues;
which all who are pregnant, and will take paines, will be able
to doe very readily: by this you shall finde a great increase.
                  Lastly, this is yet the most speedy and profitable way of
all,☞ as my experience doth assure me, to cause them to reade
ex tempore some easie Author daily,The most speedy and profitable way of translating and composing. out of the translation into
the Latine of the Author, or out of the Author into English;
first plainly, then artificially. And to this purpose I haue
translated, as I shewed, Corderius Dialogues, whose latin you
know to be most easie, familar, and pure; and also Terentius
Christianus; with Tullies sentences to helpe hereunto.
                  For further translating, or turning any Author, or piece of
Author,For translating an Author into Latine. or other matter into Latine; if it be difficult, direct
your Schollars to resolue the speech into the naturall order
of the words, so neere as they can. Secondly, if there be any
phrase, which they cannot expresse; to resolue & expresse it
by some other easier words & phrase of speech, with which
they are better acquainted; & to do it by Periphrasis, that is
moe words, if need be. Besides, for such English words which
they know not to giue Latin vnto;One good vse of Holyokes Dictionarie. let them vse the help of
some Dictionary: as Holyoke or Barret: Holyoke is best,
wherein the proper words and more pure, are first placed.
                  In all such translating either English or Latine,Things to be considered in translating. this is
carefully to bee obserued; euer to consider well the scope

and drift of the Author & the circumstances of the place;
and to labour to expresse liuely, not only the matter, but
also the force of each phrase, so neere as the propriety of
the tongue will permit.
                  But for all this matter of translating,Best direction for translating. that practice of
reading the English out of the Authors, and the Authors
backe againe out of the translations, shall fully teach it, so
far as it concerneth the schollar for propriety & getting of
the tongues.Translation for the sense & meaning. For translating any Latine Author into English,
only to expresse the sense and meaning of it; the sense
& drift of the Latine Author is principally to be obserued,
and not the phrase nor propriety of the tongue, to bee so
much sought to bee expressed or stucken vnto. The like
may be said for the Latine. But this kind of translating into
Latine,This kinde of translating into Latine is for schollars well grounded. is only for such schollars as are wel grounded thorough
long exercise & practice in the former kind of Grā
                     matical
translation, and in Tullies or their Authors phrase.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I hope I vnderstand you, right, and doe like very
wel of all, so far as I conceiue. Only let me intreate you, as
in the former, to rehearse the principall heads briefly concerning
this matter.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This is the sum of all,Summe of all. for this entrance in making
and writing Latine. 1. Readiness in their rules, chiefly in examples
of Nownes and Verbes. 2. Making their owne lectures
into Latine daily. 3. Continuall reading or repeating
lectures and all their Authors which they haue learned, out
of the Grammaticall translations, into the Latine of the
Authors. 4. Translating into Tullies Latine, out of a perfect
Grāmaticall translation, or as the English is so dictated vnto
them, & reading or repeating the same out of the English
into Latine. And lastly, out of the natural order, into the order
of Tully. 5. Translating into English Grammatically
of themselues, and reading forth of the English into the Latine
of the Author, or writing it downe.
                  By these means constantly practiced, they wil soone be able
to make, write, or vtter any ordinary morall matter in
pure and good phrase; especially if the matter be deliuered

vnto them in the naturall order of the words. Make triall:
and I doubt not but you will not onely confirme it, but still
find out more for the common good.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of the Artificiall order of composing or placing
the words in prose, according to Tully and
the purest Latinists.
               
                  Spoud.
                  BVt yet here is one thing wanting: namely, the rules
which you spake of for composing or placing the
words after the manner of the purest Latinists; I
meane for turning them forth of this naturall order,
into the Rhetoricall order, or order of Tully; without
which, the truest and best Latine is little worth. This I
haue found very hard for my schollars to performe;Composition a matter of difficulty. neyther
haue I had any certain grounds that they might stand
vpon. Moreouer, this I haue knowne for certaine, that many
young schollars the more confusedly that they can
transpose,The error of young schollars in displacing sentences. or disorder the words of a sentence, the more excellent
they think it to be, when as it is indeed most absurd
to the learned eare.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Although this may seeme to belong to Declamations
and Orations, because therein there is the greatest labor
for curious composition and setting of words, as wherin
schollars stand to shewe most art, indeauouring to perswade:Composition generally belonging to all Latine.
yet it is in truth generall to all Latine, whether
Translations, Epistles, Theames or whatsoeuer, and doth
bring great grace and commendation to euery part thereof;
and contrarily being neglected, doth detract very much
from the most excellent speech, be the matter and words
neuer so choise. And because there is speciall vse of it, in

the practice of all the translations: and in all this matter
of making Latine for turning or composing out of the
Grammaticall order, into the order of the Author, I will
afforde you the best help I can. But forsomuch as neither
Tully nor any of the purest Latinists do alwais obserue the
same order, and therfore I take it that no certaine rules can
bee giuen as perpetuall; I will take those which Macropedius
hath set downe, as being the most easie of all that I
know. He hath sundry generall precepts.
               
               
                  Precepts of Composition or placing the words in
Latine, as they are set downe by Macropedius,
in the end of his method of
making Epistles.
                  
                     The I. Precept.
                     Of placing the Nominatiue case, the Verbe, and the
oblique case.
                     A Perfect sentence consisting most commonly of a Nominatiue
case, a Verbe and an oblique case; this order
is kept in placing ordinarily
                     1 The oblique cases (that,Oblique case
                              •
                            first. is all besides the Nominatiue
and the Vocatiue) are commonly placed in the beginning,
the Nominatiue case in the midst,Nominnatiue in the midst. the Verbe in the end:
For example;Verb in the end in the sentence following, the Grammaticall
order is thus;
                     Caesar occupauit ciuitatem munitissimam hostium.
                     The Artificiall order is vsually thus:
                     Munitissimam hostium ciuitatem Caesar occupanit.
                     Yet if the oblique case bee of a Nowne negatiue,Except in obliques of denying. or a
Nowne of denying, it may be put elegantly in the end: as
                     
                        
Caesare fortunatiorem legimus n
                           •
                        minem.
                     Yea, any Adiectiue or Participle may bee put so, when
the chief point of the matter or meaning resteth in it: as
                     Caesarem in morteferè omnes putant miserum.
                  
                  
                     The II. Precept.
                     THe Adiectiue is ordinarily to bee placed before the
Substantiue.Adiectiues before. And between the Adiectiue and the Substantiue
may bee fitly placed the Gentitiue case of the later
of two Substantiues;Words placed between the Adiectiue and Substantiue. 1. Genitiue case as in this sentence the Grammaticall
order is:
                     Seuer itas magna Caesaris incussit terrorem hostibus.
                     The artificiall order thus;
                     Terrorem hostibus magna Caesaris seueritas incussit.
                     Also betweene the Adiectiue and the Substantiue of
the Genitiue case,2. Word gouerning the Genitiue. the word gouerning the Genitiue case,
may be elegantly placed, as in this sentence:
                     Clementia Caesariae maiestatis dedit pacem, & tranquillitatem
prouincijs.
                     The artificiall order may be thus;
                     Caesareae clementia maiestatis pacem & tranquillitatem
prouincijs dedit.
                  
                  
                     The III. Precept.
                     BEtween the Adiectiue and the Substantiue,Verbe. Tully somtime
placeth the Verbe in like manner;A
                              ••
                           erbe. sometime the
Aduerbe,Coniunction. sometime the Coniunction, sometime the Preposition
alone,Preposition. or with his case: as,
                     Magnum profecto laborem Caesar assumpsit, quem fermè
ab ipsis ad nos venisse Gadibus ai
                           •
                        nt, vt hostes suae quidem maiestati
rebelles, nostris autem supra modum rebus infestos armis
subigeret. Quam ob causam, perpetuum illi amorem▪ &
gratiam debemus immortalem.
                  
                  
                     
                     The III. Precept.
                     Of Aduerbes and Prepositions.
                     ADuerbs and Prepositions with their cases may be placed
any where,Aduerbes and Prepositions. wheresoeuer they shall seeme to stand
most fitly to please the eare: yet most elegantly before the
Verbe or Participle which they declare. As,
                     Debitam pro contemptu suis hostibus diu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dilatam seueritatem,
Caesar tandem exhibuit, sedclement issimè mitigauit.
                     These are the principall of his rules which are necessarie.
                     To these may be added,
                     1. That this is to be obserued very vsually:1. Obseruation. That the word
gouerned is commonly placed before the words gouerning,Word gouerned first.
contrary to the Grammaticall order. As here.
                     Fortitudo Caesaris potitur victoria.
                     The artificiall placing may be fitly.
                     Caesaris fortitudo victoria potitur.
                     Also if in a sentence there bee mention of two persons,2. Obseruation.
the one as it were an agent the other a patient, they stand
together most vsually and elegantly;Person doing first. the agent commonly
first: as,
                     Caesar did great wrong to Pompey in this point.
                     Hac vna in re magnam Caesar Pompeio iniuriam fecit.
                     These Precepts are set down,The end of these precepts to the end to direct young
schollars; yet so as we must not thinke, as I sayd, that these
are euer to bee followed strictly; because neither Tully,
nor Caesar himselfe, nor any who haue been most curious,
did euer obserue the same: for that should be a falt rather, as
we shall see after.
                     Notwithstanding, by practice in composing, and obseruation

in Tully,How to attain to right composition. Caesar & the best Authors, and trying how
neere we can come vnto them in translating into Latine, by
cōparing ours with theirs; and finally weighing how euery
sentence may so fall as may best please the eare; schollars
may attaine much certaintie and commendation herein.
                  
               
               
                  More exquisite obseruation in placing and measuring
sentences.
                  FOr most exquisite obseruation of placing and measuring
sentences,Obseruation in placing and measuring sentences in prose. Butlers Rhetor. Chap. 15. Rhetorically, in prose by schollars of
riper iudgement, in their Theames, Declamations, Orations
or the like, reade Talaeus Rhetoricke de Numero Oratorio.
Cap. 17. 18.
                  Out of which Chapter, and out of the Commentaries of
Minos vpon them, these precepts may be further obserued,
which follow.
                  1 That the placing and measuring of the sentences in
prose,Prose must be vnlike verse. should be both vnlike to the placing in poetrie, and
also each sentence vnlike other.No verses to be made in prose. And therefore that the
schollar make no verses in his prose, but that he shun them
warily.
                  Though in any exercise in prose,Verses cited in prose. chiefly in Theames, he
may cite verses out of other Authors eyther for authoritie
or delight.
                  2 That the beginning or ending of a sentence in prose,Beginning and ending of sentences most obserued: endings chiefly, not to to bee like a verse.
be not the beginning or ending of a verse; although this be
not so faulty in the beginning of a sentence, as in the end;
where the fault is more obserued.
                  3 That the ending of sentences bee specially weighed,
which are chiefly marked of all;Endings of sentences to be carefully waied. and therefore are to bee
carefully varyed, that they may not be displeasing.
                  4 That this curious obseruation of the endings neede
not bee regarded aboue sixe syllables from the end;This neede not be aboue sixe syllables. and
those to stand on feete of two syllables, Trochees principally.
                  
                     
5 That we doe not continue the same feete in the ends;The same feete not to be continued in the ends.
but dispose them diuersly: not all long syllables, nor all
short, vnlesse more seldome; but commonly tempering
long & short syllables together,Tempering cō
                        monly long & short syllables. as Trochees and Iambicks,
sometimes Spondees and Perrichees, yet so as wee be not
curious.
                  6 That sentence is accounted most sweet and excellent
which endeth in two Troches;The sweetest sentence ending in 2. Trochees. 
                     viz. the first syllable long,
the last short, as in this sentence.
                  Deindè patris dictum sapiens temeritas fil
                        ••
                      cōmprŏbā
                     
                        •
                     it.
                  This endeth in an Iambicke and two Trochees.
                  Tully vsed this most often.Tullies ending. So as in that one Oration
pro Pompeio, it is obserued to be an hundreth and fowrteene
times.
                  7. Yet the variety ought to be such, that this art of placing
or setting the number of syllables,The art of placing to be hid. may not bee obserued
of euerie one, and so bee made enuious, nor the curiositie
ridiculous; but to be laboured so as it may most delight
and drawe on others.
                  8. That the sounds of the very words and letters are the
principall things to bee respected herein.Sounds to be respected principally, in words or letters. For the elegant
composition, is that which is made by a sweet sound of letters
and words.
                  9. Therfore words of the best sound are to be obserued;Words of the best sound.
and amongst them most elegant Aduerbes and bonds of
Coniunctions to bee noted diligentlie.
                  Words sounding well are these:

                        1. Verbals: as, Dominatrix, gubernatrix.
                        
                        2. Compounds: as, pernoscere, excruciari.
                        
                        3. Superlatiues: as, Conspectus iucundissimus.
Ad dicendum paratissinus.
                        4. Words of mo syllables: as, Moderatio animi.
Tempestas anni.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
10 Words which are insolent,Insolent words to be 
                           •
                        uo
                           •
                        ded. hard and out of vse, are to
be as warily auoided, as rockes of Mariners.
                  11 That in all sentences,That all words may 
                           〈…〉
                         & distinct sound. the words haue an easie and distinct
sound: that is, neither harsh nor gaping; but that they
fall and conclude aptly and sweetly, fitting best the vtterance
of the pronouncer, and as may most like the eare of
the hearer.
                  These are the summe of those rules as I remember. Although
the excellency heereof is rather to bee attained, by
vse and practice, then by any certaine precepts.
                  
                     Spoud.
                     Sir these put in practice may be very sufficient
for whatsoeuer can be required in this behalfe, as it seemeth
vnto me.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     These things concerne onely the placing and setting
or measuring of sentences, which is one little part of
Rhetorick? and there the rest is to be fully sought, & how to
adorne all sentences with tropes and figures. The practice
of these is to be vsed in their seuerall exercises.
                     Thus haue I gone thorough all these at large, for making
the Accedence and Grammar perfect, for construing, parsing,
and making Latine; applying my selfe to the capacity
of the 
                           •
                        udest learner in so many words; because these
things well performed, all other learning wil be most pleasant,
as 
                           •
                        as said before.
                  
                  
                     Spoud.
                     But one other thing by the waie, I cannot omit
to demaund that I did obserue by your speech, that you
would haue your very enterers to make some exercise euery
night of themselues.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I would indeede haue no Euening passed without
some little exercise in Latine by all,☞ from the very lowest
who begin to write Latine;No 
                              〈◊〉
                            to be pas
                              •
                           ed without some little exercise against mo
                              ••
                           ing. I meane something to be shewed
the next daie about 9 of the clocke.
                  
                  
                     Spoud
                     But what exercise woulde you appoint to such
little ones, that coulde bee easie enough and meet for their
capacitie.
                  
                  
                     Phil.
                     I woulde appoint them to beginne euen at, In
Speech bee these eight parts &c. and so giue them 2. or 3.

lines of it for euery one to turn into Latin. And for the examining
what they haue done where they are many, & time
will not permit to examine what euery one hath done; to
cause some one or two whom you suspect to be most negligent,
first to pronounce the English without booke, then to
construe it into Latine without book, or to repeat the Latin
as they haue made it: but to construe it without booke is far
the surest, or to reade & construe it out of the English. And
according to these as they pronounce, and are shewed their
faults, for all the rest to correct theirs. If any be found not
to correct so, or to haue omitted his exercise, to haue his due
correction.
                     Though I haue tried many wayes and exercises for these
little ones, to doe priuately by themselues, yet I finde none
comparable to this: for this they will doe with much facilitie
and contention, after a little that they are entred; being
helped somewhat by their Latine rules, which they haue
learned.
                     Thus they may alwayes haue a fit exercise, and know aforehand
what they are to doe. This also will further much
towards their parsing in Latin, and better imprinting their
rules.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               How to make Epistles, imitating Tully, short, pithie,
sweete Latine and familiar; and to indite
Letters to our friends in English
accordingly.
               
                  Spoud.
                  I Am very glad I asked you this question: I rest fully satisfied
in it, as also in al this matter of making and composing
Latine, for the euidence of the meanes; and doe
thanke you heartily for directing me so particularly.
                  
                     
Now let vs come, I pray you, to the other seuerall exercises
of Schollars, which are to bee practiced in Schooles
continually, for the morefull attayning of the knowledge
of the Latine tongue.
                  And first for the making of Epistles,Of making Epistles. in such sort as was
mentioned before; that is imitating Tully, short, pithy, full
of variety of good matter, sweet Latin and familiar; and for
inditing of like Letters in English:
                  I haue found this exercise of making Epistles, no lesse
difficult then the former toyle of making Latine.Difficulty of making Epistles, purely and pithily. For
although I haue taken great paines: yet after long practice,
I haue hardly beene able to bring them to a
shew of that which you speake of, I meane so to imitate
and resemble Tully; but that they will frame them of
long sentences, matters vnfit for an Epistle, flash and to
little purpose; but very childish, and more like vnto a
Theame or an Oration, then to an Epistle. Thus I see it to
be also amongst the chiefe of the Schollars, of sundry of
those who are much accounted of, and wherin the schollars
seeme to doe the best.
                  As for inditing Letters in English,Inditing English Letters little exercised in Schooles. I haue not exercised
my schollars in them at all; neyther haue I knowne them
to be vsed in Schooles: although they cannot but bee exceeding
necessary for schollars; being of perpetuall vse in
all our whole life, and of very great commendation, when
they are so performed. Therefore I still craue your helping
hand to direct me, how to bring my schollars to the attayning
that faculty.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Let me first heare what way you haue taken in
these, like as you shewed me in the former kinds; and then I
shall relate vnto you how this may bee done, so shortly as I
can.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I haue done this:The ordinary meanes of directing Schollars to make Epistles I haue read them some of Tullies
Epistles, and also some part of Macropedius or Hegendorphinus
de conscribendis Epistolis. I haue directed them
that they are to follow the rules set downe in the seuerall
kindes of Epistles there mentioned, and made the

examples plaine vnto them.
                  Moreouer, I haue vsed oft to put them in minde of this,
that an Epistle is nothing but a Letter sent to a friend, to
certifie him of some matter, or to signifie our mind plainly
and fully vnto him. And therefore looke how wee would
write in English, so to doe in Latin. These and the like are
the helpes which I haue vsed: and I take them to bee the
most that are done in ordinary Schooles.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I like well of your reading of Tullies Epistles,
which indeed is the very foundation of all: but for Macropedius
and Hegendorphinus, although their paines were
great; yet I cannot see, but that they will rather require an
auncient learned Master to vnderstand, and make vse of
them, then a younger schollar, who is to be taught how to
speake.Hard for children who haue no reading, to inuent variety of matter of themselues. Also for telling a childe that he must inuent variety
of matter of his owne head, to write to his friend; this is a
taske ouer hard to ordinary wits. For what can a childe
haue in his vnderstanding, to be able to conceiue or write
of, which hee hath not read or someway knowne before?
according to that Maxime: Nihil est in intellectu quod non
prius fuerat in sensu.
                  
                  Therefore omitting these, wherein I my selfe haue also
found a great deale of toyle, with small fruit; I will set you
downe plainely the very direct way, so neere as yet I haue
beene able to learne; and whereby I am out of doubt,
that that same faculty may be easily gotten, of writing such
Epistles; fully expressing Tully, as was said, and of inditing
Letters like vnto them, which are our vsuall Epistles, as the
Latine were of the Romanes.
                  The way may be this:
                  1 When your young schollars haue gone through
Sententiae pueriles,
                     Helpes for making Epistles. 
                     Confab. Cato, or the like; and can begin
to make Latine in some such good sort as was shewed; let
them then reade Tullies Epistles, gathered by Sturmius;1 Reading Tullies Epistles▪
                      as
being of the choysest of his Epistles, and most fitte for
children. This one booke rightly vsed, may sufficiently
furnish for making Epistles, so farre as shall be needfull

for the Grammar Schooles. It would be read by them twice
in the weeke at least, vntill they had gone through a good
part thereof; vnlesse they be able to reade it of themselues
ex tempore, or by the helpe of the translation.
                  2 As they reade euery Epistle,☞ or before they are to imitate
any one,2 Making thē very perfect in euery Epistle. make them as perfect in it as you can, and as
time will permit: not onely in construing, parsing, reading
out of the Grammaticall translation into the Latine; but also
to be able to giue euery phrase, both Latine to English,
and English to Latine.
                  Also cause them to make you a report what the summe
of the Epistle is; and this if you will, both in English and
Latine also, as was said of the Fables.
                  3 Cause them for their exercise to make another Epistle
in imitation of Tullies Epistle,☞ vsing al the phrases and
matter of that Epistle;3 To cause them to make another Epistle in imitation thereof. onely applying and turning it to
some friend, as if they had the very same occasion then presently:
and also changing numbers, tenses persons, places,
times: yet so▪ as thereby to make all the matter and phrases,
each way most familiar to them▪ and fully their owne.
                  And first let them doe this in a good English stile, as was
said; I meane in making an English Letter first: setting it
after the manner,To do this first in English, then in Latine. as they did their English Translation; of
that page of their booke towards the left hand, or on the
first columne, the Latine on the other ouer against it, sentence
for sentence.
                  Herein they are only to differ from the Translations,To set the Epistles after the manner of the Translations. that
they 
                        〈◊〉
                      doe not in these Letters sticke so much to wordes,
to answere word for word both English and Latine; as to
write purely and sweetly, as well in English as in Latine, and
to expresse their mindes most fully in both, and in most familiar
manner.
                  4 The next day to make another Epistle,☞ as being sent
from their friend to whom they writ,4 Making answers to Epistles. in answere to that
which they writ the former day: and in that to answere euery
sentence from point to point, in as short manner as the
former Epistle was, stil reteyning the same phrases as much

as they can.Examples of imitating Epistles. I will take for example the first Epistle of Sturmius.
The more easie it is for the children, the better it is.
               
               
                  
                     M. C. Terentiae salutem plurimam dicit.
                     SIvales, benè est: ego valeo. Nos quotidie tab
                           •
                        llarios vestros
expectamus:Tullies Epistles to be imitated. qui si venerint, fortasse erimus certiores
quid nobis fac
                           •
                        endum sit: faciemus
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         te statim certiorem, valetudinem
tuam cura diligenter. Vale. Calendis Septembris.
                  
               
               The summe of the Letter is; That Tully writes to his
wife Terentia:The manner of the report of the summe of the Letter. signifying vnto her, that hee was in health:
that he waited for the Letter-carriers daily: how by them
he should know what to doe; and that he would then certifie
her of al things. And so concludeth, wishing her to looke
well to her health. The Letter bare date the Calends of September.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              An English Letter in imitation of Tully.
                              IF you be in health, it is well:
I am in health. I haue long
looked for yourLetter carriers. Messengers.
When they shall come, I shalbe
more certaine what I am to do;
and then I will forthwith certifie
you of all things. See that
you looke very carefully to
your health.
                              
                                 The Answere.
                                 I Reioyce greatly of your
health. I am sory that you
haue looked for the Carriers so
long. They wil be with you very
shortly, & then indeede you
shalbe more certain what to do.

Wee shall forthwith looke to
heare of all your matters. I will
in the mean time looke to my
health, as you aduise. Farewell.
                              
                           
                           
                              An Epistle in imitation of Tully.
                              EPISTOLA.
                              SIvales benè est: ego qu
                                    •
                                 dē
valeo: diu tabellarios vestros
expectaui. Cūvenerint
certior ero quid mihi faciēdū
sit. Tum autē te omnibus de
rebus certiorē faciam. Tuam
diligentissimè valetudinem
fac vt cures.
                              
                                 Responsio.
                                 TE valere maximè lator.
Doleo quòd tabellarios
tam diu expectasti.
Statim vobiscum erunt, &
tum re vera certior eris
quid tibi agendum sit.

Nos deindè vestra omnia audire
sperabimus. Meam interim
vt suade; curabo valetudinem.
Vale.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Antonius Schorus in the end of his booke, de ratione discendae
linguae latinae, hath sundry examples. I will set downe
one Epistle, imitated two wayes: the first keeping almost
the wordes and forme of Tullies Epistle; the other imitating
onely the forme, but changing the wordes. Tullies Epistle
is this:
               Aulo Trebonio, qui in tua prouincia magna negotiaet ampla,
& expedita habet, multos annos vtor valde f
                     •
                  miliariter.Tullies Epistle. Is cum
antea semper & suo splendore & nostra caeterorum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  , amicorum
commendatione gratissimus in prouincia fuit, tum hoc tempore
propter tuum in me amorem, nostram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   necessitudinem, vehementer
confidit, his meis literis, se apud te gratiosum fore. Quae
ne spes eum fallat, vehementer te rogo: commendo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tibi eius
omnia negotia, liberos, procuratores, familiam: inprimis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vt
quae T. Ampius de eius re decreuerit, ea comprobes, omnibus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   rebus
eum ita tractes, vt intelligat nostram commendationem
non vulgarem fuisse.
               The first imitation, more following the words, is this.
               Petro Fabro,The first example of imitation of the former Epistle. qui in vestra vrbe & magnanegotia, & multos
amicos habet, multos annos vtor familiariter. Is cum antea semper
& suo splendore, & nostra caeterorum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   amicorum commendatione
gratissimus in hac nostra Repub. fuit, tum hoc tempore
propter tuum in me amorem nostram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   necessitudinem vehementer
confidit, his meis literis se apud te gratiosum fore. Quae
nespes eum fallat, vehementer te rogo: commendo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tibi eius
omnia negotia, amicos, cognatos, inprimi
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vt quae procuratori
de eius rebus videbuntur, ea comprobes: omnibus
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   rebus eum
ita tractes, vt intelligat nostram commendationem non vulgarem
fuisse.
               The second imitation, expressing the forme.
               Petrus Faber,The second imitation. qui tibi notus est, & magnas res apud nos gessit,
multos annos mihi valde familiaris fuit. Is cum semper & sua
dignitate, & benefi
                     •
                  ijs multis erga me, meis omnibus gratissimus

fuit: tum nunc ob tuum ergame animum, nostram
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   coniunctionem,
non dubitat quin hac mea commendatione sit in
maxima gratia apud te futurus. Quod vt fiat, summoperè te oro:
committo
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   tuae fide
                     •
                   & curae omnes res eius, amicos, cognatos,
parentes: praecipuè verò vt quae procurator de rebus eius agat
ea consil
                     •
                  o tuo iuues: & ita honorificè eum accipias, vt sentiat
has nostras literas apud te pondus habuisse.
               Thus practicing and trayning vp your schollar by little
and little; first for imitation, more neerely following the
wordes; afterwards only the forme, and such phrases as shal
seeme fittest: and euer first writing their English Letters, and
then their Latine answering thereunto; you shall see that
they will come to a liuely imitation of Tully; especially if
you exercise them wel in Tully, in such sort as is prescribed.
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, this must needes bee a most sure and ready
way. But in imitation what things am I to direct them to
obserue?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  That they take only so much as is needfull,The rule in imitation. and fit
for their purpose, leauing out all the rest; that they adde
what is wanting, alter and apply fitly to the occasions, according
to the circumstances of times, persons, places, and
the like; that nothing may appeare stollen, but all wittily
imitated. Be sure that they know perfectly the matter and
the phrase, of that which they should imitate: and then nothing
will be hard, in imitation of Epistles, Verses, or whatsoeuer.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  What is then the summe of all, which you would
haue principally exercised, for the speedy attayning this
faculty?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  That your schollars haue daily a peece of an Epistle,
or a whole Epistle appointed them, matter and phrase
made every familiar vnto them; then one day to make an
Epistle in imitation, and that both English and Latine; the
next day to make an answere in like manner: thus to proceede
vntill they come to some good perfection. And so
much may serue for Epistles.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               Of making Theames full of good matter, in a pure
stile, and with iudgement.
               
                  Spoud.
                  NExt after Epistles Theames▪ doe follow; wherein
if you can direct me also, how these likewise may
be composed by children, so as to bee couched
full of good matter, written in a pure stile, and
with iudgement, and with as much certainty and readinesse
as you haue shewed me for making their Epistles; I shall remain
more beholden, and returne home with greater hope
to doe good.
                  For the Epistles it cannot bee otherwise, but that the
course set down must needs produce that effect, which you
haue affirmed; by reason of these singular patterns of Tully,
which children haue to imitate. But what patternes or
helpes can you haue for Theames any way comparable to
those?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  What patternes Schollars may haue, you shal heare
after: but first relate vnto me, as in the former, what way
you haue vsed, for the entring of your children in making
their Theames.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I haue according to the custome in Schooles,The ordinary manner of directing Schollars how to begin to make Theames. According to Apthonius rules.
read them some of Apthonius rules, and so it may be, haue
begun with Apologues or Fables, or rather with a Chreia:
and in their Chreia, I haue first made the seuerall parts of it,
or of their Theame so handled, very plaine vnto them, with
the manner of the proofes of it; and of gathering reasons
to amplifie it, according to the same.
                  I haue then giuen them a Theame to make, following the
example in their booke, to prosecute the same parts of the
Theame; as Exordium, narratio, confirmatio, confutatio,

conclusio, and also to follow the seuerall places, to amplifie
each thing by. I haue withall shewed them how to doe it:
as to trie what they could gather of themselues; and withall
to seeke Tullies sentences what they could find out of it,
or out of other bookes to their purpose.The inconueniences of this course. But yet (alas!) that
which my children haue done hereby for a long time, they
haue done it with exceeding paines and feare, and yet too-too
weakely, in ha
                        •
                     sh
                        •
                     phrase, without any inuention, or
iudgement; and ordinarily so rudely, as I haue been ashamed
that any one should see their exercises. So as it hath
driuen mee into exceeding passions, causing me to deale ouer
rigorously with the poore boies. Whereby some of
them, whose Parents haue been more tender, seeing their
children heauy and vnwilling to the Schoole, haue suffered
them to leaue off the Schoole, and so to lose all which they
had gotten before; others also haue beene made so feareful,
that they would rather desire to go to any base trade or
drudgery, then to be Schollars, & hereby haue very much
reproached my schoole: Because, as they haue ouer-rightly
complained, they must bee beaten for not doing that,
which they knew not how to doe; so that this feare is worse
to them, then the first for making Latines.
                  And yet notwithstanding, in their entring to make
Theames, and so likewise into versifying, I haue not knowen
how to auoid it, but I haue bin enforced to vse so much
sharpnesse, as to make them to call all their wits together,
and to stir them vp to all diligence and paines; or otherwise
I should haue done no good at all.
                  Whereupon very great inconueniences haue insued:
and yet as I sayd, I haue seene very little fruite to answere
vnto my paines.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I doe not see how by this course,This way hard enough for many Schoolemasters. these euils could
be auoided. As I said of Macropedius for Epistles, so I may
here; that this way of entring your schollars is hard enough
to many a Schoolemaster, thus to follow euery
part of the Theame and those places of Apthonius, to inuent
matter and reasons to proue and illustrate euery thing,

and to do it in a good stile. That which is said of Epistles,
that children must be acquainted by reading,Difficulty in making Theams, because schollars are not acquainted with the matter of them. with matter &
phrase fit for Epistles, before they can euer bee fit to make
such Epistles, is much more true concerning both theames
and verses; inasmuch as the matter of them is harder, being
of such things as they haue neuer read of, nor been any way
acquainted with, or at least very little. Besides, to follow the
Logicke places in Apthonius in a Philosophical discourse,
doth require both some insight in Logick, and reading in
such Authors as haue written of such morall matters. And
therfore herein many a Master deserues rather to be beaten
then the schollar,The Master oft deserues to bee beaten rather thē the schollar. for driuing the childe by cruelty, to doe
that which he himself can see no reason how the poor child
should be able to do it. It must of necessitie either driue the
schollar to vse all deuises to leaue the schoole, or else cause
him to liue in a continual horror & hatred of learning; and
to account the schoole, not Ludus literarius, but carnificina,
or pistrînum literarium.
                  
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I acknowledge it too true which you haue said:
I pray you therfore shew me your best aduise & experience
how to free my selfe & my children from these euils; that I
may both so enter them in these & also draw them on after,
as not to discourage them in this maner, nor bee driuen to
vse the like sharpnesse any more.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Herein I my self am desirous to be a learner, as in all
the rest. Although too much experience hath cōpelled me
to seek out all meanes to redress this; notwithstanding also
that I haue euer been afraid of vsing cruelty in my schoole.
And the rather haue I bin careful to seek out the easiest and
plainest way, that I might allure & draw on my schollars in
this exercise, as in all other, to proceed as in a scholasticall
play, with vnderstanding, loue and delight. So much as I
haue attained, I shall willingly impart vnto you.
                  1. We are to consider,1. To consider the principall end of making Theams. what is the end & purpose of their
making Theams; and then to bethink our selues, which way
they may the soonest attaine vnto the same. The principal
end of making Theams, I take to be this, to furnish schollars

with al store of the choisest matter,The principall end of making Theams. that they may therby
learne to vnderstand, speake or write of any ordinary
Theame, Morall or Politicall, such as vsually fall into discourse
amongst men & in practice of life; and especially cō
                     cerning
vertues & vices. So as to work in themselues a greater
loue of the vertue and hatred of the vice, and to be able
with soundnesse of reason to draw others to their opinion.
                  The best means to effect this most soone and surely,The means to furnish them. are
these so far as yet I know.
                  1. To see that by perfect learning,1. Making them very perfect in all their first school Authors. Reasons. & oft repeating they
be very readie in their first Authors, which they learned, of
such morall matters; as their Sententiae, Cato, Esopsfables:
For some one or mo of these haue the grounds of almost euery
Theam, which is meet to be propounded to schollars
to write on. So that by these they shal be furnished with the
iudgements of may Wisemen, what is truth, what is false in
most matters, with som words to expresse their minds, and
also some reasons; as with the sentences or testimonies of
the wisest, Similitudes, or Apologues in Aesop, and some
graue reasons out of Cato, which they may cal to mind. All
these may be done by the courses set downe before, and as
soon as the bare learning of the cōstruing & parsing alone.
                  2. Add to these the oft reading ouer of Tullies sentences
out of the Gram.☜ translations,2. Reading ouer & ouer Tullies sentences. & the sentences of the other
Authors adioined with the same. As also the reading them
forth of Latine into a good English stile. Thus yoush I find
by experience, that after that children are perfect in their
first schoole Authors, they wil also read this book of themselues,
by the help of the translatiō alone, to go ouer & ouer
it, euery day thus reading a peece of it amongst thēselues,
with little or no hindring any of their school exercises.
                  3. To the end that they may haue presidents and
patterns for Theams,3. Presidents or examples. like as they had for their Epistles and
for making Latin, some book is to be chosen which is written
to this purpose, and such a one as is most easie, both for
the sweetest Latine and choisest matter.
                  These presidents are of two sorts: some are to furnish

them still,Presidents for matter. with more variety of the best matter; others, for
the whole forme and frame of the Theame.
                  Of the first sort,☞ for singular matter notably compact
together,Reusneri Symbola. 
                     Reusners Symbola doth seeme to me most familiar
and plaine: wherein the Poesies or sentences of the seuerall
Emperors, both Italian, Greek, and Germane are handled:
As these;
                  Artem quaeuis terra alit. Apex Magistratus authoritas.
Bonus dux, bonus comes. Bonis nocet, qui parcet malis. Cedendum
multitudini. Festma lentè and the like
                  
                  This book I take to be a very worthie booke to traine
vp young Gentlemen,Reusner worthy to traine vp young Gentlemen, and all of any good sort and condition. and all others whom we would haue
to become wise men, & good Common-wealths men. It is
full of most singular precepts and instructions concerning
dueties and vertues; and for framing and ordering the
whole course of our life, and managing all our affaires with
wisedome, safetie and commendations. So as any one may
receiue many wise directions, for all occasions of life, and
withall much sweete delight, in it. And for this matter of
Theames, it is fraughted full of the graue testimonies and
sentences of many of the auncientest, wisest, and most experienced;
all fitly applyed, without any matter to corrupt
or offend, and in a most familiar, easie, and pleasing stile.
                  The manner of the vse of it for the first enterers into
Theames,☞ where they haue bookes, and the Teacher would
specially apply them to Theames,How Schollars may vse Reusners Symbola for Theames. and that they haue time
enough, may be this:
                  To take theThe words or Mottoes. Poesies or Theams of it in order: or if any
of them seeme ouer hard for childrens capacities, in regard
of the matter of them, to make choyse of the most easie
and familiar, first: to reade vnto them euery night a
peece of a Theame of it, as a side of a leafe, or more or lesse;
according to the abilities of their Schollars. In reading, first
to make the Theame or generall matter of it very plaine
vnto them. They are commonly expounded for the sum
of them vnder the Poesie, in verse, or with som short glosse,
or both. Afterwards, to shew your Schollars the chiefe

reasons and sentences, as you do reade, and in what words
the force of each Argument or reason lieth. Also to obserue
al the phrases which are either more difficult or pure,
or most fit to that purpose in hand.
                  And thus to make euery thing plaine vnto them; first
opening them, after examining the same, and so causing
them to vnderstand, and to be able to answere euerie point
therof in Latine, or to giue the hard phrases to the English.
                  This poasing by short questions, with the other things
mentioned, will make the obscurest peeces of it very euident,
and cause both weaker Masters and schollars to profit
greatly in vnderstanding. After all this, if you will, cause
them to construe it amongst themselues and to giue the
sense, and so make it as perfect as they can euery waie: Or
if they bee able, heare them to construe it themselues first,
or to read it out of the Latine into English, and then make
it plaine to them. Then let each seuerally see how hee can
gather a short Theam out of that; choosing out all the principal
sentences and reasons, and composing them in good
order: following, if you thinke good, the parts of a Theam:
viz. Exordium, Narratio, Confirmatio, Confutatio, Conclusio,
though their Theame be not aboue 12. or 
                        •
                     6. lines, according
to their time & abilitie. To these they may adioine other
reasons or sentēces, as they can, either what they haue
learned, or what they can gather fitly to the same purpose.
                  To bring this Theame of theirs thus made, the next day
at the time appointed for shewing their Theames each one
to pronounce his Theam without book;Pronouncing their Theam
                           •
                        . you in the meane
time looking on that which is pronounced, & examining
each fault, as they are vttering it or after, by asking them
short questions of the faults, and causing them to answere
them, and to shew how they should be amended; and so making
a dash with a pen vnder euery falt, or the letters where
the falt is, to leaue them to them to correct them after. Yet
your selfe somtimes to peruse the exercises after againe, to
see that they haue corrected them; as I shal shew in another
place. By this means the first enterers may haue choise of

matter gathered to their hands, which otherwise they
were to seeke in other Authors they knewe not where no
                        •
                     
how.
                  2. All the Theams of this Author being thus written of,Benefit of Reusner so vsed, & of daily Theams out of it.
and pronounced by them memoriter, which may bee done
in a short time, keeping each night a Theame, must needs
help to furnish them with variety of the best matter, and fit
phrase. Besides that, this will be a great furtherance to audac
                        •
                     tie,
memory, gesture, pronuntiation: and by the continual
and diligent reading of that Author, with their other
Authors, they shall haue much help to construe & vnderstand
any other morall Author ex tempore.
                  
                  Or if this course bee ouer-tedious,☞ by reason of the
multitude of schollars,These Theams to be limited according to leasure and oportunitie. or their other exercises; then
to reade them the more at a time, and let them bring them
once or twice in the weeke, made longer and more carefully.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This way may bee very good for entering young
schollars, and to store them with the best matter & phrase:
but might there not bee some speciall rules and directions
giuen, for writing their Theames according to the order of
the chiefe schooles, prosecuting the seuerall parts of the
Theame?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes: but these I thinke fittest to succeed in the second
place,The best and most easie direction for Theams to be written at large, with iudgement according to the parts therof. after that they haue thus furnished themselues,
with words and store of matter, by this help, or Tullies sentences,
or the like; or in want of other books to vse Apthonius.
Then to learne to flourish and adorne their Theames
after.
                  For the surest and easiest direction for such Theams, to
be done in more exquisite manner, where the schollars may
haue leasure to them;To take the Theams out of Apthonius, and how to make them to vnderstand them fully, and prepare matter. I shall shew you my iudgement, and
what I can yet find or conceiue to be the best.
                  1. Because I would not haue my schollars discouraged
any way thorough the difficulty of this exercise, I would
do as in their first Theams for matter: so in these. That is,
I would take their Theames (at least for a time) out of Apthonius,

either in order as they stand, or choosing of the
most familiar, and in all things read and make it plaine vnto
them, with the seuerall parts and arguments, as I shewed
you before in Reusner.
                  Then I would demaund of them, first to giue mee Apthonius
arguments: as, what reasons hee hath from the
Cause, Effect, Contrarie, Similitude, Example, Testimonie.
                  Next, what reasons euerie one can giue of his owne, to
proue the same.
                  In the third place to shew, what any of them can obiect
against it; or if it be true, what absurdities and inconueniences
will follow of it; and also some of them to answere
the obiections and inconueniences: and lastly my selfe to
supplie their wants and faylings.
                  After this done, direct euery one of them who are to
write of it, to remember where they haue read any thing of
that Theam, or by the Indexes of their books of Cōmonplaces:
as Tullies sentences, Reusner, or the like, to seeke
what they can finde of that matter.
                  2. That they obserue these parts, named

                        Exordium.
                        Narratio.Parts of the Theame.
                        
                        Confirmatio.
                        Confutatio.
                        Conclusio.
                     
                  
                  3. To make their Exordium very short,
                        Exordium what one. two or three
lines, to gaine the approbation of the hearers, and their
attention.
                  If the Theam be of any person in accusation or defence
of them after the manner of declamations,If the Theame be of persons. then that their
Exordium may bee fittest taken, from the partie himselfe
who is accused or defended; from some description of him
to his praise or dispraise; or else from the person of the aduersarie,
or of the auditours, or of the party himselfe who
writeth.
                  For the persons whom they will defend, they must labor

to perswade their hearers of their vertues, or to remoue
from them all preiudicate opinion. And for the persons
whom they will accuse, to dispraise them, by shewing their
bad qualities; so to bring them into disgrace.
                  But if the Theame bee of some matter to be proued or
disproued,Theame of some matter. commended or discommended, which are most
ordinarie; their Exordium may bee taken from the matter;
by commending it for the excellency thereof, or for the
benefit which may redound to the hearers, by the knowledge
of it; or discommending it by the contrary, or by
some circumstance of time▪ persons, places, or the like.
                  In their Narration, to the end that the Auditors may
fully vnderstand the matter,Narration. and themselues may proceed
more easily; let them set downe first the Theame or matter
in as few and plaine words as they can.
                  Secondly, expound the doubtfull words or phrases, if
therebe any. If it concerne persons or facts of persons,
then to set downe all the circumstances to expresse the nature
& maner of it. Or if it concerne some special matter, to
make some short diuision of it; if it bee a generall into his
specials, or if a whole into his members or parts: so to goe
throgh euery part in order, ioining each part together with
fit transitions, to shew their passage frō one part to another.
                  In the Confirmation to the end,Confirmation. to bee able to proue
the matter the better;
                  1. To note in their Authors all the principall reasons
which they can, to that end, and to gather them forth.
                  2. To trie what reasons they can inuent of themselues
according to the chiefe heads of Inuention, following either
Apthonius order, or the ten chief heads of Inuention:
as, Causes, Effects, Subiects, Adiuncts, &c. which ar the same
in effect, but farre more easie to prosecute, according to the
Art of meditation, whereof we shal speak after. By considering
wel either the thing it self, Causes & Effects of it: or if it
be a Proposition, as in this (Children are to obey their Parents)
by marking carefully both parts of the Proposition
or sentence, both Antecedent and consequent, as they are

called; and the one part wil surely afford some reasons.
                  As if we thinke first of the parents what they haue beene,
and are towards the children; and so what the children
haue and doe receiue from them (thus following the parts
according to those places of meditation) any one of vnderstanding
shall be able to finde out reasons why the children
are to obey their parents.
                  Then hauing found out reasons, before they set them
downe in their Theame, as they will haue them, to ranke
them in their minde or in writing; so as they doe purpose
to set them in their Theame: setting some stronger in the
first place, weaker in the midst, reseruing some of the stronger
to the last, crossing and leauing out all the weake ones,
whereof any one may discredite all the rest.
                  In the Confutation to seeke out and set downe two or
three good reasons,Confutation. to ouerthrow or reproue the contrary
opinion to the Theame: and also to consider what may be
obiected against it, and how to answere them, by way of
Occupation and Subiection, or of preuenting and obiection.
                  Then to direct them,Conclusion. that the Conclusion is nothing but
a collection gathered from all the former reasons; in which
may be a short recapitulation, or rehearsall of the summe of
the reasons, and an vrging (if they will) of one or two of the
principall & most forcible reasons somwhat more, to leaue
a deeper impression in the minds of the hearers; & so out of
them to conclude most firmly. And thus much may serue
for the direction in generall for making the Theame.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But this seemes still to me rather too obscure for
young Grammar schollars: I pray you let me heare, if you
could not leade me yet vnto more ready helpes.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The most excellent patterns, I take to be the most
speedy and ready helps for schollars to be acquainted with,
and to learne to imitate them: for they in euery thing doe
most auaile, to teach the soonest and sureliest.
                  As for variety of Exordiums and Conclusions,☜ Apthonius
his Prog
                           •
                        masmata may helpe to direct;Imitation of Exordiums and Conclusions. and also Master
Stockwood his disputations of Grammar.
                  
                     
For furnishing with matter and substance,Authours for matter. besides Reusners
Symbola mentioned, Erasmus Adages of the largest
and last Edition, is a rich store-house. Also Lycosthenes
his Apothegmata, printed at London by G. Bishoppe,
M.D.XCVI. is of good vse.
                  Lycosthenes of the last Edition (as I heare) is dangerously
corrupted with Popery,Lycosthenes of the last Edition to be taken heed of, as it is augmented and corrupted by the Iesuites, printed Coloniae, sumptibus Lazari Zetzueri An. M.D.C.III.
                      and rayling against K. Henry
the eight, K. Edward, and our late blessed Queene; and
therefore not to be permitted vnto children. Many other I
might name vnto you, which haue written of such morall
matters; diuers of them in English, and some of them very
notable: as the French Academie, the morall part of it:
Charactery, Morall Philosophy, Golden groue, Wits Common
wealth, Ciuill conuersation; and others.
                  So in Latin▪ 
                     Z
                           •
                        gedine his Philosophia Poetica; The sentences
selected out of the best Authours, adioyned to Tallies
sentences; Flores Poetarum for Verses to flourish withall.
                  But the former, viz. Reusner Erasmus Adages, Apthonius,
and Lycosthenes, may serue in steed of many, for Schollars
who are of vnderstanding and iudgement to vse them
aright; chusing out the summe of the most excellent matter,
and making it their owne; composing euery thing fitly,
without apparant stealing out of any.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what helpe doe you account the very best
for inuention of matter,Helpes for inuention of matter. to find it out as of their own heads,
which you know is principally esteemed of?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  That which I named in the direction for the
Theame, is the vsual manner in schooles, as I take it; I mean
the following the places of Apthonius: as, à Laudatiuo, Paraphrastico,
Causa, Contrario, Parabola, Exemplo, Testimonio
veterum, Breui Epilogo.
                  
                  
                     So à Manifesto, Credibili, Possibili, Consequente, Decoro,
Vtili. And ab Obscuro, Incredibili, Impossibili, Inconsequenti,
Indecoro, Inutili, and the like.
                  
                  Yet these doe seeme to mee also farre too hard for childrens
conceits, who haue read no Logicke, and ouer-tedious.

But the following of those ten first and chiefe heads of
reasoning;The knowledg of the ten grounds of Inuention, the readiest. to wit, from Causes, Effects, Subiects, Adiuncts,
Disagreeable things, Comparisons, Notations, Distributions,
Definitions, Testimonies (to one of which each of Apthonius
or Tullies places doe belong) is farre the easiest,
surest, and plainest way.
                  If that little booke called the Arte of Meditation,☜ were
made somewhat more plaine for the definitions or descriptions,The arte of meditation most profitable for inuention.
that children might see euery thing euidently; and illustrated
by a few moe examples; and so schollars made
perfect in it by examining; they would bee able to inuent
plenty of good matter presently, after that they had beene
exercised in Reusner, and the other Authours; in reading,
and also in writing some variety of Theames, after the manner
set downe before.
                  Let them practice when they would inuent matter, but
to runne through those places curiously in their mindes;
and if one place doe not offer fit matter, another will surely,
and furnish them with store: so that by the helpe of that
small Treatise, if it were so perfected, all this might bee accomplished;
and that with a small meditation any schollar
of vnderstanding might discourse very commendably of
any such matter.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It is great pitie it should not be made exact, if the
vse and benefite bee such as you conceiue of it to this purpose,
besides the worthy end for which it is written.
                  But as you haue giuen patternes for other exercises, so
let me heare your iudgement, where they may haue th
                        •
                     
best patternes for Theames, for the whole frame thereof,
being handled according to all the parts seuerally.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Apthonius (out of whom these Theames may bee☜
taken first and the schollars also to haue liberty to gather
out the principall matter;Presidents for the manner of Theames, and out of which to take their Theames first; or out of Reusthner, or others as we wil yet making it their owne, by
seeking to better euery sentence) hath sundry very good
presidents for such Theames; and in sweete Latine, written
by Rodulphus Agricola, Cataneus Lorichius, or others: as
the example of a Common-place, of the Thesis, and the

like. Though Apthonius his owne (I meane) those translated
out of him, are of a more harsh stile in Latine; yet the
order is good, as being written and set forth of purpose to
this end.
                  These very Theames may be written on,☞ first for incouragement;
after, others of like matterto be imitated, according
to the same places.☞
                  
                  Secondly,Tullies Paradoxes for more excellent patternes. next vnto those in Apthonius, which are
more easie, Tullies Paradoxes are most singular patternes
for true Rhetoricke, though the order of them seeme to be
more obscure: they will be notable directions, if that the
schollars be of capacity and ripenesse, and haue the seuerall
parts rightly opened vnto them, that they fully vnderstand
them.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But for Declamations what examples or helpes
would you vse?Declamations and pattrnes for them.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The Declamation being nothing else but a Theame
of som matter, which may be controuerted, and so handled
by parts, when one taketh the Affirmatiue part, another the
Negatiue, & it may be a third moderateth or determineth
betweene both; we haue very good Presidents in the Thesis
in Apthonius: as in that question handled both affirmatiuely
and negatiuely, viz. Vxor est ducenda, Vxor non est
ducenda.
                  
                  If it be in a more vehement inuectiue against some vice,Examples of Inuectiues.
we haue sundry examples in Apthonius, in Loco communi.
As, In villarum incensores, In sacrilegum, Incontumacem, In
auarum.
                     Examples of praise and dispraise.
                  
                  Likewise the seuerall examples there set downe of praise
and dispraise, of persons, cities, or the like. So the Presidents
in Apthonius of particular actions, in accusing or defence
of them, may be great helpes to giue much good direction.
                  For further patternes, see Tully his Orations; and specially
the Inuectiues against Catiline.
                  In these kinde of Theames, wee shall haue farre more
vse of those figures of Sentences, which are the very life
and strength of an Oration; as of Exclamations, Reuocations,

Apostrophees, Prosopopies; and the rest of the figures
in Dialogismo.
                  
                  I haue heard of some good ensamples in English, viz.
thirteene Declamations; but I haue not beene able to finde
them out.
                  But these kinde of exercises of Declaming are rather for
the Vniuersities;Declamations fit for the Vniuersities, or for principall schollars in the Grammar schooles. Manner of writing downe the Theames by Schollars of iudgement. or at least for such Schollars in the Grammar
schooles, as haue beene long exercised in the former
kindes.
                  For the manner of writing downe the Theames by
Schollars of iudgement, it may not bee amisse where
leasure will serue, to cause the schollars to write them thus:
In the first Margent towards the left hand, together with the
seuerall partes of the Theame (as Exord. Narratio, Confirmatio,
Confutatio, Conclusio, being set in great letters ouer against
each part) to set also the heads of the seuerall arguments;
chiefly against the Confirmation: as Causa, Effectum:
like as Apthonius doth set his places, à Causa, à Contrario.
And in the later side of the page, towards the right hand, to
set the seuerall tropes or figures, but in two or three letters.
As for Metonymia Efficientis, no more but Met. Effic.
or the like: making some line vnder the word, in which
they are; The shorter the better, if it can bee vnderstood.
                  One Theame in the weeke well performed in this maner,☜
besides all other exercises,One Theame thus in the weeke may suffice, and to spend their odd times in making Verses, as more sharpening the wit. Making Theames ex tempore, a matter of great commendations if it be don schollar-like. may be sufficient; like as the order
is in many of the chiefe schooles.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Certainely Sir, these courses seeme to me as easie
as the former, both for Masters and Schollars; that hereby
they must needes labour, and goe on with delight;
beeing thus plainely guided and directed from point to
point.
                  Yet to proceede a little further herein, if you will giue me
leaue: I haue heard of some schollars marueilously praised
for this, that they haue beene able to speake of a Theame
ex tempore for a quarter of an houre, or more together, in
good Latine, and to very good purpose.
                  
                     
Now how doe you thinke that this may be done? for this
is a matter of very high commendations to young schollars
euen in the Vniuersities; and much more in the Grammar
schooles, if it can be done.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This exercise must needes require much reading,The way to make Theames ex tempore.
                     
and practice to doe it, in such commendable manner; as
indeed it may. The best way how to attaine it most soone
and surely▪ is this, so farre as yet I can conceiue:
                  1 They must practice constantly for a good space, the
former or better course of making Theames; that they
may become very ready in writing their Theames of any
morall matter with a little study.
                  2 I haue seene this practice to bee easie and profitable
to this end:A practice most easie and profitable to helpe to make Theames ex tempore.
                      the very vse of the Grammatical translation of
Apthonius, according to the maner of the vse of the translations,
for keeping the schoole Authours perfectly.
                  As first, causing them to reade a Theame out of the Latine
into English; or where it is hard, first to reade it ouer
in English to giue some light;To follow a patterne of a Theame, made familiar vnto them by the Grammaticall translations. To see how each is able to better his Authour, in vttering euery part of themselues, both English and Latine. then out of the Latine into
English, to vnderstand it perfectly: afterwards to reade it
out of the English translation into Latin, to haue the phrase
and Latine readily to expresse their mindes.
                  Then euery one in his course, to trie how he is able to expresse
or vtter that Theame of himselfe; first in English,
then in Latine, euery part of the Theame in order.
                  For example: To begin first with the Exordium, to trie
how they can vtter it in English, and whether they can better
the Authour. After the first, a second fellow to assay how
he is able to better the first; so another after him to better
them both: and so forward as you will.
                  After this, to make tryall how they can vtter the same in
Latine; euery one still bettering others: then to doe the
like in the Narration; and so through euery part, both in
English and Latine; still contending to go beyond their
patternes in purity of phrase and matter, contracting, adding,
or changing as they will.
                  When they haue for some good time vsed this practice,☞
                     
then trying how they are able to discourse of themselues in
a Theame giuen vnto them,To practice to discourse of themselues. according to the order of meditation,
or places of Inuention, by continual exercise they
shall attaine hereunto.
                  The practice in Apthonius will affoord them matter and
wordesenow for imitation of Exordiums,Where to be stored with matter: and wordes for all parts. manner of Confutations
and Conclusions.
                  Their readinesse in their first Authours of morall matters,
as also in Tullies sentences, and Flores Poëtarum;
and that their continued exercise in Reusner, with the helpe
of the places of Inuention, will commonly yeelde matter
sufficient.
                  What phrase or word they cannot vtter in Latine,
                  1 Let them bethinke themselues how they would first
vtter and vary it in English,Helpe for supplying wordes or phrases. and some of the English words
will bring Latine wordes,1 To think how to vtter it in other words in English. or phrases to their remembrance;
or else how they can expresse it by Periphrasis, or circumlocution
in moe words, by some description, or by the generall,
or the contrary, or by some property, or the like.
                  2 Next to this,☜ they may vse the helpe of Holyokes
Dictionary;2 Helps of Dictionaries and bookes of phrases. and for phrase Manutius or Master Draxes
Calliepëia: the phrases may bee found more easily in the
Calliepëia.
                  
                  3 And to the end that they may be sure to haue variety
both of words and phrase,To meditate the chiefe phrases before. which doth much delight; it shal
not be amisse to peruse before in the phrase book, the principall
wordes or phrases which concerne that Theame, and
how many wayes they may be vttered: at least the Master
when hee tryeth his Schollars in this extemporall faculty,
if hee bee not a ready and perfect Latinist may haue the
phrase booke by him,Helpe by the Master. to looke euery hard phrase which
they cannot vtter well; and how they may vary it diuers
wayes.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But to the end that schollars may be sure euer to
haue store of matter, or to finde of a sudden where to turne
to fit matter for euery Theame; what doe you thinke of
Common-place bookes of such morall matters, that euery

schollar should haue his Common-place booke written.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I do account them a great help where the schollars
haue leasure and iudgement to gather them;Common-place bookes a singular help. I meane, to
gleane out all the choyse sentences and matter in the best
Authours. Or, because that that is ouer-great a toyle, and
requires more iudgement then can bee looked for in so
young yeares; if they had but only bookes of References,
it would be exceeding profitable: to wit, such Common-place
bookes as did but only containe the generall heads
of matter, and then the Quotations of three or foure of the
chiefe Authours; as Reusner, Erasmus Adages, Tullies sentences,
or some other; setting downe the booke and the
page, where to turn of a sudden to any such matter in them.
This would ease them of much searching, and make schollars
to do such exercises much sooner, and with farre greater
commendations: like as it is in Diuinity, Law, Physick,
and whatsoeuer other Artes. Thus they may vse the matter
of the best Authors, going farre beyond the matter which
the wit of any childe can conceiue; sith that those bookes
haue in them the choysest sayings of the very wisest of all
ages: although they are stil to adde whatsoeuer they can inuent
of their owne braine, so it be wittily and pithily.
                  Such a book of References wel gathered, and made publicke,
would much further young schollars herein.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I see well how they may be furnished for store of
matter; yet for choyse of good wordes and phrase, to haue
copie and variety euer ready at hand, I make some doubt
how they may be furnished: for it is a toyle to goe euer to
turne to phrase bookes; neyther can they haue time when
they are to speake ex tempore.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Take no care for that;How to get store of phrases store of matter being thus
gotten, as I haue shewed, wil bring words: yet to haue copie
of Synonymaes & good phrase, besides their Authours made
perfect, & other helps mentioned; Calliepeia translated in
propriety, & read one while out of Latin into English, another
while out of English into Latin, & after trying how to
vary both in English and Latin; will help very much to furnish

with copie both English and Latine. Hereof I haue
known som experience. A little triall will soon cōfirm this.
                  There may be also other helpes forvarying:Other helps. as the rules
in Erasmus de Cap
                           •
                        a, in Macropedius and others; and more
specially some select phrases to seuerall purposes noted in
Erasmus de Copia.
                  
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what say you concerning Orations,Orations. what
course doe you thinke fittest to bee able to performe them
with commendations?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I take them to belong rather to the Vniuersities,Orations belong specially to the Vniuersities.
that there is more seldom vse of them in schooles, and then
also to be performed by schollars growen to som maturity.
                  For examples or patterns of Orations,Examples of Orations. wee can haue no
better then Tullies Orations; wherein are presidents of all
sorts. In these is the schollar to bee exercised to knowe the
nature of them, & the maner of the loftiness of stile vsed in
them. Also Turners Orations, Muretus, or others. Though
for entrance into them we may follow the exāples of praises
in Apthonius. Chap. 8. Or some other select Orations.
                  Yet, because in Schooles of special note, and where there
are auncient schollars,
                        Orations ex tempore. sometimes it may bee expected amongst
them, that some one of them should make an Oration
to entertaine a Benefactor, or other person of note;
and it may be, to do it ex tempore, as their comming is of a
sodaine; therfore certaine speciall heads of an Oration to
that purpose might be euer in readinesse.☜ As the commendations
of a person for his descent, learning, loue and countenance
of good learning & vertue, beneficence curtesie,
fauor towards that place, and the like. Also for excusing
themselues by their tender yeers, want of experience and of
practice in that kind, bashfulnesse, timorousnesse; and yet
their desire to answere the parties loue & expectation, with
presuming vpon their patience, and such others. To be acquainted
also with variety of choise phrases to the same
purposes, to haue them euer in fresh memory.
               
               
                  Sp.
                  These courses are very plain in my iudgemēt: yet notwithstanding,
sith they are of more seldom vse, but Theams

of daily practice, wee are specially to looke vnto them.
Therfore my weak memory, let me heare in two words,
the sum of all concerning the Theames.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This is the sum;
                  1. That they be acquainted with som matter for Theams
and easie phrase,Sum of all for Theames. and so accustomed to write Theames in a
plaine manner first, following Reusner principally.
                  2. That they learne to handle the Theame more curiously
according to Apthonius, prosequuting and adorning
the seuerall parts thereof, making choise of the most
excellent patternes.
                  3. That they haue the helps and grounds of inuenting
reasons of themselues, and do know whereto finde more
store of matter and phrase to expresse their mindes, and be
furnished with helps of the best books.
                  4. Lastly, that as in all other exercises, they vse continuall
practice; which makes the hardest things easie and pleasant.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               How to enter to make verses with delight and certaintie,
without bodging; and to traine vp schollars
to imitate and expresse Ouid or Virgil,
both their phrase & stile.
               
                  Spo
                        •
                     d.
                  NOw that wee haue gone thorough all the whole
course of writing Latine in prose, and the seuerall
exercises therof which are requisite in Grammar
schooles, so far forth as I remember; it remaineth
that we come to verse: wherein I presume of your loue as
in all the former, not to conceale anything from me, but to
impart whatsoeuer may helpe to the attaining of that facultie.
               
               
                  
                  Phil.
                  Though Poetry bee rather for ornament then for
any necessary vse;☜ and the main matter to be regarded in it,Poetry rather for ornament then for any necessity. Yet there may be commendable vse of it.
is the puritie of phrase and of stile: yet because there is
very commendable vse of it, sometimes in occasions of
triumph and reioicing, more ordinarily at the funerals of
some worthy personages, and sometimes for some other
purposes; it is not amisse to traine vp schollars euen in this
kinde also. And the rather because it serueth very much
for the sharpning of the wit, and is a matter of high commendation,
when a schollar is able to write a smooth
and pure verse, and to comp
                        •
                     ehend a great deale of choise
matter in a very little roome.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Surely sir though it is, as you say, but an ornament,
yet it is such a one, as doth highly grace those who
haue attained it, in any such measure as you speak of; and
two such verses are worth two thousand, of such flash and
bodge stuffe as are ordinarily in some schooles. But this I
haue found also to be full of difficutie,The ordinary difficulty of this faculty. both in the entring,
the progresse, and also in the end; that my schollars haue
had more feare in this, then in all the former, and my selfe
also driuen to more seuerity: which I haue been inforced
vnto, or else I should haue done no good at al with the greatest
part.
                  And yet when I haue done my vttermost, I haue not had
any to come to such pe
                        •
                     fection as you mention,The folly of some in this kinde. to write so
pithily or purely: yea, let me tell you this, that I haue knowensom
Masters, who haue thought themselues very profound
Poets, who would vpon an occasion of a Funerall
haue written you a sheete or two of verses, as it were of a
sydden; yet amongst all those, you should hardly haue
found one such a Verse as you speake of, vnlesse it were
stolne; and most of them such, as iudicious Poet would
be ready to laugh at, or loath to reade. Therefore I intreat
you to guide me, how I may redresse this euill, and preuent
these inconueniences.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Though I be no Poet, yet I finde this course to be
found most easie and plaine to direct my schollars:
                  
                     
1. To looke that they bee able in manner to write true
Latine,The most plain way how to enter to make a verse without bodging. and a good phrase in prose,1. To write true Latine. before they begin to
meddle with making a verse.
                  2. That they haue read some poetry first;2. To haue read some Poetry. as at least these
books or the like, or some part of them: viz. Ouid de Tristibus,
or de Ponto, some peace of his Metamorphosis or
of Virgil, and be well acquainted with their Poeticall phrases.
                  3. I find this a most easie & pleasant way to enter them;☞
that for all the first bookes of Poetry which they learne in
the beginning,3. Practice of turning them out of the Grā
                        maticall translations into verse. they vse to reade them daily out of the
Grammaticall translations: first resoluing euery verse into
the Grammaticall order, like as it is in the translation; after
into the Poeticall, turning it into verse, as the words are in
the Poet: according as I shewed the manner before, in the
benefit and vse of the translations.☞ For the making of a
verse,Giuing Poeticall phrase. is nothing but the turning of words forth of the
Grammaticall order, into the Rhetoricall, in some kinde of
metre; which wee call verses. And withall, that in reading
thus out of the translations, they vse to giue the Poeticall
phrases, to our English phrases, set in the margents, and also
the Epithetes.
                  For this practice of reading their Poetry, out of the translations
into verse, a little trial will soon shew you, that very
children wil do it as fast almost as into prose: and by the
vse of it, continually turning prose into verse, they will be
in a good way towards the making a verse, before they haue
learned any rules therof.
                  4. Then when you would haue them to go in hand with
making a verse;4. To be very cunning in the rules of versifying. that they be made very cunning in the rules
of versifying, so as to be able to giue you readily each rule,
and the meaning therof.
                  5. That they bee expert in scanning a verse,5. To be perfect in scanning. and in prouing
euery quantity, according to their rules, and so vse to
practice in their lectures daily.
                  6. To keepe them that they shall neuer bodge in their
entrance,6. To keepe frō bodging in their entrance. neither for phrase nor otherwise, but to enter

with ease, certainty and delight; this you shall finde to be a
most speedy way:
                  Take Flores Poetarum,
                     ☜ and in euery Common place
make choise of Ouids verses,To vse the like practice in Flores Po
                              •
                           tarum for verse, as in Tullies sentences for prose. or if you find any other which
be pleasant and easie: and making sure, that your schollars
know not the verses a forehand, vse to dictate vnto them
as you did in prose. Cause also so many as you would haue
to learne together, to set down the English as you dictate.
                  Secondly to giue you, and to write downe all the words
in Latine verbatim, or Grammatically.
                  Thirdly, hauing iust the same words, let them trie which
of them can soonest turne them into the order of a verse:
which they will presently doe▪ being trained vp in the vse of
the translations; which is the same in effect.
                  And then lastly, read thē ouer the verse of Ouid, that they
may see that themselues haue made the very same; or wherin
they missed: this shall much incourage and assure them.
                  After that they haue practiced this for a little time;To do this without pen. if for
speediness, & for sauing paper (because they may soon run
ouer much) you do vse but only to read the English Grammatically,
and appoint som one of them to deliuer it in Latine;
then all to trie which of them can soonest turne those
words into a verse, or how many waies they can turne them
into a verse: you shall see them come on a pace, and an earnest

                        ••
                     rift to be wrought amongst them.☜
                  
                  This also may bee done most easily,The most easie way of turning verses out of Flores Poetarum
                      by the vse of
Grammaticall translations of all the choyce verses in Flores
Poetarum; practicing as in Tully & other, to read them▪
                     ex tēpore out of the English first into prose▪ after into verse.
They wil be as familiar & easie, as to read prose, and to do it
with as much delight and contention, or more; euery da
                        •
                     e
practicing a little by course.To note hard words quātities Epithets. For this is nothing (as I sayd)
but the Poeticall composition. In the practice of this likewise,
vse to note euery new & hard word, and quātity, as also
Epithetes; according to the generall rule before, and the
manner in each lecture,☜ and oft to examine those.
                  7. Cause them to turn the verses of their lecture into other
verses,7. To turne the verses of their lectures. either to the same purpose, which is easiest for yoūg

beginners, or turned to some other purpose, to expresse
some other matter; yet euer to keep the very phrase of the
Poet, there or in other places, only transposing the words
or phrase, or changing some words or phrase, or the numbers,
or persons, or applying them to matters which are familiar,
as they did in imitating Epistles. This may be practiced,
each to bring first a verse or two thus changed, either
being giuen at eleuen to be brought at one, or at euening to
be brought in the morning, or both.
                  8. As they proceed,☞ to cause them to contract their lectures,8. Contracting their lectures.
drawing seauen or eight verses into fowre or fiue, or
fewer: yet still labouring to expresse the whole matter of
their Author in their owne verse, and euery circumstance,
with all significant Metaphors, and other tropes and phrases,
so much as they can.
                  Thus▪ they may proceed if you wil, from the lowest kind
of verse in the Eclogues, to somthing a loftier in the Georgicks;
and so to the stateliest kinds in the Aeneids: wherein
they may be tasked to go thorough some booke of the
Aeneids,The certaine benefit of this exercise. euery day contracting a certaine number, as some
5 or 6. a day, for some of their exercises, striuing who can
expresse their Author most liuely. By which daily contention
you shall find, that those who take a delight in Poetry,
and haue sharpness & dexterity accordingly,To expresse their Poet most liuely. will in a short
time attaine to that ripenesse, as that they who know not
the places which they imitate, shall hardly discerne in
many verses, whether the verse bee Virgils verse, or the
schollars.
                  But herein there must be this care,Caueat in contracting. that before they goe
in hand with this kinde of contracting, they bee both well
exercised in the former kindes, or the like; and also that
they beate out the meaning of the place fully, marking
what goeth before, and also what followeth after; and obseruing
curiously euery phrase, elegancy, and matter of any
weight.☞
                  
                  Morouer,To make verses of any ordinary Theam. that your schollars may be able to write verses
ex tempore, of any ordinary Theame, after they haue bin wel

practiced in turning the easie verses of Flores Po
                           •
                        tarum,
forth of prose into verse, that they can doe it readily; appoint
them of the most familiar Theames of it, and the
sweetest verses thereof in order, to see how they can turne
the same ex tempore into other verses, to the very same purpose;
either by imitation, or contraction, like as I shewed the
practice in their lectures: or hauing but the light of those
verses, how they can make other verses of their owne like
vnto them.
                  By this practice kept duely,☜ to make some such verses
twise in the day (as to giue them Theams before their breaking
vp at noone,To versifie ex tempore.
                      to bring them at one of the clocke, and
at night to bring them in the morning, or nine, as before;
onely hauing this help and direction) or of a sodaine euer
before they are to pla
                        •
                     e, to versifie of some Theame not
thought of: and secondly by causing them to bring the
sum of their Theams written vnder their Theams, comprized
in a disticke, or two or moe, you shall finde that they
will grow in so good sort, as shall be requisite to make you
verses, ex tempore of any vsuall Theame, without hindering
of their other studies. And here by they will soone bee acquainted
with matter of all sorts according to those Common
places,Benefits of this practice. and also with variety of poetical phrase of the
best, with Epihetes & stile. This exercise is very commendable
to satisfie such,The vse of versifying ex tempore.
                      as vse to giue Theams to versifie vpon
ex tempore; and also for that it is a very great sharpner of the
wit, as was sayd, and a stirrer vp of inuention and of good
wits to strift and emulation.
                  In this matter of versifying,☜ as in all the former exercises,
I take this Imitation of the most excellent patternes,Imitation surest
to be the surest rule, both for phrase and whatsoeuer: And
therefore I would haue the chiefest labor to make these purest
Authors our owne, as Tully for prose, so Ouid and Virgil
for verse so to speake and write in Latine for the phrase,
as they did.
                  For them who desire to attain to more exquisite perfection
in this faculty of Poetry,Further helps for versifying. these things may much further
besides the former:
                  
                     
1. For more store and variety of matter,For store of m
                           •
                        tt
                           •
                        r to haue Cōmon place books or books of references to to the most excellent places in Poets. to haue Common
place books (as I said for the Theams) therein at least
to haue ref
                        •
                     rences▪ wherby to turn of a sodaine to matters
of all sorts, in the most exquisite and pure Poets: to haue
some direction both for matter and imitation; whether for
Gratulatory verses, Triumphs, Funerals, or whatsoeuer.
Or to refer all such principall places for imitation, to the
heads in Flores Poetarum; which may serue insteede thereof☞
                  
                  2. For variety & copie of Poeticall phrases,2. 
                           〈…〉
                        
                      the The saurus
Phrasium poeticarum gathered by Buchlerus of the last
Edition. An. M. D Cvij. is a notable helpe.
                  Also both for words and phrases,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      
                     Sylua Synonimorum,
may stand in good steede, chiefly for schollars of iudgementable
to make right choise of the fittest.
                  3. For store of Epithetes,3. For Epithets, Textors Epithets of the last and largest. which if they bee choyse,
are a singular ornament, and meanes of speedinesse in
this facultie, and so for all other matters belonging to Poetrie,
Textor his Epitheta of the largest and of the last Edition
printed at Lions, M. D. Cij. may bee a great helpe.
                  The abbridgement of Textors Epithetes may serue insteede
hereof to young schollars:Abb
                           •
                        idgement of Textor. and namely to such who
are not able to buy the large; though the large is more profitable.
                  4. For hauing of the best authorities for the quantities
of all syllables,☞ 
                     Smotius his Prosodia will furnish plentifully;4. For Qua
                              •
                           iti
                              •
                           s and Authorities Smet
                           ••
                         Prosodia 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
all needfull words being set in it in the Alphabeticall order.
For rules of quantities, though our owne Grammar may
be sufficient; yet you may see also Smotius his Methodus
dignosc
                           •
                        n
                           •
                        arum Syllabarum ex Georg. Fabricio, set before
his Prosodia. And rules of the quantities of Syllables in M.
Butlers Rhetorick, short and very plaine. Chap. 14 de Metro.
                     ☞
                  
                  Also the Virgils printed with Erythraus Index,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      for Authorities
and vses of all words in Virgil.
                  5. For imitation of the best Poets,
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      and further direction
to attaine to more perfection in Poetry, see Sabines precepts

                     Decarminibi
                           •
                        s ad vete
                           •
                        um imitationem artificiose componendis▪
                     
ioyned with Textors Epithets. Also Buch
                        ••
                     rus his
Institutio Poetica in the end of his Thesaurus phrasium poeticarum.
                  
                  6 For the Figures belonging to Poetry,6 Figures of Rhetoricke. see Butlars
Rhetoricke in his fourteenth Chapt. De Metro.
                  
                  7 For turning of Verses diuers waies,7 For turning Verses Poetically: Stockewood his Progymnasma s
                              ••
                           olafticum.
                      M▪ Stockwood his
Progymnasma scholasticum is instar omnium▪
                      to direct and to
incourage young schollars. In which booke towards the
end of it, you shall haue one Disticke or couple of Verses,
varied 450. wayes.One Disticke varyed 450. wayes. The Verses are these:

                        1 Linque Cupido iecur; cordi quo
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            parcito: sivis
                        Figere fige alio tela cruent a loco.
                        2 Parce meo iecori; intactum mihi linquito pectus:
                        Omnia de reliquo corpore membrapete.
                        3 Ca
                              •
                           epuer, &c.
                     
                  
                  And in the shutting vp of all,One Verse turned 104. waies, the same words being kept. this one Verse is turned by
transposing the words 104. wayes; all the same wordes, and
onely those wordes being kept: which might seeme impossible,
but that there we may see it before our eyes, that nine
wordes should serue to make a hundreth and foure Verses,
all of the same matter. The Verse is this:

                        Est mea spes Christus sol
                              •
                           s, qui de cruce pendet.
                        Est Christus solus mea spes, qui de cruce pendet.
                        Est solus Christus mea spes, qui de cruce pendet.
                        Solus de cruce, &c.
                     
                  
                  A schollar of any inclination and fitnesse for Poetry, cannot
but receiue notable incouragement, hauing these, or
but the principall of these bookes: this exercise of Versifying
will be found a most pleasant recreation vnto him after
a time.
                  8 Lastly,8 Practice still all in all. in this exercise, as in all the rest, I holde daily
practice and diligence (following the best patternes) to be
the surest and speediest guide; and which will bring in time
much perfection, where there is aptnesse of nature concurring.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  But repeat mee in a word, which exercises you
would haue daily put in practice.Daily and easie exercises.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Turning the Verses of the Lectures, as was shewed;
chiefly by contraction in Virgil, keeping strictly his
phrase.
                  2 Before each breaking vp at noones and nights, to
haue a Theame out of the easiest of Fl
                           •
                        res Poëtarum in order,
to bring Verses of it at their entrance againe, or as is appointed
to them.
                  3 Writing Verses of their weekly Theames.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               The manner of examining and correcting
Exercises.
               
                  Spoud.
                  HAuing thus gone through the principall exercises
of writing;Examining exercises neuer to be omitted. I pray you let me heare your iudgment,
for the examining of such exercises, and
the best manner of performing it:Though tedious yet profitable. for I finde it a
matter very tedious and troublesome.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Howsoeuer it be tedious,Neglect of exmining brings carelesnesse in schollars. yet it is such a matter as
would neuer be omitted, no more then the giuing of exercises;
nor to be slightly passed ouer, so much as time and oportunity
will permit. For when the schollar knoweth that
his exercise must be strictly examined, it will make him
more carefull in performing thereof, and contrarily; and it
will be a great helpe to bring him sooner to perfection.
                  For the manner of doing it;
                  1 The Master ought heedfully to obserue those speciall
faults,1 Masters to obs
                           •
                        rue generall faults. wherein his schollars doe most vsually slip; and
to acquaint euery one, not onely with the generall, but also
with his particular, to warne them of them.
                  
                     
For example;Wherein schollars do most commonly slip. I haue found my schollars to misse most
in these: through want of Dipthongs. Incongruity in their
Concords. In the vse of the two chiefe rules of the Relatiue
Qui, quae quod. Ablatiue case absolute. Apposition▪
Coniunctions to couple together like cases, moodes and
Tenses. Nominature case after the Verbe, &c. The Accusatiue
case before an Infinitiue Moode.
                  Also that they will oft haue a Synchesis,
                     Synchesis. or a disordered
confusion of their wordes;Hyperbaton to be auoided. and sometimes they will vse hyperbaton:
which is a further fetching or carrying of some
wordes, whereby a sentence is obscured; and the schollar
forgets himselfe before he come to the end of his sentence,
and so writes false Latine. Long Periods are therefore to
be auoyded as much as may be.
                  2 The Schollars are to be called vpon,☜ to reade ouer
their exercises in the naturall or Grammaticall order,2 To reade ouer their exercises first in naturall order. so as
they construe: and then they may see presently how the
wordes doe hang together, both for agreement, gouernement,
and sense, and where the faults of Grammar
are.
                  3 That besides their rules, they be able presently to parallele
or proue each phrase and construction,☜ by the like
example in Grammar,3. To parallele each thing by examples. or by a like phrase out of Tully, or other
Authours: and what they know not, to seeke out; to
the end that they may be able to iustifie euery word, euen
where they haue read it, so much as may be.
                  4 The higher schollars to looke to elegancie,☜ and finenesse
of phrase and Composition;4 To looke to elegancy and finenesse of Composition. and so to bee reading
their exercises ouer and ouer, stil correcting and amending
them, neuer thinking an exercise well enough, vntill no
fault can be found,Neuer to think any exercise laboured enough▪
                      in Latine, propriety, composition, matter;
no nor in the least tittle. The schollar is herein to imitate
the curious painter, who is still amending and bettering
his picture, to drawe all into admiration; that his
Theames, Verses, Orations may be as the harpe of Orpheus,
to draw all the hearers or readers after them.
                  5 To appoint aduersaries to take one anothers exercises,☜
                     
and to see whether of them can finde the moe faults:5 Aduersaries to note faults in one anothers exercises. and
if you will, to set vnderneath, how many faults either of
them findes; and so to giue them to the Master, or to themselues
first to correct, then to the Master.
                  6 Afterall,☞ the Master is carefully to reade ouer euery
ones exercise,6 The maner of examining by the Master. so much as leasure will permit; and by questions
to make themselues to finde where the errour is: as but
asking; Doe we say thus or thus? and to cause them to amend
it of themselues by giuing a like example▪ And in the
meane time, to make some little line vnder the phrase or
word, or peece of the word or syllable wherein the errour
is, that they may amend it after in their bookes. And for all
correcting of translations in Latine, to doe it by comparing
their exercise with the Authour; and so exercises of imitation,
to see who commeth next to the example.
                  7 In examining exercises in the highest fourmes (as in
Theames,☞ Declamations,7 Special faults in the youngest fourmes. Verses, Orations, and the like) besides
the faults against Grammar, the diligent Master should
obserue, first, all barbarous phrases, or Poeticall phrase in
Prose, or contrary: secondly, Tautologies, or oft repetitions
of the same thing or words: thirdly, want of transitions;
that is, of fit bonds or phrases, whereby to passe elegantly
from one point to another; so as they might be more easily
vnderstood: fourthly▪ harsh composition: fiftly, lacke of
matter: sixtly, want of elegancy in Tropes and Figures; and
so like elegancies noted in Grammar.
                  7 To haue a diligent eye that the schollars do forthwith
correct their exercises,☞ so noted out vnto them:7 Care that they do correct their exercises forthwith. and to this
end he is oft to looke in their bookes, whether they haue
corrected their former exercises; and to vse sharpe reprehension
or correction for that carelesnes, to make them to
looke to that aboue all. For there is nothing wherein their
negligence is more intollerable, nor for which the Master
shal be more censured, when their parents, or others who be
learned▪ shall looke into their bookes,8 This to be 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        e by others 
                           〈◊〉
                         of and reade ouer their
exercises, and there to find them vncorrected.
                  8 If at any time the Masters occasions permit not so much

time, yet to see that it be performed by the Vsher or some of
the highest schollars, and the number of faults noted.
               
               
                  Spou.
                  But what if there should be 30. or 40.☜ in a fourme (as
it may be in the greater schools;How to do for correcting where there are very many in a fourme; and where time will not permit to correct all. especially amongst the
lower fourmes) how would you do to examine all their exercises
in a morning, but you shal hinder your selfe & them
frō many other things, wth you must of necessity performe?
               
               
                  Ph.
                  In such cases we must yeeld to necessity, & vse the best
policy we can; as in that exercise of translating into Latin, to
cause som 3. or 4. whom you most feare,In exercises of translations. to pronounce their
exercises, or to reade or construe thē out of the translation;
you to looke vpon the exercises, as they are pronouncing,
& cause them to shew how they must be amended: so al the
rest to correct theirs, according as they heare those corrected:
if any be found carelesse to correct so, that he be
surely corrected: and this is the best helpe which I know in
this behalfe.
                  So likewise where you giue them a Theame to make Verses
ex tempore:
                     Verses ex tempore.
                      or vpon som smal meditation, as those which
are to be brought each morning, or at one of the clocke,
when time will not permit to peruse the writing of euery
one; yet to cause euery one to pronounce the Verses which
he hath made: and as they pronounce, to shew them their
faults, and then cause them to correct them after. Thus
haue I shewed you my iudgement also for examining of
exercises.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               How to answere any needefull question of
Grammar or Rhetoricke.
               
                  Spoud.
                  WEll good Sir, you see how bolde I am, to require
your iudgment in euery mater, wherin
I find difficulty: now to return to the brief again of those
things which you affirmed might be done for learning;
                  This I remember was another point, which cannot
but greatly commend a schollar: to bee able to answere

any difficult question of Grammar, euen beside those which
are in the rules, which are commonly learned; and also how
to oppose or dispute schollar-like in Latine, of any good
Grammar question; as both what may be obiected against
Lillies rules, and how to defend them: I pray you let mee
heare of you how this may be done, and what is the most
speedy way which you know hereunto.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The plainest,How to answer any difficult question of Grammar. shortest, and surest way, I finde to be
this:
                  1 See that they be very ready in all the vsuall and ordinary
questions of Grammar,1 To be perfect in all ordinary questions of Accedence. by daily examining at Parts.
                  2 For most of the rest fit for young schollars,2 In those set together in the end of the Accedence questions. I haue gathered
them for the vse of mine owne schollars, and set
them together after the end of the Accedence Questions;
yet so▪ as I haue sorted and referred euery Question to the
right place whither it appertaines: as to the Noune, Pronoune,
Participle, and so the seuerall heads thereof.
                  When as young schollars waxe perfect in all the former,
which are in the Accedence; then a little paines in teaching
them these, making them plain vnto them, and examining
them some halfe side at time (in stead of the time spent before
in examining the former) will very soone make them
as ready in these also.
                  3 After these,3 In the Latine questions dispersed through the Grammar, not learned vsually. you may (if you please) goe through the
questions of Grammatica, and make them plaine; examining
them in Latin: and so through all the necessary questions
which are scattered here and there, through the whole
Grammar: directing them to marke out the questions, or
the speciall wordes wherein the questions are, and how to
be propounded; that they themselues may oppose one another,
or one to oppose all as neede is.
                  But this as you shall thinke necessary;Caueat. and so as it do not
hinder better studies.
                  4 You may runne through the questions in M. Stockwoods
disputations of Grammar,☞ as they are commonly
noted in the Margents,4 Stockwoods questions. but onely propounding the question
in few words, both English and Latine, as need requires,

and teaching them to answere in a word or two.
                  By going through these, they may be able to answere all,☜
or most of those which are set together in the end of his
disputations;Most of the difficulties of the auncient Classicall Authors collected into one by M. Stockwoods last Edition, printed Anno. 1607. wherein he hath with marueilous paines, and
diligent obseruation, collected a very great part of the difficulties
of all Classicall Authours, and in the last Edition
noted the words in the Margents, in which the difficulty in
each sentence is. What other are wanting in these, may be
answered by them, being of like nature.
                  5 To giue a further light, and that nothing may bee
wanting for my children,5 Certaine generall Figures to answere many difficulties by. I haue adioyned vnto the later
end of all the Accedence questions which I spake of, certain
generall figures: vnto some of which, many of the difficulties
of all auncient Authours (both those in Stockewood
and others) may be referred, or else vnto those figures set
downe in the Grammar and Rhetoricke.
                  For answering the questions of Rhetoricke,In Talaeus Rhetoricke to giue definitions, diuisions and one short example. you may if
you please, make them perfect in Talaeus Rhetorick, which
I take to be most vsed in the best Schooles; onely to giue
each definition and distribution, and some one example or
two at most in each Chapter; and those of the shortest sentences
out of the Poets: so that they can giue the word or
words, wherein the force of the rule is. And so to proportion
all other questions accordingly.
                  To this end, the wordes wherein the force of the examples
consist,Talaeus examples would be noted as Grammar. would bee marked as in the Grammar;
and that not onely in some one or two examples in euery
Chapter, which they are to haue perfect without booke,
but also in euery example through the booke, to be able to
apply any.
                  Claudius Minos Commentary may bee a good helpe to
make Talaeus Rhetoricke most plaine,Minos Commentary to helpe for vnderstanding Talaeus. both for precepts
and examples.
                  If your Schollar after he hath read these,☜ doe but vse to
bee carefull to keepe a short Catalogue in his minde, of
the names of the Tropes, and also Figures (and those both
of Grammar and Rhetoricke) hee shall with practice of

examination and obseruation be able to tell any of them,
but repeating the heads in his minde.
                  Or in stead of Talaeus,Butlars Rhetoricke, a notable abbridgement of Talaeus, and farre more easie and profitable. you may vse Master Butlars Rhetoricke,
of Magdalens in Oxford, printed in Oxford; which
I mentioned before: being a notable abbridgement of Talaeus,
making it most plaine, and farre more easie to be learned
of Schollars, and also supplying very many things
wanting in Talaeus. Both it and the Commentary together,
are almost as small as Talaeus alone, and not a much greater
price, though the worth be double. It is a booke, which
(as I take it) is yet very little knowne in Schooles, thought it
haue beene forth sundry yeares, set forth for the vse of
Schooles; and the vse and benefit will be found to be farre
aboue all that euer hath beene written of the same.
                  Finally,Brasbridges questions on Tullies offices. for answering the questions of Tullies Offices,
M. Brasbridge his questions therof, are as short and perspicuous
as any of the former.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, I haue not (in truth) so much as euer heard of
eyther of those bookes: as neyther of any almost of those
singular helps which you mentioned for Poetry; by which
apt Schollars cannot choose but become excellent
Poets.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Thereby may appeare what a generall want here is
amongst vs;Generall want in the ignorance of the best helpes. when God hath giuen so many worthy helpes,
whereby we and our Schollars may attaine so readily the
excellency of all learning meet for vs, and make all our
courses so full of al pleasant and alluring contentment, and
yet we shall neglect to enquire after them.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               Of Grammaticall oppositions, how to dispute schollarlike
of any Grammar question in good Latine.
               
                  Spoud.
                  IT seemeth to be very euident, that by these means they
may be able to answere any necessarie question, meete
for them; but for those schollar-like oppositions in
Grammar questions, I heare you to say nothing, although
it cannot but be a maruellous profitable exercise.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is indeed a profitable exercise: and I finde that it
may be very easily attained thus;
                  1. About that time when they begin to reade Virgill or
before,Two to dispute each day insteed of their Theam or Verses. as they are able, when they begin to make Theams,
two of them may be appointed, insteed of their Theam, or
Verses to be made for that mornings exercise, to dispute euery
day by course. The manner of it thus:
                  Let them take M. Stockwoods disputations,1. To follow M. Stockwood and to vse his very words. to direct
them. And first for their greater ease and incouragement,
to enter them; appoint them to dispute in the very words
which M. Stockwood hath, and that of all the questions in
order, about a side of a leafe at a time, or as they can well: so
that following the words of the Author, there needeth no
more labour, but committing it to memory and vttering;
vnlesse they can meditate to doe it more shortly of themselues.
                  2. After this when they haue thus gone ouer the book or
the greatest part of it,2. After to take only the substance of his disputations, & go thorough a whole question at a time. which they may doe in a short time,
keeping a constant course: then cause them to practice to
take a whole disputation at a time, or at least a whole question,
and to bring only the substance of it as shortly as they
can; yet st
                        •
                     l obseruing as much as may be▪ M. Stockwoods
phrase, his order and witty conceits, which he vseth both in
obiecting and answering.
                  
                     
For their better vnderstanding of their disputations,Helpe for the vnderstanding of the disputations amongst the enterers. do
as in their Theams: vse at their entrance, to read them ouer
vnto them: shew them the plaine meaning of euery thing;
and by examining the sum of it all, first in English after
in Latine, cause them to vnderstand so much as time will
permit.
                  What they are not able to vtter in Latine, remember
to cause them first to vtter in English, and then they wil
easily do it in Latine, as we said.
                  When they haue beene well exercised in these that they
are able thus to dispute with facility, and are acquainted
well with Stockwoods phrase and order; they may haue other
questions giuen to handle wholly of themselues, if
you will.
                  By these means of continuall disputing they shall reape
these benefits:Benefits of such scholastical oppositions.
                  
                  1. They shall bee much helped for the perfect vnderstanding,
and answering of any difficult Grammar question,
as was sayd before.
                  2. They shall bee very much furthered for deliuering
their minds easily in Latine.
                  3. They shal be notably fitted for disputations in the Vniuersity,
or any like opposition, mooting, or pleading in
the Innes of Court.
                  4. It shall bring audacity, help, gesture, pronuntiation,
memory, and much prouoke them to an ingenuous e
                        •
                     ulation
and contention.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But I haue seene in a schoole, where the schollars
haue beene able to dispute ex tempore of any ordinarie
morall question, which you should propound vnto them:
which me thought did exceedingly grace them, and was a
very rare commendation vnto the schoole.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Though I doe grant with you that this deserued
very great praise;Disputations of Morall Philosophy belong rather to the Vniuersitie. yet this seemes to me rather to belong
to the Vniuersities, then to the Grammar schooles. For I
take it not onely meet, but also most equall and necessarie,
that euery place haue their owne Priuiledges reserued vnto

them; and that one in no case should incroach vpon another.
                  Aboue all,The priuiledges & prerogatiues of the Vniuersities by al means to bee preserued. that there be a chiefe regard of the Vniuersities,
as vnto which the Grammar schooles are ordained
principally, for training vp young schollars to furnish
them; and that they haue all their honours and prerogatiues,
reserued most carefully vnto them. Of which sort
these disputations in Logick and other Philosophie are.☜
                  
                  Notwithstanding I shall shew you my iudgement,How these may be done and how farre. how
this may be performed also; and as I take it in the most easie
manner, and most surely, so farre as it may be.
                  1. I would haue my schollar well practiced in these
Grammaticall disputations,1. By practice in the Grāmaticall disputations. to haue phrase & order of disputation
in readinesse, and to keep themselues within the
compasse of that kinde of reasoning; leauing logicall and
strict concluding by Syllogisms, vnto the Vniuersitie.
                  2. To haue read ouer Tullies Offices,2. To bee acquainted with Tullies Offices and the questions of it. with vnderstanding;
which by the helpe of Master Brasbridges questions,
and the Grammatical translations they may the more speedily
by farre.
                  3. To choose out of the easiest of those questions,3. To oppose of som of those questiōs insteed of the Grammaticall. and
to appoint the schollars insteede of their disputations in
Grammar: when they haue gone thorough those, then to
reply and answere an argument or two vpon some of these
questions daily. It were worthy the labor of some ingenuous
and good Latinist,Som of Tullies Offices questions handled after the manner of M. Stockw▪ Grammaticall disputations worthy the labour▪
                      as M. Stockwood, to handle some
of the questions of Tullies Offices after the manner of his
Grammaticall disputations, to fit schollars the more for
such witty and pleasant disputations, against that they
should come to the Vniuersitie. But I speak this as the rest
vnder better iudgement, and so farre as these may be meet
for the Grammar schooles.
                  4. For inuenting reasons to replie,4. How to inuent reasons by the helpe of the places of Inuē
                        tion. it may soone be performed,
by the dullest capacitie, according to the manner
of inuenting reasons for Theames or verses, following the
chiefe heads of reasoning. If the replier do but only meditate
what can be sayd against the question or position, from

some one of those chiefe places of reasoning, discoursed in
his mind in order; hauing the places euer in fresh memorie
(as I shewed before) by the practice of the Art of Meditation,
or the like: For then if one place will not presently
afforde meete matter, another will. And commonly, the
places from Causes, Effects, Contraries, Examples, Testimonies,
are most pregnant to bring reasons to our minde.
                  Moreouer,☞ to helpe to answere the subtilties or 
                        •
                     allacies;
besides the perfect vnderstanding of the question,Helps for the answerer. and the
matter of it, by reading or meditating of it diligently, the
wise obseruing by the aunswerer from what place of reasoning
the argument seemes to be taken, will vsually answere
the reason. For, the most ordinary fallacies or deceits in
reasoning, are from a bare shew of Causes, Effects, Contraries,
Testimonies, and the rest, mistaken or misalledged;
yet vrged as if they were true Causes Effects &c. when they
are but fained or bare shewes: Or else in wra
                        •
                     gling about
words, not disputing to the purpose, and to the point; but
in some other sense mistaking the question.
                  For those common places or heads of Inuention,☞ all
schollars who come to any ripeness,All the chiefe schollars are necessarily to be acquainted with the heads of Inuention. are necessarily to be acquainted
with them, as was touched before. These wil euer
stand them insteed for making of all Epistles Theams, Verses,
Declamations, Oppositions.
                  Also to helpe them to resolue whatsoeuer they reade
or heare in any continued speech;For Inuenting, Resoluing, Remembring. and to remember it, by
gathering all the matter vnto the seuerall heads of Inuention.
Thus to be able to remember, and confute a Position,
or an Oration, ex tempore, with much admiration.
                  Without these helps they shall neuer be able to do these
things; or at least not with that facilitie, and in so commendable
a manner, though they haue otherwise very singular
gifts, of nature and learning.
                  But aboue all,Continuall exercise all in all. as in all other exercises so in this chieflie,
continuall practice of disputing is all in all; when once
you haue directed them how to attaine good order, or method,
phrase, and matter.
                  
                     
If you desire any more,Goclenius Problemes. cōcerning the difficult questions
of Grammar, reade Goclenius his Problems in the end of
his Obseruations of the Latine tongue.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I much approoue of all that you haue sayde in
this matter; and principally that the Vniuersities should be
honoured by all means▪ and their dignities reserued inuiolable;
yet giue me leaue to tell you of one thing, which here
may seeme to bee blame-worthy,
                        Ob. That this may seem to make them truants to dispute out of the words of the booke. which is this: That you
would haue your enterers into this kinde of opposing, to
bring the whole disputations of M. Stockw▪ to dispute in
his very words; this may helpe to make them truants, to
trust only to their books and memory, and not to stirre vp
their owne wits and inuentions.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Nothing less: for you see how after that they haue
bin exercised this way for a time, then I would haue them to
trie their owne wits & inuentions also; first abbridging their
Author,Necessity of being well acquainted with the best examples. then bringing their owne: But▪ for following this
course, both experience and reason do shew it to be the surest;
as in all other learning, so in this (like as we obserued
in generall before) to let them haue first the most excellent
patterns, & neuer to rest vntil they haue the very patterns
in their heads, and as it were euer before their eies; for then
they wil be able to go forwards of themselues with delight &
cōmendations.The euils of in forcing schollars to exercises, wherof they are not acquainted with the examples first. Wheras, otherwise to inforce them by feare,
to vndertake such exercises, wherwith they are not acquainted,
nor see the reason of them, it is a matter of ouer great
rigor▪ that I say no more of it, & which must needs worke a
maruellous distast in the schollar, as I haue noted. Besides,
to cause such young ones to dispute without hearing or seeing
such presidents, is al one, as to teach them to write only
by precepts or some direction without copie. For euen as
therin they shal both write very il fauouredly if any thing at
all, and learn so bad a hand, as they shal be much troubled
to forget, which they must doe before they can come to a
good hand▪ so is it here. 1. They shall dispute very weakly
& childishly, both forwords & matter▪ if any thing at all, &
2. they shal get barbarous phrase, to make them to be skorned,
and which they shall hardly forget againe.
                  
                     
But of the otherside,Benefits of the contrary; viz of hauing the best patternes. they being trained vp thus, shall
make not onely the matter of their learned Authour their
owne, but also his phrase; and be so furnished, that any man
wil take delight to heare them. And that which I say of this,
the same I affirm of all excellent patterns, whether for making
Theames, Verses or whatsoeuer; that the more absolute
their Presidents are, and the more cunning they are in
them, the more singular they shall vndoubtedly proue.
                  This is the very maine reason, why all would haue the
children to learne each Author so perfectly, as to say euery
worde without booke, as much as is possible, that the verie
phrase and matter of their Author may bee their owne to
vse perpetually.
                  To conclude this point,Triall by experience. triall and experience may teach
vs. Let two children be taken, one of a more pregnant and
sharpe wit, the other of a slower and duller capacity: cause
him of the sharpe wit, to do all only by precept and his own
Inuention in making Epistles, Theames, Verses, disputing;
but let the other of the duller capacitie be trained vp, not
only by precept and his own inuention; but principally by
being kept strictly to imitate the most excellent patternes
in all things: then make the triall, whether he of the duller
wit shall not expresse the sharpnesse, learning, grauitie, of
the most learned and wise men, with certaine assurance to
iustifie what hee hath done: whereas in the other; shall be
found by a learned and a iudicious examiner, nothing but
froth, childishnesse and vncertaintie, in the greatest ouerweening
of wit and learning; and whether the duller and
harder wit shall not do it with farre lesse labour.
               
               
                  Sp.
                  I must needs yeeld vnto that which you say,Following cō
                        stantly 
                           〈◊〉
                         excellent patterns doth 
                           〈…〉
                         euery calling. for that
euidēce of truth which cannot be gainsaid. For this indeed
all men doe see by common experience, that in all trades
and sciences, they who get themselues most excellent patternes
to follow, and are the curiousest in expressing them
most liu
                        •
                     ly, are euer found the most excellent workemen.
And therefore I do content my selfe, as fully answered, intreating
that we may still proceed.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               Of pronouncing naturally and sweetly
without vaine affectation.
               
                  Phil.
                  WHat will you that we come vnto next? Take
it that wee haue gone thorough the most
things, which concerne our function for
teaching the Latine tongue.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  There remaine yet two other matters, and those
of no lesse difficulty nor waight then most of the former;
and without which, yet schooles doe lacke their principall
ornaments, as I suppose: the one of them is pronouncing
sweetly, the other speaking Latine purely and readily.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These 2. are▪ indeed worthy of our best thoughts.
The first of them,The excellency of Pronuntiation. that is, Pronuntiation, beeing that
which either makes or mars the most excellent speech. For
al speeches are vsually esteemed euen as they are vttered or
pronounced; the finest schollar without this is accounted
no bodie: and a mean schollar hauing attained this facultie,
is ordinarily reputed and commended aboue the best.
Wherupō you know how that famous Greek Orator, when
he was asked, what was the chief grace or excellēcy in Rhetorick,
what was the second and third; he stil answered, To
pronounce wel.The necessity and estimation of being able to speake Latine readily and purely. And for the second, that is, speaking of Latine,
as in examinations and disputations, so in all other
things, there would bee a perpetuall vse of it amongst all
Grammar schollars of any yeers. To the end, to fit them to
answer any learned man in Latine, or to dispute ex tempore:
also to traine them vp to be able to speak purely when they
come in the Vniuersities; as in some Colledges they are only
to speake Latine: or to fit them, if they shall go beyond
these as, as Gentlemen who goe to trauell, Factors for Marchants,
and the like. The readinesse in which facultie if it

be in a good phrase, how much it graceth a childe in Vniuersitie,
Citie, or Countrey, we all of vs knowe.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, you haue spoken very truely of these: therfore
let vs come vnto them in order, I intreate you; and first
vnto pronuntiation.Pronuntiation ordinarily hard to be attained in Schooles. This I haue found passing hard to
acquaint my schollars withall, to bring them to any ripenesse
or commendable faculty, but still they will speake as
a boy who is saying his lesson; though I haue both directed
them how to pronounce, vttering the sentences oft
before them, and haue very much called vpon them for
the same.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  To bring your schollars vnto this sweetnesse of
pronuntiation,How schollars may be broght to pronou
                           •
                        ce sweetly. this is the plainest and surest way, so farre
forth as yet I can finde: and this I am assured will effect it
in a commendable sort;
                  1. You must remember that which was generally premised
in the beginning.☞ To acquaint your young schollar
from the very first entrance,1. Children to be trained vp to pronoūce right from the first entrance. to pronounce euery lesson
and each word audibly, leasurely, and distinctly, euer sounding
out the last letter.
                  2. To pronounce euery matter according to the nature
of it,☞ so much as you can;To vtter euerie matter, according to the nature of it. chiefly where persons or other
things are 
                        •
                     ained to speake.
                  As for example: In the Confabulatiunculae pueriles,
Cause them to vtter euery dialogue liuely, as if they themselues
were the persons which did speake in that dialogue,
& so in euery other speech, to imagine themselues to haue
occasion to vtter the very same things.
                  3. What they cannot vtter well in Latine,☞ cause them
first to do it naturally and liuely in English,What they can not vtter in Latine, to learn to do it in English, then after the same manner in Latine. and shew them
your selfe the absurdnesse of their pronuntiation, by
pronouncing foolishly or childishly, as they do: and then
pronounce it rightly, and naturally before them likewise,
that they may perceiue the difference to be ashamed of the
one, and take a delight in the other.
                  So cause them to do it after you, vntill that they can do
it in good sort, tuning their voices sweetly. When they can

doe it in English, then cause them to doe it iust in the same
manner in Latine; and thus they will vndoubtedly come
vnto it very easily.
                  4 Also cause sundry of them to pronounce thus the very
same sentence;4 To cause sundry to pronounce the very same sentence in emulation. disgracing the speech of those who pronounce
absurdly, by imitation of it, and gracing as much
the speech of those who doe it most naturally and pleasantly:
propounding such as patternes and markes to all their
fellows, for al to emulate and imitate them; as I haue aduised
generally.
                  5 Cause them to doe the like in Corderius,5 In all Authors wherein persons are fained to speak to be carefull for this. Esops Fables,
or Terence as they did in Confabulatiunculae. For Esops
Fables, we haue shewed before the manner, for making
a report of each Fable, first in English, after in Latine, and
the benefite thereof.
                  So after when they shall come to Virgils Eclogues,☜
cause them yet still more liuely, in saying without booke,
to expresse the affections and persons of sheepeheards; or
whose speech soeuer else, which they are to imitate. Of
which sort are the Prosopopeyes of Iupiter, Apollo,
and others in Ouids Metamorphosis, Iuno, Neptune,
Aeolus, Aeneas, Venus, Dido, &c. Virgils Aeneids.
                  So in all Poetry,Poetry to be pronounced as prose, except in scanning. for the pronuntiation, it is to be vttered
as prose; obseruing distinctions and the nature of the
matter; not to bee tuned foolishly or childishly after the
manner of scanning a Verse as the vse of some is. Onely to
tune it so in scanning, or getting it without booke, vnlesse
you would haue them to pronounce some speciall booke,
for getting authorities for quantities; or others, onely to
that same purpose.
                  6 To helpe hereunto yet more,6 Further helpes as they proceede. Practice of oft pronouncing 
                           〈◊〉
                         e
                           •
                        ically, some speciall examples in T
                           •
                        l
                           •
                        us. and that they may doe
euery thing according to the very nature; acquaint them
to pronounce some speciall examples, set downe in Talaeus
Rhetoricke as pathetically as they can: as examples of Ironies,
Exclamations, Reuocations, Prosopopeyes, and those
which are in his rules of pronouncing.
                  Let them also be taught carefully, in what word the Emphasis

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
lyeth;To marke in each sentence in what word the Emphasis is. and therefore which is to be eleuated in the
pronuntiation. As namely those wordes in which the
chiefe Trope or Figure is.
                  Thus let them take speciall pains to pronounce Theams
or Declamations,☞ striuing who shall doe best:Butlars Rhet. li. 2. cap. 2. de voce in singulis verbis. Care in pronouncing all exercises. and in all
their oppositions to dispute, as if ex animo in good earnest,
with all contention and vehemencie.
                  Finally, the practice of pronouncing emphatically, of
some of Tullies Orations, which are most flowing in these
Figures of sentences (especially in Exclamations,The curious pronouncing some of Tullies Orations or the like. Prosopopeis,
Apostrophees, and the like: as some against Catiline)
must needes much acquaint them with great variety of pronuntiation,
to be fitted for all sorts.
                  For more exquisite knowledge and practice hereof,More exquisite knowledge hereof left to the Vniuersities Butleri Rhet. lib. 2. de proment.
                      I
leaue it to the Vniuersities, which are to perfect all those
faculties which are but begun in the Grammar Schooles;
and do referre you for precepts, to the second booke of
Talaeus Rhetoricke de pronunciatione: or rather of Master
Butlars Rhetoricke, as I said before.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               Of speaking Latine purely and readily.
               
                  Spoud.
                  I Pray you Sir, go on to the last point: in this which you
haue said for the maner of pronuntiation, I haue heard
nothing which I can iustly except against, it doth all
sound so pleasing and likely in mine eare. When I haue
more tryall, I shall be able to say more.
                  In the meane time let me craue the like, for the manner
of learning to speake Latine. If you can shew me so plaine
a way of it, as this seemeth to be, surely you shall make mee
much more to reioyce.
                  
                     
For of this I may complaine yet more,Complaint of the trouble and difficulty to traine vp schollars to speake Latine. then of most of
the rest; that though I haue laboured and striuen by Ferula,
and all meanes of seuerity, yet I haue not beene able to
make my Schollars to vtter their mindes in any tollerable
manner, of ordinary things, but in very barbarous phrase,
nor so much as to put it in practice amongst themselues;
much lesse to vtter their minds in Latine easily, purely, and
freely as it were to be wished, and as you haue shewed the necessity
and commendation thereof.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I my selfe haue had long experience of the truth
and griefe of this complaint likewise, though I also haue
done what I could continually: and yet of late time I grow
to this certaine assurance, that Schollars may be brought
to talke of any ordinary matter which can be required of
them, both in good Latine, and also most readily and
easily.
                  Herein hath beene a great part of my errour and hinderance,The generall errour for the time when schollars are to begin to speake Latine.
that I euer thought as most doe, that children were
not to be exercised to speake Latin, for feare of Barbarisme,
vntill they came into the highest fourmes; as at least vntill
they were in the third, fourth, or fift fourmes: and hereuppon
I could neuer attaine to that which I desired.
                  But now I finde euidently,To learne to speake Latine, must be begun from the first entrance into construction. that this must be begun from
the very first entrance into construction; their first books
being principally appointed, and read to them to this end,
to enter and traine them vp in speaking of Latine of ordinary
matters:
                  As Confabulatiunculae Pueriles, Corderius, and other like
Colloquiums. And therefore they should then begin to
practice to vse those phrases which there they learne.
                  Also for the Grammar, I see no reason but it might haue
beene all as well set downe in the English, like as the Accedence
is, and learned in one halfe of the time, & with much
more delight; but onely or chiefly to traine vp schollars
to deliuer all their Grammar rules, and matters concerning
Grammar, in Latin.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It standeth with very great reason, that it should

be as you say, that in the learning of those bookes, the right
foundation of speaking Latine familiarly should be layed;
and the practice begunne; and that indeede there is a generall
mistaking about this: but I desire you to set downe the
whole course and proceeding in it, how to bring it
to perfection; and then I shall bee much better able to
iudge.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For the manner of effecting it,☞ I find it to be most
easie thus:The surest course for entring young schollars to speake Latine. 1 Examining and answering euery peece of a rule or sentence in Latine, to make them their owne. So in their Authours.
                  
                  1 You must remember that which I said, concerning
the manner of the examining both of their Grammar rules
and Lectures; to pose euery peece of a rule, and euery part
of a sentence both in English and Latine, as leasure will permit;
and to cause them to answere both in English and Latine,
vntill they be able to vnderstand and answere in Latine
alone. And so both examining in the wordes of their Authors,
and causing them to answer likewise in the very same
words of the Authours, they will enter into it with great delight.
For the particular manner. I referre you to the Chapter
of examining in Latine, which I shewed you before at
large, and set downe examples of it.
                  2 What they are not able to vtter in Latine,2 To vtter before them what they cannot. How the Master himselfe may do it easily before them. vtter you
it euer before them; that as the childe learneth of the mother
or of the nurse, to begin to speake, so they may of you
and of their Authour.
                  If you were not able so to vtter euery thing before them,
as very many are to seeke this way, amongst others (I meane
in this, to speake in Latine easily and purely, euen in ordinary
matters);3 The daily practice of Grammaticall translations; chiefly reading bookes of Dialogues out of English into Latine, which is nothing but such talking. yet this continuall practice of daily examining
and teaching your schollars to answere out of the
wordes of the Authour (as the manner was set down before)
and watchfulnesse to vse to speake Latine, onely amongst
all whom you would haue to learne it, shall bring you vnto
it; and much more by the meanes following.
                  3 I doe finde the daily practice also of those Grammaticall
translations, which I haue so oft mentioned in reading
the Latine of the Author out of the translation, to be a

marueilous helpe heereunto; especially the reading of
bookes of Dialogues: as of Confabulatiunculae pueriles,
Corderius, &c. For if there they can presently expresse their
mindes in Latine, of any such matter as is there handled;
why shall they not be able to doe it likewise, of any such
thing falling into their common talke.
                  4 As they learne these Dialogues,☜ when they haue
construed and parsed,4 To talke together in the wordes of the Dialogues, each sentence first in English, then Latine. cause them to talke together; vttering
euery sentence pathetically one to another (as was
shewed in our former speech of pronouncing) and first to
vtter euery sentence in English, as neede is, then in Latine.
                  So you shall be sure that they shall not goe by rote (as we
tearme it) and as they may do soone, if they only repeate the
Latine so talking together. And moreouer, euer thus with
the English, the Latine will easily come to their remembrance,
so often as they haue occasion to vse the same.
                  5 The practice mentioned of turning euery morning a
peece of their Accedence into Latin,5 Translating and vttering euery morning a peece of their Accedence in Latine. for their exercise, shall
much prepare them to parse and speake in Latine.
                  6 Accustome them to parse wholly in Latine, by that
time that they haue bin a yeare or two at the most, in construction,6 Custome to parse wholly in Latine, and how to doe it.
and are well acquainted with the manner of parsidg
in English, as we aduised before. This they will do very
readily, if you traine them vp well in their Accedence, and
in the former kindes of examining and exercises, which I
spake of euen now; and more specially by the right & continuall
apposing of their Grammar rules in Latine.
                  Moreouer, the Dialogues in the end of the first booke of
Corderius Dialogues,Corderius lib. 
                           •
                        . Colloq. 69 70. 71. 72. 73. 74. 75. will much further them in this parsing,
because they are principally written to this purpose;
as all his foure bookes are very sweete and pleasant for all
ordinary schollars talke.
                  7 Next vnto these I finde the daily practice of disputing
or opposing in Latine (following the order,7 Daily practice of disputing. and vsing
the helpe of M. Stockwood) to be marueilously profitable,
for witty and sweet speech.
                  
                     
8 Vnto these you may adde the practice of varying of
a phrase,8 Practice of varying a phrase into diue
                           •
                        s 
                           •
                        oimes. according to the manner of Erasmus, Riuius, or
Macropedius, de copia verborum: as the wayes of varying
the first Supine, of the Imperatiue moode, the future tense,
the Superlatiue degree, and the like. But these onely as leasure
will suffer not hindering the most necessary exercises.
                  9 So also for copie of the purest phrases and Synonimaes,9 Copie of Synonimaes, & the 
                           •
                        urest phrases, & how to get them. This noted before.
besides the daily helpes of all their Authours,Manutius
or Master Draxe his phrases, to see how many wayes
they can vtter any thing in good phrase; and so to turne to
any phrase when they haue occasion. And more specially
for that practice of the reading them ou
                        •
                      of the Grammaticall
Translations in propriety (as was shewed before of the
Dialogues) any shall finde to be most easie, to furnish with
store of the purest phrase for any purpose.
                  10 Besides,☞ for the Master to vse oft, at taking or saying
Lectures or exercises,10 Exercising the schollars oft to giue variety for euery difficult matter. or at their pronouncing or shewing
exercises, to cause them to giue variety for anything; who
is able to giue a better word or phrase, or to giue the greatest
copie to expresse their mindes, and where they haue read
the wordes or phrase.
                  11 Where none can giue a fit word,11 Holyokes Dictionary, describing things by Periphrasis or circumlocution. there to turne their
Dictionaries, as to Holyokes Dictionary, and then to furnish
them; or to describe the thing by some Periphrasis or
circumlocution of words or the phrases mentioned.
                  12 But to the end to haue copie of proper wordes, besides
all other helpes spoken of,12 To giue dai
                           •
                        y certaine proper wordes, and where they haue read them. it were not vnprofitable to
haue daily some few wordes to be repeated first in the morning;
as out of Adrianus 
                        •
                     unius his Nomenclator; or out
of the Latine Primitiues, or the Greeke Radices; the vse
whereof I shall shew hereafter: and euer for those wordes
which they haue learned (any one who can soonest) to
name where they haue learned them.
                  Thus by all meanes they should be furnished with propriety
and copie of the best words; which is a wonderfull
helpe to all kinde of learning, especially to the knowledge
of the tongues.
                  
                     
13 To all these may be added for them who haue leasure
enough the reading ouer and ouer of Erasmus Colloquium,13 Reading ouer Erasmus Colloquium.
Castalions Dialogues, or the like.
                  14 Lastly when you haue layed a sound foundation that
they may be sure to haue warrantable and pure phrase,14 Continuall practice, when they haue learned a pure phrase. by
these means or the best of them, and all other their schoole
exercises; then continuall practice of speaking shall vndoubtedly
accomplish your desire to cause them to speake
truely, purely, properly, and readily; Practice in a good way
being here, as in all the rest, that which doth all.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These things, or but the best of them, being constantly
practiced cannot but effect marueilous much, and
very surely; chiefly if we could bring them to speake Latine
continually, from that time that they beginne to parse
in Latine:Difficulty to cause schollar
                           •
                         to practice speaking Latine amongst themselues. but this I haue had too much experience of, that
without great seuerity they will not be brought vnto: but
they will speake English, and one will winke at another, if
they be out of the Masters hearing.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is indeed exceeding hard, to cause this to bee
practiced constantly amongst schollars. That is a vsuall
custome in Schooles to appoint Custodes,
                     ☜ or Asini (as they
are tearmed in some places) to obserue and catch them who
speake English in each fourme,Inconueniences of Custode
                              •
                           .
                      or whom they see idle, to
giue them the Ferula, and to make them Custodes if they
cannot answere a question which they aske.
                  But I haue obserued so much inconuenience in it, as I
cannot tell what to say in this case: for oft-times, he who is
the Custos will hardly attend his own worke, for harkening
to heare others to speake English.
                  Also there falleth our amongst them oft-times so much
w
                        •
                     angling about the questions, or defending themselues,
that they did not speake English, or were not idle, that all
the whole fourme is troubled. So likewise when the Custodes
are called for, before breaking vp at dinner and at
night, there will be so much contention amongst them, as
is a disquieting and trouble to the Master. Moreouer, this
I haue obserued, that euer if there be any one simple in a

fourme or harder of learning then the rest, they will make
him a right Asinus, causing such to be the Custodes continually,
or for the most part, if they cannot answere: and to
this end will be alwayes watching them; wherby many such
are not only notably abused, but very much discouraged
for being schollars, when they see themselues so baited at
by all: some others are made ouer malipart thereby.
                  Besides all these,☞ I doe not see any great fitnesse, that one
schollar should smite another with the Ferula;Of one schollar smiting another with the Ferula. because
much malicing one another, with grudges and quarrels do
arise thereupon. So that the discommodities that follow the
Custodes, seem to me to be many moe then the benefits can
be; chiefly in losse of time, and hindering more in other
learning, then can be gotten in that.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I my selfe haue had experience of most of these
inconueniences: but what way will you take then, to cause
your schollars to speake Latine continually?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This is the best way that yet I can finde,The best means & to auoid
the former inconueniences;☞ First, to appoint the two Seniors
in each fourm (of whom we shall speake after) as to look
to all other matters in the fourme,1 Seniours of each fourme to looke to the whole. so to this more specially,
that none speake English nor barbarous Latin: & if they
be found partiall or negligent, then to preferre others into
their places; besides the other censures to be inflicted vpon
them which I shall mention to you, when we shall come to
speake of punishments; & so to haue their due rewards, being
found carefull.☞ Secondly, the Masters owne eye & eare
in the Schoole,2 The Masters eye and eare. to be continuall Custodes so much as may
be,☞ both for Monitors and others. Thirdly, if they do vse to
parse in Latin (& therefore must needs exercise themselues
in that against that time that their Master doth come to
hearethem) & secondly,3 Parsing in Latine. if they be kept in their places, and
strictly looked vnto for performing all exercises; I doe not
see but they may be made to speake Latin in the schoole at
schooletimes; neyther that they shall haue any great occasions
of the contrary. Fourthly,4 Weekely Monitours abroad. for speaking Latin in all
other places, it must only be by Monitours appointed weekly,
as we shall haue occasion to speak more after, and some

seuerely corrected who are found most carelesse herein.
               
               
                  Spoud
                  But if any one alone,☜ who hath some vnderstanding
of Latine,How any one may by himself alone attaine to speake Latine of ordinary matters. would learne to speake of familiar matters,
to be able to talke with others, what course doe you thinke
the speediest?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Euen the same which I would vse to help a whole
Schoole: which if I should take a course for a wager, amongst
others, I would vse specially, to cause them daily to
spend some quarter, or halfe an howre, each in his order,
reading Corderius first out of Latine into English, after out
of English into Latine, euery one a little peece; where one
failes another to helpe; and the booke or Master where all
faile: and also the Master to cause them to vary each hard
phrase (and chiefly all which are of most common vse) so
many waies as they can, trying who can doe best; himselfe
to adde moe where they faile. After Corderius gone ouer,
to do the like in other easie Authors, as Terence, or Terentius
Christianus, and the like. So I would haue the priuate
learner to practice daily the same, reading Corderius first
out of Latine into English, by help of the translation; after
trying how he can read it out of English into Latine, and euer
where he fails, to vse the help of the Latine book lying
by him. The continual exercise in this, if they labor to be
perfect in the examples of Nowns & Verbs, and somwhat
in knowing the Rules of the Accedence, as was shewed, shal
most speedily effect this desire. For thus may any one soon
learne to vtter all that booke: And in it is the substance of
most things falling out in ordinary speech. After this, hee
may do the like in other easie books by the same helpe of
translations. And lastly, practicing to translate other books
of dialogues (as, Erasmus Colloquium, or the like) and afterwards
reading them forth of English into Latine againe, any
one may come on very fast.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This stands vpon the former grounds. These seuerall
points which you haue gone thorough, seeme to me
very sufficient (and to neede no addition) for training vp
schollars to attain to so good perfection in the Latin tong.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These are but an entrance, meet for the Grammar

schooles; but to attaine to the perfection of the Latine
tongue, for propriety, choise, elegancy, puritie, will require
much and long reading, and exercise in the Vniuersities.
                  
                     ☞ For further direction thereunto, I refer you to Gocleninius
his obseruations of the Latine tongue:Goclenius his obseruations for them who seeke to come to puritie and ripenesse in the Latine tongue. whom I take
to be worthy the diligent reading of all schollars who are
of iudgement, and who doe desire to come to the puritie
and ripenesse of the Latine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               How to attaine most speedily vnto the
knowledge of the Greeke
tongue.
               
                  Spoud.
                  NOw that we haue gone thorough all the principall
points of learning, which belong to the knowledge
of the Latine tongue▪ so much as can be required
in schooles, as far forth as I can conceiue
or remember for the present; let me (I intreat you) require
your like helpe for the Greek: for I desire now, to be directed
in euery matter, which may concerne our calling and
facultie. I doe perceiue by our former speeches, that you
likewise haue trauelled and found much experience and assurance
herein.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Although I am onely a learner in the Greeke,The Greeke may be gotten with farre lesse labour the
                           •
                         the Latine. as
in the Latine, and my hope is chiefly for the time to come:
yet this I haue found by experience, that the Latine once
obtained, the Greeke may bee gotten with farre lesse labour,
and euerything as certainly, And this also in a little
time, so much as it shall bee requisite for the Grammar
schooles.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  Surely sir,One benefit worth al our labour in the Greek. if but that one thing that I saw in the
note, may be attained, concerning the tongues, the Greek
and Hebrew, I doe not see what can be more required for
the Grammarschooles: That is; That schollars may be able
as they proceed, to reade the Greeke of the New Testament
and the Hebrew of the olde, first into Latine, or
English exactly, out of the bare text; and after, out of a translation
to reade them into the text, that is, into their owne
wordes againe: and also to giue the reason of euery word,
why it must be so, and to be able to proceed thus of themselues
in the Vniuersitie.
                  The continual practice hereof, must needs make them
worthy Linguists, as was there sayd, and notable text men.
I pra
                        •
                      you therfore let me heare of you, how this may bee
effected, and I shall thinke my selfe sufficiently satisfied for
all my trauell, though it were but in this one thing alone besides
all the former.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Nay rather,To go through the whol course of the Greek. let vs goe thorough the whole course
still, so farre as wee can, how the exact knowledge of this
famous tongue may bee gotten most speedily. For when I
do remember the worthy testimony, which our learnedest
Schoolemaster doth giue,M. Askams testimony concerning the Greeke tongue▪ Schoolemaster p. 17. 2. concerning this Greek tongue,
I cannot thinke any paines ouer-much, for the finding out
the readie waie to the perfect knowledge of it. Hee in one
place hauing mentioned sundrie of the renowned Greeke
Authors, as Plato, Aristotle, Zenophon, Demosthenes, Isocrates
and others, whom he names there (the matchlesse
masters in all manner of learning) addes these words in
praise of the Greeke tongue, and the learning in it.
                  Now let Italian, sayth hee, and Latine it selfe, Spanish,
French, Dutch, and English bring forth their learning, and
recite their Authors, Cicero onely excepted, and one or
two more in Latine; they be all patched clouts and ragges
in comparison of faire wouen broad cloathes. And truely,
saith he, if there bee any good in them, it is either learned,
borrowed, or stolne from som one of those worthy wits of
Athens. Thus far M. Askam.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  This is a high commendation indeed, to bee giuen
by a man of such reading and estimation for learning,
as M. Askam was; and which must needs incite all students
to the reading of the principall Greeke Authors, to desire
to heare these peerlesse Masters to speake in their ovvne
tongue.
                  Wherefore, I pray you let vs heare from you, how you
thinke that the way may bee made so ready vnto it.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The way may be most short and easie to him,The way to the Greek the same with the Latine. who
is acquainted with the maner of getting the Latine tongue,
so as hath been mentioned; because it is the very same with
it in effect.
                  1. If your schollars who are to enter into it,Getting first the chiefe rules. be such as
haue time enough before them; let them get the Grammar
very perfectly,☜ especially all the chiefe rules, by continuall
saying and poasing, as in the Latine. Most exceptions
or Anomalies may bee learned after, or turned vnto
presently, as they learne their Authors. Because Rectum is
Index sui, & obliqui. And knowing the rule perfectly, they
will soone know the reason of the change.
                  More specially,To be very perfect in Nownes and Verbs. make them very perfect in declining
Nouns & Verbs, and giuing all the Terminations of them:
I meane the seuerall Terminations of each declension,☞ and
euery case in them;Terminating Nownes. and so likewise the Terminanations of
euery Coniugation, and each Tense therein.
                  In the Coniugations,Coniugating & terminating Verbs. to giue the first person of euery
Mood and Tense, in each voice together (wherby they are
the soonest learned,To giue the first person in euery Moode & Tense in each voice together. one directing another) and also to bee
able to runne the Terminations as in the Latine.
                  For example, in the first Declension. The terminations
of the Declension are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Terminations of the cases
are 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , &c.
                  So declining the example.
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  So in the rest: The Terminations gotten first perfectly,
the words are declined presently, as I sayd.
                  In the Verbs also, besides the Terminations, to vse to giue

the first Persons together in euery voice. Onely let them
be perfect in the Actiue voice, giuing all the first persons in
order; then the Passiue and middle voice by comparing
them to the Actiue: As Indicat
                           •
                        vus presens, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         verbero,

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . Imperfectum, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         verberabam, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
Futurum pr
                           •
                        us, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         verber
                           •
                        bo 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  So the Terminations of them, if you will: As 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
&c.
                  To this end, make them very perfect in the tables of the
cognata tempora. And also, cause them to run the Terminations
in each voice thus; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  You shall finde they will be learned not onely very soon
and surely this way, but also most profitably for vse.
                  After these to bee perfect in Pronowns,To bee very perfect in Pronowns, Aduerbes, Coniunctions, Prepositions. Aduerbs, Coniunctions,
and Prepositions; giuing (if you will) Latine to
Greeke, and Greeke to Latine, as I shewed before in the
Latine. Because then all the labour is with the Nowns and
Verbes onely.
                  If your schollars who begin Greeke,How schollars of vnderstanding & iudgement, may take yet a shorter course. be of good yeeres
and iudgement; it may suffice to haue them perfect in
the examples of the Nownes and Verbes, and some fewe
principall rules, in such sort as I haue shewed: and to be well
acquainted with the order of the Grammar, by shewing
how and where euery part of it stands; that so they may
learne the Rules or the meaning of them, by turning to
them; as they shall haue occasion in euery lect
                        •
                     re.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what Grammar woulde you haue them to
vse?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Master Camdens Grammar,☜ notwithstanding the
faults in the print (as indeede there are very many; which
thing would bee carefully amended in all our schoole Authors)
and what other exceptions can be taken: because,
as it is one of the shortest as yet, so it is most answerable to
our Latine Grammar, for the order of it. Wherby schollars
well acquainted with our common Grammar, wil be much

helped both for speedy vnderstanding and learning it. Also
the words of art set downe in it in Greeke, as well as Latine,
will bee a great helpe for reading Commentaries in
Greeke: as vpon Hesiode, and Homer.
                  To the end to make that Grammar most plaine,
                        To make it plai
                              •
                           e: Grammatica Graecapro Schola Argentinensi per Theophilum Golium. and to
supply and helpe whatsoeuer is defectiue; I take it, that the
Strasburge Greeke Grammar, set sorth lately by Golius
(which seemes to me to haue been made in an imitation of
Camden) may be as a good Commentarie, though the order
be not euer directly kept: The first part of it seruing for
a briefe sum of the Etymologie, the second for an exposition
at large.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But with what Author would you begin, to enter
them into Construction?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I hold the Greeke Testament to bee most fit;☞ and
that for these reasons:To begin Construction with the Greek Testament. Reasons.
                  
                  1. Because,1. For the familiarnesse of it. that thorough the familiarnesse of the matter,
(in that children are so well acquainted with it, by daily
hearing or reading of it) the Greek thereof which is easie
of itselfe, will be made yet far more easie to the learner; for
that the matter will bring the words, as I haue oft sayd.
                  2. Because all schollars who can haue meanes to come
to any knowledge of the Greeke,2. Because that booke with the Hebrew of the old Testament are the Books of books. Being only written by the Lord. Hauing life in the
                           •
                        . should indeauour aboue
all other Authors, to be well acquainted with this. First, for
that this booke together with the Hebrew of the Old Testament
were written by the Lord himselfe; not onely the
matter, but also euen the very words of them.
                  Secondly, for that eternall life is onely in these bookes,
being truely vnderstood and beleeued. So that wee may
rightly tearme these the Bible, or Book of books; because
all other bookes are but as seruants vnto these, and all other
are nothing without these, for any true good, but only
to condemnation by leauing men more without excuse.
Yea,All who may, are to labor to see with their owne eyes, and why. euery one who can haue opportunitie, should labour
to see with his owne eyes, for the fulnesse of his assurance,
rather then to rest on others. And much more because
there are so many and such malicious sl
                        •
                     unders against all

our translations; as that those shamelesse calumniations
haue beene a principall meanes to turne many thousand
soules, after Sathan and Antichrist, by causing them to reiect
the sacred Scriptures vtterly, to their endless perdition,
and haue beene enough to shake the faith of Gods Elect.
Vnder this very pretence of false translations,☜ and obscuritie
of the Scriptures, hath Antichrist principally holden
vp his kingdome; keeping all in palpable ignorance to be
drawen to dumb Idols, to murther Princes, to lying and all
abhominations which himselfe listeth.
                  And therefore in these respects it were to bee wished,
that all schollars who haue any leasure, and may come to
these studies of Greeke and Hebrew (especially they who
purpose in time to become teachers of others) would doe☜
their indeauours to be as perfect in these two bookes,To striue to haue these books as familiarly as the Iewes had the Hebrew. and
to haue them as familiarly as euer the auncient Iewes had
the Hebrew. This cunning in the Text should make them
to speake as the words of God indeed, with facility, authority,
and power.
                  Those also,☜ who haue but a little time to bestow in the
Greeke,If any purpose to haue but a smattering in the Greek, to haue it here, and why. would bestow it here, for the former reasons; and
because they may haue good occasion & helpe to increase
in this continually, by the daily vse which they haue of the
scriptures: wheras they, hauing but a smattring insom other
Greek Authors, and contenting themselues therewith, doe
come in a short time vtterly to forget all; and so all that labour
which was taken therin, is altogether lost.
                  If any doe preferre some other Greek Author,☜ for the
sweetnesse and purity of the Greek,The Testament compared to other Greek w
                           ••
                        
                        ters. and so will spend their
little time 
                        •
                     o that; Luke is inferior to none therein, by the
iudgement of the learned. If they look to the excellencie
of all wisdom, what light is there to the light of the Sunne?
Also, for them who haue a desire to trauel further,This is a not
                           •
                        
                        ble entrance to read all other Greek Authors amongst
all the famous Greeke writers, for the surpassing humane
wisedome to bee found therein; this booke once perfectly
knowen, will make the passage thorough all of them both
very direct and plain, and also full of all delight and contentment,

& to read al other Authors without any danger.
                  In the Greeke Testament,☞ to begin at the Gospell of
Iohn as being most easie;In the Testament to begin at the Gospell of Iohn. and next vnto that to go through
the Gospell of Luke, if you please. In which two Euangelists
most of the history of the Gospell is contained: that
by them the Euangelists may be soone run thorough; And
also the Acts: Then all the Epistles may be read with speed.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I cannot but allowe and like of all these things;
and principally of reading the Greeke Testament in the
first place, making it the entrance, and another foundation
to all the Greek studies. But if that could be brought
to passe,How schollars may be made most perfect in the Greeke Testament. that schollars, as they proceeded herein, might
growe as perfect in the Greeke Testament, as it is sayde of
the learned Iewes, that they were in the bookes of the Olde
Testament; what a blessing might it bee to the Church of
God, and what a happinesse to all posterity?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Surely, I am fully perswaded of it, that very much
may be done in it; and after also, in the Hebrew of the Old,
to come neere vnto them: except that, that was their natiue
language. This perswasion I ground, partly from that little
experience which I haue had in mine owne triall; yet sufficient
to confirme me by proportion. More specially, by
that which is well knowen in a worthy schoole in London,
(to which I acknowledge my selfe much beholden for that
which I haue seene in this behalfe, and some other) where
som of the schollars haue bin able in very good sort to c
                        •
                     
                     strue
and resolue the Greek Testam. out of the Latine into
Greek, wheresoeuer you would set them, and to go verie
neer to tell you, where they had read any speciall word or
phrase in it, to turn to them. And lastly, for the euident reasons
therof, and the agreement of it with som former courses
in the Latine, wherof I haue a full assurance.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I pray you shew me the meanes how.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The means are these,☞ most easie & plain, for euery
one to teach who hath any Greek,Meanes parti
                        
                           •
                        ularly. and for others to learne:
                  1. That they haue so much knowledge in the Grammar,
as I shewed chiefly in Nowns and Verbes.
                  
                     
2 Besides the Greeke Testament, I would haue euery
one to haue his English Testament, or Latine, or both;
and euer in their entrance before they learne a lesson, to
haue read it ouer in the translation, and to bee able
eyther to say it without booke, or make a report of it
in English or Latine: but better to say it without booke,
euen in the English; which with a little reading ouer,
especially before bedde time, those who are of good memories
will get quickely. This same done with vnderstanding,
will exceedingly bring the Greeke with it: besides,
that thus they shall haue much opportunity and
furtherance, to get the English text almost by heart, as we
tearme it.
                  3. In reading a Lecture to them, euer tell them what
example each Noune and Verbe is like vnto, and for Pronounes,
Aduerbes, and the like: if they bee not perfect in
Grammar, tell them in a word, or point them where they
are in the Grammar; iust after the manner as in the Latine.
                  4 Shew them carefully al the hard words, & those which
they haue not learned; and for those which you thinke they
cannot remember otherwise, or wherin there is need of speciall
labour, cause euery one to write them in a little paper
book, made for that purpose, with sundry columnes in each
page, to write at least the Greek word & Latin or English in,
in each Chap. & the Verse against them: to the end to take
most paines in those, & to run oft ouer them: and so euer to
see after where they haue had those wordes before. And
thereby also to account how many new wordes they haue
in euery Lecture: for all the rest learned before in any
place or which are very easie, are not to be accounted for
any new wordes.
                  Thus shall you prouoke and encourage them to more
paines▪ when they haue not ouer fiue or sixe new words in a
douzen or twenty Verses, and in time happely not two in a
Chapter. So that they will haue the most of the hard words
in a short time, and be able easily to proceed of themselues,
without any reading, throgh these & other helps following.

5 When they learne to construe, let them doe it by the
helpe of the translation; obseruing wherein the translation
seemes to differ from the wordes of the Greeke, and marking
the reason thereof; and after to trie of themselues how
they can construe, looking onely vpon the translation,
beating the Greeke out of it, as formerly they did the Latin.
Those who are of any aptnesse, will doe it presently.
                  And thus by practice, euery day going a piece, and oft
reading ouer and ouer, they will grow very much, to your
great joy.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But giue me leaue to aske of you two or three
doubts.
                  1 Why you would haue them to write down their hard
wordes in a booke:1 Why to haue the hard words written downe. will not making some markes at the
wordes serue as in their Latine Authours, according to the
generall obseruation?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This was obserued before, as I remember to mark
their hard wordes eyther in their bookes, or setting them
downe in a paper. But here I thinke it to be better, thus to
write downe the principall; First, because schollars now will
be carefull to keepe their Greeke Testaments faire from
blotting or scrauling, although a booke were well bestowed
to make them perfect in it, though it were neuer so marked.
Secondly, be
                        ••
                     use when they are fit to reade Greeke, they
haue commonly good discretion to keepe their notes, and
to make vse of them; going oft ouer them.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But might there not be some other meanes for
the getting of the hard wordes aforehand? for this must
needes be some labour, and aske care and diligence thus to
write them down.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes verily, if it be looked to in time; all these may
be so prepared aforehand, that most of this labour now
may be spared, and onely speciall difficulties to be obserued.
                  The maner of it is thus: That wheras there is nothing in
getting any tongue, but to get wordes,☞ and Grammar for
framing and setting those wordes together, and afterwards

practice; I hold it to be farre the speediest course,The speediest way, to get the Greeke Ra
                           •
                        ices first. to haue
the schollars to haue learned the Greeke Radices or Primitiue
words, before that they goe to construction; or at least
to be well acquainted with them.
                  This course some famous Grecians haue taken:How it may be done easily, without losse of time. wee may
doe it most easily, and without any losse of time, or very little,
if any; as I haue made triall: First, hauing gathered the
Greeke Radices out of Scapula, after the manner of that abbridgement,
called voces primogeniae, I haue heretofore caused
such as I haue thought fit, to write it out, and to bring
me a side (or so much as I thought good) euery morning
at my entrance into the Schoole, or presently after; and so
haue vsed to examine those wordes amongst them all, once
or twice ouer, and where they haue learned the principall
Latine wordes. (Of late I haue seene the Greeke Nomenclaton
vsed, not without fruit; though it be vnperfectly gathered.)
                  The manner of getting the wordes may bee most easie,
thus:Manner of learning them.
                  
                  Hauing these in this manner with the English adioyned:
if you would make triall herein; when you haue examined
a side, reade them ouer as much more against the next day;
reading first the English word, then the Latine, and Greeke
last: shewing them some helpe how to remember, by comparing
the Greeke with the Latine, or English; and so the
English will bring the Latine to remembrance, and both of
them the Greeke.
                  And in examining them,Manner of examining them for speed and memory. to aske them the English word;
and to cause them to giue both Latine and Greeke together,
both backeward and forward againe.
                  As, posing thus: How say you, I loue? He answereth, Amo,

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , amo, I loue: so they will be perfect each
way. Thus within the space of a twelue moneth they may
goe through the whole; spending not much aboue a quarter
of an houre in a day or half an houre at most of schoole
time. Those who are diligent may get them in good sort,
onely (as I haue oft admonished) making some little pricks

or markes at the hardest to runne oft ouer them: and when
they haue once gone ouer them, you may cause them to
bring you a leafe at a time, or more; as those who are apt
will doe readily.
                  By this meanes, besides that they shall learne very many
Latine wordes,Benefit hereof. chiefly most of the Primitiues to further
them greatly in the Latine, and to counteruaile all the
time and labour bestowed in them: they may also, when
they come to construction, eyther haue euery Radix
in their head, or turne to it with a wette finger, and make
it perfect in an instant; and thereby haue such a light to
all other wordes comming of these, as presently by them,
to conceiue of and remember any word.
                  And thus by them and their readinesse in the Grammar,
to goe on in reading by the helpes mentioned, faster then
you would imagine.
                  For hauing these Radices perfect,Hauing Scapula in the school to run to, they shall presently haue any thing. they will conceiue
presently by a little obseruing, of what roote euery
word commeth, and ghesse neere at the significations of
them.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how shall I teach my fourmes which
haue not learned the Greeke Grammar, to reade these
Radices?
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Nothing more easily:☞ for I finde by experience
that they will learne that presently,How children may soone learne to reade the Greeke before they learn the Greeke Grammar. by knowing but the
value and power of the Greeke letters; I meane what
euery letter signifieth, or soundeth in the Latine: and
so calling them by their names, as A. b. g. d. or giuing
them their sounds. Although if you will, the names of
the Greeke characters are soone learned: but that former
course, with continuall reading ouer to them before
hand, so much as you would haue them to learne at
once, will sufficiently effect it, vntill they learne the Grammar.
                  In learning these Radices,
                     In learning the Radices to obserue right pronuntiation for accents and spirits. call vpon them oft to marke
carefully the accents of each word, with the spirits: for that
will further them exceedingly to accent right, when they

come to write in Greeke, by knowing but the accent of the
Primitiue word, and a few other rules. Right pronouncing
of them, will make both their accents and spirits remembred.
                  By some experience of the fruite of this booke,This booke laboured in for the common good. for the
speedy getting of the Greeke▪ I haue endeauoured to make
it more perfect, by placing so neere as I can,
                  First, the most proper significations in the first place; and
onely one worde in each signification, lest the volume
should proue ouer-great: though (if the volume would
beare it) variety vnder euery one, being rightly placed, were
the better, to vse as neede required; and therby also to help
to furnish with copie of Synonimaes.
                  
                  Secondly, by setting downe also the English in one
proper word, or iust as the Latine; onely to expresse it,
and without variety: except in some speciall things which
haue diuers names in our owne tongue, not commonly
knowne.
                  Thirdly, setting downe also the Articles in the
Nounes, at least in all which are hard to distinguish. The
Future and Preterperfect tenses of the Verbes may be
known by their figuratiue letters: Anomalyes are set down
in the Grammar for most part.
                  I also intend (God willing) to set in the Margent of it
all the Hebrew Radices, against euery Radix in Greeke;
at least so many as can be found: which I presume vpon
good ground will be found a speedy introduction to the
Hebrew.
                  Thus young schollars, and all others who are desirous
to get the tongues, may make a most easie entrance
into them, and goe forward with much pleasure in all together:
for hauing these, they shall lack nothing in effect,
but some precepts of Grammar, with practice in reading.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But I would thinke, these Radices should be very
hard to remember.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Not so: for there is such an agreement and harmony,

betweene all the foure tongues,Helpe for committing wordes to memory. or some of them in
many wordes, as will make the learners to take a delight in
them, and much quicken and confirme the memory of the
weakest; if it be but by the very sounding of one word like
another.
                  Those wordes which they cannot remember thus, direct
them to remember them by some other name or thing
which we know well; being of a like sound: which so soone
as they but conceiue, the Greeke or Hebrew wordes may
come to their minde, or the significations of them.
                  Here must be remembred that Maxime in the Arte of
Memory,
                        
                           •
                        aueat in remembring. that the more we doe animate or giue life vnto
the obiect, or thing wherby we would remember, the more
presently will the word which we would remember come to
our minde. But yet withall, we must alwayes looke to that
diuine Caueat, that we neuer helpe the minde by any filthy
obiect, or whatsoeuer may any way corrupt it, or offend
the Lord: because we must neuer doe the least euill, that we
may obtaine the greatest good. If we get any thing so, the
more the worse; for it cannot prosper, but to bring a curse
with it.
                  But for this point of the agreement of the tongues, it may
be I shall haue more occasion yet after, and how to remember
the wordes.
                  And thus much shortly for remembring the Radices.
                  
                  Yet besides these,The Greeke Radices contriued into continued speeches. there might yet bee a shorter way for
committing all the Radices to memory, or exceedingly helping
thereunto;
                  If all the principal of them were contriued into continued
speeches, & diuided into certaine Classes or chiefe heads;
and they translated verbatim into Latine or English, or
both: and the translation to be made in a booke separate,
or in seuerall pages; as in the one page the Greeke, in the
other ouer against it the Latine or English, line for line, and
so many words in a line: like as is the translation of Theogius,
and the other small Poets adioyned, with Sylburgius
annotations; that so looking onely on the Greeke, they

might learne first to construe into Latin, and after looking
onely on the translation they might beate out the Greeke
(as I shewed before in the vse of the translations) and onely
vse the helpe of the Greeke text where they could not finde
it out otherwise.
                  By this meanes, when they were able to reade these
both wayes, both the Greeke into the translation, and
the translation into the Greeke readily (as they might
soone doe, by oft reading ouer, and by vnderstanding
the matter of them well) it must needes make all other
Greeke very easie, being but the same wordes in effect.
                  This work also is done in part: it perfected and adioyned
as a praxis in the end of the Radices, being so framed (as was
shewed) the one might soone be learned by the helpe of
the other.
                  And finally for this matter of thus getting all the Radices,
                     Strange Latine wordes.
or principall wordes in the tongues, if all the hard
Latine wordes, and specially whereof they may haue vse in
good Authours, and which they haue not learned in
their former Authours (as namely in Virgil, or the rest
vnder him, or which were not to bee found in his Nomenclator)
were set downe after all these Radices, in a few
leaues in the end, the schollars should be with all furnished
for ordinary Latine words.
                  As for such wordes as are peculiar to some speciall
artes, as to Physicke or the like, they are to bee studied
and lear
                        •
                     ed onely of them who apply themselues to those
artes.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Well Sir, to returne vnto the point again for making
your schollars so perfect in the Testament, by helpe
of reading it out of the translation;Learning the Greeke out of our translations I would thinke that
it must needes bee hard to learne to construe or reade
it out of our translation, to doe it with iudgement on sure
grounds; because ours so oft doe expresse the sense and
force of the wordes, for the better vnderstanding of the
matter, according to the phrase in our owne tongue;

and not the wordes particularly.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Indeede it is oft-times the more hard and vncertaine:
and therefore the Schollar must take the more paines
to remember it.
                  But to this purpose, for the exact getting of the
Greeke Testament,☞ if there were a perfect verball
Translation,The readiest and surest way by a perfect verball translation, or the verball
                           •
                        et in the Margent▪ where it differeth from that we vse. according to the manner of the interlineall
(that so out of that the schollar might daily practice
to reade the Greeke) this must needes make him
exceeding readie, without danger of any missing, eyther
of the phrase, or misplacing the wordes: or in
steede of such a perfect verball Translation, if you take
the ordinary interlineall Translation; and where it
doth not sufficiently expresse the force of the Greeke
wordes, there setting downe the different wordes in the
Margent, as they are in the best Translations, you shall finde
it very profitable. Or if you will, you may take Bezaes
Translation, and set the verball in the Margent, where Beza
differeth from it. The difficult Radices would be also be set
in the Margent.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It is very like that this would make them very
perfect in the wordes of the text: but yet this verball translation
would not serue for the manner of construction, or
the parsing of it; like as the Grammaticall translations did
in the Latine.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  By this time,How to east the Greeke into the Grammaticall order. when they know the wordes, and
the meaning, they will be able to cast them into the Grammaticall
order of themselues; and so all that labour is supplyed
for construing and parsing: for euen as they cast and
dispose the Latine into the naturall order; so they may the
Greeke.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Then that must needes follow▪ which you affirme;☞
that by daily practice of reading the Greeke out of
such a translation,How any who haue but a smatering may proceed of themselues in the Greeke Testament. they may be exceeding perfect in the
Testament; and that after that they are a little entred they
may goe on of themselues in it: and so likewise all others
by the same reason, who haue any smattering in the

Greeke, as all such Ministers who are desirous hereof, may
grow to great readinesse and perfection in it by themselues,
thorough such a Translation.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is most certaine: for there is the very same reason
in it that is in the Latine; and this I finde that a child of
9. or 10. yeere old, being well entred, shall be able only by
the help of the translation, to read of himselfe an easie Author,
as Corderius, or Tullies sentences, as fast out of Latine
into the English, or the English into the Latine, as the Latine
is ordinarily read alone, after he hath read it ouer once
or twice: to bee able to reade you thus, in the space of an
howre, a side of a leafe or more, of that which he neuer saw
before: And by oft reading it ouer, to haue it almost without
booke, if he vnderstand the matter of it.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But if they should vse the very Interlineall of
Arias Montanus,This cannot be so well done, by the Interlineall or hauing the Greeke and Latine together as by hauing them separate. Experience. as it is: I meane the Greeke and Latine
together; might they not as well learne by that; as hauing
them so seuerally, the Greeke in one book the Latine in another?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  No in no wise. This will appeare most euidently
to any who shall make triall, how much sooner and more
surely they will learne, and keep that which they learne, by
this meanes of hauing the bookes separate.
                  The reason also is euident; because when the bookes are
so seuered, the mind it beates out the words, and makes
them its owne: yea, and also imprints them; and doth vse
the Translation but onely as a Schoolemaster, or a Dictionary,The Interlineal is continually a prompt
                           •
                         to the schol
                           •
                        ar, and a deceiuer of the mind insteed of a Master, vnlesse it be vsed with great wisdome.
where it is not able to finde out the words of it selfe;
and also to try after, that it haue gone surely. But when both
are ioined together, as in the Interlineall, the eye is as soone
vpon the one as the other: I meane, as soone vpon the Latine
as vpon the Greeke; and so likewise vpon the Greek as
vpon the Latine, because they are so close ioined one vnto
the other. So that the booke insteed of being a Master to
helpe only where it should, where the mind cannot study it
out▪ it becommeth a continuall prompter and maketh the
mind a truant, that it will not take the pains, which it should.
                  
                     
How this euill can be preuented amongst schollars,This euill cannot be preuented amongst schollars. hauing
both together, I doe not possibly see. For, whether
they be to get it themselues, or to be examined; yet still will
their eye be vpon the helpe, where it should not be.
                  Indeed this I grant,☞ that the Interlineall translation may
bee a worthy helpe for a man of iudgement or vnderstanding;How men of vnderstanding may vse the Interlineall.
who can so moderate his eye as to keep it fixed vpon
either Greeke or Latine alone, when hee would beat the other
out of it; as vpon the Greeke onely when hee would
construe, or reade it into Latine, or on the Latine onely
when he would reade it into Greeke, and so can vse them as
was sayd, without hindring the mind to studie and beat out,
or to remember. Though the wisest shall find it very hard
to vse it in this sort, but the eye will be where it should not;
vnlesse hee vse this course, to lay a knife, or a ruler, or the
like, on the line which he would not see, & so remoue it as
neede is. Thus hee may vse it both for the Greeke and Hebrew.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It stands with great reason. Well then, the way
beeing so ready and plaine, they are vtterly vnworthie so
great a benefit, who wil not take paines in so easie a course.
                  But if I woulde haue my schollars to proceede in other
Greeke Authors,How the schollars may proceed in other Authors. what courses should I then take:
Though I cannot doubt, but being only thus entred in the
Testament, that they will be well accepted in the Vniuersitie,
and goe forward speedily.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  If you traine them vp thus f
                        ••
                     st in the Testament,
they vvill goe forwards in others with the smaller helpes.
But if you would haue them to begin in other Greeke Authors;
I take the very same help of translations, either verball
or Grammaticall, to be the most speedy furtherances,
so that there bee a diligent care of propriety in translating,
and of variety set in the margents; to vse them in all things
as in the Greeke Testament, and in the Latine Authors
mentioned.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how shal we do for such translations of those
Greeke Authors?
               
               
                  
                  Phil.
                  Insteed of reading lectures to them, you may thus
translate them their lectures daily, either in Latine or English;
and cause them then eyther to seeke them out of
themselues by their translations, Grammars and Lexicons:
Or reading them first vnto them, cause them to make them
perfect hereby.
                  By this labour of translating, you shall finde your selfe
to profit very much in this knowledge of the Greeke, and
be greatly eased in your paines.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But be it so, that I am not able to translate thus;
as he had neede to be a good Grecian who should translate
in such manner: what then should I do?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  If you bee able to reade the Author truely vnto
them,The benefit of such translations of some of the purest Authors performed by skilfull Grecians. and profitably; then may you also translate it thus:
you may haue helpe by such translations as are extant, to
giue you much light. But it were much to bee wished, that
to this purpose, some skilfull Grecians would translate som
of the purest Authors in this manner. As namely, Isocrates,
Xenophon, Plato, or Demosthenes, or some parts of
them, which might seem most fit for schollars; onely to be
for this purpose of getting the Greeke. To begin with the
easiest of them first. All painfu
                        •
                     l students would be found
to profit exceedingly, and to become rare Grecians in a
little time.
                  Thus they might goe on vntill they were able to reade
any Greeke Author of themselues, with such helpes as are
extant.
                  In the meane time,As the fables translated in the Strasburge Grammar. you may vse such Authors as are so
translated, or which come the neerest vnto them; of which
sort are those fables of Aesop translated in the Argentine
Grammar, and others which I shall shew you in the manner
of parsing.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  For the parsing then, what way may I vse?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I haue shewed you this in part:Parsing in Greek▪
                      as the noting and
causing your schollars to write euery hard word, shewing
what examples they are like, the speciall rule, & so the other
helpes as they are in the Latine, by casting words into the

Grammaticall order.
                  More speciall helpes for them, who are not acquainted
with Camdens Grammar.
                  1. They may vse the Praxis Praeceptorum Grammatices
of Antesignanus,☞ set downe in the end of Cleonards
Greeke Grammar;Helps 
                           •
                        or construing and pa
                           •
                        
                        fing. wherein is both an Interlineall verball
translation,Praxis praeceptorum Grammatices Antesignani. such as I spake of; and also a parsing of euery
word familiarly and plainely, much according to the manner
of parsing of Latine, which I shewed you; which may
be a good direction for parsing.
                  2. Berkets Commentary vpon Stephens Catechisme,Berket on Stephens Catech, printed by Wechelus an. 1604
parsing euery word according to Cleonard in folio, is found
to be a speedy helpe.
                  3. M Stockwood his Progymna
                           •
                        ma scholasticum:
                     ☞ wherin
is also a Grammatical practice of sundry Greeke Epigrams
gathered by H. Stephens,
                        M▪ Stockw. Progimnasma scholasticum ex Anthologia Hē
                        
                        
                           •
                        ici Stephani. hauing a double translation
in Latine (the one ad verbum, the other in verse) and
also a varying of each Epigr
                        ••
                      Latineverse by diuerse Authors.
And lastly, an explanation or parsing of euery hard
word set in the margent, or vnder each Epigram in manner
of a Commentarie. In it also the Greeke text is set downe
both in Greek Characters, and also in Latine letters interlineally,
directly ouer the head of the Greek words; of purpose
for the easie entering and better directing of the ignorant.
                  The Commentary in it for parsing, may be also a good
direction, for parsing in the shortest manner by pen or reading.
                  Besides these,☞ for Poetry, wee may take these Authors,
which are easie and plaine by their helpes mentioned:The best & fittest Authors 
                           •
                        or Poetry, & most easie:
                  
                  1. Theognis his sentences with the other Poets ioined
with him: as namely, Phocilides with the Latine translation
and notes,Theognis. Phocili
                           •
                        es. Hesiode with C
                           •
                        po
                           •
                        ine and M
                           •
                        lanchthon. set forth by Sylburgius; which is verie notable
to enter young Schollars into Poetry, for making a
verse.
                  2. Hesiode his Opera and Dies with Ceporine and Melancthons
Commentaries set forth by Iohannes Frisius Tigurinus,
                     
and the new translation of it, adverbum, by Erasmus
Schemidt, Greeke professour at Wittenberge, printed
1601.
                  3. Homer with Eustathius Greeke Commentarie may
easily bee read after these (especially after the Commentary
on Hesiode;
                     Homer with Eustathius. which may bee as an introduction to it)
by the help of the verbal Latine translation of Homer: and
the words of Art, belonging to Grammar set down in Greek
in M. Camdens Grammer.
                  Moreouer, these directions following wil be most speedie
helps for all the Poets:
                  To haue in readinesse some briefe rules of the chiefe
figures,To haue in readinesse a short briefe of all the dialects and figures, a speedy help for the knowledge of the Poets. and dialects: as those who are in Master Camdens
Grammar; so to be able to referre all Anomalies in Greeke
vnto them. Those with the verba anomala, and the particular
dialects, according to each part of speech, set downe
in the end of Camden, may resolue most doubtes: for
Anomalies and speciall difficulties which you cannot find
otherwise,A principal help for all Anomalies and difficulties in Greeke. you may find many of them set Alphabetically
together in the end of Scapula his Lexicon, where they
are expressed fully, and particularly: which you shall proue
to be a maruellous readinesse to you.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Here are indeed very many and singular helpes:
most of which, I may truely say as before, that I haue not
so much as heard of. But if I would haue my schollar to
write in Greek, what meanes should I vse then?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  If you mean for the tongue,How to write purely in Greek to be able to write true
and pure Greeke, the sure meanes are euen the same, as for
writing Latine.
                  1. The continuall practice of construing,☜ parsing, and
reading forth of the translation into the Authors, is making
the Greeke continually.
                  2. To come to the stile and composition, and so for Orthography,
to doe as for the Latine. As I directed you to
giue them sentences in English, translated Grammatically
out of Tullies sentences, to turne into Tullies Latine, wherby
both your selfe and they may haue a certaine guide for

them to go surely; so here to giue them sentences or peeces
out of the Testament, or out of Isocrates, as ad Demomcum,
or out of Xenophon to translate into Greeke, and so to
see how neere they can come vnto the Author. Or else, to
aske them onely the Latine or English of the Greeke, and
to trie how they can turne it into Greek first Grammatically,
after in composition: or sometimes one way, somtimes
the other. And to this purpose also, the translations of som
excellent parts of the purest Greek Authors were most necessary.
                  By these meanes they might come in time, to be as accurate
in writing Greeke for the stile and composition, as
in the Latine. For all other exercises in Greeke, I referre
you to that which hath been said concerning the Latine,
the reason and meanes being the like.
                  Or if you meant for writing the Greek hand faire,How to write faire. most
exquisite copies constantly followed, as in the Latine and
English, and practice, shal bring them vnto it. But for this,
I likewise refer you to that which was sayd concerning the
way of writing faire.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what say you for versifying in Greeke?Versifying in Greek. for
that you know to commend the chiefe Schooles greatly.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  As I answered you before, so I take the meanes to
be in all things the same, as for versifying in Latine; except
that this is more easie, because of the long and short vowels
so certainely knowne.☞ To be very perfect in the rules of
versifying;Theognis may be easily learned without booke by the helpe of the translation▪
                      inscanning averse. To learne Theognis, that
pleasant and easie Poet without booke, to haue store of
Poeticall phrase and authorities: which is the speediest and
surest way. And so to enter by turning or imitating his verses,
as in Latine. But herein as in all the rest, I do stil desire
the help of the learned, who can better shew by experience
the shortest, surest, and most plaine waies.
                  Notwithstanding,☞ let me heere admonish you of this
(which for our curiositie wee had neede to bee often put in
minde of) that,A Caueat for the time bestowed in such exercises of writing in Greek
                           •
                        . seeing wee haue so little practice of any exercises
to bee written in Greeke, wee doe not bestowe too

much time in that, whereof wee happely shall haue no vse;
and which therefore wee shall also forget againe: but that
wee still imploy our pretious time to the best aduantage in
the most profitable studies, which may after do most good
to Gods Church or our countrey.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Your counsell is good: yet repeate mee againe
a briefe of the principall of these helpes for my memorie
sake.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This was it;
                  1. To make your Schollars very perfect in the Grammar,Summe of all.
chiefly Nownes and Verbes; that they may bee able
to proue and parallel euery thing by a like example, or at
least to turne to them readily.
                  2. To haue the Greeke Radices by the meanes mentioned.
                  3. Continuall vse of most accurate verball or Grammaticall
translations; and in the meane time to make them
perfect in the Testament daily vse of our ordinarie translations
so as was shewed, by reading the Greek out of them
ouer and ouer.
                  4. Helpe of the best Commentaries and Grammaticall
practices in the books mentioned.
                  5. To be ready in the dialects and the common figures
for the Poetry.
                  6. Noting all the difficulties, and running oft ouer them
as in the Latine; and so all other helpes of vnderstanding
the matter first, and the rest mentioned generally.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI.
               How to get most speedily the knowledge and vnderstanding
of the Hebrew.
               
                  Spoud.
                  BVt what say you, for that most sacred tongue, the
Hebrew? How, I pray you, do you think, that that
may bee attained, which you mentioned, that students
may come so soon to the vnderstanding of it?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This may be obtained the sooner,The knowledge of the Hebrew may be the soonest gotten and why because we haue
it all comprised, so far as is necessary for vs to know, in that
one sacred volume of the old Testament. Also because the
principall rootes of it are so few, the matter so familiar, as
which euery one of vs ought to bee acquainted with. The
Nowns haue so little varying or turning in them.
                  And finally, for that wee haue such singular helpes for
the vnderstanding of it (as the Interlineall verball translation,
and the translations and labours of others which beat
out the propriety, force and sense of euery word & phrase)
like as in the Greeke Testament, that nothing can be difficult
in it to the good heart, who will vse the means which
the Lord hath vouchsafed, and will seek this blessing, from
his Maiesty.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Surely, hee is vtterly vnworthy of this heauenlie
treasure, who will not seek & beg it from the Lord, and dig
deep for it: I meane, who wil not vse any holy meanes, for
the obtaining of it; and much more the course being so
short, plaine & direct, as you say. But I intreat you to trace
me out the shortest way.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The way, so far as yet I haue been able to learne, is
wholly set downe already in the manner of getting the Latine
and the Greek. But to make a brie
                        •
                     e rehearsall▪
                  
                  
                     
1 For them who would bee more accurate Hebricians
for the beating out of euery tittle,1 The Grammar to be gotten most exquisitely of them who desire to come to perfection in the Hebrew. they are to haue the
Grammar very accurately; and that by the like means euen
as the Greeke and the Latine.
                  But for those who onely desire the vnderstanding of it,
and to be skilfull in the text, the chiefe care must be, that
they be made perfect in some few principall rules of Grammar
of most vse.Some chiefe parts for others who onely desire the vnderstanding. Also in declining and coniugating the
examples set down in the book, & in the seuerall terminations
of declensions, numbers, moodes, tenses, persons, to be
able in them in some good manner to giue Hebrew to Latine,
and Latine to Hebrew, and to run the terminations in
each; at least to giue the Latine to the Hebrew perfectly.
And so in the seuerall Pronounes, Aduerbes, Coniunctions
to do the like; I meane, to giue Latine to the Hebrew, to
haue them very readily, seeing they are but few, and sundry
of them of continuall vse.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what Grammar would you vse?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Martinius of the last Edition,Grammars to be vsed. with the Technologia
adioyned to it,Martinius with his Technologia. I take to be most vsed of all the learned, as
most methodicall and perfect; although Blebelius is farre
more easie to the young beginner,Blebelius accounted most plaine and easie as much more answering
to our Latine Grammar; and made so plaine of purpose by
questions and answeres, that any one of iudgement may
better vnderstand it, and goe forward with delight: so as it
may be a notable introduction or Commentary to Martinius,
who had neede of a good Reader, to learne to vnderstand
him perfectly.
                  Both read together,The seuerall points in Martinius you may finde in Blebelius by the table in the end of Blebelius. must needs be most profitable; Martinius
for method and shortnes, Blebelius for resoluing and
expounding euery obscurity: yet euery one who hath learned
a Grammar, may best vse the same, because that is most
familiar to him.
                  But for them who are to begin, or to teach others, they
may take the easiest first, that the learner may no way bee
discouraged; and after others as as they shall thinke meete,
or which shall be found most profitable, by the iudgement

of the greatest Hebricians. This I thinke to be the surest
aduice; and by comparing of Grammars together, euer to
beate out the sense and meaning.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  What is your next meanes?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The getting of the Hebrew rootes,The second principall meanes, the perfect getting of the Radices. together with
the Grammar, euery day a certaine number. Hereunto the
Nomenclator Anglolatmus-Graecus-Haebraicus, mentioned
before, if it were so finished, might be a notable introductiō.
                  For the maner of committing the Radices to memory,Manner of committing the Radices to memorie. I
shewed it before: yet hereto speake of it a little more fully,
first to helpe our remembrance by som of the chiefe helps
of memory; as by comparing in our meditation the seueral
words in the Hebrew, with what words they are like vnto,
eyther in the English, Latin, or Greek, which words eyther
do come of them, or sound like vnto them, or with some other
roote in the Hebr
                        •
                     w, wherwith they haue affinity. That
so soone as we see the Hebrew roote, the other word which
we would remember it by, comming to our minde; the vnderstanding
or meaning of the Hebrew roote may also
come to minde with it.
                  As for example,Examples of helping memorie in the Hebrew. to begin in the first Radices, & to giue som
light in 2. or 3; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     
                        
                           •
                        uber or pubert as, may be remembred
by 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , pubertas; and by ephebe or ephebus, in Latine
comming of it, signifying the same: as Postquam excessit ex
ephebis. Terent. Also 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      may be remēbred by the month
Abib in the Scriptures, which was amongst the Iewes mensis
pubertatis, in quo seges terrae Canaan protrudebat spicas.

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Perijt, may be remembred by Abaddon in the Apocalips,
called in Greek Apollion, the destroyer, or destruction;
the Angel of the bottomlesse pit. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     voluit, acquieuit, or
bene affectus est in aliquid, vt pater in filios: It may fully be remembred
by Abba, father, comming of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     pater: and so
the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Greeke, or Abbas an Abbot, quia Abbas
erat pater totius societatis. And Auus seemes to come of the
same By any of these we may remember the roote.
                  Thus we may remember very many of them by the help
of Auenars Dictionary (as I shewed) or by our own meditation,

euen from the wordes comming of them indeede, or
in shew, obserued according to certaine rules which Auenarius
giueth in the beginning of his Lexicon.
                  The reason hereof also is most euident;☜ for that this is the
mother tongue of all tongues,The Hebrew the mother tongue most auncient and worthy. & was the only tongue, vntil
the confounding of the tongs at Babel: in which confusion,
som words were changed altogether, in others the significations
were altered, & many haue bin depraued and corrupted
by continuance & succession of time.Others deriued from it. Therefore as this
tongue is to be honored, so this diligence in comparing &
deriuing other tongues,The benefit of diligence in comparing the tongues. must needes be of exceeding great
profit many wayes: & amongst other, for this very purpose
of conceiuing or cōmitting to memory, & retayning the
Hebrew more surely, by other wordes better knowne to vs.
                  Other wordes which cannot be remembred thus,How other words may be remembred, which cannot be so deriued. yet
may be remembred by the learned, by some thing which
they sound like vnto, in one of the three tongs; So that we
forget not to animate that which we remember by: that is,
to conceiue of it in our minde, as being liuely and stirring;
like as we noted before in the Greeke.
                  The rest of the roots besides these,The hardest rootes which seeme to haue no affini
                           •
                        y. will be but few: and
being noted with a line with a black lead pen (as was said) or
any marke, and oft run ouer, they may soone be gotten.
                  Besides these,To marke out also the harder deriuatiues in the Hebrew. som mark would be giuen vnder euery deriuatiue,
in each roote, which doth differ much in signification
from the Radix, and cannot be remembred well by the
Radix, nor how it may be deriued from it.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Such a Nomenclator as you speake of, must needs
be a rare and speedy helpe to all the tongues, if it were well
gathered by some very learned and iudicious Hebrician.
But in the meane time, what abbridgement would you vse
for getting these Radices of the Hebrew?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The Epitome of Pagnine I take to be most common:The best Epitome for getting the Radices.
but Buxtorphius his abbridgement (going vnder the
name of Polanus) must needes be the best in all likelihood;
as hauing had the helpe of that and all other, and gathered
by great iudgement.
                  
                     
I haue seene a draught of another,This is not fully finished. much shorter then
them both, collected by comparing Pagnine, Auenar, and
others; shewing also for most part how the Hebrew deriuatiues,
which are more obscure, are deriued from the Radices,
giuing at least a probable reason for them: and also in
sundry, shewing the agreement and manner of the deriuation
of the tongues, one from another, and the affinity of
many of them; to helpe the memory with the speedy and
sure getting of all.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It were great pitie, but that that should be perfected;
for the benefite of it must needes be very great. But
might there not be such a deuise, of contriuing all the Hebrew
roots into continued speeches; and so learning them
by studying them out of verball translations, as you shewed
for the Greeke?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes vndoubtedly,The way might be more compendious by the rootes reduced to Classes. it might easily be accomplished
by some exquisite and painefull Hebrician, to make this
labour yet much more compendious: Although I doe not
doubt but any indifferent memory, might in the space of a
twelue moneth or lesse, get all the Hebrew Radices very
perfectly,By the Dictionary alone they might be gotten in a short time. by the former meanes of Buxtorphius or Pagnines
abbridgement alone; spending but euery day one
houre therein. And when they were once gotten, they were
easily kept by oft repetition, running ouer the hardest,
being marked out; and by daily practice in reading some
Chapters; though much more easily, by hauing the heads
reduced to such classes, and the oft running ouer them.
                  I haue heard moreouer of all the Radices, with their Primitiue
significations alone, drawne into a very little space;
which being well performed, must needes be a notable furtherance.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  What is your third helpe?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The perfect verball translations written out of Arias
Montanus,The third help, perfect verball translations, and continuall practice of them. by conferring with Iunius and our owne
Bible, specially our new translation, and setting the diuers
readings in the margents with a letter, to signifie whose the
translations are, and also euery hard Radix noted in the

margent, as now sundry of them are; with references to
them by letters or figures, as I shewed for the Greeke: these
being vsed as the English translations, for getting the Latin,
and as the Latine or English for the Greeke, will be found aboue
all that we would imagine.
                  And that after this manner:
                  First, as I said for the others, by reading ouer the translations,The manner of vsing these repeated.
to vnderstand the matter.
                  Secondly, learning to construe the Hebrew into the Latine
exactly, and backe againe out of the translation into
Hebrew; looking onely on the translation, to meditate and
beate out the Hebrew. This helpes vnderstanding, apprehension,
memory, and all (as I said) to haue the text most
absolutely.
                  Lastly, beginning with the easiest first (as in the other
tongues) as eyther some part of the History (as namely Genesis,
the bookes of Samuell) or else the Psalmes; and therin
specially the hundred and nineteene Psalme, as most
plaine of all other: or rather to beginne with the Praxis
vpon the Psalmes, the first, the fiue and twentieth, and the
threescore and eight, set downe in the end of Martinius
Grammar, printed by Raphalengius, Anno 1607. which
will both acquaint the learner with the vnderstanding of
Martinius, and set him in a most direct and ready way, by
the other helpes.
                  For the certainty of this,Experience of this for assurance. besides that the reason is the very
same with the Latine, and like as I said for the Greeke
also, I haue moreouer knowne this experience in a childe,
vnder fifteene yeares of age; who besides all kinde of studies
and exercises, both in Latin and Greeke, as those mentioned
before, and his daily progresse in them, had within
the space of lesse then a yeare, gotten sundry of the principall
and most necessary rules of Grammar. Also a great
part of the Radices in Buxtorphius, though hee spent not
therein aboue two houres in a day. And besides all this,
hee had learned about foureteene or fifteene Psalmes:
wherein he was so readie, as that hee was able not onely to

construe or reade the Hebrew into the Latine; but also out
of the bare translation, to reade the Hebrew backe againe,
to shew euery Radix, and to giue a reason in good sort for
each word, why it was so. Of this hath beene tryall by learned
and sufficient witnesses.
                  The which experience with the daily trials of reading the
Latine so exactly and readily out of the English, and getting
it (as it were without booke) by that practice, doefully
assure me that by this daily exercise the very originals of
the Hebrew may be made as easie and familiar as the Latine
is; yea, in time with continuall practice, to be able to say
very much of it without booke:A Student cannot be better imployed then in thus imprinting the originals in his hart, if he haue leasure. as I shewed before for the
Greeke. And what Student, especially of Diuinity, can euer
bestow some part of his time in a more pleasant, easie and
happy studie? when there will be no more but reading ouer
and ouer with meditation, and still to be reading the words
and wisedome of the Highest; in whose presence he hopes
to dwell, and to heare the same sweete voyce in the Temple
in heauen eternally.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  By these means, it seemeth to me that any tongue
may be gotten speedily.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yea verily,☞ I do so perswade my selfe. For seeing (as
I said) that there is no more in any tongue,It seemeth that any tong may be gotten thus. but wordes and
ioyning of those words together; therfore the words being
first gotten, chiefly by being contriued into continued
speeches, & those so learnd out of such verbal translations:
secondly, some few rules of them being knowne: thirdly,
continuall vse of such translations; would make any tongue
to be vnderstood and learned very soone, so farre as I can
conceiue.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  How soeuer this be, which seemeth indeede most
probable;These tongues, Latine, Greeke, and Hebrew may be gotten in each Nation, by these means of translations in their owne 
                           •
                        ongues. yet I take it, there can be no doubt of this, but
that in euery country of the world, the Latin, Greek, & Hebrew
may be attained by the same meanes: which three are
enough (yea the two last alone sufficient) to know God and
Iesus Christ to eternall life: and that so by the knowledge
of the Originals, men may haue a certaine knowledge of
the eternall worde of the Lord.
               
               
                  
                  Phil.
                  I can see no reason at all to the contrary, but
that these our Latine Classicall Authours being translated
Grammatically into other tongues, by some who
are learned amongst them, the Latine may as well bee
learned thereby by them out of their translations, in their
own tongues, by such helps of rules as haue bin mentioned,
or the like, as out of translations in our English tongue.
Secondly, the Latine tongue being once gotten, the getting
of the Greek and Hebrew are the very same vnto them
which they are to vs.
                  Or otherwise, the Greeke and Hebrew but translated
so alone,Greeke or Hebrew most easily learned by perfect translations in each tongue. into the seuerall tongues of each Nation
(I meane verbally) they might as easily, if not more easily,
be learned in each countrey out of them, as out of
the English or Latine; and the sense or meaning also,
if in euery difficult place, or where the wordes seemed
to be out of order, it were set in the margents ouer against
them.
                  The same I say for our English; into which the Hebrew,
in most places translated verbatim, doth keepe
a perfect sense, and might bee learned out of it. Also
the most absolute fulnesse of vnderstanding of the matter
in our heads, doth bring wordes, most readily to expresse
it; which I haue oft tolde you of.☜
                  
                  But remember this that I haue said;Of the vse of perfect verball translations for getting the originals. that the verball
Translations, for these originals, shall make the learners
most cunning in the text, and in the very order of the
wordes of the Holy Ghost, without danger of any way
deprauing, corrupting or inuerting one iotte or tittle:
though for the Latine, the Grammaticall translations
bee farre most profitable, as we haue shewed.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Are these all the directions that you would giue
me herein?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These are all which yet I know.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  By these then it seemeth that you are fully
perswaded that this holy tongue may be obtayned.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yea vndoubtedly, so much as shal be requisit for vs,

by obseruing withall those generall rules, set downe for the
getting of the Latine; and chiefly that, of making markes
vnder euery hard word in each page, without marring our
bookes; and to runne oft ouer those.
                  But herein it is necessary that I put you in minde againe,Obseruation re
                           •
                         eated how much and what to learne in eu
                           •
                        
                        ry booke▪
                     
of that which I admonished you of in the Greek; that your
schollar learne so much onely, as eyther the present time
requires: I meane, whereof he may haue good vse presently,
or else when he shall proceede to higher studies in the
Vniuersities, or to other imployments. And for other speculatiue
or more curious knowledge in Quiddities, eyther
to cut them off altogether from hindring better and more
needefull studies, or to reserue them to their due time and
place; or to leaue them onely to them who shall giue themselues
wholly to these studies, to be readers in the Vniuersities,
or for like purposes; as, the learning of the musick and
Rhetoricall accents: the Prosodia metrica, and the like.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  What is then the summe of all?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For them who desire to be exact Hebricians, to be
very perfect in the Grammar; for them who desire but only
the vnderstanding, to haue,
                  1 Some necessary rules, and principally examples of
Nounes and Verbes very readily.
                  2 The Radices.
                  
                  3 Continuall vse of verball translations, or others; as
in the Greeke.
                  4 Oft running ouer the hardest wordes.
                  But these, as all other things, I write vnder correction,
and with submission and desire of better iudgement.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXII.
               Of knowledge of the grounds of religion and
training vp the schollars therin.
               
                  Spoud.
                  NOw that we haue thus gone thorough all the way
of learning, for whatsoeuer can bee required in
the Grammar schooles; and how to lay a sure
foundation, both for the Greeke and the Hebrew,
that they may bee able to goe on of themselues in all these
by their owne studies: it remaineth that wee come yet to
one further point, and which is as it were the end of all
these.Schollars to be trained vp in Religion. That is, how schollars may be seasoned and trained
vp in Gods true Religion and in grace; without which all other
learning is meerely vaine, or to increase a greater condemnation.
This one alone doth make them truely blessed,
and sanctifie all other their studies.
                  Moreouer, they being taught herein in their youth shall
not depart from it when they are old. I intreat you therefore
to shew me so shortly as you can, how schollars maie
bee taught all those things which were contained in the
note: As,
                  1. To be acquainted with all the grounds of religion
and chief histories of the Bible.
                  2. So to take the Sermons▪ at least for all the substance
both for doctrines, proofes, vses; and after to make a rehearsall
of them.
                  3. Euery one to begin to conceiue and answere the seuerall
points of the Sermons, euen from the lowest formes.
                  These are matters that I thinke are least thought of in
most schooles,This most neglected in schooles. though of all other they must needes bee
most necessary, and which our lawes and iniunctions doe

take principall care for; and that the schoolmasters, to these
ends, be of sincere religion.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I feare indeede that it is as you say, that this is ouer-generally
neglected.The popish Schoolemasters shall rise vp against vs. And herein shall the popish schoolemasters
rise vp in iudgement against vs: who make this the
very chiefe marke at which they aime, in all their teaching;
to poure in superstition at the beginning, first to corrupt
and deceiue the tender minds.
                  But to returne vnto the matter, how they may bee thus
trained vp in the feare of the Lord; I shall set you downe
the best manner, so neere as I my selfe haue yet learned,
follovving the order of these particulars mentioned.
                  1. For beeing acquainted with the grounds of religion
and the principles of the Catechisme;☞ Euerie Saturdaie
before their breaking vp the schoole (for 
                        〈◊〉
                      finishing their
weeks labours,How to teach them the Catechisme and when. and a preparatiue to the Sabbaoth) let them
spend halfe an howre or more in learning & answering the
Catechisme.
                  To this end, cause euery one to haue his Catechisme,
to get halfe a side of a leafe or more at a time; each to be able
to repeate the whole. The more they say at a time and
the ofter they runne ouer the whole, the sooner they will
come to vnderstanding. This must be as their parts in their
Accedence.
                  In examining,☞ first your Vsher or Seniors of each fourm
may heare that euery one can say.Manner of examining Catechisme. Afterwardes, you hauing
all set before you, may poase whom you suspect most
carelesse.
                  1. Whether they can answere the questions.
                  2. In demanding euery question againe, to stand a little
on it, to make it so plaine and easie, as the least childe amongst
them may vnderstand euery word which hath any
hardnesse in it, and the force of it.
                  Let the manner of the poasing bee as I shewed for the
Accedence. The more plainly the question is drawen out
of the very words of the book, and into the moe short questions
it is diuided, and also examined backeward and forward,

the sooner a great deale they will vnderstand it, and
better remember it.
                  Herein also to vse all diligence to apply euery peecevnto
them, to whet it vpon them, to worke holy affections in
them; that each may learne to feare the Lord and walke in
all his commandements. For, beeing in their hearts and
practice, it will be more firmly kept. This also must be remembred
for all that followeth.
                  2. For the Sabbaoths and other daies when there is anie
sermon,Taking notes or writing sermons. cause euery one to learn somthing at the sermons.
                  1. The very lowest to bring some notes, at least 3. or 4.
If they can, to learne them by their owne marking; if not
to get other of their fellowes to teach them some short lessons
after. As thus: Without God we can do nothing. All
good gifts are from God: or the like short sentences; not to
ouer-load them at the first.
                  To this end, that the Monitours see, 1. That all be most
attentiue to the Preacher.
                  2. That all those who can write any thing,2. All who can write to take notes. or do but begin
to write 
                        •
                     oining hand, doe euery one write some such
notes, or at least to get them written, some 5. or 6. or moe
as they can, as I sayde to bee able to repeate them without
booke, as their other little fellowes.☜
                  
                  But herein there must be great care by the Monitours,Caueat of any noise or disorder in gathering notes.
that they trouble not their fellowes, nor the congregation,
in asking notes, or stirring out of their places to seek of one
another, or any other disorder; but to aske them after they
are come forth of the Church, and get them written then.
                  3. For those who haue been longer practiced herein,3. The higher to set downe parts of the sermon more o
                           •
                        
                        derly. to
set downe, 1. The Text or a part of it. 2. To marke as
neere as they can, and set downe euery doctrine, and
what proofes they can, the reasons and the vses of them.
                  4. In the highest fourmes,4. In all the highest fourm
                           •
                         to set downe the substance exactly. cause them to set downe all
the Sermons. As Text, diuision, exposition, or meaning,
doctrines, and how the seuerall doctrines were gathered,
all the proofes, reasons, vses, applications. I meane all
the substance and effect of the Sermons: for learning is

not so much seene, in setting downe the words, as the substance.
                  And also for further directing them,☞ and better helping
their vnderstanding and memories,Manner of noting for helping vnderstanding & memorie. for the repetition
thereof; cause them to leaue spaces betweene euery part,
and where neede is to diuide them with lines. So also to distinguish
the seuerall parts by letters or figures,☞ and setting
the sum of euery thing in the margent ouer against each
matter in a word or two.Helps for memory in the margent, & for vnderstanding. As, Text, Diuision, Summe.
                  First Obseruation or 1. Doctrine, Proofes, Reasons 1.
2. 3. Vses 1. 2. 3. So, the 2. Obseruation or doctrine, proofes,
reasons, &c. so thoroughout. Or what method soeuer, the
Preacher doth vse, to follow the parts after the same maner,
so well as they can.
                  Direct them to leaue good margents for these purposes:☞
and so soone as euer the Preacher quotes any scripture,To leaue good margents.
as hee nameth it,To set downe quotations as they are spoken. to set it in the Margent against the place,
lest it slip out of memorie.
                  And presently after the sermon is done, to run ouer all
againe,To set downe the heads of all in the margents after. correcting it, and setting downe the sum of euerie
chief head, faire and distinctly in the margent ouer against
the place, if his leasure will suffer.
                  By this helpe they will be able to vnderstand, and make
a repetition of the sermon,Benefit of this. with a verie little meditation;
yea to doe it with admiration for children.
                  After all these,To turne it after into Latine for the next daies exercise. you may (if you think good) cause them
the next morning, to translate it into a good Latine stile,
insteed of their exercise the next day (I meane, so many of
them as write Latine) or some little peece of it according
to their ability.
                  Or rather,☞ (because of the lacke of time, to examine
what euery one hath written) to see how they are able out
of the English,Or to read it into Latine ex tempore.
                      to read that which they haue written, into
Latine, ex tempore, each of them reading his peece in order,
and helping others to giue better phrase and more variety,
for euery difficult word; and so to runne thorough the
whole.
                  
                     
This I finde that they will beginne to do,Experiēce how soone they will do this. after that they
haue beene exercised in making Latine a twelue moneth or
two, if they haue beene rightly entred, and well exercised in
Sententiae pueriles; especially in the diuine sentences in the
end thereof, and in Corderius with other bookes and exercises
noted before, chiefly by the practice of reading out
of the translations.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But when would you examine these?Examining the sermons.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For the reading into Latine, I would haue it done
the next day at 9. of the clock for their exercise, or at their
entrance after dinner; that so they might haue some meete
time to meditate of it before: and for examining of it in
English, to do it at night before their breaking vp, amongst
them all shortly, or before dinner.
                  Herein also some one of the higher fourmes might bee
appointed in order to make a repetitiō of the wholeserm on
without book,One to make a short rehearsall of the whole first. according as I shewed the manner of setting
it down; rehearsing the seueral parts so distinctly & briefly,
as the rest attending may the better conceiue of the whole,
and not exceed the space of a quarter of an howre.
                  After the repetition of it,To aske questions of all things difficult. if leasure serue, the Master may
aske amongst the highest som few questions, of whatsoeuer
points might seeme difficult in the sermon: for by questions
as I haue said, they wil com to vnderstand any thing.
                  Next to appose amongst the lowest,To cause the least & all sorts to repeate their notes. where he thinkes
good, what notes they took of the Sermons, and cause them
to pronounce them; and in appoasing to cause them to vnderstand,
by applying all things to them in a word or two.
Thus to go thorough as time shall permit.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This strict examining will be a good means to
make them attentiue?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It will indeed;Benefit of this strict examining. so as you shal see them to increase in
knowledge and vnderstanding aboue your expectation:
And besides it wil keep them from playing talking, sleeping
and all other disorders in the Church. To this end therfore
poase diligently, all those whō you obserue or suspect most
negligent▪ as I haue aduised: then you shall haue them to attend
heedfully.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  But how will you cause them to be able so to repeate
the Sermon? Mee thinkes that should bee very difficult.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The schollars will doe it very readily,How they may be able to repeat the whole sermons without booke. where the
Preachers keep any good order; when they haue so noted
euerything as I directed before, and set downe the sum in
the margent. For then, first meditating the text to haue it
perfect: secondly, meditating the margents to get the sum
of all into their heads, and the manner how it stands: thirdly,
obseruing how many doctrines were gathered and how,
what proofs, how many reasons & vses of euery doctrine;
they will soone both conceiue it, and be able to deliuer it
with much facilitie after a little practice.
                  But herein the principall helpes are vnderstanding,Principall helps for it. by
getting the summes, and margents; obseruing the order,
and constant practice. Vnderstanding will bring words:
practice perfection.
                  If those who are weaker or more timorous,☞ haue their
notes lying open before them,Helpe of notes for assurance. to cast their eye vpon them
here or there where they sticke, it shall much embolden
them, and fit them after to make vse of short notes of any
thing: I meane of the briefe summe of that which they
shall deliuer.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These are surely very good exercises for the Saturday
for catechizing, and the daies after the sermons for
repeating of the sermons: but would you haue no exercises
of religion at all in the other daies of the weeke?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes. As there is no no day but it is the Lords, and
therefore it and all our labours to be consecrated to him by
a morning & an euening sacrifice, I mean praier & thanksgiuing
morning & euening; so there would no day be su
                        •
                     
                     fered
to passe ouer, wherin there should not be some short
exercise or lesson of religion: which is both the chiefe end
of all other our studies, and also that, wherby all the rest are
sanctified. And to this end, one quarter of an hower or
more might be taken euery euening before praier, though
they were kept so much the longer, that it might not hinder

any other of their daily studies: Although in this, no
losse will euer be found, to any other studie, but the Lord
wil bless so much the more; That also to be in such a course
as none could any way dislike, & which of all other might
be both most sure and profitable.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  What such a course can you find which is so profitable,
and which all must needes so approue of, which
might be so short?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  To go thorough the history of the Bible, euery day
a history, or som peece of a history: I meane, some few questions
of it in order, as the time will permit.
                  To this purpose,Euery night to go thorough a peece of the historie of the Bible. there is a little book called the history of
the Bible, gathered by M. Paget: wherin if you cause them
to prouide against euery night a side of a leafe, or as you
shall thinke meet, of the most easie & plaine questions; and
to examine them after the maner of examining the Catechism;Manner of examining the history.
you shall see them to profit much, both for the easinesse
of the history, and the delight which children will
take therein.
                  Wherein also if first you shall shewe them or aske them
what vertues are commended in that history; what vices are
cōdemned; or what generals they could gather out of that
particular; or what examples they haue against such vices,
or for such vertues; and thus examine them after the same
maner, so going ouer & ouer as the time permits, you shall
see them to come on according to your desire.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But me thinks that you would not haue them to
take euery question in that booke before them.Not to trouble them with euery question.
                  
               
               
                  Phil.
                  No: I would haue only those histories which are
most familiar for children to vnderstand, and most to edification;
and so those questions only to be chosen. There
are sundry concerning the Leuiticall lawes, which are beyond
their conceit, and so in diuerse other parts. For that
shuld euer be kept in memorie, that things wel vnderstood
are euer most soone learned and most firmly kept: and we
should euer be afraid to discourage our children by the difficulty
of anything.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  It is true indeed. And moreouer, howsoeuer it is
most certaine that all holy Scripture is profitable, and all to
be knowen: yet som parts are more easie and as milk, meet
for the weakest and youngest children to be taught, and
which they may vnderstand and conceiue of easily; others
are as stronger meate, and more obscure, wherewith they
are to be acquainted after. But as in all other learning, so it
is here, euery thing is to be learned in the right place. The
more plaine and easie questions and places will still be expounders
and masters to the more hard and obscure.
                  But yet,Obiection, cō
                        cerning them who would not haue their children taught any religion. howsoeuer I like very well of all this, you know
that there are some who would not haue their children to
be taught any religion, nor to meddle with it at all.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  There cannot bee anie such who either loue or
know the Gospell of Christ, or regarde their owne saluation,
or the sauing of their children.
                  The rest are to be pittied and praied for, rather then to
be answered.
                  The Popish sort know the necessitie hereof: and therefore
they labour principally to corrupt the youth, and offer
their pains freely to that end. They shal be the Iudges of
all such.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But it will take vp ouer-much time from their
other learning.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I directed you how to cut off all such exceptions:How to deale that this may not hinder any other learning
I would take the time to that purpose ouer and beside their
ordinarie. It is but mine owne labour, for a quarter or halfe
an howre in the day at the most, keeping them a little longer.
Although if it should be part of the schoole time, there
would neuer be found any losse therein.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how will you teach your children ciuility &
good manners? which is principally required in Schollars.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Religion will teach them manners:How to teach the schollars ciuilitie. As they grow
in it, so they will also in all ciuil and good behauiour. The
word of the Lord is the rule and ground of all, to frame
their manners by; that is therefore the first and principall
meanes.
                  
                     
Secondly, out of their Authours which they reade, you
may still take occasion to teach them manners; some of
their Treatises being written of purpose to that end: as Qui
mihi, Sententiae pueriles, Cato, Tullies Offices, &c.
                  For the carriage of youth, according to the ciuility vsed
in our time, and for the whole course of framing their manners
in the most commendable sort, there is a little booke
translated out of French,The Schoole of good manners, or The new Schoole of vertue for ciuilitie. called The Schoole of good manners,
or The new Schoole of vertue; teaching youth how
they ought to behaue themselues in all companies, times,
and places. It is a booke most easie and plaine, meet both
for Masters and Schollars to be acquainted with, to frame
all according vnto it; vnlesse in any particular the custome
of the place require otherwise.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  How would you haue the children acquainted
with this?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The Master sometimes in steade of the History, or
if he will (at some other times) might reade it ouer vnto
them al, a leaf or two at a time, & after to examin it amongst
them. It is so plaine that they will easily vnderstand it.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But if I could thus teach them Religion, and Latine
all vnder one; it were a most happy thing, and I should
cut off all quarrell and exception.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I will shew you how you may doe it.☜ Cause your
Schollars to reade you a Chapter of the New Testament,How to teach Religion and Latine all vnder one, by reading each night a peece of a Chapter. Practice this constantly and carefully, and trie the experience of Gods blessing in it.
or a peece of a Chapter, as time will permit, about twentie
verses at a time, in steed of the History mentioned. One
night to reade it out of the Latin into English; reading first
a verse or a sentence in Latine to a Comma, or a full point,
as they can: then Englishing that, not as construing it,
but as reading it into good English; so throughout: the
next night to reade the same ouer againe forth of an English
Testament, into the same Latine backe againe.
                  Thus euery one of those who are able, to reade in order,
each his night; all the rest to looke on their owne
Testaments, English, Latine, or Greeke, or to harken.
Let them beginne at the Gospell of Iohn, as was

aduised for the Greeke, as being most easie; or at Matthew
if you please; and you shall soone finde that through the
familiarnes of the matter, they will so come on both wayes
(both in reading the Latine into English, and English into
Latine) as your selfe will maruell at, and their parents will
reioyce in; and acknowledge themselues bound vnto you
for to see their little ones to be able to reade the Testament
into Latine.
                  Besides that, it will be also a notable preparatiue to learne
the Greeke Testament, when they are so well acquainted
with the English and Latine before.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what Latine translation would you vse?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Such as my Schollars haue: Erasmus or Beza; but
chiefly Beza, as the more pure phrase, and more fully expressing
the sense and drift of the Holy Ghost. Therein
your selfe, or your schollars marking the peculiar Latine
phrases, when they reade first forth of the Latine into the
English, they will be able of themselues (when they reade
them the second time forth of the English into Latine) to
giue the same phrases againe, and to imprint them for
euer.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what time should I haue then for the History
of the Bible, that little booke which you mentioned; wherof
must needes be very singular vse: would you haue me to
omit it?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  No, in no case: one quarter of an houre spent in
examining it before prayers in the forenoone,When the History to be repeated. a side or a
leafe at a time (as I said) may serue for that; and another
quarter or not much more, before prayers at the breaking
vp at euening for this; and so neyther to lose time, nor to
omit any thing necessary for their happy growth herein. In
this reading of the Chapters so, you shall finde that they
will get as much Latine, and goe on as fast as in any other
exercise whatsoever; and also will doe it with ease, when
they haue beene first well trayned vp in the Grammaticall
translations, and that each knoweth his night to looke to it
aforehand.
               
               
                  
                  Spoud.
                  But at this kinde of reading the Chapter, the lesser
sort which vnderstand no Latine, will get no good.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes very much.How all the least may profite by reading of the Chapters▪
                      If after that the Chapter is read,
you vse but to examine some two or three, as time will permit;
asking them what they remember of that which was
read, or how much they can repeat without booke of it: you
shall see that in a short time they will so marke, or so looke
to it afore hand, as they will (almost any of them) repeate
you a verse or two a peece. If you vse to appose ordinarily
for example, some one whom you know can repeat a great
deale, it will much prouoke the rest, to marke and take
paines; and especially if (as in other things) you vse to appose
aduersaries, whether can repeate the more. And thus
much for that, how they may get Religion and Latine together.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIII.
               How to vnderstand and remember any
morall matter.
               
                  Spoud.
                  YEt one other point remaineth, which is of great
vse, and very fit to bee asked here; how children
may be made to vnderstand, and conceiue of any
ordinary matter meete for them? as the points of
the Sermons, the History of the Bible: for euen most of
these things may seeme to be aboue childrens capacities;
and I see vnderstanding to be the life and substance of all.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  This point hath been taught throughout in part:A principall helpe of vnderstanding, how to make children to vnderstand any thing and remember.
but this I say vnto you againe, and you shall finde it most
true; that for any one who would conceiue of any long
sentence and remember it, let him diuide it into as many
short questions as he can, and answere them (though closely)
in his minde; it shall giue a great light. So do with your

schollars in any thing which you would haue them to vnderstand:
diuide the long question or sentence into many
short ones; by the short they will vnderstand and conceiue
of the long. I shewed the maner in examining young schollars,
at In speech, and in Sententiae pueriles.
                  
                  For other helpes; as for marking the summe and drift
of euery thing, and also for obseruing what goeth before,
what followeth after, the propriety of words, those circumstances
of examining and vnderstanding, casting the words
into the naturall order, and the like: I referre you to the
Chapter of construing ex tempore; where these things are
handled at large.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Yet for my further direction, giue me one ensample
in a sentence, in the storie of the Bible, because wee
were speaking of that last, and how to teach children to vnderstand
that. I take it there is the like reason in the Latin,
and in all things.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  There is indeede the same reason. I will giue you
an instance in a sentence or two in the first Chapter in Genesis:
and the rather because this is vsed by many, to cause
children to reade a Chapter of the Bible, and then to aske
some questions out of that. For example:
                  1 In the beginning God created the heauen and the
earth.Examples of asking questions, to helpe vnderstanding.
                  
                  2 And the earth was without forme and voyde, and
darkenesse was vpon the face of the deepe, and the spirit of
God moued vpon the waters.
                  3 Then God said; Let there be light, and there was
light, &c.
                  I would propound my questions thus, sundry wayes, out
of the wordes, and that they may answere directly in the very
wordes:
                  
                     Q. What did God in the beginning?
                  
                     A. He created heauen and earth.
                  
                     Q. When did God create heauen and earth?
                  
                     A. In the beginning.
                  
                     Q. Were not heauen and earth alwayes?
                  
                     
                     A. No; God created them.
                  
                     Q. What a one was the earth?
                  
                     A. The earth was without forme or fashion.
                  
                     Q. Had it any thing in it?
                  
                     A. No; it was voyde or waste.
                  
                     Q. Was there nothing vpon it?
                  
                     A. Yes; darkenesse was vpon the deepe.
                  
                     Q. Was there nothing else mouing?
                  
                     A. Yes; the spirit of God moued on the waters.
                  
                     Q. What said God then?
                  
                     A. Let there be light?
                  
                     Q. Was there light as he commaunded?
                  
                     A. Yes; there was light.
                  
                     Q. Was there no light before?
                  
                     A. No; God commaunding created it: there was nothing
but darkenesse before: darkeness was vpon the deep.
                  These questions and answeres arise directly out of the
words; & are the same in effect with those in the little booke,
called The Historie.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These verely giue a great light, and are marueilous
easie, and do cause that a childe may conceiue and carie
away most of them; whereas reading them ouer hee
marked little in them. But yet here are some things darke,
and ouer-hard for children to vnderstand: as, what is meant
by created, by the deepe, and the mouing of the spirit vpon
the waters, &c.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is true;These short questions giue a great light to harder points, how they are to be vnderstood. but yet by this meanes a childe shal haue
a great light and helpe for vnderstanding, conceit and memory
in most. And for those things which remaine obscure,
the learner is to marke them out, and inquire them of
others, or of the notes & short Commentaries vpon them;
and so by the other helpes mentioned: and especially considering
the drift of the Holy Ghost, and comparing with
more plaine places where like phrases are vsed. But here it
shal be the safest, in posing to aske those things which arise
clearly & naturally out of the words, & may be fully vnderstood;
to omit the rest vntil God shal make them as euident.

The easiest being first learned perfectly, the rest will come
in their time, and the fruite according to your desire.
                  And let me tell you this for your owne benefite: In your
priuate reading Scriptures,Helpe in priuate reading. or other bookes, where you
would fully vnderstand and lay vp, vse thus to resolue by
questions and answeres in your minde; and then tell me
what you doe finde. The benefit which I doe conceiue of
it, makes me bolde thus to aduise you: but this by the
way.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Thus you will binde me vnto you for euer, in directing
me in euery thing, so plainly and so easily; and not
onely for my children, and how to doe them all this good,
but euen for mine owne priuate. Though I cannot requite
you, yet the high God, who hath giuen you this heart, and
who neuer forgets the least part of the labor or loue which
any of his seruants shall shew to his name, he will certainely
reward it.
                  Thus haue we gone through all the maine and principall
matters concerning this our function, for all parts and exercises
of learning, which I doe remember; so farre as doe
belong to our calling: so that now I should leaue off from
hindering or troubling you any further. Yet neuerthelesse,
whereas I remember that you said, that God might direct
this our conference, not onely to our owne priuate benefite,
but also to the benefite of many thousand other; and
verely I see that hee may turne it to a perpetuall blesing:
giue me leaue to propound some other doubts, to the very
same purpose, to remoue whatsoeuer may hinder or bring
scruple to any, and to supply what yet may seeme wanting
or hard to be effected.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Goe on I pray you: I shall resolue you in all, according
to my poore ability, as I haue in the rest. Now indeede
we haue a fit time: and God knoweth whether euer we shall
haue the like opportunity againe. Therefore propound
whatsoeuer may tend hereunto.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               Some things necessary to be knowne, for the better
attaining of all the partes of Learning
mentioned.
               1 How the Schoolemaster should be qualified.
               
                  Spoud.
                  My first question shall bee this:How the Schoolemaster should be qualified. How you would
haue your Schoolemaster qualified, to be able to
doe all these in this manner: hee had not neede
to be euery ordinary man.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I will answere you, how I thinke it necessary, that
the Schoolemaster should be qualified.
                  1 To be such a one as is sufficient to direct his Schollars
in the things mentioned,1 Sufficient to direct his Schollars. Or tractable. or in better; according as the
learning of his Schollars shall require: or at least such a
one as is tractable, and not conceited, though his ability
be the meaner; and who will willingly vse any helpe or direction,
to fit him hereunto. Neyther is there any thing
here, but that any one meere to be admitted to that place,
may by his labour and diligence (following but euen this
direction) attaine vnto in short time, through the blessing
of God.
                  2 He must resolue to be painefull and constant in the
best courses;2 Painefull and constant, of conscience to God. of conscience, to do a speciall seruice to God
in his place: to be alwayes vpon his worke, during schoole
times; neuer absent from his place or office more then vppon
vrgent necessity.
                  To cast aside all other studies for the time of his schoole,To cast off all other studies for schoole times.
I meane in the greater Grammar schooles: his eye to be
on euery one and their behauiours, and that nothing bee

wanting to them: his minde vpon their taskes and profiting;Not to post ouer the trust to others.
not posting ouer the trust to others, for hearing parts
or Lectures, or examining exercises, so farre as his owne
leisure will serue. For he shall sensibly discerne a neglect,
euen in the best where they haue any hope to escape the
Masters own view. One day omitted shall make them worse
two dayes after. The Masters eye must feede the horse:
therefore where he is compelled to vse the helpe of some
schollars, he is to see that they deale faithfully, and to take
some short tryall of them after.
                  3 Hee should be of a louing and gentle disposition
with grauitie;3 Of a louing disposition to incourage all by praise and rewards. or such a one as will frame himselfe vnto
it; and to incourage his schollars by due praise, rewards,
and an honest emulation; who also dislikes vttery all seuerity,
more then for necessity: yet so as that he be quicke
and cheerefull▪ to put life into all, and who cannot indure to
see sluggishnesse or idlenesse in any, much lesse any vngratiousnesse;
and therefore can vse also not onely
sharpenesse, but euen seuerity with discretion where
neede is.
                  4 Hee ought to bee a godly man, of a good carriage
in all his conuersation,4 A godly man and of good carriage. to gaine loue and reuerence
thereby. And therefore to auoyde carefully all lightnesse,To seeke to gain and maintaine his authothority, & how.
and ouer-much familiarity with boyes, or whatsoeuer
may diminish his estimation and authority. And also
to the end that God may grace him with authority,
to aime in all his labour, not at his owne priuate gaine
or credite, but how he may most honour God in his place,
doe the best seruice to his Church, and most profite the
children committed to him. To expect the blessing of
his labours only from the Lord, and to ascribe all the praise
vnto him alone. Thus to serue forth his time, so long as he
remaines therein, that he may be euer acceptable vnto the
Lord, looking (as was said) for his chiefe reward from
him.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Indeede Sir, such a man cannot doubt of a blessing,
and a reward from the Lord: yet neverthelesse he had

neede haue good helpe, and also to bee well rewarded and
incouraged from men, at least by them with whose children
hee takes these paines. You thinke it then necessary
that he should haue an Vsher: I pray you let me heare, your
iudgement of this, and what a one you would haue his Vsher
to be.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               Of the Vsher and his Office.
               
                  Phil.
                  TO answere your questions,An Vsher necessarie in all greater schools. and first for an Vsher.
I thinke it most necessarie, that in all greater
schooles, where an Vsher can bee had, there bee
prouision for one Vsher or moe,To diuide the burden. according to the
number of the schollars; that the burden may be diuided equally
amongst them. As Iethro exhorted Moses concerning
the Magistracie; wherein he was ouertoiled, and the
iudgement of the people much hindred for lacke of help;
that therfore there should be prouision of helpers made:
so is it as requisite here.
                  That so the Master may imploy his paines principally
amongst the chiefer; as the Vsher doth amongst the lower.
For otherwise,Euill of lacke of an Vsher. when the master is compelled to diuide his
pains both amongst little & great, he may much ouer-wearie
himselfe, and yet not be able to do that good with anie,
which he might haue done hauing helpe.
                  Hence also it shall come to passe, that another Schoolemaster
who hath but two or three of the chiefe fourmes
onely vnder him, shall haue his schollars farre to excell his,
who is troubled with all; though the other neyther take
halfe the paines, nor obserue so good orders. Besides, that
he who hath the care of all, can haue no leasure nor opportunity
to furnish himselfe more & more for the better profiting

and growth of the highest, nor for any other studie
to answere the expectation of his place.The Master burdened with all, is as the husbandman ouercharged with more then hee can compasse. It is in this case as
we see in husbandrie; where the meanest and most vnskilfull
husband hauing but a little husbandrie to follow, which
hee is able to compasse thoroughly, goeth ordinarily beyond
the most skilfull beeing ouercharged, though hee
toyle neuer so hard, and weary himselfe neuer so much.
                  And howsoeuer wise order and policie may much help,Supply by schollars not sufficient.
to the supply of the want of an Vsher, by meanes of some
of the schollars: yet it shal not be comparable to that good
which may bee done by a sufficient Vsher, because of his
stayednesse and authoritie; neither without some hinderance
to those schollars, who are so imployed.
                  Besides this, in the absence of the Master (which sometimes
will necessarily fall out) how hard a thing it is to keep
children in any awe without an Vsher (when boyes are to
bee gouerned by boyes) euery man knoweth; what inconueniences
also come of it, and specially what discredit to
the schoole. And thus much for the necessitie of an Vsher.
                  Now for the sufficiency of the Vsher,Sufficiency of the Vsher. it would be such,
as that hee should bee able in some good sort to supply the
Masters absence; or that he be such a one, as who will willingly
take any paines, and follow any good direction to fit
himselfe for his place.
                  For his submission,To be at the Masters command. he should be alwaies at the Masters
command, in all things in the schoole, euer to supplie the
Masters absence, as need shall require; and to see that there
be no intermission, or loitering in any fourme, if the Master
bee away: but that euery one doe goe on in his place.
Yet awarie care must be had,To be vsed with respect. that hee be vsed with respect
by the Master, and all the schollars, to maintaine and increase
his authoritie, to auoide all disgrace and contempt.
                  Also,☞ for the auoiding of all repining and malice against
him,Not to meddle with correcting the highest. there would be this caueat; that he doe not take vpon
him the correction of those which are vnder the Master;
without aspeciall charge, or some extraordinary occasion.
                  
                     
And to speake further what I thinke in this case;It were the best if the Vsher medled with no correction at all, vnlesse in the Masters absence. That
although I would haue the Vsher to haue authoritie to correct
any vnder him, or others also, need so requiring in the
Masters absence, and all the schollars to know so much: Yet
he shold not vse that authoritie, no not in correcting those
vnder himself, vnless very sparingly; but rather of himselfe
& in his own discretion, to referre or to put them vp to the
Master; so to keepe the schollars from that stomaking and
complaints which will be made against him to the Parents
and otherwise, do he what he can to preuent it: vnlesse it be
where the Vsher teacheth in a place separate from the Master;
there he is of necessitie to vse correction, though with
great discretion, and so seldome as may be. Experience also
sheweth, that the schollars will much more willingly
and submisly take correction of the Master without the
least repining. Neither need this correction to be so great,
as to trouble the Master very much, if right gouernment
be vsed.
                  All this must bee ordered by the discretion of the wise
Master, so as they may stand in awe of the Vsher: otherwise
little good will be done.
                  The principall office and imploiment of the Vsher,The Vshers principall imployment with the younger, to traine them vp for the Master.
where there is but one, should be, for all vnder construction
and the enterers into it, to prepare and fit them for the
Master, to lay a most sure foundation amongst them; to
traine them vp to the Masters hand; and so to make them
exceeding perfect in all the first grounds, that they may
goe on with 
                        •
                     ase and cheerfulnesse, when they come vnder
the Master.
                  Also to the end that the Vsher bee not a meanes of the
negligence of the Master,To preuent all inconueniences by the Vsher. but to preuent that, and a number
of inconueniences, and also to tye both Vsher and
Schollars, to perpetuall diligence and care; and withall that
the Master may haue an assured comfort in the profiting
of all his Schollars, and boldenesse against the accusations
of any malitious party, this shall be very requisite: that the
Master go ouer all once in the day (if he can possibly) to see

what they haue done, and to examine some questions in
each fourme of them vnder the Vsher, to make triall in
some part of that which they haue learned that day, how
well they haue done it; or at least amongst some of them
where there are many. This account will inforce all, both
Vsher and schollars, to a very heedefull care. It may bee
shorter or longer, as time and occasions permit.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               Helpes in the schoole.
               
                  Spoud.
                  BVt be it so,Helpes besides the Vsher. that you be destitute of an Vsher; or hauing
an Vsher, yet your number is so many, as you
are not able to goe thorough them all, in that sort
that were meete: what helpe would you vse then?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  My helpes are of two sorts; generall or particular.
My generall helpes which are common to all schooles, euen
where there are Vshers, are these:
                  1. That which was noted amongst the generall obseruations;1. Helpe in Schooles, fewnesse of the fourmes.
to haue all my schoole sorted into fourmes or Classes,
and those so few as may be: though twenty in a fourme or
moe, the better, as was sayd; and my fourmes diuided into
equall parts. This shall gaine one halfe of time, for the
reasons there mentioned.
                  2. In euery fourme this may bee a notable helpe,2. Seniors in each fourme. that
the two or fowre seniors in each fourme, be as Vshers in
that fourme, for ouerseeing, directing, examining, and fitting
the rest euery way before they come to say; and so for
ouerseeing the exercises.
                  Also in straights of time, to stand forth before the rest,
and to heare them. The Master to haue an eie and see carefully
that they deale faithfully, and make some short examination

after. And in all lectures those two Seniors to be
blamed principally for the negligence of their sides, and
contrarily to be commended for their diligence. This may
bee a second and a very great helpe: like as it is in an army,
where they haue their vnder-officers for hundreths or for
tennes; as Decuriones, Centuriones, &c. for the speciall gouernment
of all vnder them. These who thus take most
paines with the rest, shall stil euer keep to be the best of the
fourmes.
                  A third might be added:3. Authority. which is Authority and good
Gouernment, which indeed is aboue all. But of that it will
be fitter to speake by it selfe.
                  The particular help where either an Vsher is wanting,Particular help. or
else is not sufficient,Subdoctor in place of the Vsher, or where the Vsher is not sufficient. is by a Subdoctor, one or mo, according
to the number of the schollars. The Subdoctor is to
be appointed out of all your highest fourmes▪ euery one to
be his day insteed of an Vsher, to do those things which the
Vsher should, according to their abilities; and so to obserue
the behauior of all vnder them.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These cannot but bee very worthy helpes. But
here I pray you resolue me a doubt or two, arising hereon.
                  1. How will you diuide your schoole thus, and especially
your fourmes, for the appointing of your Seniors, that
euery one in a fourm may be placed according to his learning?
which I take to be very necessary; so as they shall not
thinke, that any are preferred by the fauour of the Master:
also that all may sit as Aduersaries and fit matches, and so
to haue sides equally diuided, to doe all by that emulation,
and honest strift and contention, which you spake of.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For my fourmes I would put so many in a fourm,Sorting the fourmes so many together as may be.
as possibly can goe together, as was noted: the better will
be continuall helpers to the other, and much drawe on the
worse.
                  Secondly, for the diuision of my fourms, and election
of Seniors, I finde this the only way to cut off all quarrelling,
and to prouoke all to a continuall contention;
                  1. By voices; all of a fourme to name who is the best

of their fourme,Choise & matching each fourme. and so who is the best next him. Those
who haue the most voices, to bee the two Seniours of the
fourme. These they will choose very certainly. Then to
the ende to make equall sides; let the second or Iunior of
those two so chosen, call vnto himselfe the best which hee
can, to make his side.
                  After that, let the first choose the best next; then after,
the second and his fellow, to choose the best next to them
again: And thus to go thorough choosing vntil they haue
chosen all the fourme. The two Seniours, I say, to be chosen
by electiō of the whole fourm: then they two to choose,
or call the rest of the fourm by equall election; the Iunior
choosing first and so to go by course: If the Senior should
choose first, then his side would euer be the better; which
by the Iunior choosing first is preuented.
                  By this meanes you shall find that they will choose very
equally,☞ and without partialitie,Benefits of this election. to the end that each may
haue the best fellowes; euen as gamesters will do at matches
in shooting, bowling or the like: and euery match shal
be very equall, or small difference amongst them.
                  Also hereby all mutterings shall be cut off, wherby some
kind boyes will bee whispering to their Parents, that their
Master doth not regard no
                        •
                      loue them, but preferres others
before them. Thus also the painefull shall be incouraged,
when they find themselues preferred by the iudgement of
all their fellowes; and each made to striue daily to bee as
good as his match or aduersary, and for the credite of their
side: and finally, they wil labor that they may be preferred
at the next election; or at least, not bee put downe with disgrace.
This election would be made oftener amongst the
younger, as once in a moneth at least; because their diligence
and quicknesse will much alter: Amongst the Senior
fourmes once in a quarter may suffice; yet at the Masters
discretion.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  This election surely is most equall, and the benefits
of it must needs be very great according to that which
you haue sayd; and chiefly to helpe as much as any one

thing to make the schoole to be indeede a pleasant place of
honest,This a chiefe means to make the schoole Ludu
                              •
                            literari
                              ••
                           
                        
                      schollarlike, sweete and earnest contention. But
you spake of a third generall helpe, which might be added,
which you sayd was aboue all; to wit good gouernment: of
this I do desire to heare.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVII.
               Of gouernment and authoritie in
schooles.
               
                  Phil.
                  COncerning the gouernment of the schoole,Gouernment the help of helpes. of
which you so desire my sentence; I do indeed account
it the helpe of helps: as it is in all kinde of
societies; so principally in the schoole: out of
which, all other good and ciuill societies should first proceed.
To the end, that out of the schooles, and from the
first yeares, children may learne the benefit and blessing
of good gouernment, and how euery one ought to doe his
duetie in his place: and so from thence this good order and
gouernment may be deriued into all places in som maner.Authority the top of gouernment.
                  
                  This gouernment ought to bee, 1. By maintaining authoritie,
which is the very top of all gouernment; and is
indeed aspeciall gift of God.
                  This authority must be maintained,Authority how to be maintained. as in the Magistrate,
by his so carying himselfe, as beeing a certaine liuing lawe,
or rather as in the place of God amongst them;1. By being a liuing lawe. I mean, as
one appointed of God, to see the most profitable courses
to be put in practice painfully, and constantly, for the speediest
furnishing his schollars with the best learning & manners,
to the greatest good of the schollars, Gods Church,
and their countrey.
                  2. It must bee maintained by a most strict execution of
iustice,2. By most strict execution of iustice in praemio. poena.
                      in rewards & punishments. As Solon said that the

Common-wealth, was vpholden by two things; praemio &
poena. That the painefull and obedient bee by all meanes
countenanced, incouraged and preferred: the negligent,
and any waie disobedient, be disgraced, and discouraged in
all their euill manners, vntill they frame themselues to the
diligence and obedience of the best.
                  Thus by the incouragement & commendation of vertue,Incouraging vertue.
and discountenancing of vice; you shall in time ouercome
the most froward nature,Discouraging vice. and bring all into a cheerefull
submission:The euils of the contrary, or of partialitie. Wheras of the contrary, dealing partially,
or making no difference betweene the good and the bad,
and much more discountenancing the painful and toward,
and countenancing or fauouring the idle and vngracious,
you shall see all ouerturned:Obserue this and be warned. for who will not frame himselfe
to the lewdest, when it is all one vnto them, whatsoeuer
they be? our corrupt natures being so prone vnto the worst
things.
                  3. That in all their gouernment there be a true demonstration
of conscience and loue,3. By a demonstration of conscience and loue in all. to doe all as of conscience
to God, and of loue to the children, for the perpetuall
good of euery one; and in an indeuor & study to draw them
on by loue, in an honest emulation, with due praise and rewards;
abhorring cruelty, & auoiding seuerity (as was said)
more then of necessity.
                  4. By beeing Presidents of all vertue to their children;4. By being presidents to the children, of all vertue.
and being as carefull in their owne places first, before the
childrens eyes to do their dueties, as they would haue their
children to be in theirs. And so finally, by their holy and
faithfull cariage, to seeke that God may rule, and that the
children may obey God: For then hee will both blesse all
their labours, and maintaine their authority.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Surely si
                        •
                      these are worthy meanes to maintaine
authority: which vnlesse it be preserued inuiolable, all gouernment
goeth downe▪ But I perceiue, you vtterly dislike
that extreame seueritie whereby all things are done in verie
many schooles, and the whole gouernment maintained only
by continuall and terrible whipping; because you haue

so oft mentioned it as with griefe.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  You shall find that M. Askam doth as oft and more
vehemently inueigh against it.Extreame seuerity and whipping to be auoyded in schooles, and all meanes vsed to preuent it. For mine owne part I doe
indeed altogether dislike it, more then necessity inforceth:
and I take it that I haue better grounds for my dislike, then
any one can haue to the contrary; euen from those things
which cannot be contradicted.
                  1 We are to imitate the Lord himselfe;1 By the example of God. who though he
be iustice it selfe, yet is euermore inclined vnto mercy,
and doth not execute the seuerity and rigour of his iustice,
when any other meanes can serue: who if he should
smite vs, euen the most vigilant of vs all, so oft as
wee offend, as many doe the children; which of vs could
liue?
                  2 What father is there;2 By the generall desire of all wise parents, hauing naturall affections. nay which of vs is there who is
a father, who would not haue our owne children rather trained
vp by all louing meanes of gentle incouragement,
praise and faire dealing, then with buffeting and blowes,
or continuall and cruell whipping, scorning, and reuiling?
Or which of vs could but indure to see that indignity
done to our owne children, before our faces?
                  Now our gouernement and correction ought to bee
such, as which the very parent being present (I meane
the wise parent) might approoue; and for which wee
may euer haue comfort and boldenesse, euen before
the holy God. To this we are to striue and contend alwayes,
vntill at length we attaine vnto it.
                  3 Which of vs is there that would willingly liue
vnder such a gouernement of any sort,3 By that which euery one of vs would haue done vnto our selues. that our state
should bee as the people, vnder their taske Masters in
Aegypt, that we should bee smitten continually for euery
little fault? and labour we neuer so much to doe our duties,
yet still we should be beaten.
                  4 Let euery mans experience teach whether extreamity
or excesse of feare4 For the mischiefes which follow excesse of 
                           •
                        eare, taking away all vnderst
                           •
                        nding and sense from the wisest. (which must needes follow
vpon such cruell and continuall beating and dulling)
doth not depriue and robbe the minde of all the helpes

which reason offers. So as that the minde running about
that which it feares so much, forgets that which it should
wholly intend; whereby in timorous natures, you shall see
some to stand as very sottes, and senselesse through an apprehension
of some extreame euil, or by extremity of feare;
wheras they are otherwise as wise & learned as the best. Insomuch
as all deuices are to be vsed to rid children of that
kinde of ouerwhelming feare; and sometimes correction
for it, when this feare is without cause, and cannot be helped
otherwise.
                  5 For the schollars themselues;5 For the schollars to worke in them a loue of learning. because all things
should be done in the Schoole, so as to worke in the children
a loue of learning, and also of their teachers: for that
this loue is well knowne to be the most effectuall meanes,
to increase and nourish learning in them the fastest; and also
that gouernement which consists in loue, is euer the firmest.
                  Now this extreame whipping, all men know what a dislike
it breedeth in the children, both of the schoole, and of
all learning as that they will think themselues very happy,
if the parents will set them to any seruille or toyling busines,
so that they may keepe from schoole. And also it workes
in them a secret hatred of their Masters; according to the
sayings, Quem metuunt oderint: and, Quem quis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         odit perijsse
expetit; whom men doe feare with a slauish feare, them they
hate, and wish in their hearts to see their death.
                  6 In regard of the Masters themselues;6 In regard of the Masters, to gaine hearts of children and parents. because by this
milde and louing gouernement, they shall both haue the
hearts & commendations of the children presently, when
they see in the Masters the affections of fathers towards
them; and also they will euer keepe a sweet and thankefull
remembrance of them, all their life long: that euer when
they haue occasion to speake of their Schoolemasters, they
will doe it with reuerence, and praise God that euer they
fell into the hands of such Masters: whereas of the contrary,
they shall be sure of the secret hate and complaints of the
poore children presently, where they dare speake: and euer

after when they come at their owne liberty, they will
then report as they haue found, and it may be farre worse.
So that they can neuer speake of their Master, but as of a
thing which they abhorre: his name is as a curse in their
mouthes; many wishing they had neuer knowne him. For
that then they had beene schollars, if they had not falne
into the hands of so cruell Masters.
                  7 And finally,7 That Masters may euer haue boldnesse and comfort. because in this louing, equall, milde and
tender gouernement, the Masters shall euer haue boldenes
and comfort before the children, their parents, in their own
consciences, and before God himselfe: whereas in the cruell
and vnmercifull tyrannie, they shall haue nothing but
feare; feare of the children, feare of their parents, feare in
their owne consciences, feare for the Lord who hath said,
that there shall be iudgement mercilesse for them who shew
no mercy; and so the conscience being awaked, to haue nothing
but feare round about, except the Lord doe graunt
vnfained repentance to escape thereby.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I know not how to answere that which you say.It is hard for the Master striuing to do good, to moderate his passion.
The Lord be mercifull vnto vs all who are in this calling, euen
for this sinne: for it is no small matter to moderate our
passion, and our correction. When the parents and others
looke for great things at our hands, and we find little good,
and oft-times those the worst, whom we would fainest haue
to doe the best: which of vs can herein iustifie our selues?
But I pray you Sir, how would you haue our authority
maintained, and iustice executed, which you so commend?
You would haue correction vsed, and sometimes sharpness
too; as I obserued in your speech for your Schoolemaster.
How wold you haue the iustice, inpraemio & poena, in rewards
and punishments? Set me downe shortly the meanes: and
first for rewardes and incourageme
                        •
                     ts; after for punishments.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               Of Preferments and incouragements.
               
                  Phil.
                  FOr the rewardes of learning by preferments and incouragements;Incouragements to be by these meanes;
thus I finde best to doe it:
                  1 By often elections of euery fourme,1 Often elections and preferments therein. in such
manner as was shewed; and so euer preferring the
best thereby, to higher places as they grow in learning.
                  2 By gracing all the Seniors,2 Countenancing and gracing the Seniours, and all the best and most painefull. all best in each fourme,
both to incourage them, and to prouoke their fellowes
to emulate them, to striue in all things to bee like vnto
them: and also to cause all their fellowes in all things to
reuerence, and preferre them, both by giuing place to them
and otherwise.
                  3 By preferring or putting vp those into higher
fourms,3 Putting vp into higher fourmes. Giuing places. who profite extraordinarily.
                  Also daily (if you see good) to giue higher places to them
who do better, vntill the other recouer their places againe,
by the election of the whole fourme, or by their diligence.
                  4 To vse to commend euery thing in their exercises,4 Commending euery thing wel done.
which is well or painefully done; passing ouer the lesser
faults onely with a word, shewing our dislike: and that
which is absurd, with some pretty speech; sharpely reprouing
or disgracing their absurdity, without further correction,
if there doe not appeare in them extreame negligence.
                  Yet in praising them, you are to beware of making any of
them wantonly proude,Caueat in praysing. or letting them to be any way ouerbolde
or malepart, or of vsing them ouer-familiarly: for

familiarity will certainely breede contempt, and sundry inconueniences;
whereas a reuerend awe and louing feare,
with these incouragements, shall continually nourish all
vertue and diligence.
                  5 This might be vsed also with much fruite,5 Disputation for the victorship. to incourage
and prouoke: but this as shall be found meet; To haue
a disputation for the victorship once euery quarter of the
yeare: as the last Wednesday or Friday of each Quarter in
the afternoone; the manner thus:
                  Cause the two Seniours of the two highest fourmes to
sit together in the vpper end of the Schoole;Manner of the Disputation. and all the
Schollars from the lowest which take construction, vnto
the highest▪ to aske of eyther of them, each two questions
in order▪ of the best questions, which they haue learned in
their Grammar or Authours: first the two Seniour aduersaries
of the highest fourme to answere, then two of the next.
And then let those two of them foure, who answered best
(that is, one of either fourm who answered most questions)
bee the victours for that Quarter. Two other of their
next fellowes, or moe, to take note, and set downe to how
many questions each answered; and so the victorship to be
decided.
                  After this, some vse to cause the schollars euery of them,
to giue something for a Praemium,
                     
                        Praemia giuen to the two victours. to the Victours: as
each one a point or a counter, or moe; or else better gifts if
they be well able, of such things as they may without their
hurt, or the offence of their parents, and as euery one
will himselfe. These to bee diuided equally betweene the
two Victours, as a reward of their diligence and learning;
to incourage them, and all the rest of them by their ensample
to striue at length to come vnto the Victorshippe;
because then besides the honour of it, each may come
to receiue againe more then euer they gaue before.
                  The practice of this disputation must needes bee very
profitable;☜ though some good Schoolemasters doe doubt
of the expediency for Schollars to giue any thing, but to
honour them otherwise.
                  
                     
The two victours in regard of this dignity, and the applause
from their fellowes,Office of the victours for their Praemia.
                      should vse to make some exercises
of Verses, or the like, to get leaue to play on euery
Thursday, when there was no play day in the weeke before.
And so they two continually to haue that day for
their fellowes, as a further reward and honour of
their learning; I meane onely in such weekes when they
had no play before, or at the Masters discretion. But
this (as was aduised) as Masters shall finde it most expedient.
                  6 Aboue all these,☞ this may be vsed as a notable incouragement
and prouocation,Solemne examination to be made once euery yeare. both to Masters and schollars,
and very necessary; That euery yeare, at least once in the
yeare, there be a solemne examination by the Gouernours
of the schoole, or some specially appointed thereunto.
                  Against which time,Exercises to be prouided against that time. all of any ability should prouide
some exercises faire written; as eyther Translations, Epistles,
Theames, or Verses, according to the daily exercises of
euery fourme: and withall some declamations where there
are auncient schollars, an Oration by the highest, to giue
the visitours intertainement. That in these their exercises,
all may see their profiting, at least in writing, and receiue
some other contentment.
                  Also all to keepe their chiefe exercises faire written in
bookes,To keepe their daily exercises faire written in bookes for tryall then by comparing. to be shewed then; that by comparing them together
with the former yeares, both the Masters diligence
and their profiting may appeare, and haue due commendation.
                  Besides these also,A course of examination to be appointed, and to be performed first by the Masters and Vshers. for the full examination of the schollars
in all their learning, the Schoolemasters and Vshers are
to be appointed an order and course in their examination;
and themselues first to make a demonstration before the
Visitours, what the children can doe in euery fourme, both
in their Grammar and Authours, and each kinde▪ as shall
be fit. It would be done first by themselues, because the
schollars are best acquainted with their manner of examining,After by others not satisfied.
and will be most bolde to answere them. After them

the Visitours and others, who are not satisfied, to examine
where, and as they please.
                  Then when all is done,All who do wel to be praised. as the Visitours are to incourage
all who doe well, with praise; so those who doe best, would
be graced with some Praemium from them:The best specially graced. as some little
booke, or money; to euery one something: or at least with
some speciall commendation.
                  It were to be wished that in great schooles,Some Praemia giuen. there were
something giuen to this end, to be so bestowed; fiue shillings
or ten shillings. It would exceedingly incourage and incite
all to take paines.
                  This set solemne publike examination,☜ will more inforce
all,Benefit of set and solemne examination. both Masters, Vshers and Schollars, to take paines, and
tye them to make conscience of their dueties, and to seeke
to profite and increase daily in knowledge, that they may
then answere the expectation of all men, and giue vp a
good account; then any augmentation of maintenance, or
statutes, or whatsoeuer deuise can possibly doe:
                  Although all necessary prouision is to bee made, both
for the best statutes and orders; and chiefly for sufficient
maintenance, and rewardes to giue all kinde of hartning
and incouragement both to Masters, Vshers, and
Schollars.
                  Also if at such examinations,Something giuen to some painefull poore schollar to help the Vsher. something were giuen by
the Visitors or other benefactors, to be allowed vpon some
poore schollar of the schoole, who is of speciall painefulnesse
and towardlinesse; to the end he might be assistant to
the Vsher: it would much help both Vsher and the younger
schollars, and animate all such to take paines; striuing who
should haue that preferment.
                  Before such publique examinations,All parents to haue notice before su
                           •
                        h examination. all the parents
of the children should haue notice giuen them: that
all of them may know certainely, the hopes of their
children, and contrarily; and all who will may take
tryall.
                  That so neyther the parents may bee abused, neyther
schooles, nor schollars discredited, nor any lose their time,

nor be wearied out, in that to which they are not fitted by
nature; but euery one to be imployed to that in due time,
to which he is most apt.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These meanes constantly obserued, together
with that strift and contention by aduersaries, must needes
prouoke to a vehement studie and emulation; vnlesse in
such who are of a very seruile nature, and bad disposition:
but how will you deale with them? you must needs vse extreame
seuerity towards them, who regard neyther preferment,
nor credite, nor feare ought but stripes.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For these and all the rest (besides the former preferments)
to the end to auoyde this cruelty, which is so odious
to all, we are to striue to this one thing following:
                  7 Aboue all,7 To labour euer to worke conscience in al to do all of conscience to God. to labour to worke in them some conscience
of their dueties, by planting grace in them, and the
feare of the Lord; with childelike affections towards the
Lord, as towards their heauenly Father.
                  And that also, besides al other means of Religion, spoken
of before,By calling on them to remember these things: by calling oft vpō all, to remember these things:
                  1 That in their calling they serue not men,1 That in their calling they are Gods seruants. but God;
that they are Gods children and seruants. As the very
drudge is Gods seruant: so they are much more, being imployed
in so holy a calling, as to get knowledge and good
nurture, for the good of the Church of God, and their owne
saluation; and principally that they may be most seruiceable
to God in all their liues after, in what calling soeuer.
                  And therefore euer to bethinke themselues, that Gods
eye is vpon them,His eye is vpon them. and he markes all their labour, and of
what conscience to him they doe it; and so will accept
and reward them according to their faithfulnesse: so to be
painefull and obedient, not for feare of their Master,
nor of the rodde; but for the feare and loue of God,
because hee hath appointed them so. And so herein to
make a full demonstration, who they are amongst them
that are truely wise, who feare and loue God indeede; and
who otherwise.
                  2. To call on them oft, to aime at this, to vse all their

wit,2. To study to get le
                           •
                        rning to honor God with, & do seruice to his Church. their labour, time, and all their gifts, which are Gods,
to get the best learning that they can; to doe the Lord the
greatest honour which they are able, whilst they shall remaine
in the earth, and the best seruice to his Church▪ and
thereby to walke towards eternall life. Because, thus they
shall be sure that God will honour them seeking to honour
him; & wil cast learning vpon them so far as shall be good.
                  3. To put them oft in mind of the reward of their learning,3. To put them in mind of the rewards which follow learning
which they may looke for euen in this life. As those
rewards which accompanie great learned men; namely,
riches, honours, dignities, fauour, pleasures, and whatsoeuer
their hearts can desire; and much more that rewarde
which shal be eternall; that if men should be vnthankfull,
yet God wil reward al our labor & study aboundantly, euen
euery thought & meditation that euer we had for his name.
                  To this end,Excellent sentences to be oft incu
                           •
                        cated, to worke in the schollars a loue of learning. Pro. 3. 13. to inculcate oft vnto them som of Salomons
Prouerbs, cōcerning the excellency of learning & wisdom.
                  As, Pro. 3. 13. Blessed is the man that findeth wisdom, and
the man that getteth vnderstanding.
                  14. For the merchandize thereof is better than the merchandize
of siluer, and the gaine therof is better then gold.
                  15. It is more pretious then pearls; and all things that thou
canst desire, are not to be compared vnto her.
                  And so forth, the 16. 17, & 18. verses. Also Prou. 4. 7. 8.
& 8. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. &c. & 33. 34. &c. These
and the like, being indeed chiefly meant, of the diuine wisdom,
comprehend also this learning, which is the way and
meanes vnto that diuine and heauenly wisdome.
                  By these meanes, and remembring well the generall obseruations
to put them in practice (as,To keepe groūds perfect. to make all grounds
exceeding perfect as they go, chiefly their Accedence and
Grammar, and to keepe them by continual
                        •
                      repetitions
and examinations, that they may goe on with ease,☜ and feeling
a sweetnesse of learning,To 
                           〈◊〉
                         the nature of each 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and fra
                           •••
                         our selues thereto accordingly. and keeping a constant
course in your gouernment; obseruing wisely the nature
and disposition of euerie one, and framing your selfe therto
accordingly) you shall vndoubtedly see the Lord so

bringing them in obedience by your prayers, as a very
small punishment shall serue.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  It cannot he, but if we can plant the feare of the
Lord in them, to worke in them a conscience of their duties,
it must needs be most auaileable; and much more all
these: but yet seeing that punishments also must needs be
inflicted on some oft times and on all sometimes (because
otherwise as you sayd, iustice cannot be executed, nor any
gouernment or authority maintained) I pray you let mee
heare, how you would proceed in the same.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIX.
               Of execution of iustice in schooles by
punishments.
               
                  Phil.
                  FOr inflicting punishments,To punish vnwillingly. we ought to come thereunto
vnwillingly, and euen inforced; and therefore
to proceed by degrees: that who cannot bee moued
by any of the former meanes of preferments, nor
incouragements, nor any gentle exhortation nor admonition,
may be brought into order and obedience by punishment.
                  And therefore,To proceed by degrees in punishing. first to beginne with the lesser kindes
of punishments; and so by degrees to the highest and seuerest,
after this manner obseruing carefully the natures of euery
one, as was sayd.
                  1. To vse reproofes;1. Reproofes. and those sometimes more sharpe
according to the nature of the offender, and his falt.
                  2. To punish by losse of place to him who dooth better
according to our discretion.2. Loss of place.
                  
                  3. To punish by a note,3. Black Bill of principall vse & most auaileable which may be called, the black
Bill. This I would haue the principall punishment, I meane

most of vse: for you shall finde by experience, that it being
rig
                        ••
                     ly vsed, it is more auaileable then all other, to keepe

                        〈◊〉
                      obedience; and specially for any notoriously idle or
stubborne, or which are of euill behauiour any way.
                  The manner of it may be thus:
                  To keepe a note in writing:Manner of the blacke Bill to depriue them of the play-daies. or which may more easily
be done; to keepe a remembrance of all whom you obserue
very negligent, stubborne, lewd, or any waie disobedient,
to restraine them from all liberty of play.
                  And therfore,To make them all to knowe what to looke for. to giue them all to know so much before
hand, that whosoeuer asketh leaue to play, or vpon what
occasion soeuer, yet we intend alwaies to except all such; and
that the liberty is granted only for the painfull and obedient,
which are worthy to haue the priuiledges of schollars,
and of the schoole, because they are such, and are an ornament
to the schoole: not for them who are a disgrace vnto
it.
                  So alwaies at such playing times,To view the fourmes before play, and to separate all the disobedient and vnworthy to be left to their taskes. before the Exeatis,
the Master and Vshers to view euery fourm thorough; and
then to cause all them to sit still, whom they remember to
haue been negligent, or faulty in any speciall sort worthie
that punishment, and to doe some exercises in writing besides;
either those which they haue omitted before, or such
as wherein they cannot be idle.
                  But herein there must be a speciall care,Care for their taskes to be performed faithfully in their restraint. when they are
thus restrained from play, that either Master or Vsher, if it
can be conueniently, haue an eye to them, that they cannot
loyter; or some one specially appointed, to see that they do
their taskes.
                  Also that they bee called to an account the next morning,
whether they haue done the taskes inioined, vnder
paine of sixe ierkes to be surely payed.
                  Moreouer,Notorious offenders to sit vntill they shew geod tokens of amendment. for all those who are notoriously stubborne,
or negligent, or haue done any grosse fault, to cause them
to sit thus, not only one day, but euery play day cōtinually,
vntill they shew themselues truly sory for their faults, and
do amend; becomming as duetifull, and submisse as any other;

and vntill they do declare by good signes, their desire
and purpose to please and obey their Master. Vnlesse they
be released at very great suite, or vpon sufficient sureties of
their fellowes, to incurre otherwise their penalty if they amend
not.
                  This course straightly obserued,Benefit of this punishment strictly obserued, and why. partly thorough the
shame of being noted in the ranke of disordered fellowes,
and also lest their Parents should knowe it; and partly
thorough depriuing them of play, and more also thorough
this strict account to be giuen of their taskes, and
seuerity of correction otherwise, will more tame the stubbornest
and prowdest, thorough Gods blessing, then anie
correction by rod: and this without danger to the schollar,
or offence to their friends.
                  And therefore,To look to this strictly. when rod and all other meanes faile, let
vs looke carefully to this, not to leaue one stubborne boy,
vntill hee be brought as submisse and dutifull as any of the
rest. For, those beeing brought into obedience, the rest
may easily bee kept in order, with very little correction:
whereas one stubborne boy suffered, will spoile, or at leastwise
indanger all the rest.
                  4. Sometimes in greater faults,4. Correction with rod more seldome, and chiefly for terrour. to giue three or fowre
ierkes with a birch, or with a small redde willow where birch
cannot be had. Or for terror in some notorious fault, halfe
a dozen stripes or moe, soundly laied on, according to the
discretion of the Master.
                  Some doe only keep a bill,Custome of some in the vse of the blacke Bill. and note carefully their seuerall
principal disorders; and now and then, shew them their
names and faults mildly, how oft they haue been admonished;
and when they take them in hand pay them soundly,
and by this policie keepe them in great obedience.
                  In this correction with the rod,C
                           •
                        ueats in correction. speciall prouision must
be had for sundry things.
                  1. That when you are to correct any stubborne or vnbroken
boy,1. Manner of correction of the stubborne and vnbroken. you make sure with him to hold him fast; as
they are inforced to do, who are to shooe or to tame an vnbroken
colt.
                  
                     
To this end to appoint 3. or 4 of your schollars,To hold them fast. whom
you knowe to bee honest, and strong inough, or moe if
need be, to lay hands vpon him together, to hold him fast,
ouer some fourme, so that he cannot stir hand nor foot;
or else if no other remedy will serue, to hold him to some
post (which is farre the safest and free from inconuenience)
so as he cannot any way hurt himselfe or others, be he neuer
so peeuish. Neither that he can haue hope by any deuise
or turning, or by his apparell, or any other meanes to
escape.☜ Nor yet that any one be left in his stubbornness to
go away murmuring,Not to let any to goe awaie in their stubbornnesse. pou
                        •
                     ing, or blowing and puffing, vntill
he shew as much submission as any, and that hee will lie
still of himselfe without any holding; yet so as euer a wise
moderation be kept. Although this must of necessitie bee
locked vnto; because besides the euill ensample to others,
there is no hope to doe any good to count of, with any vntill
their stomacks be first broken: and then they once thoroughly
brought vnder, you may haue great hope to work
all good according to their capacity; so that it may be, you
shall haue little occasion to correct them after.
                  Moreouer, a very child suffered in his stubbornnesse, to
scape for his strugling, will in a short time come to trouble
two or three men to take him vp, and to correct him without
danger of hurting himselfe, or others.
                  2. To be very wary for smiting them ouer the backes,To be wary to auoide all smiting or hurting the children. in
any case, or in such sort as in any way to hurt or indanger
them. To the end to preuent all mischiefes, for our owne
comfort; and to cut off all occasions from quarrelling parents
or euill reports of the schoole. And withall, to auoid
for these causes, all smiting them vpon the head, with hand,
rod, or ferula.Caueat of threatning. Also to the end that we may auoid all danger
and feare for desperate boyes hurting themselues, not to vse
to threaten them afore, and when they hane done any notorious
fault, nor to let them know when they shall be beaten;
but when they commit a new fault, or that wee see the
schoole most full or opportunity most fit to take them of a
sodaine.
                  
                     
3. That the Master do not in any case abase himselfe,That the Master do not abase himselfe to struggle with any schollar. to
striue or struggle with any boy to take him vp: but to appoint
other 
                        〈◊〉
                      the strongest to do it, where such need is, in
such sort as was shewed before; and the rather for feare of
hurting them in his anger, & for the euils which may come
therof, & which som Schoolemasters haue lamented after.
                  4. That the Masters and Vshers also, do by all meanes,
auoide all furious anger,To auoide all furious anger. threatning, cha
                        •
                     ing, fretting, reuiling:
for these things will diminish authoritie, and may do
much hurt, and much indanger many waies.
                  And therefore of the contrary,How correction ought euer to be giuen. that all their correction
be done with authority, and with a wise and sober moderation,
in a demonstration of duety to God, and loue to the
children, for their amendment, and the reformation of
their euill manners.
                  Finally,Sparing the rod where necessitie requireth is to vndoe the children. as God hath sanctified the rod and correction,
to cure the euils of their conditions, to driue out that folly
which is bound vp in their hearts, to saue their soules from
hell, and to giue them wisdome; so it is to be vsed as Gods
instrument to these purposes. To spare them in these cases
is to hate them.Assurance of s
                           •
                        fety in correction when it is done 
                           •
                        right, Such correctiō is no cruelty. To loue them is to correct them betime.
Do it vnder God, and for him to these ends and with these
cautions, and you shall neuer hurt them: you haue the
Lord for your warrant. Correction in such manner, for
stubbornnesse, negligence and carelesnesse, is not to be accounted
ouer-great seueritie, much lesse crueltie.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how hard a matter is it to keepe this moderation
in correcting, and thus to temper our anger! Surely,
it must bee a greater worke then of flesh and blood: how
may wee attaine vnto it? It is a matter which hath often
times troubled me, but I haue not been able to ouercome
it.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I doe not condemne all anger in vs:☞ nay, anger in
the Schoole-master is as necessary as in any other,Anger necessary in Schoolemasters, so it be tempered aright. to be angry
at the negligence and other vices of the children; for
God hath ordained this to be a meanes, to whet vs on to do
our duties, & for the reformation & good of our schollars,

to keepe them euer in a holy awe by the feare of it. Yea,
sometimes in more grieuous offenses, God is wonderfully
pleased with it, though it be more vehement; as we may see
in the anger of Moses & Phineas, so that we tēper it in such
sort, as that we sin not in it. That it do not cause vs to break
out to reuiling, fretting, chafing, blowes on the head, or otherwise
to any cruell or vnmercifull dealing with the children,
to vse them worse, then wee would vse a dogge, as
we say:
                  But that wee euer remember, that they are children,
Gods children, heires of his kingdome; we are to nu
                        •
                     ture
them onely vnder him, to traine them vp for him, and for
his Church; nor to correct nature but vice; to do all to the
end to make them men.
                  Now the helpes of repressing this our anger,Meanes to represse furious and raging anger. are the wise
consideration of those things which I haue mentioned, or
the like. As to keep a continuall memory, whose the children
are; what they are; for whom we bring them vp; vnder
whom and in whose place; whether we would haue God angry
at vs, & to smite vs, as we do the children, for euery fault
which wee do: how we would haue our owne children dealt
withall: and also Gods iustice to measure to vs or ours, with
what measure we mete to others. Besides, to remember, that
anger will blinde our mindes, that we cannot see to correct
or vse any right moderation.
                  Moreouer, to haue euer in mind, the mischiefes that
come of anger; how it will diminish our authority, and disgrace
vs extremelie in the eyes of the children, when it is
immoderate, and without iust cause. Also that in our anger,
we may do that euill in a moment, which we shall repent all
our liues long. And the rather, because Sathan watcheth to
get aduantage against vs, to bring vs to some notable euils
in our anger. Into whose hand, it is iust with God to leaue
vs, because we would not watch ouer this passion to keepe
it in temper; when we know that of all other our affections
we mostly open to his malice in this, by reason of our continuall
occasions of anger.
                  
                     
Therefore to conclude this point, as wee are to vse all
wisdome to preuent these euills; so principally, a constant
course in obseruing all orders, shall preuaile maruellously,
by cutting off most occasions of anger.
                  And finally, when all other meanes faile of conquering
this vnruly passion: let vs call to mind the means, which
the Lord hath sanctified to bring euery thought into obedience;Places of scripture to be euer in our minds for repressing and moderating our anger.
to wit, his heauenly word and praier. To this end
it shall bee necessary, to haue euer in minde, some speciall
places of holie scripture against anger; as these and the
like:
                  Be angry but sin not,Eph. 4. 26. 27 let not the sunne goe downe vpon
your wrath: neyther giue place to the diuell.
                  Bee slowe to wrath:Iam. 1. 20 For, the wrath of man doth not accomplish
the righteousnesse of God.
                  Cease from anger,Psal. 37. 8. leaue off wrath: fret not thy selfe also
to do euill.
                  A foole in a day is knowne by his anger.
                  Be not of a hastie spirit, to be angrie: for anger resteth
in the bosome of fooles.
                  The angry man is said to exalt folly, to set vp his folly to
be seene of all.
                  A man of much anger shal suffer punishmēt:Pro. 19 19 and though
thou deliuer him, yet wil his anger come againe.
                  In a word, that seuere denuntiation of our Sauior for this
vndiscreete anger, breaking out into euill speeches, may
humble vs continually and make vs afraide of this sinne:
                  That whosoeuer is angry with his brother vnaduisedly,Mat. 5. 22
shall be culpable of iudgement [or subiect to punishment.]Danger of rash anger when it exceedes.
And whosoeuer shall say vnto his brother Racha, shall bee
worthy to be punished by the Councell; and whosoeuer
shall say foole shal be worthy to be punished with hell fire.
                  By all which words it is most euident, that our vndiscreete
and hastie anger which ouertakes vs too oft in our
places, making vs to breake out (vnlesse wee bee more
watchfull) not onely into reuiling speeches, but also to
blowes, and to great seueritie, is highly displeasing to

the Lord; and it dooth exceedingly indaunger vs for his
wrath and vengeance, vnlesse we be daily humbled by vnfained
repentance for it: and yet so, as that we cannot looke
to escape some like measure from him, that we or ours shal
surely feele his hand, vnlesse we preuent and amend it.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  These are worthy places of holy Scriptures; and
able to stay vs, if we could keepe them in memory. But yet
euen in the most moderate, the very desire to do good, and
to answer our places, moued by the vntowardnes and carelesnesse
of many of our children, doth cause vs sometimes
to forget our selues, and to breake out ouer-much.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  God hath left this to our calling,Occasions of anger left to our calling to humble and exercise vs. as a meanes to trie
vs, and to humble vs continually; and also to haue matter
wherin to exercise vs to striue against, and to make vs more
watchfull in our places. But if wee could learne but these
three lessons,Three lessons for preuenting of anger. wee should wonderfully preuent Sathan in
these occasions of our anger, wherein wee are so ouertaken;
                  1 So much as euer we are able,1 Constancy in obseruing order, and our eye euer on all. to haue our eye continually
round about the Schoole vpon euery one; and
namely the most vnruely, to keepe them in awe: and that
we keepe order strictly in euerything at all times; as specially
in all examinations and taskes, and our times for euery
thing most precisely, that they may looke for it: for omitting
them somtimes, makes the best too carelesse, & some
bolde to offend, in hope that they shall not be seene, or not
called to an account: wheras by the contrary they grow
into a habite of painefulnesse and obedience.
                  2 Studying to put on a fatherly affection and to deale
so with them as a good father amongst his children.2 Fatherly affections. This
shall also bring them or many of them to the affections
and dutifulnesse of louing children, to doe all of cons
                        •
                     ience.
                  3 Labouring to be Enocks,3 To walke i
                           •
                         our places with God as Enock. to walke in our places with
God, as euer in his presence, his eye alwayes on vs; that hee
obserues all our wayes and will reward and blesse vs, according
to our conscience herein: thus to walke before him,

vntill he translate vs hence, being as little absent from our
place and charge, as possible may be; cutting off wisely all
vnnecessary occasions. Oft absence of the Master is a principall
cause of the schollars negligence and not profiting,
with the griefe and vexing of the Master, arising thereon;
vnlesse he haue very good supply.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Happy men were we if we could attaine to this.
But I pray you sir, what thinke you of this, to haue ever the
rodde or ferula in our hand, at lesser faults to giue them a
blow or a ierke on the hand; and so when wee see any of
them idle?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  If we will striue earnestly, according to the former
meanes, we shall by little and little attaine to that ability, to
cut off those occasions, and come to this good gouernement,
so farre as the Lord shall be well pleased with vs; and
that he will passe by our weakenesses. But for hauing the
rodde or ferula alwayes in our hands, if we be of hastie natures,The danger of hauing the rod of ferula euer in our hand.
I take it to be, as for a furious man to carie euer a
naked sword in his hand. It will make vs to strike many a
time, when wee will bee sory for it after, if it fall not
out worse. For these lighter faults, proceeding from
lacke of time, yeares, capacity, discretion, or the like,
would rather be corrected by words, and reformed louingly,
then by this continuall whipping and striking: neyther
will any good and wise father smite his childe for euery
fault.
                  I would therefore haue neyther of these to be continually
holden vp;Rather a little twigge if any thing at all. but rather some little twigge, if you will
needes: I meane a small twigge something more then a
foote long; that if you a little rap them on the heads, you
can no way hurt them, neyther their head, eyes nor face.
                  But I account this farre the best, for a Schoolemaster by
his graue and wise carriage,For the surest, to haue nothing ordinarily, but grauity and authority. and his faithfulnesse in his
place; and also by carefully obseruing, and surely and
soundly correcting the negligent and disobedient, when
other meanes faile; to striue to come to this, that his owne
presence, or at least his eye & speech, may sufficiently preuaile

to keepe all in a submisse obedience; and that he may
vse the rodde very sparingly, but onely in greater faults,
and on the principall offenders for example and terrour.
This shall be a fatherly and worthy gouernement indeede,
when the children thus obey of conscience; striuing who
shall be the best, and each way most dutifull. And thus in
a short time, when your Schollars are so inured to your
gouernement that they know what to looke for, you shall
finde that very seldome correction will serue.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I like your aduice wonderfull well herein:The time of inflicting common punishments. but
when would you haue the time, of common punishment
to be inflicted; as namely that for their misdemeanours
in the Church, or other grosse faults noted by the Monitours?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I would haue this done commonly at the giuing
vp of the Monitours Bils, some day before prayer; sometimes
one day, sometimes another: and when the Master
findes the greatest company present, then to call for the
Monitours of that weeke; lest keeping a settime, any absent
themselues by fained excuses or otherwise, or cry vnto their
parents, that they dare not go to the schoole, because they
must be beaten. But for extreame negligence, or other
faults in the Schoole, the very fittest time is immediately
before the breaking vp, vpon the play-dayes; then if need
                        •
                     
so require, first to whip all the stubborne and notoriously
negligent, as also those who haue done any grosse fault:
and after to cause them to sit, and do some exercises, wherof
they are to giue a strict account, as I said. This will surely by
Gods blessing tame the proudest of them in time, & bring
them to be as submisse as the least childe; as experience
will manifest.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But what if you haue any,Such as of whom is no hope of reformation to be sent from Schoole in time. whom you cannot yet
reforme of their vngratiousnesse or loyt
                        •
                     ring, and whom
you can do no good with all, no not by 
                        〈◊〉
                      these meanes? As
some there are euer in all schooles extreamly vntoward.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  These I would haue some way remoued from the
schoole; at least by giuing the parents notice, and intreating

them to imploy them some other way; that neyther
other be hurt by their example, nor they be a reproach to
the Schoole, nor yet we be inforced to vse that seuerity with
them which they will deserue. But keepe these courses
strictly, and you shall see that they will eyther amend, or
get away of themselues, by one meanes or other; I meane,
by some deuice to their parents, to leaue the Schoole, and to
go to some other imployment.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXX.
               Of Schoole times, intermissions and
recreations.
               
                  Spoud.
                  NOw that you haue thus curteously gone through
this point concerning the Schoole-gouernment,
by rewards and punishments (which being rightly
put in practice, must needes bring a great blessing
with them) let me craue your iudgement also for the
times of Schoole and intermissions; with recreations to be
vsed therein.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  To giue you my iudgement in all these briefly,Schoole time to begin at sixe. according
to that which by tryall I finde best;
                  1 The Schoole-time should beginne at sixe: all who
write Latine to make their exercises which were giuen ouernight,
in that houre before seuen, vnlesse they did them
the night before, to get parts or the like.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Would you then haue the Master and Vsher
present so early?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  The Vsher should necessarily be there, to be present
amongst them;The Vsher to be present at sixe, only to ouersee all. though hee follow his owne priuate
studie that houre, yet to see that all the Schollars doe their
dueties appointed, and that there be no disorder: which

will be, vnlesse he or some other of authority be amongst
them. For otherwise the best children, left to their owne
liberty, will shew themselues children. If the Master bee
present at seuen, it may suffice, where there is any in his
place, whose presence they stand in awe of.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But it is hard for the little children to rise so early,
and in some families all lie long: how would you haue
them come so soone then? You would not haue them beaten
euery time that they come ouer-late, as the custome is
in some schooles.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  That I take farre too great seuerity, and whereby
many a poore childe is driuen into wonderfull feare, and
eyther to play the truant, or make some deuice to leaue the
schoole; at least to come with a marueilous ill will, and oft
to be dragged to the Schoole, to the reproach of the Master
and the Schoole.
                  The best meanes that euer I could finde to make them
to rise early,How to make all children to striue who shall be first at schoole without any correction. to preuent all this feare of whipping, is this; by
letting the little ones to haue their places in their fourmes
daily, according to their comming after sixe of the clock:
so many as are there at sixe, to haue their places as they had
them by election or the day before: all who come after six,
euery one to sit as he commeth, and so to continue that
day, and vntill he recouer his place againe by the election
of the fourme or otherwise. Thus deale with them at all
times, after euery intermission, when they are to be in their
places againe, and you shall haue them euer attending who
to be first in his place; so greatly euen children are prouoked
by the credite of their places.
                  If any cannot be brought by this, then to be noted in the
blacke Bill by a speciall marke, and feele the punishment
thereof: and sometimes present correction to be vsed for
terrour; though this (as I said) to be more seldome, for making
them to feare comming to the Schoole.Intermission at nine and three for a quarter of an houre, or more.
                  
                  The higher Schollars must of necessity rest to doe their
exercises, if their exercises be strictly called for.
                  Thus they are to continue vntill nine, signified by Monitours,

Subdoctour, or otherwise. Then at nine I finde
that order which is in Westminster to bee farre the best;
to let them to haue a quarter of an houre at least, or more
for intermission, eyther for breakefast, for all who are
neere vnto the Schoole, that can bee there within the
time limitted, or els for the nece
                        •
                     sity of euery one, or their
honest recreation, or to prepare their exercises against the
Masters comming in.
                  After, each of them to be in his place in an instant vpon
the knocking of the dore, or some other signe giuen by the
Subdoctor or Monitors, in paine of losse of his place, or
further punishment, as was noted before; so to continue vntill
eleuen of the clocke, or somewhat after, to counteruaile
the time of the intermission at nine.
                  To be againe all ready, and in their places at one, in an
instant
                        •
                      to continue vntill three, or halfe an houre after:
then to haue another quarter of an houre or more, as at
nine for drinking and necessities; so to continue till halfe
an houre after fiue: thereby in that halfe houre to counteruaile
the time at three; then to end so as was shewed, with
reading a peece of a Chapter, and with singing two staues
of a Psalme: lastly, with prayer to be vsed by the Master.
                  For the Psalmes, euery schollar should begin to giue the
Psalme and the tune in order,To sing part of a Psalme before breaking vp at night; and each to begin in order and giue the tune. and to reade euery verse before
them; or euery one to haue his booke (if it can bee)
and reade it as they doe sing it: where any one can not
begin the tune, his next fellow beneath is to helpe him, and
take his place.
                  By this they will all learne to giue the tunes sweetely,
which is a thing very commendable; and also it will helpe
both reading, voyce and audacity in the younge
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But these intermissions at nine and three, may be
offensiue: they who know not the maner of them, may reproch
the schoole, thinking that they do nothing but play.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  We are so much as may be in all things to auoyde
offence:Intermissions at nine and three a clocke not offensiue. but when by long custome the order is once made
knowne, it will be no more offensiue then it is at Westminster,

or then it is at noone and night; so that it be done in a
decent order.
                  The benefits of such intermissionsBenefits of intermissions. will be found very
great, and to preuent many inconueniences.
                  1 By this meanes neyther Masters nor Schollars shall
bee ouer-toyled,1 None ouer-toyled, but wits euer fresh. but haue fit times of refreshing. For
there is none (no not almost of the least) but being vsed
to it a while, they will sitte very well in their places,
for two houres together,The least will soone learne to sit two houres together. or two houres and a halfe;
without any wearinesse or necessity, obseruing duely those
times.
                  2 By this meanes also the Schollars may bee kept euer
in their places, and hard to their labours, without that
running out to the Campo (as the tearme it) at schoole
times,2 Kept euer in their places at schoole time. and the manifolde disorders thereof; as watching
and striuing for the clubbe, and loytering then in the fields,
some hindred that they cannot go forth at all.
                  But hereby all may haue their free liberty in due time;
and none can abuse their liberty in that sort, nor haue their
minds drawne away, nor stirre abroad all the day at schoole
times: except vpon some vrgent necessity, to be signified
to the Master or Vsher; and so leaue to be gotten priuately,
to returne presently againe. And also in those cases to lose
their places for that day, vnlesse the case be approued very
necessary and sure; to the end to cut off occasionsLeaue to be graunted vpon vrgent occasions besides. from such
as will pretend necessities. If any one be catched abusing
his Master or his liberty, without necessity onely, vpon desire
of idlenesse or play, he is to be corrected sharpely, for
ensample. By this meanes you shall bring them to that order
and obedience in a short time as they will not thinke of
stirring all the day, but at their times appointed, or vpon
very vrgent and almost extraordinary necessity.
                  3 Besides these benefits,3 The time may be gained daily, and sundry inconueniences preuented. this will also gaine so
much time euery day, as is lost in those intermissions;
because there is no day but they will all looke for so much
time or more, to the Campo: especially the shrewdest
boyes, who vse to waite for the club, and watch their times;

these will be sure to haue much more then that. Besides all
the time which they lose in wayting for that idle fit; and
that they will, if they can, be away at Lectures, and shewing
exercises: and likewise they will exceedingly trouble the
Master in asking three or foure sometimes together, what
businesse soeuer he be about.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I haue been well acquainted with these disorders
of the Campo, and vexed with them many a time: I shall be
most glad▪ if I may thus reforme them, and finde these benefites
in stead thereof. But what say you for their recrea
                     
                        •
                     ions?
Let me also hea
                        •
                     e your iudgement in them: for I
see that you would haue in like manner a speciall regard to
be kept thereof.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I would indeed haue their recreations as well looked
vnto, as their learning; as you may perceiue plainely,
by their intermissions, at nine and at three.
                  Besides those, and all other their intermissions, it is very
requisite also, that they should haue weekely one part of an
after-noone for recreation,Weekely recreations. as a reward of their diligence,
obedience and profiting: and that to be appointed at the
Masters discretion, eyther the Thursday, after the vsuall
custom; or according to the best opportunity of the place.
That also to be procured by some Verses, made by the Victors,
as was shewed: and then onely, when there hath bin
already no play-day in the week before, nor holy day in all
the weeke.
                  Before their breaking vp also, it shall not bee amisse to
giue them a Theamto make som verses of, ex tempore,
                     Before breaking vp to play, to make verses ex tempore.
                      in the
highest fourmes, after they haue beene for a time exercised
therein: or if time permit, sometime to cap verses.
                  In capping verses the way to prouoke them the most,
and to haue most variety of good verses,Or cap verses. The best manner of capping verses. is, to appoint
some one or two of the best, to challenge their fellowes to
come one after another; and euer as any one but sticketh
or misseth in a syllable, the other to tell him, and another to
come in his place: or els to trie aduersaries or fourmes together.
                  
                     
This exercise will much helpe capacitie and audacitie,Benefit of capping verses.
memorie, right pronuntiation, to furnish with store of authorities
for Poetrie, and the like; so as that they may bee
very cunning in their Poets by it.
                  Therefore it may also be vsed in regard of the benefits
at some other fit times besides, insteed of some other examination.
                  Hee that brings the most sweete verses,The greatest commendation in these. out of Ouid
and Virgil or Cato amongst the yongest, and so out of other
most approued Poets, is to haue euer the greatest commendations.
                  Absurde verses, such as most are of those called Carmina
Prouerbialia, are to be hissed forth: Namely, those which
are tearmed versus Leonini. As that first verse,
Si canis ex hilla religatur mordet in illa.
                  
                  And so all other of the same mould. Though euen amongst
those of that booke there are some tolerable verses,
if good choise be made.
                  This exercise may well goe before play: for it is nothing
but a pleasant schoole recreation, & will exceedingly whet
on the schollars to an ingenuous contention.
                  All recreations and sports of schollars,Manner of their recreations. would be meet for
Gentleman. Clownish sports, or perilous, or yet playing
for money, are no way to be admitted.
                  The recreations of the studious are as well to be looked
vnto,The recreatiōs of the studious to be regarded. as the study of the rest: That none take hurt by his
study, either for minde or bodie, or any waie else.
                  Yet here of the other side,Ouer much play to be carefully auoided. very great care is to be had, in
the moderating of their recreation. For schooles, generally,
doe not take more hinderance by any one thing, then
by ouer-often leaue to play. Experience teacheth, that this
draweth their mindes vtterly away from their bookes, that
that they cannot take paines, for longing after plaie, and
talking of it; as also deuising meanes to procure others to
get leaue to play: so that ordinarily when they are but in
hope thereof, they will doe things very negligently; and
after the most play they are euermore farre the worst.
                  
                     
And contrarily, when they are most holden to it, without
looking for any play, in such a course, as wherein they
may take delight, and goe on with ease; then will they do
farre the best, without any daunger of taking hurt thereby;
for that thē their learning is for most part as a play to them
who are ingenuous.
                  Therefore Masters are to vse great wisdom in auoiding
this▪ and answering with mildnesse, all those who are euer
importunate in asking leaue.
                  And whereas such suiters are wont to be instant thus,
That the Schollars will learne the better after; we may say
truly, that they will learne fa
                        •
                      the worse after. Also, whereas
they think that they do them good; they do both them,
their friends and the schoole very great hurt, for the reasons
mentioned. It is continuall applying which brings
learning, and the credit of a schoole. And for this cause it
were not amisse, nor inconuenient (neither for the schoole,
nor the Master himselfe who hath a regard of the profiting
of his schollars) if in such places where both Master and
schollars are hindred hereby that there were some statute
for the helpe of the Master, that he could not giue leaue of
himselfe aboue once in the weeke, without consent of the
Minister, or some man of authority in the towne; vnlesse
very seldome, and vnto some chiefe parties to be yeelded
vnto of necessity, in regard of some speciall dignity or desert.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Many Masters would count this a bondage.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  They should yet finde it a profitable bondage,
and which would bring no small freedome and comfort to
themselues, or benefit and credite to their schooles in the
end.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXI.
               Inconuenience growing by diuersitie of
teaching, and of Grammars.
               
                  Spoud.
                  BVt what think you of diuersities of Grammars,Inconuenience by diuersity of Grammars and courses of teaching. and
of diuers courses in teaching? do you not take them
to be very inconuenient?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Yes indeed: for by this means they younger
schollars comming at new schooles, or vnder new masters,
are new to begin; or are hindered, and do lose much
time, when they must after asort begin againe. Many of
great towardnesse and hope are thought to haue nothing
in them, because they are not acquainted with the newe
courses.
                  Also their former Masters are discredited, which happely
had taken the best and most profitable paines with
them: the children are vtterly or very much discouraged.
Besides that many schoolmasters are extreamly ignorant,
and insufficient, not knowing any good course of teaching
at all.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But how might these be helped?
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Only thus: The best courses being once foūd out by
search, conference, and trial, with directions & helpsHow helped. for the
practice therof▪ & the same vniuersally receiued or at least
known; these inconueniences should be for most part preuented,
& both Masters & schollars go on with cheerfulnes
in euery place. In the meane time this is the safest course;
To make them perfect in our ordinary Grāmar, by the vse
whereof alone so many excellent schollars haue been: then
they shall be sure to goe forward in any schoole or course,
and to be well liked by euery one.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXII.
               Euils by ordinarie absence of
Schollars.
               
                  Spoud.
                  ALthough I haue been troubled by that diuersitie,
yet much more by the absence of many of my
schollars,Euils by absence of schollars. when some of them are away, two or
three dayes in a weeke, and sometimes happely a
moneth together, or almost a quarter of a yeere, as in the
haruest time, and it may be they haue no bookes neither;
and yet the Parents will expect, that they should profit as
much as if they were there daily, and as if they had al necessary
bookes.
                  Also they will bee ready to raile vpon me that their children
do no good: whereby both my selfe and my schoole
are much traduced; when the fault is wholly in themselues
or principally, neither can I tell how to helpe it.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I knowe this to bee a common grieuance. The
best waie to redresse it, is this, so farre as I know:
                  1. Parents are to bee admonished, either to keepe their
children to schoole daily, or to keep them away continually.
For by such absence, though it bee but now and then,
the mindes of the best and most studious will bee much
drawen away, or they discouraged, and made vnable to go
with their fellowes.
                  Other their fellowes also, are often much hindred for
them; Schooles and Masters discredited by them: Besides
that in their absence they commonly learne much euill;
and chiefly stubbornnesse to corrupt themselues and others
                  
                     
Therefore this would bee looked vnto specially,How redressed. to be auoided
so much as may be: And order to be taken by the
gouernours and ouerseers of schooles, that all such should
be sent home againe, who are kept awaie aboue a certaine
number of daies; as thirteene in a Quarter (as the statute is
in some schooles) or a like number: vnlesse in case of sicknesse,
or such necessary occasion to be approued by the
Master or ouerseers.
                  Those most seldome absences, to be punished by losse
of their places, and correction too, if the fault be found to
be any way in themselues; or at least to sit still on the play
daies to learne when their fellowes plaie, to recouer that
time againe, and to make them more carefull to come;
or by all these meanes together. This will make the Parents
to amend it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIII.
               Discouragements of Schoolemasters by
vnthankfulnesse of Parents.
               
                  Spoud.
                  THis is good counsell, if I could get our ouerseers
to put it in execution; I my selfe will trie what I
can doe to redresse it by these helpes: Yet there
is one other discouragement, whereby I haue bin
very much troubled in my selfe, many times; that is, the
great vnthankfulnesse that I finde,Discouragement of Schoolemasters by vnthankfulness of Parents. and haue euer found in
many whose children I haue had; That some, if they think
they haue any little priuiledge by the place, they will not
so much as giue me thanks for all my labours, nor it may
be afford me a good word, though their children do neuer
so well vnder me.
                  
                     
Others who haue no priuiledge in the place, will giue little
or nothing, in regarde of my paines, or to my meete
maintenance, according to my place, to incourage mee to
take paines: and besides, they will run behind with me two
or three Quarters, and then they will seek some occasion to
take away their children, to set them to other schooles, finding
some quarrell that their children did not profit, or the
like; and thus not onely defraude me of my due, but also
raise such slaunders against me, for the recompence of all
my paines.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  We must look for thankes,Thanks to be expected at Gods hands. Remedies against discouragements by vnthankfulness of Parents. and the rewards of our
labours from God, where the world is vnthankfull. But for
the help of this, my aduise is, that first we labour to be faithfull
in our places, in the best courses and kindes; chiefly to
make our schollars good Grāmarians: and then we may be
bold to cause them who are of abilitie to paie accordingly
in some sort, for the instruction of their children. They
will better esteem the worth of learning, and of the seruice
we performe to them (in those in whom they are to liue after
their time) and also to the Church & Common-wealth.
And if God doe blesse vs, that our schollars profit indeede,
we shall in time haue schollars enow; such as will be willing
to pay well, how basely soeuer learning be esteemed of.
                  Moreouer, to preuent all such shifting and detraction,
it is wisdom euer to cal for our due at the Quarters end; and
to see that our cariage & gouernment be such in our place,☞
as that we may stand in the face of any such vnthankful detractour.
Also, that Gods blessing on our labours, may euer
answere for vs; which following but these directions we
may certainly expect.
                  Finally, that in our places we labour to serue the Lord
faithfully: and then wee may bee sure to receiue the full reward
of all our labour, from him; let men, as I said, be neuer
so vnthankfull.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIIII.
               What Children are to be kept to
learning.
               
                  Spoud.
                  SIr, if I should not take heart and courage to set to my
calling afresh, I were much to be blamed, hauing all
my doubts thus answered, and being thus heartened
in euery part. But yet, that I may both returne vnto
it cheerefully; and also goe forward, and continue happily
to the end: I pray you let me haue your iudgement in these
two points:
                  1. What children you would haue set to learning, and
incouraged to goe on in the same.
                  2. Which you would haue sent to the Vniuersity, & how
qualified.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  To both these I shall aunswere you vvhat I hold.1. what schollars to be set to learning.
                  
                  To the first: I would haue those who after good time of
triall shall be found the fittest amongst a mans children, to
be applied vnto learning;Most apt & of greatest hope. as being the meetest to be offered
to God in a more speciall maner, to the publick seruice
of his church or their Countries.
                  And so those onely of them, to be incouraged to goe
on in the same, whom you find most ingenuous, and especially
whom you perceiue to loue learning the best; which
also do witnesse the same by their painfulnesse and delight
in their books. The rest to be fitted so far as may be conueniently,
for trades, or some other calling, or to be remoued
speedily.
                  2. To the second I answere: That such onely should be
sent to the Vniuersities,2. What schollars to be sent to the Vniuersities. who proue most ingenuous and towardly,
and who in a loue of learning, will begin to take

paines of themselues, hauing attained in some sort the former
parts of learning;Ingenuous and louers of learning. being good GrammariansGood Grammari
                           •
                        ns. at least,
able to vnderstand, write and speake Latine in good sort.
                  2. Such as haue good discretion how to gouerne themselues
there,Of discretion. and to moderate their expenses; which is seldome
times before 15. yeeres of age: which is also the
youngest age admitted by the statutes of the Vniuersity, as
I take it.
                  Some of chiefe note for learning and gouernment,
and of long experience in the Vniuersitie (as namely,
some worthy heads of Colledges) would haue none sent
nor admitted into the Vniuersitie,None to be sent to the Vniuersities, be
                           •
                        ore 15. yeeres of age at least. before they be full fifteen
yeers olde at least; for these reasons specially amongst
others:
                  1. Because, before that time, they will commonly require
more bodily helpe, then can be there afforded.
                  2. The Vniuersitie statute forbiddeth to admit any vnder
this age.
                  3. Because that daily experience doth teach how inconuenient
it is in diuers respects.
                  Finally, all generally of whom I can heare in the Vniuersitie,
doe assent hereunto. Many would haue them 17. or
18. yeere olde before; because then commonly they haue
discretion to sticke to their studies and to gouerne themselues.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I doe much approue their iudgement. I would
haue them good schollars, before they goe to the Vniuersitie;
and namely sound Grammarians, that the Tutors
need not to be troubled with teaching them to make or to
construe Latine; but that they may goe forward in Logick
or other studies meet for the Vniuersitie. For such a schollar
as is able to vnderstand well what hee reades, or what is
read vnto him there (I meane in regard of the Latine) shall
doe more good in a yeere, then a weak schollar shall do
in two or three; chiefly, if hee haue discretion to gouerne
himselfe, and abide close to his booke.
                  For when as the schollar is faine to turne his Dictionary

for euery word, or hearing a Lecture read doth come away
as he went; vnlesse he be placed vnder a most painefull Tutor,
how is it possible that he should profite any thing, in
respect of him who goeth a good schollar thither? How
many euils doe come vpon the sending of schollars so rawly
thither, both Vniuersity and Countrey doe fully know
and 
                        •
                     ue.
                  Now you haue so louingly and fully answered me in euery
doubt, and so largely laide open your minde vnto me,
as indeede I cannot desire any more of you: Onely let me
tell you this,To practice the most profitable that the points are so many, as I feare that I
shall neuer be able to put them in practice.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  You may make triall of all, or the most likely of
them; and constantly practice those which you finde most
profitable: the shorter that you can be in euery thing, the
better shall you do; so that all be done with vnderstanding,
as I said before.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  I trust you will giue me a copie of them: for otherwise
I shall neuer be able to remember them; besides
that they will require to be oft read ouer and ouer, vntill I
shall grow perfect in them. I doe not doubt, but you haue
set them downe.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  I haue; though as yet very imperfectly, for lacke
of meete leasure. Such as I haue I shall impart (seeing your
earnest desire to doe good) and more as God shall adde
more helpe and experience by your selfe, and by others▪
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXV.
               A briefe rehearsall of the chiefe points and helpes
mentioned in this booke.
               
                  Spoud.
                  HOw much shall you make me more indebted by
that fauour, aboue all your other kindnesse hitherto!
Yet in the meane time before we depart,
to the end to helpe my weake memory, and to
cause me to goe on more cherefully, let me request onely
these two things of you further:
                  1 To repeat the principall heads of those things which
should be as it were in the Masters remembrance alwayes,A briefe rehearsall of the chief points mentioned in this booke.
to be continually put in practice.
                  2 To set me downe a short Catalogue of the bookes
and helpes which you haue mentioned belonging hereunto,A rehearsall of the bookes and helps mentioned.
for the better accomplishing of all these seuerall parts of
learning.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  For those principall heads, though most of them
were named in the obseruations; yet sith such little briefes
doe much helpe memory, I will rehearse them so neere as
I can.
                  These were of the chiefe:
                  1 To cause all to be done with vnderstanding.The principall heads of those things which would be kept euer in memory, to be put in practice by the Master continually.
                  
                  2 To cut off all needlesse matters, so much as may be,
and passe by that which is vnprofitable.
                  3 To note all hard and new wordes: to obserue matter
and phrase carefully.
                  4 To learne and keepe all things most perfectly, as
they goe.
                  5 To haue few fourmes.
                  6 To discourage none, but to draw on all by a desire of
commendation.
                  7 To stirre vp to emulation of aduersaries, and to vse all
good policy for one to prouoke another.
                  
                     
8 Continuall examining (which is the life of all) and
chiefly posing of the most negligent.
                  9 Right pronuntiation.
                  10 Some exercise of memory daily.
                  11 To haue the best patternes for euery thing; and to
doe all by imitation.
                  12 The Master to stirre vp both himselfe and his Schollars
to continuall cheerefulnesse.
                  13 Constancy in order.
                  These were generally premised. To these we may adde;
                  14 To get an Idea or short summe and generall notion
of euery Treatise or Chapter.
                  15 To parallel all by examples, or to giue like examples
for each thing, and where they haue learned them.
                  16 To see that they haue continually all necessaries.
                  17 To countenance and preferre the best, to be markes
for the rest to aime at, and that all may be incouraged by
their example.
                  18 Maintayning authority, by carefull execution of iustice
in rewards and punishments, with demonstration of
loue, faithfulnesse and painefulnesse in our place, with grauitie;
working by all means a loue of learning in the schollars,
and a strift who shall excell most therein, of a conscience
to do most honour and seruice vnto the Lord, both
presently, and chiefly in time to come.
                  19 In a word; Seruing the Lord with constant cheerefulnesse,
in the best courses which he shall make knowne
vnto vs▪ we shall vndoubtedly see his blessing, according to
our hearts.
                  M. Askam hath these steps to learning:Master Askam his steps to learning. First, Aptnesse of
nature: Secondly, Loue of learning: Thirdly, Diligence in
right order: Fourthly, Constancy with pleasant moderation:
Fiftly, Alwayes to learne of the most learned; pointing
and ayming at the best, to match or go beyond them.
                  Philip Melanchton also, in his Preface before Hesiod, aduiseth
after this manner;Philip Melanchtons direction. To striue to make schollars exceeding
cunning in euery Authour which they reade.

doe this by oft reading and construing ouer their Authors;
causing them to note euery thing worthy obseruation, with
some marke, to run ofter ouer those: not regarding how
many the Authours are, but how exactly they learne them;
chiefly all their sentences & speciall phrases, that the speech
of the children may euer sauor of them: for thus he saith;
Vt quis
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         author optimus, it a saepissimè relegendus ad imit ationem:
And that thereby they may alwayes haue of a sudden
a patterne or president in their minde, whereunto to run,
as the painter hath. And so much for the chiefe points:
for the seuerall books and helps, I referre you rather to the
seuerall Chapters; where you may soone see them together,
as you shal haue occasion to vse them for their seuerall
purposes.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  But it is a great charge to poore men, to prouide
so many bookes as may seeme necessary.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  It is true indeede; yet one yeare gained in their
childrens learning, will recompence abundantly all charge
in bookes which they shall neede: and much more, if by
them they shall gaine sundry yeares, and be furnished with
all kinde of excellent learning meet for their yeares; which
without the best bookes, it is no more likely to do, then for
any to proue exquisite in other trades and sciences, without
the most fine instruments seruing thereunto.
                  And this one certaine assurance of the obtayning this
treasure of learning, by following the right meanes and
courses, may counterpoize all labour and charges whatsoeuer
can be furmised, for attayning of the same.
               
               
                  Spoud.
                  Sir, I rest fully satisfied; praysing the Lord, and
acknowledging my perpetual debt for this our conference.
               
               
                  Phil.
                  Let vs giue God all the glory; to whom of due it appertaines:
and let vs euer intreate him, that as he hath thus
begun, so he will perfect his owne worke, for the euerlasting
praise of his owne name, and the perpetuall good of
all his people, vntill Christ Iesus shall come. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE SEVERALL
CHAPTERS, WITH THE PARticular
Contents of them.
            
               CHAP. I.
               1 A Discourse betweene two Schoolemasters,
concerning their function: in the end determining
a conference about the best
way of teaching, and the manner of proceeding
in the same.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  The Schoolemasters place, ordinarily, wearisome, and
thankelesse.
                  They, who haue felt the euils of labouring without
fruit, will neyther spare trauell nor cost to helpe the same.
                  Many honest hearted & painful Schoolemasters vtterly
discouraged, and liuing in continuall discontentment,
through lacke of knowledge of a right course of teaching.
                  Some few God much blesseth in this calling, thogh rare.
                  More true contentment to bee found in this calling,
rightly followed, then in any recreation.
                  The fruits of this, most sweet in the remembrance.
                  Knowledge and practice of the best courses will much
augment the blessing of our labour, and fill our liues with
contentment.
                  How the way of all good learning may bee made more
easie, then euer in former ages.
                  Many worthy helpes lie hid from the greatest part, only
through neglect.
                  
                     
A briefe rehearsall of the chiefe contents, for the better
entring into the conference, & for giuing more light and
life to all that followeth.
                  The manner of proceeding in this conference.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               2 WHen the schollar should first be set to the school.
Branches;
               
                  The time of the first entrance in countrey schooles, at
seuen or eight yeare olde.
                  The child of any ordinary towardlines, to begin to learn
about fiue yeare olde. Reasons and benefit of it.
                  Two or three yeares may be gained hereby, to fit them
sooner for the Vniuersity.
                  Parents ought to labour to see their childrens good education
before their eyes, so soone as may be.
                  Obiections against setting children so young to the
schoole, answered.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               3 HOw the schollar may be taught to reade English wel
and speedily, to fit him the sooner and better for the
Grammar schoole.
               Herein these things handled;
               
                  The inconueniences of hauing the Grammar schooles
troubled with teaching A. B. C.
                  
                  How this might be remedied by some other schooles in
each towne for that purpose.
                  The redresse hereof to besought.
                  To be borne with patience, where it cannot be auoyded;
and the burden of it to be made so light as may be.
                  The first entring of children to be looked to heedily.
                  To teach to reade wel, a matter of good commendation.
                  Griefe & discredit to the Schoolemaster for want of this.
                  To teach to call and pronounce each letter right.
                  
                     
How to know their letters the soonest.
                  To spell, and take a delight therein.
                  Some of the hardest syllables and words set downe, for the
practicing children in spelling of them; to helpe by
them to spell any other speedily, and for writing true
Orthography.
                  Of ioyning syllables together.
                  Bookes to be first learned of children.
                  In what time children well applyed, may learne to reade
English.
                  Diuiding and distinguishing syllables.
                  The pleasantest way to teach the little ones, to pronounce
their letters, and to spell before they know a letter; and
how to doe it.
                  Any one who can reade, may thus enter children, if they wil
follow the directions; and so a poore body may make an
honest liuing of it, and free the Grammar schooles.
                  Complaints for children for getting to reade English, when
they first enter into Latine; and how to auoyde them.
                  The iust complaint of want of care in our schooles, for proceeding
in our owne tongue, as in the Latine or Greeke;
wheras our chiefe care should be for our owne language:
and reasons for it.
                  How schollars may increase continually, as fast in our own
tongue as in the Latine.
                  The chiefe fault of children going backe in English, when
they begin to learne Latine, is in the Parents.
                  An ordinary fault, that schollars are to seeke in matters of
common numbers; and how to redresse it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               OF writing. How the Master may direct his schollars to
write faire, though himselfe be no good pen-man.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  Faire writing a great benefit and ornament to schooles.
                  The opinion is fond, that a good schollar cannot be a good
writer.
                  
                     
The trouble of Schoolemasters, for want of this skill to
teach their schollars how to write.
                  When the schollars should begin to write.
                  To haue all necessaries thereunto, and books kept faire.
                  Each to learne to make his owne pen, and how.
                  Holding the pen, and carrying it lightly.
                  In stead of setting copies, to haue little copie-bookes fastened
to the tops of their bookes; and those of the best
which can be procured.
                  Manner of their copie-bookes and copies.
                  Inconuenience of following diuers hands.
                  Euils of the want of such copie-bookes.
                  Faire writing to be practiced by all the schollars once euery
day.
                  General rule in writing, to make all like the copie.
                  How to keepe euen compasse in writing, not ouer-high
not too low.
                  Benefit of ruling-pens for each, and what ones.
                  The bookes of the young beginners to bee ruled with
crosse lines.
                  The compasse in greatnes and neerenes of the letters.
                  Ioyning the letters in writing.
                  Writing straight without lines.
                  Speciall furtherances for the first enterers, when they
cannot frame any letter.
                  Leisurely drawing the letters as the Painter, a chief help.
                  To obserue ornaments of writing.
                  To make all the letters most plaine.
                  Mischiefes of getting a bad hand first.
                  What the Master is to doe, to the end that he may learne
to teach his schollars to write faire.
                  To walke amongst the schollars, to see that they obserue
their directions, and to marke all faults in writing.
                  This skill is to be gotten, to auoyde the euils by wandring
Scriueners.
                  The vse of Scriueners in Grammar Schooles, what.
                  The summe of the principal directions for writing, to be
euer in memory.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               CErtaine general obseruations to be knowen of Schoolmasters,
and practiced carefully; chiefly in all Grammar
learning.
               
                  1. That schollars bee taught to doe all things with vnderstanding,
and to haue a generall knowledge of the matter
before.
                  To do all things by reason with vnderstanding, brings
almost double learning, besides ease and delight.
                  Reading without vnderstanding, is a neglect of learning.
                  Triall of difference betweene learning with vnderstanding
and without.
                  Verses of Horace to this end, worthy to bee written in
letters of golde, to be imprinted in the memories of all.
                  How some writers haue so far gone beyond others in eloquence,
thorough their ripenesse and vnderstanding.
                  How to teach all to be done by vnderstanding.
                  2. To learne onely such things as whereof they may
haue good and perpetuall vse.
                  3. To note all hard words or matters worthie obseruation,
and the manner of marking them.
                  4. To learne all things so perfectly, as the former may
be insteed of a Schoolemaster to the later.
                  5. That the whole schoole be diuided into so few forms,
as may be; with reasons for the same.
                  6 To haue a great care that none be discouraged, but all
to be prouoked by emulation and desire of praise.
                  A sentence of Tully to this purpose worthie to be euer
before the Masters eye.
                  Strift for victories the most commendable plaie and a
chiefe meanes to make the schoole Ludus Literar
                           •
                        us.
                  
                  7. Each to haue his aduersary: and they to be so matched
and placed as all may be done by equall strift.
                  
                     
8. To vse euer to examine the most negligent.
                  9. Continuall care of pronouncing.
                  10. To haue some exercise of memory daily, for making
excellent memories.
                  11. To haue the best patternes of all sorts that can bee
gotten.
                  12. The Masters to incourage themselues and their
schollars continually.
                  12. Constancie in good orders, with continuall demonstration
of loue, to doe all for the greatest good of
the schollars.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               HOw to make children perfect in the Accedence.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  The vsuall manner of learning to reade the Accedence.
                  The ordinary manner of getting the Accedence without
booke.
                  The best meanes, for learning to reade the Accedence.
                  Generall rule in learning without booke, or getting
whatsoeuer seemeth hard, To take but a little at a time.
                  To cause them first to vnderstand their lectures and
how.
                  Admonition to Masters, desirous to do good; To be as
the Nurses with little children.
                  Example how to make children to vnderstand, by shewing
the meaning, and by asking questions.
                  In what points of the Accedence, the chiefe labour
would be bestowed to make young schollars very perfect▪
                     viz. in all kinde of declining.
                  How to be most speedily perfect in the Verbs; which are
a mean foundation, and wherin the greatest difficulty lieth.
                  No paines can be too great in Nownes and Verbs vntill
they be exceeding perfect.
                  
                     
Two generall obseruations in the English rules: what
parts of the English rules, to be made most perfect in.
                  Helpe for examination of the Accedence: viz. The
questions of the Accedence, called the Poasing of the English
parts. Other needfull questions adioined to the end of
the same.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               HOw to make schollars perfect in the Grammar.
               
                  What is done ordinarily in schooles in teaching
Grammar.
                  What things are requisite in learning Grammar.
                  How to get the Grammar with most ease and fruite.
                  Benefit of Lillies rules construed.
                  Learning the rules without booke.
                  Construing the rules without booke.
                  How to do where leasure is wanting.
                  How to examine so as to make your schollar to answer any
question of his Grammar; with an example thereof.
                  To appose only in English, where children are too weak
to answere in Latine.
                  Examining in the Latine Nownes and Verbes.
                  Examining the Syntaxis, and helpes thereunto.
                  Repeating titles and margents, or the beginning of the
rules, in a continued speech, to keep the rules perfectly.
                  Helpe for hearing part in straights of time.
                  Helps for further vnderstanding the rules.
                  The sum of all, wherin chiefe care would be had.
                  A perfect saying euery rule, not so absolutely necessarie.
                  To turne to each hard rule in parsing, a helpe to make
Schollars perfect in the Grammar.
                  Grammar to be made as a Dictionary to the Schollars.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               OF Construction, or of construing Authors, how to
make all the way thereof most easie and plaine.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  Things seeming difficult in construction.
                  The ordinary toile of Masters about giuing lectures, &
making their schollars able to construe.
                  Difficulty in taking lectures, in propriety of words and
sense.
                  Griefe of the Masters for their schollars forgetting
that which they haue learned.
                  The waie of construing most plaine, by practice of
the Rule of construing, and of Grammaticall translations.
                  The rule of construing vnheard of to the most.
                  The rule set downe by sundry learned Grammarians.
                  The rule according as Master Leech hath set it downe.
                  The rule according to Crusius.
                  The rule expounded more at large, though the curious
handling of it be left to some others.
                  The sum of the rule briefly.
                  An example of construing and of Grammaticall translations
according to the rule: wherin may be seene the generall
benefits therof, for resoluing Latine into the Grammaticall
order, construing, parsing, making Latine, and
trying it.
                  The chiefe reason of the benefits.
                  Benefits of translatiōs according to the rule, set down
more particularly.
                  Things specially obserued in the translations of the
Schoole Authors.
                  How to vse the translations, so as to attaine the former
benefits.
                  Obiections against the vse of translations in Schooles,
answered.
                  
                     
The vses and benefits mentioned, cannot be made of any
other translations of the Schoole Authors, except of the
Grammaticall: and the reason of it.
                  Som exampls of other translations, to manifest the truth
hereof.
                  Grammatical translations separate from the Latine, cannot
indanger any to make them truants.
                  How to preuent idlenesse or negligence in the vse of the
translations.
                  These no meanes to make Masters idle, but contrarily to
incourage them to take all paines.
                  The account to be iustly made of such translations.
                  Schoole Authors translated Grammatically.
                  Other bookes also translated Grammatically for continuall
helps in Schooles.
                  What helpes to be vsed for construing higher Authors,
and so for construing ex tempore.
                  
                  The higher fourmes to practice to goe ouer so much as
they can, construing ex tempore.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               OF Parsing and the seueral kinds therof. How children
may parse of themselues, readily and surely.
               The particular branches are these;
               
                  The vsuall manner of teaching to parse.
                  The certaine direction for parsing.
                  To parse as they construe, marking the last word.
                  To obserue carefully, where they haue learned each
word, what exāple euery word is like; so to parallel by exā
                     ples,
each thing which they haue not learned in their rules.
                  An example of parsing, set downe at large for the rudest.
                  Manner of hearing lectures amongst the lower.
                  How to knowe by the words what part of Speech each
word is.
                  
                     
How a childe may knowe, of what Coniugation any
Verbe is.
                  Much time and toyle in parsing, thorough examining
each word by the Master, how helped.
                  The surest, shortest & speediest way of parsing, to parse
as reading a lecture.
                  How to helpe to prepare the children for parsing at taking
lectures, by shewing them onely the hard words, that
they may take most paines in them.
                  Example of marking the hard words amongst the first
enterers.
                  Marking the hard words helpeth much, and preuenteth
many inconueniences.
                  How to oppose so as children may get both matter,
words and phrase of each lecture, with examples of it in
the first Authors: and how to make vse of each Author.
                  Parsing in the higher fourmes, and to do all in Latine.
                  The sum of all for parsing.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               OF making Latine. How to enter children to make Latine,
with delight and certainty; without daunger of
false Latine, barbarous phrase, or any other like inconuenience.
               Particular points;
               
                  To enter children to make Latine, a matter ordinarily
extreamly difficult and full of toyle, both to Master and
Schollar.
                  The vsuall manner in country Schooles, to enter children
to make Latine.
                  The shortest, surest, and easiest way, both to Master and
Schollar, for entring to make Latine.
                  Making first the Latine of their lectures, and giuing a
reason of each word. Example of it.
                  Continuall construing, parsing, and reading their Authors

out of Grammaticall translations, is continuall making
pure Latine, to cause children to come on in it very
fast.
                  Choosing fit sentences out of Authors, for the children
to make of themselues.
                  The maner of the entrance of children to write Latine,
so as to profit in English, Latine, Writing faire and true, all
vnder one labor.
                  How to haue their bookes ruled to this purpose.
                  Manner of dictating the English to schollars, when they
are to learne to write Latine.
                  Making and setting downe the Latine, by the Schollars.
                  Benefit of it for, certaine direction both to Master and
Schollar.
                  Further vse to be made of the Latine so set down, to make
it fully their owne.
                  Composing the Latine into the order of the Author.
                  Tullies Sentences, the fittest book to dictate sentences
out of.
                  An example of the manner of dictating, and writing
downe both English and Latine.
                  Translating into pure Latine, and in good composition
of themselues, trying who can come neerest vnto Tullie.
                  How to preuent stealing, and writing after one another.
                  How to goe on faster, and dispatch more in making Latine.
                  Translating into English of themselues, after M. Askams
maner; and after, reading the same into Latine again,
or writing it.
                  The most speedy and profitable way of translating for
young schollars.
                  How to translate an Authour into Latine, or any peece
thereof.
                  Such translating onely for Schollars well grounded.
                  Summe of all for making Latine.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               OF the Artificial order of composing, or placing of the
words in prose, according to Tully, and the purest latinists.
Herein these particulars:
               
                  Pure composition a matter of difficulty.
                  The error of young Schollars, displacing sentences, in
an imagination of fine composition.
                  Composition generally belonging to all Latine.
                  Rules of composition, as they are set down by Macropedius,
in the end of his Method of making Epistles.
                  More exquisite obseruation in placing and measuring
sentences.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               HOw to make Epistles imitating Tully, short pithy,
sweet Latine and familiar, and to indite Letters to our
friends in English accordinglie. Herein these things;
               
                  Difficulty of making Epistles purely, and pithily.
                  The ordinary meanes of directing Schollars to make
Epistles.
                  Difficulty for children, who haue no reading, to inuent
variety of matter of themselues.
                  Helpes for making Epistles, by reading Tullies Epistles,
and imitating them.
                  Making answeres to Epistles.
                  Examples of imitating Epistles, and answering them.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               OF making Theames full of good matter, in a pure stile
and with iudgement.
               
                  
Herein these branches;
               
                  The ordinary manner of directing schollars how to enter
to make Theames, according to Apthonius precepts.
                  The inconueniencies of that course for yong schollars;
and that it is hard enough for many teachers.
                  Difficulty in making Theames, because schollars are not
acquainted with the matter of them.
                  The schollar is oft beaten for his Theame, when the Master
rather deserueth it.
                  To consider the end of making Theames.
                  The meanes to furnish the schollars for Theames.
                  Presidents or examples for Theames.
                  Presidents for matter, to furnish schollars with store of
the best matter.
                  
                     Reusneri Symbola, a booke meete to this purpose; and
chiefly for trayning vp young Gentlemen, and all of chiefe
sort and condition.
                  How to vse Reusner for Theames.
                  An easie direction for Theames, to be handled according
to the seuerall parts thereof.
                  Imitation of Exordiums and Conclusions.
                  Other Authours for matter.
                  Helpes for inuention of matter.
                  The knowledge of the ten grounds of Inuention, the
readiest way.
                  The Art of meditation most profitable and easie for help
of inuention.
                  Presidents for the forme and manner of making
Theames.
                  Declamations and patternes for them.
                  Declamations fit for the Vniuersities, or for the principall
schollars in Grammar schooles.
                  Manner of writing down Theams by schollars of iudgement.
                  Making of Theames ex tempore, a matter of great commendations,
if it be done schollar-like.
                  The way to make Theames ex tempore.
                  
                  
                     
A most easie and profitable practice, to helpe to make
Theames ex tempore.
                  
                  Whereto be stored with matter and words for each part
of the Theame.
                  Helpe for supplying wordes and phrases.
                  Common-place bookes, a singular helpe.
                  Orations.
                  Orations belong specially to the Vniuersities.
                  Examples of Orations.
                  Orations ex tempore.
                  
                  Summe for Theames.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               OF versifying. How to enter to make verses with delight
and certainty, without bodging; and to traine
vp schollars to imitate and expresse Ouid or Virgill, both
their phrase and stile.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  Poetry rather for ornament then for any necessity.
                  There may be commendable vse of Poetry.
                  The ordinary difficulty of Poetry.
                  The folly of some in this kinde.
                  The most plaine way how to enter to make verses, without
bodging.
                  Turning the verses of their Lectures into other verses.
                  Of contracting or drawing seuen or eight verses into
foure or fiue; and the certaine benefit of this exercise.
                  To make verses of any ordinary Theame.
                  To versifie ex tempore.
                  
                  Helpes for versifying.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               THe manner of examining and correcting exercises.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  Examining exercises neuer to be omitted.
                  Generall faults wherein schollars doe commonly slip.
                  To reade ouer their exercises first in naturall order.
                  To parallel each thing by examples.
                  To looke to elegancy and finenesse of composition.
                  Neuer to thinke any thing laboured enough.
                  Aduersaries to note faults in one anothers exercises.
                  The manner of examining exercises by the Master.
                  Speciall faults in the highest fourmes.
                  Care that they doe correct their exercises presently.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               HOw to answere any needfull question of Grammar or
Rhetoricke.
               Herein these things;
               
                  To answere any Grammar question, a thing commendable.
                  How to answere any difficult Grammar question.
                  Most of the difficulties of the auncient Classicall Authours,
collected briefly by M. Stockwood.
                  How to answere the questions of Rhetoricke.
                  How to answere the questions of Tullies Offices.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               OF Grammaticall oppositions. How to dispute schollar-like
of any Grammar question in good Latine.
               Herein these branches:
               
                  
                     
To vse the helpe of Master Stockwoods disputations of
Grammar.
                  Benefits of such scholasticall oppositions.
                  Disputations of morall Philosophy belong rather to the
Vniuersities.
                  How these may be done, and how farre.
                  Obiection answered, for disputing out of Master Stockwood.
                  Euils of inforcing schollars to exercises, with the examples
whereof they are not acquainted first.
                  Benefite of hauing the best paternes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               OF pronouncing naturally and sweetly, without vaine
affectation.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  The excellency of pronuntiation.
                  Pronuntiation ordinarily hard to bee attained in
schooles.
                  How schollars may bee brought to pronounce sweetelie.
                  Children to be trai
                        •
                     ed vp to pronounce right from the
first entrance.
                  To vtter euery matter according to the nature of it.
                  What they cannot vtter in Latine, to learne to doe it first
in English, then in Latine.
                  To cause sundry to pronounce the very same sentence in
emulation.
                  To be carefull, chiefly for pronuntiation, in all Authors
wherein persons are fained to speake.
                  Poetry to be pronounced as prose, except in scanning.
                  Further helpes in pronouncing.
                  To marke in each sentence, in what word the Emphasie
lyeth.
                  Care in pronouncing exercises.
                  
                     
The more exquisite knowledge and practice of pronouncing,
left vnto the Vniuersities.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               OF speaking Latine purely and readily.
               
                  Complaint of the difficulty to traine vp schollars to
speake Latine.
                  The generall errour, for the time when schollars are to
begin to speake Latine.
                  To learne to speake Latine should be begun from the
first entrance into construction.
                  The surest course for entring young schollars to speake
Latine.
                  How the Master himselfe may doe it easily before them.
                  The daily practice of Grammaticall Translations, and
chiefly of reading bookes of Dialogues out of English into
Latine, is a continuall practice of speaking Latine.
                  Difficulty to cause schollars to practice speaking Latine
amongst themselues.
                  Inconueniencies of Custodes for speaking Latine.
                  Inconuenience of one schollar smiting another with the
Ferula.
                  The best meanes to holde schollars to speaking Latine.
                  How any one may by himselfe alone, attaine to speake
Latine in ordinary matters.
                  For them who desire to come to ripenesse and purity in
the Latine tongue, Goclenius his obseruations of the Latine
tongue, is of singular vse.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               HOw to attaine most speedily vnto the knowledge of
the Greeke tongue.
               
                  
Herein these branches;
               
                  The Greeke may be gotten with farre lesse labour then
the Latine.
                  One benefite of the perfect knowledge of the Greeke
Testament alone, worthy all our labour to be taken in the
Greeke.
                  M. Askams testimony concerning the Greeke tongue,
and the excellent learning contained in it.
                  The way to the Greeke, the same with the Latine.
                  How schollars of vnderstanding and iudgement may
take a shorter course.
                  To vse M. Camdens Grammar.
                  
                     Grammatica Graecapro Schola Argentinensi per Theophilum
Golium, may serue in steede of a further exposition
of Camden.
                  To begin construction with the Greeke Testament, and
why.
                  To striue to haue the Scriptures as familiarly in the Originals,
as the Iewes had the Hebrew.
                  Those who purpose to haue any smattering in the Greek,
to haue it in the Testament, and why.
                  The Testament compared to other Greeke Authours.
                  The Testament a notable entrance to all other Greeke
Authours.
                  How schollars may be made most perfect in the Greeke
Testament.
                  The speediest way to the Greeke, To get the Radices
first.
                  The easiest way, how to learne the Greeke Radices.
                  
                  How any may soone learne to reade the Greeke, before
they learne the Greeke Grammar.
                  How the Nomenclator of the Greeke Primitiues might
be made of singular vse.
                  Helpe for committing wordes to memory.
                  Caueat in remembring.
                  
                     
The Greeke Radices contriued into continued speeches,
may be gotten soonest of all.
                  The readiest and surest way of getting the Testament▪
By a perfect verball translation, separate from the Greeke.
                  How by the help of such a translation, any who haue but
a smattering in the Greeke may proceede of themselues in
the Testament.
                  This cannot be so done by the interlineall, or hauing the
Greeke and Latine together, and why.
                  How schollars of iudgement may vse the interlineall.
                  How to proceede in other Authours.
                  The benefit of such translations of some of the purest
Greeke Authours.
                  Parsing in Greeke.
                  Helpes for parsing in Greeke.
                  Helpes for knowledge of the Poets.
                  How to write in Greeke purely.
                  How to write faire in Greeke.
                  Versifying in Greeke.
                  Summe of all for the Greeke.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               HOw to get most speedily, the knowledge and vnderstanding
of the Hebrew.
               Herein these branches;
               
                  The knowledge of the Hebrew may be the soonest gotten,
and why.
                  Manner of learning the Grammar, and what Grammar
to be vsed.
                  The getting the Hebrew Radices, a chiefe helpe.
                  Manner of committing the Radices to memory.
                  Examples of helping the memory in learning the Hebrew
Radices.
                  
                  The benefit of comparing the tongues.
                  The best Epitome for learning the Radices.
                  
                  
                     
The way might be more compendious by the rootes reduced
to Classes.
                  
                  Continuall practice of perfect verball Translations, a
singular helpe.
                  A Student hauing opportunity cannot be better imployed,
then in getting perfectly, and imprinting the originals
in memory.
                  The Latine, Greeke and Hebrew, may bee the soonest
gotten by such perfect Translations in each tongue.
                  How much and what to learne in all things.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               OF knowledge of the grounds of Religion, and trayning
vp schollars therein.
               Herein these heads;
               
                  Schollars are to be trained vp in Religion.
                  Religion most neglected in Schooles.
                  The Popish Schoolemasters shall rise vp in iudgement
against all who neglect it.
                  Teaching the Catechisme, and when.
                  Examining the Catechisme.
                  Taking notes of Sermons.
                  Setting downe all the substance of the Sermons, in the
higher fourmes.
                  Manner of noting, for helping vnderstanding and memory.
                  To translate the Sermon into Latine, or to reade it into
Latine ex tempore.
                  
                  Examining Sermons.
                  Repetition or rehearsall of the Sermons.
                  Benefit of strict examination of Sermons.
                  How the repetition may be done readily.
                  How to goe through the History of the Bible, and the
manner of examining it.
                  Obiections answered.
                  How to teach the schollars ciuility.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXIII.
               HOw to vnderstand and remember anie Morall matter.
               Herein these things;
               
                  A principall helpe of vnderstanding, to cause children
to vnderstand and remember by questions.
                  An example hereof.
                  Helpe in priuate reading, by questions.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIIII.
               SOme things necessarie to be knowen, for the better attaining
of all the parts of learning mentioned before:
as,
               
                  1. How the Schoolemaster should be qualified.
Herein these branches;
                  The Schoolemaster ought to be sufficient to direct his
Schollars, or tractable and willing to be directed.
                  The Schoolemaster must be painfull and constant, of
conscience of God.
                  He must cast off all other studdies at schoole times.
                  He must not post ouer the trust to others.
                  The Schoolemaster must be of a louing disposition, to
incourage all by praise and rewards.
                  He ought to be a godly man, and of good cariage.
                  To seeke to gaine, and maintaine authority, and how.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXV.
               OF the Vsher and his office.
               Herein these particulars;
               
                  An Vsher necessary in all greater Schooles.
                  
                     
Euils of lacke of an Vsher.
                  The Master burdened with all, is, as the Husbandman ouercharged
with more then he can compasse.
                  Supply by Schollars, not sufficient.
                  Sufficiency of the Vsher.
                  The Vsher to be at the Masters command.
                  To be vsed with respect.
                  The Vsher not to meddle with correcting the highest
Schollars.
                  The Vsher to vse as little correction as may be, vnlesse
in the Masters absence.
                  The Vshers principall imployment with the younger,
to traine them vp for the Master.
                  To preuent all inconueniences by the Vsher.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVI.
               HElpes in the Schoole besides the Vsher.
               
                  Seniors in each fourme.
                  Particular helpe, a Subdoctor in place of the Vsher, or
where one Vsher is not sufficient.
                  Sorting the fourmes, so many into a fourme as may be.
                  Choise and matching each forme equally, that all may
sit as matches.
                  Benefits of this election.
                  This equall matching all, a chiefe meanes to make the
Schoole Ludus L
                           •
                        terarius.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVII.
               OF gouernment and of authority in Schooles.
               Herein these branches;
               
                  Gouernment, the helpe of helps.
                  Authority, the top of gouernment.
                  Authority how to be maintained.
                  
                     
The Masters and Vshers to be as liuing laws, to maintaine
their authority.
                  Authority maintained by most strict execution of iustice,
by rewards and punishments.
                  Incouraging vertue, discouraging vice, to maintaine authority.
                  The euils of neglect hereof, and of partiality.
                  Authority to be maintained by a continuall demonstration
of conscience, and loue to the schollars.
                  By being Presidents of all vertue.
                  Extream seuerity, & whipping, to be auoided in schooles;
and all meanes vsed to preuent it.
                  Reasons.
                  Difficulty for the Master to moderate his passions oftentimes,
if he striue to doe good.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXVIII.
               OF Preferments and incouragements.
               Herein these particulars:
               
                  Incouragements to be by these meanes;
                  Often Elections.
                  Countenancing and gracing the Seniors, and all the
best and most painfull.
                  Putting vp into higher fourmes.
                  Giuing places.
                  Commending euery thing well done.
                  Caueat in commending.
                  Disputation for the victorship.
                  
                     Praemia to be giuen to the two Victors.
                  Office of the Victors for their praemia.
                  
                  Solemne examination to bee made once euerie
yeere.
                  Exercises to be prouided against that time.
                  To keepe their daily exercises faire written in bookes,
to try their profiting▪ by comparing with the former.
                  
                     
A course of examination to be appointed: and the same
first to be performed by the Masters and Vshers; after by others
not satisfied.
                  All dooing well to bee praised, the best specially graced.
                  Benefits of this set solemne examination.
                  All Parents to haue notice before such examinations.
                  To labour by all meanes to worke a conscience in all the
Schollars, to do all of dutie and loue to God, and how.
                  Some excellent sentences to be oft inculcated, to worke
in the Schollars a loue of learning.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXIX.
               OF execution of iustice in Schooles, by punishments.
Herein these particulars:
               
                  To punish vnwillingly.
                  To proceede by degrees in punishing.
                  A note which may be tearmed the black Bill, of principall
vse, and most auaileable in punishing & reforming.
                  Manner of the blacke Bill, to depriue all chiefe offenders
of the benefit of play daies.
                  To cause all such to knowe aforehand, what to looke
for.
                  To view the formes before play, and to separate all the
disobedient and vnworthy, to be left to their taskes.
                  Care that their taskes be strictly exacted.
                  Notorious offenders, or stubborne boies, to sit so many
dayes, vntill that they shew good tokens of amendment.
                  Benefit of this punishment, strictly obserued, and
why.
                  Correction with rodde to be vsed more seldome, and
chiefly for terror.
                  Caueats in correcting.
                  Manner of correcting the stubborne, and vnbroken.
                  
                     
Not to suffer any to goe away in their stubbornnesse.
                  To be wary to auoide all smi
                        •
                     ing or hurting the children.
                  Caueat of threatning.
                  That the Maister doe not abase himselfe, to struggle with
any stubborne boy.
                  To auoide all furious anger and cha
                        •
                     ing.
                  How correction should euer be taken.
                  Sparing the rodde where necessitie requireth, is to vndoe
the children.
                  Assurance of safety in correction, when it is done aright.
                  Anger necessary in Schoolemaisters, so it bee tempered
aright.
                  Meanes to represse furious and raging anger.
                  Places of Scripture to bee euer in our mindes, for the repressing
and moderating our anger.
                  Danger of rash anger when it exceeds.
                  Occasions of anger, left to the calling of the Schoolemaisters,
to humble and exercise them.
                  Three lessons for preuenting anger.
                  The danger of hauing the rod, or ferule euer in the hand
of the Maister or Vsher.
                  The surest way to haue nothing ordinarily, but grauitie
and authoritie.
                  The time of inflicting common punishments.
                  Such as in whom is no hope of reformation, to bee sent
from Schoole in time.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXX.
               OF School-times, intermissions, and recreations.
               
                  School-time to begin at sixe.
                  The Vsher to be euer present at sixe of the clock, though
onely to ouersee all.
                  How to make children to striue vvho shall bee first at
Schoole without correction.
                  Daily intermissions at nine, and three of the clock, for a

quarter of an hower or more.
                  To sing part of a Psalme before breaking vp at night, and
each to begin in order, and to giue the tune.
                  Intermissions at nine of the clocke and three, not offensiue,
when they are once knowne.
                  Benefits of intermissions.
                  None to stirre forth of t
                        •
                     eir places at Schoole-times, but
vpon vrgent occasions.
                  The time of the intermissions may be gayned dayly, and
sundry inconueniences preuented.
                  Weekely recreations.
                  Before breaking vp to play, to make Verses ex tempore, or
to cap Verses.
                  The best manner of capping Verses.
                  The greatest commendation in these.
                  Manner of their recreations.
                  The recreations of the studious to be regarded.
                  Ouermuch play to be carefully auoided.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXI.
               
                  INconueniences growing by diuersity of teaching and of
Grammars.
                  How this helped.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXII.
               Euils by ordinary absence of Schollars.
            
            
               CHAP. XXXIII.
               
                  DIscouragements of Schoolemaisters, by vnthankefulnesse
of parents.
                  Remedies against such discouragements.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXXIIII.
               
                  WHat Children to be set and kept to learning.
                  What Schollars to be sent to the Vniuersities.
                  None to bee sent to the Vniuersities before fifteene yeares
of age at least.
                  The best courses to be practiced.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XXXV.
               
                  A Briefe rehearsall of the chiefe points and special helps,
mentioned through the whole booke.
                  The principall heads of those things, vvhich vvould
bee euer kept in memory by the Maister, to bee continually
put in practice.
                  Mt. Askames steppes to good learning: with a briefe direction
of Melanchtons.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            STudious Reader, I thought meete to giue thee notice,
that my Translation of Sententiae Pueriles, and of
Cato, are now vnder the Presse; and the former of
them, within a day or two, ready to come forth. Expect
the other, shortly after.
         
         
            
            Postscript.
            PAge 53. line 3. reade by that. p. 78. l. 35. for declension read Gender
or declining. p. 87. l. 16. for euer reade a
                     •
                  way. p. 115. l. 9. put in so
far as I know p. 116. after the 11. line, put in so mothers for most part.
p. 191, l. 
                  •
               7. put out 
                  
                     •
                  ound. p. 202. l. 25 for of Grammatica, read at Grammatica.
p. 2
                  •
               0. l. 32▪ put out secondly. p. 251. l. 20. for most, read many. p.
274. l. 22. put out kinde. 297. l. 35. for rest, read: rise.
            
         
         
            Faults escaped by the Printer.
            IN PAge 20. line 3 the Alphabet should haue beene distinguished
by threes, thus; A b c. d e f. g h i. and so for the rest.
            
               
                  
                     Page
                     Line
                     False
                     True.
                  
                  
                     20
                     25
                     thus
                     this
                  
                  
                     30
                     24
                     long
                     longest
                  
                  
                     30
                     36
                     a booke
                     bookes
                  
                  
                     31
                     22
                     m. i t.
                     m c.t.
                  
                  
                     31
                     30
                     without
                     or without
                  
                  
                     46
                     1
                     Third
                     A third
                  
                  
                     56
                     9
                     of
                     or
                  
                  
                     59
                     29
                     manuifoelicis
                     manuifoelici
                  
                  
                     63
                     3
                     parsed
                     poased
                  
                  
                     63
                     27
                     parsing
                     poasing
                  
                  
                     72
                     23
                     more
                     most
                  
                  
                     73
                     1
                     goe truely
                     goe surely
                  
                  
                     79
                     3
                     speedily
                     specially
                  
                  
                     102
                     12
                     Que
                     Que
                  
                  
                     18
                     Virtutem.
                     virtutum
                  
                  
                     36
                     weapon
                     weapons
                  
                  
                     114
                     9
                     must
                     will
                  
                  
                     137
                     2
                     àscio
                     ascio
                  
                  
                     144
                     3. & 11
                     vincit
                     vincet
                  
                  
                     179
                     31
                     fittest
                     fit
                           ••
                        est
                  
                  
                     182
                     17
                     curiously
                     cursorily
                  
                  
                     192
                     1
                     in manner
                     in good manner
                  
                  
                     221
                     37
                     so great
                     great
                  
                  
                     231
                     16
                     Nomenc
                           •
                        aton
                     Nomenclator
                  
                  
                     234
                     35
                     Th
                           •
                        ogius
                     Theognis
                  
                  
                     235
                     22
                     his
                     this
                  
                  
                     236
                     19
                     be also
                     also
                  
                  
                     241
                     13
                     who
                     which
                  
                  
                     278
                     24
                     oderint
                     oderunt.
                  
               
            
            Page 200. in the margent against line 18 for yongest▪
                read highest:
            
            
            
            
         
      
   