
      
         
            
            ¶Against filthy writing / and such like
delighting.
            
               
                  WHat meane the rimes that run thus large in euery shop to sell?
               With wanton sound, and filthie sense, me thinke it grees not well
               We are not Ethnickes we forsoth, at least professe not so
               Why range we then to Ethnickes trade? come bak, where wil ye go?
               Tel me is Christ, or Cupide Lord? doth God or Uenus reigne?
               And whose are wee? whom ought wee serue? I aske it, answere plaine
               If wanton Uenus, then go forth, if Cupide, keep your trade
               If God, or Christ, come bak the best, or sure you will be made
               Doth God? is he the Lord in deed? and should we him obey?
               Then his commaundement ought to guide, all that wee doo or say
               But shew me his commaundement then, thou filthy writer thou
               Let seet, I cease, if not, geue place, or shameles shew thee now.
            
            
               WE are no foes to musicke wee, a mis your man doth take vs
               so frendes to thinges corrupt and vile, you all shall neuer make vs
               If you denie them such to bee, I stand to proue it I▪
               
               If you confesse (defend them not) why then doo you reply?
               But such they bee I will mainteine, which yet you bothe defend
               And iudge them fooles, that them mislike, would God you might amend
               But, substance onely I regarde, let Accidencis go
               Both you and wee, bee that wee bee, I therfore leaue it so
               And yet I wishe your tearmes in deed, vpon some reason stayd
               If mine be not, reproue them right, Ile blot that I haue sayd
               And that I wrote, or now doo wrighte, against you as may seeme
               What cause I had, and haue, I yelde, to modest men to deeme
               I wishe you well I doo protest, (as God will, I will so)
               I cannot helpe, as frend ye wot, nor will not hurt as so
               But for the vile corrupting rimes, which you confesse to wrighte
               My soule and hart abhorres their sence, as far from my delight
               And those that vse them for their glee, as you doo vaunte ye will
               I tell you plainly what I think, I iudge them to bee ill
               This boasting late in part hath causd, mee now to say my minde
               Though chalenges of yours also, in euery placé I finde.
            
            
               Thomas Brice.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London by Iohn
Alde for Edmond Halley and are to be solde in Lumbard strete at the
signe of the Egle.
         
      
   