
      
         
            
            
            THE WEEPING LADY: OR, LONDON LIKE NINIVIE IN SACK-CLOTH. Deſcribing the Mappe of her owne miſerie, in this time of Her heauy Viſitation; with her hearty Prayers, Admonition, and Pious Meditations, as the occaſions of them offer themſelues in Her PASSION.
            
               Written by T. B.
            
               Lord, haue mercy on vs. Weepe, Faſt, and Pray.
            
            Printed at London by B. A. and T. F. for MATHEVV RHODES, and are to be ſold by Nath: Browne, in the Long Walke, neere Chriſt Church. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            THE EPISTLE TO the READER.
            
               COurteous Reader, Briefly thus: If looking in my Booke, you ſee Men impriſon'd in their owne Houſes, and abroad none; if heere you ſee a multitude of Croſſes, and abroad none; if heere their equall number of Bils, with LORD HAVE MERCIE VPON VS, and abroad none; and ſhall ſay, Thus they haue beene, but are not. I anſwere, That they Haue, is enough, why they are not, I know not; that they yet might be, we all know, in the loſſe of Husbands, Wiues, Children, Seruants, Kindred, our Neighbours, and common Acquaintance. A wound ſmarts no leſſe couer'd, then diſcouer'd: For ſome decreaſe in the number, let vs praiſe God, and pray to God, for the continuance of this mercy begun, till this ſad Viſitation be ended.
            My intent in erecting this poore Monument of Miſery, was, to make this Ladies Teares out-liue Her Teares: That, when (by the infinite Mercies of God they ſhall bee wip'd off, and all Her Sores made whole; we may▪ in the view of this, and other (more worthy) Remembrances of Her, re-view them; in them, thoſe infinite Mercies; and in both, be made mindfull of them, end eternally thankfull for them: Which God grant.
            
               Thine; THO: BREVVER.
            
         
         
            
            
               
                  Lord, haue mercy on vs. Weepe, Faſt, and Pray.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, GENErous, and euer-worthy Louer of Goodneſſe, and Pious Endeauours, WALTER LEIGH, Eſquire, SWORD-BEARER to the Honourable LORD-MAIORS of this Famous Citie of LONDON.
            
            
               Right Worthy Sir:
            
            
               A Sad Sharer of the common miſeries of theſe ſad times, prompted by his owne Sorrowes, ha's, (though too weak a Pencil-Man for ſuch a Piece) vndertaken to draw that Sorrow to the Life, that ha's drawne many thouſands to Death; my Title ſpeaks my meaning; The Wounds of this VVEEPING LADY.
            To haue drawne Her in her Health, the Idea
               
or Conceptions of the moſt pure and pregnant VVits might haue been deficient, ſuch was Her Beauty, Her Splendor, ſuch were her change of Colours, Glorious within, and without in Embroydered Garments. But now, (ſuch is her Change Shee ha's no Change, wearing only one Suit, and that the ſad habit of Mourning.
            
            In thus preſenting Her, I preſent you with nothing but grones, Sighs, tears, ſhreaks, folding of armes, bearing of breſts, wringing of hands, pale looks, deiected eies, bleeding hearts, & moſt heauy & bitter condolements. How vnpleaſing this might be to many, I am not ignorant; but imboldned by that of the Preacher, The Heart of the Wiſe is in the Houſe of Mourning, &c. my hopes are faire of her fauorable and gracious receiuing.
            To whom better to preſent this Lady of ſo many Honourable Lords, then to your worthy Selfe, I know not; your Worſhip hauing been to many, & now to This, Her Laſt, (equall in fame with any from Her Firſt) a prime and much reſpected Officer, beating the Sword that moſt impartially guards Her, and wounds Her Enemies. Shee is now on the mending hand, and our hope (in Him, that what he wil doe can doe) is ſtrong for the dayly decreaſe of her ſorrowes; the ſpeedy returne to Her ſolace, and fulneſſe of Beauty and luſtre. For which among many Thouſands of Her afflicted Sons and Daughters, inceſſantly praying; I reſt,
            
               Euer Bound to your VVorſhi
                     ••
                   pleaſure: T. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE WEEPING LADY: OR LONDON LIKE NINIVIE in SACK-CLOTH.
            
               
                  IERIM. 9.21.
               
               
                  Death is come vp into our windowes, and entered into our Houſes.
               
            
            LIke tender Plants, beate, with too great a ſhowre,
            Or like a Tree that's blaſted; or a Flowre
            Pluckt from the Roote; Decembers gloomy ſhade,
            The Sunne ecclips'd; Youth to diſeaſe betraid:
            Or like to any thing, that Chance, or Time
            
            Or Heauens iuſt Anger, ſcourges in the Prime,
            
            Diſroabing it of Ornament, of Grace,
            And ſeating what's opponent in their place
            
               Sits now the Miſtreſſe, Lady of her kinde;
            That Queene, whoſe Beauty did attract the minde
            Of All, to ſee it; to admire, to loue,
            And (in their Functions ſerue it) to approue
            Her worth, and their owne duties: ó like theſe,
            Or ſadder Figures, of Her ſad diſeaſe
            Lies London now; beate, blaſted, wither'd, ſhooke,
            Of ſtrangers pittied, of Her owne forſooke.
            But, to diuide Her ſorrowes, and to bring,
            The wounds, ſighes, teares, and each particular ſting
            Of Her afflicted Boſome, to your Eye,
            Liues not in my Intention. Nor if I
            Had ſuch a Will, had I the power to ſpeake
            My Griefe; for Hers (too ſtrong) makes me too weake.
            Her ſelfe doe that, for what's in Sorrowes breaſt,
            The Bearer of it, can decipher beſt:
            I onely drawe the Curtaine, and thus ſhow,
            This Queene of Cities, now, the Queene of woe.
            
               
                  London, the Anatomizer, of Her owne miſeries, as out of a broken ſlumber thus ſpeakes.
               HOw ſaine would Sorrow ſleepe? But as my Head
               Would touch the Pillow, of that downy Bed
               The mournfull ſound of ſighings, of deepe groues,
               Viſion of Teares, and vniuerſall mones
               That doe preſent themſelues before me, keepe
               That Comfort from me, and command me weepe.
            
            
               
               Her Bells, continually Towling.
               O Heare the Inſtruments, my ſoule did loue,
               My Bells, that ſummon to the Spouſe, the Doue,
               The Oracle of Heau'n, Now ſadly ſound
               Nothing but frightfull ſummons to the ground:
               Nothing but calls to Death; nothing but Knells;
               All notes of Griefe, for All are paſſing Bells.
               Nay more to adde, to my Affrights, affright
               Death, will haue all Times, minutes; and by NightTowling night and day.
               
               Command this dolefull Towling, as by Day:
               We know who ſends him, and we muſt obey.
               What change there is in all things vnder Fate?Digreſſion.
               
               How ſadly now they found? And but of late,
               When their ſhrill voyces, did proclaime the Gaine
               Of Englands Heart, out of the Hate of Spaine,
               
               What Dulcet ſounds they had? — And while they plaid
               To th'mounting flame of Bonfires, that were madeThe King his returne from Spaine
                  
               
               Ioying His ſafe Arriuing? Since that Time
               What muſicke made they, when the pride and prime
               Of all her Sex (MARIA) in our LandThe Queenes arriuall.
               
               Made Her moſt wiſht Arriuall; Hand in Hand
               Ioyning two royall Siſters, to Aduance
               The Glories of them both: Great Britaine, France.
               
               But I too farre, in this Digreſſion goe,
               My joy (almoſt) made me forget my woe:
               The woes of my diſeaſe; —The Sore, that treads
               My Beauty vnder foot; — The Sore that ſpreads
               
                  O're all my Happineſſe; — The Sore that makes
               Me, to be loath'd and left; — The ſore that takes
               My Sonnes and Daughters from me; And the Sore
               That makes this mournfull muſick ſound, all o're
               My ſpatious Circuit, round about my Walls;
               
                  The neglect of our duties remembred.For round about them, are the dreadfull Calls
               Of Death, in their ſad language. — Had we heard
               Their Calls vnto the Temple, and prepar'd
               Zeale, and Diuine affection, that the word
               Sowne in our ſoules, might (as it ought) afford
               A fruitfull Harueſt of good workes, no doubt,
               We had not heard theſe clangors flye about
               
                  Her Counſell to flye to him, from him we cannot.Thus to affright, to wound vs. — But 'tis Iuſt
               Thoſe ſounds, we would not heare, theſe ſounds we muſt;
               Till Heau'n be pleas'd to ſtill'em. — That He may
               Lets flye to meet him; Weepe, and Faſt, and Pray.
               
            
            
               The Graues ſtill greedily gaping.
               O See, (like wounds digg'd in my tender ſide)
               My multitude of Graues, that gaping wide
               Are hourely fed, with Carcaſſes of Men;
               Thoſe hardly ſwallowed, they'le be fed agen,
               Gorg'd with my Sonnes and Daughters: as if Hee
               
                  All things made for man, man for God.All things were made for, were but made, to be
               A prey to wormes: — As if the end of Birth,
               Were 
                     〈◊〉
                   to cry, to labour, and in Earth
               
                  Haue his eternall period: — As if Breath
               Were a Childes bubble, and the ſport of Death:
               For ſo Hee triumphs now; ſo now He kills,Deaths Triumph.
               
               So empties Houſes; ſo the Graue he fills,
               Thoſe Tenements of his. —Where many lye,
               (Too many manyes) not like things that dye
               Aſſur'd in their Redeemer, that they ſhall
               Riſe to a Beeing, whence they ne're can fall;
               But — I ha'done; — Paſſion, thy power is ſtrong
               The reſt in weeping; teares are ſorrowes Tongue.
               Sleepe, ſleepe in peace my Children, in your duſt
               Wee ſee what t'is, to brittle life to truſt,A great helpe to liue, is, to remember we muſt die.
               
               And Her ſtill fayling Adjuncts: For thus fades
               The Pompe of fleſh: And — enter'd thoſe darke ſhades
               From Court, or from the Village, All are one,
               Degrees in Life there are, in Death there's none.
            
            
               Her Houſes, their Maſters Priſon.
               O See my Sonnes and Daughters, that ſuruiue
               Their Houſhold maſſacr'e, (halfe dead) aliue,
               In their owne Houſes buried; or as bad,
               Enjayl'd, impriſon'd; — In that paſſion clad,
               That to behold them, makes Affection wring
               My Heart to Blood, mine Eyes into a ſpring;
               (Maternall loues Companions) — See the WifeThe Wife.
               
               Sadly bemone, the loſſe of halfe Her life,
               
                  I'th' loſſe of her poore Husband. — See her ſit,
               (While ſighes, doe ſighes, and teares, doe teares beget)
               Ready to follow him, from this ſad vale
               To His eternall Manſion. — See the pale
               And gaſtly ſeate of death, vpon the face
               
                  The Huſband. Parents. Children.Of Husbands for their Wiues: —Behold the Race
               Of griefe in Parents, for the ſad depart
               Of Sonnes and Daughters; Sonnes and Daughters ſmart,
               To ſee the ſtroake, this ſtrange Diſeaſe doth giue
               Vpon thoſe Liues by which they Be, and Liue.
               See them debard all meetings of delight,
               See them debard ſociety, and ſight
               Of Kindred, and Familiars; — See them there
               Bard the beſt pleaſure, that doth Paſſion cheare,
               Their Recreatiue walkes, loſing their ſhare
               Of what all taſte, the ſweet and wholſome Ayre,
               A poore mans only phyſicke. — See them looſe
               The benefits of thoſe poore Trades they vſe:
               
                  The ſumm of their miſeryTo ſumme vp all their miſeries in one,
               See them i'th' Dongeon, of laments and mone.
               Yet thus it muſt be, by the Lawes, and Loue
               Of me, their Citie, and of that Aboue,
               For 'tis by Heau'n commanded. — —Thou great God
               
                  Yes Prayer.That more delightſt in Mercy, then thy Rod.
               (Ioyning them both together) — be to theſe
               In their need plenty, in their Languor eaſe.
               And in the midſt of this infectious flame,
               Let thy good Angell come, and be the ſame
               
                  To them, and me their Mother, that He was
               To thoſe i'th' midſt of burning Flames did paſſe
               Vntouch'd, or vnoffended. —In thy Hand,
               Is Life and Death; All power in thy Command.
            
            
               Her Multitude of Croſſes.
               O See me full of Croſſes; ſee, and weepe
               To ſee the Croſſe thus like a Gangrene creepe
               From part to part vpon me. —Nor iſt ſtrange
               Wee weare theſe Croſſes; they are Heau'ns exchange
               Of Croſſes with's.— Wee Croſſes had before.
               The Rich-mans Croſſe vpon the hungry Poore,Our Croſſe dealing one with another.
               
               In griping and ingroſsing: which to quit,
               Need ha's agen (with a dexterious Wit)
               Croſt them in Cheats and Theeuing. —Woe is me
               The many Croſſes of a Terme to ſee;
               Strange Croſſes in ſtrange Caſes: —Then a ſleight;
               The Croſſe of Meaſure, and the Croſſe of Weight;
               The Croſſe of honeſt-ſeeming, to deceiue;
               The Croſſe of Swearing, to make men beleeue
               What Truth is rackt to looke on. —And for theſeOur ſinnes the cauſe of our fichneſſe.
               
               
                  Croſſes of Sinne, the Croſſes of Diſeaſe
               Sticke like a brand vpon's; vpon vs fall
               The Firſt, on many; but the Laſt, on All.
               But to the Croſſe agen, which doth preſent
               In all, (but in my Sorrowes) all Content.
               
                  Saint George his Croſſe, Englands, the Badge of Ioy,
               
                  Theſe Croſſes the Badge of Death.Is heere the Badge of Him that doth deſtroy,
               No Champion euer like Him: —For His power,
               In thouſand Places, Thouſands in one Hower
               
                  Her incitement to Prayer and 
                        •
                     oly duties.Turnes to the Pit before Him. — Gainſt this loſſe
               O lets petition Heau'n; and that this Croſſe,
               
               This Viol full of Anger may bee ſtaid;
               Which, till it be (by the Almighty laid)
               Wee patiently muſt beare it; 'Tis decreed:
               For Hee for Vs vpon a Croſſe did bleed,
               Has told vs plainly we His Croſſe muſt beare,
               
                  The neceſty of themOr nere aſcend His Dwelling. —Where no care,
               No Chance, no Change, Time or Defection dwels;
               But All ſo full of Glory, it excels
               The Compaſſe of Mans thought. —Toth' Croſſe we then
               Add — Lord haue Mercy vpon vs All. —AMEN.
               
                  ¶ Her Termes.O See my Termes cut off, in them the Law,
               
               (That eeuen Line, Iuſtice her ſelle doth draw,
               Guiding to pious dealing) Like a Mute;
               Nor hinder wrong, nor help a rightfull Suite,
               While my Infection ſpreads. Woes, woe ſucceed,
               Of all Demurres, heeres a Demurre indeed.
               
                  Her Parament.¶ See how the City ha's diſturbd the Court,
               How my Diſeaſe ha's troubled the Import
               And weighty Buſineſſes of that High Seat,
               Where Royall Charles and his graue Synod treat
               The grounds of all our ſafety. —And at laſt
               Diſſolu'd that Royall meeting heere, and plac'd
               
                  LONDON, Weſtminſt.Mine, and my Siſters Dignity and Grace
               
                  Vpon a Handmaid to vs. —Ore which Place,Oxenford. Her Petition.
               
               Thou God of Mercy all thy Mercies ſpread,
               And there, and heere, and euery where ſtrike dead
               This All-deuouring Monſter. Let thy loue,
               Make this an Act, in thy great Court aboue.
               ¶ O See how my Diſeaſe, has ſeem'd to checke¶ Her Pageants.
               
               The loue, and dutie, is prepar'd to decke
               My ſtreetes with ſtately Pageants. Things ſhould weareWhat they ſhould be.
               
               Much Coſt, much Art, and in their ſtructures beare
               The fulneſſe of Inuention: where the Eye,
               May feaſt it ſelfe, on the varity
               Of ſpecious Formes, and Figures, and the Eare,
               The ſoule, of all thoſe rich Inuentions heare
               Deliuer'd, in Choyce language. — I preſumeWhat they ſhall be.
               
               That thus they ſhall be, when they ſhall aſſume
               Their coſtly Robes preparing. — But (alas)
               They yet ſtand bare and naked; and men paſſeWhat they are.
               
               By them, as by my ſelfe: for that Diſeaſe
               That dyms my luſtre, has denyed it theſe,
               And all thoſe Beauties my large Bounds embrace.
               Repaire ſweet Mercy, what ſad frownes deface.Her briefe Petitions
               
               O ſee how thicke, theſe ſhafts of vengeance flye,
               How thicke they fall, how thicke Men fall and dye,Of this Maſſacre in generall
               
               Which way ſo e're we turne vs! If your eyes
               Can ſee for Teares, ſee how this Tyrant plyes
               The cruell part Hee's acting. How He ſweepes
               Whole Familyes before him, and then keepesWhole Families taken away.
               
               (In diſmall emptineſſe) Poſſeſſion there,
               Where life againe would enter, but that Feare
               
                  Do's for a time deterre him. For this Foe,
               (Inuiſible, Inuincible) a Blow
               Giues aboue all reſiſt. — O ſee my Streets
               To many, Death-beds; for this Monſter meets
               Men boldly there and ſtrikes 'em: —heere Men tread,
               To ſight, in ſafety; there o'th' ſodaine dead.
               See, ſee, O ſee, how thicke from all my parts
               Gallants in Coaches, and their Goods in Carts
               Flye my poore wounded Body: —where before
               
                  The Flight of Citizens Her Sons, 
                        •
                     ith her 
                        •
                     ender Hearts an
                     
                        •
                     uiſh for it.(That their rich ſplendor might in mine be more)
               They would embrace me, hugge me. —But the Flight
               Of theſe moue little; That would kill me quite,
               Is, that my Sonnes, (They that vpon my Breſt
               Haue had repoſe, (a long and tender reſt)
               And from it ſuck'd the Subſtance made them grow
               Great in the Worlds Opinion) In my woe,
               Want and diſtreſſe forſake me. Theſe, that Hee
               
               That was a Bond-man, and by me made Free;
               That tooke his Oath to loue me, and ſubmit
               His beſt Endeuours to mee, to beget,
               Guard and maintaine mine Honors. —But no more.
               Thus Swallowes Winter flye; the Rich, the Poore.
            
            
               
               Vpon Relation of the many Miſeries, that many of thoſe that flye the City, doe fall into in the Countrey.
               
               Her Teares, Sighes, and Paſſion augmented.
               O My full Tyde of Anguiſh! Yet myne Eye
               Drops not ſo faſt, ſo much to ſee them flye;
               As, in that Flight, to ſee them headlong runne
               To greater dangers, then they flye to ſhun:
               In multitudes we finde it; and ſtill thus1. Her gree
                        •
                      for them that mind not Hers.
               
               Deplore their Sorrowes, though they mind not vs.
               Heere Bils and Halberts meete 'em; —where, (as one
               Had dar'd the Law in ſome great miſchiefe done)2. Met and ſtayed like Fel
                        •
                     ons.
               
               They muſt be ſtaid, examin'd, and there ſhow
               What place they came from, to what place they goe;
               Th'occaſions of their trauaile; and before
               Some Conſtable, can hardly tell three ſcore,
               Muſt ſhew their Paſſes. And from place to place,3. Shew their Paſſes like Rogues
               
               (Paſſing through Villages) through this diſgrace
               Paſſe till they end their Iourney. And what then?
               What comfort find they (poore diſtreſſed Men)
               When (through theſe ſcornes and loathings) they haue got
               The place to which they trauaile? Are they not
               With great ſuſpition, much amaze and feare,
               (As if each part about them ſeem'd to bearo
               
                  
                  Their en
                     
                        •
                     tainmēt.Plagues and infections in them) entertain'd
               At Halberds point, at diſtance? and conſtrain'd
               (In their leaſt pitty) to a priuate Roome?
               Though nere ſo ſound they are; and in the Doome
               Of that Impriſonment, ſome part o'th' load
               Of what they ſhun at home, they meet abroad.
               
                  Marke 
                        〈◊〉
                      miſe
                     
                        ••
                     .But this is but diſgrace: See ſome poore ſoules
               Vnder neceſſities more harſh controules
               Made ſtrangers to acquaintance; nay, the Sonne
               A ſtranger to his Father; Brothers ſhun
               The Partners of their Blood; and Mothers 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               Thoſe they haue hugg'd and dandled, (as they me.)
               O let me weepe, (weepe blood) and through that glaſſe
               
                  Hardly welcomeLooke yet a little further; where (alas)
               Wee may behold ſome of my Sonnes that here
               Had ſoft and eaſie lodging, lodging there
               
                  Hard 
                        •
                     odging.In Stables, Barnes, out-Houſes; nay be glad
               To ſleepe in Houils; thinke no roome too bad
               That had a couering o're it: ſome be faine
               To lodge, where neither 'gainſt the Wind, the raine,
               Nor the Suns fury, they could ſhelter haue;
               Heau'n only couering them, and they their Graue.
               Then, as a ſad Companion to their woe,
               (For miſeries doe ſeldome ſingle goe)
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     . Their miſeries in their ſickneſſe.Behold them in theſe Lodgings, faint and weake,
               Their Purſes many may ſome comfort ſpeake,
               But purchaſe none or little; and that too,
               But dealt among them, as a man ſhould doe
               
                  Such duties to a Lyon, to a Beare,
               Or ſome ſuch ſauage Creature, in great feare,
               Fling ſome poore pittance to them, and then flye:9. The tendance.
               
               Heere's all their tendance, let them liue or dye.
               See ſome o're taken with ſo faint a breath,10. Many there, as with vs, dye in the common way, 
                        〈◊〉
                      & Ditche
               
               Ere halfe their Iourneyes done they Inne with Death,
               I'th' common way they tread on; as they goe
               Fall to the ground and dye: great numbers ſo
               In Rodes, in Ditches, in the open Field,
               The debt of Breath, thus to their Maker yeeld;
               And wher
                     •
                   they dye, are buried. Some agen
               (So bold we are to ſinne to adde more ſinne)
               On Sledges, Barrowes, Dung-carts, any thing
               (The wiſedome of thoſe places pleaſe to bring)
               Are borne to places more remote; and ſome
               (Like Dogges) are hal'd with Cart-ropes to a Tombe
               Fit, but for Dogges and Caryon: into which,
               As they are found, th'are tumbled; Poore, and Rich:
               Their rich Apparell, their rich Pockets; All:
               Nay, Gold it ſelfe they bury; that muſt fall
               To'th' place it came from: ſo that by this Rod,The ſ
                        〈◊〉
                      God, a D
                        •
                     
                     uell.
               
               That ſeemes a Diuell now, ſeem'd once. God.
               Oh, I could weepe my ſelfe into a Stone,
               Or my, as ſenſleſſe Image, in the mone
               Of my poore Sonnes and Daughters; that with meHer Apoſtrophe in Groues & ſighing.
               
               Had had farre better vſage: But, in vaine
               I weepe for them: Now to my ſelfe againe.
               
                  So, (as preparing to a Bridall Bed)
               In what a Path of Hearbs and Flowers men tread,
               Which way ſo ere they wander: For, each Street
               Seemes now a Garden; All as greene, as ſweet.
               But Oh, my ſad my ſicke, my bleeding Heart!
               Theſe are no Nuptiall ſtrewings; heere no part
               Of ſuch a Ioye's appearing: For (O, ſee!)
               Theſe Paths are for the Dead, and ſuch as be
               The halfe, dead traine attends them. Euery where
               Nothing but Graues, but Coffins, but the Beere,
               And bearing breathleſſe Bodies to the Ground;
               Delight's an Exile now, pale Mourning Cround.
               ¶ See how my Streets are emptied, how my Trade,
               (Io which there is another Sickneſſe made)
               Lyes as 'twere dead and Buried. See, (O, ſee)
               The Shops of thoſe are Dead and thoſe that Flee,
               So euery where ſhut vp, a man may ſay;
               What's all this Time; but Grim DEATHS HOLIDAY?
               ¶ Yet ſee my emptineſſe too 
                     〈…〉
                   mone,
               For not a Friend, a Friend without a groue,
               Sighes and ſad Language meet. —See Death deſtroy
               All our expected pleaſure, all our ioy,
               Till Heau'n ſhall ſtop his Progreſſe. Vnawares
               Our Feaſting's turnd to FASTING; Play, to PRAYERS.
               
               Moſt fit it ſhould bee, and moſt fit, wee praiſe
               That Holy KING, that made theſe Holy DAIES.
               
                  That has commanded, what his God commands,His Proclamation is Falling an Prayer Niniu. buckler.
               
               That Second God to vs, that vnderſtands
               That the beſt Buckler, to defend the ſtroake,
               Heau'n layes on Sinners, which their ſinnes prouoke;
               I
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  eeping Niniuies. That Prayers and Teares,
               When Hezekiah, was beſet with feares,
                     Hezekiahs Prayer.
               
               Procur'd an Angell, in his cauſe to fight,
               Whoſe vnreſiſted power, in one night,
               A hundred, foureſcore, and fiue thouſand men
               Laid dead before him; Hee who knowes agen,
               When God had purpos'd this good King to death,
               By Prayer, He chang'd that purpoſe, and got breathHis life prolonged by Prayer
               
               For fifteene Summers longer. He that knowes
               How; when the fiery Serpents, wounded thoſe
               Murmur'd at Moſes, when good Moſes prayed,
               Thoſe Serpents loſt their ſtings, that Plague was ſtaied.
               So Lord ſtay this, this Serpent, whoſe ſharpe ſting
               Has pierc'd to many; and let Mercy ſpring,
               In thy good pleaſure to vs. — From the Deepe
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   anguiſh Lord we call, we pray, we weepe,
               
                  
                     •
                  nd doe as they did: By this Serpent ſtrooke,
               Wee on a ſecond; on our Sauiour looke,
               Expecting cure. — To which be pleas'd to Bow,
               And what their prayers did then, let ours doe now.
            
            
               
               With this Exhortation to her Sonnes, in the briefe Enumeration, or Repetition of ſome things formerly ſpoken by way of Alluſion, Shee Concludes.
               HEare then my Bells, call to the Church, and Death;
               Reuiew my Graues: There the full point of Breath;
               Know thy proud fleſh, a Priſon to thy Soule;
               The Croſſe a Badge, did Death and Hell controuſe.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                   thou the Lawe of Heau'ns eternall Loue,
               The Acts and Statutes of that Court Aboue;
               Loue thou the ſights, the bleſſed Angels ſee;
               Serue thou the God, with whom All pleaſures be;
               Obey his Royall Subſtitute, thy King;
               Let loue among you, haue an endleſſe Spring:
               Leuell your words, and Actions to the will
               Of Him, has power to pardon, or to ſpill,
               And I ſhall ſoone be well; and you in Me,
               And I in you, All our beſt wiſhes ſee.
            
            
               
               The Authors comfortable Concluſion and thankfull Remembrance of Gods great mercies, in the happy ſurceaſe of this dangerous Contagion, and preſeruation of thoſe, who are yet liuing.
               THus much for this Cloude of miſerie, now to that gloriou
                     •
                   Sunne of Gods mercy, which moſt graciouſly riſing vpon vs, hath begun to diſſolue, diſſipate, and diſpell it, in the decreaſe of thoſe that dye of this heauily bewayled Contagion: Vpon which looking, let vs ſay with Dauid, What ſhall I returne to the Lord, &c. Withall, make this promiſe, and zealouſly ſtriue to performe it; That that God, that in his Anger, remembers Mercy; That deſires not the death of a Sinner, but rather, than he returne and liue, may continue this mercy to vs; and ſpeedily (if it be his bleſſed will and pleaſure) ſay as he ſaid, to that deſtroying Angell, in the time of his Kingly Prophet, It is ſufficient; hold now thy hand. That ſo, we heere at home, and thoſe abroad, that (as if they could ſlye from God) ſlew from vs, may againe meete; he decently merry; Liue louingly, aſſiſt one another willingly, and finally that All together, to him that of 
                     •
                  othing, hath made vs; that loſt, hath Redeemed vs; that erring, reduced vs; that Ignorant, hath taught vs; that ſinning hath gently chaſtiſed vs; that diſpayring hath comforted vs; that falling hath raiſed vs; that ſtanding hath held vs; that going hath lead vs, that Comming hath receiued vs; And, that from this and many other dangers hath deliuered vs. Wee may ſhew our ſelues euermore thankfull: ſtill pray, ſtill praiſe him, that ſo this ſpan of Life ended, we may, (falling in death) riſe againe to that Life that ſhall neuer end.
            
            
               
               Foure things euer to bee Remembred.
               Thinke on thy Sinne,
               That thou maiſt grieue:
               On DEATH,
               That thou thy ſin maiſt leaue:
               The Laſt great Iudge,
               That thou maiſt feare:
               On MERCIE,
               that thou not diſpaire.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   