
      
         
            
            
            THE
SECOND PART
of the true watch,
CONTAINING THE
perfect rule and summe of
Prayer: So plainelie set downe,
that the weakest Christian, taking
but the least paines, may in a
very short space, learne to pray of himselfe,
with much assurance and comfort:
both to get strength to obserue
the Lords watch; and to
helpe to turne away, or at least
finde comfort in the euils
that are to come.
            
            
               Luk. 21. 36. Watch and pray continually, that you may be
accounted worthie to escape al these things
that shall come to passe, and that yee may
stand before the Sonne of Man.
            
               Esay 62. 6. 7. Yee that are the Lords remembrancers, giue
him no rest.
            AT LONDON
Printed F. K. for Samuel Macham, and are to
be sold at his shop in Pauls Church yard, at the
signe of the Bul-head. 1607.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
HONORABLE MY
singular good Ladie, L.
ELIZABETH Countesse
of Huntingdon.
            
               OVR Sauiour hath not
without good cause,
(Right Honorable) so oft
called on vs to watch
and pray,Mark. 13. 33. and 14. 38. ioyning these two together;
and warning his Disciples in
their greatest dangers to watch and
pray, that they might not fall into
temptation; and also charging vs al
to watch and pray continually, that
wee may bee accounted worthy to
escape all the euils that shal come to
passe,Luk. 21. 36. and to stand before the Sonne
of man: because wee can neither
watch vnlesse we pray, to obtaine
strength from the Lord by it; nor
pray with any comfort or power

vnlesse we watch; nor euer get assurance
to escape the euils that shall
come on the world, much lesse the
temptations of Satan, and damnation
of hell, and appeare with boldnes
before our Sauiour, vnlesse we
both watch and pray. In regard
whereof, first my dutie to the Maiestie
of God, who prepared the
watch against so needfull a time;
and after so graciously caused my
poore desire therein to be accepted
in his church, hath encouraged me
to endeuour to adioine vnto the
watch, this short directiō for praier,
as a secōd part & vnseparable cōpaniō,
for the further good of his seruāts,
of whō sundry haue desired it
at my hands. And secōdly, your Ladiships
most fauourable acceptance
of it, being dedicated vnto my Honorable
Lord, perswading mee of
your Honors vnfained desire both

to obserue the same, and walke in al
the waies of the Lord, haue imboldened
mee to presume to offer this
vnto your Honorable Ladiship:
both to testifie my dutifull & thankfull
affection to your Honor also:
and withall my feruent desire that
you may both walke hand in hand
all your daies, in the selfesame narrow
way of eternall life; as being
of the same heart and holy
accord; inabled thereunto by the
spirit of the Lord, obtained by continuall
and instant prayer. That so
ye may shine as glorious lights together
in the earth, and after in the
heauens aboue the brightnes of the
Sunne for euermore.
            This shall bee in the meane time
your key into the palace of the Almightie,Mat. 7. 7. 8 and 21. 22.
and to the presence chamber
of his glorious Maiestie:Psal. 135. 18. whereby
you may be admitted at al timesIames 4. 8.
               
to most familiar conference; receiue
immediate answers from his Highnes:Esay 65. 24
obtaine the riches and pleasures
of his house, with the most
pretious iewels of his treasurie, to
adorne you farre more gloriouslie
then al the pearle & pretious stones
of all the Princes of the earth: all
which shall vtterly vanish as the
dimmest star, when the brightnesse
of your glory shall appeare.Gen. 32. 28. and 1. 2. You
shall as Israel preuaile with your
God;Hebr. 1. 14. haue his Angels and all the
hoasts of heauen at your desire;Iames 47. all
being at a perpetuall league with
you:Ephes. 6. 18. vanquish the diuels and put
them to slight:Iob 22. 27. 28. 29. ouerthrow the plots
of the wickedest, and bee accepted
for the Church: subdue in your
selfe each corruption: bring euery
thought into an holy obedience:
finde the Comforter at hand in all
your trials; the sweete voice of the

Spirit, making you with cōfidence
to call him Abba, oh Father;Rom. 8. 15. 16. and giuing
you most strong assurance of
a kingdome, and the life of the Angels
in the very terrours of death.
And in a word, you shall thus most
happilie redeeme the daies of our
vanitie, and treasure vp in heauen
abundantly against the time of the
perfect accomplishment of your eternall
triumph and felicitie.
            Wherunto according to my perpetuall
bounden dutie I shall alwaies
striue during my life; both
by my incessant prayer, and all other
holy meanes, which the Lord
shall in mercie vouchsafe vnto mee
his poore and vnworthie seruant.
And in this studie towards your eternall
glory and happines I rest my
selfe; nothing doubting of your
like honorable acceptation of this
my poore endeuour, howsoeuer

penned in a most plaine and familiar
stile; not to delight the curious
with an houres reading, (which I
leaue to others) but to helpe the honest
heart that is desirous to learne
of our Sauiour how to pray,Luke 18. 1. and
con
                  •
               inue therin in this life without
fainting,Esay 65. 13. 14. to reioyce and sing with
the Angels for euer after; when
all others shall weepe and
mourne, and neuer find
any comfort or release.
            
               Your Honors in the Lord euer
to be commanded.
IOHN BRINSLEY.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE PREFACE
TO THE CHRISTIan
Reader, containing a large and
plaine direction to all the simpler sort,
how to vse this aright; and an earnest
exhortation to all sorts to giue
themselues instantly to watching
and prayer.
            
               IT hath bin wished (Christian
and louing Reader)
that as I haue gone briefly
thorow the Commandements
and Articles of
the faith, to set downe the true watch;
so I would take some paines in like manner
to go thorow the Lords Prayer, to
set downe the rule and summe of prayer,
for the further perfecting and our better

performing the same watch. Whereupon
notwithstanding my great inabilitie, in
respect of many of my brethren, yet considering
the Lords former mercie, who
shewes his power in weakenes; and that
by this motion of diuers, he seemes to require
my poore labour in this also, I haue
attempted likewise to make triall herein:
the better to inable the simpler sort, and
to stir vp all sorts to this holy dutie of
prayer; that wee may obtaine strength
from the Lord to keepe his watch more
faithfully, with innumerable other benefits
procured by the same. And the rather
waying well into what dangerous
times we are fallen; wherein the greatest
part (as it is much to be feared) in such
a declining to Atheisme, and generally
to extreame coldnes or luke-warmenes,
do seldome or neuer pray priuately; vnlesse
perhaps they vse the Lords Prayer
without vnderstanding. And of those
who vse to pray, some although they

pray much, yet they do it verie superstitiously,
to the prouoking of the Lord, and
hurt of their owne soules, insteed of receiuing
any true comfort therein; as all
our popish sort doe. Others haue a desire
to pray, but want abilitie or leasure; as all
our young and weak Christians. A third
sort droope in their troubles, temptations
and feares, & are at their wits end,
as Iacobs sons, not knowing what way
to take, and so continue fretting & vexing
themselues, or attempt vnlawfull
meanes for their reliefe and comfort. A
fourth are afraid to vse the Lords Praier
as a prayer, because they cannot comprehend
the power and meaning of it in
so short a forme. A fifth haue gone forth
with our Sauiour into the garden, promising
and beginning to watch & pray,
which yet through our long peace, ease
and prosperitie, are fallen a sleepe. Anoother
sort liue in monstrous sinnes, as in
oppression and vnmercifull dealing, deceit,

secret vncleannesse and the like,
without repentance; and yet imagine
that they do pray, that their prayers are
accepted, and that they shall be heard in
the day when they crie, deceiuing their
owne soules. A last sort, and those one
only and scarse to befound abide therein
with our Sauiour, in watching, cries and
teares; wrastling and weeping as Iacob
for the deadly malice & bloodie threats
of Esau; and holding vp their hands
with Moses against Amaleck, and
also to pacifie the Lords wrath, that it
may not be powred out vpon his people,
for all our grieuous prouocations. To
witnes my loue therefore yet further to
all these, and all other the Lords people, I
haue thought it my dutie, to offer this
weake labour also vnto the Church of
God, commending the successe vnto him
who is only wise, and worketh by what
instruments it pleaseth him, and aboue
all that we are able to conceiue: yet not

before I had first communicated it vnto
some, much reuerenced of all, for their
learning and pietie. Now I onely craue
pardon to speake freely, to each of these
sorts particularly.
            And first to you that pray not at all,
looke but vpon the necessitie of prayer,Harken you that pray not at all.
and consider well in what state you stand
vntill you both can and vse to pray; that
you are in state of damnation, hauing all
things accursed vnto you, and working
your perdition; and that you but onely
tarrie for the execution of Gods vengeance;
and then if God open your eyes to
see your selues and your danger, I shall
not neede to call vpon you: for, I know
you will giue no rest vnto your eyes, vntill
yee both can and do practise this dutie:
nor that you will euer let day passe
hereafter, but reserue some part of it frō
your pleasures and profits, to bestow on
the Lord in praier, at least a morning
and an euening sacrifice.
            
               
                For you that pray in an vnknowne
tongue, or without vnderstanding,You that pray man vnknowne tongue. bee
aduised to spend no more labor in vain,
deceiuing your owne soules: but learne
of your Lord and Sauiour to pray according
to that heauenly paterne, wherein
all true wisedome and comfort are to bee
found, and which hee hath prescribed
vnto you to vse, if you be any of his disciples;
warranting you, that if you so
aske you shall haue; and then shall you
finde him to answere to your hearts desire,
and carry you into all his sauing
truth.
            
                And you that haue a desire to pray,
but know not how to performe this dutie
aright;You that desire to pray. I haue chiefely intended your
good, both to direct you for the things
which are principally to be begged of vs,
cōtained in the Lords praier, the summe
whereof I haue indeuoured to set downe
plainely in these short formes, applying
them to the times; and also to helpe you

for the maner of vttering your requests;
ayming at this specially, that by daily
practise and meditation herein, you may
better attaine to the true vnderstānding
of the Lords prayer, and euer haue it in
fresh memorie: which being the true
perfection and paterne of all holy prayer,
doth in the infinite wisedome of God
comprehend whatsoeuer wee can aske.
That so you hauing first gathered by
wise obseruation in the watch, a true catalogue
of your owne speciall sinnes and
wants, together with the maine sins and
wants of the Church and Land, may be
able of your selues both for matter and
words, to make a most holy confession of
sinnes, and powre forth your supplications
according to your necessities, with
comfort and assurance. I haue set them
downe in two formes, both containing
the same matter, as they are one set against
the other: the one more shortly,
because of our wearinesse in the best

things, and chiefely in this dutie of praier,
(though of all other most necessarie)
the other somewhat more largely, for the
fuller vnderstanding of it; & the heads
of both in the margent, for the better remembring
therof, or conceiuing the like.
Not intending to tie any necessarily euer
to vse one of these, (though it were much
better to vse them or the like, then not
to pray at all, or to pray vnprofi
                  •
               ablie)
nor to vse the whole euer at large; although
all the things therin comprized,
are to be begged daily for our selues, or
our brethrē; but to vse those most which
chiefely concerne our speciall necessities,
and the necessities of the Church & our
Land; all which may be referred to one
of these sixe petitions; As when we would
pray for the glorie of God, or to kindle
the zeale of it in our hearts, or that hee
would shew his glorie in the preseruation
of our King and Realms, to vse the first.
For the Church of God and perfect vnitie

therein, and against the proude enemies
thereof; or to get more assurance
that we are true members of it, to vse the
second petition. The third for cheerefulnes
in doing Gods will or submission to
the same. The fourth for dependance on
God, for the things of this life, and against
all worldly cares. The fifth for
forgiuenes of sins. The last against dangers
or feare of temptation, or any euill
whatsoeuer. I haue laboured to set downe
the heads so plainly in the margent, distinguishing
them by figures, that euerie
one that is desirous to learne, hauing but
the seuerall parts of the Lords prayer in
his mind may meditate of them happily
at his worke, or as God giues any leasure;
first marking how many things are
chiefely to bee learned in the Preface;
then in each petition; so in the conclusion:
and withall labouring to feele the
need that hee hath of them, our miserie
without them, and our happinesse in inioying

them; stirring vp his heart to a
vehement desire of them: and then at
time of prayer, to trie how hee can pray
of himselfe according to the same order;
vsing in the meane time, the helpe of one
of the prayers set downe, to get fit words;
and withall a daily meditation of his
particular sinnes, (chiefely those following
his nature and course of life, with
his principall wants, dangers, chastisements
and mercies receiued;) which wil
be the speediest teacher to the simplest to
pray with true feeling and power. If you
would yet wish further direction for the
generall confession of sinne, you may vse
the first and second helpes in the watch
of the miseries and hainousnes of sin, Edit.
2. p. 5. l. 9. If for an increase in holines,
the third helpe of the blessings following
a holy conuersation, pag.. 11. If
for true comfort and thankesgiuing; you
may vse the helpe of the rules for direction
and comfort in our examination,

               pag. 13. All which with the graces we
haue obtained in the Law, and promises
wee are assured of in the Gospell, must
needes cause the simplest to send forth
most sweete prayers and thankesgiuings
vnto the Lord. And so much for you
that are desirous to pray.
            Now to you that droope and faint
vnder your seuerall troubles and temptations,
not knowing what to doe,You that faint in your troubles. the
Lord hath here shewed you plainly what
you should doe. Learne of Eliphas in
Iob:
               Iob 22. 21. 
               Acquaint your selues with your
God, search your sins by the true triall;
Make peace with him;26. then you
may lift vp your face to God, make
your prayer vnto him, and he will heare
you:
               28. And his light shall shine vpon
your waies. When others are cast
downe you shall be lift vp,29. and God
will saue the humble person. Therfore
continue in prayer, wrastling with
him, let him not go before he haue blessed
               
you, hee will certainly doe it: Proue
and see. Onely, waite vpon the Lord in
the way of righteousnes vntill hee send
you comfort; vsing all holy and warrantable
meanes to helpe herein, to serue his
diuine and fatherly prouidence; but bee
afraid of so much as euer thinking of any
indirect course (as to do but the least
euil to obtaine neuer so great a good) and
much more of rebelling against the Lord
or his anointed, and that authoritie
which he hath set ouer you; lest aboue all
other your miseries, you bring vpon you
the terrors of an accusing conscience,Rom. 13. 2.
and procure vnto your selues most certaine
w
                  •
               e and endlesse damnation. And
thus much also for you that faint in your
trials. If you desire further aduice, looke
the watch, pag. 127.
            You that are afraid to pray, vsing the 
Lords praier as a praier,You that are afraid to vse the Lords praier. because you cannot
comprehend the meaning of it in so
few words: and for that the multitude

abuse it; accept my earnest endeuour to
knit our hearts in one, both by assisting
you, that you may haue the summe of the
chiefe heads euer in fresh memorie, as
before your faces; and that those who abuse
it without vnderstanding may
learne a more holy vse thereof. If yet you
say, that you cannot so comprehend the
full meaning of it, and all things contained
in it, the like you may say (as I
take it) of euery seuerall petition thereof,
and so we should vse none of them in our
prayers at all.
            For you beloued that sometimes were 
feruent in prayer,You that are fallen asleepe. but now are cold and
heauie, or altogether fallen asleepe; I say
not vnto you awake; Behold frō whence
you are fallen, and the danger wherein
your selues and the Church of God stand
continually; seeing our experience teacheth
vs, that there is but a haire bredth
betweene vs and death; especially if euer
the Lord should leaue his anointed,

our Iosiah, the breath of our nostrils,
for one minute, into the enemies hand.
But only 
                  •
                put you in mind of the speech
of our Sauiour to his drowsie Disciples;
Sleepe hencef
                  ••
               th & take your rest. I beseech
the Lord that I may neuer see that
day. But what meane all our prodigious
signes? and aboue all the worst, that almost
all areI desire to awake you by oft beating vpon this point. fallen asleepe in the midst
of such inueterate and deadly malice,
with all sorts of grieuous sins, increased
to the vttermost, to prouoke the Lord:
after so many bloodie practises, and terrible
forewarnings giuen so oft, and
gratiously to preuent the fierce wrath of
the Lord; with such sudden and insolent
ouer flewings; some of them in the
middest and highest part of the Land,
where the people were altogether secure,
as not hauing the least thought of any
danger by water; which together with
the former, (principally of the raging
seas) all must needs acknowledge to bee

the finger of God. If our sinnes had been
so increased in the daies of popish blindnes,
they had been nothing in respect;
but now in such a glorious light, wherin
all of vs haue been conui
                  •
               ced so many
waies; and subscribed in our hearts to
the truth of God; and also doe generally
still iustifie the good waies of God;
and yet for most part set our selues to
trample all vnder our feete, hating or
scorning all that so walke, how gratious,
dutifull and blamelesse soeuer they bee;
this must needs make our sins vnmeasurablie
sinfull, and aboue the sins of all other
people.
            And you that imagine you pray, and
are accepted of the Lord, and yet liue in
your vnmerciful oppression, or any other
such haynous sin; may it not well be demaunded
of you, as the Lord doth of the
people before the Captiuitie:Ier. 7. 9. 10. Will you
sweare, lie, dissemble, oppresse, build your
houses with blood, commit adulterie,

drinke the blood of soules and all other
euil, and yet crie, the temple of the Lord,
we are the seruants of the Lord, and call
vpon his name? Will the Lord take a
wicked man by the hand? Can the hypocrite
call on God in the day of his
aduersitie? No, no, you deceiue your own
soules; vntill you haue made peace with
God by vnfained repentance, and by
Zacheus restitution peace with men.
Nay although you cōmit not halfe these
sins,Ezec. 18. 11. but liue in any one of them, or any
other like, hath not the Lord saide you
shall surely die for it? What good then
can your prayers doe, when the Lord
turnes away his eare (as frō that whichProu. 28. 9.
is abominable,)Prou. 1. 24. 25. 26. and will laugh at your
destruction; because you would not first
harken vnto him to turne from your euill
waies, while he stretched forth his 
hands vnto you?You that still continue with our Sauiour.
            
            Therefore vnto you (my deere brethren
of all sorts and degrees) who haue

continued with our Sauiour hitherto, in
watching, prayers and teares, and yet at
length begin with Moses to faint, with
long holding vp your hands, or are in
danger thereof; I vnfainedly desire of
the Lord, that I may bee as Aaron or
Hur, to helpe to confirme your weake
hands and wearie knees.Deut. 20. 1. 2. 3▪
                Let not your
hearts faint.2. Chr. 25▪ 2. The Lord our God is with
vs while we are with him. Let vs continue
wrastling and weeping, and become
so much more instant and importunate
as the sins & dangers increase; vrging
him euer with his owne glorie, the pride
of his enemies, and their blasphemies, if
euer they should preuaile: together with
his gratious promises, loue and former
mercies, both to all his owne people in all
ages, and especially towards our selues,
declared hitherto in all our peace, prosperitie,
miraculous deliuerances, with continuance
of the Gospell beyond all expectation.
Oh that all in the Land fearing

the Lord,Three things wished at the hands of all fearing God. and the tokens of his displeasure,
had hearts to performe but these
three duties to his heauenlie Maiestie.
            
                First that euerie one of vs would but
learne to know our owne speciall faults
and wants by carefull meditation in the
law,Each to know and amend our speciall faults. together with the sins and wants of
the Church and Land, and so to consider
each night how we preuaile in reforming
our selues; and then frame our
praiers and thankesgiuing accordingly:
for each of our particular and principall
sins, are as Satan that stood at Iehosuahs
right hand, that our praiers cannot
go vp vnto the Lord. And of all others,
that euery one whose conscience doe accuse
them of crueltie towards their brethren,
would take away that crying sin
of oppression, crying louder for vengeance
then al the sins of the earth besides,
which brought the floud of waters, when
the earth was filled with crueltie; and

brought in the fierce Babylonian, to oppresse
and spoile the great men in Iudea,
and to make those goodlie houses desolate,Esay 5. 8. 9.
which had formerly been built by
the oppressions and spoiling of the poore:
which makes the poore to sigh being wearie
of their liues,Psal. 12. 5. whose sighes the Lord
must needes heare and auenge,Exod. 22. 22. 23. when
man regardeth them not:Deut. 9. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. which will so
shut vp the bowels of the Lords mercie
and compassion, that hee will shew vs no
more mercie, but, reiect all our praiers,
because we would haue no mercie of the
poore; no, though Noah, Iob and Daniel
were amongst vs;Ezek. 14. 14. that they should
but saue their owne soules; and so must
needs bring a fearefull desolation vpon
our sinfull nation, vnlesse it be speedilie
redressed: besides the blasphemies of the
Idolatrous enemies of the Church of
God, and their braggs of their workes of
mercie and pitie; thereby mouing the
people to a discontentednes, & to dislike

of the religion of the Lord, as being the
breeder and nourisher of all such cruel
and vnmercifull dealing; though euen
in this same bloodie sin, they be as deepe
as any other.
            
                Secondly, that all would learne of our
Sauiour to pray as he hath commanded.To learne of our Sauiour to pray.
I haue this consident hope, that the weakest
Christian amongst vs hauing a
good heart,My hope of the simplest. although he haue neuer been
able to vtter his requests to God for himselfe
or Gods Church,Learne but the chiefe heads of the margents and trie, making them your morning meditation. would in few
weekes (but following this poore direction)
learne to pray in feeling with much
comfort: & those who want good hearts,
would by this practise obtaine them.
            Thirdly, that wee would all ioyne to
pray according to the two first petitions,
 for the Church of God, our Prince and
Realmes, with true vnitie therein,To pray according to the two first petitions chiefelie. and
against all the enemies of them; for then
vndoubtedly we should neither neede to
feare the practises of the Popes Seminaries

nor diuels,The fruit hereof. nor yet all the enemies of
the world; but only stand still with Moses,
and see what the Lord would still
do for vs. Happie shall they be, whom the
Lord singles out vnto this worke, to be if
it were but as one of Gedeons three
hundred, for the perpetuall preseruation
of the Church of God and their countrey.
But for the rest, although they
scape the Beare, yet a Lion shall teare
them in peeces; for being deliuered with
Gods s
                  •
               ruants from the temporal iudgement,
the eternall wrath of God doth
certainly remaine for them. Wherefore
giue me leaue to speake a little furtherA further pressing the exhortation to prayer.
vnto your soules in this important businesse,
if I may awake but some of you.
            You that spend your liues in pleasures,
will you not be perswaded to spend someTo them that liue in pleasures.
houres in this heauēly work, to talke with
God for the sauing your owne soules and
the people of the Lord? Oh that you knew
the vnspeakable sweetenesse that heerein

you should find; whereas in your vaine
pleasures what can you looke for, but intolerable
bitternes in the end? will not
all these increase the wrath against vs?
whereas the changing them into prayers,
with fasting and teares, would be as
the sacrifice of Noah, wherein the Lord
would certainly smell a sauor of rest; and
as the repentance of Niniuie, that hee
that had compassion on the poore ignorant
heathen, would much more cause
his face to shine still more bright, vpon
vs, whom he hath vouchsafed so long
the profession of his name. Know it for
certaine, as the Lord hath giuen any of
you mo of his outward blessings, & with
them more time & meanes to serue him,
so hee lookes for so much more time at
your hands to be spent in instant prayer,
then of any other of the earth, and so
must your account be. Do not the popish
sort that liue in your bosoms obserue, besides
your extreame irreligiousnes, how

you neuer vse to pray priuately, or with
any deuotion? and are they not hereby
hardened to like far better of their owne
blind superstition; wherein they spend so
much time in praier? How will you answere
your God for the blood of so many
soules as hereby perish? If you could bee
perswaded (which you will one day feele,
either in this life, or when it is vtterlie
too late) that these & all other your sins,
wherein now is your felicitie, will bee as
so many swords to peirce your poore
soules, and so many diuels to torment you
eternally; and your repentance & death
altogether vncertaine: you durst not let
one minute passe, but would fall into bitter
mourning for all your sinnes, and for
your time so ill spent, and bee warned by
our Sauiour to begin to watch and pray,
that you might escape all these miseries,
that will certainly come vpon you.
            You also that haue filled your houses 
with the spoiles of the poore, & the earth

with their cries, the crie of your sinnes is
gone vp into the heauens, that the Lord
threatneth to be auenged forthwith. Let
the counsell of Daniel to Nabuchadnezar
be acceptable vnto you,Dan. 4. 24. if you will
escape the decree that is comming forth
against you. Breake off your sins by righteousnes,
and your iniquities by mercie
towards the poore.Esay 1. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. Repent and make restitution
while you may▪ Cease to do euil,
learne to doe well, seeke iudgement, releeue
the oppressed, iudge the fatherlesse
and defend the widow, as the Lord bids
you by his Prophet. Then you may pray,
and your praiers shall be heard: though
your sins were as crimson (that is, most
bloodie sins) yet they shall be made white
as snow. If yee consent and obey, yee shall
eate the good things of the Land: but if
yee refuse and be rebellious, ye shall be deuoured
with the sword; for the mouth of
the Lord hath spoken it. Your oppressiōs
which haue pressed downe the poore vnto

the ground, will one day crush you into
the bottome of hell, and will be a loade
heauier then the whole earth vpon you:
that you would giue all the world, if you
had it, to be disburdened of them; and
at your death the iudgement threatned
vnto Iehoiakim shall surely light vpon
you,Ierem. 22. 18. 19. that none shall lament or mourne
for you, to say, ah Lord, ah his glorie; but
all shall reioyce that the earth is eased of
you; and your remembrance shall remaine
most vile and loathsome to all posteritie,
as the memorie of other oppressors
doth before.
            And for you that would neuer spare
so much as one houre from your worldly 
businesses to priuate praier,To the worldling. when God
opens your eyes to discerne the true profit
hereof, aboue the other, & that hitherto
you haue been meerely of the world, and
vtterly without God; howsoeuer you look
to your worldly businesse, you will looke
to this businesse of the Lord, and set your

selues times of praier, which the gaining
of the world cannot make you to forget.
            
                And in a word, so many of you as can
talke with men of any earthly matter,To all that cānot pray of themselues, nor regard to learne.
and make any request for this present
life, for whatsoeuer you need; and yet
could neuer vtter so much as one speech,
no not in secret to your Father in heauē,
nor make any one supplication for any
heauenly thing with feeling; how can
you thinke that euer you were touched
with Zeale of Gods glorie or his kingdome?
or how can you imagine that you
can be the children of the heauenlie Father,
or haue any interest in the Lord
and his kingdome; or be any thing but
meere worldlings, sauoring onely the
world, and it alone your portion, hauing
a world of miseries and torment remaining
for you for euer? Learne therefore
to praie aboue all; you will finde this a
treasure ten thousand times better then
all the wealth & pleasures of the world.

For what you would haue, this will vndoubtedlie
procure you, as far as shall be
good; and whereas all the honors, pleasures,
riches and friends in the world,
can neuer giue you any true contentmēt,
nor adde one minute vnto your life; this
only will fill your hearts in heauenly contentation,
with abundant ioy and gladnesse,
and make you liue and raigne with
Christ for euer in the heauens.
            Now so many as acknowledge that
thus indeede you ought both to watch 
and pray,To all that acknowledge the truth and necessitie hereof. and yet but only giue these the
reading, without care to learne the practise
of them, or happily hauing some
good motions or purposes, to put them
forthwith in practise, or it may be, haue
begun well, yet through your pleasures
or worldly businesse, or at least a carnall
sloth and securitie leaue them off, and
returne to your old courses, bee warned
from the Lord; for this will certainly be
one further witnesse and conuiction against

you, then euer formerly you receiued,
and much better it had bin for you,
that you had neuer seene this way of life,
thus plainly and easily set before you, and
how you may either helpe to preserue the
whole, or at least escape your selues from
the euils to come; then after you haue
knowne it, and subscribed in your hearts
to the truth and necessitie of it, and happilie
put your hands to the plow, to looke
backe againe. Remember Lots wife; if
you be out of Sodome hie for your liues,
vntill you be safe in Zoar; and being safe
your selues, learne to be as importunate
with the Angell of the Couenant, when
you but thinke of the sins of the Land, as
faithfull Abraham was: comforting
and incouraging your selues in this, that
you are not alone but many with you,
and the Lord hath yet his ten righteous
left, in all quarters some, that mourne
and crie for all the abominations. If in
this attempt I haue failed of that I desire,

I humblie craue pardon; and also
that my good will may be accepted, in
this endeuour intended chiefely to helpe
the simple. Vouchsafe me your better direction,
and I shall willinglie follow it.
My desire is to labour herein also to
bring this together with the watch to
more perfection, if I shall find it accepted,
and that it may bring the least good
to Gods Church; in which I desire not
to liue one day longer, then I may bee
some way profitable. I haue so oft made
reference to the watch as to a maine
ground of prayer, and for that this is as
a second part, and an vnseparable companion
thereof,Ephes. 6. 13. 14. 18. (as the Apostle makes
them Ephes. 6.) and also that I neede 
not trouble you with oft repetition of theTo them that are not perswaded of such present necessitie of praier, but thinke me ouer fearefull.
same things.
            Cōcerning the present necessitie hereof,
(that I may neither seeme ouer bold,
not yet to fearful of some grieuous iudgment
without cause) I desire of all sorts

that you would examine it betweene the
Lord and your owne consciences (to
whom I appeale, and which I know will
witnesse with me, when I shall stand before
the great tribunall) your consciences
I say, not asleep in this deepe security,
but either throughly awaked by the law,
or as they were vpon the instant of the
discouerie of the gunpowder plot; or at
any time before any of our great deliuerances,
fullie accomplished in the midst
of our extreame dangers. Remember
but whether your hearts weare not then
as my heart is now; that if God had done
with vs as he then threatned, he had not
been most righteous, and wee iustlie deserued
it. Did not all hearts tremble in
the acknowledgement of the truth of his
Maiesties sacred speech in the Parliament
house at that time? And who
would not haue confessed in any of these
dangers, that it had not been full time
for each to haue betaken himselfe to this

armour; to haue run to God by instant
supplication, and stood vp in the breach;
and for euery one to haue learned to
watch and pray? And must not our
case since be far more desperate, wee hauing
receiued thus our third most terrible
admonition, together with so many
mercies still heaped vpon vs? Let vs but
thinke what wee haue done since that
time, to secure vs from the finall execution
of his vengeance: haue we not most
fearefully increased the transgression, going
still many degrees backwards, running
from the Lord, and suncken deeper
in our rebellion, insteed of turning to
him according to our oft promises, and
his infinite mercy? Besides our impudencie
in sinning; and our eating vp one
another in euery corner and degree, racking
al things to the vttermost farthing,
and all commonly to maintaine pride
and all excesse; countenancing the lewdest
in euery place, disgracing and treading

vpon the vpright, that he that abstaines
from euil maketh himself a prey:
Let but the shamelesnes of that one sin of
quaffing, condēned by the heathē, in Assuerus
Court in their greatest pomp and
excesse that euer we reade of, and registred
in Gods book for that cause, be witnes:
although we cānot imagin that euer
it was practised in halfe so odious a maner,
as it is ordinarilie with vs euerie
where, in scorning the Lord to his face,
and sacrificing to Satan. Our cloakes of
Ciuility wil proue but Adams figleaues.
Inquire of your own hearts, whether this
be not the generall verdict of all whom
God hath touched, or who retaine any of
their ancient feeling; yea whether the very
blind may not grope it; that there was
neuer such a declining to all loosenes, opē
prophanenes & euen Atheisme heard or
read of in any age, where the Gospell was
professed, nor that sinne was practised
with so high a hand. And then answere

plainly, whether the Lord may not iustly
get himselfe glory of vs, in the declaration
of his iustice, and the power of his
wrath against our sins; seeing the riches
of his mercies in sparing and deliuering
vs, haue made vs so far to exceede, as to
deny the tokens of his wrath, and despise
him to the face; scorning and hating nothing
so much as a holy care to serue him
according to his wil. Or what followes amongst
men (euē the most equal & merciful)
after the third admonitiō at most,
but the due execution & final expulsiō?
And whether we haue not iust cause to
feare and seeke to pacifie his wrath? Or
whether hee may not most righteouslie
cause his owne children to crie in feeling
the miseries which haue not cried out in
seeing the abominatiōs, & seeking to pacifie
him: and also whether hee may not
iustly pluck the world frō vs, which hath
so bewitched & plucked vs frō him. And
to conclude, whether it be not much better

that we each awake and meet him in
time with intreaty of peace, because he is
so merciful, thē to be awaked of him and
crie day and night (as his people in the
Captiuitie) when it is too late, and he will
shew no mercy vntill his work be accōplished
vpō vs. Thus hauing presumed this
second time, to testifie my heart to al, and
my earnest desire of a heauēly vnion, and
all happines to Gods Church, & this our
nation, I take my leaue; with my instant
praiers that al Gods seruants may haue
their eies open, to see the necessitie of this
work aboue al other, & their harts prepared
to set thēselues forthwith hereunto,
(which hath made me the longer in perswading
vnto it.) The whole successe I
leaue to his heauenly Maiestie, whose
this work is, & who hath long called vs
al vnto the practise of it, looking & wondring
that so few haue come to help,Esay 6. 3. 5. and
whose only arme hath helped vs hithertoEzek. 22. 30▪
               
& wil for euer,Iudg. 5. 23. if we but only cry to him.
         
      
      
         
            THREE PRINCIPALL
points to be first learned and felt of
euery poore Christian, that intends to
helpe in this worke of prayer; the summe
where of being in our hearts, will bee as a
continuall spurre and preparatiue to
prayer, and as the life and
soule thereof.

               1. The necessitie of prayer.
               2. The speciall properties of them that
can pray.
               3. The power of prayer rightly performed.
            
         
         
            The necessitie of prayer.
            1 WE can neuer come to any assurance
that we are in the fauour
of God,Without this cōstāt practise, we can neither be assured that we are Gods children, nor that wee haue right to any creature. or his children, before wee
make conscience to practise this dutie
daily: for the spirit of prayer, (which
makes vs to pray with sighes & grones)
is the earnest and seale of our adoption;

and is giuen vnto vs so soone as euer
Christ is made ours by faith; and therefore
in the meane time we stand in stateRom. 8. 15. 16.
of damnation,Gal. 4. 6. and are theeues and vsurpers
of that which we haue.
            2 We can haue no comfort,But haue all things work to our damnation. that the
things which we enioy shal be to our saluation;
but to increase and seale vp our
condemnation; seeing they are only sanctified
by the word and prayer;1. Tim. 4. 5. and for
that we receiue them without giuing the
Lord his due glory.Prou. 16. 4.
            
            3 We cannot looke to obtaine any
one thing as a blessing,We cannot looke to obtaine any thing as a blessing, nor turne away any euill. of al those things
which our Sauiour hath taught vs to
pray for, nor to turne away any one euil
but by prayer: for God hath ordained
this to be the onely hand hereunto,Mat. 7. 7. saying,Iam. 4. 2. 3.
Aske and ye shall haue.
            4 Seeing euery worldling can speake
to his friend,Nor be any thing but meere worldlings, feeling no want, nor able to speake of any thing else. for worldly things; and euery
child can and vseth to run to his louing
father making his mone & requests
for whatsoeuer he would haue; how can
we imagin that God is our heauenly and
tēder Father, or we any thing but merely

earth-wormes and worldlings,Rom. 8. 5. vntill
wee vse to run vnto him daily to beg of
him heauenly things, which wee continually
and principally stand in need of.
            5 If we will be saued we must pray,Otherwise we cannot be saued.
seeing our Lord and Sauiour, (who will
saue only those that obey him, and destroy
all the rest,) hath so oft charged vs
to pray, and to pray continually, as the
importunate widow; teaching vs also,Luke 18. 1. so
plainly how to pray;Matth. 6. 9. leading vs by the
hand, if we will be guided by him; and
made vs such gracious promises if we wil
pray;Psal. 14. 4. and contrarily describing the accursed
Atheists to be such as call not vpon
his name.Ier. 10. 25.
            
            6 Lastly,The Lord cals vs al to step into the breach with Moses.
                the Lord our merciful God,
at this time especially cals vs all that are
in any fauour with his Maiestie, to steppe
vp into the breach to stay his hand for
being auenged,Ezec. 22. 30 for the generall ouerflow
of iniquitie in all estates; concerning
which all naturall men could say
long agoe, that God must needes bring
some terrible plague vpon our nation,
without speedie repentance; which indeed

hee had done sundrie times since,
(butAt the intended inuasion. thrice aboue all other, neuer to be
forgotten) had not his hand been wonderfully
stayed: and we notwithstanding
since insteed of repenting,The death of Q. Elizabeth.
                haue growne
much worse in euery kind of iniquitie,
being now become not only secure,The gunpowder plot. but
also hardned in all our euill courses, to
make but a sport of sin, and a scorne of al
those who make any conscience to walk
in the waies of the Lord; so that hereby
our sin must needs be increased to the vttermost,
and much more considering the
Lords most miraculous deliuerances of
vs; his continuall threatnings and admonitions
by his seruants proclayming
his wrath; warnings from heauen and
earth; a continued pestilence for so many
yeeres together, visiting euery corner
of our Land; the raging of the winds
and waters, to such a terror and desolation:
the sword set to our very hearts; the
graue prepared for vs by our enemies,
yet wee deliuered, and sundrie of them
throwne in as our ransome. Now after al
this, and that in the cleare light of the

Gospell, with innumerable mercies besides,
& sundry promises of our amendment
wee waxing still worse and worse,
and now without all hope of recouerie;
how can it be but the Lord must needes
waxe wearie with forbearing; or what
comfort can bee left vs but onely the instant
prayers of Gods faithfull seruants,Reade with reuerence the Prophet Ieremie, with the rest who liued hard before the captiuitie euen in Iosiahs daies, and compare times with times, and it will make vs crie instātly to God, day and night.
either to stay his hand still, or to secure
vs to bee hid in the euill day? If all this
cannot awake vs, yet this one thing well
considered, will vndoubtedly rouse vs,
as the certainest euidence of vengeance
approching, that those enemies by whō
he hath so oft threatned vs to auenge his
quarrell, and whom we al know by long
experience to thirst most greedily after
our blood, are againe increased in number,
pride and malice, after the time that
we had thought them quashed for euer
rising, or once daring to shew their faces
againe: that knowing their holie father,
the bloodie positions, Machiauellian
plots and practises of their cursed religion
in all countries, we must needes see
our selues in imminent danger of vtter

destruction euerie houre, more then that
mightie arme shal still protect vs, which
wee see to bee iustly stretched out against
vs for our sinnes, and the
power of praier which hitherto
hath staied it, to be fearfully
abated.
         
         
            
            THE SPECIALL PROperties
of them that can pray: (for
as Iosuah told the people they could
not serue the Lord,Ios. 24. 19. so euery one cannot
pray)Prou. 28. 9. and these euidently grounded
out of the Lords
Prayer.
            1 WE must bee the children of
GOD,Wee must be children of childlike affections towards our heauē
                  ly Father, and able to cal him Father. borne anew by his
Word and Spirit, hauing some assurance
of his fauour, and a desire to grow therein;
carrying alwaies childlike affections
to his Maiestie: for we must come to him
as to our deare Father, and be able by the
Spirit of adoption to call him Abba, oh
Father.
            2 Wee must euer come vnto our Father
only through his beloued Sonne,Rom. 8. 15. by
whom we are reconciled,Comming in faith only in Christ & in a true sense of our owne vnworthines. made his children,
and kept in his fauour; and withall
in a true sense of our vnworthines to bee
called his children, or make any request

vnto him: and so we must make our petitions
only in the name of this our Lord
and Sauiour, in whom alone our Father
is well pleased: begging in faith (that is)
in full assurance to be heard for Christs
merit, in whatsoeuer wee request of our
tender Father.
            3 We must come in all humilitie before
his heauenly Maiestie,In all humilitie, being but dust and ashes; yet with our hearts lift vp to heauen. remembring
we are but dust and ashes; yet full of heauenly
affections; able to lift vp our harts
vnto him, and to bee onely conuersant
with him in the heauens for the time
of prayer principally; hauing all our
thoughts separated from the earth, and
all earthly cogitations; because we speak
to our Father which is in heauen.
            4 We must be brethren of brotherly
and tender hearts towards all the children
of our heauenly father,Wee must be brethrē tenderly affected towards all the childrē of our heauenly Father. (that is, all
those who soundly professe the Gospell
of Christ in word and conuersation) because
our heauenly Father will haue vs
hereby both to declare and increase our
loue; praying all one for another, and
in the name of all, as deare brethren and

feeling members; crying earnestly for
all: Our Father.
            5 We must be such as are zealous for
the glory of our heauenly Father;Zealous of our Fathers glorie aboue all things in the wo
                     •
                  ld. desirous
both to behold his glory, shining
brightly in all his workes, and chiefely in
his heauenly word; and labouring to
draw all others to a like reuerend admiration
thereof; making this the end of all
our indeuours, that our heauenly Father
may bee honoured; and casting all our
thoughts which way we may gaine him
any glorie; more afraid of dishonoring
him any way, or offending him, but euen
in our thoughts, then any euill that can
befall vs in the world; and such as vse
to mourne for all the dishonors done
vnto God his heauenly Maiestie; that we
may euer both truly begin and end our
prayers with this feruent desire; That his
great name may be glorified, because all
kingdome,Seeking first the kingdome of heauen, and the righteousnes therof. power and glorie are only his
for euer.
            6 Such as first seek his kingdome and
the righteousnes of it; that is, the inlargemēt
of the Church wherin Christ raignes

and is magnified, and so the spreading of
his true religion, and of all the meanes
belonging to the conuersion and sauing
of his elect; with the vtter ouerthrow of
all false religion and vngodlines, whereby
Satan and Antichrist do raigne, vsing
all diligence for sauing ourselues and others:)
that being heere partakers of his
kingdome of grace, wee may euer after
raigne with him in glorie: and also such
as long and waite for the comming of
our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Otherwise
how can wee pray in truth: Let
thy kingdome come?
            7 We must bee of an holy conuersation,Making cō
                  science of euery tittle of the will & word of the Lord.
as the loyal subiects of this heauenly
kingdome; striuing to know the will
of our heauēly Father, in al things which
concerne vs; and such as make conscience
of euery tittle of his word, as Noah
and Moses: who in all things as the
Lord bad them, so did they: able to say
as Dauid, I am heere Lord to do thy will, I
am desirous to do it as cheerefully as the
Angels in heauen; readie with Abraham
to leaue all at the Lords commandement,

and offer vp whatsoeuer is dearest
vnto vs in the world; and to receiue
any triall with patience and thankfulnes,
and with Paul, not onely ready to bee
bound, but to die at Ierusalem for the
name of Iesus. Or else we can neuer pray
in sinceritie, Thy will be done in earth as
it is in heauen.
            8 Such also as labor to depend whollie
vpon the Lords fatherly prouidence,Labouring to depend wholly vpō the Lords prouidēce and protection.
and watchfull protection, for this life,
and all the comforts of it; in a feeling of
our owne naturall frailtie, that if hee but
take away our breath wee are gone, and
cannot of our selues continue one minute;
and withall, that wee are neither
worthie of, nor able of our selues to get
the least crumme of bread, much lesse to
cause it to do vs any good; and therfore
such as vse to beg it euery day from our
heauenly Father, and that as well for the
poore as for our selues, being liuely touched
with their miseries; desirous to imploy
that which he bestowes vpon vs, to
his glory and the good of his children;
labouring (as Iacob and Paul) if we haue

but bread to be therewith content: such
as neither trust in the abundance of
meanes, nor faint in the want of them;
but onely vse all meanes appointed to
serue his diuine and fatherly prouidence,
casting all the care for the successe vpon
him alone, being assured that he cannot
faile vs, nor forsake vs of that that shall
be best for vs; (so far as may stand with
his owne glorie and the good of vs his
people) at least so long as we endeuour
to honor him, walking as his obedient
children: without this we can neuer pray
aright; Giue vs this day our daily bread.
            9 We must bee such as vse to trauell
vnder the burden of all our sins,Trauelling vnder the burden of our sinnes. especially
presumptuous and scandalous; in the
sense both of the multitude & haynousnes
of them, & also our misery by them,
vntill we be throughly washed from thē
in the blood of Iesus Christ; as hauing
no other meanes of deliuery or satisfaction:
feeling with Paul the corruption
of our nature, and our daily infirmities to
be as a death vnto vs; and hereupon vsing
to crie instantly in the eares of the Lord:

Forgiue vs our trespasses; neuer giuing
him ouer vntil we obtaine this assurance.
            10 We must be voide of malice,Voide of malice, vsing to pray for our enemies. and
such as vse to pray for our very enemies;
and are readie to doe them any kindnes,
wherby to gaine them to Christ, or leaue
them more without excuse; because then
wee haue this assurance to bee forgiuen,
and not else; neither can we say in truth
Forgiue vs our trespasses, as wee forgiue
them that trespasse against vs: but pray
for a curse vpon our selues.
            11 Hauing a continuall sense of the
danger we stand in,Fearing alwaies, and watching, lest wee should fall into temptation, so suspecting all our waies. of falling into some
sinne euery houre, to the dishonor of our
heauenly Father, and prouoking his displeasure,
with innumerable euils following
thereupon; through the deadly malice
and subtiltie of Satan, who hath the
aduantage of our corrupt nature, and all
things in the world to beguile vs: fearing
alwaies lest for our sinnes the Lord
should leaue vs in his hand; and thereupon
such as are carefull to keepe our
rankes, and the watch of the Lord. That
wee may continually pray in feeling,

Leade vs not into temptation, but deliuer
vs from euill.
            12 Carrying alwaies a reuerent and
thankfull acknowledgement of his absolute
kingdome,Acknowledging euer his soueraigntie, and how he disposeth al for his own glorie, and the good of his elect. power and soueraigntie
ouer all creatures, that hee ouerrules
both the rage of men and diuels, and all
other things in heauen and earth, disposing
all to his owne glorie, and the saluation
of his obedient subiects and children;
that we may be euer able to sound
forth with thankfulnes, For thine is the
kingdome, power and glory for euer and
euer.
            13 Lastly wee must bee such true beleeuers,Able in true faith with thākfulnes to say Amen.
as being assured that hee will
graunt all that we beg, as shall bee most
for his own glory, and the greatest good
of his elect, do rest our selues wholly vpon
his fatherly loue, being able in
thankfulnesse euer to say: Amen;
Lord let it be so as
we doe assure our
hearts it shal
bee.
         
         
            
            THE POWER OF
true Prayer.
            1 WHen we are such sound Christians,To giue vs assurance of Gods fauour.
and vse to pray in this
manner, wee shall haue a certaine assurance
that we are Gods children,Rom. 10. 12. and in
his fauour,Rom. 8. 15. 16. 26. and such as shall be saued vndoubtedly:
for this is the Lords seale
and the earnest of our inheritance.2 Cor. 1. 22.
            
            2 We shall haue a comfortable and
sanctified vse of all things wee enioy.To haue all things sanctified vnto vs.
1. Tim. 4. 5.
            3 We shall bee sure to obtaine whatsoeuer
he hath taught vs to pray for;To obtaine whatsoeuer we so pray for. so
far as shal be for his owne glory and our
good; for the very forme of prayer containes
a most gratious promise; that so
asking we shall obtaine: otherwise our
Sauiour would neuer haue taught vs to
pray so; assuring vs that if wee aske in
faith we shall haue, and that according

to our faith, it shall bee done vnto vs.
            4 The seruent prayers of a few of vs,For the turning away any iudgement from our Land, or procuring any blessing.
being such as are described, shall doe
more for turning away any iudgement
from the Church; discouering and ouerthrowing
the deepest plots of Gods enemies,
or for procuring any blessing to
our Land, then many of our valiantest
souldiers and wisest polititians; or then
many thousands of our enemies, & hundred
thousands of the wicked ioyning
with them to prouoke the Lord by their
sins, can doe to bring a iudgement vpon
vs. For wee know how many times that
one Moses staied the Lords hand, that he
could not destroy his people; and also
that Eliah was the Chariots and horsemen
of Israel; yet were they men subiect
to like passions that we are: for our
God is still the same of infinite compassion;
and therefore looke what Gods
seruants haue been formerly able to doe
by their praiers, the same shall wee doe
still, so farre as shall be necessarie, if we
striue to walke in their steps. So that we
haue no cause to feare, sith one of them

alone could so farre preuaile with the
Lord, but that many of vs ioyning as an
a mie to compasse the Lord about with
our prayers and teares, may much more
ouercome his heauenly Maiestie, if our
hearts and hands be steadie with Moses;
especially he hauing shewed such tokens
of his compassion and loue towards his
chosen flocke amongst vs, as neuer in any
age more:Ezech. 22. 30. and now calling vs also to
stand vp in the breach,Iob 22. 30. hauing assured vs
that the innocent shall deliuer the Iland.
Therefore all of vs that feare the Lord,
must cheerfully each incourage one another
to this dutie,Deut. 20. 1. 3. 4. confirming the wea
                  ••
               e
hands and wearie knees;Heb. 12. 12. being certainly
assured of this at least, that though the
Lords decree should bee gone forth against
vs for all our exceeding prouocations,
and that hee would not spare the
whole at our prayers, (whereof notwithstanding
we may haue gratious hope to
the contrarie, if we can but find our harts
feruently set to this dutie of prayer) yet
we shall saue our owne soules,Ezek. 14. 14. and the
Lord will bee vnto vs as a sanctuarie,

whereas otherwise, if such a iudgement
come vpon vs, as hath been so oft almost
fully executed, (which the Lord in mercie
still saue vs from) we are all accessary
to it, who haue not sought in time to
turne it away, and accursed with Meroz,
               Iudg. 5. 23.
because we came not to helpe the Lord
against the mightie: and so shall find nothing
but feare and an euill conscience to
chase vs:Prou. 28. 1. whereas on the contrarie wee
shall be strong and couragious as Lions
whatsoeuer come to passe; knowing that
euen in the midst of the fire there he will
bee with vs,Esay 43. 1. 2. 3. that the flame shall not so
much as kindle on vs (more then he
wil dispose to his own exceeding
glorie and our endlesse comfort)
and also in the flouds
that they do not ouerwhelme
vs.
         
         
            
            A MOST HEAVENlie
and sure rule according to
the whole Lords Prayer in order:
whereby wee may grow to strong
assurance and much power
in Prayer.
            
               LIue alwaies as an obediēt child,
in the eye of thy heauenly Father;
humbled in the reuerence
of his most holy and
glorious Maiestie, and in the sense of
thine owne vilenesse and vnworthines
to be called his childe; longing vntill
he take thee vnto himselfe into the heauens;
studying what way thou mayest
Let the desire of the two first petitions be euer in thy hart, & beg al other things for them only as being the end of all, then shalt thou bee each way most blessed, and aske what thou wilt so, & thou shall receiue it. honor him most in the meane time:
and that first by yeelding all obedience
to the lawes of his kingdome, and gayning
moe thereunto: attending continually
what his diuine will and pleasure
is concerning thee, chiefely in thy particular

calling, and the charge committed
vnto thee: and then thou shalt surely
find him God all-sufficient vnto thee,
more tender ouer thee then euer was father
or mother, performing vnto thee
all his promises according to all thy petitions,
for this and for the better life; and
sealing vnto thee a plentifull assurance
of the free pardon of all thy sinnes in the
blood of his Sonne Iesus Christ; and that
he will saue thee from the tempter, and
all euill that they shall not hurt thee:
That thou shall be able with all ioy and
thankfulnes to acknowledge vpon happie
experience, his absolute kingdome
and power, and so to giue him continually
with all his holy Angels, all glory,
praise and dominion, resting thy
selfe most fully satisfied in his
onely loue and fauour for
euer and euer.
         
         
            
            THE SVMME OF
all in other words, most
plainly; for the vnderstanding
of the simplest.
            
               OBserue diligently the Watch of
the Lord; growing daily in
the practise of euery Commā
               dement,
and faith in all his promises:
and keepe in thy heart a Catalogue or
short summe of thine owne chiefe sins,
wants and infirmities, together with
the maine sins and wants of the Land,
and tokens of the Lords wrath due therunto
(gathered by wise obseruation according
to the rule of the Watch) and
withall set before thee the infinitnesse of
the Lords loue and compassion towards
his, with his speciall fauours towards
thy selfe: and then pray feruently in faith
to thy heauenly Father, looking stedfastlie
at Iesus Christ thy Sauiour; crying

onely in zeale for his glorie and kingdome;
and thou shalt bee able to pierce
the heauens; to preuaile with God as
Iacob, and much more with men; and
finde by good experience the truth of
that promise,Esay 65. 24. that before thou callest
God will answere; and
whilest thou speakest hee
will heare.
         
         
            
               
               THE PERFECT
RVLE AND SVMME
of Prayer.
               
                  Our Father]
Oh Lord most
holy and glorious,
terrible
to all the wicked,
but most
gratious and
ful of compassion
towards
all that desire
to obey al thy
Commaundements:
we that
are but dust
and ashes, children
of wrath
by nature, and
most rebellious
of all thy
creaturs, dare
not of our
selues once

lift vp our eies
to heauen.
               
                  Father.] Yet
neuerthelesse
seeing it hath
pleased thee
to receiue vs
for thine own
children by
grace, thorow
thy Son Iesus
Christ, by whō
thou hast purchased
& ordained
vs to
eternal glory,
and giuē him
to be our mediatour;
wee
come before
thee, (oh Father)
in his
name; magnifying
thee for
this fauour,
beeing the
greatest happines
that euer
could befall
vs.
               
                  
Increase in vs
daily this assurāce,
by making
vs to
grow in repē
                  tance
& faith;
& framing vs
to the image
of thy Son, in
al knowledge▪
loue & obedience;
wholly
changing and
renewing vs,
that wee may
bee no longer
strāgers from
thee, but may
delight to be
euer in thy
presēce, hearing
thy voice
or speaking to
thee in prayer,
crying, Oh
Father.
               
                  
                  Our] And that
it may bee
more euident
that thou art
our Father indeede,
giue vs
grace to loue
thy childrē aboue
all other
for thy sake:
and each so
much more, as
they more excell
in vertue,
and are more
deare vnto
thee, that we
may daily remember
them
in al our prayers,
saying;

Our Father:
And delight
in their companies
onely,
as those with
whom we shal
liue for euer.
Knit our harts
in brotherlie
loue, that wee
may tenderlie
comfort & edifie
one another,
afraide
of grieuing or
hindering, &
much more of
turning anie
one out of the
way of life.
               Let our holie
agreemēt in al
the substance
of thy truth,
with our ioint
profession to
walk together
in the path of
life, bee of

more force to
vnite vs, then
all the trash
of the world,
or cunning of
Satan to diuide
vs.
               Are we not all
that so walke,
thine owne
children, and
coheires of
thy kingdom;
notwithstanding
all our
imperfections
and some lesse
diuersities
which must
accōpanie vs
while wee are
in the earth.
               Cōfoūd therfore
all deuices
working
this diuision,
to thy dishonor

& reioycing
to our enemies,
who
thus conspire
to worke our
shame & ruin,
if it were possible.
               Let vs neuer
rest vntill wee
finde these
hartie affections
towards
al thy childrē,
that heereby
we may know
certainly that
we are trāslated
frō death
to life, whē we
can pray, Our
father.
               
               
                  VVhich art in
heauen▪
                  ] And
whereas thou
raignest in

the heauens
where thou
hast prouided
throns for vs,
humble vs stil
more, in the
sense of thy
greatnes; seeing
we are but
poore wormes
crawling in
sin.
               And yet so lift
vp our hearts
vnto thee, yt
wee may bee
with thee, esspecially
in all
our prayers;
lōging to behold
thee face
to face: & let
our cōuersation
be so heauēly,
that the
world may see
that wee are
thy heauenlie
children trauelling

towards
thee, &
our selues may
grow vp to a
full assurance
that heauē is
ours, reserued
by our Lord
& Sauiour for
vs, & all creatures
euer to
do vs good.
               
                  Hallowed] And
seeing thou
hast vouchsafed
vs onelie
this honor, to
be the heires
of thy kingdom,
whereas
thou mightest
iustlie haue
lefte vs with

the wicked
to euerlasting
perdition.
               Giue vs grace
euer to testifie
our thankfulnesse,
seeking
in and aboue
al things
to honor thee.
Opē our eyes
to behold thy
power, wisedom
& goodnes
shining in
all thy works,
& much more
in thy heauē
                  ly
word chieflie
in all thy
iudgmēts vpon
thine enemies,
& mercies
towards
thy children,
still shewed euery
day.
               
                  
Make vs able
to cōsider of,
and set forth
the prayses
belonging to
thee therein,
both in word
& deed; yt by
vs thy great
name may be
knowne in all
the world. Aboue
all in
that wherein
thou hast bin
magnified before
our eyes,
in shewing thy
fatherly care
for vs, & wrath
against our enemies:
how
for dishonoring
thee in
abusing thy
Gospel, and al
thy blessings
bestowed on
vs aboue all
people; thou
hast not onely
corrected vs

tenderly with
thy milder
rods, but hast
also sundrie
times raysed
vp most cruell
enemies,
threatning
not onely to
take away the
Gospell, but
our vtter destruction
also,
and brought
them to the
very executiō
of it, because
we would not
hearken and
turne vnto
thee according
to thy
mercies: yet
euer when we
haue cried
vnto thee,
thou hast plucked
thē backe
in the instant,
and taken vē
                  geance
for vs:
so as we haue

oft thought
yt they durst
neuer haue
attēpted the
like againe: &
so, as if the
most barbarous
nations
had receiued
but the least
of our deliuerances
with
our meanes
they would
haue repēted
long agoe, as
wee haue oft
promised.
               Oh gracious
Father make
vs euer to
acknowledge
this, & to see
that thy anger
is againe more

fearfully kindled,
for that
these our enemies,
(as
our sinnes) do
stil increase in
number and
malice, without
hope of
leauing off
their practises,
vntil they
haue wrought
either ours or
their owne
endlesse ruin.
               Good Father,
let this token
of thy
wrath, (together
with the
arming of the
dumbe creatures,
both
windes and
waters so oft
threatning
our destruction,

for the ouerflow
of all
iniquitie in euerie
place)
preuaile so
mightily with
vs, that wee
may all presently
seek to
appease thine
anger. Diddest
thou not
before ye bloodie
and fiery
conspiracie
warne vs all
from heauen
(as thou didst
Ierusalem) inclosing
vs in a
fiery tent with
pillers of darknesse,
of fire &
blood (foreshewing
vs as
by yt which followed
we may
iustlie deeme)
yt bloodie destructiō
which
was towards
vs?
               
                  
Did not many
of our hearts
trēble at that
sight, causing
vs to seeke
more earnestly
to turne away
the future
euils?
               And feared
wee without
cause? Had it
not bin effected
indeed,
and we all inclosed
in the
most dark, fiery
and bloody
tent that euer
ye world heard
of; if yu hadst
not heard
the prayers
of thy poore
children, in
the verie instant,
and remembred
vs
in mercie?
               
                  
And shall wee
remain senselesse
still in
the middest
of the tokens
of thy wrath,
making the
whole land to
trēble at the
report of thē?
Saue vs from
that the heauiest
iudgmēt
that euer fell
vpon the hart
of man, wherby
not onely
the Egyptiās,
but also thine
owne people
were prepared
for their
final desolatiō,
so oft threatned
by our
Sauiour, that
by seeing wee
should see &
not perceiue,
but haue our

harts more ful
(by al ye means
vsed for our
repentance)
lest we should
conuert & be
spared.
               Opē our eyes
to see our
fearful estate,
and how farre
this iudgemēt
hath seased
on vs already.
Conuert vs &
we shal be cō
                  uerted,
& not
harden our
selues against
the tokens of
thy wrath, thy
word and seruants.
               
                  
Oh leaue vs
not vnto thē
whose mercies
are crueltie,
to cause
them to blaspheme,
but
let vs still fall
into thy hāds
who pitiest vs
whē thou smitest
vs, and in
wrath remembrest
mercie.
               Though our
sinnes be haynous

to anger
thee, yet let
the cry of thy
seruants still
preuaile.
               Hast thou not
saide it, that
the innocent
shall deliuer
the Iland? and
dost thou not
cal vs to stand
vp in ye breach,
because thou
wouldest not
destroy vs?
Hast thou not
beene wont
to pardon
whole natiōs
at the prayers
of a few of thy
seruants?
               Therefore we
thy remembrācers

(knowing
that thou
art still the
same, as to thy
seruāts in former
time, and
wee as deare
vnto thee; and
that thou cāst
denie vs nothing
which
we beg in thy
Sonnes name,
according to
thy will, for
our good) doe
humblie intreate
thee,
to glorifie thy
mercie in pardoning
our
sin, and turning
vs speedilie
vnto
thee; but make
thine enemies
to feele thy
hand, & those
chiefely, who
haue as Balaam
caused vs
to prouoke

thee so grieuously,
that
we haue been
so oft in so
fearefull danger,
by our
backslidings
and rebelliōs.
               Get thy selfe
glory vpō thē
as vpon Pharaoh,
that whē
thou hast deliuered
vs and
ouerthrowne
thē, as fundrie
times thou
hast begun,
wee may sing
praises, and euer
keep a remembrāce
of
thy mercie.
               Let vs bee afraid
of obscuring
any part
of thy glorie;

and much
more of seeking
our own
honour, or taking
any part
of thine honour
to our
selues, being
proud of thy
gifts. But aboue
all, keep
vs from dishonoring
thee,
by our sinfull
liues amongst
the wicked,
to cause them
to blaspheme.
               Let this bee
our honor to
honour thee,
and contrarily
our greatest
dishonor.
               Strēgthen vs
to walk so vprightly,
that
others seeing
our good
workes, may

glorifie thee,
and wee may
weare the reproch
of the
wicked as a
crowne.
               So kindle the
zeale of thy
glorie in our
harts, that we
may bee grieued
continually
for all
the dishonors
done vnto
thee. And
that insteede
of being ashamed
of
thee, or any
part of thy
truth, we may
euer professe
it with all holie
wisedome,
and boldnesse
as our chiefest
glory; that our
Sauiour may
acknowledge
vs before thee
in the presēce

of men & Angels,
to be the
heires of thy
kingdom; whē
he will denie
all other, as
those whom
hee neuer
knew, to their
endlesse confusion.
               Thy kingdome
come]
               And whereas
thou (oh Father)
art chiefly
glorified in
the increase
of thine owne
people which
obey thy
word, amongst
whom onelie
thou raignest,
and especiallie
when thou
causest thy religion

& people
to prosper
against all the
power of hell:
Grant thy Gospell
whereby
thou conquerest
& rulest,
to be sincerelie
preached
euery where,
and make it so
powerful that
it may destroy
the kingdome
of Satā & Antichrist;
& gather
all thine
vnto thee,
that so thou
mayest hasten
thy glorious
kingdome.
               And to this
end, raise vp
Kings and
Queenes to
nourish vs
with the word

of life, & preserue
vs from
the rage of all
our cruel enemies,
especially
that bloody
Antichrist:
and for those
that are such
already, make
thē ten times
more, accounting
this their
greatest dignitie
to haue
the bringing
vp of ye heires
of thy kingdome
committed
vnto
them.
               And as it hath
pleased thee
to settle this
kingdome in
so great peace
amongst vs,
deliuering vs
frō that blood
thirstie whore
of Babylon, &

to cōtinue the
same beyond
all former expectation
vnder
our dread
Soueraigne,
so indue him
with such an
abūdant portiō
of thy Spirit,
according
to that high
dignitie laide
vpon him; and
with such tender
affections
towards thy
children, that
in token of
true thankfulnes
for all his
dominions, &
chiefelie the
wōderfull deliuerances
of
his Maiestie &
his, (and of all
vs thy people
principally by
him) hee may
set himselfe
with Iehosaphat
                  
and Ezechiah,
& other worthie
Kings of
Iuda, to inlarge
thy king
dome, & promote
thy pure
religion, destroying
al vngodlines;
and
to procure
each way the
good of vs
thy poor childrē
cōmitted
to him; that al
we being still
more loyallie
affected, as
toward our
most happie
nursing father
vnder thee, &
as al the good
people were
towards Dauid,
may euer
sound foorth
thy praises for
him, and pray
earnestlie for
his preseruation,

& of our
Queene with
all their royal
progenie, that
his kingdome
may bee established
vntill
Christ shall
come, to resigne
vp this
earthly scepter
and raigne
with thee eternally.
               
                  
Giue all our
Rulers ye same
heart, yt they
may be as the
hāds of thine
annointed in
euery place,
for this purpose.
               And as thou
hast ordained
chiefely to finish
thy kingdome
by the
preaching of
thy Gospell,
which thou
did dest first
spread by thy
holy Apostles
subduing the
world therby,
so wee pray
thee to send
foorth such
powerful preachers
into euerie
congregation,
which

may not cease
to admonish
euerie one
with teares:
framing thē
                  selues
by all
holy meanes
to win all; afraid
of the
least offence,
which might
hinder the saluation
of anie
one. Awaken
at length all
sorts of vncō
                  scionable
ministers,
drūkē
with ye blood
of their people;
that remēbring
the
crie of Abels
blood, they
may be thinke
themselues in
time what to
answere when
Christ shall
come: and either
giue thē
repentance &

care for their
peoples saluation,
or free
them frō thē,
and cōmit thē
to such by
whō they may
bee brought
into obediēce
to the lawes
of thy kingdome;
that
thou alone
maiest raigne
as Lord amongst
them,
Antichrist being
cast out
vtterly, with al
things whereby
hee hath
kept any of
thy people vnder
his slauerie,
or seekes
to pull them
into Babylon.
               
                  
Deface (oh
Lord) all the
prints of his
Idolatrie, and
cut off all
hopes of euer
building vp
Babel againe.
               And seeing
the chiefe glorie
and safetie
of thy kingdom,
is in the
vnity of thy
subiects; take
away, good
Lord, all causes
of contentions.
Confound
all the
plots of cursed
Balaam,
who knowing
that no kingdome
diuided
can stād, seeks
to rend thy
Church in
peeces, the
easier to preuaile
against

it, when thou
art also departed
from it; as
euer Satan
hath beene
wont. Graunt
yt we may buy
this peace,
with the losse
of all, except
thy fauor, that
al sorts seeing
our holie
agreemēt, may
ioyne themselues
vnto
vs, and come
into the bosome
of thy
Church. And
moreouer, sith
thou wilt haue
euery one to
helpe to build
vp thy kingdome,
and to
saue others
by bringing
them therunto,
graunt vs
more care, not
onely for our

charges committed
to vs;
but for euerie
one tied vnto
vs by any special
bond that
wee may take
euery first occasion
for gaining
them vnto
thee, by all
holy meanes.
               Let vs not rest
before they
be safe. And
that wee may
preuaile the
more, giue vs
(oh Lord) a
sweet feeling
what a blessed
thing it is to
be of thy kingdome,
& partakers
of thy
glorie: euen
to be Kings &
Priests vnto
thee; and
what happines

there is in
liuing such a
holy conuersation,
& how
wretched the
state of all other
people
is, being bōdslaues
of Saran,
and reserued
for hell.
               Graunt vs to
liue in all
things, as thy
obedient subiects,
that wee
may passe frō
this kingdom
of grace into
thy glorious
kingdome.
               Make vs to
feare the occasiōs
of backsliding,
that
wee neuer so
much as once
look back vnto
the world,

but hie fast
towards heauē
where our
Sauiour keeps
possession for
vs. Destroy in
vs all our corruption,
wherby
Satan preuailes
against
vs. Hastē that
day when the
differēce shall
appeare between
vs and
thē that feare
thee not, whē
we shal raigne
with thee for
euer.
               And because
wee now liue
by faith, and
not by sight,
the wicked
oft flourishing
whē thy children
are afflicted:

Oh Lord increase
our
faith in all thy
sweete promises,
yt through
the comfort
of it, & power
of godlinesse,
we may grow
vp to a full assurance,
that
wee are the
true heires of
thy kingdome
and ouercome
all hinderances,
that being
faithful to
the death, we
may haue the
crown of life.
Fill our hearts
with such
peace & ioy,
with all the
fruits of righteousnes,
that
all may see to
what kingdome
wee belong,
and wee
feeling ye beginning

of it
here, may enter
into thy
heauenly ioy.
Thy wil be &c.]
And that our
childlike affectiōs,
with our
zeale & thākfulnesse,
may
more appeare
to all ye world;
quicken vs to
do thy heauē
                  ly
will, chiefelie
wherein
thou hast
shewed vs
how thou wilt
haue vs walk,
that wee may
do it cheerefullie,
as the
Angels.
               Accept our
will for the
deede. Let it
be our chiefe
desire to stād
in thy presence,

to enquire
by all
holy meanes
what thy diuine
pleasure
is: and euer so
soone as thou
hast made it
knowne vnto
vs, giue vs Dauids
Eccho, to
say I am heere
Lord to doe
thy will, thy
law is within
my heart.
               And whereas
it is thy decree,
that
thorow many
troubles wee
must enter into
thy kingdome;
(good
Father) subdue
our corrupt
wils to
thy holy will,
that hūbling
our selues vnder

thy hand,
we may trie &
reforme our
waies immediately,
without
once whispering
against
thee: knowing
yt in loue
thou so workest
our good
in all our trials,
and wilt
giue vs a happy
issue in thy
due time.
               And if it shall
bee thy good
pleasure to
cal vs to suffer
for thy name;
keepe vs that
we may suffer
as thine owne
children for
righteousnes,
and then to
take vp our
crosses with
thankfulnes,

reioicing that
thou countest
vs worthy that
honour, looking
stedfastly
at our Lord &
Sauiour, who
hauing▪ first
troden yt way
before vs, sits
for euer in
glorie at thy
right hand.
But keepe vs
that we neuer
do any thing
against thy reuealed
will, to
procure therby
neuer so
great a good;
seeing thou
canst and wilt
effect whatsoeuer
is best
without our
sin. That wee
may euer truly
pray; Thy
will bee done
in earth, as it
is in heauen.
               
                  
                  Giue vs this day
&c.]
               And thou (oh
deare Father)
when wee are
such; that
ye world may
see thy tēder
care ouer vs,
and how thou
fulfillest thy
promises vnto
vs, & that wee
may the better
attend the
seeking of thy
glorie and
good pleasure;
vouchsafe
vs the cō
                  forts
of this
present life.
Shew vs thy
loue in prouiding
for vs in
due time. Direct
vs to vse
all painfulnes
and holy wisdom,
chiefely

in our particular
calling,
with all the
meanes to
serue thy prouidence:
auoiding
whatsoeuer
may hinder
our comfort,
or hurt
our estate.
Graunt vs to
hide our selus
vnder thy
watchful protection,
knowing
that our
times are in
thy hand, to
continue as
pleaseth thee;
and to consider
that of
our selues, we
cannot prolong
our liues
one minute,
nor haue any
power to get
one morsell of
bread, vnlesse
thou both

shew vs the
meanes, assist
vs to vse thē,
& giue a blessing
to them.
Hūble vs here
in, that wee
are not worthie
the least
crumme of
bread, which
we are taught
to beg daily:
and that wee
are but vsurpers
of it, and
of whatsoeuer
else we haue,
vnlesse we be
in Christ; because
wee hauing
lost all,
can haue no
right to anie
thing vntill it
bee restored
vnto vs in him
who is Lord of
all. Increase
our assurance
that thou hast
giuen him vnto

vs, yt we may
haue a true title
to whatsoeuer
wee enioy.
Blesse thy
good creaturs
to nourish &
comfort vs.
               Giue vs contented
hearts
though wee
haue but
bread, acknowledging
thy fatherlie
prouidēce as
wel in want as
plentie, and
that thou wilt
make euen
bread sufficient
when other
means
faile.
               And if we shal
come to haue
no more but
for the present

day, nor
any meanes of
succour; then
strengthen vs
to cast our
selues vpon
thee without
fainting, and
to shew that
we liue not by
bread onelie,
but by thy
power & tender
care and
blessing Certifie
our consciences,
that
though wicked
men may
bee hungerstarued,
yet
thou wilt neuer
let any of
vs that serue
thee, being
heires of thy
kingdome, to
wāt any thing
that is good
for vs, but wilt
work extraordinarilie
causing

our enemies
to feede
vs, or the
fouls to bring
vs meate, rather
then we
shall want.
Keep vs therfore
from carking
cares aforehand,
for
prouision for
vs or ours, &
much more
from murmuring,
whereby
thou art dishonored
& prouoked.
Make
vs able to sanctifie
thee, vsing
only the
means for thy
protection &
prouidēce, cō
                  mending
our
selues wholly
vnto thee, being
certainlie
assured that
thou canst not
faile vs. And

whē thou dost
bestow thy
gifts vpon vs,
make vs to behold
thy good
nesse in them,
vsing thē holily,
& neuer
abusing them
to satisfie our
lustes, or to
puffe vs vp, or
set our confidence
& loue
vpon thē; but
that wee may
imploy them
to maintaine
thy worship &
seruice, and
performe all
holie duties,
especially for
the reliefe of
thy children,
for whom we
are to praie
daily, and to
whom thou
hast giuen an
interest in the
vse of them;

that so we may
shew our thākfulnesse
to
thy heauenly
Maiestie, loue
to thy childrē
and chiefelie
the most excellent,
and
therein the
true practise
of the Communion
of
Saints, wayting
for the
ioyfull sentence,

                  Come ye
blessed of my
Father, receiue
the kingdome
prepared for you
&c.
               Forgiue vs our
trespasses.]
               And whereas
our sins onely
doe hinder, &
turne from vs
all these blessings
which
we haue begged▪
and bring
innumerable
euils vpon vs,
insteede of
thē, & so make
vs most vnhappie,
wherupō
thou hast
taught vs to
crie euerie
day, forgiue
vs our sinnes;
               Pardon (good
Lord) and remoue
all our

sinnes out of
thy sight. And
to ye end that
we may neuer
giue thee rest
vntill we haue
gotten this assurance;
teach
vs that herein
is all true
happines, and
without it we
are most miserable,
& without
all hope
of comfort.
               Shew vs also
the haynousnesse
of sinne,
declared in
the fearefull
punishment of
thy most glorious
Angels,
the excellentest
of all thy
works, whom
for one sinne
thou diddest
throw downe

vnto hel to be
reserued in
chaines of
darkenesse to
the iudgemēt
of the great
day. And after
wards in our
first parents
cast out of
their happie
estate accursed
in themselues
and all
their posteritie,
euen al vs,
vntill wee obtaine
deliuerance
by laying
hold of
our Lord and
Sauiour. Make
vs able yet
more plainely
to behold the
same, not only
in the generall
destruction
of the
olde world;
turning Sodom
into

ashes; preparing
hell for
an euerlasting
punishment to
all vnbeleeuers
and impenitent
sinners;
but also
in thy seueritie
against
thine owne
children, as in
cutting off
Moses (onelie
for that hee
did not sanctifie
thee at the
waters of strif)
that he could
not enter into
Canaan, after
hee had
led thy people
forty yeers
and now
brought them
to the borders
of it.
               
                  
And besides
the heauy punishmēt
of Dauid
and his
house all his
life long, and
the fearefull
iudgemēts on
many of thine
owne faithful
seruāts. Teach
vs to cōceiue
aright of the
vilenesse and
danger of sin
hereby, that
the least sinne
of thine elect
could neuer
haue bin ransomed,
but by
the sacrifice
of thine owne
deare Sonne;
and how thou
diddest powre
out vpon him
the ful viols of
thy wrath, to
cause him to
crie, my God
vvhy hast thou

forsaken mee.
               
               Giue vs a continuall
meditation
hereof,
and of the innumerable
euils
which euerie
sinne
brings on
thine owne
children, vnlesse
they bee
preuented by
speedy repentance,
especially
depriuing
vs of all true
comfort and
power in praier,
so long as
wee remaine
therein without
repētāce,
besides ye losse
of many extraordinary
fauours.
Shew
vs withal how
our sinnes increased,
being

committed
not onely
against thy
glorious Maiestie,
but also
against our
high calling,
and all thine
abūdant mercies
with so
strong means
to restrain vs,
besides so many
vowes and
promises of amendment,
&
that after pardon
formerly
obtained and
sealed vnto vs.
               Grants vs some
sight also of
the multitude
of our sins, not
onely in breaking
thy Commandements,

in thought,
word or deed,
but euen in omitting
anie
part therof, or
doing it without
all our
heart; besides
the sin of our
first parents
whereof wee
are all guiltie;
and the corruption
of our
sinful natures
whereby wee
are so infected
with sin, that
wee are inclined
vnto euil
cōtinaully; &
vnable to
thinke anie
thing but that
which is sinfull;
so little
moued by thy
iudgemēts or
mercies, to
make anie
right vse therof.

Giue vs
such a liuelie
sense hereof,
& of our daily
frailties, in
                     •
                  rmities
& noysome
lustes,
flowing from
this lothsome
sinke, that in
the feeling of
this bondage
of our corruption,
wee may
euer sigh, desiring
to be deliuered
therefrom.
               Set before our
faces also the
grieuous sins
of our youth,
& much more
those which

we haue committed
since
our high calling,
contrarie
to our consciences,
and
whereby wee
haue dishonored
thee to
the reproach
of thy Gospel,
griefe of thy
seruants, or
hindering the
saluation of any
soule: that
by al these we
beholding the
infinitenes of
our debt, and
our great misery
therby, that
we may runne
continually to
the fountaine
of thy Sonnes
blood, which
is open to all
the house of
Israel for sin &
vncleannesse,
crying, Wash

me thorowlie
from my sin,
purge and purifie
me. And
yet that the
vgelie view of
them may not
vtterly dismay
vs, as though
we could not
be purged frō
them; comfort
vs in the infinite
worth &
merit of thy
Sonnes blood
which is al-sufficient
to
cleanse vs
thorowly, although
wee
had al the sins
of the world
vpon vs, so
long as wee
can crie to be
washed therin.
But yet
seing thou admittest
none
to this fountaine,
but only

them that
come in true
fainth, and vnfaied
repentance
for all
their sins, resoluing
to liue
a new life, and
crying after
this fountain:
               Make vs able
in the sense of
our vilenes by
nature, and
our particular
sins, to mourn
bitterly when
wee looke at
thy Son whō
we haue pearced
thereby,
and so to hate
sinne, that we
may be afraid
of euer defiling
our selues
againe, sinning
against
that precious
blood.
               
                  
Helpe vs to
trie our repē
                  tance
& faith
to bee such as
are sound, &
haue beene
wrought in vs
by the preaching
of the
Gospel, & do
cōtinually increase,
which
are the certaine
euidences
thereof.
               Grāt vs grace
to iudge our
selues daily,
yt we may not
be iudged of
thee. Remember
vs also, we
intreate thee
againe, for our
sinfull Land;
though euen
the earth bee

corrupt, & the
crie of the
sinnes exceeding
great, yet
let the cry of
vs thy childrē
in euery corner
preuaile
against ye crie
of the sinnes,
that thy mercie
may bee
magnified in
all the world.
As vvee for
giue &c.] And
as thou hast
taught vs to
pray onely so
to be forgiuē,
as we forgiue
others; assuring
vs that if
we do forgiue
wee shall bee
forgiuen, and
otherwise we
shall neuer
bee forgiuen.
Change our
malicious and
proud hearts,

that although
we hate ye sins
and company
of the wicked,
and reioice in
the execution
of thy righteous
iudgmēts,
and pray daily
for the confounding
of al
the wicked
practises and
deuises of the
enemies of
thy Church;
that yet wee
may seeke the
saluation of al
sorts: and for
them that are
our enemies
but vpon priuate
respects,
giue vs grace
to pray earnestly
for thē
that they may
repent & obtaine
mercie.
               
                  
And that wee
may seeke to
pacifie them,
by offering
them full satisfaction,
and
doing them any
good, so
far as may stād
with their saluation,
& the
credit of the
Gospell, to
heape coales
vpon their
heads, either
to gaine them
or leaue them
more without
excuse; and to
seale vp to our
selues a ful remission
of all
our sins therby.
               
                  
                  Leade vs not into
temptation.]
And seing our
deadly enemy
seekes hourely
to tempt vs
to sin to dishonour
thee,
and become
his vassals, yt
thou mightest
leaue vs in
his hand to
execute his
malice vpon
vs, and bring
vpon vs al the
euils which
follow sinne,
wherupon our
Sauiour hath
taught vs to
pray, Leade vs
not into temptation:
Open our
eies (good Father)
to see
our continual
danger; and

first for the
multitude of
damned spirits
ranging
vp and downe
as roaring Lions
to deuour
vs. Teach vs
to know that
they are able
to bring vs to
as fearful sins
as euer were
committed, &
to destroy vs
vtterlie in a
moment with
all that wee
haue, if thou
giue them
leaue. Acquaint
vs with
their subt
                     •
                  lties
in fitting
their temptations
to our
particular estates
and dispositiōs
which
they know, by
dogging vs euer,
& taking

their aduantages
to solicite
vs to
those sinnes,
whereby they
haue most preuailed
against
vs formerly or
against other
thy seruants;
and how they
are wont also
to draw vs on
by degrees, as
first to yeelde
to some smaller
matters
which are accounted
no
sinnes; or to
thrust our
selues carelessely
or with
our warrant
into the danger
and occasions
of temptation,
neglecting
the calling
laid vpon
vs, as Dauid to
lie on his bed

in the afternoones
insteede
of looking
to the affaires
of his
kingdome.
               Make vs able
to consider
how they
haue all the
baites of the
world, both
the credit, riches
& pleasures
thereof,
which they euer
hold forth
vnto vs, if wee
will follow
their counsel;
and otherwise
threaten not
only the losse
of all these,
but also of all
comforts, with
hatred, disgrace
and many
other euils
which wee
must suffer frō
                  
malicious mē,
if we wil make
such a strict
conscience of
all our waies,
to the verie
least duty that
thou hast cō
                  manded.
               And whereas
wee are ordinarilie
secure
in ouerweening
of our
own strength;
Shew vs (oh
Lord) the
vilenesse of
our corrupt
natures, which
are euer readie
to conspire
with Satan
to our vtter
perdition,
& to swallow
euery baite
which he layeth

for vs,
without anie
feare of danger;
so that
wee haue no
strēgth, more
then thou
reachest forth
thine hand to
helpe vs. Reueale
vnto vs
also the danger
wee stand
in frō thy glorious
Maiesty,
lest yu shouldest
leaue vs vp vnto
the power
of the tempter,
and our
owne corruption;
to awake
vs from our security,
for our
neglect of thy
watch, & carelesse
vsing the
meanes of
grace, or at
least for tēpting
thee, in
not auoiding

each occasion
of temptatiō.
               And seing the
tempter in all
his temptations,
hideth
the danger &
vglines of sin,
shewing only
the faire side
of it, that is,
the go
                     •
                  d that
wee shall get
thereby, and
chuseth the
subtillest and
fittest instrumēts
to serue
his purpose, as
the counsel or
example of
men of chiefest
reputatiō,
somtimes chā
                  ging
himselfe
into an Angel
of light, neuer
comming like
himself; wherby
hee deceiues

all the
world, and oft
preuailes with
vs thine owne
children, at
least to presume
to sinne,
because thou
art so mercifull;
               Good Father
set before vs a
cōtinual view
hereof, and of
the sundry euils
which by
euery sin wee
ha
                     •
                  e vpō our
heads; especially
the woūd
of conscience
which wil certainely
come
on vs vnlesse
it be preuented,
& which
none can
beare. Make
vs to know
that howsoeuer

reprobats
may wallow in
their filth, and
scape vnpunished
here, being
reserued
for hell, and
fatted for destruction:
yet
thou wilt not
suffer any of
vs thy childrē,
who haue
begunne to
make a profession
of thee
according to
thy word, to
commit the
very least sin,
but wilt make
vs feele the
smart of it, vnlesse
wee preuēt
thee speedily
by repentance,
because
thou wilt not
bee dishonored
by vs, nor
haue vs condemned
with

the world; &
that the wicked
may see
thy hatred against
sin, and
what plagues
remaine for
thēselues for
euermore. Yea
(oh holie Father)
let vs
feare alwaies
lest thou shouldest
leaue vs
neuer so little,
& suspect
all our waies,
in as much as
Satan more
maliceth vs,
thē any other
of the world,
and therefore
seeks hourely
to prouoke
thee to leaue
vs in his
hand, and for
that our sins
will cause moto
blaspheme,
hardening thē
                  
to perdition,
than the sins
of any other:
wherupon verie
few of thy
worthiest seruants
haue escaped
to the
end; without
some grieuous
wounds, the
scarres wherof
they haue
carried to
their graues,
to the blemishing
their
professiō, the
griefe of thē
                  selues
and all
the godlie.
And therfore
as thou hast
giuen vs this
only remedie
to watch and
pray that wee
enter not into
temptation,
so make
vs able to
keepe this thy

watch, and by
it to bee better
acquainted
with our
selues, & our
particular infirmities,
that
wee may alwaies
weare
the compleat
armour, chieflie
the shield
of faith, & thy
Word euer in
readinesse against
each
temptation,
which w
                     •
                  l put
Satā to flight;
that being
strēgthned by
thy Spirit, we
may stand fast
in the euill
day, & get the
cōquest without
anie grieuous
wounds;
to thy greater
glorie, & our
owne greater
honor in the

heauens: Wee
do not pray against
temptations
altogether,
knowing
the profit that
wee reape
thereby; but
that wee may
indure fighting
valiantly
and conquering,
vntill
thou set the
crowne vpon
our heads.
               
                  For thine is the
&c.] We haue
been bold to
beg all these
things of thee
(oh holy Father▪)
because
all kingdome,
power & glorie
are onelie
thine; acknowledging

that we haue
receiued all
from thy heauenly
bounty;
and being assured
th
thou wilt grāt
vs all these
things for thy
Sonnes sake,
and whatsoeuer
else is
good for vs,
so far as shall
bee for thine
owne glorie,
seeing thou
art absolute
Lord & King
in heauē and
in earth, and
doest dispose,
guide and ouerrule
all
things, as shal
make most for
thine owne
glorie, and
the greatest
good of vs
thine obedient

subiects
and children;
               That we may
set foorth the
glorie of thy
dominiō, and
happinesse of
thy Kingdom,
liuing as thy
loyal subiects;
to which wee
hereby binde
our selues for
euer; and so
returne all
possible thāks
and praise to
thy heauenly
Maiestie, saying
euer, Amē.
               Be it so (oh
Lord holy &
true) as wee

fully beleeue
it shall bee. Euen
so Amen:
Come Lord
Iesus, come
quicklie.
            
            
               
                  
                  
                     OVr Father which
art in heauen]1. We must come trembling, because of Gods glorious Maiesty:
Oh Lord most holy
and most glorious, whose
brightnes the Angels are
not able to behold, so terrible
to all the vngodly, as
they shall wish the mountaines
to couer them, that
they may neuer appeare
in thy presence; and yet a
most gratious and tender
Father to all thy children
that desire to obey all thy
Cōmandements:And our ovvne vilenesse by nature. we that
are but dust and ashes,
and by nature through
the fal of our first parents,

children of wrath in state
of damnatiō, bond-slaues
of Satan, and most rebellious
of all thy creatures,
dare not presume of our
selues, once to lift vp our
eies to heauen;2. Yet in cō
                     fident boldnes, as to our Father in Christ. yet neuertheles
seeing it hath pleased
thee of thy free mercie
to adopt vs to be thy
childrē by grace, through
thy Son Iesus Christ, and
hast chosen vs hereunto,
bought vs with his precious
blood, called vs by
thy Gospel, sealed vs with
thy Spirit, and giuen him
to bee our perpetuall mediator
at thy right hand,
bidden vs to come to thee
as to our tēder father, and
call thee father through
him; oh deare Father wee
present our selues before
thy diuine Maiestie onely
in his name,3. Onely in the name of Christ our Mediator. magnifying

thy mercie that thou hast4. With thankfulnes for our happiestate in him.
vouchsafed vs this blessed
estate to be thy children,Watch. ed. 2. p. 1. l. 1. 2.
and to haue thy fauor, being
the greatest happines
that euer can befal mortal
creatures.5. Begging an increase of our assurance. Giue vs hearts
(most gratious Father) to
seek daily to increase this
assurance, by growing in
repentance for all our sins
and faith in thy sweet promises;
frame vs euery
day more & more to the
image of thy Sonne,By more conformitie to Christ in knowledge. Watch. pag. 88 lin. 6. in all
knowledge of thy heauē
                  ly
Maiesty;And al childlike affections. being affectioned
to reuerence, loue and
obey thee as our most
deare Father, wholly chā
                  ged
in all the parts & qualities
both of our soules
and bodies; that we may
be no longer strangers frō
thee, as all the wicked are,
who bidde thee to depart

from them; but may take
our chiefest delight to be
euer in thy presence,Delighting in the presence of our Father. to
heare thee to speak to vs in
thy heauēly word, & to vtter
all our wants and our
whole heart to thee in our
praiers, crying, Oh Father.
               
                  Our] And that it may
be more euident,6. And an increase of our loue to al Gods children: not only
to our selues, but to all the
world, that wee are thine
own children indeed, giue
vs hearts to loue all thy
children, being our brethren
and sisters, aboue all
other for thy sake alone:
and euery one so much the
more, as they more liuely
carry thy image in all holines
excelling in vertue,Chiefely as they more excell in vertue:
and so are more deare vnto
thy heauenly Maiestie;
that we may euery day in
all our prayers remember
them as our selues, begging

alike for them all,
saying,By praying for them as for our selues, and delighting in their companies. Our Father: And
that wee may delight in
their companies onely, as
those with whom we shall
cōuerse together for euer
in the heauens. Knit all
our hearts in this firme
bond of brotherly loue,Begging most instantly our heauenly vnion to bee shevved in al duties:
that we may tenderly exhort,
releeue, helpe, comfort
& support the weakenesses
one of another, seeking
by all meanes the edifying
of others, afraid of
giuing the least offence to
grieue, and much more to
hinder the saluation or
turne any one out of the
way of life.Confirmed by all bonds of agreement: Let this happie
brotherhood and holy
agreemēt in all the substance
of thy truth, which
is able vndoubtedlie to
saue our soules, together
with our ioynt profession

to walke hand in hand, in
all the narrow way of life,
haue more power firmely
to vnite vs, then all the
trash, pompe or pleasure
of the world, with all the
cunning of Satan or Antichrist
can haue to diuide
vs.
               Are wee not all that so
walke,And common interest. thine owne children,
hauing thy Son our
Sauiour, thy Spirit our cō
                  forter
and earnest for our
ioint inheritance and glorie;
notwithstanding all
our infirmitie and imperfections,
with some lesse
diuersities in iudgement,
which must accompanie
vs vntill we bee perfect in
the heauens?
               Confound therefore all
the deuices of thine enemies,And all contrarie deuices of our enemies confounded.
that worke this euill
among thine owne children,

to so great dishonor
to thy heauenly Maiestie,
whereby our enemies
insult ouer vs, who
haue conspired thus to
worke our shame, and to
prouoke thee against vs,Which by our di
                        •
                     isio
                        •
                      seeke our ruine:
to leaue vs into their hāds
to our vtter ruin, if it were
possible. Deare Father,
let vs neuer thinke our
state to be good, vntill vve
carrie these hartie affections
to al thy children,That we may neuer thinke our state good. studying
to knit this bond of
loue, being able truly thus
to pray, Our father. For
hereby we know that wee
are translated from death
vnto life,Vntill vve loue the brethren. because we loue
the brethren, and vntill
this time we abide still in
death.1. Iohn 3. 14.
               
               
                  Which art in heauē
                  
                  7. To grow in reuerence to our heauenly Father. And
whereas thou our Father
art highly exalted in the

heauen of heauens, and
there also hast prouided
thrones for vs thy childrē
after wee haue suffered a
little; humble vs euermore
in the sense of thy
greatnesse, together with
our owne basenes and vnworthinesse,
beeing but
poore wormes crawling
vpon the earth, & loaden
with innumerable sinnes.
And yet withall lift vp our
hearts alwaies vnto the
heauens,8. And in heauenly affections: there to be conuersant
with thee our heauēly
Father, minding heauenly
things▪ especially in
all our prayers; longing
there to behold thee face
to face: and that in the
meane time while wee abide
heere below,And conuersations: we may
be of such heauenly conuersatiōs,
so vsing ye world,
as if wee vsed it not, that

the world may see that
wee are not of it, but pilgrims
and strangers here,
and thy heauenly childrē:To declare our selues his children.
and that our selues also
may hereby grow vp to a
strong assurance that heauen
is ours,Watch. pag. 90. lin. 9. & all the ioyes
thereof reserued for vs by
our Lord & Sauiour,And heauē ours, and all creatures at a league vvith vs for our good. and
all the creatures in heauen
and earth at a league with
vs to do vs good, so far as
shall stand with thine honor
and our saluation, euer
readie to helpe in time of
need.
               
                  Hallowed be thy name]
And seeing thou (oh tender
Father) hast vouchsafed
vs this honour aboue
the greatest part of the
word,For this honour that God hath vouchsafed to vs to be his children. to bee thine▪ owne
children and heires of thy
glorious kingdom, wheras
thou mightest iustlie

haue left vs in our sinnes
with all the wicked to euerlasting
shame and perditiō.1. To seeke his honor in and aboue al things.
Giue vs grace (good
Father) to testifie our loue
and thankfulnesse all the
dayes of our life,VVatch. p. 78. lin. 17. in studying
in and aboue al things
which way to honor thee.2. To haue our eies open to behold his glory, shining in all his workes, as his Creatures:
Open our blinde eyes to
this end, to behold the
glory of thy wisedome,
power, goodnes and righteousnes
shining in al thy
workes, euen in the basest
creature in heauē or earth;
and much more in thy
heauenly word;VVord: Iudgement: chiefely
in all thy terrible iudgements
executed vpon the
enemies of thy Church
therin reueiled,Mercie: with mercies
towards thy children,Watch. pag. 31. lin. 17.
and which thou still
shewest euery day, especiallie
towards our selues.

Make vs ab
                     •
                  e to take euery
occasion to consider of aright,3. To be able to set foorth his praises belonging to him therein, and haue a holy vse of them.
and set foorth the
praises belonging to thee
therein, and haue a holie
vse of them both in word
& deed, yt by vs thy great
name may be knowne &
magnified in al the world.
Aboue all,4. Chiefely his glory manifested in our daies, for vs and against our enemies. set euer before
our faces (good Lord) that
wonderfull glory wherein
thou hast been magnified
in these our daies, and before
our daies, in the euident
declaration both of
thy displeasure against vs
of this sinfull nation; and
withall of thy mercy and
tender care for vs, and
wrath against our enemies;
how for dishonoring
thee,First for vs, in ab
                        •
                     ndant mercies. by abusing thy
Gospell which thou hast
giuen vs with such peace
and prosperitie, as neuer

nation knowne before,
thou hast not only corrected
our grieuous transgressions
and securitie,And then correcting vs fa
                        •
                     herly for abusing his mercies to his dishonor: So to bring vs to amendment: as
a tender Father with thy
milder rods of dearth, pestilence
& sundrie the like,
to bring vs to amendmēt,
and cause vs with more
cheerefulnes to embrace
thy Gospell, and bring
foorth the fruits of it:After threatning vs by cruell enemies, to take avvay all: but
also raised vp against vs
sundrie times, most cruell
enemies, threatning not
only the taking away thy
Gospell, but our vtter destruction
also,Bringing them to the execution: & brought
the enemies to the verie
execution thereof, because
we would not serue thee
with good hearts, according
to all thy mercies
bestowed vpon vs: and yet
euer when we haue cried
vnto thee, thou hast heard

vs,Yet euer deliuering and auenging vs, vvhen vve haue cried vnto him: as thou diddest thy
people Israel, and as thou
diddest heare Iehosaphat
against the Moabits, and
Ezechiah and Esay against
the proud Assyrian; and
plucking them back in the
instant, hast taken vengeance
for vs: that we haue
oft thought that they
durst neuer haue risen against
vs any more:So as it had been enough to haue conuerted the most barbarous nation. so as
if the most barbarous nations
of the earth, had receiued
but the least of our
deliuerances, with our
meanes, they vndoubtedly
had repented long ago
in sack-cloath and ashes;
as we for the present haue
promised vnto thee. Oh
gratious Father,5. To pray for grace euer to remember and acknowledge this. inable vs
alwaies to remember and
acknowledge this, and to
see moreouer that thine
anger is not yet turned away,

but more fearefully
kindled against vs,And to see moreouer his anger kindled againe, by increase of our sins, with these bloodie enemies, and their malice. for that
as our sins and prouocations
are multiplied, so
these our bloody enemies
insteede of decreasing, or
ioyning themselues vnto
vs, do still increase daily;
and their malice is become
much more deadly
against vs thy poore children,
without hope of leauing
off,Without hope of leauing off; vntill they haue their vvils. vntill they haue
wrought either ours, or at
least their own vtter ruine,
which in time they must
needs effect.
               Good Father cause this
principal token of thy displeasure,And also witnessed by many fearefull signes:
together with all
other signes therof shewed
from heauen and earth,Arming windes and vvaters against vs:
(as the arming of the
dumbe creatures against
vs, both winds and waters
so strangely and furiously

in so many places, threatning
vtterly to sweepe vsThreatning to sweepe vs avvay:
away in our deadly securitie,For our ouerflovv of iniquitie, that we may be awaked, and seeke to appease his wrath in in time.
for the great ouerflow
of all iniquitie euerie
where) cause this to work
so mightilie, that we may
all bee presently awaked
out of our deepest securitie,
and seek by al meanes
to appease thy wrath. Oh
Lord, diddest thou not
before that most secret,That remembring our former vvarnings from heauē, and vvhat follovved the fierie tent spred ouer our heads.
bloodie and fierie conspiracie,
warne vs all frō heauen,
(as thou diddest Ierusalem
before her last destruction)
by a fierie tent
directly ouer our heads,
inclosing vs all, with pillers
of most horrible darknes,
pillers of fire, and pillers
of blood, foreshewing
vs (as by that which
followed wee may iustlie
deeme) that bloody darknesse

and fiery destruction
that was towards vs? Did
not the hearts of many of
vs tremble in the beholding
thereof, and in fearing
some grieuous iudgment
that was to come,
causing vs to flie to thee,
to seeke to hide our selues
vnder thy wings? And did
wee feare without iust
cause? Had it not been effected
indeed, and we all,
chiefely our dread Soueraigne
with all our heads
and rulers, inclosed in the
most darke, fiery & bloodie
tent, that euer the
world heard of; in that
most vnnatural and accursed
massacre, if thou our
gracious and most tender
Father haddest not heard
the prayers of thy poore
children, which both before
and at that very instant

were humbled before
thee, and so thought
on vs in mercy? And shall
we now be senselesse still
in these signes, & tokens
still entring in vpon vs,
as fearefully as euer any of
the ten plagues vpon the
Egyptians,VVee may not be senselesse in these tokens of his wrath, seazing vpon vs as fearefully as any of the piagues of Egypt. making the
whole land to tremble, at
the very report of them?
Saue and deliuer vs from
that iudgement,Chiefely to be saued frō that heauiest iudgement: of all other
the heauiest that euer
fall vpō the heart of man:
and whereby not onely
the Egytians were prepared
for their finall ouerthrow
in the sea, but also
thine owne people Israel,
both before the great captiuitie,VVhereby both Egypt and Israel vvere prepared for 
                        •
                     estruction.
and also before the
last and vtter desolation
of that natiō, so oft threatned
by our Sauiour: (that
by hearing we should

heare,That we should be worse for all the meanes sent to call vs to repentance, vntill the iudgement come, that we may s
                        •
                     e our estate and turne: & not vnderstand,
and seeing we should see,
& not perceiue; but haue
our hearts made more
fat and senselesse (by all
the meanes sent to call vs
to repentance) lest wee
should be conuerted, and
thou shouldest spare vs.
Oh open our eies that we
may see in what state we
stand, and how farre this
iudgement hath seased
vpon vs already. Conuert
vs & we shall be conuerted;
and neuer let vs, (as
those whom thou hast vtterly
destroyed) harden
our selues against the euident
tokens of thy wrath,And not harden our selues against the Lord.
denying or making light
of them, much lesse to oppose
our selues against
thee, thy word, and seruants.
Preserue vs from
the outragious ouerflowings

of the multitude,
which thou mayest iustly
arme against vs in their
ignorance, like the furious
waues of the raging seas,
for lack of our care & cō
                  science
to see thē taught,
to knowe thee and thine
ordinances, and to feare
thy great and mighty
name. Let not the flouds
of iniquity swallow vs
vp. Aboue all,That vvee may neuer fall into the bloody enemies hands: neuer leaue
vs in their hands whose
very mercies are cruelties,
that they should blaspheme
thy great name, to
say where is now their
God; but let vs still fall into
thy hands,But still into the Lords. and deale
with vs as it pleaseth thee,
for with thee is mercy,
and when thou smitest vs,
yet thou pitiest vs,Because hee pitieth vs vvhen hee smiteth vs. euer in
wrath remembring mercie.
Though our prouocations

be more hainous,
then we are able to expresse,
yet Lord heare the
crie of thy seruants, and
let them stil preuaile6. To pray instantly that the crie of his seruants may preuaile: with
thee to stay thy hand. Hast
thou not sayd it, and manie
a time made it good,
euen vnto this very day,As hitherto according to his promise: Sith he cals vs novv to stand in the breach, as Moses to stay his hād: to declare the riches of his mercie: sauing vs still at the prayers of a fevv.
that the innocent should
deliuer the Iland? & doest
thou not call for vs thy
poore seruants, to stand
vp with Moses in the
breach to stay thy fierce
wrath, because thou art a
God of mercie, and wouldest
not destroy thy people?
most declaring the
riches of thy grace, in
pardoning and sauing
whole nations at the praiers
of a few of thy poore
seruants, and giuing the
wicked for their ransome?
Therfore (oh good Lord)

we whom thou doest call
to be thy remembrancers
(knowing that thou art
still the same good God
to thine, as thou wast to
Moses, Abraham,
                  And seeing he is still the same to vs, as to Moses and Abraham: and
Samuel; and being assured
that through thy Son
we are as deare vnto thee,
as the apple of thine owne
eie, that thou canst denie
vs nothingAnd vve so deare to him that he can deny vs nothing: which we beg
in his name, which may
make for thine owne glorie
and goodWhich may make for his glorie, and our good: of thy people)
do humbly intreate
thee to glorifie thy mercy,
that it may shine to all
the world,To intreate him to magnify his mercie in pardoning and turning our hearts to meete him: in pardoning
the sinne of our Land, turning
the harts of all sorts
speedily vnto thee, to
meete thee with an intreatie
of peace: but make all
the vnplacable enemies
of thy Church to feele thy

hand;But to make his enemies to feele his hand, who haue bin the causes of our sinne by their wiles: and those chiefly
who haue as Balaam and
the Midianites, caused vs
with their wiles to prouoke
thee to so fierce a
wrath, wherein we haue
bin so oft and so lately almost
vtterly consumed,
through our backslidings
and rebellions against
thee. Get thy selfe glory
vpon them as vpon Pharo,
                  To get himselfe glory vpon them, as vpon Pharaoh.
in the heart of the sea,
that when thou hast deliuered
vs, & ouerthrowne
them (as sundry times
thou hast begunne,As he hath begunne & promised to accomplish to his euerlasting praise. and
promised to accomplish)
we may sing the song of
Moses thy seruant: and all
ages keepe a remembrāce
of thine endlesse mercy.
               Let euery one of vs be
afraide of defacing or obscuring
any part of thy
glory,7. That we may be afraid of obscuring his glory: and much more of

seeking vainly our owne
glory,Seeking our owne glory, or taking his honour to our selues. especially of robbing
thy Maiestie, by taking
any part of thine honour
to our selues as Herod;
being proud of thy
gifts, whereunto our sinfull
natures are strongly
inclined. But aboue all,
keepe vs frō dishonoring
thee by our euil example,8. That we may not dishonour him by our sins:
amongst the wicked and
vngodly, to cause them to
blaspheme that glorious
truth which we professe.
Make vs to account it our
greatest honour to honor
thee,But account it our greatest honour to honour him; and contrarily. and the greatest dishonour
and euill that euer
can befall vs, so much as in
shewe to dishonour thee.
Strengthen vs to walke so
vprightly,9. To honour him by our holy ensample. that others seeing
our good workes,
may glorifie thee our heauenly
father; and that we

may stop the mouthes of
all the wicked,To stop the mouthes of the wicked. bearing
their reproch as a crowne
vpon our heads.
               So inflame our harts
with a zeale of thy glory,
that our righteous soules
may be vexed from day to
day, for all the abominations,10. To haue the zeale of Lot against the abominations of our age.
whereby thou art
dishonored by Atheists,
Papists, and all sorts of
godlesse men.11. VVith a bold acknowledgement of the Lord, and euery part of his truth: And let vs
be so farre off from dishonoring
thee, by being
ashamed with Peter of
thee and thy religion, or
any part thereof, where
we ought to professe it,
that in all places we may
shewe it forth, with all
wisdome and boldnesse,
as that which is our chiefest
glory,As being our glory: gracing it with
a holy conuersation: that
our Lord & Sauiour may

acknowledge vs before
thee our heauenly father,That vvee may be acknowledged of him before all the vvorld: to our ovvne euerlasting honor:
in the presēce of thy glorious
Angels, and of the
whole world, to be thine
owne children, and heires
of thy Kingdome; when
he will most iustly deny
all the fearefull and vnbeleuers,
as those whom he
neuer knew, to their endlesse
horror and confusion.
               Thy kingdome come.]
               And whereas thou (oh
Father) art chiefely glorified
when thy kingdome
commeth,Seeing Gods glorie is in the inlarging his kingdome, and doing his vvill. and thy will is
done; that is, in the increase
of thine owne
Church & people, which
obey thy word, amongst
whom alone thou raignest
as Lord and King, &
especially when thou doest
inlarge thy dominions

against al the subtlety and
power of hell, causing thy
religion and people to
prosper & increase:1. To pray for a free course to the Gospell, which is the scepter of his kingdome, and that it may be powerfull euery where. Good
father giue thy Gospell
(which is the scepter of
thy kingdome) whereby
thou conquerest and rulest,
a free course to be sincerely
preached in all the
world, all impediments
being vtterly remoued;
and make it so powerfull
in all places that it may
vtterly throw downe the
kingdome of Satan, and
Antichrist; conuerting &
speedily gathering all
thine elect vnto thee, that
so thou maiest hasten thy
kingdome of glory.
               And to this end, wheras
thou hast ordained
Kings and Queenes, to be
nursing fathers and mothers
to thy poore2. For Kings and Queens, to be nursing fathers and mothers to the Church:
                  
Church, to nourish vs thy
children with the word
of life, and to preserue vs
frō the rage of that bloody
Antichrist,Chiefely to preserue is against the rage of all cruell enemies, and to account this their chiefest dignitie. and of all other
cruell enemies; oh
almighty and deare Father,
raise vp such for vs
in all the countries of the
world, and those which
are such already make thē
ten times more, that they
may account this their
greatest dignity, to haue
the bringing vp of thine
own children & heires of
thy kingdom, cōmitted to
their care & faithfulnes.
               More specially as thou
hast setled this thy kingdome
among vs, of this
nation in much peace and
prosperity, vnder our late
tender nursing mother,3. Especially to pray for our soueraigne, raised vp for vs, in place of our tender mother.
deliuering vs from the tyranny
of that bloodthirsty

whore of Babylon, and
continued the same still
most miraculously, and
beyond all former expectation
vnder our gracious
Soueraigne, whom thou
hast raised vp for a foster
father in her place; so we
beseech thee to inlarge
the hart of thine anoynted
seruant,That hee may haue an abundant portion of Gods Spirit: with such an
abundant portion of thy
Spirit, both of wisdome
and zeale for thy glory &
kingdome, and tender affections
towards thy children,According to his high dignitie and charge:
according to that
high dignity layd vpon
him; and the charge committed
vnto him, that in
token of true thankfulnes
for all his dominions
and great honour, and
much more for the admirable
deliuerances giuen
vnto him and his, (and aboue

all that thou hast
made him twice, cheifely
so wōderfully in our eies,
thy principal instrument,And the deliuerances of the Church by him, he may set himselfe to aduance Christs kingdome and Gospell: Watch. pag. 43. lin. 2.
in sauing vs thy poore
Church) he may set himselfe
much more earnestly
then euer did Cyrus, or
Darius, euen worthy Iehosaphat,
and Ezekiah, to
aduance thy glory, in inlarging
and furthering
this kingdome of thy
Sonne, and in promoting
thy pure religion with all
his power, destroying
whatsoeuer is against it,
and discountenancing
all vngodinesse; and to
procure each way both by
godly lawes,Procure the good of Gods seruants, repressing the vvicked: and all other
holy meanes, the good of
vs thy poore people committed
vnto his trust, repressing
all the wicked;
that we may liue a quiet

life in all godlinesse and
honesty,That vve may liue in al peace and godlinesse without feare, affected towards him as the good people were towards Dauid:
                   fearing none but
onely thy heauenly Maiestie:
that all we thy children
being affected towards
him, thine anoynted,
more and more, as towards
our happy nursing
father vnder thee, and as
all the good people were
towards thy seruant Dauid,
may euermore accordingly
sound forth thy
praises for him,Sound forth his praises: and cry
continually vnto thee, for
the preseruation of his
Maiestie,And pray for him and his, to raigne for euermore. with our noble
Queene, and all their royall
progenie, that the
throne of his kingdome
may be establihed vntill
Christ, the King of Kings
shall come: then to resigne
vp the scepter into
his hands, and to be taken
vp into his throne to

raigne with thee for euermore.
               
                  4. For our Magistrates to haue the same harts. Good Lord giue all
our Magistrats and Rulers
vnder him the same heart,
that they may be as the
hands of thine anoynted
in euery place, for the accomplishment
of this
worke.
               And withall as thou
hast appointed to build
vp thy kingdome,5. For our Ministers to tread in the steps of the holy Apostles. Watch. p. 45. l. 11. 12. chiefely
by the sincere preaching
of thy sacred Gospell,
whereby thou didst first
spread it so speedily, subduing
all the world by
the Ministrie of thy holy
Apostles; so we pray thee
send forth such faithfull
Preachers, into euery congregation,
which being
furnished with gifts,Seeking to saue euery soule. and
tenderly affected with the
care of euery soule, committed

vnto their charge,
may not cease with Paul,
                  By vvord,
to admonish euery one
both publickly and priuately,
day & night with
teares; going before them
in all holy conuersation,And conuersation.
and framing themselues
to all, to win all; afraid
of giuing the least offence,
either to harden, or any
way to hinder the saluation
of any one of them.To awaken all our vnconscionable Ministers: Awakē
at length (oh Lord)
all our blind guids, and all
sorts of vnconscionable
Ministers, who are drunke
with the blood of soules,
that they may but remember,They may remember the crie of Abels blood:
how the blood of one
Abel did crie for vengance
from the earth, and
thinke where they wil appeare,And Christ appearing.
when Christ shall
come to take an account
for euery soule: and either

giue them repentance for
that bloody sinne,And either to repent & become profitable, or the people may be committed to such, as by whom Christ may raigne, and they saued: that
they may saue thēselues,
and those committed to
them; or else vtterly free
thy people from this heauie
iudgement, and set
such in their places, by
whose faithfull Ministrie
thy people may bee
brought euery where, into
a holy obedience to
thy heauenly Gospell, to
their euerlasting saluation;
that thou alone mayest
raigne as Lorde and
King,Antichrist cast forth: and whatsoeuer belongeth to him, or whereby he hath deceiued the people of the Lord: and Antichrist cast
out vtterly, with all that
appertaines to his bloody
religion, and whereby he
hath vpholden his throne
and tyrannie, & kept any
of thy people vnder his
flauery, or at least seekes
to bewitch them, to pull
them into Babylon againe.

Good Lord destroy
all the very prints of that
cursed Idolatrie,And the very prints of his Idolatire vtterly destroyed. & whatsoeuer
may put his fauorits
in hope of euer repayring
the ruines of their
Babel.
               And seeing (oh Lord) yt
this is the glory & safetie
of thy Kingdome,6. To pray for a holy vnitie in the Church, chiefely amongst the leaders: And to take away all causes of contention, confounding all Balaams deuices. whē
all the subiects of it, especially
the leaders of thy
people, liue in a holy vnitie
vnder thy laws: take away
we beseech thee, all
contentions frō amongst
vs, with the causes therof.
Confound we pray thee,
all the plots of that cursed
Balaam of Rome; who
knowing that not thine
owne kingdome, if it be
diuided, can stand, seekes
day and night by all his agents,
to rend thy Church
in peeces, the easier to

preuaile against it when it
is diuided,Who seekes by our diuisions, to preuaile against vs. and thou departed
from it: as Satan
hath euer preuailed by his
instruments in all countries.
Grant we may buy
this peace with godly Abraham,
with the losse of
all things,And that we may buy this peace with the losse of all. except thy fauour;
that all sorts seeing
our holy agreement may
come forth of Poperie,That all sorts may ioyne themselues vnto vs. &
profanenes vnto vs; & our
brethren departed, may
turne into the bosome of
thy Church againe.7. That euery one of vs may haue a care to saue others. Wat. p. 57. l. 14. 15. And
wheras thou hast appointed
that euery one of vs
should labour to build
vp thy Kingdome, by
bringing others thereunto,
that they may be saued;
giue vs harts to haue
a speciall regard,Especially all committed to our charge: not only
of all those committed to
our charge, to bring them

in obedience to the lawes
of thy Kingdome,With all knit vnto vs by any special bond: but euen
all who are tyed vnto
vs by any speciall bond,
that we may take euery
first occasion which thou
offerest for procuring,Taking all occasions to saue them by al means, being as the Angels for Lot. or
furthering their saluation,
and so gayning them vnto
thee, by all good admonitions,
exhortations
and examples. Let vs be
as the Angels vnto Lot,
neuer resting before we
haue gotten them safe into
Zoar.
                  8. That vve may haue a feeling of the happines of this kingdome. And that we may
be able to perswade others
more effectually,
Lord giue euery one of vs
a sweete feeling, what a
blessed thing it is to bee
the subiects of this thy
Kingdome;VVatch. p. 11. lin. 2. p. 114. 115. to haue all the
priuiledges thereof, and
to be partakers of thy
glory,And of the revvard of holines: euen Kings, and

Priests vnto thee; and
what reward and happines,
there is in liuing such
a holy conuersation; and
how wretched & vnhappie,And hovv vvretched the state of all other is. VVatch. p. 56. 7. 8. 9. the state of all other
people is, seeme they neuer
so happy in this
world, being but bondslaues
of Sathan, reserued
for the chaines of eternall
darknesse.9. That vve may liue as the subiects of this kingdome: Oh heauenly
King, grant vs to liue in
all things, as the subiects
of thy Kingdome, that so
we may passe from this
Kingdome of grace, into
that thy Kingdome of
glory.Fearing the causes of backsliding. Watch. pag. 122. lin. 8. Make vs to feare
the causes of backsliding,
that we may neuer so
much as looke backe with
Lots wife, towards this euill
world; but euer hie
fast towards thine heauenly
Kingdome, hauing our

eie at our Lord and Sauiour,Hying fast tovvards heauen, looking at our Sauiour.
who fitteth at thy
right hand, keeping there
possession for vs. Destroy
in vs euery corruption,
whereby Satan keepes
vs any way in his slauerie,10. To destroy all our corruption.
or at any time gets the dominion
ouer vs. Hasten
that glorious day,11. To hasten the day of the appearing of our glorie and triumph. when
the difference shall appeare
betwene vs thy subiects,
and those who serue
thee not; when we shall
wholly raigne in glory
with thee, free from al our
enemies, and from euer
offending thee any more.
And because in the meane
time,12. And in the meane time seeing vve liue by faith. we thy subiects liue
by faith, and not by sight
in this world, where all
things vsually seeme to go
out of order; the wicked
florishing in their vngodlinesse,
when wee oft

weepe and mourne:To increase our faith: Oh
Lord increase our faith, in
all thy gracious promises,
that through the comfort
and power of godlinesse
wrought in vs thereby, we
may grow vp to such a ful
assurance,That vve grovving to ful assurāce, may ouercome the vvorld. VVat. 116. lin. 20. 117. lin. 7. that we are the
true heires of thy kingdome,
that we may easily
ouercome al the hindrances
of the world, and hauing
the patiēce of Saints,
we may be faithfull to the
death, vntill thou set the
crowne vpon our heads.And remaine faithfull to the death.
Fill our harts with such
peace of conscience, and
ioy in thee,13. To be filled vvith peace, ioy and righteousnesse: That al may see of vvhat kingdome vve are: with all the
fruits of righteousnesse,
incoraged by thy sweete
promises, that all others
may see to what Kingdome
we belong, and we
our selues may feele daily,
the beginning of it in our

selues,And we feele the beginning of it in our selues, so entring into our ioy. so entring into thy
heauenly ioy.
               
                  Thy wil be done in earth, as
it is in heauē. And that our
childlike affections towards
thy heauenly Maiestie,1. To pray that vvee may declare our childlike effections, zeale and thankfulnes, 
                        •
                     y doing his heauenly vvill:
our zeale for thy
glory, and thankfulnes for
thy Kingdome, may bee
more manifest to all the
world; quicken vs to doe
thy heauenly will, & commandements,
chiefely
those with which thou
hast fully acquainted vs,As cheerefully as the Angels.
how thou wilt haue vs to
walke, and keepe thy
watch;2. That hee vvill accept our will for the deed. and that with as
much readinesse as thy
Angels in heauen:3. That vve may delight to stand in his presence, to inquire his vvill by all meanes: and
wherein we are too short
accept (good Father) our
will for the deede. Let it
be our delight to stand euer
in thy presence, to inquire
thy diuine pleasure,

both by reading and hearing
thy heauenly word,
and asking of others;
and euer so soone as thou
hast by any meanes made
knowne vnto vs, what thy
good wil is,Hauing Dauids Eccho, I am heere Lord: giue vs forthwith
Dauids Eccho, that
without consulting with
flesh and blood we may
say forthwith, I am heere
Lord, to doe thy will, yea
thy law is within my hart:
that so all our seruice may
be freevvill offrings vnto
thee.That all our seruice may be freewill offerings. And whereas it is
thy decree, that thorowe
many troubles wee must
enter into thy heauenly
Kingdome;4. To prepare for troubles, and humble our selues vnder them, as his obedient children▪ Making right vse of them: (good Father)
frame our corrupt wils
vnto thy heauenly will, &
giue vs grace both to look
for them, & euer to humble
our selues vnder thy
hand as thy obedient

children, seeking alwaies
to pacifie thee, searching
immediately, and amending
whatsoeuer is amiste,VVithout whispering:
without once whispering
against thy diuine Maiestie:Assured that God doth all of loue for our good, and vvill giue a happy issue.
being assured that
thou still louest vs, euen
when thou correctest vs
most sharply, and art
working our good; & wilt
in thy due time giue a
happy end to all our troubles,
and cause thy louing
countenance to shine on
vs againe.5. To take vp our crosses, not suffering as euill doers, but onely for righteousnesse: And if it shall
be thy good pleasure to
call vs to suffer for thy
name, keepe vs that we
may not suffer as euill doers,
or busie bodies for
medling in things without
our calling, so to
bring crosses on our selus,
but as thine owne childrē
for righteousnesse; and

then make vs to take vp
our crosses,VVith ioy and thankfulnesse. with al ioyfulnesse
and thankfulnesse,
that thou accountest vs
worthy that honor, looking
stedfastly at the great
reward holden forth vnto
vs, in ye hand of our Lord
& sauior,Looking at our Sauiour. who hauing troden
that way before vs, is
there highly exalted to
raigne for euer.6. That vve may neuer do any thing against his reuealed wil, to obtaine neuer so great a good, which we imagine. But keepe
vs that we neuer goe against
thy reuealed will,
whereby thou hast conuinced
our consciences,
vnder pretence either to
honour thee, or doe any
seruice vnto thy Church,
or for neuer so great a
good: seeing thou canst
and wilt maintaine thine
owne honour, & saue thy
Church, effecting whatsoeuer
is best without our
sinne. That we may euer

truly pray, Thy will be done
in earth, as it is in heauen.
               
               
                  Giue vs this day our daily
bread.] And then (oh
deare Father, when thou
hast giuen vs such harts
thus to seeke thy will;To the end that all may see the Lords tender care for vs, and that we may attend the doing of his vvill. that
the world may see the
tender care that thou hast
for vs, and how thou dost
fulfill vnto vs all thy promises,
and that we likewise
may wholy attend the
seeking of thy glory,1. To pray for the comforts of this life. in
the inlargement of thy
Kingdome,Watch. pag. 51. lin. 6. and doing thy
will; vouchsafe vs gratiouslie
all things meete
for the comfort of this
present life:2. That hee would shew his f
                        •
                     therly prouidence for necessaries, and to direct vs to the means to serue his prouidence. Watch. pag. 65. lin. 15. Shew vs thy
fatherly loue, prouiding
sufficiently for all our necessities
in thy due time:
Direct vs to vse all the holy
means, which thou hast
appointed to serue thy diuine

prouidence, both
painfulnesse, thrift and
godly wisdome,Chiefely in our particular calling, auoiding the contrarie. chiefely
in our particular calling;
auoyding as warily whatsoeuer
may any way
indanger vs, make our
liues vncomfortable, or
hurt our estate.3. To cōmit ourselues wholly to his protection, depending on him without feare. Grant
vs grace also euermore,
in all humility to commit
our selues vnto thy Fatherly
protection, not fearing
what man can do vnto
vs; remembring that
our times are in thy hāds,
to continue so long as it
pleaseth thee; & that likwise
vnlesse thou who hast
giuen vs our liues do preserue
them,4. To know our ovvne frailtie, wee cannot
continue one moment.And vnabilitie to get a crumme of bread, or to see or vse the meanes.
Make vs to know that of
our selues wee haue no
power to get one morsell
of bread, vnlesse thou

both shew vs the meanes,
and after inable vs to vse
the same, and giue a blessing
to them.To be humbled in the sense of our vnworthines of bread: Humble vs
in the sense of our vilenesse,
that wee are so farre
off from deseruing eternal
life, that we are not worthy
of the least crumme
of bread, which thou hast
taught vs to beg daily: and
grant vs grace to knowe,
that when we haue it, wee
are but theeues and vsurpers
of it,And that we are vsurpers of it▪ & of all other things, and of whatsoeuer
else we possesse, & to
make a dreadful account
for it, vnlesse thou giue it
vs in Iesus Christ;Vntill they be giuen vs in Christ, hauing lost al in Adam. because
we hauing lost al through
Adams transgression, can
haue no right vnto it againe,
vntill it be restored
vnto vs,5. To get more assurance of our title in Christ. in our Lord and
Sauiour. Vouchsafe therefore
to increase our assurance

that thou hast giuen
vs thy Sonne who is Lord
of all, that in him we may
be certaine, that we haue
a true title to whatsoeuer
we inioy.6. For power to the creature to nourish vs. Giue withall
both power and strength,
to thy good creatures, to
norish and comfort vs.
               
                  Bread.] Bestow vpon vs7. For contentation vvith our estate.
contented harts, with the
estate wherein thou settest
vs,VVatch. p. 66 lin. 12. And to see the Lords prouidence in bread alone. though we haue
but bread; & grace to see,
and acknowledge thy
wise and tender prouidence,
aswell in want as
plē
                  
                     •
                  y, being vndoubtedly
assured that thou canst, &
wilt make bread alone to
satisfie vs abundantly,
when other meanes faile.
               
                  This day.]And vvhen we haue but for the day, nor any meanes. And if thou
shalt euer bring vs into
that strait, that we shall
haue no more but for the

presēt day, nor any means
of succor in the world;To be able to cast our selues wholly on the Lord vvithout fainting. VVatch. p. 21. lin. 7. thē
strengthen vs to giue thee
glory, by casting our selus
wholy vpon thee, without
impatience or fainting;
that we may be able euen
then, to shewe our confidence
in thee, & how we
liue not by bread onely,
but by euery word proceeding
out of thy mouth.
Certifie our consciences
aforehand,8. To pray for assurance that the Lord will neuer let vs want that is good: that howsoeuer
wicked men, be they
neuer so rich, may starue
with hunger before they
die, yet thou wilt neuer let
vs thine owne obedient
children, and heires of thy
Kingdome, to want any
thing that shall be good
for vs; but that thou wilt
rather worke extraordinarily,But worke extraordinarily:
when ordinarie
meanes faile, causing our

enemies to feede vs,When ordinary meanes faile. if our
bretheren forget vs, the
very foules to bring vs
bread, and the heauens to
poure vs downe a blessing.9. To be afraid of dishonoring the Lord, by carcking cares aforehand, or impatience in trials.
And therefore (good
Father) let vs alwaies bee
reuerētly afraid of dishonoring,
or grieuing thee
by carcking cares aforehand,
for prouision for vs
or ours: and much more
of murmuring, or impatience
in any such trials,
whereunto our sinfull natures
are extreamly inclined.10. VVhen we vsed only the means to referre the blessing to the Lord.
Make vs able to
sanctifie thy great name,
in vsing onely the meanes
for thy protection and
prouidence, referring the
worke & whole successe
vnto thy heauenly Maiestie
alone, being certaine
that thou wilt doe
that, that shall be best, and

that thou canst not faile vs
nor forsake vs.11. To haue a holy vse of all Gods gifts to our saluation: And when
thou doest bestowe thy
gifts vpon vs, giue vs a holy
vse of them; that both
they may further our saluation;
and that wee may
see thy goodnes in them;
and neuer abuse them
to satisfie our sinfull desires;Neuer abusing them:
or puffe vp our
proud harts; or make thē
our gods, putting our
confidence or felicitie in
them;But imploying them to the ends appointed, as first and chiefely, to maintaine Gods religion, and relieue his seruants: but that wee may
imploy them to the maintenance
of thy religion,
with all the holy ends
which thou hast ordained
them for: and especially
for the reliefe & comfort
of our poore brethren,
for whō thou hast taught
vs to pray daily as for our
selues; and to whom thou
hast giuen an interest in

the vse of our goods.Esay 58. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. &c. Giue
vs bowels of compassion
towards the poore and
needy, that we may take
off euery heauie burden,
relieue the oppressed,
deale our breade to the
hungry soules, that their
backes and bellies may
blesse vs, and that thou
mayest remember vs
in the day of our aduersitie,
and we lay vp a sure
foundation against the
time to come: that therin
also we may shewe forth
our homage to thy diuine
Maiestie,So to shew our homage to God: that we hold all
of thy goodnesse; and declare
the loue we beare to
thy children for thy sake,
and chiefely to them that
most excell in thy graces,
and so the true practise of
the Cōmunion of Saints,And the communion of Saints: wayting for the ioyfull sentence.
waiting for that ioyfull

sentence, Come yee blessed
of my Father, receiue the
Kingdome prepared for you,
for when I was hungry, you
gaue me meate.
               
               Forgiue vs our trespasses.]
               And wheras our sinnes
onely do hinder our assurance,And seeing our sinnes onely do hinder all these things which we haue begged:
that we are thy children,
and cause vs that we
can neither behold thy
glory, nor feele the power
and happinesse of thy
Kingdome; neither yet
haue that full securitie for
thy fatherly prouidence,
and protection from all
euill, which otherwise we
should find, and do moreouer
bring all contrary euils
vpon vs, and therefore
thou hast taught vs to cry
euery day,1. To pray for pardon of all our sinnes: 
                  forgiue vs our
trespasses: Pardon (good
Lord) and remoue all our

sinnes, that keepe away
these good things from
vs. And that we may cry
more earnestly for forgiuenesse,
neuer giuing
thee rest, vntill wee haue
attained it;Because heerein alone stands all true happinesse. teach vs that
heerein alone stands all
true peace and blessednes,
when we haue this full assurance
sealed in our
harts, that our sinnes are
pardoned; and that all
they whose sinnes are not
remitted, are most accursed
and vnhappy.2. To this end to see the haynousnes of sinne: And to
this end shewe vs (good
Father) first the hainousnesse
of sinne, by making
vs to consider aright thy
wrath, declared against it
from heauen,In the fearefull punishment of the Angels: in the fearefull
punishment of thy
most excellent creatures
the Angels, whom for that
one sinne, euen because

they were not cōtent with
their estate, thou hast cast
down into hel, to be reserued
in chaines of darknes,
vnto the iudgemēt of the
great day; then to be damned
to endlesse torments:
& afterwards in our first
parents,Our first parents: cast frō their happy
estate, for eating ye forbidden
fruit, & for whose
sin alone, all the curses of
this life & that to come,
fel not only vpō thēselues
but also all their posterity,
euen all of vs, being wrapped
vnder the same condemnatiō,
vntill we be deliuered
by Iesus Christ. Open
our eies to see this thy
wrath against sinne yet
more fully, not only vpon
the wicked in the generall
destruction of the old
world, and in turning the
filthy Cities of Sodome &The old world.
                  
                  Gomorrah into ashes, to
remaine as eternal monuments
to all posteritie;Sodome. &
in preparing the lake burning
with fire and brimstone,
for an euerlasting
punishment to all vnbeleeuers,Hell prepared for the wicked:
and impenitent
persons; but euen against
the sinnes of thine owne
dearest childrē,And in the punishment of Gods dearest seruāts: As Moses: as in y• heauy
punishmēt vpon thine
own faithful seruant Moses,
for so smal a sin in our
account (as not honoring
thee before the people, in
beleeuing and auouching
thy power and truth) that
thou didst cut him off for
entring into Canaan,
which of al earthly things
he must needes most desire,
being the land of promise,
the type of heauen,
and also after that he
had led the people, fortie

yeares towards it. And besides
the punishment of
Dauid,
                  And Dauid. and his house for
that one sinne, that thy
hand did so pursue him
and his, all his life long; &
so thy sharpe corrections,
laid vpon all other thy
dearest seruants, registred
in thy booke; Lord teach
vs yet more rightly to cō
                  ceaue
the vilenesse of sin
by this one thing chiefely,And chiefely that vpon our Sauiour himselfe.
that the least sinne of
thine elect, could neuer
haue bin ransommed, but
by the vnspeakeable torments
of thine owne beloued
Sonne, the Lord of
glory, taking our nature
to become a sacrifice to
appease thy wrath, and to
satisfie thy Iustice: & how
thou didst poure out vpon
him, the full viols of
thy wrath, to cause him to

sweate drops of blood, &
to cry out; my God my God,
why hast thou forsaken me.
Giue vs thy children some
true sense heereof,3. To haue some sense of the innumerable euils, which each sinne brings p. 5. l. 22 23. p. 6. 7. and
withal this grace to keepe
a cōtinuall remembrance
of the innumerable euils,
which euery sinne brings
euen vpon vs, thine owne
children in our soules or
bodies,Vpon Gods owne children: goods, name or
friends, vnlesse wee preuent
them by speedy and
vnfained repētance;Vnlesse they be preuented, especially depriuings vs of Gods protection and prouidence, and al power in prayer. especially
how thereby we are
left wholly destitute of thy
protection & prouidence,
and depriued of all comfort
and power in prayer,
so long as we remaine
therein; and also of many
extraordinary experiments
of thy bounty,
which otherwise wee
should find. Make vs able

in some sort to comprehend
the greatnesse of sin,4. To bee able to comprehend in some sort the greatnes of our sin, how it is increased by circumstances, being 
                        •
                     om
                        •
                     mitted 
                        •
                     gainst the infinit God: our high calling:
by the infinitnesse of thy
glorious Maiestie, against
whom each sinne is committed:
& how our sinnes
are increased heereby also,
that they are committed
against our high calling
to be Christians, and
heires of thy Kingdome:
with such abundant mercies,
both ordinarie and
extraordinarie;All mercies: and so many
and strong meanes
to restraine vs;Meanes: besides
sundry vowes and couenants
renewed,Vovves: and that
after mercy obtained, and
pardon formerly sealed,After pardon obtained.
vpon our promise of amendment.
Open our
blind eies to haue some
sight also of the multitude
of our sinnes,5. To haue some sight of the multitude of our sinnes. how
they are more in number,

then the starres of heauen,
seeing they are euery
breach of thy diuine will,Being euerie breach of Gods Commandement, in thought:
reuealed vnto vs in thy
law and Gospell, and that
not only in thought, word
or deede,Or in omitting the very least dutie: but euen in omitting
of any part thereof,
or doing it without all
our hart, and all our
strength;Besides Adams sin. besides the sinne
of our first parents, whereby
we are all the children
of wrath, and vnder thy
curse; and also besides the
corruption of our sinfull
natures receiued fromThe corruption of our nature:
thence; whereupon wee
are so wholy inclined vnto
euill, that all the
thoughts of our harts,Being wholly carried to euill: are
onely euill continually;
so as we cannot of our
selues so much as thinke,
much lesse will any thing
but that which is sinfull;

and hence also the hardnesse
of our harts,And the hardnes of our hearts. that we
are so little moued, either
at the hearing of so many
iudgements, or the inioying
of so many mercies, to
make any right vse of
them.6. For a continuall feeling of ourdaily fraulties: Vouchsafe vs such
a liuely, and continuall
sense heereof, together
with a feeling of our daily
slips, wants, frailties, infirmities,
imperfections &
noisome lustes, issuing
from this filthy puddle of
originall corruption in vs,
that we may bee wearie of
this body of sinne,Trauelling vnder them, Desiring to be deliuered. groning
vnder the bondage
of this our corruption, &
sighing to bee deliuered
from it.7. That vve may see our most grieuous sinnes, both before our calling and since. Shewe vs also our
most grieuous sinnes, not
onely of our youth and
ignorāce, but those much
more which we haue committed,

since thou hast called
vs by thy grace vnto
so high a dignitie, & conuinced
our consciences;
chiefely our open and
scandalous sinnes,Chiefely our scandalous sinnes. whereby
wee haue most dishonored
thee, causing thy
Gospell to bee euill
spoken of; grieued thy
children, or any way hindred
the saluation of others;
that by all these we
may see vvhat debters we
are,8. That by all these wee may see what debters vvee are: & how vnable to pay
the least part, but to lie in
hell for euermore; that we
may crie continually with
Dauid,
                  And may be driuen to cry for forgiuenes, and to runne to the fountaine of Chrisis blood. 
                  Lord forgiue vs
our sinnes, and blot out all
our offences; wash vs thorowly,
purge and clense
vs; thus running euery
moment, to the fountaine
of thy Sons blood, which
is open to all the house of

Israel, for all sinnes & vncleannesse.And yet that we may find comfort in the al-sufficiencie thereof.
And yet withal
that we may not be vtterly
ouerwhelmed, by the
vgly view of the multitud
or lothsomenesse of our
sinnes, as though they
could not bee pardoned,
nor we purged from thē;
comfort vs in this that thy
Sonnes blood is of infinite
merit, and all sufficient
to wash vs from all
our sinnes (though they
were the most haynous
sinnes, that euer were cō
                  mitted;
yea although we
had all the sinnes of the
world vpon vs) so long as
in a true feeling of them,
we cā desire to be washed
therein.9. To the end that we may not bee deceiued in the forgiunes of our sinnes. But because wee
are all very ready to deceiue
our selues, imagining
that we are washen,
when we remaine still in

our filthines; seeing thou
neither callest, nor admitst
of any to this fountaine,
but them that come in
true repentance for all
their sinnes,To pray for true repentance and faith, which are the vnseparable companions of forgiuenes. fully purposing
amendment; and in a
liuely faith in thy sweete
promises, desiring to
grow therein; Oh grant
vs grace, truely to see our
particular sinnes, and the
vilenesse of them, and
make vs able in the sight
of them, and the sense of
our estate and danger by
them, to mourne bitterly
for them, looking at thy
Sonne, whom wee haue
pierced thereby; and so
to hate and abhorre them,
that being once purged
in this Lauer, we may bee
euer afraid of defiling our
selues againe, or of sinning
against that pretious

blood.And to trie them both by the word, to be sincere. Wat. pag. 2. lin. 8. Helpe vs to trie
both our repentance and
faith, by the holy rule
which thou hast giuen vs
in thy law and Gospell,
that we may know them
to be such, as will abide
the triall, and not hypocriticall;
and which also
haue bin first wrought in
vs,And such as haue been vvrought in vs, by the Gospell, and do increase and grovv. by the powerfull
preaching of thy Gospell,
and doe continually increase
and grow: which
are the infallible euidences,
yt they are sound and
sincere.10. That vvee may continually examine & iudge our selues. Giue vs harts to
be daily examining, and
iudging our selues that
we may escape thy iudgement.
We intreate thee also
againe for our sinfull
Realmes,11. To pray againe for pardon of the sins of our land. to pardon all the
fearefull prouocations
thereof, and to be pacified
at the instant prayers

of thy faithfull seruants,As the instant prayers of Gods seruants by the blood of Christ.
crying vnto thee in all
places by the blood of thy
Sonne, which speakes better
things then the blood
of Abel; Let that cry still
preuaile against the cry of
the sinnes, that thy mercie
may bee magnified in
all the world.
               
                  As we forgiue them that
trespasse against vs.]Whereas we must pray to be forgiuen as we forgiue. And
whereas thou (oh holy
and gratious Father) hast
taught vs euer to pray to
be forgiuen, as we forgiue
them that trespasse against
vs, telling vs plainely that
if wee forgiue others for
thy cause, thou wilt also
forgiue vs; and contrarily
that if we will not forgiue
others,1. To pray against all maliciousnes and desire of reuenge: we shall neuer bee
forgiuen: Change (good
Lord) the wickednesse of
our sinfull hearts, which

are most strongly bent to
malice and reuenge, that
howsoeuer wee hate the
sins and company of the
wicked,That though we hate the sinnes of the wicked and reioyce in the execution of Gods righteous iudgments on them: and whatsoeuer
else is in them, whereby
they dishonour thee, or
shew themselues to bee
thine enemies: and although
we also reioyce in
the execution of thy righteous
iudgements, whereby
thou gettest thy selfe
glory vpon the proud enemies
of thy Church; and
do also pray daily for the
confounding of all their
wicked practises and deuises;And pray for confounding their euill practises:
yet Lord graunt vs
hearts to seeke the saluation
of all sorts,Yet that we may pray for and seek their saluation. because we
know not whether they
belong to thine eternall
election; and for them
that are but our enemies
vpō priuate respects,2. For them that are our enemies on priuate respects, to pray their sinne may be pardoned: giue

vs grace that insteede of
seeking reuenge, we may
pray earnestly for them,
that they may see their
sins, and haue their hearts
changed, and so obtaine
pardon for it: And moreouer
that we may seeke to
pacifie them,And that vve may seeke to pacifie them and gaine their loue: by offering
them reconciliation or ful
satisfaction, doing them
good or gratifying them
by any kindnesse, so far as
may stand with their saluation
and credit of thy
Gospell, euen when they
hunger to feed them, and
when they thirst to giue
them drinke,to heape coales on their heades: to heape
coales vpon their heads as
thou hast commanded; either
to gaine them by our
Christian kindnesse, or to
leaue them more without
excuse;And get full assurance of forgiuenesse to our selues. and to seale vp to
our selues a most plentiful

assurance of a full remission
of all our sins thereby.
               
                  Leade vs not into temptation,
but deliuer vs from
euill.]Seeing Satan seekes continuallie by temptations to draw vs to sinne to prouoke the Lord against vs & bring some euill vpon vs. And seeing (oh tender
Father) that our deadly
enemie seekes hourely
by his temptations to
draw vs to sin against thy
heauenly Maiestie to dishonor
thee, making vs his
vassals to do his will, so to
strippe vs vtterly both of
thy protection and prouidence,
and to cause thee
to leaue vs in his hand,
to bring vpō vs thy wrath
with all the euils following
vpon sin; whereupon
our Sauiour hath taught
vs to pray alwaies, Leade
vs not into temptation, but
deliuer vs from euill:
                  1. To pray we may see the danger we stand in each houre. Good
Lord open our eies to see
the danger wherein wee
stand continually, & first

for the multitude of those
damned spirits that rangeFor the multitude of damned spirits▪
                  
vp and downe day and
night with a deadly malice
seeking to deuour vs.
Teach vs to know (oh holy
Father) what their power
is against vs,2. For their power to tempt and destroy vs in a moment. if thou do
not restraine it; that they
are able to bring vs to as
fearefull sins, as euer they
brought any of thy seruants
vnto, and to destroy
vs vtterly in a moment
both soules and bodies,
with al y• euer thou hast giuē
vnto vs, if thou preserue
vs not. Acquaint vs with
their deep subtilties,3. Because of their subtilties: both
in fitting their temptations
to our particular natures
and dispositions,Whereby they knowing our dispositions: to
our conditions, callings
and occasions which they
know perfectly; alwaies
dogging vs at the heeles,

and watching vs,Marke and take all aduantages: & their
meetest opportunities;
whereby they take their
fittest aduantage to ouercome
vs, as against Eue
and Dauid,
                  To solicite vs to those sinnes wherin they are most like to preuaile, drawing vs on by degrees, to yeeld first to smaller matters which the world accounts no sinne: chiefely by soliciting
vs to those sinnes,
wherein we haue bin formerly
ouertaken, or wherby
they haue most preuailed
against thy dearest seruants:
& that also in drawing
vs on by degrees, as
first either to yeelde to
some smaller matters
which the world accounts
no sins, but trifles, or too
much precisenes; as Eue
to eie the forbidden fruit,
and to reason with the
Serpent about the temptation:Or not to auoid the occasions of temptation or neglect our calling.
or else not to auoid
the danger and occasions
of the temptations,
but thrust our selues into
them carelessely without

any warrant, neglecting
the calling laid vpon vs; as
Dauid to lie idlely on his
bed in the afternoones insteede
of looking to the
great affaires of his kingdome.4. For their innumerable allurements and baytes of this world:
Make vs able yet
more fully to conceiue of
our perpetuall danger,
through their innumerable
allurements and baits
to deceiue vs both of the
credit and estimation of
the world, with the riches
and pleasures thereof;
which they euer hold
forth & proffer vnto vs,VVhich they proffer. if
we will follow their perswasions;5. For their threatnings if we wil be so precise as to make conscience of each of Gods Commaundements.
and otherwise
threatning not onely the
losse, or at least the hazarding
of all these, but more
also the hatred, disgrace
and reproch of the world,
with depriuing vs of all
comforts, the losse of our

goods, with many other
euils, which we must bee
sure to looke for daily at
the hands of malicious
men; if we will be so strict
as to make conscience of
euery one of thy commā
                  dements,
so as we wil not
do the least thing forbidden,
nor omit the least dutie
commanded vs. And
whereas we are ordinarily
secure in an ouerweening
of our owne strength and
abilitie to resist Satan;
Shew vs (oh Lord) euen
in our hearts,6. For the vilenesse of our nature readie to conspire with them: the vilenesse
of our corrupt nature,
which is euer ready as a
bond slaue of Satans, and
a traitor against our soules
to conspire with him presently
to our vtter perdition,
and as readie to run
after & swallow euery one
of his deadly temptatiōs,And to swallow euerie baite:
                  
as euer fish the baite:Without all strength to resist. so as
we haue no strength in the
world to help our selues,
but all against our selues,
more then that thou gratiously
reachest foorth
thine hand vnto vs, strengthening
& deliuering vs.7. For Gods displeasure, to leaue vs in their power for our security.
And heerein we pray thee
also to reueale vnto vs
that great danger which
wee stand in continually
from thy glorious Maiestie,
seeing wee haue no
warrant of protection, or
any aide from thee (but
rathe iust cause of feare
that thou shouldest giue
vs vp wholly into the power
of the tempter, and
our own corruption) longer
then that we make cō
                  science
to obserue thy
watch, walking carefully
in euery one of thy Commandements;
vsing diligently

euery meanes of
grace, & auoiding as warilie
each least occasion of
temptation.8. For Sathans cunning in hiding all this danger, and the vglinesse of sinne: And moreouer
seeing the subtill tēpter
in all his temptations,
vseth all his cunning to
hide all this danger with
the vglines of sin, and the
misery that he knoweth it
will bring vpon vs; shewing
onely the faire side of
it,Shewing onely the faireside of it what we shal get by it, and vsing the fittest instruments to effect his purpose: as the safetie, credit,
pleasure or gaine which
we shall get by it, and also
vseth the fittest instrumēts
to perswade vs hereunto;
as the counsell or example
of the wisest, learnedst,
or wealthiest & of chiefest
reputation, & sometimes
of those who haue a name
for godlines, so changing
himselfe into an Angel of
light,Neuer cō
                     
                        •
                     ing like him selfe to tempt, and neuer comming
like himselfe, (vnlesse to

driue poore soules into
vtter dispaire) whereby he
not onely deceiues the
world,Whereby he deceiues all the world: but euen vs thy
children, either to make
vs to thinke sin to bee no
sin,And oft times Gods owne children, making sinne to seeme no sin. or at least to presume
to sin, because thou art so
mercifull, or for that thou
doest not punish presently.
Cause vs (good Father)2. To pray we may haue a continuall remembrance of the seuerall miseries of each sinne, Watch. p. 5. 6. 7.
to keepe a continuall and
fresh remembrance hereof,
and withal of that fearfull
misery which we hale
vpon our heads by euerie
sin; especially the wound
of conscience, which no
creature was euer able to
beare,Chiefely the wounds of conscience which none can beare: and vvill come vnlesse it bee speedilie preuented: and which will certainly
come vpon vs, vnlesse
it bee preuented by
speedie repentance. And
howsoeuer the reprobate
and the vngodly may
wallow in their filthines,

and yet seeme to be more
free from punishment thē
any other,That although wicked men escape here, vvho are reserued for hell, the Lord yet vvill not suffer vs so: because thou
reseruest them for hel, and
therefore fattest them for
the day of slaughter: yet
make vs to know that
thou wilt not let any of vs
thy children (who haue
specially giuen vp our
names to thee, to make a
more sincere profession of
thy Gospell) to commit
the very least sin, but that
thou wilt surely make vs
feel the smart of it, vnlesse
we preuent it presently by
vnfained repentance:Especially vvhen our sinnes are scandalous: and
that thou wilt doe openly
when our sins are hainous
or to the offēce of others;
because thou wilt neither
be dishonored by vs,Because he vvill not be dishonored by vs, nor let vs be damned: nor
let vs be condemned with
the world; but wilt surely
correct vs to let all the

wicked see with what a
perfect hatred thou hatest
all sinne,And that the wicked may see his hatred against sinne, and vvhat remaines for thē for euer. when thou doest
punish it so seuerely in
thine owne children, and
what plagues remaine for
them eternally. Yea (oh
gratious Father) make vs
to feare alway,3. To pray we may feare alvvay lest God should leaue vs neuer so little, because of Satans most deadlie malice against vs who dreescaped frō him: lest thou
shouldest leaue vs neuer
so little; and to suspect al
our waies, in as much as
Satan carries a more deadly
hatred against vs,To prouoke the Lord against vs: who
are escaped from his tyrannie,
then against any other
people of the world;
and therfore seekes euery
houre to prouoke thee against
vs, to leaue vs in
his hand,And for that our sinnes vvill more dishonour him, and harden moe to perdition then of anie other: and also because
he knowes that our sinnes
will more cause thy glorious
name to bee blasphemed,
and harden moe to
vtter perdition, than the

sins of any other;Whence so few haue escaped to the end, wherupon
very few of thy worthiest
seruants through
his continuall dogging
them, haue escaped to
the end of their liues
without some grieuous
foiles and wounds,VVithout some grieuous foiles. the
scarres wherof they haue
carried with them to their
graues, to the blemishing
their profession, & wounding
their consciences,
with the griefe and shame
of the godly, and insulting
of the wicked.4. To learne to vvatch and pray as the remidie against all temptations: And
therefore as thou hast
taught vs this as the remedie
against euery assault of
the enemie, to watch and
pray that we enter not into
temptation; so make vs
alwaies able to obserue
this thy watch which thou
hast set before vs,And to be better acquainted vvithout selues: and to
learne to bee better acquainted

with our owne
selues and our estates,
knowing our particular
infirmities,And weaknesses: and wherein
we are weak, that we may
put on daily the compleate
armour,To put on the compleat armour, chieflie the shield of faith: chiefelie
the shield of faith, and
brestplate of righteousnes
to saue vs from his fierie
darts,And to haue the vvord euer in readinesse: and withall to haue
thy holy Word euer in
readinesse against euery
temptation,That strēgthned by the spirit and continuing in prayer vve may stand fast: which is the
sword of thy Spirit, able
vtterly to vanquish him,
and put him to flight, that
being strēgthened by thy
holy Spirit, obtained by
cōtinuing in instant prayer,And preserue our selues without any grieuous woūds, vntill vvee haue gotten the finall conquest.
wee may bee able to
stand fast in the euill day,
and so finish our course,
vntill we haue gotten the
finall conquest, without
any grieuous wounds or

foile; to thine euerlasting
glorie, & our own greater
triumph and honor in the
heauens.5. That we pray not against all temptation: We do not pray
that wee should not bee
tempted at all; for thou
hast taught vs to account
it exceeding ioy, when we
fall into diuers temptations,
knowing the good
that comes thereby; but
that we may indure temptation,But onelie that in them vve may ouercome:
fighting valiantly
and ouercomming,So to receiue the crovvne of glorie in the ende. that
when we are tried we may
haue the crowne of glorie
set vpon our heads.
               
                  For thine is the kingdom,
power and glorie,
                  VVe haue begged all from the Lord: 
                  for euer
and euer: Amen.] We haue
been bold (oh gratious
Father) to beg all these
things from they heauenly
Maiestie,1. Because all kingdom, povver and glorie are his, and vve haue receiued all from him. because all kingdome,
power and glorie
belong onely to thee; acknowledging

that whatsoeuer
good things wee
enioy, wee haue receiued
them all from thy rich
and fatherly bountie;2. Because hee vvill grant vs all good things, aboue all that vvee can aske: and
being certainely assured
that as thou hast bidden
vs to pray thus, so thou
wilt graunt vs all these
things which wee haue
begged in thy Sonnes
name, and whatsoeuer
else is good for vs, euen
aboue all that wee are able
to aske;So farre as shall bee for his glory and our good: so farre as
shall be for thine owne
glorie (seeing thou art
absolute Lord and King
in heauen and in earth,
and doest by thy mightie
power and wisedome
dispose and guide all
things,Seeing hee guideth and ouerruleth all things to serue hereunto: ouerruling the
verie counsels and rage
of all wicked men and
diuels, as shall make

most for thine owne glorie
and the greatest good
of vs thine owne obedient
subiects and children)
and hast assured vs
that asking thus in faith,And hath assured vs that asking in faith, vve shall haue:
wee shall receiue; That
wee may set foorth by
good experience the glorie
of thy dominion and
power, with the happinesse
of thy Kingdome,That vvee may set foorth the glorie and happines of his kingdom:
to all succeeding ages;
to which wee doe hereby
binde our selues all
the dayes of our life,
and to liue as the loyall
subiects of this thy Kingdome,Whereunto vvee binde our selues, and to liue as his subiects all our daies:
to thine euerlasting
glorie; and so returne
all possible thankes,
praise and dominion to
thy heauenlie Maiestie,And so returne all praise and thanks, saying, Amen.
saying euer, Amen, Bee
it so (oh LORD holie
and true) as wee doe

fullie beleeue that it shall
bee.Euen so Lord Iesus. Euen so Amen.
Amen, Come Lord
Iesus, Come
quicklie.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   