
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  
                     THE
third part of
THE TRVE-WATCH
or
The Call of ye Lord
to awake all sorts to
meete him speedely
with intreaty of
peace, & to turne
vnto him by true
repentance: shewing
what causes
we haue forthwith
to betake orselu's
to watching &
prayer.
                  Taken out of ye vision
of Ezekiel Chap: 9.
BY IO: BRINSIEY.
The sec
                        •
                     und edition.
                  
                     Imprinted
at LONDON for
Thomas Pauier
1623.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE
THIRD PART
OF
THE TRVE VVATCH,
Containing the call of the Lord, to awake
all sorts to meet him with intreatie of peace, and to
turne unto him by true repentance: shewing what
causes we have forthwith to betake our selves
to Watching and Prayer.
            Taken out of the Vision of EZEKIEL, Chap. 9.
            
               By IOHN BRINSLEY.
            
               IER. 36. 2.
               Take thee a roule of a booke, and write therein all the words that I have spoken
unto thee against Israel, and against Iudah, and against all the Nations, from the day I spake unto
thee, from the daies of Iosiah even unto this day.
            
            
               VERSE 7.
               It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord, and will returne
every one from his evill way, for great is the anger and the furie that the Lord hath pronounced
against this people.
            
            
               HAB. 2. 2.
               Write the vision and make it plaine upon tables, that he may run that readeth it.
            
            
               EZEK. 18. 30.
               
                  Returne and cause others to returne away from all, &c. Repent and turne your selves from all your
transgressions: so iniquitie shall not be your ruine.
            
            
               VERSE 32.
               For I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the
Lord God: Wherefore turneOr others. your selves and live you.
            
            LONDON,
Printed by IOHN HAVILAND for THOMAS PAVIER, and are to
be sold at his shop in Ivie lane. 1622.
         
         
            
            The summe of the whole Booke.
            1. How the Lord did long forewarne his people of Iudah, calling them to repentance,
sundrie waies, before he brought upon them the seventie yeeres captivitie in Babylon.
And withall the p
                  •
               incipall abominations which provoked him to this heavie judgement.
            2. The wofull miseries which all sorts endured in that Captivitie, when no warnings
would preuaile to bring them to unfained repentance: and more specially the plagues which
came upon the wicked and impenitent.
            3. Particular application hereof unto our selves, and of the manifold forewarnings
which we have received, chiefly from Babylon, above all in the powder treason: shewing
evidently that the Lord is angrie with us for our sinnes, and what use we are to make, as of
all our forewarnings, so chiefly of that Powder-treason.
            4. How to appease the Lord, so as to prevent the like judgements and all other plagues;

                  •
               nd ever to 
                  •
               emaine a most happie people unto the comming of Iesus Christ. Also how
very one of us may attaine to true Christian boldnesse to be alwaies readie to appeare be
               
                  •
               ore
his Majestie.
            See the more particular contents of the severall Chapters and heads after.
         
         
            
            A Commendatorie Epistle.
            
               THis Author (Christian Reader)
having desired first my censure,
now sundrie yeeres agoe, and
since my joint testimonie, touching
this worke, that by the mouth
or two or three witnesses, God
might make it more effectuall, for
accomplishing all the good his heart desireth; I could
no way justly denie the same: seeing as the ends,
which it propoundeth and wholly aimeth at, are
only to helpe to further the way to our unfained repentance,
for the generall happinesse of us all, yea even
of every soule; and that our glory may be continued
to us, and to our posteritie; so he hath long travelled
in the same, and used all holy meanes of triall
and examination, that there might be nothing in it,
but that which is necessarie to these ends, and which
might stand before the Lords Tribunall. For the
Author himselfe, though I have knowne him from
my childhood, being borne neere unto him, brought
up in the same Grammar Schoole, and after, in the
same Colledge in Cambridge, and ever since beene
most familiarly acquainted with him, and therefore
could speake more in this case then I take to be convenient,
yet I may wholly spare that paines; seeing
his owne faithfull and happy labours have so
long agoe commended him, and made him and his
holy affection for the good of all, so well knowne

to the Church of God. As first, the first part of this
True watch, the Rule of Life, so much approved of all
religious Christians, to whose hands it hath come,
that it hath now the ninth time seene the Presse, and
gone thorow the triall,See the Preface before it to the Christian Reader. Wherein he hath set out to
the view of all, the holinesse and integritie of that way
of life, which we all jointly professe (according to
Gods sacred word, and the good Lawes of our Christian
Commonweale) to the justifying of our Church
against the Separatists, to be the true Church of Iesus
Christ, and that whosoever so walketh shall undoubtedly
finde eternall life, and in the meane while all
heavenly boldnesse, peace and joy. And not only against
them, but also against the superstitious and clamorous
Papists, who herein slander our Religion, affirming
it to be a religion of carnall libertie, theirs of
holinesse, ours full of divisions and uncertaintie, theirs
of perfect unitie, thereby to draw our people to a dislike
of the eternall truth of our blessed God, and to a
liking of that popish way, which is nothing but meere
superstition in outward shews of devotion, according
to mens inventions, and such as God never commanded,
or required; nay such as God hath most expresly
forbidden, as tending to utter perdition, both of soules
and bodies. So secondly, the second part of this True
watch, the Rule of Praier, in which he hath manifested
his holy desire and unfained love to the Church of
God and his native Countrie, for a perfect peace and
unitie, with all happinesse in the same, and hath so laboured
to trace out the most sure and plaine way, following
the direction of our blessed Saviour, as that
whosoever striveth so to watch & pray, shall undoubtedly
be amongst them that are as the Chariots and

horsemen of Israel, and helpe to save the Iland. And
in the third place in his Schoole labours, for the benefit
of our children and posteritie, he hath fully witnessed
his longing desire of the perpetuall flourishing of
this our Church and Nation; concerning which travell,
(to omit all other)Dr. Hali Commendatorie Preface. The Iesuites have wonne much of their reputation, and stollen many hearts with their diligence: in this kinde we may outstrip them if wee want not to our selves. Behold heere, not feet, but wings offered to us; neither are these directions of meere spec
                     •
                  lation, but such as for the most part, to the knowledge of my selfe, and many abler judges, have beene and are daily answered in his experience and practise, with more then usuall successe What remaines therefore, but that the thankfull acceptation of men, and his effectuall labours should mutually reflect upon each other, that he may be encouraged by the one, and they by the other bene
                     •
                  ited, &c. that one testimonie of the
learned Doctor Hall, that worthie Deane of Worcester,
in his Commendatorie Preface before his booke,
called Ludus Literarius, or the Grammar Schoole, dedicated
to Prince Henrie and Duke Charles, (speaking
out of his owne experience and of sundry other learned
many yeeres agoe) may fully suffice. And much
more now of late, that more then ordinarie witnesse
by that learnedThe Preface of Mr. Butlours Rhetoricke, by I. M. to the Reader. Mr. Butlour of Oxford in his fourth
Edition of his Rhetoricke, who in stead of the commendations
of many other of principall note, which
especially in Oxford are wont to be prefixed before
any worke of speciall worth as that is; taketh only
the testimonie of this Author, in a place or two in his
Grammar-Schoole, and sets it before his booke, instead
of many; there commending him for that worke,
as having by it deserved worthily of all good learning.
Therefore seeing in all his labours his good affection
towards the Church of God, our dread Soveraigne,
with all his royall Progenie and dominions,
doth cleerely appeare,Si in Authoris ope
                  
                     •
                  isve laudem (studiose lector) multorum hîc, pro more, suffragia requiras; instar multorum sit hoc vnum literati illius, & ob exquisitam docend
                     •
                   methodum, de bonis l
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  
                  ru optimè merit
                     •
                  , magistri Iohannis Brinflei: cujus in suo Lud
                     •
                   literario, or the Grammar Schoole, cap. 16. hac sunt verba, &c. seeking only the wealth of all,
and to unite all hearts, as unto the Lord of heaven, so
to our Soveraigne Lord and King, and to his royall
seed for our happinesse for ever, with what thankfull
acceptation are all his labours to be received?
And this above all the former, wherein he now
only strives to helpe to awaken us out of our deepest
securitie, in the midst of our extremest perill,

and necessitie; and when the times call us to watch
and pray, yea to fast and pray, if ever heretofore.
First I say to rise up and watch, that we may pray.
To pray for the distressed state of all the poore Churches,
and our brethren abroad, who mourne and
wring their hands by reason of their slaveries,
butcheries, manifold feares and miseries, both of
their soules and bodies: above all for them of Bohemia
and the Palatinate, the very chiefe of them a
principall part of our selves; and withall for our
brethren of France now in great tribulation for the
profession of Christs Gospell; taking their case to
heart as feeling members, little knowing how soone
it may be our owne, and ever fearing that terrible
curse from the Angell of the Lord;Ier. 5. 23. Curse ye Meroz
(said the Angell) curse the inhabitants thereof, because
they came not out to helpe the Lord against the
mightie. Secondly to watch and pray, yea to mourne
and crie for the fearfull viols of the Lords wrath (in
all likelihood) so neerely readie to be powred
downe upon our own heads, unlesse we speedily meet
the Lord in unfained repentance. If in the yeere 88.
all sorts so generally feared it; when yet at our generall
humiliation in fasting and praier by publike
commandement, and our promising amendment,
God heard our cries, deferred the execution of his
wrath upon us; and contrarily fought for us from
heaven, arming the windes and waters for his
Church amongst us, how much more may we justly
feare it now. If then (I say) all joyntly confessed,
that if God had so dealt with us, as he threatned, we
had most righteously deserved it, for all our hainous
abominations, and for that no other meanes could

prevaile with us; and if in our severall acknowledgements,
praiers and thanksgivings upon sundrie occasions
since, we have againe and againe confessed as
much, how much more truly may we now at this
present? Seeing the Lord hath granted us since not
one yeere more alone, to see if wee would meet him
truly with intreatie of peace, and unfained submission,
but ten, yea thrice ten yeere and more, and also
used all meanes to reclaime us, both by abundant
fatherly corrections, and in his long patience and
commiseration given us our third most dreadfull admonition,
at the powder treason, never to be forgotten,
when he even plucked us out of the furnace;
and now that our sinnes are, in stead of repenting, ten
times more increased through all those meanes (in
the judgement of all who rightly consider of them:)
how can we expect any longer mercy? What can we
looke for now in that we see men so generally (chiefly
most of our Gallants) to make but a mocke of sinne,
yea of all Gods admonitions at home and abroad,
hating all true pietie, and scorning it under most
odious names? Or how can we thinke truly that our
land is purged of any of our abominations, but
stands presently guiltie of them all, having now filled
up our measure, seeing we commit most of those
fearfull abominations so often confessed, with an
higher hand then ever heretofore? Or how can we
imagine that our land is out of danger, seeing many
amongst us begin to doat againe upon the bloudie
Romish Idolatrie; and that now our enemies are so
increased in Malice, Pride, and Multitude, and so many
of the infernall Locusts feared to be in the midst
amongst us. My desire therefore is, that as this labour

hath beene undertaken for the saving of us all, from
such a vengeance, as upon these grounds we have just
cause to feare, and for our perpetuall happinesse, and
must needs for that cause concerne us all, that every
one would take notice of it, and consider seriously of
every point, as God gives him opportunitie; especially
they who have leisure (and spend many houres, yea
many dayes and yeeres, either wickedly or at least
vainly, which will bring them nothing but sorrow in
the end) to helpe hereby to turne away the wrath, or
at least to save their owne soules. The worke is large
(I grant) but too large thou canst not thinke it, seeing
the Author of it desireth to make all plaine to the capacitie
of the simplest, and truly to awake every soule,
and for that I know not of any point in it which doth
not directly tend hereunto, or can well be made shorter
without hurt to the whole; chiefly the generall
good considered; that every sinner that repents not,
turning from his evill way, must die. And therefore
doubtlesse no man shall haue just cause to repent him
of his labour spent in hearing or reading of it, but if
God give him an heart by the right applying of it to
helpe to appease the wrath, or at least to turne, and to
seeke to cause others to turne, he shall have cause to
blesse the God of heaven for it; which that every one
may doe, and that we may all instantly set our selves
to seeke his face and favour, I humbly intreat his heavenly
Majestie to grant, and rest
            
               Thine in Christ Iesus,
Edward Elton B. in D. and Pastor
of S. Mary Magdalens Barmondsey
neere London.
            
         
         
            
            AN ADVERTISEMENT
TO THE CHRISTIAN
READER.
            
               FOr those who would read this
book with comfort, and reape the
blessing desired by it, in obtaining
mercie and favour from the Lord
for themselves and the whole
land, my humble request is, that they would
first correct these faults noted after; then read
and weigh these Contents in the beginning
both generall and particular; whereby they
may see the summe and drift of all; and have
as it were a plaine view of the whole in their
heads: afterwards to read the praier in the end
which is according to the same, that they may
better conceive and make a right use thereof;
and then to read the whole in order, if their leisure
and opportunitie serve, or at least such parts
of it, as they shall thinke most necessarie; and
especially the last chapter, which most neerely
concerneth every soule. That considering all,

as before Christs judgement seat, like as I have
endevoured to doe, and so striving joyntly in
faith and love for our selves and all other the
poore afflicted Churches of Christ; the Lord
may fulfill all our holy desires, turne away all
evills from us and them, and make us to continue
a flourishing Church and a happie Nation
to the comming of the Lord Iesus in the clouds.
            Remember,
                  1. The danger we stand in, because of the Lords displeasure for our sin.
                  2. The meanes how we may yet pacifie and prevent the same, if we be
not wanting to our selues.
                  3. That we are all to be helpers hereunto.
                  4. The comfort and happinesse of the true helpers, whatsoeuer come
to passe: with the misery of the rest.
               are the
briefe and
scope of all.
            
               Esa. 65. 24.
               Before they call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking
I will heare.
            
            
               Hos. 12. 4.
               He had power over the Angell and prevailed, he wept and praied
vnto him.
               In wrastling and weeping is our victorie.
            
            
               I. B.
            
         
         
            Errours to be corrected thus.
            PReface Page 1. l. 5. marg. write, hying on us. p. 5. l. 36. thus. p. 9. l. 14. as was said.
p. 15. l. 19. to our good. In the Contents, b. 3. l. 2. too indifferently. l. 4. The light esteeme
of the great &c. c. 2. l. 5. put out sometime. l. 12. through ignorant. In the vision,
p. 1. l. 1. marg. Al: In the booke, p. 1. l. 32. should endure. p. 44. l. 25. worst. p. 45. l. 8.
marg. able. p. 65. l. 28. grandfather. p 79. l. 4. and is. l. 6. Apo. 2. l. 23. shewed. p. 111.
l. 23. disgrace. p. 114. l. 8. humbled. p. 123. l. 22. seduced brethren. p. 127. l. 18. portraid
out p. 244. marg. l. 1. Luc. 10. 13. p. 264. l. 10. enow. l. 36. of her torment. p. 304 l. 7.
marg. uncutablenesse. p. 370. l. 27. witnesse. p. 375. put out Italian. p. 377. marg. l. 16.
Mat. 7. p. 389 l. 9. Tetrastylon. p. 398 marg. l. 1. A question. p. 433. l. 25. the holy Prophet.
p. 468. l. 13. Together with the helpes herein contained and the reading. p. 514. l. 26 in many
places. p. 515. l. 5. many. p. 516. l. 17. put out, the number of. p. 517. l. 17. put out, 
                  〈◊〉
               . p. 535.
for their carkases, write they. p. 543. l. 2. all that feare.
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE
chiefe things contained in each
Chapter thorow out the whole booke in
order, either handled more at large,
or briefly pointed at.
            
               CHAP. I.
               THe resolution and opening of the vision in the 9. chapter of
Ezekiel. pag. 1
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               Directions to make a right use of this forewarning to our selves,
with Rules to be observed to this end. p. 5, 6
               The sinnes of the wicked, are in some sort the sinnes of us all.
p. 8
               Hainous and impudent sinners helpe to draw downe Gods vengeance.
p. 8
               Every soule that turneth not to God, seeking withall to cause others
to turne, must perish. p. 9
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               God not wont to bring any not able judgement on his Church, but
to foreshew it first, and then to bring it when no repentance hath
followed to prevent. p. 10
               Reasons of the Lords forewarnings of his Church. p. 14
               Application hereof to our selves, how the Lord hath forewarned
us. p. 15, 16, 17, &c.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               The withdrawing the lively tokens of Gods presence a signe of his
departure and of vengeance at hand. p. 26. & 31
               God being well pleased with his people is wont to witnesse his presence
by some apparant signe. p. 27
               
                  
Signes of the Lords presence in the daies of the Gospell, whereby
to judge of our estate. p. 28, 29, &c.
               Signes of his withdrawing himselfe p. 31
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               The Lord makes sundrie removes of his glory from his Church before
he depart from it, to shew his unwillingnesse to depart.
p. 35 36
               
               The outward glorie of the Lord in his Church wherein it consists.
p. 37
               Abundance of sanctified knowledge a speciall part thereof. p. 37
               Holinesse and unitie make Gods people glorious in the eies of their
enemies. p. 38
               The Lords glorious protection of his people, a principall outward
signe of his presence. p. 40▪ 41, &c.
               Application of the removall of Gods glory, first to Iudah before the
Captivitie. p. 42
               Secondly to our selves. p. 43
               The true practise of Christianitie more reprochfull to many then to
live in any sinne. p. 48
               How welcome the Lords messengers are unto many. p. 49
               Our unitie much departed. p. 49
               Fruits of our dissentions. p. 50
               Countenance to the true lovers of the Gospell much gone. p. 50
               Our protection oft indangered to be removed. p. 50, 51
               All our glory ready to mount up at once in the powder furnace, a
fearefull forewarning unlesse we repent. p. 52▪ 53
               God may justly leave us into the enemies hand, for suffering Pop
                     •
                  
                  rie
so to revive and grow up, after he had given us so just occasion
to seeke to root it out utterly. p. 52, 53
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               God will not spare Ierusalem if it rebell against him. p. 59
               No priviledges can secure a people from Gods judgements if they
increase in th
                     •
                  ir iniquitie. p. 58, 59
               Priviledges wherein we secure our selves. p▪
                   59, 60, 66
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   priviledges. p. 59, 60, 61
               
                  
Iudah in the beginning of her miseries not inferiour to us in prerogatives
to secure her. p. 67
               The Gospell contemned can be no freedome no not from a temporall
scourge. p. 69
               We cannot be more secured that our land is purged of the Idolatrie
of former dayes, and the bloud of Gods servants, then Ierusalem
in Iosiahs dayes. p. 70, 214
               God purposing to remaine with us, must needs deale as a kinde Father
to bring us to obedience. p. 71
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The Lord hath ever a speciall care of his in the greatest destructions,
and marketh them before the judgement come. p. 73
               Why the Lord oft lets his feele the smart with the rest in generall
destructions. p. 79
               What the marking profiteth Gods servants suffering with the rest.
p. 80
               State of the godly whom God takes away at such times. p. 82
               State of the wicked in such calamities. p. 82
               What the marke was wherewith the godly were marked. p. 84
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               The godly mourne for the sinnes of the wicked amongst whom they
live. p. 85
               The godly wont not only to mourne, but to cry for the abominations
of the wicked, according to their calling. p. 89
               Reasons why the godly so mourne and cry for all the abominations.
p. 90
               For one notorious sinner unpunished, all the place is in danger of
Gods wrath, and much more for many. p. 91, 92, 93
               Comfort to true mourners, though the Lord should execute his
judgement for the sinnes of the wicked. p. 96
               State of all contemners of Gods mercifull forewarnings. p. 100
               Iust cause of feare for the small number of true mourners. p. 102
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               The enemies by which the Lord threatneth or afflicteth his Church
are his souldiers. p. 104, 105
               
               
                  
Application to our selves to behold the Lords enemies. p. 109
               All of them are fearefull denuntiations of vengeance untill we repent,
and why. p. 111, 112
               Ioyning hands with Gods enemies, is a calling them in to avenge his
qu
                     •
                  rrell. p. 112, 113
               How righteous with God to bring in the enemie to be avenged, and
the day of the spend-thrifts. p. 113
               We cannot be assured to be delivered from them till we abhorre
their wayes. p. 113
               Our enemies humbled by our unfained repentance. p. 114
               What we should doe seeing the Lords armies approaching. p. 115
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               The mourners marked, then comes the vengeance. p. 117
               Our comfort in the remainder of the mourners, and the preservation
of the Lords Anointed. p. 119, 120
               The account we are to make of the mourners. p. 121
               It is for the godly that the Gospell with our blessings continue. p. 122
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               The charge to the destroyers to destroy without pittie, and why.
p. 124, 125
               Causes in generall provoking the Lord to so fierce a wrath, the
hainousnesse of the abominations, and that no meanes would
serve. p. 125
               The abominations committed by all sorts. p. 125, 126
               The Prophets to be read to behold the sins which brought the vengeance.
p. 127
               In the abominations of Iudah we may see our owne sinnes and estate
portraied. p. 127
               Little hope of any such search to be made by us in these daies of
securitie. The authors endevour thereupon to help herein for the
good of all. p. 128, 129
               God hath ordain
                     •
                  d the faithfull discoverie of the iniquitie as a
last and principall meanes to turne away a judgement. p. 130, 147
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI. Section 2.
               Cautions in reading these abominations. p. 132, 133
               How their sinnes were increased. p. 132
               The principall sinnes specially mentioned after Hezekiahs reformation
for which this judgement is chiefly denounced. p. 134
               The same punishment or a beavier must needs belong to us, if we
be guiltie of the same or the like sinnes. p. 136
            
            
               CHAP. XI. Section 3.
               The vengeance must begin at the Sanctuarie, because from thence
chiefly all the wickednesse proceeded. p. 137, 168, 169
            
            
               CHAP. XI. Abomination 1.
               The horrible wickednesse of the Priests and Prophets generally angring
the Lord and hastening the Captivitie. p. 138, 139
               What holinesse the Lord required of the Priests and Prophets. p. 138
            
            
               Abomination 2.
               The blindnesse of the Priests and Prophets hastening the Captivitie.
p. 141
               The Priests and Prophets ought to be Seers and watchmen. p. 141
               Blinde and senslesse men not giving warning of Gods judgements
termed dumbe dogs. p. 143
               The blindnesse and sleeping of the shepherds calls for the beasts of
the forest upon their flockes. p. 145
            
            
               Abomination 3.
               Flatterie of the Priests and Prophets hardning the people to destruction. p. 146, 148, &c.
               The faithfulnesse required in Gods watchmen & messengers. p. 146
               Dawbers must looke for a storme to cause their worke to fall on
them and all who trust in it. p. 151
            
            
               Abomination 4.
               Preaching mens devices in stead of Gods word hastening the Captivitie.
p. 152, 153, &c.
               Gods ministers ought to preach his word sincerely and faithfully.
p. 152, 153. and p. 156
               
                  
All inventions of 
                     〈◊〉
                   but vaine and foolish in regard of Gods
word, and to seeke out such things is to seeke out causes of
desolation. p. 154
               Preaching mens devices, the high way to cause men to forget
Gods word. p. 155
               The power of Gods word sincerely handled. p. 157
               Good Arts and learning, grations helps, though set in place of Gods
word they bring a plague. p. 158
               They that preach their owne devices, steale his word from his people,
and bring no good to them. p. 159
               State of such teachers when their consciences shall be awaked.
p. 160
            
            
               Abomination 5.
               Want of compassion in the Priests and Prophets hastening the
Captivitie. p. 160
               Gods faithfull ministers full of compassion towards their people. 161
               Pastors without due regard of their flockes are butchers and wolues
to their flockes. p. 162
               Pastors without commiseration of their flockes the greatest enemies
to Gods faithfull messengers and servants. p. 163
               When the watchman is the snare of a fowler, he is then hatred in the
house of his God. p. 166
               Gods terrible and most just denuntiation against all carelesse Pastors
and Idoll shepherds for his flocke, especially for his faithfull
servants. p. 167
               Application to our selves. p. 169
            
            
               Abomination 6.
               The sinne of the people in approving the wicked Priests hastening
the Captivitie. p. 170, 172
               The meanes which the Lord had provided that his people should
not be deceived by false Prophets. p. 171
               The Lord cannot but be avenged for approving of false prophets.
p. 172
               The severitie of the Lords most righteous judgement, fitting a
sinfull people with Preachers to their hearts. p. 173, 174
               
                  
How God will answer hypocrites comming to inquire of him. p. 17
                     •
                  
               
               Deceivers and deceived punished alike. p. 176
               Antichrists delusions follow the contempt of the Gospell. p. 176
               Why God sends false teachers and seducers. p. 177
               How God punished in the Gentiles the abusing of the very light of
nature. p. 178
               How the people comming to the Prophets with a desire to know the
truth, yet may be notably deceived. p. 179
               How the Prophets themselves may be justly deceived and so
deceive. p. 179, 181
               How fearefull it is after a man hath received his resolute answer
from God, to goe upon carnall respects to enquire the second
time. p. 181
               The punishment of the false Prophet and of him who asketh of
him alike. p. 183
            
            
               Abomination 7.
               The sinnes of the people against Gods faithfull Prophets sent to them
in mercie, to bring them to repentance. p. 184
               The duties and affections of Gods people towards his faithfull messengers.
p. 184
               The people grieving the Prophets by an extreme dulnesse and untowardnesse
to learne Gods word, hastening the Captivitie. p. 186
               The word of the Lord is in vaine to a rebellious people. p. 188
               They that cast away Gods word have no wisdome. p. 188
               How God punisheth the not profiting by his word with more blockishnesse.
p. 189
               The just judgement of God, to cause 
                     〈…〉
                  
servants, to learne by his enemies. p. 189
               Application to our selves. p. 190
            
            
               Abomination 8.
               Refusing to heare Gods faithfull servants, more 
                     〈…〉
                  ,
hastening the Captivitie. p. 191
               The Lords complaint for this sinne, and how it must be 
                     〈…〉
                   in a
booke for the last day. p. 192
               The just vengeance for this sinne. p. 194, 195
               
                  
For the contempt of Gods servants, he makes their tongues cleave
to the roofe of their mouthes. p. 194
               
            
            
               Abomination 9.
               Mocking and abusing Gods true Prophets and all the godly, hastening
the Captivitie. p. 196
               The custome of false Prophets to harden men in the contempt of
Gods threatnings. p. 197
               God will make unbeleevers know the truth of his word by feeling
it. p. 197
               The word in the mouthes of Gods messengers shall be as a fire to consume
all wicked gainesaiers. p. 198
            
            
               Abomination 10.
               Discouraging Gods true Prophets by threatnings, hastening the
Captivitie. p. 198
               Vengeance for this sinne. p. 199
            
            
               Abomination 11.
               Slandering and falsly accusing Gods messengers, hastening the Captivitie.
p. 200
               Incensing the Magistrates against Gods faithfull messengers haste
                  
                     •
                  ing
the Captivitie. p. 200
               Ordinarie with Gods true Prophets to be railed upon. p. 201
            
            
               Abomination 12.
               Secret conspiracies against Gods true Prophets and servants to
take away their lives or credit, hastening the Captivitie. p. 202
               The Lord in due time revealeth the most secret plots against his
servants. p. 203
               The depth of Sathan to smite Gods messengers with the tongue, that
none may be warned by their preaching to escape Gods vengeance.
p. 203
               
                  Ieremies familiars watch for his halting. p. 203
               How fearefull it is, against conscience to practise mischiefe against
Gods servants. p. 204
            
            
               
               Abomination 13.
               Striking and imprisoning Gods servants, hastening the Captivitie.
p. 206
               
                  Pashur the Priest attempts to smite and imprison Ieremie, hastening
the Captivitie. p. 207
               The Princes by meanes of the Priests are against Ieremie, and labour
the king to put him to death. p. 207
               
                  Zedekiah, against his conscience leaves Ieremie into the hands of
the Rulers. p. 207
               Cause of all Ieremies troubles. p. 208
            
            
               Abomination 14.
               Shedding the bloud of the Prophets and other of Gods servants,
hastening the Captivitie. p. 209
               What that bloud was which brought the Captivitie. p. 209
               How the cry of the bloud of Gods servants ascends into heaven.
p. 211
               Vengeance for abusing the house and servants of the Lord.
p. 211
               How good it had beene for Iudah to have beene awaked at the
admonition of the true Prophets. p. 212
               How necessary to stop such evils in the beginning. p. 21
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Those who were so vilely accounted of, were the dearest, servants
of God and chiefe meanes to stay his wrath so long.
p. 213
               Of all other sinnes God can least endure the wronging of his messengers
and dearest servants. p. 213
               From the disgracing of Gods servants all impietie flowes. p. 214
               What wisdome it is to prevent all indig
                     •••
                  ies against Gods messengers.
p. 214
               Our nation as fearfully defiled with the bloud of Gods servants in
the daies of Queene Mary, as Ierusalem in the time of Manasses.
p. 214
               
               Apparant signes that our Land is not yet purged of that bloud.
p. 214
               
                  
God cals upon us to search out this sinne if we will escape his search,
and the search of the bloudy enemie. p. 215
            
            
               Abomination 15.
               The unfruitfulnesse of the Lords vineyard laying it waste. p. 216
               What God had done for Iudah, to make her fruitfull, and so for us,
and our Covenant thereupon. p. 216
               The Lords complaint against his vineyard in Iudah, and how it concernes
us. p. 217
               Scarse any true godlinesse, viz: men truly sincere to be found among
them before the Captivitie. p. 218
               What the Church is to doe in times desperatly evill. p. 218
               The Lords righteous vengeance for the unfruitfulnesse of his vineyard.
p. 219
               Application to us, with the Lords appeale for it to every ones conscience.
p. 219
               The Papists principall argument and loud exclamations against us
for our unfruitfulnesse. p. 220
               Complaints of the dressers of the vineyard for it. p. 222
               Sighes of the poore witnessing it. p. 222
               Vnfruitfulnesse of the Ministerie. p. 222
               How wee may justly lament for our negligence, and time
mispent. p. 223
               The Magistrates fruit. p. 224
               The accusation of the conscience in the carelesse Magistrate. p. 224
               The private mans fruit. p. 225
               
                  Mr. Bradfords complaint for his owne unfruitfulnesse to be well noted
of all. p. 226
               Each of us to acknowledge particularly our unfruitfulnesse. p. 227
            
            
               Abomination 16.
               Corruptions crept into all places and callings that almost all was become
as drosse, hastening the Captivitie. p. 230
               Only a few reserved in every calling. p. 231
               Vengeance proportionall to be melted together in the midst of Ierusalem.
p. 23
                        •
                     
                  
               
               Application to trie whether we have no need of such a melting. 232
               
                  
How neere we were to the furnace. p. 232
               England could not have filled the furnace. p. 233
               The furnace proclaimed to all people that we are corrupt, and what
God is about to doe unlesse we repent. p. 233
               Our corruptions instanced in the cry of many sinnes. p. 234
               The truth hereof as of the rest to be inquired of amongst the most
conscionable and painfull Ministers. p. 234
               This should never passe out of our hearts, how neere we have beene
unto the melting. p. 235
            
            
               Abomination 17.
               Hypocrisie angring the Lord, hastening the Captivitie. p. 235
               Their Covenant concerning the sinceritie of Gods worship. p. 236
               Wherein their hypocrisie chiefly consisted. p. 236
               The outward service without the inward, is a wearinesse unto
the Lord, so the Ceremonie without the Morall commandement.
p. 237
               To trust in outward observations, is to trust in lying words. p. 237
               Hypocrisie in observing the traditions of men more then Gods commandements.
p. 238
               Hypocrisie in serving God by the commandements of men, and not
of any conscience to God. p. 238
               Hypocrisie causeth the Lord to loath all our service, and to take
away his Religion. p. 238
               Application for our hypocrisie, in performing a bare outward service.
p. 239
               Hypocrisie in retaining still the dregs of Poperie. p. 239
               Many of our people doe all principally for the commandements of
men, as ready to receive any other religion. p. 240
               How few of whom we may justly hope that they are soundly religious.
p. 240
               If so, how can we looke to escape Ierusalems vengeance or a heavier.
p. 240
               The sinnes of the chiefe men of all sorts from whom wickednesse
descended to all the rest, and the meanes how. p. 241
               The Lord will require all his sheepe of the pastors, and why.
p. 242
            
            
               
               Abomination 18.
               Covenant of the Magistrates and Rulers. p. 242
               Magistrates ought to be as God in his place. p. 242
               Magistrates ought to be fathers to all under them. p. 243
               Magistrates ought to be most temperate, and fearing God. p. 243
               Magistrates as lights and patternes to the rest. p. 244
               Their great men in stead of being as God, were most rebellious against
God. p. 244
               In stead of fathers lions. p. 244
               The Lord compares cruell Rulers to Butchers and Cookes. p. 245
               Their great men gave themselves over to all licentiousnesse. p. 246
               Instead of being lights, they became most vile ensamples. p. 246
               Their vengeance proportionall on them. p. 247
               Application in all humble reverence, how neere the vengeance was
to us in each particular. p. 248
               What the Popish conspirators pretended in blowing up the Parliament
house. p. 249
               Great men are to remember the honour laid upon them, and the
end why God hath done it. p. 250
               
                  Nehemiahs ensample to be set before the face of all worthy Rulers.
p. 252
            
            
               Abomination 19.
               Taking up the evill fashions of other countries, hastening the Captivitie.
p. 253
               Gods people to observe the manners prescribed by him. p. 253
               They might not conforme themselves to Gods enemies, but were to
destroy every thing that might teach them their manners.
p. 253
               They tooke up the odious fashions of other Countries, and this was a
chiefe cause why the Lord did forsake them. p. 254, 255
               They fell to doat upon the guises of the Babylonians, whom God had
ordained to be their scourge. p. 255
               Vengeance for this to be cast off, as they had cast off the Lord for
these. p. 256
               All to be caried into Babylon, on which they had so doated, where
they should execute Gods vengeance on them. p. 256
               The Lord sanctified the Babylonians for his ghuests against the

time of this sacrifice, when hee would visit all who delighted
in these vanities. p. 257
               Application to examine our odious fashions of divers sorts, as charging
with healths, whorish plaies, and the like. p. 257, 258
               Private reading Scriptures left off by such. p. 259
               Filthie and scurrilous Pamphlets received in place. p. 260
               Babylonish policie by corrupting our manners, first, to overthrow
our Religion. p. 260
               Having prevailed with the greater, they make sure account of
the rest. p. 260
               The device of old Balaam, as the surest stratageme, worthy our
best consideration. p. 261
               There is no sorcerie against Israel abiding in obedience. p. 262
               Application of the Historie of Balaams stratageme to our selves.
p. 264
               A mystery whereby to bring Italy into England, and so to obtaine
their purposes. p. 264
               A just lamentation for that no warning will serve but we must
do at after them, and be weary of the Lord. p. 264, 265
            
            
               Abomination 20.
               Oppression of the poore, hastening the Captivitie. p. 265
               Our covenant with the Lord for justice and mercy to the poore.
p. 265
               A patterne for great men in Iob. p. 265
               
               Their transgression, that instead thereof they were most cruell extortioners
and oppressors. p. 266, 267
               The Lord compares extortioners to Apothecaries & Millers. 268
               They joined house to house, till there was no place for the poore.
p. 269
               Vengeance proportionall. p. 269
            
            
               Abomination 21.
               Oppression by ingrossing and inhancing the prizes of things to
swallow up the poore, hastening the Captivitie. p. 270
               What God requires of rich men in time of dearth. p. 270
               The rich were become as cormorants to the poore. p. 270
               The Lord will never forget this sinne, it makes the land to
tremble. p. 271
               
                  
Application to unsatiable corne-mungers. p. 272
               Gods warning forgotten in the levellers insurrection. p. 273
            
            
               Abomination 22.
               Oppression to raise their houses, hastening the Captivitie. p. 274
               To build by oppression, is to consult shame to their houses. p. 275
            
            
               Abomination 23.
               Oppression to support their pride hastening the Captivitie. p. 275
               The attire of gracious women, what it ought to be. p. 276
               Their women helpt to flea the poore to support their pride. p. 276
               They minded nothing but pride when God threatned them most. p. 276
               The plagues which all such bring on themselves and theirs. p. 277
               A glasse for proud women to view themselves in. p. 278
               What this would worke rightly practised. p. 278
               Our pride though exceeding theirs so as cannot be expressed, yet
must one day be set in open view, before the faces of all who doe
not repent. p. 279
               Vengeance proportionall for this sinne. p. 279
               This sinne, and the sighes of the poore for it, cry continually for vengeance
to be taken on such a monster. p. 280
            
            
               Abomination 24.
               Pride in sumptuous buildings, causing oppression, hastening the
Captivitie. p. 280
               A glasse for them who build their houses by oppression. p. 281
               The unmercifulnesse of ambitious builders. p. 282
               The way for great men to prosper. p. 282
               The case of all oppressours, how they live, and what they provide
for their children. p. 283
               Application. p. 284
            
            
               Abomination 25.
               Oppression to maintaine riot and excesse, hastening the Captivitie.
p. 284
               What the Lord requires for all his mercies chiefly of rich men. p. 284
               How they requited the Lord and used his benefits, never thinking of
the worke of the Lord. p. 285, 286
               
                  
A glasse for all given over to their pleasures. p. 286
               Men given over to pleasures forget the affliction of Ioseph. p. 287
               The seers given up to wine and good fellowship can see nothing amisse
till the vengeance of God come. p. 287
               The fruits of excesse and idlenesse. p. 288
               They became to be impudent in uncleannesse, to shew their filthinesse
openly like the Sodomites. p. 288
               Men giving themselves over to carnall pleasures have no knowledge.
p. 288
               Such prepare captivitie temporall, or eternall, or both. p. 288
               Hunger and thirst remaine for all belly-gods. p. 289
               Neither Gentrie nor greatnesse will save from Gods vengeance, hell
gapes for such. p. 289
               The proudest must be brought downe to the depth of hell, and goe captives
with the first. p. 289
               God abhorres the excellencie and haughtinesse of all such, and the palace
                     •
                  
where their sinnes are most practised. p. 290
               Desperation the portion of all proud belly-gods when Gods vengeance
comes. p. 290
               God must needs visit for such things and his soule be avengedon such
a nation. p. 290
               Application to every conscience. p. 291
            
            
               Abomination 26.
               Vnsatiable covetousnesse causing oppression hastening the Captivitie.
p. 291
               The studie and covetousnesse of the Lords people. p. 291
               All before the Captivitie generally given to covetousnesse. p. 292
               The fruit of covetousnesse in the Prophets to speake only to please.
p. 292
               The manner of healing with faire words as the Prophets did before
the Captivitie. p. 292, 293
               Covetous men can see nothing but for their owne advantage. p. 293
               Vengeance proportionall. p. 293
               The wretched estate of all covetous Prophets. p. 294
               The difference of the preaching of the true Prophets and the covetous
worldlings. p. 295
               
                  
The power of the true Prophets shewed forth chiefly in the time of
abounding of all iniquitie and approching of judgement. p. 295
               A perpetuall night came upon the false Prophets at the Captivitie.
p. 296
               Covetousnesse, dumbnesse, blindnesse, sleeping, goe together in the false
Prophets. p. 296
               Iust vengeance on all for their unsatiable greediness: p. 296
               Application to all sorts of spoylers of the poore. p. 297
               Application to those who oppresse to make themselves great. p. 297
               Application to the haughtie, on whose garments is found the bloud of
the poore. p. 297
               Application to sumptuous builders oppressing. p. 298
               Application to them that oppresse to pamper themselves, saucing all
their dainties with the bloud of the poore. p. 299
               Application to the mightie ingrossers, whose houses are filled with the
spoiles of the poore. p. 299
               Application to all who have set up the world in their hearts to worship. p. 300
               How to be beautifull and glorious indeed. p. 301
               How to set our nests on high and to build them for eternitie. p. 301
               How to give our selves to all delights and to be prodigall therin. p. 302
               How to hoord up and ingrosse. p. 302
               How to covet a holy covetousnesse. p. 303
            
            
               Abomination 27.
               The generall Apostasie of Iudah hastening the Captivitie, that they
were ever starting away and departing from the Lord. p. 304, 305
               Their zeale in the beginning of the daies of Ezekiah & Iosiah against
Idolatry & for reforming religion, & how soon it was gone. 305, 306
            
            
               Abomination 28.
               Falling from their forwardnesse in Religion to all profanenesse, hastening
the Captivitie. p. 307
               The sum of Gods Covenant with them to magnifie and obey his word.
p. 307
               They cast away the word of the Lord, in regard of making any conscience
of it. p. 308
               The plague which is upon them that cast away Gods word to set up
their own imaginations; they shal see they have had no wisdome. 309
               
                  
The Lord will reject all them that reject his word, as reprobate silver
is rejected. p. 310
               All they forsake the Covenant, who doe not obey it, though they
seeme in word to embrace it. p. 310
               Application to all sorts whose hearts tell them they are such. p. 311
            
            
               Abomination 29.
               Scorning the word of the Lord and all true profession hastening the
Captivitie. p. 314
               How pretious Gods word ought to be to his people. p. 314
               They loathed Gods word, and counted it a burden. p. 314, 315
               They made the word matter enough of the vilest reproch to every
one truly professing it. p. 315
               The fearfull extremities that Gods servants are oft driven to,
through the hatred which they endure for the word. p. 316, 317
               The very scornes and taunts against Gods word and servants shall
be one day a heavie burden to every scorner. p. 318
               God will visit every scorner and his house, and reward them with
an everlasting shame. p. 318, 319
               Application of this sin and denunciation to our selves. p. 319, 320
               Scorning Gods word and faithfull messengers cannot scape unpupunished.
p. 321
            
            
               Abomination 30.
               Pollution of the Lords Sabbaths hastening the Captivitie. p. 322
               Covenant for the Sabbath. p. 322
               He is a bless
                     •
                  d man that endevoureth truly to keepe the Sabbath,
and to such a one only the Covenant and promises belong. p. 322
               They despised and polluted Gods Sabbath, and how. p. 323
               They put no difference betweene the holy and prophane. p. 323
               Their Priests hid their eies from Gods Sabbath. p. 324
               The Lord complaines that he is profaned by them that willingly
suffer his holy things to be polluted. p. 324
               The Lord chargeth them with carying and recarying upon the Sabbath.
p. 325
               The commandement for the Sabbath belongs as well to us as to
them. p. 325
               
                  
The Lords anger and message sent unto them for this sinne, chiefly
to their King and Rulers. p. 325
               The cvill ensample of our forefathers is no example for us, but rather
increaseth the wrath. p. 326, 344
               The Lords gratious promise to the reformation of the Sabbath,
VIZ. continuance of their Kings, dignitie and prosperitie. p. 326
               All desiring the establishing of the throne of the Lords Anointed,
and prosperitie of their nation, to looke to it. p. 326
               What good friends they are to Prince, State, Church and Commonwealth,
who call into question the time of the Sabbath. p. 327
               Vengeance for pollution of the Sabbath, viz, kindling a fire in the
gates of Ierusalem, and their 70. yeeres Captivitie. p. 327
               The feeling of such a plague (as was towards us) but one day,
would make us most willingly to stoope unto the Lord. p. 328
               
                  Nehemiah after the Captivitie acknowledgeth Gods righteous
vengeance in it for polluting the Sabbath, and laboureth thereon
the redresse of that sinne. p. 328
               Al the sins which rulers might redresse are accounted their sins. 328
               Former examples of Gods vengeance should warne us. p. 329
               In Nehemiah is the lively picture of a worthy ruler who had seene
the miseries of a Captivitie for sinne. p. 329
               Three ensamples in Nehemiah never to be forgotten of tender-hearted
and worthy governours. p. 329
               1 Nehemiah lookes forthwith to the particular state and miseries
of the people, to be more affected therewith. p. 330
               2. His willing and compassionate hearing of the cries and grievances
of the poore. p. 330
               The happie way to redresse the evils of Gods people. p. 330
               How good governours may prevaile when they wish nothing to be
done, but what themselves doe first. p. 331
               3. Nehemiah himselfe seeth the reformation of the evils, especially
of the Sabbath. p. 332
               Application to our selves concerning the Sabbath. p. 332, 333
               To remember here the consuming fire wherwith the Lord threatned
us. p. 334
               Our land made well-ne
                     •
                  re as a desolate widow. p. 334
               We are they on whom God now complaines, for despising his holy
things as he then did upon Iudah. p. 335
               
                  
For putting no difference betweene the holy and prophane. p. 336
               Our sinne in admitting all indifferently to the table of the Lord.
p. 337
               This sin enough to bring Gods plagues upon the whole land. p. 338
               The 
                     〈…〉
                   that great censure of Excōmunication. p. 338
               Hiding our eies from Gods Sabbath from seeing the most weightie
duties of the Sabbath to performe them. p. 339
               To consider whether we be not they who have thought the Sabbath
overlong. p. 341
               Sabbath profaned by carying and recarying. p. 342
               Our pretended necessities cannot excuse us more then them. p. 342
               Reserving journies ordinarie for the Sabbath. p. 342
               Concourse to plaies and the vilenesse of them. p. 343
               The inevitable danger to frequenters of plaies. p. 343
               Fr
                     •
                  quenting Tavernes and Alehouses where nothing is more common
then scorning all pietie upon the Sabbath. p. 344
               God hath only warned us hitherto. p. 344
               The speech turned to all who have the chiefe charge of the house of
the Lord and his Sabbath. p. 345
            
            
               Abomination 31.
               Sundrie degrees of their profanenesse angring the Lord and hastening
the Captivitie. p. 346
               Opposing themselves against all power of religion and godlinesse,
when they gloried in his outward ceremoniall worship. p. 346
               They bent their tongues and workes against the Lord, and against
all true pietie and conscience of his waies, using all devices to put
out all feare of his name. p. 347
               They spake good of evill, evill of good, glorying in their most shamefull
sinnes. p. 347
               They justified and loved the wicked, condemned and hated the good.
p. 348
               They sought to cast all shame on the godly. p. 348
               Thence they proceeded to spoiling and all violence. p. 348
               They used to make shewes of religion when they were as Sodome. 349
               They would make shewes of seeking God in fasting, and leane on the
Lord even then when they were so vile. p. 349
               
                  
The vengeance for their outragious profanenesse, viz. the spoiling
them by the Caldean, which they should not beleeve till it came,
who should d
                     •
                  ale with them accordingly, as they had done with
the Lord and his people. p. 350
               Application to us to search our sinne before 
                     〈…〉
                   to
search us. p. 351
               Our swaggerers in each place walke usually in the steps of their
profanenesse, especially against the Lord and his servants.
p. 351
               These the only good fellowes, men of renowne, as before the
floud. p. 353
               The speech turned to these, if but to save some of them. p. 353
               The terrible anger of God upon all profane despisers of the Gospell,
not to beleeve any judgement towards us, though never so plainly
denounced and manifested, nor towards themselves. p. 354, 355
               The case of prophane persons in the day of Gods vengeance. p. 355
               Their case in the day of death and of the last judgement. p. 356
               Their happinesse who can take the time of mercy. p. 357
            
            
               Abomination 32.
               The Idolatrie of Iudah hastening the Captivitie. p. 357
               Their Covenant with God to have worshipped him only according
to his word, without retaining the least shew or occasion of Idolatrie.
p. 358
               He had enjoyned them to make open protestation against all Idolatrie
even in the very enemies land. p. 358
               There was in them notwithstanding a very generall inclination to
run a whoring after Idols. p. 359
               
                  Hezekiah and Iosiah raised up to destroy & deface Idolatry. p. 359
               The zeale of the people in destroying Idolatrie in Ezekiahs daies,
& Gods admirable favour to Ezekiah & Iudah therupon. p. 359
               Their relaps to Idolatrie with Manasseh falling to be worse then
the heathen. p. 359
               
                  Manasseh led captive for this; his repentance and destroying Idolatrie
againe. p. 359
               
                  Iosiah raised up to worke a thorow reformation, and with a most
strange detestation of Idolatrie in the hearts of the people. p. 360
               
                  
                  Iosiah solemnly renues the Covenant with the Lord, to worship him
only according to his will, and compelleth all to stand to it, so by
all meanes convincing them before the Captivitie. p. 360
               The Lord sent them moe Prophets, and with more power before the
Captivitie then ever in former time. p. 360
               Idolatrie was usually one sinne whereof they did ever warne the
people. p. 361
               Idolatrie practised secretly in all Iosiahs daies. p. 361
               The remnant of Baall, with the Chemarims and those who sware
by the Lord and Malcom still remaining in his daies. p. 361
               Idolaters compared to shamelesse strumpets sending for their lovers,
viz. Priests to teach them the worship of their Idols.
p. 362
               The Rulers fell to most horrible Idolatrie in secret, hard before the
Captivitie, as the Lord shewes Ezekiel. p. 362
               
               The outward forme of Gods religion may seeme to have continued
even unto their very last desolation, without any publike Idolatrie.
p. 362
               A publike fast proclaimed by Iehoiakim hard before the Captivitie,
but not performed as it ought. p. 363
               Vengeance denounced for this sinne of Idolatrie, To cause them to
run into the holes to hide them and to curse their Gods. p. 363
               The Lord threatneth to raise their lovers against them, who should
use them as strumpets for this, and cause their fornications to
cease. p. 364
               To plague them from Egypt and Babylon. p. 364
               The Covenant ours as well as theirs. p. 364
               The Lord as much detests Idolatrie now as then. p. 364
               The Lord hath raised up sundrie of his worthie servants to destroy
Idolatrie as well with us as with them. p. 365
               The Lord may complain of us herein as much as upon Iudah. p. 365
               In this sin we seeme farre to exceed them in the daies of Iosiah.
p. 366, 367
               
               Yet the vengeance came on them presently after the death of Iosiah,
and principally for this sinne amongst others. p. 366
               Certaine points to be seriously thought of by all the favourers of
Poperie amongst us, and by all who stand in suspence. p. 367
               
                  
1. The occasion and manner of casting Poperie out of our land,
p. 367
               2. The bloud of so many learned and most holy Martyrs, as Cranmer,
&c. witnessing against it. p. 367
               Answer concerning their pretended Martyrs. p. 369
               3. So many worthie Preachers in each part of our land convincing
all ever since then. p. 369
               4. So many learned writers unanswerable confuting it and every
peece of it. p. 369
               5. The discoverie of their Index Expurgatorius for their wicked
dealing against the Gospell, and for upholding Poperie. p. 370
               6. So many discoveries of their unnaturall cruelties, the fruits of
their religion, and for the supporting thereof. p. 370
               The chiefe of them made trumpetters of the abomination of their
religion. p. 370
               Our Saviours argument most strong against that religion, to prove
it to be a principall religion of Sathan under a shew of holinesse,
especially the Iesuited Papists religion. p. 371
               7. Their religion teacheth these things, witnesse those evidences
which follow in the end of this Abomination, viz. p. 371
               
            
            
               Abomination 32.
               This alone sufficient to cause all not utterly given up to flie out of
Babylon. p. 372
               8. Miraculous deliverances and preservations of our Princes, religion,
and us all, at the Spanish invasion, the death of Queene
Elizabeth, and so wonderfully bringing in the Lords Anointed
amongst us, and at the gunpowder treason. p. 372
               9. The wonderfull bringing the Gospell againe after Queene Mary,
with the admirable preservation of the Lady Elizabeth. p. 372
               
               10. The wonderfull continuance of the Gospell since, notwithstanding
so innumerable stratagems against it. p. 372
               These as infallible arguments of Gods favour and love towards us,
as theirs were towards Iudea, and ought as much to knit our
hearts to the Lord and his truth, and to a detestation of that
bloudie Religion. p. 373
               Our happinesse if wee have hearts to meditate of these things.
p. 373, 374
               
                  
To thinke what it is to take the marke of the Beast, chiefly after
these convictions. p. 373
               11. The relenting of most hearts for the present, in sundrie discoveries
of their wickednesse. p. 373
               12. Exhortation to thinke of these things, and to compare our
way of life with theirs, whether is more equall, and whether is
more agreeable to the word of the Lord. p. 374
               To reade the French massacre, and the Spanish Inquisition. p. 375
               What they long for who seeke to bring in Poperie againe. p. 375
               Answer to the vaine perswasion of our professed Papists, concerning
their owne safetie, if God should leave us into the hand of the
enemie. p. 375
               All the rich should be made Hugonotes as in Paris, at the French
massacre. p. 375
               What they may looke for, who looke to bee enriched by such a
day. p. 375
               Warning to all, who foreseeing these evils, doe not their uttermost
endevours to turne them away. p. 376
               God speakes to each as Mordecay to Hester. p. 376
               
               Three necessarie questions. 1. How so many have and doe daily
fall to Poperie notwithstanding all these things. 2. How to be
resolved of the truth. 3. How to be kept from backesliding
from the truth. p. 376
               For answer to the first, to consider,
               1. Who they have beene that have fallen. p. 377
               2. Reasons why such have and doe so fall in Gods justice. p. 378
               All are contemners of the truth, who never so received the love
of it, as by all holy meanes to search the knowledge of it and to
obey it. p. 379
               The reasons why some of Gods deare servants have and may fall
for a time. p. 381
               God may thus leave up his owne for a time, but he will fetch
them againe at least by strong hand, if they be his elect indeed.
p. 382
               Answer to the second question, viz.
               
               How those who stand in doubt, may be resolved which is the Religion
of the Lord. p. 382
               
                  
Answer to the third Question, viz. How to be kept from declining
to Poperie, and from falling from the Lord. p. 385
               For those with whom no other meanes can prevaile to cause them
to be afraid of Poperie: First, to consider as before Christ of the
former reasons. p. 385
               2. To ponder our Saviours reason against the malicious lewes,
Iohn 8. 44. to prove they were of the devill: and so one reason
against Poperie fetcht directly from it. p. 385, 386
               A Syllogisme demonstrating plainly, that Poperie, especially
the Iesuited Papists Religion is in a speciall manner of the
devill, teaching lying and murder for the supporting of it.
p. 386
               Proofe of the Proposition. p. 386
               Proofe of the Assumption, That Poperie teacheth lying and murdering
for the supporting and advancing of it. p. 386
               Helpes and preservatives which God hath provided for those who
would be kept from Poperie, the scourge that followes the contempt
of the Gospell. As p. 387
               1. Notable confutations of Poperie to keepe us. p. 388
               2. Notable discoveries of the bloudy cruelties and vilenesse of Poperie,
and contrarily, The perpetuall witnesses of the truth which
we professe. p. 388.
               
               3. Speciall helpes for sanctification, whereby to be kept from declining
from God, and so from this scourge. p. 389
               4. Helpes for praier, because we cannot be kept except we pray;
nor stand in these evill daies without the speciall sustaining hand
of our God. p. 390
               5. Helpes for fasting to humble us and to make our praiers more
powerfull and effectuall that we may be kept. p. 390
            
            
               Abomination 33.
               Atheisme of Iudah, angring the Lord to the uttermost, and bringing
the Captivitie. p. 390
               The day of vengeance wished by desperate scoffing Atheists.
p. 391
               What a day that will be when it commeth. p. 392
               Atheists scoffing at the threatnings of the Prophets. p. 392
               
                  
This sinne cannot be purged till they die. p. 392
               All were at a covenant with death and hell. p. 392
               Atheists of all others most timorous when the vengeance comes.
p. 393
            
            
               Abomination 34.
               Divisions of Iudah, angring the Lord, and bringing the Captivitie.
p. 394
               Their divisions flowing from all their abominations, and chiefly
from the Apostasie so generally. p. 394
               All were given to covetousnesse and spreading nets. p. 395
               No man could trust other. p. 395
               The greater spoiling the poorer. p. 395
               All against the true Prophets, and against all that feared the Lord,
and why. p. 395
               Their owne familiars waiting to have matter against them.
p. 396
               Not one left with Gods faithfull servants to be seene to stand
for them. p. 396
               The Church had none to looke to but to the Lord. p. 397
               The number of the godly exceeding small at that time amongst
them, as the grapes after the vintage. p. 397
               How the Church comforts her selfe against the insulting of the
enemie. p. 397
               A question answered, viz. In so many divisions to whom to joine.
p 398, 399.
               
               Application to our owne soules concerning our divisions, and the
rest of the heads herein. p. 399
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               The meanes whereby the Lord had striven with them, to bring
them to repentance, that he might spare them and how in
stead of repenting, their sinne was increased by them all.
p. 400
               Meanes by calling them by his word, and how he had thereby stri
                  
                     ••
                  n
with them in all sorts. p. 401, 402
               
                  
How he had called them by the continuall voice of his mercies.
p. 402
               How he had called them by the voice of his rods both bodily
and spirituall. p. 403
               The Lord weary with smiting, inforced to give them up to their
owne hearts lust, and to this induration. p. 404
               The highest step of their induration, that they were given over to
scoffe at the Lords warnings, whereby he called them to repentance.
p. 405
               This sinne could not be purged. p. 405
               Some causes of their induration, and why they profited not by all
the meanes which the Lord used. p. 406
               Why the Lord would spare them no longer, after he had used all
these meanes to reclaime them. p. 407
               Application to our selves. p. 408
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               The severitie of the Lords vengeance when no other meanes could
serve. p. 410
               The Lamentations of Ieremie written to set out this miserie.
p. 411
               Their carnall confidence in Iosiah seemeth one cause to have provoked
the Lord to take him away; after whose death began their
miseries immediatly. p. 412
               The wofull miseries which at that time they endured. As p. 412
               1. Famine in the most lamentable kindes. p. 412
               2. Destruction by the sword. p. 413
               3. The desolations of the Temple. p. 414
               4. The finall desolation that came upon them. p. 414
               5. The shame cast upon the Lord and his people. p. 414
               6. The people that escaped caried captives. p. 415
               The miseries of their Captivitie. p. 415
               7. In their Captivitie the Church acknowledgeth all this justly
come upon her for rebelling against the word of the Lord.
p. 415
               Despising Gods word, and misusing his messengers, caused that

                     〈◊〉
                   could be no more remedie. p. 416
               
                  
Application why the Lord should not execute as heavie a judgement
upon us, as on Iudah. p. 416
               How neere we have beene unto it, and how oft. p. 416
               The mourning of the Lord for his people before this execution.
p. 417
               The Lords expostulation after a sort mourning over us, for our foolish
impenitency and unkindnesse. p. 417
               The changing of our danger into such a joyfull day. p. 419
               Our unthankefulnesse in forgetting our wonderfull deliverances and
mercies. p. 420
               The Lords expostulation further urged bemoaning our unkindnesse
and wilfulnesse. p. 421
               Whether the Lord may not justly thus speake unto us, especially having
so many ready to receive our most bloudy enemies into our
bosomes. p. 421, 422, 424
               
               Our answer to the Lords expostulation taken away. p. 424
               Application to all notorious sinners, who are the men that hale on
the vengeance of the Lord. p. 425
               Warning to all obstinate sinners howsoever the Lord deale with us
at the cries of his servants. p. 427
               Their miserable state at death, most at Christs appearing. p. 427
               How each may come to the certaine knowledge of the truth hereof,
viz. by inquiring of his owne heart awaked. p. 428
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               How Gods faithfull servants are wont to be affected seeing his anger
kindled against his people. p. 430
               How they are wont in such cases to use all meanes to pacifie his Majestie. p. 431
               The meanes which they have beene wont to use to this end. p. 431
               1. Gods faithfull servants have beene wont to intreat the Lord in
secret, to pacifie him thereby towards his people. p. 433
               2. They have beene wont to forewarne Gods people of their sinnes,
and his vengeance comming on them for the same. p. 434
               3. Gods servants have beene wont to direct his people to the meanes
whereby he may be pacified. p. 436
               The principall meanes publike humiliations. p. 436.
               
               
                  
Examples hereof. p. 436, &c.
               The example of Iehosophat is to be beholden of all religious rulers,
who would see the like experience of the Lords presence and mercie
towards them, and therefore set downe at large. p. 438
               The way to ouerthrow and daunt the enemies of the Church.
p. 439
               
               Our owne practise and experience. p. 441
               Reason hereof.
               All having provoked the Lord, all must seeke to pacifie him by humbling
themselves. p. 442
               The office of forewarning and calling to fasting belongs to Gods Ministers. p. 443, 446
               The supreme Magistrates to appoint publike fasts in such cases, and
to see them practised by all, and give ensample hereof. p. 443
               The Ministers to call upon the Magistrate to this end, and to warne
all the people. p. 444
               Otherwise, the bloud of every soule must be required at their
hands. p. 444
               A generall president for all posteritie. p. 446
               The Lord then cals to fasting when his vengeance is comming for
the abominations increased. p 446
               2. Gods Ministers are to labour that the humiliation of his people
may be unfained and availeable; and to set before their faces
the meanes hereof. p. 447
               Fasts performed hypocritically, more increase the vengeance. p. 447
               Nature of hypocriticall fasting. p. 447
               The outward humiliation availeth nothing without the inward, and
without the other parts of a true fast. p. 448
               The true humiliation must be both outward and inward. p. 448
               The outward humiliation, and wherein it is. p. 448, 449
               Exercises of Religion to be adjoined to the outward humiliation.
p. 449
               The publike humiliation must be in a great assembly. p. 450
               The people are to be warned hereof, and called on to prepare themselves p. 450
               Meanes to be used in these assemblies for working sound humiliation
with faith and repentance. p. 450, 451
               
                  
The inward humiliation, and wherein it is. p. 452
               Time of the continuance of such solemne humiliations. p. 453
               Things to be done after our humiliation, as reforming all the abominati
                     •
                  ns. p. 454
               The fruit and happy successe of such humiliations. p. 455
               Particular experiences of the power and fruit of such like humil
                     •
                  ations
in Gods servants privately. 456
               If God be so easily intreated sometimes by one of his poore servants
only, how much more at the cries of so many of his children at
once. p. 457
               Till the time that the meanes be used for appeasing Gods Majestie,
we can never have any comfortable hope of escaping a more terrible
judgement. p. 457
               Publike humiliations failing, Gods messengers are to stirre up his
owne servants to seeke him privately. p. 457
               What manner of men they are who must be called on to seeke God
privately, when the publike meanes faile, viz. meeke ones, and
who have wrought his judgements. p. 458
               These in all ages have beene the only men in favour, and preservers
of the rest. p. 458
               In such desperate cas
                     •
                  s all are to intreat the meeke ones to cry unto
the Lord for them. p 459
               The Lord seekes such to stand in the breach, and when he findes
none, viz. very few in respect of that they ought, then comes the
vengeance. p. 459
               The godly in such times must labour to be more righteous, and
so more meeke, that their praiers may more prevaile, and so must
seeke the Lord privately, as Moses, Nehemiah, and Daniel. p. 459, 460
               The manner h
                     •
                  w to importune the Lord. p. 460
               The godly shall thus helpe either to pacifie the Lord for all the people,
or be hid themselves. p. 461
               The cry of the Prophet Zephany to the faithfull is ever to sound in
all our eares when all other meanes faile. p. 461, 462
               1. Complaint of the weake Christian for his unabilitie, thus to
seeke the Lord privat
                     •
                  ly: answered. p. 462
               To follow the example of Daniel in our private fasts. p. 462
               
                  
We are to be provoked to this dutie by these holy men, viz. Daniel,
Neh
                        •
                     mi
                        •••
                     , &c. the acceptance and successe which God gave
them. p. 463
               The second complaint of the weake Christian of unabilitie to confesse
our sinnes, and beg the things which concerne our peace, answered;
and so how to seeke God thus privately. p. 464
               The fruit and blessing of this labour. p. 466
               Gods messengers are not only to be carefull to save and pull a people
from Gods wrath, but also to keepe them from comming under it
againe. p. 468
               The meanes to preserve a people from backesliding, and to keepe
them ever under Gods favour. p. 469
               The causes of the evils being removed, so will also the evils flowing
from them. p. 470
               The fountaines of obedience and grace to be heedfully looked to, to be
kept pure. p. 471
               The happy estate of a people, living under a holy Ministerie, countenanced
by a godly Magistracy, and contrarily, the miserable
estate of people destitute thereof. p. 471
               Experience of both amongst our selves. p. 473
               The schooles of good learning to be regarded above all things for a
perpetuall supplie and succession of such Magistrates and Ministers.
p. 473
               The best meanes of learning to be sought out, established, and strictly
put in practise in them. p. 474
               A last dutie of the faithfull messengers of God to comfort and confirme
the hearts of all the godly living amongst the wicked in
such times. p. 474
               The Prophets never to leave importuning the Lord, all other
meanes and hopes failing. p. 475
               Application to all who succeed in the place of the Prophets, to trie
whether we finde at this day the same affections in us which
they had. p. 475, 476
               Our sinnes as great as theirs all circumstances considered, and
Gods anger accordingly. p. 475
               Our wonted humiliations in pestilence, dearth, and other signes of
Gods anger. p. 476
               
                  
What we have done lately for our so many and 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Gods
anger kindled against us. p. 477
               Why God hath so tried many of his faith full servants by 
                     〈◊〉
                   and
the like extremities and temptations. p. 477, 478
               The dolefull harvest, An. 1609. p. 478
               The Lords complaint and threatning against us for our sens
                     •
                  esnesse
and not hearkning to his call, neither by his word, judgements,
nor mercies. p. 481
               If God by such things called Iudah to fasting and praier, then he
hath and doth so to us. p. 481
               He needeth no other witnesses but our owne consciences. p. 482
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               The sinne of Gods people may be so great, that he will not spare
them, no not at the praiers of his dearest servants, though their
presence and praiers may wonderfully prevaile, p. 484, 485, &c.
               Quest. Whether the Lord will not ever spare his people upon a generall
humiliation and repentance rightly performed answered.
p. 486, 487
               How publike fasts may be made uneffectuall to save, viz. when men
turne not from their evill way, or are not soundly humbled. p 488
               
               We have no one example to the contrarie in Gods booke, but all witnessing
hereunto, that Gods people humbling themselves and
turning from their sinnes, God will turne from his fierce wrath.
p. 489
               The Lord proclaimes his mercy herein to all the world. p. 489
               The servants of God humbling themselves though severally
and at the same time, may much prevaile, as in the daies of
Hester. p. 490
               If one Moses may doe so much, much more so many. p. 490
               Objection answered concerning the feare of the Lords decree come
forth, and then too late to seeke. p. 490
               So long as the Lord gives a people hearts to use the right meanes to
pacifie him, so long there is great hope that he will be appeased.
p. 491
               Objection answered concerning David who feeles the temporall
scourges, notwithstanding his unfained repentance. p. 491
               
                  
The Lord hath beene wont to inflict some lesser judgement when
the humiliation hath not beene unfained, though he have saved
his people from the greater, and why. p. 492
               When the time is that the Lord will not spare his people any longer,
no not at the private praiers of his dearest servants. p. 493
               Three principall signes hereof. 1. When a land is full of bloud.
2. When it is full of declining and perversnesse. 3. When it is
overgone with Atheisme. p. 494
               For the first, what that bloud was whereby their land was so d
                     •
                  filed
that God would not spare them. p. 494, &c.
               The second maine sinne for which God would not spare them; their
generall all perversnesse and defection increased without hope of returning.
p. 499
               Neither word, judgements, nor mercies would doe them any more
good. p. 500
               There was also amongst them a marvellous corruption of judgement,
both in misjudging of the good waies of God, and also in
wresting of judgement. p. 500
               Perversnesse in judgement cause of their perversnesse in manners.
p. 501
               Their last and principall sinne a senslesse Atheisme growing upon
all, that they did not acknowledge God in his judgements as they
had beene wont. p. 501
               Reasons why the Lord cannot spare when these sinnes come to this
height as theirs were. p. 502
               Application to our selves, whether we be come to this height of sin,
and have these tokens thereof. p. 504
               God hath manifested his love as much to our nation as to any other,
and that he is most unwilling thiu to enter into judgement with
us. p. 504, 505
               He spread
                     •
                  th out to us both his white and his blacke tent together. p. 50
                        •
                     
                  
               
               To trie what we can answer the Lord if he charge these things on
us, as first that our land is full of bloud. p. 505
               The crie of violence and oppression goeth up to heaven for the crueltie
of Landlords, Vsurers, and men void of commiseration.
p. 506
               
                  
The like crie amongst us as was in the daies of Nehemiah.
p. 506
               The crie of the poore in dearths. p. 507
               The holy law of God for the care to be had for all the poore of the
land. p. 509
               We must sometime lend, looking for nothing againe. p. 509
               How the Lord will blesse such a care for the poore; and contrarilie. p. 510
               Vumercifulnesse crieth loud for vengeance, and will bring judgement
without mercy. p. 510
               The generall crie of the poore that they and theirs must be brought
to perpetuall beggery. p. 511
               The husbandman cannot pay his rent but by selling his corne
at high prizes, and according to the same must usually all
other commodities bee, that the poore must live in miserie.
p. 512
               What we are growing to hereby. p. 512
               The cause of all our unmercifulnesse and spoiling commonly, viz. to
maintaine those sinnes of Sodome, Ezek. 16. 49. p. 513
               Our land defiled with the bloud of Gods servants in Queene Maries
daies. p. 513
               Deadly malice against all who make conscience to walke in the waies
of God, by all those who have chosen to live in their owne evill
waies. p. 514
               The advice that a mans wisest friends will give, to any noted for
prof
                     •
                  ssion, rather to put up all wrongs, then in most places to seeke
redresse. p. 515
               Our land full of the bloud of soules. p. 515
               What our state must needs be herein through the multitude of ignorant
and unconscionable Ministers. p. 516
               Multitudes destroyed by evill ensamples, and through the generall
neglect of superiours for the soules committed to them.
p. 517
               Application of the second cause why the Lord could not spare them,
viz. That they fell away more and more. p. 517
               The word in many places become unfruitfull and without power.
p. 518.
               
               
                  
Gods mercies have made us so insolent, as to say we will not heare.
p. 518
               Gods judgements have made us to fall away more and more, especially
since our deliverance from our so long feared day. p. 518
               Pestilence, famine, and wilde beasts next forerunners of the sword.
p. 519
               All Gods strokes so multiplied to make us to seeke him, have made
us more senslesse, and to walke more stubbornly against him.
p. 520
               This of all other a most infallible for erunner of vengeance, when
men wax uncurably worse by smiting. p. 520
               The manner of the Lords proceeding in judgement against Israel,
before her Captivitie, is recorded for a president to us. p. 520
               Application to our selves of Gods manner of proceeding with us in
judgements. p. 521
               We almost overthrowne as Sodome, being as a firebr and pluckt out
of the burning. p. 521
               God threatneth us with whatsoever he hath denounced, seeing we
amend not. p. 522
               God threatneth to smite us seven times more, to bring one plague
in the end seven times greater then any of the former, unlesse
we repent. p. 522
               God having shewed such tokens of his love and compassion towards
us will be magnified accordingly. p. 522
               The third signe of Gods anger, and for which he threatneth he cannot
spare, to wit, Atheisme, and how it declareth it selfe openly
amongst us. p. 523
               If we had beene rightly perswaded that all our judgements had been
sent by the Lord for our sinne, we had repented long agoe in
sackcloth and ashes. p. 523
               Our timorousnesse to manifest our love to the Lord, and our hatred
of sinne. p. 524
               Our generall leaving off to mourne for all our sinnes and tokens of
Gods wrath, or to tremble before him. p. 524
               Whence come these men
                     •••
                  ned but from some spice of close Atheisme,
that we thinke at least, that God is not so angry against sinne or
so regardeth it. p. 524
               
                  
Cause of our drowsie professing in many, for that iniquitie hath 
                     ••
                  
                  gotten
the upper hand, that it seemes unpossible that ever pietie
should looke up againe, therefore best to frame our selves to the
time. p. 525
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               What brings true boldnesse to appeare before the Lord. p. 526
               The assurance and safetie of the mourners, before the destruction
come, being sure marked by our Saviour, repeated againe for our
further comfort. p. 526
               To be put in minde ever to beare his marke in our foreheads; that
so we may alwaies have boldnesse before him. p. 527
               The boldnesse of the marking Angell appearing againe before the
Lord, and giving up his Commission. p. 527
               This only can bring boldnesse to appeare before the Lord, when we
can say, Lord I have done as thou hast commanded me. p. 528
               Our obedience is chiefly in our willingnesse and unfained endevour,
mourning for our wants, and this doth our God accept. p. 528
               Two notable ensamples of boldnesse hereupon, to appeare before the
Lord. p. 529, 530
               Reasons why they only who have done as the Lord hath commanded
can be bold to appeare before him. p. 531
               When all nations shall tremble and shrike, they alone shall lift up their
heads for joy, because of that their happiest day. p. 532
               The contrary horrour of all who have not done as the Lord hath
commanded them, whensoever their consciences shall be truly
awaked, more specially at death, most at the dreadfull judgement.
p. 532, 533
               Reasons of their horrour. p. 533
               State of them then, who have neglected their callings, and that
which hath beene commanded them. p. 534
               How fearefull the condition of all those men is who have not gained
with their talents, nor increased them, and more of those who
have used them against the Lord, and for Sathan. p. 534
               Their case of all other most fearefull to whom most hath beene committed.
p. 535
               How their horrour shall be increased. p. 535
               
                  
No impenitent sinner can possibly looke to stand before the Lord.
p. 535
               Application to all who have neglected to doe as the Lord hath
commanded them. p. 536
               Application to the chiefe to put them in remembrance, as their answer
must be the greatest for their place and charge. p. 536
               The Magistrates Commission, and what the Lord will call for at his
hards. p. 537
               The Iudges commission. p. 538
               The Ministers commission. p. 538
               The account of each Governour of a family for every soule within
his gates. p. 539
               The account of every one to whom he hath committed any talent.
p. 539
               How the Lord will reply to all sorts beginning to excuse themselves,
untill their mouthes be stopped. p. 540
               How he will reply to all for imploying their talents by trying their
advantage. p. 542
               Objection of the weake Christian, viz. who can be able to appeare
before the Lord? p. 543
               Every one who hath unfainedly striven hereunto, shall be able to
stand before the Lord, and reasons of it. p. 544
               Object. 2. The cry of all sorts of sinners whose consciences shall be
awaked when they shall bethinke themselves of this appearing.
p. 545
               The Lords answer to all such. p. 545
               What the Lord commands the poore sinner in the first place.
p. 546
               The endevour of Sathan to drive all such poore sinners to endlesse
despaire. p. 547
               How to comfort the poore humbled sinner against Sathans assaults
and temptations. p. 547
               The second terrour of Sathan, that the time of mercie is past.
p. 549
               The time is never too late whilst the Lord calls us to repent, if we can
obey. p. 549
               Generall comfort; never repentant sinner but found mercie. p. 550
               
                  
The Lord still stretcheth out his hands to all to come to him. p. 550
               The terrible voice of the Lord to all despisers of mercy now offered.
p. 551
               The Lord will one day bring all that belong unto him, to say, Lord
I will doe as thou commandest; at least he will bring them by
strong hand. p. 552
               God purposeth their destruction whom he suffereth to goe on perpetually
in their impenitencie. p. 553
               Application to us all in generall, what securitie we have to escape the
vengeance so long threatned from Babylon, untill we doe as God
commands. p. 553
               The Lords reply to us if we answer that we have repented and
therefore shall have peace. p. 554, 555
               God threatneth us as sensibly from Rome as he did them from Babylon.
p. 556
               Conclusion of all, how to trie the certaintie hereof, and when we
may have securitie and boldnesse. p. 557
               Comfort to all the meeke who can say that they have truly endevored
to doe as the Lord hath commanded them: These only have
the promises. p. 557
               The Lord hath given most comfortable answers against each feare
of his servants in such cases. p. 558
               Against the feare of being left into the enemies hand. p. 558
               The second feare for the wrongs and provocations of the enemies,
answered. p. 559
               Our third feare, for that we are but poore wormes, and nothing in
regard of our enemies which are the mightie men of the earth.
p. 560
               The fourth feare of Gods people, for the miseries we may come
into in the meane time amongst our enemies, answered.
p. 561
               A fift answer of the Lord against the feare of want of necessary
comforts. p. 562
               A sixt comfort against feare of fainting in the long continuance
of the troubles of the Church. p. 563
               The seventh, the Lords answer to the faithfull soule mourning for
feare of the dangers of the Church. p. 565
               
                  
What every faithfull servant of God should doe for the Church
and this nation, that would never see 
                     〈◊〉
                   feele their miseries▪
                  p. 565
               All to hearken what the Lord calleth and crieth for at our hands,
moaning our estate. p. 566
               What he will doe for us, and against our enemies, if we will yet hearken
unto him. p. 567
               A holy praier according to the Contents of the booke. p. 569
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL ESTATES
AND DEGREES, WHO
truly tender their owne Soules, the
Church of God, and their natiue
COVNTREY.
            
               IT is now many yeares (Christian
Reader) since by reading those holy
Prophets which liued next before
the Captiuitie of Iudah,Occasion of this watch, feare of Gods iudgements lying vpon vs. who
denounced the same to be ready to
come vpon Gods people for their
sinnes, and by considering and comparing
the same with the times
wherein we liue, I haue euer feared
the life plague or a heauier to be hanging ouer this our
sinfull Nation.This feare hath not bin vvithout iust cause, as eu
                     •
                  nts haue declared. Neither haue I feared without iust cause:
for how neere indeed such a iudgement hath bin vnto vs, and
how the same threatnings haue bin ready to be verified vpon
vs,Our later d
                     •
                  ngers and deliuerances still the greatest. the world is witnesse, euen all they who haue but onely
heard the report of our dangers, and of our wonderfull and
euen miraculous deliuerances. And euer the later perils and
preseruations haue bin the more wonderfull;The duty of all Gods faithfull Ministers to be euer giuing warning. as that one of
the Powder furnace was aboue all that euer former age heard
of. In the due meditation and regard whereof, I haue taken
it to be my dutie, and of all the faithfull Ministers of Christ,

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
to follow the example of Noah, and of all those faithfull Prophets,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. 17, 18. & 18. 30.
in giuing warning aforehand, (keeping within the limits
and compasse of our calling) to helpe to open the eyes of all, to
foresee,Iam. 2. 14. and to cause all to tremble for the anger of the Lord,
also to contend with all our power to turne euery soule from
his euill way:Ior. 23. 22. that so his wrath may be appeased,Iam 4 17. & 5. 19, 20. and we deliuered
from the dreadfull execution of his heauiest vengeance.2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11.
Herevpon in my former feare amongst other causes I
was chiefly emboldned (and that not long before the time of
that bloudie Powder-treason,A chiefe occasion of the first part of this watch, as the title of it declareth. as the Lord had so directed it)
to endeuour to set downe truly, and after to publish to all, the
first part of this watch, viz: The rule of life, contayning the
couenant which we haue all entred into with our God. To the
end to helpe to keepe all his people from the generall declining
from that his blessed couenant to profanesse and iniquitie, and
from the outragious wickednes of the rest, that we also might
all learne to watch to be preserued in the euill day.So of the second part, The Rule of Prayer, to stir vs all vp to watching & prayer, as our sins & dangers still increased. And since
then likewise the second part of the same watch, viz: The
rule of prayer, to awaken vs the better, and to stirre vp all
the Lords faithfull seruants the more speedily and instantly
to betake our selues wholly to watching and prayer, not onely
to be accounted worthy to escape the euills approching, but also
that ech of vs may still helpe to preserue the Island; like as
our most compassionate Father hath in the riches of his mercy
vouchsafed to accept vs vntill this day.The time of y• comming forth of the second part. And this likewise he
in his wisdome directed to come forth at the very instant, yea
in the midst of the last apparant danger, which we in our parts
were in,The dreadfulnesse of those tunes to many, howsoeuernow forgotten. for the insurrection about inclosures: which howsoeuer
it might seeme nothing or small to them who dwelt far
from it; yet to vs who expected the approching of the rebells
euery houre, and heard how the hearts of the people were
generally bent, it was no lesse terrible than any of the former,
but so much more fearefull, the neerer it was. Now therefore
in the third place:The cause of this third part, our sins increasing. forasmuch as all men may behold all kinde
of wickednesse and impietie still increasing fearefully without
hope of redresse, so that vnlesse we will put out our owne eyes,
we must see the iudgement of God hasting faster vpon vs, and

being at the very dore, I haue taken it my bounden dutie, and
my best seruice that I could doe and possibly performe, to his
heauenly Maiestie, his Church, and my Country, to adde this
third part: to the end to set before the faces of euery one of
vs, the heynousnesse of our sinnes in euery degree, and so the
equitie of the Lords proceeding against vs: that we may all
be inforced to iustifie his Maiestie, though he come to execute
whatsoeuer he hath so often threatned, when no kinde of forewarning
can doe vs any good. And also to try if yet at length
he will vouchsafe to recall vs againe to his couenant, and put
new life into vs, to meet him falling vpon our faces in fasting
and prayer, to pacifie his wrath, and that ech of vs may begin
to put that in practise which was intended and sought in the
two former parts, that is, to watch and pray continually, not in
words any longer, but in deed and truth; for the preseruation
and lasting welfare of vs and our posteritie.
            That the heauiest iudgement must needs be feared to be so
much the neerer,The heauiest iudgment iustly feared to be hard at y• dores. as the anger of the most High is more kindled
against vs, no man can doubt: and that his wrath is incensed
to the vttermost, is most apparent to all, whose eyes he hath
opened, or who doe but beleeue his heauenly word: for that in
stead of hauing any of our greeuous abhominations (which
we may behold set before our faces in the Treatise following,
euen by the Prophets themselues, and forwhich he hath so
often threatned us,) yet vnfeignedly repented of, we haue indeed
increased them many times more.All of vs hauing solemnly entred into couenant wt our God; haue caused him to threaten to take away his couenant by our transgression. The couenant of our
God, which the whole land professeth, and ech of vs in our
Baptisme haue solemnely entred into, we haue most grieuously
transgressed. And this many of vs haue done with so high a
hand, as that we haue caused that his heauenly Gospell to be
blasphemed, inforcing him to threaten to take his couenant,
with all his blessings from vs: yea, to leaue vs to be made a
prey and a spoyle vnto our enemies, which thirst after our
bloud continually.This confessed by all Anno 1588.
                This all confessed, when they so despightfully
and proudly came against vs, as being ready to swallow
vs vp quicke, and ech of vs then acknowledged, that his wrath
was most iustly kindled against vs for the same: so as if he

should then haue cast vs off vtterly, for euer being his people,
or a nation any more, that yet we had most righteously deserued
it.And in all our dangers Anno 1602. 1603.
                This we haue in like manner many a time since acknowledged,
in all our dangers and plagues which we haue had
vpon vs plague after plague, as those ten plagues of Aegypt.
More especially in the grieuous dearths, and chiefly in that
most poysoned plague of pestilence, as the sundry confessions
of sinnes, then made and still extant, doe and shall euer beare
witnesse. But aboue all other times, when we were all ready
to be consumed in the hot fierie furnace at once: yea this we
ordinarily and daily euery one confessed, whilst we liued in imminent
danger euery houre, before the Lord so miracul
                  ••
               sly
and graciously set vp his Anointed ouer vs.
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   euery one then. Euery one then
could say, Our sinnes are so 
                  •
               heynous, as that we must needes
haue some terrible vengeance without speedie repentance.
This wrath ther
                  •
               fore we must needs acknowledge to be farre
greater now than euer heretofore:Gods wrath must needs be greater now than euer before. not onely for that in stead
of repenting, our sinnes are so growne vp in euery kinde, but
also because we are now so generally, and so much further off
from repentance, or any purpose of amendment, yea of so much
as of any sense of our sinnes, or feare of any iudgement to be
toward vs for the same, than euer we were in former time,
notwithstanding all the meanes which he hath so long vsed to
awaken vs,This can be no way appeased, but by taking away our sins the cause of it, and turning againe to his Couenant. and to bring vs to repentance. How then can this
fire of the Lords anger be euer quenched, we deliuered from
the violence thereof, that we should not be consumed of it, but
onely by seeking out the principall causes of it, to wit, our
maine transgressions against the couenant of our God, by which
he hath bin so prouoked, and also by confessing and acknowledging
them, and turning backe ioyntly to the humble obedience
of that his most holy Couenant againe: Israel cannot stand
before their enemies,Examples. vntill Achans sacriledge be found out
and punished;Iosh. 7. 10. neither can the dearth be stayed in the dayes
of Dauid,
               2 S
                     •
                  m. 21. 1. 14. 24. vntill the causes of it be found out, and the Lord
pacified by taking away the iniquitie. Nor yet can the storme
vpon the Seas be quieted,Ion
                     •
                   1. 15. so long as Ionah lyeth asleepe in his
sinne. How much losse now, when so many Achan
                     •
                  
                be in

euery corner, and Ionah asleepe euery where in the eyes of all?
As it is with a particular man,As it is for 
                     •
                   particular man, so for a whole Nation. so is it with a whole Nation.
That like as there must be first a searching out of his sinne,
with confession of it, and turning againe vnto the Lord, before
his anger can be appeased, so must it be for a whole Nation
(so far as we can iustly conceiue) before any sound assurance
can be giuen that his wrath is turned away. This seemes euery
where most euident thorow all the booke of God.
            How Poperie is growne vp againe,The increase of Pope
                     •
                  ie and all profanenosse, notorious to all. the late proclamation for
preuenting it, and the furie of that bloudie Religion, and for
the preseruation of his Royall Maiestie, and his Seede, set
forth vpon the occasion of the cruell murther of the French
King, doth sufficiently witnesse. And likewise the generall
vrging the Oath of Allegeance inforced therevpon: besides
so many lamentable experiments, and our ouer-iust feares
for their trecheries expected ech howre. How Atheisme
also, with all kinde of outragious iniquitie, and scorning at all
true pietie, doe ouerflow in euery place, aboue all former
times,Some sins heynous heretofore, now thorow custome & commonnesse, become as no sinnes. no man can denie. Indeed some sinnes haue bin odious
heretofore, and especially when they began first to spring vp,
and were cryed out of, as which all the godly feared, that they
would presently bring the vengeance of God vpon vs all, which
now through long custome and commonnesse are made no sins:
as that beastly valour of powring downe wine and strong
drinke, and our glorying in it; pride with all monstrous excesse
therein, oppression, deriding and hating all true godlinesse, and
the power of religion. Though all of them, and many like, are
in a higher degree in the Land, and practised with a farre
higher hand now,No sinne truely repented of. than euer heretofore. Or if any one abomination
be taken away and gone, who can say that it hath bin
generally repented of▪ or left of any conscience, o
                  •
                for feare of
the Lord and awe of his word? And therefore if he be the
same holy God, still hating sinne as much as euer he did, and
who will neuer cleare the guiltie, how should it be but (though
our owne hearts, and all the world doe slatter vs, telling vs
that we shall haue peace) yet as our sinnes are 
                  〈◊〉
                increased
and our abhominations gone vp to heauen,As our sins are m
                     •
                  ltiplied, so his wrath. so his wrath and

               
                  ••
               ousie must needs smoke against vs,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   34 7. and his curses & plagues
be multiplied vpon vs vntill he hath put out our name from
vnder heauen;De
                     •
                  . 18. 19, 20. vnlesse we meet him speedily and appease his
wrath by our humble and vnfeigned turning vnto him. But
these crying sinnes can neuer be taken away,The cr
                     •
                  ing sins cānot be taken away, vnlesse y• causes of them be first repented of. vnlesse also euen
the other sinnes of the Land be likewise repented of. I meane
those from which these proceed, and for which men are so generally
giuen vp vnto these monstrous iniquities. For these
outragious enormities are the heauiest punishments of other
sinnes, and ordinarily the immediate fore-runners of the greatest
temporall iudgement.We cannot repent vntill we know both the maine prouocations, & ech our owne sins, with the iudg
                     •
                  
                  ments belonging to them. Neither can we euer haue any
assurance to be preserued from that extremest vengeance, vntill
we returne more generally in our hearts, from all our euill
wayes vnto the Conenant of our God: neither yet euer repent
nor turne from them, vnlesse we see both generally the most
heynous prouocations of the Land angring his Maiestie, and
ech of vs our owne seuerall sins particularly, with his iudgements
belonging therevnto. Therefore sith that our most
pitifull father hath,God hath ordeyned the discouerie of our iniquitie to turne away our captiuitie. in the riches of his endlesse compassion,
ordeyned the discouerie of the iniquitie, and of the certaine
approaching of his iudgement to turne away the vengeance,
and that by turning his people from their euill way; and so
he complaines of the Prophets, that they had not discouered
their iniquitie to turne away their captiuitie,Ierem. 23. 22. and saith plainly
of them,And his Prophets standing in his counsell to turne vs frō our euill way. That if they had stood in his counsell, and declared
his words to his people, they should haue turned them from
their euill wayes, and from the wickednesse of their inventions.
I haue therefore as I say, taken this as my chiefest seruice,This is y• bounden dutie of all his messengers and their chiefe seruice.
that euer I could performe vnto his heauenly Maiestie,
his Church and people of this our Nation, euen to helpe to
search out our sinne, by his holy word, and to set our iniquities
before our faces, with his most righteous iudgements due vnto
vs for the same, and ready euer to breake in vpon vs like the
raging seas, thereby to helpe amongst others to bring vs to repentance.
And the rather for that, howsoeuer euery one of vs
will acknowledge that we must first turne away from our sins
vnto him, before he will turne to vs from his fierce wrath,

and also that we must search and finde out our iniquities, and
see the danger which we stand in for them, before we can turn
                  •
               
from them, 
                  •
                yet long experience hath confirmed this, that we
being lulled so fast asleepe in our securitie thorough our long
prosperitie,Because we will neuer search out our sinnes of our selues. can neuer search out our sinne of our selues, vnlesse
they be set plainely before our faces, and we awaked and
rowzed by his most terrible denuntiations for the same. If
Dauid himselfe such a worthy Prophet,
                  Dauid must haue Nathan to awaken him. a man of a most tender
conscience (as is euident by all his Psalmes) and his watering
his bed with his teares) yet being become secure in his
sinne,2 Sam▪ 12. must haue Nathan to awake him, by setting his sinne
plainely before his face, before that he can see the vilenesse
of it to repent so of it as to finde mercy (though his sin was so
grosse and palpable, and Gods wrath lying vpon him so heauily
in a spirituall manner, and also his vengeance ready to be executed
in most fearefull sort.) How much more then haue we
neede of some Boanarges, sonnes of thunder, to awaken vs,
being a sinfull and hard-hearted people and dead in our iniquities.
And if those to whom he hath not only spoken once &
twise, but also smitten with sicknesse vpon their beds, that
their soules draw to the graue,Iob 33. 23. and their life to the buriers,
had neede of a messenger, an interpreter, one of a thousand
to declare vnto them their righteousnesse,Men smitten with sicknesse drawing neere to the buriers, must haue an interpreter one of a thousand. to set their sinnes
before their eyes, and wh
                  •
               re they may finde the true righteousnes,
before they can say they haue sinned, & repent to finde
mercy: How much more we our selues? when most of vs who
haue bin chiefe in this provocation are in health and prosperitie,
and in no misfortune like other folke, but rather fed in all
pleasure, as against the day of slaughter. And to conclude
this point,They who had crucified our Sauiour. we see how those three thousand, that crucified our
Lord & Sauiour, could not yet see their bloudy sin, notwithstanding
all which they had formerly heard and seene in our
Sauiour, and also the dreadfull signes at his passion, vntill
that Peter particularly laid open their wickednesse, applying
it vnto them directly that they were the men, and
then onely are they pricked at their hearts, and cry out,
Men and Brethren, what shall we doe? Now I say, if none

of these, no not they whose sinne was so intolerable, and who
had bin so manifestly convinced, can search out their sinnes
of themselues, to be so soundly humbled, as to turne and seeke
to pacifie the Lords wrath; how much lesse hope is there of vs,
a natiō so setled vpon our lees, & so hardned by our abusing the
long patience & forbearance of our most tender father? who
hauing bin in so many dangers, & yet still deliuered frō them
all, do thinke that it shall be so with vs euer, & that now there
can be no more danger toward vs. We therefore had more need
of many such as Nathan,
               We are they y• haue neede of Nathan if euer any. to set our sin most liuely before our
faces, and after to tell vs directly, That we are they with whom
God is now angry, and that aboue all the people of the earth, as
he hath knowne vs aboue all other Nations, like as we shall see
in the sequell.Amos 3. 
                     •
                  . We haue neede not of that one messenger, that
one of a thousand alone,Of all Gods faithfull messengers. but of all the faithfull messengers and
men of God, by their preaching, and all holy meanes, to shew vs
our vnrighteousnes: and of Peter,
               Of Peter. to giue vs to know for a
suretie, That we are the men who haue crucified the Lord Iesus.Acts 2. 36.
Yea we haue neede of Ionah,
               Of Ionah.
                to proclaime vnto vs, Yet
fortie dayes and England shall be destroyed for her sin.Ionah 1. 2. And
finally, when preaching will not serue to awake vs, we haue
neede of Ieremie or Baruck to write the sinnes of vs all,Of Ieremie or Baruch to write our sins, when all other means faile. with
the plagues which God hath praepared and denounced against
vs for the same; That euery one euen running by may read
them, as written in capitall letters vpon tables: to try if yet
at length by this meanes,Ier. 36. 2. 3. we may see the greatnes of the anger
that is kindled against vs, and so repent and retùrne euery one
from his euill way, that he may forgiue our iniquitie and sin,
and deliuer vs from the imminent, and all like future
plagues.
            To this very end,We may here se
                     •
                   our sins and iudgement set before vs in the sins of Iudah. by the Lord himselfe. that we may behold the Lord himselfe
discouering vnto vs our iniquities, and so may haue 
                  •
               o more
pretence nor cloakes for our sinnes, nor yet surmize the
least partialitie, here we may all see (and that in the very sins
of Iudah, for which God brought vpon them that terrible captiuitie)
the Lord himselfe and not men, setting before our faces
both our sinnes in generall, and the transgressions of ech of

vs, as in particular, and how we haue thereby deserued such a
iudgement. These I haue laboured to set out more fully, and
to apply them more particularly vnto vs, because of the degrees
acknowledged by all to be necessarie vnto sound repentance
in euery one, who lookes to get full assurance of Gods
mercy.These labored in more 
                     •
                  pecially, bicause of the degrees in true repentance As first a true search, sight and sense of his sinne and
Gods anger for it. 2. Humble confession of it. 3. Griefe of
heart with detestation of the same. 4. Crying for pardon.
5. A lowly offering our selues to his Maeiestie to w
                  •
               lke with
him all our dayes. 6. A faithfull performance of our vowes.
For this cause haue I bent my chiefe studie to helpe somewhat
herevnto, that all these parts of true repentance may be
wrought in vs, and the same made vnfeigned. And to this
end I haue prepared first (as 
                  〈◊〉
               ) and sent before,The Couenant sent before acknowledged by the learned. the Couenant
of our God with vs, in the fi
                  •
               st part of this watch: that
it might be throughly tryed, like as it hath bin approued for
many yeares, by sundry learned professors of the Gospell, euen
by all to whom it hath come, so far forth as I know, to be that
truth of God, wherein we all agree: and the summe of that
which the Lord requires of vs generally, without which we
cannot be established, and of euery one particularly, if we will
be saued.The branches of the Couenant, set here before our sins. In this part I haue likewise set the seuerall branches
of the same Couenant before sundry of our heynous sinnes,
that by comparing them togither, we may more liuely behold
our transgressions and provocations. Yea I haue striuen thorow
the whole to helpe,That we may all see & turne to the Couenāt of the Lord. that euery one of vs might returne to that
his blessed Couenant, for the happinesse of vs all, and of euery
particular soule, and to saue vs both from the temporall and
eternall vengeance.1. For y• whole Nation. And first in regard of the whole Nation,
because we all stand continually in danger of that anger of
God to be powred out vpon vs, which had formerly almost
ouerwhelmed vs all, and for ought we can imagine, must needs
ouertake vs in the end, vnlesse we more generally repent and
turne vnto his Maiestie.No policie can secure vs, but our more generall turning. No policie of man nor humane
meanes can euer secure vs from the furie of Babylon, and that
he should not suffer them to execute their malice vpon vs, and
leaue them to be executioners of his plagues so often and so

neerely accomplished,Ier. 18. 7. but this our more generall turning. All
that euer they haue done or doe intend are nothing but the
Lordsthreatnings, denouncing by them to pluck vs vp, to root
vs out, and destroy vs; as we shall see at large in this vision of
Ezechiel.
               All their malice & mischieuous deuises are the Lords denuntiations against vs. They are onely Gods axe, his souldiers, his executioners,
though themselues know not so much. It is true indeed,
he may deferre his plagues, or lessen them, at the prayers
of his faithfull seruants, as he hath done many a day and saued
vs in the imminent perils;Isai. 106, 15. but there is nothing (so far as
we can perceiue out of the word of the Lord to giue vs any
securitie) that can cause him to repent of that great plague,Frō which nothing can cause him to turne but our turning to him.
and destruction, which he seemeth to haue denounced so plainly
and directly from Heauen against our Realme and Nation, so
to turne it away, but onely our turning from our wickednesse.
We may all behold our pr
                  •
               sent estate in the 18 of Ieremie,
               Ier. 18. 5.
written as in great letters for euery one to read, and that so
plainely, as none can pretend ignorance, but it must of necessitie
convince euery conscience in all the Land; for to vs it is directed,
both to vs all in generall, and to euery soule particularly.
At the 5th verse of that Chapter,vers. 5. first he sends Ieremie to
the Potters house, that there he might see the Potter breake
the pots in his hand at his pleasure. Then the word came vnto
the Prophet at that very instant, saying,
            O house of Israel, cannot I doe with you, as this Potter,
saith the Lord? Behold as the clay is in the Pottershand, so
are yee in my hand, oh house of Israel. And after he adds
these words, vers. 7. I will speake sodeinly against a Nation
to plucke it vp, and to roote it out, and destroy it. vers. 8. But
if this Nation against whom I haue pronounced, turne from
their wickednesse, I will repent of the plague which I thought
to bring vpon them. vers. 9. And I will speake sodeinly concerning
a Nation & concerning a Kingdome, to build it vp, &
to plant it. vers. 10. But if it do euill in my sight, & heare not
my voyce, I will repent of the good which I thought to doe for
them. vers. 11. Speake now therefore vnto the men of Iudah
and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, saying, Thus saith the
Lord, Behold I prepare a plague for you, and purpose a thing

against you. Returne now therefore euery one from his euill
way, and make your wayes and your workes good.
            To apply this to our selues:Application. Did not the Lord shew this
vnto vs much more visibly than he did vnto Ieremie;
               Our destructiō shewed and accomplished in effect. That we
were all as the clay in his hand, that he had not onely power to
dash vs in peeces, but had in effect done it already; saue that
he did (as it were) create and forme vs againe of such a sudden,Our deliuerance as a new creation.
that we did all wonder at it; and all Nations shall haue
cause to wonder to the end of the world.
            How many wayes,How many wayes, yea how sensibly & suddenly God hath spoken vnto vs may appeare in this whole worke. yea how sensibly and suddenly God hath
spoken vnto vs all, (both proclayming by most infallible tokens,
that his anger is kindled against vs to the vttermost, and
that he is ready to powre out vpon vs the full viols of his vengeance:
and also on the other side declaring in all his long
forbearance and admirable d
                  •
               liuerances, how vnwilling he is
to proceede to the execution, if any other meanes might reclaime
vs) will euidently appeare to euery one, who with any
conscience or due consideration shall read that which followeth
in this vision.Nothing can secure vs so as to giue vs comfort, but turning to y• Lords Couenant. And for that other maine point, That nothing
else can truly secure vs from the execution, so as to giue vs
true comfort, but our turning to the Lords Couenant; aske of
all the booke of God of all the places conteyning promises and
theeatnings to whole Nations; whether all the promises be not
made vnto our turning and obedient walking in his Couenant:
and all the threatnings after this manner;Leuit. 26. 3, 23, 24. That if we walke
more stubbornely against him, he will increase his vengeance
accordingly,That all holy meanes are to be vsed therto. and plague vs yet seuen times more. So that all
holy meanes are to be vsed to helpe to recall vs to the true obedience
of that his holy Couenant, that ech may renew the oath
of our obedience to Iesus Christ, for the happinesse of the
whole and of euery soule.Euery soule who will not returne must die. For God will haue vs all to know,
That whatsoeuer soule will not returne to his Couenant must
dye; it must die eternally. Yea though we liue not in a wilfull
reiecting of all the Couenant,Ezec. 8. 10, 11. but in any one abomination wittingly:
on rary to the same; and much more doing it presumptuously
that is, both wittingly and willingly, being warned
and convinced thereof, as the word is most direct. Yea if we

doe not turne,Yea all who seeke not to c
                     •
                  use others to tu
                     •
                  ne. and seeke to cause others to turne, chiefly all
those committed to our charge, we must dye. Onely that man
is a iust man, who doth iustice, and endeuours to walke in all
Gods statutes,Iam 2. 10. and to deale truly, turning and seeking to cause
others to turne,Gal. 2. 10. that man onely shall liue. Neuer any soule
shall haue any assurance to escape Gods vengeance,Num. 15. 30, 31. or haue
true boldnesse to appeare before the Lord,Heb. 12. 14. but only such a man.Ezech. 18. 30.
Aske of the holy Scriptures,Ezech. 18. 9. whether this be not the tenour
of them all:Who it is whō God accounts a iust man, which shal liue. whether any other be a liuing member of Christ,
or haue any part in his bloud▪ or in that redemption wrought
by him.
            But aboue all,All obstinate sinners helpe to draw downe vengeance vpō the whole land, beside the destroying of their owne soules. this is yet more dreadfull, that whosoeuer
they be, that liue in a wilfull breach of any part of the Couenant
of God, and chiefly those who wallow in any one of those
abominations which brought this captiuitie of Iudah, doe not
onely destroy their owne soules, without vnfeyned repentance,
but also doe helpe (so much as one mans sinne can doe) to draw
downe the vengeance of God vpon the whole Land to the ruinating
both of Church and Common-wealth that bred them.
Euery of our blasphemers, drunkards, whoremongers, Idolaters,
profane Sabaoth-breakers, despisers of the word of
the Lord, with all other notorious sinners, haue their hands
therein.The Lord frō heauen cryes to vs all to turne, speaking, Therefore the Lord from heauen speaks vnto vs all,
and cryes loud vnto vs to turne 
                  •
               nto him, that we may escape
his vengeance, He hath here in this vision set such a glasse before
our faces, as wherein we may behold our selues most liuely,
both our present and future estate, what he threatneth to doe
vnto vs.3. To his vineyard. Oh tho
                  •
                the vineyard of the Lord, he shewes vnto
thee that for thy vnfruitfulnes he is about to make thee waste!
You who are the fruitlesse branches behold your condition, either
you must bring forth fruit speedily, or else be cut downe
and throwne into the euerlasting fire.2▪ To all drawing neere to God with lips alone. You who draw neere
vnto God with your lips in an outward profession, but your,
hearts are so far from him, that by your lines you giue occ
                  ••
               
to his enemies to blaspheme his name; he shewes you here th
                  •
               
i
                  •
               dgement that he hath prepared for you.3. To oppressors. Open your eyes,
you cruell oppressors, you that flea the poore and needie, and

behold here what the Lord is prouiding for you, and what
a destruction you are pulling vpon your owne heads.4. To all giuen vp to all excess in pride and belly-cheere. You
who spend all your time in pride, belly cheere, and all excesse
of ryot, with abundance of idlenesse, neuer regarding
to strengthen the hands of the poore and needie, but
still to weaken them by plucking from them violently, see
whether you are rushing forward, bethinke your selues before
it be too late.5. All casting away the word of the Lord. You who cast away the word of the Lord,
scorning and hating to be reformed by it, here the Lord forewarnes
you what he is bringing vpon you. You that pollute
his Sabaoths after the manner of the Gentiles,6. Polluters o
                     •
                   the Sabaoths. to you
he himselfe speakes, that if you will not obserue his rest, he
will make the land to rest when it lyeth desolate, and no
man to passe thorow it.Leuit. 26. 34. Or that at the least your selues shall
be thrust forth from his eternall rest into the place of horrour
and crying, where you shall neuer haue rest day nor
night.
            All you who are outragious in your courses,7. Outragious in their courses & euil fashions. and make the
euill fashions of all Countries about you, euen of the enemies
of Christs Gospell and murtherers of his Saints, to be
your glory, you may here behold how you call in continually
these wicked enemies to auenge the Lords quarrell, and to
be the executioners of his most righteous iudgements vpon
you.8. All turning backe to the Idolatrie of former times. Oh you that are turning backe or hastning apace to
the vile Idolatrie of former dayes, which sometimes very
children abhorred in seeing the abomination of it: and all
you who would so faine be in Babel againe, you may here
take a view of the terrible vengeance of God vpon your
selues in such extreme blindnesse, and how you are drawing
in the bloudy Babylonian vpon your selues, and posteritie, and
euen the whole Land, so far as you are able, with as ill or a
worse captiuitie than euer came vpon Iudah; which how
neerely you had effected, your owne hearts are witnesses. Here
you may see how that one day alone of Babels crueltie, one of
their powder furnace dayes, shall be inough for you, at least
when you shall nish to stand a far off for feare of her torment:
whereof you are sure to haue your parts, if you will needs

be partakers of her sinnes.9. All challenging the Lord by their profanesse and Atheisme. And you that by your intolerable
profanenesse and Atheisme doe seeme after a sort to challenge
the Lord to his face, to darè him, if he be a God, to shew himselfe,
and to hasten his vengeance, and so make your selues
merry with scoffing at all who feare his name, you may in this
heare the Lord himselfe telling you, as from heauen, that you
are the men, for whose cause he cannot spare, for whom he can
haue no more pittie, and that he will make you especially to
feele whether he be a God, a iust and terrible God or no.All of vs may see y• Lord setting before vs the meanes wt he vsed to reclaime vs and spare vs. Here
finally we may all see the Lord himselfe setting before vs both
our generall and particular estate, with the meanes which he
hath vsed to reclaime and spare vs, the terrour of his anger
and plagues when no other meanes will serue. And lastly▪ the
way how yet we may be deliuered, and not onely be set free out
of the danger,And how yet we may escape. but also remaine a glorious Nation vntill his second
comming, and how euery one may escape his vengeance.
            Thorow out haue I striuen to shew my loue and earnest desire,Here is no more but an endeuor to saue all,
not onely to the whole, but also to saue euery soule from
these plague: Yet haue I not indeuoured any more herein
than the Angell for Lot in labouring to pull vs out of the destruction
remayning for the impenitent; nor any more than
Esay, Ieremie, Ezechiel, with other the Prophets and faithfull
men of Iudah, did before the Captiuitie, in seeking to
turne away that calamitie and all other their miseries from
them;within the bounds of the word, and within the compasse of the calling of euery Man of God, as God offereth opportunitie & holy meanes. nor going past the bounds of the word of the Lord deliuered
by those Prophets: Nor yet any more at all, than I take
to be the dutie of euery faithfull Minister and Man of God,
so far as the Lord shall offer him opportunitie, to seeke to preserue
all from Gods wrath, and to plucke euery soule out of the
fire of his vengeance. And this by shewing all sorts their
sinnes, to bring them to repentance thereby, by haling & drawing
to get euery Lot out of Sodom, before the destruction
come.Ezek. 18. 30, 32.
            
            If any one shall be offended for the discouerie of his sinne
amongst the generall,The offending of them who are asleepe in the midst of this perill not to be regard
                     •
                  d. without the knowledge and sight whereof
he cannot be saued, and that onely because he would still
liue in it; or would not be awaked, his displeasure therein is no

more to be regarded, than if one in an heauy sleep, in the midst
of an house all on fire about him, now ready to fall vpon his
head, to burne him to ashes: whom God shall enable to pull
forth any such, when he shall awake them and cause them to
see their danger wherein they were, and their gracious deliuerance,
then will they magnifie his great name,They plucked forth will magnifie God for vs. that those did so
aduenture themselues for them, and esteeme such aboue all other
of the earth. And as for the displeasure of men, better
is it ten thousand times to haue all the world offended with
vs, for our labouring in loue and dutie in our place to saue,
and pull men from vnder Gods wrath, and forth of the very
pit of hell, so much as he shall vouchsafe vs mercy, than to
haue the Lord angry with vs,Better to haue all men offended wt vs, than the Lord. for being vnfaithfull in that
which hath beene committed vnto vs, and for neglecting to
saue his people from destruction. Oh what extreme foolishnes
is it to feare man,Foolishnesse to feare men. whose breath is in his nostrils, and whose
heart is in the Lords hand, to turne as the boates in the waters,
& to incline as pleaseth him, who cānot moue a finger at vs but
by his permission, nor do any more than he wil turne to 
                  〈◊〉
                good;
and not to feare him,Not to regard the horrour of Gods anger, on Moses Exo. 4. 24.
                who if he be angry with vs neuer so little,
all our dayes are gone! Who would haue killed Moses for
omitting the circumcising of his childe; who brought the tempest
on the sea, and would not suffer it to cease, vntill that
Ionah was throwne into it,Ionah 1. 13. because he prouided for his owne
peace, with neglect, or at least through feare of performance
of that dutie inioyned him, which was to goe to Niniue, to
preach vnto them, That within fortie dayes Niniue should be
destroyed.Threatned against Ieremie 1. 17.
                Who finally threatneth Ieremie to destroy him,
before the people, if he feare their faces: and will certainely
whip his dearest seruants▪ vnto his worke, if they begin to loyter
We therefore,Therefore Gods messengers had neede to looke to themselues▪ to help to saue all. To cause all to see his mercy in sparing vs. who are Gods messengers, had neede to
looke vnto it, to indeuour so far as we may, keeping within our
limits, to pull all sorts of sinners with violence out of the fire;
and to striue to set their sinnes before their faces in their natiue
colours. And the rather that so all of vs seeing the
heynousnesse of our owne sinnes, and of the sinnes of our Land,
may come to some more due consideration of the infinitenesse

we did not vnderstand them, I take and hold it to be necessarie
still to try further all holy meanes:Eccles. 12. 1. we know not which the
Lord will blesse. Surely for the greatest part, the most plaine
is the most profitable.
            But if it shall be obiected,The applications so plaine to driue vs vnto Christ. that the applications to the
particular kindes of sinnes and sinners are ouer plaine, and
come too neere the quicke. I answer againe, Blessed man is
he who can finde them to come neere to his owne corruption
and sinne.Act: 2. 36, 37. Is not this the onely way to driue vs to behold the
true brasen serpent,Numb: 21. 9. when we feele our selues stung at our
hearts?Iohn 3. 14, 15. Can euer any wretched sinner cry out, Men and
Brethren, what shall I doe, that I may be saued, vntill he
haue his soule thus pierced? Or can any fornicator, adulterer,
blasphemer, or any other notorious sinner, finde the soueraigne
cōfort which is in Christs bloud, but only such a one?
Yet this I say vnto euery soule,If any thing seem to pierce which is not Gods word, or it misapplied, it is no more to be feared than a dart of stubble. that if any thing doe seeme
to pierce, which is not the word of the Lord, or is any way
misapplied, that it is not any more to be feared than darts of
stubble. But so far as it is his blessed word, & following necessarily
out of the same, it will one day certainely wound vs, and
better here, whilest we may haue our wounds cured againe,
by applying that soueraigne remedie of the bloud of the Son
of God, than to be smitten thorow with it, when all hope
of cure is past, and so to haue our hearts galling vs and
vexing vs eternally.
            I therefore here doe also humbly beg of all the worthy
and faithfull seruants of the Lord,The Authors humble desire to haue this brought to the tryall, and so to more perfection, as all other his labo
                     ••
                  s. as I haue in my former
labours, to helpe me to bring euery peece of this worke to
the tryall, for the full assurance of euery soule, who is desirous
to see his euill way, and would escape the day of the
Lords wrath, or who would seeke to helpe to pacifie his wrath
kindled against vs. If there be in it any one sentence, which
is not either the word of the Lord, or not arising out of it,
and agreable thereto, that it may be reformed; or if it bewray
the least partiall affection in leaning to any side, but to
the Lord, and to his manifest truth agreed vpon by vs all,
who soundly professe Christs Gospell; or the least false testimonie.

Our most holy and blessed God, infinite in wisdome &
power, needes not our lye to bring any of his to repentance,God needs not our lye to bring his to repentance. Iob 13. 7, 8, 9, 10.
               
nor for setting forth of his glory. No, no, his owne word
is inough, and shall be found aboundantly sufficient to saue
all his elect, to destroy all his enemies, to deliuer his
Church, to get himselfe the victorie. I dare not wittingly
affirme one vntruth, no, not against the bloudie enemie,
nor against Sathan himselfe, no, nor yet wrong any creature
vnder heauen: farre be it from me to giue the Accuser that
aduantage. How then may I doe it for the cause of the Lord,
who abhorreth the very least iniquitie, and with whom no
euill can dwell.
            Moreouer sith all this,The work tendeth to the renuing of our Couenant for the happinesse of vs and of our posteritie. wholly tendeth to helpe towards
the making and establishing our peace with our God, by
seeking to recall vs all vnto his obedience, that we may
euery one renew our vow and couenant with him, for the
wealth of vs and our posteritie, I haue strictly kept my
selfe within the limits of the first part of this Watch, which
conteyneth the Summe of the Couenant of our God:Limited within the bounds of the Watch, wherein we all agree. wherein
we all agree in outward profession, and vnto which whosoeuer
returneth vnfeignedly to walke in the sincere obedience
of it, shall vndoubtedly haue eternall life: like as euery
impenitent transgressor against it,For the breach whereof each impenitent person stands condemned by the generall verdit of all the Churches of Christ. The desire of the Author to be a faithfull witnesse. is certainely condemned
by the generall verdict of all the true Churches of
Christ.
            In all this worke I haue and doe instantly desire of the
Lord, that I may be a faithfull and true witnesse, both
for his heauenly Maiestie, and for his people; and also,
that I may shew in euery part, a right demonstration of
an vnfeigned loue to the Church of Christ, and towards
my Nation, euen to euery soule, for the sauing of ech from
the wrath to come; and withall that I may preserue the
honour due to all in autoritie, chiefly to the highest, to binde
all hearts to their superiours, ech to others, and all of vs to
Iesus Christ, That he may euer remaine our Captaine, Protector,

King and Sauiour, euen he who will one day manifest
all the secrets of the hearts of men, who haue bin with him,
and who against him: who will come quickly, and
reward euery one as their workes shall be.
Amen,Ap
                     •
                  c. 22. 20. euen so, come
Lord Iesus.
         
         
            
            CONTENTS OF THE
seuerall Chapters, particularly
as they arise out of the Vision,
Ezechiel 9.
            
               1. THe Vision giuen to Ezechiel,
                  Vers. 1. with the occasion
and opening of it.
               2. Certaine directions to be obserued in our reading
hereof, to teach vs to make right vse of the Vision to
our selues.
               3. The Lord is not wont to bring any terrible iudgement
on his Church,vers. 1. but euer before hand to giue
some euident warning. That he neuer warned
without cause or in vaine: and what iust matter we
haue for all our manifold & gratious forewarnings
to betake our selues to watching and prayer.
               4. The withdrawing of the Lords glorious presence
from his Church,vers. 3. is both an euident signe of his
displeasure, and a manifest threatning of his departure:
And what causes we haue therevpon to
watch and to pray to pacifie the Lord, so to hold
him still amongst vs.
               5. How the Lord is most vnwilling to depart from his
Church,vers. 3. so long as there is any other remedie; manifested
in his oft threatning to depart before he

goe; and of the outward tokens both of his glorious
presence in his Church, and of his departure
from it: And what causes we haue in respect thereof
to watch and pray continually.
               6. No priuiledges can doe a people any good,vers. 4. if they
grow in their iniquitie, but the mo their mercies
haue bin, the greater is their sinne, and the heauier
shall their iudgement be, when it commeth: what
cause we haue thence to watch and to pray for the
fearefull increase of the transgressions amongst vs.
               7. The marking of the mourners.4. That is, how Gods
owne people are marked, in the midst of the greatest
confusions, before the destruction come. And
so what cause euery one hath to watch and to pray
that he may be so marked.
               8. The propertie of the godly liuing amongst the
wicked in a sinfull age,4. is, to mourne and cry for all
the abominations and tokens of Gods anger. Also
what cause all Gods seruants haue to watch and
pray for the fewnesse of such, and that ech of vs
may be found of that litle number.
               9. The enemies by which the Lord threatneth or afflicteth
his Church,v. 2. & 5. are his soldiers; and therevpon
what cause we haue to giue our selues to watching
and prayer, because of the increase of them in number,
pride and malice.
               10. The mourners being once marked & made sure,v. 5.
then comes the vengeance; for the destroyers follow
at the heeles of the marking Angell. What
neede we had therefore to watch and pray, bicause
we know not whether this worke be not already
accomplished, or how neere it is.
               
                  
11. The principall abominations for which the godly
so mourned,v. 4. & 6. and which moued the Lord to so seuere
a vengeance; first in generall, after more particularly.
And therein what causes we haue to
watch and pray both to be kept pure
                     •
                   from them,
and to obteyne pardon and redresse of them, or at
least that we may escape the plagues due vnto
them.
               12. The meanes which the Lord had vsed to bring
them to repentance,v. 4. that he might spare them, and
how their sinne was increased thereby. Also the
cause why the meanes could doe them no good.
And what neede we haue therevpon to watch and
pray continually.
               13. The seueritie of the Lords vengeance,v. 5, 6, 7. and the miseries
which all sorts indured in that captiuitie,
when no other meanes could serue to reclaime
them. And thence what neede we haue all to
watch and pray continually to turne away the
like, and also to be thankfull for all our former
deliuerances, from as great calamities so neere
vnto vs.
               14. How Gods true messengers and all his faithfull
seruants are wont to be affected when they perceiue
the Lords anger to be kindled,v. 8. and his iudgements
ready to rush vpon his people. Also the
meanes, which in this their holy affection they vse,
to preuent the euils, and to pacifie his Maiestie.
And herein likewise what cause we haue to watch
and pray for the want of these affections, and for
the generall neglect of the state of the people, and
of pacifying the Lords wrath.
               
                  
15. The sinnes of a people may be so heynous,vers 9, 10. as that
the Lord will not be pacified at the prayers of his
deerest seruants. Also when that time is, and what
cause we haue therevpon to watch and pray continually.
               16. The true obedience of Gods faithfull messengers
and seruants will bring them boldnesse to appeare
before him,vers. 11. and this alone when they are able to
say, in a good conscience, Lord I haue done as
thou hast commanded me. And what great cause
all of vs haue to watch and pray continually, that
we may be alvvayes able to say so; to haue boldnes
euermore hereby, vvhatsoeuer come to passe.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE VISION
given to EZECHIEL before the
great Captivitie of IVDAH, set downe in
the ninth Chapter of Ezechiel; with the
occasion and opening
thereof.
            
               
                  1. HE cryed also in mine eares with a loud voyce,
saying;All the visitations of the Citie draw neere. Cause them that have charge over
the Citie to draw neere, even every man with
his destroying weapon in his hand.
                  2. And behold, six men came from the way of the higher
gate, which lyeth toward the North, and every man a slaughter
weapon in his hand; and one man among them was clothed
with linnen, with a writers inkehorne by his side, and they went
in and stood beside the brazen Altar.
                  3. And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from
the Cherub whereupon he was, to the threshold of the house;
and he called to the man clothed with linnen, which had the
writers inkehorne by his side.
                  4. And the Lord said unto him, Go through the middst
of the Citie, through the midst of Ierusalem, and set a marke
upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and that cry for all
the abominations that be done in the midst thereof.
                  5. And to the others he said in my hearing, Go yee after
him through the Citie, and smite, let not your eye spare, neither
have yee pittie.
                  
                     
6. Slay utterly old and young, both maides and litle children
and women, but come not neere any man upon whom is the
marke, and begin at my Sanctuarie; then they began at the
auncient men which were before the house.
                  7. And he said vnto them, Defile the house, and fill the
Courts with the slaine: goe yee forth, and they went forth,
and slew in the Citie.
                  8. And it came to passe, while they were slaying them,
and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cryed and said, Ah
Lord God, wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel in the
powring out of thy furie upon Ierusalem?
                  9. Then said he unto me, The iniquitie of the house of
Israel is exceeding great, and the land is full of bloud, and
the Citie full of perversenesse: for they say, the Lord hath
forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not.
                  10. And as for me also, mine eyes shall not spare, neither
will I have pittie, but I will recompence their way upon their
head.
                  11. And behold, the man clothed with linnen, which had
the inkehorne by his side, reported the matter saying, I have
done as thou hast commanded me.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER I. 
               
                  The resolution and opening of the Chapter.
               
               
                  BEfore the last and most grievous
Captivitie of Iudah and the destruction
of Ierusalem by the Babylonians,Occasion of the Vision.
the Lord used all ordinarie
meanes to bring the people
to repentance,The Lords using all means to spare his people. that he might spare
them, because he pitied them, being
his owne chosen people and
peculiar inheritance. Amongst other,Chiefly by his Prophets. he stirred up divers
of his faithfull servants the Prophets, as Isay, Ieremie,

Micah, Zephanie, Ezechiel, and others; some of them
long before the same; others of them he continued unto
the very day, still by them fore-warning and calling
them to repentance.
               To these Prophets he revealed both the particular
iniquities,To whom he revealed their sins & plagues. whereby he was so provoked, and also the
speciall judgements and plagues which he had prepared
for them, unlesse they repented. That they might lift
up their voyces as trumpets,To awake and bring them to repentance. declaring these things unto
them; at least hereby to awaken them to move them to
turne and seeke unto him, before his wrath was wholly
powred out upon them.
               This Chapter is part of a vision revealed to Ezechiel
concerning the destruction of Ierusalem,This Chapter a part of ye vision. The summe whereof is a forewarning of the destruction of Ierusalem. now hard at
hand, conteyned in the foure Chapters togither, to wit,
in the 8. 9. 10. 11. And it consisteth of foure parts, according
to the number of the Chapters. First, in the
8 Chapter is shewed the wickednesse of those,Parts of the vision▪
                   who still
remained in Ierusalem. Secondly, In the ninth Chapter
the slaughter and destruction is declared,1. Wickednesse of the people. cap: 8. which the
Lord would bring upon all in the Citie, except those
which were marked. Thirdly,2. Their destruction. cap. 9. In the 10 Chapter is
set downe a vision of the fire of Gods vengeance, which
was throwne upon the Citie,3. Famine and pestilence forerunning cap. 10 to consume many of them
with pestilence and famine before the taking of the Citie,
and also in burning both the Citie and the Temple,
when the glory of the Lord was departed from it.
Fourthly,4. The miseries of those who should escape and goe into Captivitie. chap. 11. In the 11 Chapter is fore-shewed the most
grievous persecution, which should follow all those, who
should escape the sword, and that fire of Gods vengeance,
the pestilence and famine, and so the miseries
which they shall endure: whereunto are annexed the
promises of the Gospell, for the comfort of Gods
servants.
               Now in the 8 Chapter,Summe of this ninth Chapter. A denunciatiō that the Lord wil be avenged presently, and the manner of the execution. v. 1, 2. to 8. the Lord having shewed unto
the Prophet some secret abominations, and that in
the Temple it selfe, whereby his anger was inflamed to

the present execution of his vengeance; in this he declareth
that he will be avenged forthwith, and the manner
of his proceeding. The Chapter divideth it selfe
into five parts. 1. The Lords denuntiation of this
most grievous visitation now at hand.Division of this Chapter. vers: 8. 2. The manner
of the Lords proceeding in two Commissions:
The first for the marking and making sure of all the
godly before the destruction come.9. The second for
the destruction of all the rest.10. 3. How the Prophet
was affected with this grievous denuntiation, and how
he intreateth the Lord for Ierusalem. 4. The answer
and resolution which the Lord gives unto the Prophet,
That he will not spare, and why. 5. The returne of
that Angell whom God had sent to marke the faithfull,
giving up his answer for the execution of his commission.
               In the manner of the denuntiation of this so terrible
a destruction is set out,An opening of the severall parts of the Chapter. First, how the Lord himselfe did
denounce it, crying with a loude voyce in the eares of
the Prophet, both to assure him of the certaintie of it,
and also to stir him up to a more due consideration of
the dreadfulnes of the same.v: 1. How the Lord himselfe denounceth it. Shewing also the neernesse of the execution. Secondly, the Lord shewes
unto him the neereness of the execution thereof, saying,
Cause them that have charge over the Citie to draw
neere; meaning the enemies, whom he had appointed to
be executioners of his wrath upon it, every one armed
with a weapon in his hand, as being ready to destroy it.
               For the manner of the execution of this slaughter,v: 2. The manner of the execution. it
is also set forth, First, by declaring how many they were
who came to destroy, that is, six men, representing the
chiefe Captaines of the Caldeans, or the Angels appointed
for conducting the Armie. And these six are
according to the number of the chiefe gates of Ierusalem.In the number of the Executioners.
To signifie that the enemies should come in so
great multitude and so mightily, that they should besiege
the Citie on every side, so as none should escape
out; and should rush upon them so furiously in every

street, that they should fill all with the slain, and cause
the chanels to flow with bloud.From whence they came. Secondly, it is set forth,
by shewing from whence these six came, which was
from the way of the upper gate looking toward the
North; signifying thereby, that these enemies should
come from Caldea or Babylon, which was northward
from Ierusalem.How they were prepared. Thirdly, by declaring how they were
prepared: every one in armes with his weapon in his
hand,Whither they came: viz. to the Temple for the pollution of it. as ready to destroy. Fourthly, by setting downe
whither these six came; which was to the great brazen
Altar in the Temple. To shew thereby that God sent
these destroyers chiefly for the pollution of his holy
things,The Angell of the Covenant sent amongst them for marking the Elect. his sacred worship and religion. Fiftly, how
amongst these destroyers, the Lord sends one speciall
Angell for the marking and preservation of his faithfull
ones in the Citie: to wit, the Angell of the Covenant,
the onely Author of the preservation and salvation of
his servants.Exod. 28 42, 43. Levit: 16. 4. And he appeares clothed with linnen, attired
like to the High Priest, prepared to make an atonement;
with an inkehorne also by his side, as ready to
marke all his elect.
               In the third verse is shewed,Where the Lord appears. how and where the Lord
appeared to give his commissions, both to the destroyers,
and to the saving Angell.
               1. The glory of the Lord appeares, removes from
the Cherubins, where he had promised to dwell for
ever, and stands upon the threshold of the dore of the
Temple, as now departing from them.
               Afterwards is set downe vers. 4, 5, & 6.How he gave two Cōmissions. how the Lord
gave two strait commissions or charges: The first is to
the saving Angell for his faithfull ones:1. To the saving Angell for the Elect and faithfull ones. The second to
the destroyers concerning all the rest.
               In the first commission to the saving Angell, is plainely
expressed,To set a marke upon them. 1. what his charge or commission was,
namely, to goe thorow the midst of the Citie, even
thorow the midst of Ierusalem, and to set a marke upon
the foreheads of sundry to be knowne from the rest in

the destruction. 2. who they are that must be marked.
That is,And how they are described. the godly abhorring all abominations of the
wicked: who are also described by two properties.
First, that they mourne and sigh in themselues. Secondly,
that they cry out for all the abominations of the time
wherein they liued. 3. Why they are marked; that
when the destroyers came, they might not touch any
of them.
               In the second commission to the destroyers,The second Cōmission to the destroyers to destroy all vnmarked without pitie. Not to touch the marked. is conteyned,
1. The summe of their commission: To follow
hard after the saving Angell, and to smite all whom
they found unmarked, without any respect of old or
young, maydes or children. 2. To take carefull heede,
that they touched not any upon whom the marke was.
               3. Where they should begin to destroy. And that was
at the Sanctuarie,To begin at the Sanctuarie. at the wicked Priests and Levites,
which ministred there, as being the causes of the sinnes
of the rest.
               4. How they should proceed in the slaughter: from
the Sanctuarie to defile the whole Temple;How to proceed. to fill the
Courts with the slaine of them, who liuing so wickedly,
had yet a vaine confidence in the Temple of the
Lord, thinking that the Temple could shelter them from
his vengeance.The speedie execution of their Commission. 5. The speedie execution of their
commission, that as they were commanded, so they began
at the Ancients which were before the House, destroying
them first, and then the rest, untill they had
made a finall dispatch thorow the whole Citie. And
this is continued unto vers. 8.
               
                  Vers. 8. In the third place is set downe how the Prophet
was affected with this terrible vision of this
slaughter of Gods people,3. How the Prophet was affected here
                     
                        •
                     uth. though himselfe should
escape amongst them who were marked: That he
fell upon his face, crying unto the Lord, and making
humble intercession for them; That the Lord would
spare them, being but a poore remainder of the people
of Israel, left after so many destructions.
               
                  
                  Vers. 9, 10. To which there followeth in the fourth
place,4. The answer and resolution of the Lord. the answer and full resolution of the Lord, thereby
to stay the servent prayer, and importunacie of the
Prophet; and also to manifest his owne iustice, in that
his most righteous proceeding.That he would not be intreated, and why. That he would not be
intreated for them any longer; partly, bicause their land
was full of blood, by their cruell oppressions of all
sorts; and partly, for that the Citie where justice should
have bin had, for releeving the oppressed, was now become
full of corrupt judgement, and of all perversenesse,
falling away more and more without hope of returning.
But principally, for that they were generally
become Atheists, shamelesly saying in their liues, The
Lord saw them not, it was no matter how they liued,
and making but a scoffe at all the Lords messengers and
warnings; therefore his eye should not spare them, neither
would he have any more pitie of them.
               
                  Vers. 11. In the last verse is set downe the returne of
the answer and commission of the marking Angell:The returne of the cōmission of the marking Angell.
That he had done according to his commission; marked
and made safe all the godly, that mourned for all the
abominations; and so had fully prepared and made the
way to the present execution of this finall destruction.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                   Certaine directions to be observed in reading hereof, to teach
us to make our right use of this vision and forewarning to
our selves.
               
               AS this vision was first given by the Spirit of
God unto Ierusalem, to warne them of the
neerenesse and greatnesse of this destruction,
which came vnto them for our ensample:The vision is written to admonish vs. so
is it written to admonish us upon whom the ends of the
world are come. And is therefore our vision to awaken

us,And is our visiō at this day. and to fore-warne us at this day, setting before our
faces, what causes we have to watch and pray continually
to prevent the like judgements,To stir us up to watch & pray. and by all meanes
to seeke to pacifie the Lords wrath, before it be thus
powred out upon us; and also to helpe to stirre us up
hereunto. For the better understanding whereof, and
the more fruitfull applying of it to our selves, to move
us to unfeigned repentance,Rules to be observed in reading this visiō. and speedie seeking the
Lord, we must carefully observe these rules and directions
following.
               
                   1. That we read it and attend to it, not as to a bare
historie,To receive it as a message sent us from ye Lord. or an ordinarie discourse, but as to a divine
message and gratious fore-warning sent from the Lord
of heaven and earth in the riches of his mercy to every
one of us, both high and low, rich and poore, to admonish
us to meet him presently with intreatie of peace.
               
                   2. Not to looke at the messenger, by whom the Lord
now sends it,To looke wholly at the Lord in it. 2 Cor. 2. 4.
                   but wholly at him who sends it, and to
hearken to his lively voyce, speaking unto us herein,
and to the evidence and demonstration of his Spirit applying
it unto us.
               
                   3. To consider seriously▪ that we have herein to
deale onely with the holy and mightie God,To remember wt whom we have to deale herein. before
whom all the wicked of the world shall one day be
speechlesse; howsoever they are now most bold and
wittie in excusing all their sins, and in speaking against
every one who shall admonish them. And to this end to
set our selves as in his presence, at whose appearing all
the proudest of the earth (who dare now out-face his
Majestie) shall in the guil
                     •
                  inesse of their consciences,
creepe into the holes of the rocks,
                     
                        •
                     sa: 2. 19. and wish the hills &
mountaynes to fall upon them,Rev: 6. 15, 16. to hide them from his
face. And withall to remember, that we must certainely
appeare before him, and then be sure to answer for all our
contempts and not profiting by his fore-warnings.
               
                   4. Herein also ech of us are yet further to testifie our
religion and reverence to the Lord, in receiving this,To shew our reverence to the Lord in receiving this message, as Iosiah did. 2 King. 23. 19.
                   so

far forth as it is his expresse word, or agreable thereunto,
and belonging to us, as that worthy patterne of true
godlinesse, that holy Iosiah, though a King, did receive
the discoverie of the abominations of Iudah, and the
threatnings of the Lord; whose heart melted, so that
he powred out teares at the same. And also so to humble
our selves,To humble our selves and to turne and cause others to turne. turning to the Lords Covenant, and doing
our endevour to cause others to turne, as he did at the
Lords message sent unto him, (though by so weake
meanes) (as might seeme) but by a woman,2 King. 23. 1, 2, 3, 4. to wit, Huldah
the Prophetesse) because he knew it to be the word
and message of the Lord.Ezek▪ 18. 30. And that not onely to so much
as shall be pleasing unto us, but even to that part of it,
that shall most directly touch us. As indeed it shall be
most happy for that man who shall so receive it, and shall
so humble himselfe before his divine Majestie. Therefore
we are every one to be so affected, the Lords High Priest,To be affected as old Eli was at the message of young Samuel. 1 Sam. 3. 17, 18. as was old Ely
who disdeyned not to receive a
most grievous and dredfull message by the hand of yong
Samuel, a boy brought up under him; but charget
                     •
                  
him in the name of the Lord, to tell him every word
which the Lord had spoke unto him, not to hide a
word from him. And afterwards having heard it, in
stead of being offended, he saith, It is the Lord, let him
doe what seemeth him good. Yea, we shall most truely
declare our homage and obedience to the word of the
Lord,And David at the voyce of Nathan▪ 2 Sam. 12. 13.
                   by submitting our selves wholly unto him, and
ech acknowledging our particular sinnes, as David did
at the admonition of Nathan. That thereupon we may
ech receive that comfortable answer,That we may receive the like comfortable answer. 
                  The Lord hath put
away thy sinne. And that we may all thus helpe to
pacifie him, that he may not proceed to his heavy resolution;
howsoever he shall humble us, for the manifold
dishonours, which we have done to him by all our sins,
and for causing his enemies to blaspheme his great name
& Gospell, which he hath vouchsafed us the profession
and libertie of, above most other people of the earth.
               
                  
                   5. Ech of us are to apply every part as spoken to us
by the Lord particularly, and as making one bodie:Ech to apply every part as spoken to our selves particularly. for
even the sinne of the Atheist, Idolater, Drunkard, and so
of every wicked man, may be said in some sort to be the
sinne of ech of us; and we are all lyable to the punishments
thereof,Sith the sins of the wicked are in some sort the sins of vs all. even those of us, that thinke our selves
most innocent and free from them. As the sinne of
Achan
                  As Achans of Israel. is counted the sinne of all Israel; for so doth
the Lord tell Iosua plainely,Iosu 7. 11, 12. when he punished them all;
That Israel had sinned, they had taken of the excommunicate
thing, they had done that which Achan did. Even
so the sinnes of all the notoriously wicked are the sins
of us all,See 
                        〈◊〉
                      upon Iosu. 7. 25. confirmed out of Austin.
                   chiefly their open abominations. All of us are
guiltie and endangered by the same, if at the hearing
and seeing them,If we haue not mourned for them, we have not mourned, as we should, for
the dishonour done to the Lord, and his anger kindled
thereby. Or if we have not cryed for pardon,Cryed for pardon, & sought
to turne away the vengeance, yea and done our vtmost
endevour ech of us in our places and callings, to stop
them,And sought to stop the course of sinne. and the course of sinne reigning amongst us. None
of us can justifie our selves, but God might for this very
sin depart from us, as he threatneth Ioshuah for Achans
sacriledge,Iosua 7. 12. and might leave vs to be wrapped in the same
judgement.
               
                   6. We are to consider that ech of our particular grievous
sinnes doe not onely hinder the power of our prayers,
whereby we should help to pacifie the Lords wrath;Ech of our heynous sins hinder our prayers & help to draw downe vengeance.
but also, in steed thereof, helpe to draw downe the anger
of God, not onely vpon our selves, but vpon the whole
Land: more specially and principally the notorious and
outragious sinnes of our most horrible transgressors,Chiefly of all impudent sinners. as
of blasphemers, scorners of God and of his truth, oppressors,Isa. 5. 18.
drunkards, filthy persons, and all impudent sinners,
who hale on the vengeance of God, as it were with
cart ropes. That it is his infinite mercy, that it hath bin
kept off hitherto. And therefore howsoever such men▪
may imagine and boast of themselves to be friends to

their country,Such are enemies to Christ, seeking to drive him out & set vp Sathan, yet in truth they will be found the principall
enemies: first to Iesus Christ, doing as much as lyeth
in them, thereby to drive him out, and to set vp Sathan
in his roome; and doe not onely murther their owne
soules without repentance, but also as much as such sins
can, to betray the Lords Anointed, his Church, & their
native Country,And do betray all to y• enemie. As in the Captivitie. with all our happinesse, into the hands
of the bloudie enemie. Because for the sinnes of these
principally, Gods vengeance comes upon his people, as
here in this lamentable captivitie may plainely be seene.
And therefore ech of us are to finde out our owne particular
sinnes,Therefore ech to find out our particular sins, and to reforme our selves. and in the reading and hearing hereof, to
say, This is my sinne, which the Lord reproves & threatneth
us all for, and me especially by name. So ech of us
are to begin to reforme our selves, or else we shall never
be able to judge of the sinnes of others:Els we can neither judge of y• danger, nor helpe to pacifie the wrath. much lesse have
a right feeling of them, so as to be helpers to pacifie the
wrath by our prayers, and to turne away the like plague
from our selves.
               7. Every one of us are to resolve with our selves,7. Each to resolve to doe whatsoever God bids vs. Every soule y• seekes not to cause others to turne to the Covenant as well as himself, must perish. that
whatsoever the Lord shall say unto us, we will doe it, as
the people made profession to the Prophet Ieremie to
doe, if they had had hearts to haue performed it accordingly,
and ech to cast away our deerest sins, rather than
they shall beat backe our prayers, and much more helpe
to pull downe vengeance upon us. Because of that
which God threatneth, that every soule who turnes not
to all his Covenant, (so far as he shall manifest it to his
conscience,Ez
                        •
                     ch. 18. 20, 26, 30, 31, 32. to be his Covenant,) and that seeks not also
with all his power to cause others to turne shall perish.Deut. 29. 19. to 25.
That same sinne wherein any one continueth shall be
his destruction;Happy man who hath grace to learne this lesson, & forthwith to practise it. and the endangering of all so far as
lyeth in him. And this may serue for the generall directions
in reading this vision, to make right use of it to
our selves, for pacifying the wrath.
               Now to the Vision.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                   The Lord is not wont to bring any terrible judgement upon
his Church, but usually ever aforehand, to give warning
thereof, neither at any time to wa
                        •
                     ne in vaine. And what
cause we have for our manifold forewarnings to give our
selves to watching and praier.
               
               
                  HEe cried in mine eares with a loud voice,Vers. 1. saying:
Cause them that have charge over the City to
draw neere, [or, the visitations of the City draw
neere &c.] To come to the words of the vision.
The Lord so plainely foreshewing this dreadfull
captivitie, not only heere in this Vision, but also so many
other wayes, and denouncing it by his Prophets so long
before it came, declaring also the causes of it, sheweth in
the first place.
               That he hath not beene wont to bring any notable
judgements upon a people,God hath not beene wont to bring any notable judgemēt on his Church, but to foreshew it first, & then to bring it whē no repentance hath followed to prevent. especially upon his Church,
or where his Church hath beene, but he hath ever used
to make the same manifestly knowne before, at least to
his owne faithfull servants amongst them, and after as
he foreshewed it, so to bring it to passe, unlesse his anger
hath beene some way pacified.
               This we may see in sundry of the most fearefull destructions
that ever he brought upon the world, mentioned
in his booke; In all which he hath left this carefully
recorded, because he would have all his people to
be well acquainted with it.
               As first before the destruction of the old world,As first before the destruction of the old world. besides
the plaine evidence of Gods vengeance at hand,
being apparant and almost visible in the strange increase
of the iniqvity, many of them being become Gyants, to
set themselves impudently to fight against his Majestie,Gen. 6. 4.
and against all godlinesse contrary to the light of their

owne consciences,Gen: 5. 11, 12. and for that all flesh had corrupted
their wayes; so as the earth was corrupted and filled
with crueltie: he also warned them himselfe in a speciall
manner,Gen: 6. 3, 13. by the making of the Arke, and by the
preaching of Noah.
                  1 Pet: 3. 20. And this he did by the space of an
hundred and twentie yeeres before;Hebr: 11. 7. which time he gave
them to repent, striving with them by his Spirit, chiefly
in the Ministerie of Noah, to bring them to amendment.
               Secondly,2. The captivitie of the ten Tribes. before the Captivitie of the ten Tribes;
which were caried away by Salmanasar into Assyria,
(from whence they never returned) besides many other
threatnings,2 King: 17. 3, 6. dangers, warres, overthrowes and plagues:
he also forewarned them long by sundry of his holy
Prophets, as Ahiah, Iehu, Eliah, Michaj
                        •
                     , Elisha; but
more specially,2 King: 17. 14, 15, 16. but even hard before, by Obadiah, Hosea,
Amos, Ioel, Ionah, and others. By all whom he foreshewed
that judgement evidently unto them, though they
would not obey, but hardned their necks, and were
worse and worse, untill the vengeance caried them
away.
               Thirdly, before this lamentable captivitie of Iudah,3. Before this Captivitie.
besides this vision and many others, he forewarned
them likewise, by sundry of his most worthy servants
the Prophets, raised up extraordinarily and sent unto
them, crying unto them early and late, Prophet after
Prophet, and that, for a long time togither. But most
plainely by the space of threescore yeeres and more by
Esay,Zeph: 3. 1, 2, 3, 5. Ieremie,2 Chron: 36. 15, 16, 17. Mica, Ezechiel, Zephanie, and others, still
proclayming this terrible desolation. Although they
likewise mocked his servants, misused his messengers,
growing daily worse and worse, untill there was no
remedie.
               Fourthly,4. Before ye last and utter subversion of the Iewish nation. before that last and utter subversion of the
Iewish nation, he forewarned them sundry wayes, but in
a more speciall manner: First, by the preaching of Iohn
the Baptist,Matth: 3. 10. threatning them, That the axe was then

laid to the roote of the trees. Afterwards by our Saviour
himself over and over most evidently,Matth. 21. 33, 44 & 24. 23, 24. setting downe
in plaine termes, the manner of their destruction, and
the grievousnesse of it.Luc: 19. 41. & 20. 9. And to omit all other admonitions
by the Disciples of our Saviour and his Apostles,
Ios
                        •
                     phus in his storie records,Iosephus de bello Iudaico. That besides many terrible
signes from heaven and earth, strange lights in the
nights, a dreadfull blazing starre over the Temple, fearefull
sights of chariots and horsemen of fire, and an Armie
marching towards Ierusalem; a hydeous voyce
was also heard in the Temple, at one of the Feasts, saying,
Let us goe out of the Temple, and depart hence. There
was moreover in a time of their greatest peace & plenty
foure yeeres before their warre began, one of the ruder
and meaner sort, whose name was Iesus, the sonne of
Hanani, who being come forth of the country to Ierusalem
at the Feast of the Tabernacles, and going into the
Temple, began of a sudden to cry out with a loud voyce
in this manner, A voyce from the East, a voyce from the
West, a voyce from the foure windes a voyce against Ierusalem,
a voyce against the Temple, a voyce against the bridegroome
and the bride, a voyce against all this people. This
he continued day and night going thorow all the streets
of the Citie. And although he was rated and cruelly
beaten, yet he never gave over, going up and downe th
                     •
                  
Citie thus: woe to Ierusalem and the San
                        •
                     tuarie thereof
woe, woe to Ierusalem. And thus he cryed out, especially
on their feast dayes, and that for seven yeeres and five
moneths togither, neither was he ever thought to be
hoarse or weary; but went thus up and downe, being
taken as a mad man, untill in the time of the siege going
about upon the wall, and crying out lowder than ever
before, woe, woe to the Citie, to the Temple, and people: and
at last having added this voyce, woe also to me, he was
smitten upon the head with a stone, shot out of an engine,
that he dyed. And last of all, when they had suffred
most grievous miseries by bloodie dissensions amongst

themselves, murthering one another, and by most pitifull
famine, as ever was before, that they were inforced
to eat such things as their soules did abhorre, and which
bred a most terrible pestilence amongst them, immediately
before the taking and sacking of the Citie, and putting
them to the sword, a voyce was heard among the
Christians,Euseb. lib. 3. c. 3. which spake to them thus, Goe forth to Pella,
which so soone as the Christians had done, the enemie
brake in upon them, and slaughtered the rest with a most
lamentable destruction.
               Fiftly, before the last and finall destruction to come
upon the world by fire,Before the final destruction the signes are plainly foretold. the Lord hath foretold sundry
signes and tokens which shall come to passe, that none
can plead ignorance, or have any more excuse.
               Thus the Lord hath bin wont to deale with the
wickedest places of all other,This the Lord hath done to the wickedst places where any of his servants have bin. especially if any of his
owne deere servants have bin amongst them. As before
the destruction of Sodome, because his servant Lot was
there, he will doe nothing untill he hath revealed it to
his faithfull servant Abraham,Gen: 18. 7. Lots uncle, that he may
intreat for them.Gen: 19. 14. Afterwards, he makes it knowne to
Lot himselfe, who forewarnes his sonnes in law and
daughters to have gotten them all forth of the burning,
if it had bin possible.
               This he did to Ninivie that proud Citie before he
would destroy it;Yea to the Infidels themselves in cōmiseration as to Ninive. for he pittying the great multitude
of poore ignorant and simple people, which were amongst
them, in the bowels of his compassion, he sends
his servant Ionah first to proclaime thorow their Citie;Ion: 4. 10.
                  Yet fortie dayes and Ninive shall be destroyed.
               
               And to conclude this point:And even to Babylon, that his own people may get out from her. as he forewarned Babylon
and other the cruell enemies of his Church of
their destructions; so he hath as plainely proclaymed
his vengeance to come upon the spirituall Babylon,
(which now holding so great a part of his Church in
captivitie,R
                        •
                     v. 18. 2, 3, 4. strives to captivate all the rest) that all his
owne people may by all means get out of her, & the rest
be left utterly inexcusable.
               
                  
This may sufficiently manifest his truth to every
conscience,He will not doe any thing but he will first reveale it to his servants. that we may boldly conclude this point
with the Prophet Amos,
                  Amos 3. 7. That the Lord will do nothing
in his Church, in bringing in any destruction or terrible
plague, but he will first reveale it to his servants the Prophets.
He will make his owne faithfull ones to foresee
it by one meanes or other, so far as shall be for his glory
and their good. The reasons of it also are most cleare
why he will doe it.
               1. For his chosen sake among them;Reasons hereof. that he may
shew his love to his,1. For his owne peoples sake. and the care that he hath for them
in the greatest confusions:To shew his care for them. to the end that they may
gather themselves unto him before, and prepare to be
accounted worthy to be hid by him,That they may prepare to meet him. or else delivered;
or certainely some way finde comfort in the evill day.
That hereby their love and care may better appeare unto
the world,Seeke to save others. in their seeking by all meanes to save and
pull others from the vengeance to come. More specially,
that their faith and obedience may be seene to all, how
they beleeve and feare the Lord and the tokens of his
wrath. And that they may set themselves to become suters
unto the Lord for the rest, as Abraham, Moses, Ieremie,
and others; that so he may either spare all at their
supplications; and that thereby the world may take
notice in what high favour such are with his Majestie,
(even all they who make conscience to walke in his Covenant,
and endevour to be righteous in their generations)
when he spares so sinfull a people at their prayers;
or at least that their prayers may returne into their
owne bosomes.
               Secondly,2. For the cause of the wicked. Though they willingly blind their own eyes. the Lord doth use to manifest his judgements
aforehand even unto the wicked, as we heard, and
for their causes also: howsoever they for the most part
use all devises to flatter and harden themselves: yea, to
lull themselves asleepe in their securitie, and to blinde
their owne eyes, left they should see the judgements of
God comming upon them; and so still perswade themselves

that there shall be no such matter. And this he
doth also to declare the riches of his mercy towards
the most wretched sinners,To declare the riches of his mercy, if they will turne. and how unwilling he is to
take vengeance, so long as there is any other remedie, or
if they will turne unto him in any time. This is most
apparent in the Lords infinite compassion in sparing
Ninivie that proud Citie,Ier: 17. 7, 8. As 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ninivie.
                   after Ionah had proclaimed,
Yet fortie dayes and Ninivie shall be destroyed. And also
in reproving Ionah for his impatience, saying, Thou hast
had pitie on the gourd,Ion: 4. 9, 10, for which thou labouredst not, neither
madedst it to grow, which came up in a night and withered
in a night:11, 12. and should not I spare Ninivie that great
Citie, wherein are six score thousand persons, which cannot
discerne betweene their right hand and their left, and also
much cat
                        •
                     le? And hereupon it was that God spared it at
that time, though after, when having forgotten that
great deliverance, they fell into their old sins, he tooke
vengeance for all, as may appeare by the Prophet
Nahum;
                  N
                        •
                     h: 3. executing most severely, whatsoever he
had formerly threatned. He dealeth thus moreover
with the very wickedest, that every mouth may be
stopped,That all may be inforced to acknowledge him righteous. and all the world compelled to acknowledge
his judgements to be most righteous, thus to justifie
him therein, when no admonition at all will
serve.
               So we see,Conclusion. how he hath set downe this point most
clearely, and also the reasons of it, and that he hath not
bin wont to give any such warnings in vaine, or without
most dreadfull execution of his wrath, where his warnings
have not bin regarded.
               Now then to apply this point to our selves:Application to our selves. we are
first wisely to inquire, whether the Lord hath not likewise
forewarned us, & that most plainly, of some terrible
judgments towards this our Nation. That if we finde it
so,To try whether the Lord have not warned us of some such a judgement. we may then all know for certaine, that it is full time
to look to our selves, & to betake us all forthwith to such
a course, as whereby we may either altogither appease
his anger, or at least in some sort mitigate and asswage

it. To come to our very consciences: Must we not
all be inforced to acknowledge and say with the Prophet
Amos,Amos 3. 8. 
                  The lion hath roared, who shall not then be
afraid? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophecie?
Hath not the lyon roared upon us sundry times,The Lion hath roared upō us. as being
ready to crush our bones in sunder, or to devoure us at
once: but principally within our fresh memorie, when
the proud enemie came against us in their Navie invincible?1. By the proud Armado.
And more also when that long threatned day
came,2. The long threatned day. whereof the insolent enemie had so much triumphed,
and for feare whereof the whole Land had trembled
for so many yeeres togither.3. The Babylonish furnace. But most of all in that
more than Babylonish and unnaturall furnace; that
hellish crueltie, from which we were so marveilously delivered
in a moment, before we felt or so much as feared
any such thing at all. To omit the insurrection by the
rude multitude,4. The insurrection about throwing downe inclosures. about the throwing downe of the inclosures,
the danger whereof, all who are wise-hearted did
manifestly see, if any bloodie enemie had set it on foote,
to have bin a Leader unto them; which issue, all neere
unto them, did very greatly feare, had not the Lord so
graciously prevented that perill in an instant, & quencht
that fire, when the flame was now ready to have brust
forth so high, that getting above our heads, it would
have bin hard to overcome it, without much blood to
have quenched it.
               And to passe over in silence all other the treasonable
devises against that our worthy Deborah,
                  5. Treasonable practises against our late Queene. both before
her comming to the Crowne and after, that almost never
yeere was without some new plot, though continuing
constant with our God, they were never able to touch
one haire of her head:And since against our Iosiah.
                   and since also against our Iosiah,
the breath of our nostrills (of whom we have gloried as
Iudah of Iosiah, that under his shadow we should be preserved

                     〈◊〉
                   amongst our cruellest enemies, as we have bin
untill this day, thorough the endlesse mercy of our God)
had they not almost taken him in their nets, to have
made him and all his a perpetuall prey; if the watchfull

eye of our gracious God, had not wonderfully preserved
and delivered them. But to leave all these: Hath not
the Lord moreover thundred out vengeance by his heavenly
word in the mouthes of all his faithfull servants
thorough the whole Land,6. Vengeance thundred out by the mouthes of all Gods servants. for the abounding of iniquitie,
and that for many yeeres togither? Hath he not besides
spoken unto us from heaven, as he did to Ierusalem,7. Threatned by the Lord from heaven from y• fiery tent.
seeming to have inclosed us all in that dreadfull
tent, spred directly over all our heads, and compassing
us in round on every side (which was so terrible to behold,
with pillers of horrible darknesse, pillers of fire
and pillers of blood) about some twelvemoneth before
the powder-furnace? At the beholding of wth most fearfull
sight, all whose hearts were not utterly sensles, could
not but tremble, for feare of the Lords dreadfull anger:
for mine owne selfe I remember it well, and hope I shall
never forget it. Did he not also for a long time togither,
heretofore,By strange lights & flashings in the heavens. send most strange lights and flashings
in the heavens, and even at that very instant of that
threatned powder-destruction in a terrible manner.
Which howsoever they are taken now that they were
but ordinarie matters, thorough the long continuance
of them, and his forbearance of us, as the like forewarnings
were unto Ierusalem, & have bin to other places,
which he hath destroyed for their sinnes;How terrible they were to us at the first, our owne hearts can beare witnesse. yet let this be
seriously thought of, how we generally stood then affected
with them: whether since the time that the Lord
hath begun in a most speciall manner to threaten destruction
unto us from Rome, they have not beene
farre more usuall, till of very late yeeres, and much
more dreadfull than formerly. Let us but call to minde,
how fearfull these sights were unto us, when they began
in our remembrance, to be so seene in this our Nation.
Most, who are of any yeeres, must needs remember the
time,Our Chronicles have recorded them. with the terrour upon mens hearts, that was thereupon.
Besides that, our Chronicles have specially recorded
those first most dreadfull apparitions of them,

as of things not knowne before in our Nation,Ann. Eliz: 17. or at least
very rarely,Novemb: 14. or that the former were nothing in comparison
of these. When such strange impressions of fire and
smoke were seene in the ayre, and the heavens from all
parts seemed to burne over our heads, as the historie
doth mention.Theprodigious star. Eliz: 15. We cannot have forgotten that wonderfull
starre, which appeared about two yeeres before
these began,Novemb: 18. continuing for almost six moneths togither;
which, as it was found by the learned, was in place
celestiall far above the Moone; otherwise than ever any
Comet hath bin seene, or can naturally appeare. So
wonderfull was it, as the learned did affirme, that the
like was not read of to have bin since the beginning of
the world. And therefore it was then accounted of amongst
the learned, to have bin of signification, not naturall
but divine, as sent from God to warne the world
of some strange worke. Let us but call these things to
minde, and withall the perpetuall danger that the
Church of God and our Nation have bin in, in a more
speciall manner from Rome, since about that time, or not
much before, togither with all our judgements and great
deliverances since; and then thinke whether they may
not justly seeme to foretell, that the Lord hath yet some
greater worke to worke. Howsoever, this cannot. hurt
us to be warned by them, and to make better use of them,
than Ierusalem did,Act
                        •
                      2. 19, 20. 
                  
                     •
                  ith they are undoubted fore-runners
of the great and notable day of the Lord. And to passe
over all other former tokens,Eliz: 17. Nov: 6. (as the two great tydes recorded
to have bin one within an houre after the other,The dreadfull threatnings of the Seas.
and in the same moneth, when these grievous flashings
so appeared; the dreadfull earth-quakes, at that time,
since, and the like:) hath not the Lord since then, caused
the seas to roare and rush in upon us, as ready and
threatning to have overwhelmed us all at once? At the
very tidings whereof,Acknowledged by all to be an evidence of y• Lords anger. and of the cry and scritching of all
neere unto them, and the perishing of so many; what
heart was so flintie, which either did not powre ou
                     •
                  
                  
teares, or at least quake and tremble at that terrible approching
of the vengeance of the Lord? Hath he not
also spoken unto us since then, even in the yeere next after,
by so many strange and sodaine overflowings of the
lesse rivers in the midst of the Land?The insolent over-flowing of the lesse rivers. as if seas and flouds
and all had offered their service unto the Lord to execute
his fierce wrath and most just judgement in overflowing
& purging such a sinfull Land, & to have swept
away all of a sodaine. Yea and this many times when no
such thing was feared at all, and in such places where
never feare of waters had bin heard of before. And yet
to proceede:The sword of the destroying Angel drawne out so long togither. Hath he not proclaymed his vengeance
in every part of our Land, by his undaunted Heralt, the
consuming pestilence, so many yeeres togither, yeere after
yeere, as this Nation hardly ever knew before? What
place is there against which the sword of the destroying
Angell hath not bin shaken and stretched out in most
fearefull manner, as ready to be avenged presently? Can
there be a more visible messenger of the Lords anger? Is
it not one of the foure chiefe plagues of God sent for the
sinnes of a people,Ezek: 14. 19, 21. Ezek: 5. 17. by which he threatneth to destroy,
and a principall sore-runner of the most dreadfull, even
of the bloodie sword of the enemie? And hath not that
sword of the blood-thirstie enemie beene drawne oft
upon us?The sword of the bloody enemie devouring about us. Hath it not consumed and devoured about
us, and made most grievous slaughters and desolations,
as it were, before our faces, and at our very dores, for many
yeeres togither heretofore? First, in the Low Countryes;
after in Ireland, laying it in many places as a desolate
wildernesse; when in the meane time our selves
have bin free at home; though all was principally aymed
at us.And at length set to our very hearts. And did not the Lord after all these, in that
desperate rebellion & treason unmatchable, set the sword
to the hearts of us all? Yea, did he not in that so extreme
and deadly winter following soone after (some prints
whereof remaine unto this day) proclaime & denounce
to the consciences of all men, that he hath a controversie

with our Land? when he began with the fowles of the
ayre,The deadly winter threatning all creatu
                        •
                     es. smiting the fish in the rivers, with very many of the
creatures, and destroyed the most sweet and pleasant
flowres and herbes which grew upon the earth, wherein
we tooke chiefe delight; so as they are hardly yet repayred
againe; threatning withall the utter famishing of the
cattle, as if he had determined to destroy all things from
off the earth? Did he not also by reason of the same, afterward
cause amongst us a greater dearth of all victuals
and other things,The grievous dearth of all things following upon it so long. than ever in any mans remembrance;
all sorts of things being considered togither, and the
continuance thereof so long, whereby so many of our
poore were brought into so extreme povertie.
               And howsoever he in pitie looking upon the poore,Though the Lord st
                        •
                     yed some of these for a season, yet what is that to us so long as our sinnes remaine.
restored bread unto them (having both increased the
corne upon the ground, & after by that lamentable rayne
in the beginning of the harvest, when the corne was
ready to be brought into the barne, made it so as it could
not be kept in long or hoarded up by cormorants, and
unfit to be transported) yet did not the dearth of all
other victuals grow grievously for a long time togither?
Yea, and albeit, for a litle time after this, he withdrew
some of the former tokens of his fierce wrath, and turned
the dearth into plentie againe, yet what was that so long
as our sinnes not onely remained, but were and are daily
multiplyed, so that the cry of them goeth up to heaven?
Did not the Lord send his people Quayles to satisfie
their lust,Israel smitten with the flesh betweene their teeth. and yet for their grudgings and tempting of
him, smit them while the flesh was betweene their teeth?
And did he not in like manner amongst us that yeere,
through that unseasonable raine leave an evident print
of his displeasure upon all or the chiefe kinde of graine,The prints of Gods displeasure left on euery peece of bread with us after plenty sent.
to be remembred almost in every peece of bread? Yea,
that we may not deceive our selves in regard of any prosperitie
since; Did not the Lord after those so prodigious
fore-warnings given to Ierusalem, before her last
utter desolating, (as the historie reporteth) graunt a

most prosperous time for sundry yeeres togither,Ierusalem had divers yeeres prosperity before her last desolation. like as
also before the first beginning of this Captivitie, as tho
there had bin now no more danger to be feared, nor that
he was angry any longer; insomuch as by their prosperitie,See the Centuri
                        •
                     s.
they arose to a far greater height of all outragious
impietie; yet in the midst of their jollitie and greatest
securitie, so soone as ever they had filled up the measure
of their iniquitie, vengeance came upon them without
any more pitie.
               But hath he left us without further testimonies of his
anger since?God hath not left us without witnesse, since then for many yeeres togither every yeere some new warning. What yeere hath there bin, wherein we
have not either sensibly felt the smart of his displeasure,
and that sometimes againe and againe, or bin in extreme
perill thereof, although we have bin usually plucked
from the danger in an instant; as we were from that hideous
furnace: so that we have had commonly for many
yeeres togither, every yeere some one or mo new warning,
to see if yet any thing would doe us good. And to
come to later yeeres,The grievous snow. which are still as it were before our
faces: what monument maketh mention of such a snow
ever in this our Nation, so dreadfull and lying so long, as
therein threatning utterly the perishing both of man &
beast?The long scorching drought. And since the long drought in the summer,
wherein the heavens were made as yron, and the earth
as brasse in many parts, that it could not yeeld her increase;
whereby the poore dumbe beasts so mourned
and perished for lacke of pasture, and for the extreme
scorching of the weather mixt withall? Finally, such a
dearth and scarsitie of fodder and other nourishment to
save the poore beasts aliue,The dearth & scarsity of fodder. with the difficulty to preserue the Cattle alive. as neither our age, nor our fathers
have knowne before. And what our own estate had
bin even for bread, the staffe of mans life, (had not the
Lord from forraine Countryes so graciously fed us, like
as he hath done sundry yeeres) all of us in our parts did
easily see,The famishmēt since for bread, if God had not supplyed from other countries when notwithstanding all our supplies, so many
of the poore were so pinched and distracted, to provide
bread to save their lives. Finally, who is so senseles,

or whose heart is so flintie, that mourneth not to heare
still of so many, who have bin able heretofore to releeve
themselves and families in good sort, by keeping a Cowe
or two to give them milke,The u
                        ••
                     er undoing of so many poore. (the principall releefe of
themselves and their poore litle ones,) then inforced to
kill or sell them for very litle, through lacke of foode,
and the money spent, or having lost them thorow hunger,
shall never be able (as is feared) to buy them a Cowe
againe, to the very breaking of their hearts? Who can
denie this heavy hand of God amongst vs?
               Therefore to draw-towards the shutting up of this
point;The Prophets threatning vengeance every where. what faithfull messenger of God in all the Land,
in consideration of these things and the like, and of all
our most heynous and crying sins, hath not (as it were)
prophecied, plainely foretelling some more notable
judgement, that must needs follow after all these, if we
did not repent thereby? And shall this word in their
mouthes be vaine; Shall he threaten and shall he not
doe it?God striving wt us by his spirit, as with the old world by the Ministerie of Noah.
                   In what corner of our Land hath he not striven
by his Spirit, at one time or other, by the Ministerie of
some of his faithfull servants, which, all about them
might heare of, to have brought us to amendment?
whereby all sorts have bin convinced as well as the old
world by the ministerie of Noah. Who hath bin so
voyde of all sense of sinne,All convinced, wondring that he should forbeare us considering our sins. that hath not perceived the
very earth to be corrupted with our abominations, and
that hath not wondred that God should beare with us
any longer, being so many wayes evicted: especially in
such striving by so many for Poperie; moe for popish
Atheisme, and most for prophanenesse, and all licentiousnesse,
against the most shining light of the glorious
Gospell of Christ? Or who hath bin so deafe, that he
hath not heard of and trembled for the lowde cryes of
the mercilesse oppressors, of pride, and irreligious contempt
of God amongst us, knowing that the cry of them
must needs have gone up to heaven, as will plainely appeare
after? Yea, what simple man hath not at one time

or other (in seeing our intolerable pride, and pittilesse
oppressions) cryed out that some terrible plague must
needs come upon this Nation,And as plainely p
                        •
                     esaging some terrible judgement. saying thus in himselfe, as
that poore wretch did in Ierusalem, Woe, woe, woe to
our sinfull Nation? Hath not many a poore soule bin
of Lots minde, to remove their abode, though to their
great losse,Many of Lots minde. for the wickednesse of the places where they
have dwelt, to live in such Congregations where they
might see some feare of the Lord? I speake not of those
who have made a separation from the Communion of
Saints; but of such as mourning for that rent, amongst
other our heynous sinnes, doe yet continue with us in
the true Church of Christ, as lively members thereof,
and doe rejoyce in all the tokens of Gods presence still
with us. As namely, in all those his ordinances and
meanes of salvation, which through his mercy we gratiously
enjoy; with our holy and joynt profession of all
the wayes of life; as also, in many worthy Teachers &
faithfull servants of God of all sorts, with his heavenly
protection & great deliverances of us all untill this day;
and his chastising us so fatherly from time to time, that
he may spare us, yea pulling us continually out of the
imminent danger, as we shall see more after. And that I
may speake as in the presence of Gods majestie, and appealing
in reverence and love to every soule: Hath not
he himselfe in steed of Ionah manifested this unto us all
from heaven,The Lord himselfe in stead of Ionah manifesting the neerenesse of d
                        •
                     struction unto us. to cause all to acknowledge it, and to leave
all more without excuse, unlesse we repent, that he
threatned us, Not yet fortie dayes, and England shall be
made a desolation, (like as in those dangers when he
brought the destruction so neere unto us) nor yet 20.
dayes, nor yet ten dayes; no, nor yet three dayes, but
even one day, and my fierce wrath shall be ready to be
powred out upon you, to make you an astonishment and
an hissing to all Nations for your sinnes? For what other
thing did the threatning of destruction, so neerely to be
executed, signifie, but even as to Ninivie? Surely, I am

not able to conceive; I submit it to the judgement and
conscience of all the godly learned, and that Powder
vaut shall ever beare witnesse.Staid till this day at the instance of his sonne to see if we wil turne at length. Notwithstanding, hath
he not once againe, and even untill this very day, called
backe that most severe denunciation, and in his fatherly
commiseration and infinite pitie spared us, as he spared
that sinfull Citie; though we have not repented, no, not
as they, in our abundant meanes. This he hath done
partly for his faithfull ones amongst us, and partly at the
instant intreatie of the dressers of his Vineyard, who
have obteyned of him, to spare us yet one yeere longer,
to see, if we will bring forth meete fruit in any time,
and if no time, nor warning will serve, then to cut us
downe.
               Now we in steed of amending (by all these fore-warnings,We growing far worse for all meanes, vengeance must needes be hard at hand.
with all the admirable deliverances and blessings
which this Land doth injoy) waxing every day much
worse, and the cry of our sinnes, with the malice and
number of our bloodie enemies being daily increased,
how can we thinke but that his vengeance must needs be
at the doores; either that any peace can possibly be, so
much as hoped for from him,And our hearts considering it cannot but tremble in an expectation of vengeance. so long as our heynous
sinnes still remayne heaped up euery day more & more?
What heart therefore having any feare of the Lord (considering
how his anger must needs be kindled, and remembring
that implacable hatred of the blood-thirstie
enemies, but wayting their day) doth not tremble in a
certaine expectation of some imminent and farre more
dreadfull vengeance, than ever we felt in former times,
unlesse our hearts be some way stirred up to pacifie his
heavenly Majestie by turning unto him to prevent the
same.Conclusion.
               
               And therefore to conclude this point:All these former considerations proclaime that our visitation draweth neere. All these
things being laid togither, and set as it were in one view
before our faces, principally, that above all other
signes the Lord hath given us, that our third so terrible
and infallible an admonition, in the hellish powder-furnace,

sith none of his warnings shall be in vaine, who
can denie, but that he daily cryeth in the eares of every
one of us with a loude voyce, as he cryed to Ezechiel,
Thy visitation, oh England draweth neere. Therefore
repent, watch and pray, lest I come upon thee of a sodaine,
and make thee as Ierusalem; because no warning
will serve, neither wilt thou know the time of thy visitation,
nor be awaked out of thy deepe securitie. But
of this more fully hereafter, when we shall come to see
the sinnes of our Land, written by the Lord himselfe
in the abominations of Iuda before her Captivitie,
and that in such capitall letters, that he that runns by
may read them. And how we doe iustifie rebellious
Iudah, living in these dayes of the shining light of the
glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ, under such a shelter
as the Lords Annoynted, and also under so good lawes
commanding obedience thereunto; whereby our
sinnes must needes be farre more heynous and inexcusable
than theirs, or than ever they were in former
time.
               And this may serve for a first cause, which we have to
watch and pray: because the Lord cryes so loud unto
us all, That our visitation draweth neere, and that
he will come on us suddenly, unlesse
we repent speedily.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The withdrawing of the Lords glorious presence from his
Church, is both an euident signe of his displeasure,
and amanifest threatning of his departure. And
what cause we have thereupon to watch
and to pray to pacifie his Maiestie,
and to hold him still amongst us.
               
               
                  Verse. 3.
                  And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up
from the Cherub whereupon he was, to the
threshold of the house.
               
               A Second principall point which the Lord would
have us all to obserue to this purpose is out of
this third verse.The glory remoouing from the Cherub to the threshold of the Temple shewes God redy to depart unlesse they repent. In which he revealed to the
Prophet how the visitation of the City or the
executioners of the vengeance determined upon it did
draw neere; this is given as an evident token thereof:
That the glorious presence of the Lord, named the glory
of God, the God of Israel was gone from the Cherub that
is from that place in the Temple, where the Lord had
promised to dwell for ever, and from whence he was
wont to shew his presence most sensibly (for from thence
he used to give answers) and now it stood on the threshold
of the Temple, as ready to depart and utterly to
leave that house and his people for their sinnes. In this
therefore God would have all men to take notice.
               That it is a most certaine signe of his purpose to leave
a people,The withdrawing the lively tokens of Gods presēce, a signe of his departure and of vengeance at hand and of his vengeance hard at hand, when he
begins to withdraw the most lively and sensible tokens
of his presence from those places where he was wont to
dwell and shew himselfe most familiarly. As heere for
example, Although the Temple remaine with the Arke
and mercy feate, from whence he was wont to speake

immediatly, from betweene the Cherubims; yet the glory
is removed: the signes are there still but not the lively
presence as had beene in former time, which was indeed
the true glory.
               For further confirmation of this point:God well pleased with his people wont to witnesse his presence by some apparant signe. As in the Iorney towards Canaan. This we may
observe in the booke of God. That when he hath beene
well pleased with his people, and purposed to remaine
with them, he then hath beene wont ordinarily to shew
his presence and that (under the law) by some such visible
or audible signes, as whereby al might behold and
heare him, or at least perceive him some way. As in all
the iourny towards Canaan,Exod. 33. 3. he went uisibly before them
in the pillar of fire, and the piller of the cloude. But
when they had angred him by the golden calfe, he
threatneth that he would not goe with them, that is, he
would not goe before them in that visible manner, as he
had beene wont, to bring them to the land flowing
with milke and hony, because they were a stiffenecked
people.Moses urgeth the Lord so to goe before thē. For that it was the cheife tokē of his favour. He would send his Angell with them, but in
his owne glorious presence he would not goe before
them as in former time, whereupon Moses is importunate
with him, that he would never carry them thence,
if his presence went not with them. And that it could
not be knowne otherwise, that he and his people had
found favour in his sight, but when he went visibly with
them. Thus Moses never leaves him, vntill he hath prevailed,
that he will go with them as he was wont.
               The same we may see in the dayes of Iosua,
                  Secondly in the daies of Iesuah because of Achans sinne. where the
Lord having withdrawne his lively pre
                     •
                  ence, and suffered
his people to be overthrowne before the men of Ai;Ios. 7. 6.
Iosua falleth upon his face before the Arke; fasting and
mourning and after a sort expostulating with his Majestie,Vers. 12.
for that he would suffer his great name to be dishonored.
Whereupon God telleth him plainely that he
had indeede withdrawne himselfe from them, because
they were execrable for Achans sinne, neither would he
be with them any more, unlesse they destroyed the excommunicate

from amongst them.
               So likewise when he was angry with Saul,
                  3 When hee will cast of Saul he will shew him no signe of his presence, n
                        •
                     r answere him any way. that he
would cast him off, he doth not only take his good spirit
of wisdome and government from him, and sends an evill
spirit upon him to disquiet, and to vex him, but
moreover when he asked councell of him in his extremity,
he answeres him not, neither by dreames nor by
Vrim,
                  1 Sam 16. 14. nor yet by the Prophets. Saul had the Priests with
the Vrim before the Arke,2 Sam. 28. 6. from whence the Glory was
wont to appeare from the Cherubims: but the glory
was remooved, the Lord gave him no answere any more
from thence.
               The like might be shewed still in the story further, as
we shall see after in the particulars, but this may suffice
for the present to manifest this point.
               To returne therefore to our selves: we are first to inquire
what are the most evident signes of Gods glorious 
presence in his Church, especially in the daies of the
Gospell,The signes of the Lords presence in the dayes of the Gospell, where by to judge of our estate. and heereby we are to judge of our estate, and
whether in regard heereof we have not just cause to feare
the Lords departure, without speedy repentance, and all
to give our selves to watch and pray.
               Like as the word sincerely preached and the Sacraments
administred according to our Saviours institution
are the most infallible marks of the true visible Churches
of Christ, amongst which he hath promised his
presence, so long as these are duly observed, maintained
and reverenced; so we may marke also thorow the
booke of God, fowre most lively evidences, of his glorious
presence in his Church amongst his people.
               One whereof is more inward, felt chiefly in the soules
and consciences of men,Foure principally. to wit, the Spirit of the Lord
accompanying the word, and the powerfull operation
thereof in mens hearts,The first inward viz: the spirit of God. in and by the same word, to cause
all men to acknowledge the Lord to be there.
               The other three are more outward and apparant to
the view of the world,The other three outward. although they be nothing but

the fruits and effects of the same spirit. The first of which
three,Abundance of sanctyfied knowledge. is, when the Lord gives to his people abundance
of saving and sanctifying knowledge of his heavenly
word. The second when together with this knowledge,
he worketh in them true holinesse of life and conversation
and obedience to the same word: and withall peace 
and unitie among his people arising from the same.Holinesse with peace and unity
               
               The third is in protection, when he declares himselfe 
to be present amongst his people,3. Protection. in shielding and protecting
them and overthrowing all the plots of the enemies,
or casting a feare upon the enemie, that they dare
not rise up against his Church and chosen flocke.
               For the first of these which is more inward,The spirit and the word going togither are the tenour of the Lords covenāt viz: The
Spirit of the Lord, speaking and working powerfully in
the word. It is not the word alone, nor the Spirit alone,
but the word and Spirit going together. The Spirit accompanying
the word, and speaking to the hearts and
consciences of men, out of the mouthes of his servants.
This is the Tenor and the very substance of Gods covenant
with his Church, for the infallible demonstration
of his presence in it and with it. And I will make this
my covenant with them (saith the Lord to his Church)
My spirit which is upon thee,Isay. 59. 11. & my word which I have
put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor
out of the mouth of thy seede, nor out of the mouth of
the seed of thy seede, from henceforth for ever.
               To make this more plaine;
               As in the time of the law,As the answers from the Arke then. not the Arke alone, nor the
mercie seate covered with the Cherubims, but the answeres
from the Arke given immediatly from God, were
were the undoubted evidences of his most glorious presence
amongst them,So the spirit speaking to mens soules now For exā
                     ple when it is Powerfull in converting and drawing men after it. so this must needs be acknowledged
of all: That not the Gospell alone, nor the bare ministry
thereof, but the powerfull working of the spirit
thereby, speaking to every mans soule and conscience
is the most evident demonstration of the same glorious
presence in the dayes of the Gospell. As for example,

when the word is lively and mighty in operation, powerfull
in converting mens soules and drawing the people
of God after it.H
                        •
                     b, 4 12. This is the true presence and arme of
the Lord.As at Pen
                        •
                     ecost. As it was when the Holy Ghost was sent
downe appearing in forme of cloven tongues like fire, to
shew the heavenly fire, that should accompany the word
and inflame the hearts of the elect: like as it then
wrought wonderfully upon the consciences of the hearers,
and that very worke was an infallible witnesse of
the presence of the Lord, so is it now according to the
manner of the working and measure thereof. When by
the same spirit some are pricked at their hearts with remorse
for their sinnes and made to cry out;luk. 24. 31. 
                  Men and brethren,
what shall we doe?
                  When mens har
                        •
                     es burne at the hearing of it. as those who were so pricked at
the hearts at Peters sermon. When other have their
hearts burning within them, as the two Disciples going
toward Emaus, at the opening & applying of the Scriptures
unto them. When as others are smitten downe to
the earth in the sense of their own vilenesse and the Majestie
of Iesus Christ,Acts: 9. 4 5. as persecuting Saul who was made
thereby a preaching Paul:
                  Others smitten downe at the voice of Christ. And when others are compelled
to confesse. That they neuer heard men speake so,
as those who came of purpose being sent by the Pharises,Ioh. 7. 46.
to catch our Saviour. Or as the poore simple man
who comming in and hearing the word so Preached,1 Cor. 14. 24. 25. is
made thereby to fall upon his face, and enforced to acknowledge,
That God is in these men of a truth: when
others also shall receive such a strong assurance of the
truth of God taught unto them,1 l
                        •
                     h. 2. 27. being indeed his very
word,H
                        •
                     br. 11. 35. as they cannot be drawne away from it, by any
violence or feare,Gal. 1. 8. no, nor yet by any perswasions, though
an Angell should come from heaven and teach them
otherwise.
               And to conclude this point,When the blinde see, deaf heare, dead raised up by it. This must needs be
confessed of all to be the most cleere and invincible testimony
of his most gratious and glorious presence and
of his spirit powred plentifully upon his Church,luk 4. 18. when

by the power of the word,Matth: 16. 17. the blinde eyes are opened,
the deafe heare,Ioh: 1. 12, 13. the stonie hearts are bruised, the dead in
sinne are raised to a new and holy life:Acts 16. 14. & 2. 37. for this is not a
a worke of flesh and blood, but of the Spirit of the Lord
onely.This a principall part of the visible presence in the Primitive Church. This was a principall part of that lively presence,
whereby he was so wonderfull, and after a sort visible
in the primitive Church, when the same day were
added to the Church about three thousand soules by the
preaching of Peter and the other Apostles;Acts 2. 16, 17. and after,
when the Church increased so admirably. And by this
he hath promised to be with his faithfull ones,Matth: 28. 20. teaching
his truth sincerely unto the end of the world.And of the promise to be with his to the end of the world. This finally
is the full accomplishment of that promise; To
powre downe his Spirit upon his people in the dayes of
the Gospell, when he would gather his Church in any
place, as we may see thorow all the Historie of the Acts.
And even as it was then, so is it now according to the
measure of grace; whereby he sends downe his holy
Spirit upon any Congregation. And in some Congregations
under faithfull Ministeries, all these, (blessed be
God) are apparent, thus graciously manifesting his presence
thereby. And therefore the more generally that
this operation appeares in Preachers and people, the
more visibly doth the glory of the Lord shew it selfe, and
the more securitie may such a people have for the certaintie
of the Lords presence continued amongst them.
Every man may discerne and know it hereby.
               But contrarily,The contrary a token of Gods departure, and of judgements approching. this is as evident a signe of Gods departure
from a people, and of some heavy judgement
hasting upon them, when either the preaching shall become
generally cold and fruitlesse (except in some small
remnant,Es
                        •
                     : 6. 9, 10, 11. which evermore the Lord doth reserve in his
Church) or though it be powerfully preached by some
few,When the word shall be without power. When 
                        •
                     en 
                        •
                     ecome rather worse by it. yet men shall become generally more obstinate,
blinde, hard-hearted, and without feeling, given up to
follow their lusts with greedinesse, when by it they shall
have their hearts as hard as the nether mill-stone, or the

Smithes stithie, that the oftner they are smitten, the harder
they are. And further also this is so palpable, that
it may be felt, when men shall come to this height of
prophanenesse, that hearing the most excellent Prophets
of God, they shall heare them onely as those who
have pleasant voyces,Onely hearing not doing. listening to their words, but not
doing any thing in effect, which they teach, as the people
heard the Prophet Ezechiel.
                  Ezec: 33 31, 32. Thus it went with
them very generally before this Captivitie,Thus before this Captivitie. according as
the Lord had bidden the Prophet Isaiah to denounce,Isai: 6. 9, 10, 11.
threescore yeeres and more before it came; that by hearing
they should heare and not understand, and seeing
they should see and not perceive, but have their hearts
made more fat, least they should convert and be healed.
And ever the neerer the vengeance approched,Ever more sensible the neerer the vengeance. the more
apparent this judgement was, as appeareth in the Prophets,
untill their Land was laid desolate, like as the
Lord had threatned them before.Matth: 13. 14. So was it also before
that last utter desolation of that Nation of the Iewes:Marc: 4. 12.
whereupon we may observe this,Luc: 8. 10. that no one Scripture
is oftner alledged by our Saviour,Ioh: 12. 40. and by Paul, and cited
by all the Evangelists,Acts 28. 26. than that of Isaiah is against
them;Rom: 11. 8. to shew how that was fulfilled in their obstinacie,
which was so long before denounced by the Prophet,Ioh: 12. 39.
and that the fulfilling of it, was a cleare evidence,Whence this sentence so oft beaten on by our Saviour, & the Prophet. that
the Lord intended their ejection and subversion. Thus
saith our Saviour plainely, Therefore could they not beleeve,
because Esaias saith againe, He hath blinded their
eyes, and hardned their hearts, that they should not see
with their eyes,The most dredfull signe of the Lords departure, when he shall begin to plucke away 
                        •
                     hem that stand 
                        •
                     n the breach. nor understand with their hearts, and
should be converted and I should heale them.
               But of all other this is the most dreadfull signe of the
Lords removing from any place, when he shall begin to
take those his servants away, or to cause their tongues to
cleave to the roofes of their mouthes, by whom he was
wont to speake ordinarily in this powerfull manner, and
to whom he usually gave this testimonie in the consciences
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     : 3. 25, 26, 27.
                  
of them that heard them. That the Lord spake
in them indeed: when he shall plucke away those whom
formerly he kept,Exod: 32. 10. as Moses in the breach to stay his vengeance,
what doth he else but say, Let me alone that I
may destroy them at once.Psal: 106. 23. Thus he dealt with the most
faithfull Prophets before the Captivitie,Ezec 22. 30, 31. shutting up Ieremie
in prison,Ier: 36. 5. & 37. 38. Ezec: 3. 25. letting Ezechiel be in bonds, afterwards
removing him frō them. Or when the Prophets in steed
of miting at sin, with the mightie arme of the spirit of
the Lord, viz: his own word powerfully preached, shall
begin to smite with the weake arme of flesh,2 Cor: 10. 4. namely, the
inticing words of mans wisdome,1 Cor: 2. 1, 4. and with the ostentation
of humane learning and eloquence,Or when the Prophets shall smite with the weake arme of flesh. and this as
shouldering forth the pure word of the Lord sincerely
preached, as being too weake and meane. The more
sensible this judgement groweth in any Church, the
more is the glory of the Lord removed to the very threshold;
the more also is his utter departure to be feared,
and the finall leaving of such a people without unfeyned
and speedie seeking to pacifie him.
               Now to returne to our selves, and hereby also to discerne
of our estate;To consider whether the Gospell hath y• same powerfull operation as formerly. Let us all who ever have had any
true feeling of this working of the Spirit of the Lord in
us, and whose consciences are not utterly feared, or who
have used to observe the manner of Gods working in
his Church, enter into a due consideration hereof. Let
us examine this betweene the Lord and our owne consciences,
whether the preaching of the Gospell have still
that operation amongst us, which sometimes it hath had
to convert mens soules, to draw multitudes after it in the
love of it selfe, unlesse it be happily to heare some man
of fame, or for his rare and singular gifts, or for some like
by-respects. And whether this power of it be not fearefully
abated,Except in some few places, and removing. except in some very few places; and those
for most part, where formerly it hath not bin, as in some
rude countryes towards the Northerne parts, whither it
is daily observed to remove, as ready to take the farewel,

when it hath gathered forth Gods chosen of them, and
convinced the rest. And whether Satan, Antichrist, and
this evill world, with the pleasures and pompe of it, doe
not draw men wonderfully from Iesus Christ, to follow
after them: whether multitudes rush not violently to all
licentious profanenesse, in steed of the zealous profession
of the Gospell of Christ: others to Poperie and superstition
againe, which was so far rooted out of our Land,
and by the most abhorred, and this after the time that
God hath more discovered the abomination of that
bloodie religion, than ever heretofore. Let us but call
to minde,Whether the Lord speake so sensibly to mens soules as heretofore. how it hath bin formerly with us, in those
places where God was wont to speake unto us by his
messengers, and how it is now for most part: whether in
many places, where the Arke of God still remaines, I
meane the Word and Sacraments, whether, I say, the
glorious and lively voyce of the Spirit, that piercing of
our hearts, that burning in our soules, with those unspeakeable
comforts which we were wont to finde therein,
be not decayed exceedingly? whether it be not with
all who are fallen to fashion themselves to the extreme
licentiousnesse and loosenesse of the time;Whether it be not with all the licentious, as wt 
                     Saul, that God speaks to them no more. even as it was
with Saul, That the Lord speaks to them no more, tho
they have happily the same Preachers, and the booke of
the Law, and heare the curses against their sinnes, yet
they neither feele nor feare them any more? whether
that lively presence which did shake their hearts, be not
utterly gone?That men be not generally more voyde of feeling & feare. yea, whether we do not see this generally,
that men are every where more voyde of all feeling of
sinne, and of the feare of any judgement, whereby that
spirituall judgement doth daily seize upon us most evidently?
That by hearing the threatnings against us, we
heare but understand no more;Nor any more moved as formerly. and seeing the signes
and tokens of his wrath for our sinnes, we see them indeed,
but we are moved no longer with them; but as
they,Hearing heare not, and seeing see not. so we have our hearts more fat, our eares more
deafe, and our eyes still more blinded? And if we shall

finde it thus, That these and all other signes mentioned,
are in great measure come upon us, let us answer unfaynedly,
whether the Lord doth not sensibly threaten and
proclaime to depart and leave us altogither,Whether God doe not hereby threaten his departure, and it be not full time to seeke him. unlesse we
repent; having thus far already withdrawne himselfe
from us. And to conclude this point, whether it be not
full time to seeke to pacifie and stay him amongst us, if
we be not weary of his abode with us, and of our happinesse
thereby.
               But of this more in the next Chapter, where we shall
have cause to inquire of the outward tokens of the
Lords glorious presence, and what a removall he hath
made thereof, as likewise we see that he hath of this inward.
Thus much therefore shall suffice to have spoken
of this second cause, which we have all to watch & pray,
yea, even to weepe and cry after him, to returne unto
us againe, in shewing amongst us the power of his Spirit,
as ever in former time, and to abide with us for ever,
that he never leave us to our bloodie enemies.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  How the Lord is most unwilling to depart from his Church,
so long as there is any other remedie, which he manifesteth
in his oft threatning to take his leave, before he goe indeed.
And of the outward tokens both of his glorious presence
in his Church, and of his departure from it. And what
cause we have thereupon to watch and pray continually.
               
               
                  ANd the Glory of the God of Israel was removed,The Lord makes sundry removes before he depart; all which were tokens and forerunners of his departure. &c.
A third point specially to be observed is this:
That the Glory of God removed not once onely,
but five severall times in this vision, before it departed;
and that it removed not all at once, but so oft, going
away by degrees, and that most sensibly. By which he

would cause the Prophet most clearely to behold his
holinesse and justice; that he must needs depart from
them for their iniquities, wherewith they grieved him;
and that he was now taking his farewell: and yet withall
also to see his mercy and tender compassion, and
how he was (as we may so speake) most unwilling to depart
and leave his people to so many miseries; even Ierusalem
his owne Citie to such a desolation, if any remedie
would have bin found. This he makes knowne unto
them, to see if it would worke to stir them up to seeke to
retaine his presence amongst them.
               For the evident manifestation hereof,The first remove. Chap. 9. 3.
                   First, the Glory
removes from the Cherub, and stands upon the threshold,
as ready to depart. Secondly, it removes higher,
and stands over the dore of the house. Thirdly, it removing
from above the dore, and standing againe upon
the Cherubims, the Cherubims mounted upward from
the earth towards heaven, as ready to take their flight,
and leave the Temple altogither. Fourthly, after this,
the Glory removes to the midst of the Citie; thereby
seeming to warne the Citie of the Lords departure.
Lastly, from thence it removes out of the Citie unto the
Mount of Olives, as utterly taking leave of them, and
giving them a last farewell, untill their Captivitie was
accomplished, and his anger appeased. These were the
removes.
               Here we are all againe to inquire yet more carefully,Whether he hath not made as many sensible removes amongst us outwardly.
whether he hath not made as many and as sensible removes
of his glory amongst us of this our Nation, and
thereby given us as many plaine evidences of his departure;
not now in a vision, but so as all men must needs
see and confesse it: and also whether withall he hath not
as clearely and tenderly manifested (as I may so say) his
unwillingnesse to depart from us, if any thing can serve
to reforme us. This is a point of most serious consideration,
and such a one, as it were an exceeding mercy of
the Lord, and a token of his gratious purpose toward us,

if he would but vouchsafe us hearts generally to consider
of aright, as in his presence and as we must all know
it one day.
               To the end we may conceive it the better, we are first
to consider wherein the glory of the Lord appeareth
outwardly in his Church so as it may be beholden of all
round about it, even of the very enemies. As for the former
evidence it being more inward, is to be perceived
chiefly of the inward man, the soule and conscience,
when God so speaks unto them.
               This outward Glory consists in three things principally,The outward glory consists in three things.
as was said, whereby not only the Lord himselfe
is magnified amongst his owne people, yea to be seene
& acknowledged of others, but also by which he makes
his people to be glorious in the eies of others, and to be
honoured and feared of their enemies.
               The first is,First in abundance of heavenly and sanctified knowledge. when he bestoweth upon his people such
aboundance of heavenly and sanctified knowledge of his
worde with an hungring after the same, as that the earth
seemeth to be filled with the knowledg of the Lord, like
the waters that cover the Sea,Esa. 2. 2, 3. as the Prophet Esay speaketh.
This he promiseth to doe in his Church when he
will shew his glory in it, in the dayes of the Gospell. At
what time the Church being exalted as upon the topps
of the mountaines, there shalbe such a hungring and
thirsting after the word of the Lord that men shal incite
and provoke one another, saying, Come, let us goe up to
the house of the Lord, for he will teach us his waies and
we will walke in his pathes. Where he thus puts his
lawes into the mindes of his people, at least in a vehement
desire of it. That they all seeme to know him from
the least to the greatest of them; this is a visible token of
Gods covenant with such a people and the pardon of
their sinnes,Ier. 31. 33, 34. that he is their God and this is his glory
upon them.2 In holinesse of l
                        •
                     fe accompanying it.
               
               A second visible token is this, when this knowledge
is accompanied with obedience and holinesse of life,

when he thus writes his law in their hearts,Ezech: 36. 23. 24. 25. 26. creating in
them new hearts and new spirits. Thus the Lord promiseth
to be sanctified in his owne people before the
eyes of their enemies, when he shall clense them from all
their filthy sinnes, as with pure water; when he puts his
spirit so upon them, as to cause them to walke in his
statutes, to keepe his judgments and to do them: when
he puts his feare so generally into their hearts, as to cause
them not to depart from him.Chiefly when he gives peace and unitie, one heart and one way. Then he makes this
covenant for himselfe, that he wil not depart from them.
And chiefly when togither heerewith, he gives peace &
unity amongst them, that they have one heart and one
way.Ier. 32. 39. 40. That the Lambe may lodge with the Wolfe without
danger;Isai. 11. 6. the poore harmelesse Christian, with them
who have beene by nature as bloudy as Wolues; when
the little child may lead the Lion, even a child bringing
the word of the Lord may perswade and lead them, who
were otherwise as proude and fierce as Lyons. And
when the sucking childe may play upon the hole of the
Aspe; when the poore seruants of the Lord, who are for
harmelesnesse as little children, may be without perill in
the presence of them, who were sometimes as venemous
as the Aspe and the Viper. When they shall feed & communicate
together cheerefully and lovingly in the word
and Sacraments,Holy unity the marke whereby all may know Christ Disci
                        •
                     ples and in all the religion and service of the
Lord, and none to hurt in all the mountaine of the Lords
holinesse, within the bounds and limits of his Church.
By this all must needs see,Ioh: 13. 53. that such are indeede the Disciples
of Christ, when they love one another. And
when in regard hereof, the feet of them who bring the
glad tidings of peace, to wit, of all the faithfull preachers
of the Gospell, publishing life and salvation and working
this obedience and love,Holinesse and unity make Gods people glorious in the eyes of their enemies. are beautifull, when their comming
among a people is most acceptable, as of the messengers
of the Lord of hosts.
               Now both these are such evident demonstrations of
the glory of the Lord upon a people, that they make

them amongst whom they are conspicuous, and eminent
to be a glorious people, and cause them to be had in honour,
and to be feared of all nations round about them.
               This Moses sheweth plainly in Deut. 4.
                  
                     Deut. 4. 5. 6. 7. &c. Where he
thus speaks to the people of Israel: Behold, I haue taught
you ordinances & lawes, as the Lord my God commanded
mee, that you should doe even so, in the Land whether
you goe to possesse it. Keepe them therefore and do
them; for this is your wisdome and vnderstanding in the
sight of the people, which shal heare al these ordinances,
and shall say, Onely this people is wise & of understanding
and a great nation: for what nation is so great, unto
whom the Gods comes so neere unto them, as our God
is neere to us in all that we call unto him for.
               The Lord himselfe also hath bidden all his people to
glory in this,The Lords people bidden to glory in these. That they know and feare him, not in
their wisdome, strength, or riches; declaring all the glory
of these earthly things to be nothing to that,I
                        •
                     r. 9. 23. 24. and all the
true outward glory of a people to consist in their holinesse
and peace among themselves, and in the right
knowledge and sincere profession of his heavenly word.
As the kingdome of heaven, which is inwardly felt, in
every one of Gods Servants,Rom. 14. 17. is in righteousnesse, peace
and heavenly joy:The kingdome of heaven in holinesse peace and joy. so when these abound amongst any
people there is the kingdome of heaven truly begun, &
Christ reigning visibly. Such were those worthy congregations
mentioned in the Acts,Christ visibly raigneth in such congregations. and those to which
Paul writ his Epistles; and such are all Churches which
are like unto them at this day. And even as these things
also doe more abound and are more apparant among
them; so are they still more glorious, and Christ more
evidently holding up his scepter there. Thus much for
the two first parts of the outward glory.
               The third principall thing,3. The Third principall outward signe is his glorious protection of his people. whereby the Lord is
wont to declare his glory in his Church so brightly, as
that it may be beholden of all about, is in the protection
and defence thereof. And this is more visible also, when

he doth miraculously deliver it, plaguing and overthrowing
all the enemies, with all their wicked devises,
which they plot against his people.
               To omit the carefull protection of Abraham, Isaac,
and Iacob,
                  As 1. of Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob.
                   with all theirs, in all places wheresoever they
went; the smiting of their enemies, and that herein
stood a chiefe part of their honour:Gen. 20. 16. 26. 9, 10, 11, 12. & 27. 42. & 28. 29, 31. & 24. 32. was not this that
glory whereby he did so grace his Church in Egypt,
when he sheltered his people, and made them to grow,
notwithstanding the cruel oppressions of their enemies?
when they were as the bush in the midst of the fire that
yet consumed not?2. Church in Egypt. And secondly, when he plagued the
Egyptians, and still kept his people safe in the midst of
all those miraculous judgements.
               Thirdly,3. Going before them, and protecting them in all the way towards Canaan. when he went before them out of Egypt and
thorow the wildernesse towards Canaan, in the piller of
fire and of the cloud, so conducting them that the enemies
could not come at them, neither by day nor night.
In regard whereof, he being angry with them for the
golden calfe,Exod. 33 3, 4. had threatned that he would not goe up
with them, because they were a stiffe-necked people: as
they sorrowed and wept for this, so Moses in particular
saith,vers. 15. If thy presence goe not with us, carry us not
hence. And wherein, saith he, shall it be knowne that I
and thy people have found favour in thy sight?This the most cleare testimonie of Gods presence. Shall it
not be when thou goest up with us? So I and thy people
shall have preheminence before all the people of the
earth: for which importunitie of his the Lord condescended
thus still to continue his happy presence in that
apparent manner.
               Fourthly,4. In miraculous keeping their land. the Lord declared this his glorious presence
in the miraculous keeping of their land, that no enemie
should invade it, nor so much as once dare to attempt
the same, or thinke of any such matter; no, not then
when all their men went up generally thrice in the yeere
at their solemne feasts to Ierusalem from all the parts of
their land, and none left at home to keepe their frontiers

from invasion, or houses from spoiling, but a few poore
women and children.This continued so long as they were carefull to know & obey him. As he had promised this unto
them, so he faithfully performed it, so long as they continued
to know and feare him. So long as they made
any conscience to retaine those two former parts of his
glory in knowledge and obedience,Exod. 23. 21, 22. so long also continued
this their gracious preservation: yea, so long as
they would but humble themselves under his hand at
those his threatnings and at the shaking of his rods
against them,Psalm: 107. promising amendment, and would then
beleeve and obey his Prophets, so long abode this glory
with them.
               This the Lord wrought moreover in such strange deliverances
of them from all that did offer to assaile them,5. In their wonderfull deliverances & overthrowes of their enemies.
and in such great overthrowes of their proud enemies, as
never were heard of before in any nation. As in their delivery
in the sea,As in the sea. with the overthrow of the proud Egyptian:
many a time in the wildernesse:The wildernes. in setting them
also in Canaan by Iosuah;
                  Setting them in Canaan. no man being able to resist
them, so long as they obeyed him. So likewise in the
dayes of the Iudges,In the dayes of the Iudges. though they provoked him by
their rebellions, yet ever usually when they sought him
againe, humbling themselves, he shewed himselfe their
deliverer,Ios: 10. 13. fighting for them both from heaven and earth,
with haile and thunder, and all his hosts, causing the
very Sunne to stand still until the people avenged themselves
upon their enemies.
               And yet more specially in their famous victories in
the dayes of Samuel against the Philistims.Of Samuel.
                   In Iehosaphats
                  
                     of Iehosaphat.
victorie against the Ammonites,2 Chron: 20. 21, 23. the Moabites, and
them of mount Seir, causing their enemies to turne their
swords upon themselves, and every one to fall upon another.
But above all,2 Chr: 32. 20, 21. in that wonderfull deliverance of
Ierusalem in the dayes of Ezekiah,
                  
                     Ezekiah in the overthrow of Senacherib.
                   and that notable
overthrow of that proud and blasphemous Senacherib,
and his huge Armie; when the Ang
                     •
                  ll of the Lord slue
an hundred and foures
                     •
                  ore thousand of the enemies in

one night: upon which considerations, and the like, in
former times, the Holy Ghost faith, that God is well
knowne in Iudah,By 
                           〈◊〉
                         Gods name was great in Israel. his name is great in Israel. All the world
talked of his name and feared. Because as his Tabernacle
was there, so there he brake the arrowes & the bowe.
There he shewed his puissance and his power,Psal: 76. 1, 2, 3, 4. 12. restrayning
the rage of the enemies, and turning it unto his
praise, and so there made himselfe terrible to the Kings
of the earth.
               To conclude this point likewise.A principall part of the glory foretold to be on y• Churches in y• dayes of the Gospell. This is a principall
part of that glory of the Church in the earth, which
is so foretold by the Prophet Esay to be in the Churches
of God, in the flourishing estate thereof, in the dayes of
the Gospell. That when the Lord should wash away the
filthines of his people by his word and Spirit, he would
create upon every place of Mount Sion,Esai: 4. 4, 5, 6. and upon the
assemblies thereof, a cloud and a smoake by day, and the
shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the glory
should be a defence: and a covering should be for a shadow
in the day from the heat, and a place of refuge, and
a covert from the storme and from the raine. In which
words, all these parts of the Lords glory upon his
Church are comprized, evidently foretelling, that as he
would adorne and glorifie his Church then with abundance
of knowledge and holinesse; so his protection
should shelter it from all danger, as the coverings did the
Tabernacle.These the glory of the Primitive Church. So at this day. And this indeed was the glory of the Primitive
Church, according as it was spoken of by Esay.
Yea, every wicked man, whose conscience is not utterly
scared, when he commeth into any such a Congregation,
where these three shine bright, is inforced to acknowledge
such a place to be a glorious and blessed
place, and God to be there; untill that men have by their
disobedience to the word, and by their maliciousnesse,
put out the eye of their soule and conscience altogither.
               To applie all this.Application. And first to this people of Iudah:
                  
If wee marke well,First to Iudah. How God had withdrawn the outward glory to foreshew his departure. wee may cleerely see how God had
wonderfully withdrawne from them that outward glory
which formerly they had enjoyed, and had also shewed
them evident tokens of his departure in every one of
these respects, before he went away utterly. And first
for holy knowledge,1. All holy knowledge decayed. when they daily waxed more blind
and senselesse by all the paines of their Teachers, and all
other their forewarnings,Isai: 6. 10. so that they were worse therein
then the oxe and the asse,Isai: 1. 2. as the Prophet Esay complained
many yeeres before.2 Holines gone. Secondly, for holinesse of
life, the abominations following will evidently demonstrate,2 Chro: 36. 15, 16.
for reverence of the Lords messengers, in that they
misused them untill there was no remedy. So for peace
and unitie,So peace and unitie departed. when Ephraim was against Manasseh, Manasses
against Ephraim, and both against Iudah: when all
the godly,Is
                        •
                     i: 9. 21. who followed the true Prophets, and cleaued
only to the word and the covenant of the Lord, were generally
hated, made as signes and wonders, like as the
Prophets were whose word they obeyed.Isai: 8. 18. And lastly
for protection,3 Protection oft almost gone. when as the glory was almost gone in
Ezechias dayes, when he himselfe and Ierusalem were in
that danger by Senecharib: and cleane gone by Manasses,
at what time he was carried away captive into Babylon.
Afterwards also was Iosiah their shelter cut downe by the
enemie,Lost utterly in Iosiah.
                   which was the next & most manifest forerunner
of the finall departure and of their glory. So they had after
this, overthrow after overthrow, untill this plague
was utterly come upon them, and their glory also departed
without hope of recovery, till Gods anger was fully
accomplished upon them. Thus we have seene this point
at large,Glory departed till Gods anger accomplished. wherein the outward glory of the Church consists,
& how all this was fully verified amongst them, according
to the vision: That God had indeed made all
these removals of their glory before his finall departure.
               But now let us in the second place,Application to our selves. returne home,
from Iudah, unto our selves, and lay it neere unto our
hearts, considering well, first, whether the Lord have not

begun as sensible removals of all this glory,Whether God threaten not us by as sensible removals. even amongst
our selves, in every one of these kindes, sundry
wayes and at sundry times, proceeding by degrees. And
whether he doe not thereby threaten manifestly, that he
is purposed utterly to remove, and to take away all his
glory and his gratious presence from us, and to leave us
to the will of our enemies, to be made a reproch and a
shame when he is departed from us, unlesse we prevent
and retaine him, by our speedie amendment.
               To begin and apply in order,1. Removing so generally our delight in his word. as in the presence of the
Lord. Where is that delight of ours in most places, that
we were wont to take in his word, our inciting and incouraging
one another; Come, let us goe up to the house of
the Lord: our talking of it, and our rejoycing in it, as of
our chiefe glory? Do we not in steed hereof waxe weary
of it very generally, hearing it commonly for a fashion,
or for satisfying of the law, or some like respect? Are we
not growne to this passe,Growing to be ashamed of talking of it. for the most part, to be ashamed
of talking or reasoning of it? Yea, what is more common,
than in steed hereof, to discourage one another
from being forward in following after it, and those holy
assemblies of his people, where he hath promised his
presence for ever? Are not our people in steed hereof,
set rather to flocke to all kinds of vanities,Flocking to all vanities. and places of
the worse resort, to dishonour and provoke the Lord;
even to those places, where is open profession of all
impietie, and schooles of all lewdnesse and ungratiousnesse?
Let the ordinarie frequenting of so many profane
and lascivious playes fitter for Sodome, than the Church
of God, be witnesse.
               Where is that holy,2. Our sound knowledge of the word in many places. sound, and powerfull knowledge
of God amongst the people become, which in regard
of the long and quiet time of the Gospell, that thorow
the riches of the Lords mercy we have enjoyed, should
have growne to ripenesse,Amongst the people. that which was wont so to
abound amongst us in many goodly Congregations,
whereby the Popish sort were ashamed of themselves for

their ignorance: specially (as was said) that love which
hath bin so declared in hungring after the word, in delighting
in it as our felicitie. Nay, what is become, for
most part, of that singular commendation for readinesse
in the Scriptures, and soundnesse of judgement in the
word of the Lord,Amongst most of our Gentry, having most meanes, wherein many of our Gentry and
cheifer sort in many places did sometimes excell; for
which they were much to be commended; and indeed
it was their dutie far so to excell: for they of all other,
have the most meanes, for all good helps and leysure, to
get the knowledg of the Lord;& most bound thereto. and also are most bound
thereunto,Prov: 17. 16. for the abundance of Gods blessings, which
they injoy principally to that end, to buy wisdome, as Solomon
saith?All formerly to silence the proudest Papist Whereas heretofore many of them were
able to put to silence the proudest Papists amongst us, in
displaying the abominations of Poperie, and in maintayning
the Gospell of Christ, committed unto us in
trust to that end, is it not to be feared, (our swaggering
courses considered, and our generall neglect of religion)
that we are in the greatest part by far, become unable to
maintaine the one,Now suffering the Popish sort to insult over us. or to confute the other, or so much as
to speake with any lively feeling of the truth of the
Lord, or yet as having any sound love of the one, or dislike
of the other. And how should it be otherwise,
when we for most part give over our selves wholly to
our pleasures with all licentiousnesse,Chiefly thorow living in pleasure. or to follow after
the honours and riches of the world; and which is yet
far worse, and more to be feared, (as an evident forerunner
of vengeance) when we are so generally ashamed
to be noted, for being forward or zealous, in the profession
of the Gospell of Christ? On the other side, are not
many of the Popish sort growne to be exceeding cunning
in the mysterie of Antichrists iniquitie,Popish sort growne cunning in their mysterie. and the
depths of Sathan, whereby they deceive themselves,
and others, (for that is all the glory that can justly be
given them) seeing in the first principles of the knowledge
of our blessed God, out of his heavenly word, they

are commonly knowne to be far more ignorant,Though more ignorant than our children in the first principles of Christ. than
our litle children, which are but catechized in the faith
of Christ? Are not even ordinarily the simpler sort of
them, waxen generally so perfect in the cheife points of
their religion, by their paines which they take (though
alas to their perdition) for setting up the throne of the
Beast againe, as that they are able therein to goe about
the greatest part of the cheife among us, and put us to silence?
We can many of us be the best companions for
them that may be,Many of us good companions for them. and can talke with them, of any matter
of vaine pleasure and commoditie, and happily in
scorning at all them, who shew any more love to the
word, and more dislike of their abominations, than we
do; and who is so good a fellow, as one of them, though
a deadly enemie to the Gospell, and all that sincerely
professe the same; but hardly a word either for Christ
and his truth, or against Antichrist and his iniquitie.
Though we have as good cause to be armed against him,
with all possible meanes, especially with the armour of
the word of the Lord, as ever Nation had before, having
had so many faire warnings from him. Oh that this may
be well thought of, for sundry parts of our Land?
               But here it may be some will say: That there was
never more knowledge in the Land.Objection for abundance of knowledge answered. To whom I answer:
Far be it off from me, from obscuring any gift or
blessing of the Lord amongst us. Nay, I magnifie him
for them: but that which I have spoken, hath bin of a
sanctified and powerfull knowledge, wherein the kingdome
of God and our glory consists,Rom: 14 17. and that amongst
our people. And secondly, of such I would demand,
as before the Lord, whether in many a Congregation,
there be not a sensible decay, as in all places where the
meanes have failed; and for the rest, what is our knowledge
generally in regard of our meanes, and the long
continuance of them? Have we not very many places,
where within sundry miles, there are not two to be
found in a Towne, which have any sound, substantiall,

and saving knowledge, even of matters of salvation, and
the wayes of God? And of those who seeme to have
knowledge, doe not many of them, as it were grope for
the wall, like the blinde stumbling at noone day as in
the twilight, making no conscience at all of their wayes,
no not of monstrous sins wherein they live, not fearing
any judgement towards the Land or themselves? Is not
the very day darke over them (as we may so speake) for
seeing their owne sinnes, or the fearfull sins of the Land?
And may not the Lord therefore as he threatneth, cause
the Sunne to goe downe at noone, and darken the earth
in the cleare day?
               And where is that holinesse become,2. Holinesse & submission to Christs Gospel much removed. whereby the
Lord should be sanctified of us, and honoured of all about
us, with that obedience and submission to his most
sacred word? Are we not in very great numbers come
to this passe, to make such a fearefull revolt from all holy
conscience of our wayes, which many began to make, to
open impietie & profanenes; as that certaine who were
of us,Falling daily to most horrible impieties and profanenesse. have departed from us, although not without their
owne fearefull sinne in that behalfe. The old Serpent
hath undoubtedly used this, as one first and principall
provocation hereunto. Even the very dishonors done
to the Lords Sacred Majestie amongst us, by our heynous
sinnes, and lest they should be polluted by our intolerable
impieties, whereof they can see no hope of redresse;
and also for feare of the vengeance of the Lord
hanging over us for the same: whereby they have made
a most grievous rent in the Church of God,Hence so many separating. to the indangering
of their owne soules, and the advantaging
of the bloudie enemie against us all, though they observe
not so much.Popish sort blaspheming. Doe not the Popish sort blaspheme
the religion of the Lord established among us, for the extreme
irreligiousnesse of the lives of too many of us? Do
they not hereupon thinke, that no crueltie can be devised
sufficient for us, no not the butchering or blowing
us up all at once? Though indeed, it be not our wickednesse,

which they so deadly malice, for therein many of
them far surpasse us.Though it be not our wickednesse they hate. But the Gospell. Let Italie, and Spaine, be witnesses
hereof: for from them chiefly hath our iniquitie come,
as will appeare heereafter: but it is Christ and his Gospell,
which they so maligne to the death. doe not sundry
make fresh revoults unto them for some shewes of
holinesse,Sundry make revoults to the Apoc. 18. 3.
                   that are amongst the devouter sort, accounting
it much safer to live in filthy Babylon, the cage of every
uncleane and hatefull bird; under that abominable slavery
and and drudgery of Antichrist, then to communicate
with us at his table in the true service of Iesus
Christ?Our devotion waxen cold. Is not all true devotion waxen so odious amongst
very many of us, as that it hath beene thought
ordinarily a disgrace for the cheifer sort, & men of note,
to kneele unto the Lord in the congregation at the publike
prayers? And must not their private devotion be
sutable in all reason. Though it be not or at least have
not beene any disgrace for too many of them to kneele
in the most reverend sort, as doing a most solemne service,
though not to Bacchus, Ceres, and Venus, yet to
their owne bellies. Certainely our Land of late yeeres
hath beene grievously polluted herewith: whether it be
yet left, or at least repented of, I leave it to our
consciences.
               Is not the true practise of Christianity,Practise of Christianity more reproach full then to live in any sin. consisting in
a holy endevour to walke conscionably in every commandment
of the Lord and in being zealous for his Gospell,
which is our cheife honour, become far more vile
and reproachfull (except in some small remnant) then
to live in drunkennesse daily, in swaggering and blaspheming,
in scorning and jesting at all religion, and in
making but a sport of sinne, namely of those sins, which
are directly against the Lord in the first table? which
yet will one day be found the most heinous and intollerable
of all sinnes:The very name of a Christian become repro
                        •
                     chfull to many. yea, which may make the whole land
to tremble. Hath not that glorious name of a Christian
become a nick-name & a name of reproach with too

many? This was well beseeming Italie and Rome it
selfe,
                     A matter fit for Italy. Rhemish Testament: the throne of the Beast, as that worthie Doctor
Fulk shewed long agoe; but for any of us to take it up
from them,Acts. 11. Sect. 4. or for that it had beene abused by any, to use
it scornefully, and against those chiefly, who most unfainedly
beleeve, and shew forth the power of the Gospel
this may make our flesh to quake, and our very bones to
shiver.Lewdest commonly in credit. And yet also to proceed a little further. Are not
the lewdest commonly in credit and reputation for the
only goodfellowes, but for a man to make conscience to
shun the forenamed and all other sinnes, and not to runn
with all sorts to all excesse of vanity, doth not every one
see, that this is the only matter of generall obloquie?
To come unto the Lords owne messengers,How welcome the Lords messengers are to the greatest part. whom he
hath sent to us in kindnesse and compassion, as David
sent his seruants to the king of Ammon, and to the end
that he might turne us from our evill way and spare us,
if they be such as are faithfull,2 Chron: 26. 16. as the Lords owne mouth,
and will tell us of these and all other our sinnes;2 Sam: 10. 6. who
seeth not, (although they be never so formall) how
welcome their feete are to all sorts, who have set themselves
to run after Popery and all profanenesse, or to live
in their evill courses, though amongst all the sinnes of
the land, there be no one, which the Lord can lesse indure?
Oh is this now become our thankfullnesse,Notwithstanding his kindnesse to us. to
him that hath beene so kind unto us to be ashamed
of him, his word, messengers and seruants who notwithstanding
hath not beene ashamed to countenance,
and to shelter us, and who hath so honoured us before all
the world in such admirable deliverances, fighting as
from heaven, for us unto this day.
               But to leave the Lords messengers,Our unity much departed. where is that unity
become that hath beene forme
                     •
                  ly amongst us, when diversity
of judgment for ceremonies (which may fall upon
the deerest servants of the Lord) could not hinder
our love and holy agreement in Christ? Did not all
joyne cheerefully as one man, of one heart and of one

soule, for the building up the Temple of the Lord? yea,
were not those most truly reverenced,Our reverencing the most paynfull and holy much gone. who were the
painfullest, faithfullest, and most powerfull builders, and
all those most rightly had in honor, who walked most
conscionably, and uprightly in all the good waies of
God, to the stoppings of the mouthes of all the aduersaries?
Hath not the glory of the Lord made a sensible remove
in this behalfe? Let us see what we can answere
him herein?Fruites of our dissentions. Have not our dissentions and our violent
inuectives, and courses one against another, made not
onely the Lord & his glory to be reproached,To cause the Lord and his religion to be reproached. as if there
were no unity nor certainty in our religion, and that
therefore we are none of the Lords; but have they not
caused moreover the enemie to insult over us, as now
surely falling and overcome by our selues?The enemie to insult and be hartned to our destruction. And are they
not heartened hereby to our destruction, when we have
begun to fall by the hands of one another, and every one
to make way for the common enemie to invade? And
yet to proceed a little further; where is that countenance
and love that was wont to be shewed to the lovers of the
Gospell,Countenance to the true lovers of the Gospell gone. Popish sort shame us herein. even for the Gospels sake, which we professe?
doe not the Popish sort put us to continuall shame heerein,
in shewing ordinarily more countenance and kindnesse
to the most contemptible of their profession, the
basest runnagate, or most ignorant priest, for their very
religion which they professe, then we commonly to the
faithfullest preachers of the Gospell or the deerest seruants
of the Lord, for the love of him and his most sacred
truth? In a word where is that submission in the
greater sort,Submission to the word much removed. to yeeld to the word of the Lord, brought us
by his messengers; for his honour whose message it is, &
for the reverence of the word it selfe, being the eternall
truth of Iesus Christ? Must not all needs acknowledge,
that our glory is much departed in these respects?
               But to come to the third part of our glory;3 Protection the third part of our glory oft threatned to be removed. The Lords
gracious protection. Hath he not sundry times threatned
most manifestly the utter removing of it; so as all of

us have oft feared, his final departing and leaving of us?
Most true it is,As never nation had Gods glory more apparant in protection. That never nation was eyther recorded,
or heard of to have the glory of the Lord more brightly
shining upon it, in admired peace, wonderfull deliverances
and even miraculous overthrowes of the enemies
and discoveries of their secretest plots, then England
hath had.Psal: 76. 1. That we may truly say as the Psalmist did of
Iudah, The Lord hath heerein beene well knowne amongst
us, his name hath beene great in England: yet
we cannot forget how many a time the glory hath beene
almost gone from us, and how certainly it had gone, if
ever the bloudy Antichrist, or any of his marked souldiers
had prevailed in any one of their desperate designes.
Nor that it was ever more neerely gone from
any nation,So never any from whom it was more nerely gone. with whom it remained after, then it hath
beene from us. Did not they themselues account all
dispatched, and the glory quite removed,Accounted to be caried away in their navy invincible. in their triumphs
which they had for their navy inuincible; and
that therein they should have carried all utterly away?
Did not many an English heart tremble for feare therof?
And what could we looke for in all mans reason (considering
their long threats & mischievous designes) when
ever the eies of our tender nursing mother should be laid
but either a finall taking it away,The generall feare for it whē God should take away Qu: Elizabeth. Ot
                        •
                     er nations wondered. or a fearefull eclipsing
or obscuring of it? What heart wished not, that it
might never see that day? Did not other nations wonder
at the most incredible inthronizing of our dread Soveraigne
and liege Lord in such an unexpected peace? were
we not all become as men that dreame, when the Lord
so turned away our captivitie in a moment, even before
it came.We like them that dreame. Could we for many daies thinke that it was so
indeed, or rather that we were but as in a dreame, untill
that we perceived the Lord ratifying and confirming it,
in so strangely continuing our admired peace, beyond
all hope, and not a dogg to move his tongue against us?
were not our mouthes at that time filled with laughter,Our hearts filled with joy.
and our hearts with ioy, for this so wonderfull a remaining

of our glory? In a word as Ezekiel 
                  
                     •
                  aw that the
Cherubims mounted vpward & flew from the Temple
& from the midst of the Citie to the mount of Olives,All our glory ready to moūt up at once in the powder surn
                        •
                     ce.
as departing cleane away, so to demand of the conscience
of the most notoriovs scorner, was not, all our glory
ready visibly to mount upward from us at once? were we
not, as it were, within a minute of the execution? nothing
wanting in effect, but putting fire to the match to
have blowne up and utterly carried away all our glory?
every part of it altogither?Rebels exal
                        •
                     ing themselues against the Lord as if it had been accomplished. did not our desperate rebels
make their certaine account of it? did they not exalt
themselves against the Lord of Hosts in it, as his vengeance
taken upon some of the cheife of them openly
did notably declare?No pollicie could have preuented. could all the pollicie in the world
have preuented it, or ever so much as have suspected such
a hellish device, if our gracious God had not yet once againe
from heaven, declared the riches of his glory amongst
us, and his pitifull compassion over us and that
in a more immediate and sensible working, than at all
former times?The Lord only prevented By themselues, working on the heart of his annointed. when he first made themselves the beginners
of this discoverie, & then so mightily wrought
upon the heart of our Soveraigne Lord, casting such a
carefull feare upon him, as that he suffered him not to
rest, untill he had disclosed it: yea, we may truely say
in thankfulnesse to our blessed God, that he never gave
over,Not ceasing untill our deliverance was effected againe. untill he had againe the second time, wrought the
deliverie and preservation of Great Britaine, and of
his Church, by the hand of his Royall Servant, and
withall had granted the staying of his glory, that it
should yet remaine amongst us: that thereby all our
hearts might be more firmely linked to his Annoynted,
and unto his Seed for ever;To binde our hearts to his Majestie and his annointed for ever. and that we might all the
dayes of our life, send forth more hearty thanks, and
powre out more fervent and instant prayers, for his Sacred
Majestie, and for all his Royall Progenie.
               What soule did not for the present extoll the Lord of
glory for it,All did thus acknowledge it. as being his onely worke? Who can be so

voyde of sense, or so brutish, as yet to have lost the fresh
remembrance of it?None can deny but that it was an evident warning of a finall departure, unlesse we repent. Or who can now here denie, but
that this was first as sensible a danger and threatning
from the Lord, to remove his glory from amongst us, as
ever was in any Nation or Church, since the beginning
of the world? Yea, who must not of necessitie be inforced
to acknowledge, that this was as miraculous a stay, or
rather a returne of the glory againe, and withall as evident
a forewarning of a finall departure, as ever was read
or heard of before, unlesse we doe yet speedily humble
our selves,Our glory as neerely removed as theirs in the dayes of Iosiah.
                   and give him better entertainment. And to
shut up this point likewise; what part have we now remayning
of all the outward glory, which they had not
in the dayes of worthy Iosiah (the times being considered)
or which they had not at the beginning of all those
miseries following: which entred and seized upon them
within three moneths after the death of holy Iosiah, save
onely this one, That the Lord to accomplish his worke
on them, and to make a way to his wrath, suffred their
Iosiah to be taken in the nets of the enemie:Onely this is added to allour mercies, that our Iosiah is still preserved from the bloudie enemie. whereas he
hath so graciously, and above all former mercies, yet preserved
our Iosiah unto us, when there was but a haires
bredth betweene him, yea betweene us all and death:
though yet of late he hath so fearfully shaken his rod in
taking away that worthiest hope, that ever our eyes did
see before, and in whom we did so pride and secure our
selves.
               But alas,What we have done since in token of thankfulnes and humiliation, & in care to retaine him. if our holy God shall now come and examine
these things among us, what we have done since, in token
of our thankfulnesse for this incredible deliverie,
and for this so gratious a returne above all other, yea
above all, that almost ever the world heard of; how we
have demeaned our selves, in token of our unfeigned humiliation,
for this so dreadfull a threatning of his departure?
what desire we shew to retaine him? how we extoll
his great name for it, by advancing his religion, that
he might be the better knowne and feared amongst us?

what zeale we shew to put out that execrable and murthering
religion,What zeale & indignation we have shewed against y• murthering religion. with all the monuments and perillous
remembrances of it: that which thus teacheth and inciteth
men to expell the Lord and his glory from among
them, and with all to destroy all his people at once from
the face of the earth? what greater hatred and detestation
of it, is wrought in us, than heretofore? what can
we answer to any one of these? must we not needs be
compelled to lay our hand upon our mouthes, or rather
to confesse,Our humiliation and thankfulnesse in sinning impudently. will we, nill we, That this is the humiliation
and thankfulnesse of the greatest part among us, that we
doe many times more rebelliously lift up our faces, sinning
most impudently against his glorious Majestie, and
so far grieve and quench his Spirit, as that we seeke utterly
to extinguish all feare of his name?To grieve and thrust him out. In steed of detestation growing in admiration of Poperie. And in steed of
growing in detestation of that bloodie religion, for the
utter rooting it out, according to the just indignation
then presently had against it, (as some good lawes thereupon
provided, will ever witnesse against us, to the end
of the world) doe not very many begin afresh to grow
in admiration of it, and to dote after it, and the professors
thereof, much more than before, casting away the Lord
and his truth?That he may justly reject us, and his 
                        •
                     ervants praying for us, as he did Iosuah. Ios: 7. 12.
                   May not then the Lord most justly make
a finall remove? May he not righteously forsake and
leave us into their hands, as he left Iudah unto the Babylonian?
May he not say unto his servants, when they
are humbled upon their faces in secret, for these and the
like tokens of his heavy displeasure, and for those who
are inchanted, as by the sorcerers of Egypt, so that they
put their hands to the execrable thing;) as he said to
Iosuah in the like case? I will not be with you any more,
unlesse you will give me my glory; but I will utterly
strip you of all my glory, taking away both religion and
protection at once:He may 
                        •
                     orsake and leave us into their hands. I will leave you to be made a prey
and a desolation for ever; unlesse you will search out the
execrable thing, even all your abominations, whereby
you have made your selves odious and execrable unto

me, and unlesse you will doe your uttermost indevour to
purge and clense your Land of them all? Not onely so
many of us as run a whoring after Poperie,For suffering Poperie so 
                        •
                     o revive, & grow up amongst us againe; after he had given us so just occasion to seeke to root it out utterly. or favour it;
but even all of us; for that thorow our generall negligence
and securitie, it reviveth and groweth up againe
so freshly among us, after he had given such just occasion
to seeke to roote it utterly out of our Land. Yea, after
that he had so (above all former times) set before our faces,
the cruell rage of that blood-thirstie religion in the
cheife professors thereof, against his own heavenly Majestie,
his true religion & glory, against his Annoynted &
all his liege people, professing his name; to destroy all
at once, though with the inevitable hazarding of themselves
both soules and bodies, their owne native Countrie,
their children and houses. And also after that he
had caused us to beare such evidence against that Romish
iniquitie, in those so good lawes then enacted against it,
and as it were to give sentence upon it, having delivered
it into our hands.
               May he not justly say unto us all,1 Kings 20. 32. Whether hee may not say to us for this, as to the King of Isra
                           •
                        l for Benadad.
                   even unto our whole
Nation, for this very sin, as he said to the King of Israel
for letting Benadad goe? when he spake thus unto him:
Because thou hast let goe out of thine hand a man whom I
appointed to dye, thy life shall goe for his life, and thy people
for his people. So may he not speake and threaten us
much more; especially all of us, both Magistrates, Ministers,
and people, into whose hands he hath committed
the holy meanes to restraine and withdraw men
from that murthering religion,Choifly for neglecting y• holy means, whereby they might have bin converted & saved. so many wayes convicted
and condemned, and to bring them to Christ? and principally,
the spirituall meanes of the word of the Lord?
Yea, above all other, may he not speake so to those, to
whom he hath committed the charge of providing a
holy, learned, and faithfull Ministerie, which may tenderly
seeke the winning and saving of every soule; and
also of causing all sorts to submit themselves thereunto,
as unto the Lords ordinance to that end: for these
meanes are first and principally to be used in tender

compassion;
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   when as he hath so manifested the power
thereof, by so much gracious experience in sundry worthy
Congregations, where under such painfull and conscionable
Ministers, the people have bin brought from
Poperie and profanenesse, to embrace and obey the Gospell,
so as hardly one Papist, or notoriously profane or
disordered person, have bin to be found there, but all
cheerefully submitting themselves to the Gospell of
Christ.How God may righteously speake unto all for neglect hereof. May he not most righteously speake thus unto
us therefore; Because through they negligence and carelesnesse,
thou hast suffered to grow up and spread in the
midst of thee, that execrable, bloudie, and Antichristian
religion, (whereby my glory is so desperately oppugned;
whereby I my selfe am so openly sought to be driven
out, and with so high a hand, the soules and bodies
of all my people so endangered every houre; yea, that
which I put into thy power, and commanded thee to
seeke by all holy meanes utterly to destroy out of thy
land; that, against which thou hast so voluntarily made
so good lawes, for the sure ratifying of the speedie execution
of my Commandement,) thy religion therefore
shall goe for it, and all thy glory shall be trampled under
foote by them, untill thou know whom thou hast dishonoured
and provoked hereby.
               And to conclude this point.Whether the Lord may not as justly plead against us, as against Iudah. Hath not the Lord as
good cause to complaine of us, and to plead against us,
for the small account which we make of him, for grieving
his Spirit, and driving him from amongst us, by
this and all other our fearefull sinnes, as ever he had to
complaine of the unkindnesse of Iudah, and even to
take up the same complaint against us, which he did against
them, when he spake thus unto them by the Prophet
Micha before their Captivitie:Mich: 6. 3. 
                  Oh my people, what
have I done unto thee, or wherewith have I grieved thee?
come testifie against me. Surely I brought thee out of the
Land of Aegypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of servants:
I sent before thee also Moses, Aaron and Miriam.

O my people, remember now what Balak King of Moab had
devised, and what Balaam the sonne of Beor answered him,
from Shittim to Gilgal, that yee may know the righteousnes
of the Lord. This is the Lords plea and complaint against
Israel for their unkindnesse; calling the hills and
mountaines to witnesse the equitie of it, before that he
would depart from them, and bring upon them that
strange and terrible judgement, which he so long before
threatned by his Prophets.
               But we will defer this complaint against us,This complaint set downe after. untill
we shall have seene of our iniquities to provoke and
anger the Lord thereby, to be above the abominations
of Iudah, considering that we live in this glorious light
of the Gospell, with our extraordinarie mercies and
meanes of all sorts. Because that then, if God shall give
us hearts in reading to consider of these things aright;
we shall justifie the like complaint of the Lord against
our selves, and shall admire his patient stay, and his abiding
still amongst us.
               Thus much therefore shall suffice in like manner for
this third cause,Conclusion. wherein yet let ech of us aske of our
owne soules; whether in such a decay both of the love
of the truth, and also of holinesse, peace and unitie in the
Church; yea, in such danger of our protection to be utterly
taken away (to passe over, that it is so far departed,
That he that absteineth from evill, makes himself a prey)
and in steed thereof, in such an increase of Poperie, of
licentiousnesse, and of all profanenesse, such an enmitie
against all true pietie, with the insolencie of the enemie,
the Lord doe not call loude upon us all to watch and to
pray for the severall removes of the glory amongst us,
and the evident tokens of the Lords threatned departure,
which he sheweth in the same.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  No priviledges can doe a people any good, if they increase
in their iniquitie; but the moe their mercies have bin, the
greater is their sinne; and the heavier shall their
iudgement be when it commeth, of what
sort soever. And what causes
we have hence to watch
and to pray.
               
               
                  Vers. 4.
                  And the Lord said unto him: Goe through the
midst of the Citie, even through the midst of
Ierusalem, and set a marke upon the foreheads
of them that sigh and cry for all the abominations,
which are done in the midst thereof.
               
               IN the doubling of the speech,In the doubling of the speech, adding Ierusalem. 
                  Goe thorough the midst
of the Citie, even through the midst of Ierusalem, where
the Lord adds Ierusalem, to make the speech more significant;
not content to say, Goe thorow the Citie, but even
thorow Ierusalem: He would have all to take notice; That
though Ierusalem was the deerest unto him of all the
Cities of the world,All to take notice, that God will not spare Ierusalem, if it rebell against him. yet having broken the Covenant
on her part, and also cast him off, and defiled his
Sanctuarie, he will spare her no longer; he will have no
more pitie of any, save onely of his faithfull ones in her:
But contrarily, he will forsake her, cast her off, leave her
to be destroyed, untill the remnant left of her, learne to
seeke him, and to be reconciled to him againe. For the
Lords speech is thus much in effect:Summe of the Lords speech. Goe through the
midst of the city, even through Ierusalem, which though
it be unto me the deerest of all the places in the world,
the Citie which I had chosen to dwell in for ever, and

be as the signet upon my right hand: yet seeing it now
casteth me off, and despiseth to heare my voyce any longer,
or to be reformed, I will not spare it, neither shall
mine eye have pitie on it, save onely of my remnant in it,
but I will leave it to be destroyed and desolate, at least
for seventie yeeres. Whence the Lord would have all
his people to learne,No priviledges can secure a sinnefull people from Gods wrath. That no priviledges, promises,
mercies, deliverances, no, nor any profession of religion,
can doe a people any good at all to secure them from his
vengeance, if once they begin to cast him off and his
Covenant. But when they fall to be stubborne against
him and his word sent unto them in his mercy, he will
cast them off and leave them.
               This also is a matter to be well thought of by us.
Because as they of Iudah were wont to secure themselves
in their prerogatives, even so doe we ordinarily. First
therefore to begin with them: Were not these and the
like the things whereby they were wont to think themselves
safe,Things wherein they secured themselves. and to make their boast of so, that they could
not repent. Sometimes because they had the Lords
Temple,The Temple. Ier. 7. 4.
                   of which they so gloried, saying, The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord. Sometimes they used
to flatter themselves,The Law should not depart from the Priest. depraving Gods word, thus: The
Law shall not depart from the Priest, nor counsell from the
wise, nor the word from the Prophet. And commonly all
singing this song,Ier: 18. 18. which their children learned of them,
We have Abraham to our father:
                  They Abrahās children▪
                   and by these and the
like did they grow so extremely impenitent, that they
could not be moved by any warnings.Matth: 3. 9.
               
               And is it not even so with us;Our custome alike. That whensoever we
are admonished of the Lords anger, either by his word
or judgements on us, or by any other signes or threatnings
against us, to move us to seeke to pacifie his wrath,
is not this usuall with us to harden our hearts, and still
to lull our selves asleepe in our securitie, thinking that
we are in no such danger; and all for some speciall priviledges,
which we imagine that we have? Although it

be acknowledged by all,Priviledges wherein we secure our selves. that there are most grievous
sinnes amongst us, yea, most horrible contempt of God,
and his word, with dreadfull signes of his departing, and
that we have had many strange and terrible warnings,
yet the Lord must needs still continue with us, and there
is no such danger or cause of feare, as some imagine: and
why so?Gods true religion. Because we have Gods true religion, established
by law, maintayned by authoritie, and sincerely professed
by many.Gods favour manifested in our great deliverances. The Lord hath also shewed us such manifest
tokens of his favour and love in our sundry and most
admirable deliverances: He hath taken such vengeance
on our enemies:Overthrowes of our enemies. Prince & hopefull issue. He still discovers and overthrowes
their plots: And which is above all other his blessings,
for that he hath given us such a worthy Head and Governour,
such a hopefull Issue; so established the Scepter,
and concluded such a peace with other Nations on every
side, as hencforth we cannot have any such cause of feare,
as formerly we have had. Are not these and the like,
the things whereby we are commonly waxen so strong
and safe in our owne conceit? And are we not hereupon
become so secure from any dreadfull judgement, as that
no warnings from heaven nor earth, words, corrections,
threats, nor yet any mercies can do the greatest part any
more good, but that they desperately proceed from evill
to worse, as though no hurt could come unto us.
               Let us to this end consider a litle of the priviledges of
this Citie and people;Ierusalems priviledges. and then if the Lord open our
eyes we shall easily see,2 King: 23. 27. what causes we have of this our
confidence and securitie.Chosen to be the place of Gods residencie. First for Ierusalem; The Lord
chose it to dwell in for ever, and Sion to be an habitation
for himselfe: yea, he after a peculiar manner tyed his residencie
to that place; whereas now it is no more tyed
to any one place than unto another, but one Country
now being unthankfull, he removes his Church and abode
to another.1. King. 8. There Salomon by the appointment of
the Lord himselfe,His Temple there. built a house for his glorious Majestie,
as the place wherein he would be specially worshipped,

of all the places in the world. Such promises also were
made by him unto that place, as never unto any other:
That the people praying there (because the Temple was
a speciall figure of Iesus Christ) he would heare those
their petitions made in that place.Prayers heard there chiefly. Or when they could
not come thither,1. King: 8. 14. if they did but turne their faces towards
Ierusalem in prayer, that he would heare their
supplications made in faith and obedience,2 King: 8. 48, 49. as he heard
Daniel in the Captivitie.Valley of visions. It was so famous for visions
and revelations of the Lord, by meanes of the Arke of
the Testimonie there;Dan: 6. 10. the Priests with the Vrim and
Thummim;
                  Isa
                        •
                     : 22. 1. the Prophets and messengers of the Lord;
that it was called the valley of visions;All must pray for it. yea, it was so far
preferred before all other places, as that all must pray for
the peace of Ierusalem.Psal: 122. 6. So that the Prophet David
prayes for the prosperitie of all them who love Ierusalem.Perfection of beautie.
It is called for the excellencie of it, The perfection
of beautie,
                        
                           •
                        am: 2. 15. The ioy of the whole earth: and by our Saviour
it is named,Ioy of the earth. 
                  The holy Citie, and at that time, when it did
grow towards the very worst.Matth: 4. 5. It was then so deere unto
him,The holy Citie. as that he wept over it to thinke of the sinnes of it,
with the miseries that were to come upon it for the same.Luc: 19. 41.
And to shut up this point: when our Saviour will set
out unto the Church,Heb: 12. 22. the glory of the kingdome of
heav'n,Revel: 21. 10. in the first flourishing estate thereof in earth, and
fully in heav'n, he finds no fitter resemblance to expresse
it by, than by Ierusalem, calling it the new Ierusalem, and
holy Ierusalem; because Ierusalem was the type thereof.
These are some of the priviledges of the Citie.
               For the prerogatiues of the people,The prerogatives of the people. they are far more
surpassing,Rom: 9. 4. if we will beleeve the commendations which
holy Paul gives of them in the 9. chapter to the Romanes
vers. 4. where he so highly esteemes of them, that
he could have wished himselfe accursed, yea, cast away
utterly and seperate from Christ for evermore, from eternall
joy to perpetuall miserie, even for his brethren, that
were his kinsmen according to the flesh, if it had beene

possible therby to turne away the Lords anger from
them and to reconcile them unto his Majestie againe;
that so he might have beene glorified in saving of them.
These particular prerogatives are there moreover ascribed
unto them.
               
                   1. They were Israelites, that is,Israelites. A people descended
of the most noble stock of all the world; Israels posteritie
who prevailed with God: discending lineally from
faithfull Abraham, the father of all the faithfull, the
freind of God, and with whom God entred into covenant,
to be his God and the God of his seed forever.
               
                   2. The Adoption belonged to them. God freely
chose them and them only of all the people of the earth
to be his owne peculiar people.Having the right of Adoption▪
                   He carried them forth
of Egypt into Canaan the garden of the earth, as upon
Eagles wings, plaguing Kings for their sakes, and expelling
mighty nations to plant them in. Never ceasing
untill he had setled them and his Tabernacle (the place
of his rest) in this City.Called of God his sonnes, his first borne, his pretious ones. They were moreover so deare
unto him, as that he cannot content himselfe to call them
his sonnes, but he stiles them his first borne, his pretious
ones in whome his soule delighted. So tender he was over
them,Ier. 31. 20. as when he was compelled to chastise them for
their stubbornesse, his soule was troubled for them as a
deere father striking his childe with a heavy heart.Ier. 2, 3. And
above all dignities, he cals them a thing hallowed; the
 first fruits of all nations unto him. Thirdly the glory belonged
unto them,Thirdly the glory was theirs. that is, the honour of all the earth.
He gave them his owne name to call upon, and himselfe
to be called their God. He vouchsafed them his presence
to dwell among and in the midst of them: to
shew unto them his glorious Majestie, by such visible
signes,2 Sam: 4. 22. as never any other people saw: specially by the
Arke, which was therefore called the glory of God and
the glory of Israell: Yea, they had all that glory spoken
of before, belonging only unto them of all other people
both inward in his presence most sensibly and also outward

in knowledge, holinesse and protection, as we have
heard. Their fourth prerogative was.The covenant. That they had 
the covenant, that is, Gods covenant made with them in
solemne words to be their God and they alone his people,
and Canaan to be theirs for an everlasting possession.
               Fiftly, the giving of the law was their prerogative.
The law of God was given unto them first and immediatly
upon mount Sinai out of the midst of the fire.The giving of the law. The
Lord there so spake to them as never people heard him.
Besides all their judiciall lawes whereby they were governed
(passing Solons lawes and the lawes of all people
besides) were given unto them by the Lord himselfe.
               Sixtly, The worship was theirs,The worship theirs. Gods owne true 
worship, according to his appointment to be performed
by the priests and Levites in a most excellent order, was
committed unto them alone, which was continued for
the outward manner and forme, though not without
some corruptions, untill the very time that this captivity
began: and yet the same corruptions also graciously
reformed by that holy Iosiah.
               Seventhly, The promises were theirs,The promises. both the promises 
of this life, and that to come were specially and
chiefly made to them, and to those who should joyne unto
them.
               Eightly, The fathers were theirs,The Fathers theirs. those chiefe fathers 
of the Church, the Ancient Patriarcks, Abraham, Isaack,
and Iacob, to whom the promises were made first & confirmed
againe and againe to thousand generations. So
that they might seeme the sole heires of the promises,Acts: 3. 25. as
they are called the children of the Prophets and of the
covenants which God made unto the fathers.
               Ninthly, which is the chiefest and highest degree of 
all their excellencie,Of them Christ came. Of them Christ came, he was of
their stock and kinred. He who hath so honored all
mankind in taking on him the nature of man, must
needs honour them much more, with whom he entred
into so neere a bond to be of their flesh, even he who is

God himselfe blessed for evermore. To conclude, all
 this their dignitie, The Lord had so preferred both
them and their city,The Lord had so miraculously preserved them as all thought Ierusalem coul
                        •
                      never have beene invaded and so declared his love unto them
in his manifold and most miraculous preservations and
deliverances of Ierusalem, that untill the very time of
this lamentable captivitie, neither the kings of the earth,
nor all the inhabitants of the world, would have beleeved
that ever the enemie could have entred within the
gates of Ierusalem. Thus have we had in some sort the
priviledges of the City and the people.
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     . 4. 12. Out of which
we may most cleerely see,The Iewes if ever any had causes to secure themselues in regard of their prerogatiues. that if ever people might promise
unto themselves security in regard of outward prerogatives,
it was certainly they. Yet when they proceed
so farre to dishonour the Lord by abusing his religion,
which he had committed in trust unto them alone to
magnifie him by, and by committing all the abominations
which follow after to make his name thereby to be
blasphemed among the heathen, and when all other his
rods and meanes can do them no more good to reclaime
them and reforme them,Yet comming to a height of impiety he will spare them no longer.
But when there is no other remedie the destroyers must
come,Deut 28. 58. 63. they must spare none, but execute the Lords most
terrible vengeance, according to all that which in his
law he had threatned long afore;There is no further remedy but destroyers must come. for presently within
three moneths, after the death of their worthy king Iosiah,
whom Ieremie so much bewaileth in his lamentations,
calling him the breath of their nostrills, began all
those plagues of this people.2 King 23 31. 32. 33. For Iehoahaz the eldest son
of Iosiah was taken captive of Pharaoh Necho and carried
into Egypt,
                  Their miseries begin within three moneths after Iosiahs death. which could not be done without much
bloudshed. There land also became tributary to the
king of Egypt, and that tribute, which was very great
was to be levied upon every man of the land according
to their estimation,2 King. 23. 35. whereby all of them became servants
unto him.B
                        •
                     t ceased not ti
                        •
                     l the desola
                     
                        •
                     on accomplished. In the place of Iehoahaz did the king of Egypt
set up Eliakim his brother, whom he named Iehoiakim.
So he and his people remained servants to the king of

                  Egypt, untill they were soone after conquered againe by
the king of Babylon, who prevailing against the king
of Egypt, they all became tributaries to the king of Babylon.
                  2 King. 14. 26.
Afterward Eliakim rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar came against him
with great power, tooke him, bound him with chaines,
carried him into Babel with many of the vessels of the
house of the Lord.2 Chron. 36. 10. In his place did the king of Babel
set up Iehoiakim his sonne to raigne in his stead, who
reigned but three moneths, but he also is carried away
into Babylon, with other pretious vessels of the house of
the Lord,2 Chr. 36. 12. 13. and Zedechiah his uncle set in his place; who
rebelling in like manner against Nebuchadnezzar, (who
had caused him to sweare by God) and not humbling
himselfe at the commandement of the Lord by the Prophet
Ieremie; but hardening his neck and making his
heart obstinate that he might not returne to the Lord
God of Israell, the cheife also of the priests and of the
people sinning wonderfully and not harkening to Gods
messengers, he likewise was taken, his sonnes slaine before
his eyes, his owne eyes put out, he bound in chaines
and caried into Babel, and all this desolation foreshewed
was fully accomplished.
               All this came upon them,The causes of the captivitie, not the sinnes of a few yeeres but many of them committed long before 2 King. 21. 15. 16.
                   as the Lord himselfe saith
plainly, partly for the sinnes committed long before
the dayes of Iosiah, even since their comming out of Egypt,
and more specially for their provocations wherewith
Manasses the grave father of Iosiah had provoked
him by all his Idolatrie, and by the bloud of his seruants
which he shed, whereof the land was not yet purged;
though that bloud had beene shed threescore yeeres before,2 King, 24, 3. 4. & 21, 1
                        •
                     , 20.
besides his sinne wherewith he made Iudah to sinn
and to doe euill in his sight.2 King: 23, 26. And yet more also for that
in Iosiahs dayes the peoples heart did not so melt for
those and the like iniquities,2 King: 21, 17. as Iosiahs heart did,2 Cro: 34. 27. but
they rather still approved generally of their former evill
waies and practised them secretly. And lastly because of

these abominations following, whereby they filled up
the measure of their iniquities, and against which the
Prophets so cried out, ever threatning this judgement
for the same untill it came upon them.
               But heere it may be said,Our principall prerogatives whereupon we secure our selues. And are made unthankfull. howsoever these prerogatives
of theirs were indeed exceeding great and may astonish
us all, both in regard of our former heinous sinnes and
the judgements that have beene upon us both formerly
and of late, with the unplacable rage of our adversaries;
yet we have many things which may seeme to assure us
of Gods favour, and secure us from any such judgement
or the like.
               As first (which was shortly touched) for that we have
so many worthy preachers and good people unfeignedly
fearing the Lord. Secondly, that we have the Lords
true religion so soundly maintained. Thirdly, all open
Idolatrie is banished. Fourthly, such good lawes so religiously
established; Fiftly, for that more then all these,
we have the Lords annointed so graciously and miraculously
set over us in peace, with such a happy unity concluded
withall neighbour nations, and also so blessed an
issue. Sixtly Above all these, The Lord hath so often
testified his fatherly love and care for us, in such tender
and marvellous preservations, both of our Princes and
of our whole nation, and in so bringing his and our enemies
to shame, as he hath heereby made this Iland the
wonder of the world. And lastly for that never nation
did injoy the Gospell so long in that flourishing prosperity
and peace, which we have done; All these and the
like are such evident tokens of the Lords favour & love
towards us, as that we can have no such cause of feare, as
this forewarning & many of our Preachers would beare
us in hand.
               To answer all these and whatsoever else can be said to
secure us;Answer to our securing upon our prerogatives. Let us but consider, what King reigned in
Ierusalem, and how many yeeres togither before this
Captivitie, even when these judgements were so threatned

and hastned on,Iudah in the beginning of her miseries nothing inferiour to us in such prerogatives. and when many of these abominations
following were committed, and how he continued
till within three moneths of these miseries begun, as we
heard before: and it will appeare most like, that this
people could not be then inferiour to us in any of these
signes of Gods favour, except this, that we live in the
dayes of the Gospell; to which we shall answer after.
For first immediately before this vengeance began, they 
had that most holy King Iosiah,
                  They had that holy King Iosiah.
                   whose praises and worthy
example shall remaine unto the end of the world;
and him they injoyed, reigning in peace over them, for
one and thirtie yeeres togither. And secondly, for puritie 
of religion,Puritie of Religion. we know that never King went beyond
Iosiah in his reformation and care, compelling all strictly
to serve the Lord according to his word;2 King: 23. 3, 4, 5, 6. & 12. 24, 25. and in taking
away, so far as he was able, the very monuments of Idolatrie,
with all things that might either revive it openly
or secretly; or that might be any way a snare unto the
people. And also how he reformed all other abominations,
                  All abominations reformed.
that could be spied in all the land of Iudah, or in
Ierusalem. So as the Holy Ghost beares this witnesse of
him, that like unto Iosiah was no King before him, that
turned unto the Lord with all his heart, nor rose up
after him: That for puritie of religion, and a holy reformation,
we can make no doubt but they were equall
to us.
               And for worthy Teachers according to that time, I 
take it,Worthy Teachers according to that time. that we can make no question, but that they had
many of the Priests and Levites both learned and godly,
when the King himself was so forward to incourage and
provoke them thereunto. Besides those famous Prophets
stirred up by the Lord extraordinarily, as Ieremie, Z
                        •
                     
                     phanie,
Habakuk and others, with Esay and Micha but a
litle before, for many yeeres togither, and Ezechiel presently
after. All these and sundry others they had, howsoever
they dealt most unkindly with them, as Ieremies
example doth fully witnesse.
               
                  
                   For good people in like manner, it cannot be imagined,Many good people.
but that where such a worthy head & example was,
with such excellent Teachers, there must needs be also
many of the children which God had given to them;
and those of all sorts, even of the chiefe Magistrates, as
well as others. Such were these which mourned in Ierusalem
for the abominations,Isai: 8. 18. who are commanded to be
marked, who lived when they were at the very worst,
and sundry Worthies, as those which spake for Ieremie,
and others, which were caried away in the Captivitie;
yea,Dan: 1. 3, 4, 5. even children of the Kings seede, and of the Princes,
as Daniel and his companions, to wit, Hananiah, Mishael,
Azariah, with others, as we shall see hereafter. Though
these were and had long time bin made as signes and
wonders unto the rest,Isai: 8. 18. and the off-scowring of all
other, like as those Prophets were whose doctrine they
obeyed.
               
                   As for Idolatrie; It is most evident,All open Idolatry and the monuments thereof taken away. that they had
none openly in all Iosiahs dayes after the reformation;
nor so much as the prints suffred to remaine, nor any
thing that might revive it, as we saw, but onely that they
had not repented of that which had bin before.2 Chron▪ 34. 33.
               
               And for peace;2 King: 23. 1, 2, 3. 25. It seemeth to be manifest; That
Iosiah had peace with all about him: for although he
 was slaine in warre by Pharaoh Necho King of Egypt, it
was his owne seeking,
                     I
                           •
                        siah had peace with all about him. and a just punishment for attempting
it, and not consulting with the Lord, nor hearkning
to the words of Necho,
                  2 Chron: 35. 20, 21, 22. which were from the mouth
of God. For the King of Egypt sent messengers unto
him, to tell him that he came not against him, but against
the house of his enemie, which was the King of Assyria,
and therefore he would not in any case have foughten
with him. If the Assyrian had bin Iosiahs enemie, it is
not like that Iosiah would have hindered the King of
Egypt from fighting against him.
               
                   And finally for their securitie through their Prince
and princely progenie,Iudahs security then in regard of their Prince and princely progenie. if ever Nation could glory therein,

it was surely they, having, as was shewed, as worthy a
King as ever was, by the Lords owne record: whom
they therefore accounted the breath of their nostrils, and
such a goodly tree as under whose shadow they were safe
in the midst of the Heathen,2 King: 23. 25. as they mourne after in the
Lamentations.Lament. 4. 20. This their good King had also sundry
sonnes and sonnes sonnes,2 King: 23. 24. as may appeare in the historie
alledged before.
               As for Gods tender love and care shewed for us in
our continuall preservations,Miraculous preservation. and in all our former deliverances,
the abuse of them cannot but increase the
wrath against us, considering our grievous unthankfulnesse.
Besides that they had also then as just cause to
boast hereof, as we have now or much more, both in that
continuall preservation of their Land, through a feare
cast on their enemies, that none durst invade them, so
long as they obeyed the Lord in any good sort, (of
which we spake) and by their great deliverances, as that
in the dayes of Ezechiah, and others mentioned.
               Whereas this may be yet further imagined,The Gospell contemned can be no freedome from a temporall scourge. for our
vaine securing our selves, that we live in the dayes of the
Gospell, wherein the judgements of God are more spirituall,
and therefore having received so many strange deliverances,
it is more like that he intends to punish us
more spiritually; which is indeed the heaviest judgement
of all other. We answer; That true it is; That
we may as yet certainely expect an increase of the spirituall
judgement of blindnesse of minde and hardnesse
of heart, to fill up the measure of our iniquities, and to
make the condemnation of all the reprobate and our
plagues the more just thereby; yet these things following
thought of and well weighed, with the former, may
cause us to dread some temporall plague, and that heavier
than all which have gone before.Witnesse temporall judgements on sundry Churches and Nations▪
                   As first the outward
and temporall judgements which God hath been
wont to bring for the contempt of the Gospell; like as
in the last finall destruction and scattering of this Nation

of the Iewes over the face of the earth after the preaching
of Christ and his Apostles: and sundry other, where
the Gospell hath come, as the judgements accomplished
in removing those seven golden Candlesticks of Asia,Apoc: 2. 5, 10, 12, 13 & 2. 10, 16.
and in many other famous Churches, with the afflictions
upon them; which must needs be very grievous in all
reason, before the Gospell could be utterly taken away.
And secondly,2. Our neerenesse to such scourges, besides what we have felt. if we call to minde, how many forewarnings
we have had of such a sharpe scourge; and withall
how often it hath bin so neere to our backs.
               Thirdly, that we have had (as I take it) all the fore-runners
of the greatest temporall calamitie,3. That we have had all the fore-runners of it. which is
the very sword it selfe. That we have felt both dearths
and pestilences, and also heard the cryes of the poore
for mercilesse oppressors, ravening and devouring almost
in every part of our Land. Besides the taking from
us so many of the Royall issue, and principally Him, upon
whom all the eyes of our Land were bent, for continuance
of our shelter, yea of our life and all our blessings:
to cause all the godly to droope in fearing continually
some greater judgement, and giving all the enemies such
cause to lift up their heads afresh, as now expecting their
day againe.
               Fourthly, the implacable malice of our bloudie enemies
against us,4. The implacable malice of enemies, with all the sub
                        •
                     leties of hell. either to destroy us utterly, or to bring
our Nation by strong hand under that Babylonish yoke
againe; which cruell rage of theirs doth threaten such
a plague every houre, but that the Lord in mercie stayeth
it.
               This,5. We cannot be more secured that our land is as yet purged of the Idolatry and blood of his servants, than Ierusalem in Iosiahs dayes. fiftly, may terrifie us all, so oft as we thinke of it;
for that as I take it (under submission to better judgements)
we cannot be any more assured, that our Land
is as yet purged more of the abominable Idolatrie committed
in former times, and of the bloud of Gods servants,
the faithfull Martyrs of Iesus Christ in the dayes
of Queene Marie, with innumerable moe abominations
committed both before and since, and increased also

to this day to anger the Lord, than Ierusalem was in the
dayes of Iosiah.
                  2 King: 21. 15, 16. If God remembred against Iudah all
the Idolatrie, bloodshed, and other like abominations of
former dayes, and in the day of his visitation visited
them for all, what can we looke for, or how can we secure
our selves?
               And yet above all these,God purposing to remaine wt us, must needes deale as a kind father to bring us to obedience. That if the Lord doe love us,
and purpose to continue his religion and presence with
us, (as we have great cause of hope that he doth) then
he will deale with us as kinde and wise fathers are wont
to doe with their disobedient children, he will double
and treble his fatherly strokes upon us, untill he amends
us and makes us stoope to him. He hath already corrected
us very sharply, with all his other rods, over and
over, and continually one or other upon our backs, and
most thicke of late time; whence we must needs expect
a more sharpe scourge to awaken and amend us than any
of the former, or than all of them togither. And what
can that be, we take not upon us to divine. But let every
one bethinke himselfe, and looke into the booke of
God, and he will easily see by the course of Gods former
proceedings, what cause we have to feare: especially, if
the same abominations be found amongst us, or rather
greater than these, for which the Lord threatned, and
brought this wofull judgement: for if he spared not the
naturall branches then,Rom: 1
                        •
                      21. neither will he spare us now,1 Cor: 10. 11. being
but wilde Olives, and having so far greater light
than they,This our lesson now. and other meanes to reclaime us. And therefore
this is our lesson in this our day, and left to admonish
us now, as it was given first for them.
               For other prerogatives;Other prerogatives more increaseth the wrath; as the Gospell for our denying the power of it. If any can be found wherein
we doe excell them, they will but rather serve to increase
and hasten our judgement. As the Gospell, for example,
offring more grace and power of obedience, must needs
more kindle the Lords wrath. Because so many of us
making profession of it,Tit. 1. 16. doe yet denie the power thereof,2 Sam: 12. 14.
so far as that we make the very enemies to blaspheme,

and doe moreover proceede not onely to hate,Isai: 52. 5. & 59. 15. but also
to scorne all who labour to bring forth the fruit of it by
a holy conversation.Ier: 15. 10. & 20. 7, 8. For as it is with the most gracious
and munificent Princes,As the grace of a Prince abused. that they will shew most severitie
to such of their Subjects, whom no patience nor benefits
can winne, but that they rather waxe more rebellious
by the mercy and bountie of their Prince: so we
must know certainely,Rom: 2. 24. that it is with the Lord, that his
mercies so abused, must needs provoke him to the heaviest
indignation: which if it be but the removing of
our candlesticke,The removing of our Candlesticke the heaviest judgment. how dreadfull it is; yea, whether it be
not far worse than any bodily plague, let all the wise-hearted
judge.
               Thus much likewise for this point:Conclusion. That no favour
or priviledges can give any securitie to a sinfull people,
professing Gods religion, if they begin to cast off his
yoke, and to waxe worse and worse, to make his name to
be blasphemed; but the moe their priviledges are, the
greater is their sin, and the more grievous their punishments
shall be. And secondly, what causes we have
hereupon to give our selves more instantly to watching
and prayer, for the innumerable mercies and priviledges
bestowed upon our Land on the one side; and the increase
of our sinnes, with the tokens of Gods vengeance,
and our deep securitie on the other side. Lest our plagues
doe prove greater than the plagues of all other people,Ma
                        •
                     : 11. 21, 22, 23.
as much as we seeme to have bin lifted up above most,
if not all others, in blessings, in this last and most sinfull
age of the world, if all our blessings temporall and spirituall
be compared togither and considered aright. Oh
Lord, at length open our eyes, and then we shall so cleerly
see our estate, that it will not be any more needfull to
cry unto us to awake, to watch and to pray.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The marking of the godly: that is, How Gods owne people
are marked in the midst of the greatest confusions, before
the destructions come, and what caus
                        •
                     s
every one hath to watch and to pray,
that he may be so marked.
               
               
                  Vers. 4.
                  And set it marke on the foreheads of all that
mourne.
               
               IN this Commission to the marking Angell to set a
marke on the foreheads of all that mourne.The Lord hath ever a speciall care of his in the greatest cō
                     fusions. The Lord
giving such a charge to his holy Angell thus carefully
to preserve his chosen from this destruction; to goe
thorow the Citie, and set a marke upon every one of
them, to overpasse none: and also the destroying Angels
to follow after the marking Angell, so as they hurt none,
till all the faithfull be marked; he would have all to
know thus much: That he never casts off the care of his
people, no, not then when all things seeme most confused
in the earth. And secondly, when they are so mingled
amongst the wicked, as that they can hardly be
knowne amongst themselves, much lesse to the eyes of
the world, that yet he still tendreth them, and watcheth
over them continually. Thirdly, that he will at length
make his fatherly care and watchfull providence known
unto them, and that by some gracious and wonderfull
deliverance, even in this world, if it be so best for them
and for his glory. And lastly, that they evermore must
be surely marked before the destruction come. The Lord
hath bin very carefull to set downe this point also most
clearely, in every of those great destructions, which are

recorded in Scriptures, for examples and warnings to all
posteritie: That hereby his owne faithfull servants may
receiue comfort against the greatest afflictions that can
come upon the world.
               As first in that terrible▪
                  1. At the stood. overflowing in the generall
destruction of the old world. The waters came not untill
Noah had first prepared and finished the Arke,G
                        •
                     n: 11. 16. and also
God himselfe had shut up both him and his in the same;
so locking and sealing up the dores with his owne hand,
as that all the waters, rage they never so horribly, and
hoyse him up above the highest mountaines, yet cannot
hurt him. And why dealeth the Lord thus carefully
with Noah? Thee (saith he) have I seene righteous before
me in this generation: that is, I have seene they heart sincere,
and thy purpose and indevour ever to please me;
not following the course of the times, but crying out of
the iniquitie thereof,Hebr: 11. 7. beleeving my threatnings, and preparing
the Arke according to my commandement, to
save thy selfe and familie from the vengeance to come.
               Secondly,2. At Sodomes destruction. in that dreadfull overthrow of Sodome and
Gomorrha, before the fire and brimstone came upon
those filthy Cities,Gen: 19. 16. 
                  Lot must not onely be marked, but
also gotten forth safe from the destruction. The Angels
have such a charge of him,17. 22. as that they get him by the
hand, pull and hale him for haste, being far more carefull
for him, than he is for himselfe, and they never leave
him, till they have safe conducted him out, and then
bid him hie for his life, get him into Zoar. They tell him
plainely, that the Lords care was so great for him, that
they can doe nothing in this destruction, their hands
were tyed, untill he be there safe out of all the danger.
The reason of it also is carefully set downe by the Lord
himselfe,2 Pet: 2. 7, 8. why he accounted him worthy to escape; for
that he was a just and righteous man, grieved with the
uncleane conversation of the wicked, his righteous
soule was vexed from day to day with all their abominable
deeds.
               
                  
Thirdly,3. Before this destruction. before this destruction the Lord foretold to
Ieremie particularly, That he would give him his life
for a prey,
                     Ieremie & sundry of those who favoured him. in all places wheresoever he came, because of
his faithfulnesse in sticking to his word and commandement,
and for his warning the people. And so indeed it
came to passe,Ier: 40. 2, 3, 4. that the Lord did not onely preserve him
with sundry others fearing his name; but gave him also
speciall favour, in the eyes of the enemies, who led them
captives. So as Nebuchadnezzar himselfe gives charge to
Nebuzaradan his chiefe steward, to look well to Ieremie,
to doe him no harme, but to doe for him as himselfe
would; whether to goe home with them into Babylon,
and there to receive kindnesse, or to tarry still in the
land of Iudah with the people, which should be left
there behinde. And this mercy did the Lord shew not
onely unto Ieremie, but unto others also that had bin
kinde unto his Prophet:as Ebedmelech.
                   As to Ebedmelech the Ethiopian,
who had spoken for Ieremie to the King of Iudah,
to get him out of the dungeon:Ier: 38. 8. to 13. to whom also the Lord
gave his life for a prey, because he put his trust in the
Lord.Ier: 39. 16, 17, 18. Gedaliah. And Gedaliah▪
                   whose father Ahikam had formerly
delivered Ieremie out of danger, and from the rage that
was against him,Ier: 39. 24. & 48. 5. & 26. 24. he is made Governour of them that remained
in the Land, howsoever he was trecherously
slaine not long after.Baruch. So to Baruch in like manner, who
was Ieremies Scribe,Ierem. 45. 5. and had stucke so close to him in all
his troubles; God promiseth to give him also his life
for a prey in all places wheresoever he came. We have
likewise the ensamples of Daniel, and of his three companions,
                     Daniel and his companions.
called the three children; unto whom, besides
their preservation from the common destruction in the
first Captivitie of Babylon,Dan: 1. 3, 4. 6. 7. 
                        •
                     . 5, 6, 9. 13, 15, 17. the Lord granted that extraordinarie
favour, both to be brought up by the King of
Babylon himselfe, and by his speciall appointment, in all
excellent learning, and so far to surpasse all others, as to
be most meet for their singular knowledge and understanding,
to stand with high favour in the presence of

that mightie Monarch, though otherwise a cruell oppressor
of the Church of God, who had caried them away
captive.Dan: 3 27. He gave unto them moreover divine testimonies
of his fatherly care and protection, in the presence
of all his enemies, in those miraculous deliverances
out of the fierie furnace,Dan: 1. 8. and from the Lions den, because
they did cleave so fast unto the Lord, that they would
not suffer themselves to be polluted with the least part
or shew of the Idolatrie of the Heathen.6. 22. The like favour
for preservation he granted to Ezechiel,
                  So to Ezekiel & sundry others. and sundry
others.
               And to omit all other examples;The Christians before the last destruction of Ierusalem. At the last and finall
desolation of this Citie and Nation by the Romanes;
Histories doe report that presently before the taking of
Ierusalem, a voyce was heard among the Christians, Goe
forth to Pella, Goe forth to Pella, which so soone as ever
the Christians had done, and that they were safe there,
the Citie was sacked, and all that desolation fully accomplished,
as was declared before.
               God thus providing to set them safe before the destroyers
came. Whereby we may see evidently both by
the testimonies and charge of the Lord himselfe, and the
continuall examples, that the faithfull servants of God,
cleaving firmely unto him, in the backsliding of the
rest, have the onely immunitie and priviledge, above all
others, to be preserved at such times, so far as shall be any
way good for them; and shall be withall, for the Lords
owne glory, and the salvation of his people.
               To confirme us yet further in the assurance hereof,For assurance hereof we have the Lords promise & direction.
and to stir up our hearts, so to walke with our God, before
that time doe come, we have the Lords most gratious
direction and promise made to the Prophet Esay and
to the godly of his time,Isai: 8. 11, 12, 13. teaching them how they should
carie themselves in such outrage of iniquitie, and in such
signes of the approaching of his vengeance. he hath
caused it to be written for a most comfortable president
to all succeeding ages, and for a sure preservative against

all feare of every such danger.How to behave our selves in such times as that we may be sure to have the Lord a Sanctuary to us in all places. It is therefore carefully to
be marked of all his servants. The Prophet saith, That
the Lord spake unto him in taking him by the hand, as it
were incouraging and strengthening him and thus he
taught him. That they should not walke in the way of
that people, nor have a confederacy with them, nor
feare their feare, no, nor yet be afraid of them: that is;
He would be a place of refuge and comfort unto them against
all terrors,I
                        •
                     zech: 11. 14. 16. as the Sanctuary was. And by the Prophet
Ezekiel he adds, That he would be thus unto them,
in all the places wheresoever they should come.
               Lastly besides this gratious promise we are to observe,Obserue how the godly are excepted in the greatest denunciation of vengeance.
how in the most terrible denuntiation of vengeance against
this people, that God would not spare them, for
the greatnesse of their iniquitie, no, though Noah, Iob, and
Daniel were amongst them, yet alwaies this exception is
added and carefully recorded by the Spirit of God,Ezek: 24. 14. 16. 18, 20. That
they, to wit, Noah, Iob, and Daniel, being amongst them,
Should yet deliver their owne soules by their right eousnesse.
And againe, They only shal be delivered themselves, but the
land shall be wast: So the point is most cleere from the
Lords owne warrant.
               Let us now consider the reasons of it to strengthen us
yet further against the time of temptation. A principall
cause hereof is, The Lords most fatherly and tender love
towards these. That howsoever they are unto the world
men most odious and monstrous,Isa: 8. 18. for that they will not run
with the rest to the same excesse,
                  1 Pet. 4. 4. as the Apostle Peter
speakes, and because they by their holy profession and
carriage condemne the world as Noah did in his age, by
his preaching and living and making of the Arke, yet
are they unto the Lord as deere as the apple of his owne
eye.Zach. 2. 8. That he cannot possibly forget them, wheresoever
they be dispersed and howsoever. No, though it were
possible for the mother to be
                     •
                  so unnaturall as to forget
the childe of her wombe,Isay. 44. 14, 15, 16. yet he cannot forget these.
They are graven on the palmes of his hands and are ever

in his sight. His mercy is about them in the greatest distresses,
as a wall of fire to fence them and to consume all
contrary violence, so farre as he seeth best. And as chariots
of fire to carry them safe out of all such dangers,Isa: 43. 1. 3. yea,
to save and deliver them in the midst of the fire and in
the midst of the water. And therefore when the day of
the Lords vengeance commeth, those who formerly
thought on his name, and spake to keep others from the
wickednes of the times, are taught to comfort themselves
herein, because they are written in the booke of his remembrances,
                  Mal: 3. 16, 17, 18.
as Malachi speaketh. They are indeed the Lords
true flock: & then will he declare it openly; sparing & tendering
thē as a father doth his own son in whō he is delighted;
that men may oftentimes plainly discerne betweene the
righteous and betweene the wicked, betweene him that serveth
God, and him that serveth him not, as we saw in all
the former destructions. And finally for their sakes It is
why he spares a sinfull nation so long. But if they be
once forth, the rest can looke for nothing but fearefull
execution of vengeance, for then he bids, Smite and
spare none as followeth.Iob: 22. 30.
               
               But heere It will be said, If this be so; How commeth
it to passe,Objection. that many of the godly doe so oft feele the
smart of such calamities as well as the rest.The godly oft feele the smart of such calamities aswell as the rest. As it is very
cleare. That many of the deare servants of God, were caried
away in this and the former captivity as well as others:
even many of those who were marked; as we
heard before. That the Prophet himselfe was carried
away in the former captivitie, as also Daniel and his companions,
with many other, and so were partakers of the
common miseries of the captivitie with the rest. It is
likewise very probable that sundry of them died by the
sword of the enemie, and some by other calamities. And
on the other side It is certaine, that many of the wicked
escaped amongst the godly. It may be therefore demanded,
what this marking did then stand the godly insteed
or what they were better for it.
               
                  
To this it may be answered,Answ: First, That this is very
true,Why the Lord oft lets his, feele the smart with the rest. that many of the godly doe often feele the smart of
such generall judgements. And that most justly for sundry
causes, for which God threatneth, his wont to correct
his deerest seruants. As either for their former securitie,Apoc, 1, 2. 4, 5. 15, 16, 20▪ & 3. 19.
or else for seeking their peace carnally, by fashioning
themselves unto the evill times, as the greatest part
is wont to doe ever, so far as possibly they may, not falling
utterly from God. Or for that they have not mourned
for the abominations of the rest. Or in that they
have not bene so instant with the Lord, for pacifying
his wrath and turning away the judgment as they ought.
Or for neglecting their duties of Magistracie, ministrie,
government in their families; or at least of admonition,
exhortation, or example for saving the rest, and staying
the course of sinne. Or finally for that they have not
beene so faithfull in all things, in their places & callings
as they should: or for some other their scandalous sins,
or sinnes against conscience, whereby they have provoked
the Lord against them: for he useth to correct such,
and other sinnes like to these in his owne servants, by
heavy and sharpe temporall scourges, and sometimes by
death it selfe. Thus he shewred his displeasure against
good Iosiah for thrusting himselfe into battell without
warrant.2 Chro, 35. 21, 22. And against Moses for not sanctifying the Lord
at the waters of strife.Num: 20. 12. 1 Cor: 11. 30. Among the Corinthians also for
their unreverent receiving the Lords supper. And thus
may he suffer his owne deerest servants, to endure the
common calamities with the rest at such times, either for
a just correction of their former sinnes, as hath beene
shewed; or only for the tryall of their faith and constancy,
or for an exercise of their faith and repentance, and to
make them more fervent in praier, or to further their
sanctification to conforme them more & more to Christ;
or it may be to increase the vengeance against the enemies
through their cruelty against them,Apoc: 3. 14. or some other
like cause, as we shall see more after.
               
                  
Yet neverthelesse,What the marking profits Gods 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     uants suffering with the rest. The marking teacheth us thus
much, That though such goe into Captivity, yet there
the Lord will be with them, his holy hand will there be
over them as a buckler; There he will so protect them,
that he will turne all the evils that come unto them,Isay, 4
                        •
                     , 12, 3. 41. 8. 9▪ 10. still
to doe them good. He will thereby further their salvation
and increase their glory in the heavens.Rom, 8. 28. And when
they are killed all the day long, and accounted as sheepe
for the slaughter; yet in all that which they indure, they
are more then conquerours, thorough him who hath loved
them.Rom, 8. 36, 37. He chastiseth them thereby to make them
to walke more holily and more humbly in his presence;
and so teacheth them more sound obedience by the
things which they suffer, then ever they learned in all
their lives before, that they shall in time acknowledge,
that to have beene the best schoole that ever they came
into.Heb, 5 8. By this fire he fineth them from much of the drosse
of their sinnes and corruptions, and specially of their
unbeleife, to make them to come forth more pure, then
the gold. For First, he at such times taking from them
the meanes and staies, that they were wont to leane upon
in their prosperitie, maketh them to see their carnall and
vaine confidence, upon what propts they formerly relied
and what unbeleife is in their hearts. And then raysing
up for them such meanes as they never knew (as he did
for his people Israel in the wildernesse and in other their
distresses) he teacheth them to looke up higher then to
earthly meanes; even to his owne heavenly hand to depend
upon him for all, and to give him all the glory, making
him their only stay and comfort. At such times &
in the very greatest extremities; he hath ever beene wont
to reveale himselfe far more familiarly to his, in the gratious
works of his fatherly providence and extraordinary
favours, then ever in former time, and that even outwardly
in things belonging to the necessity & comforts
of this life. But above all for the inward comforts of
his Spirit, supporting and chearing up the hearts of all

his elect, they ordinarily finde them more true and heavenly
joy with certaine assurance of Gods favour and
love in Christ, then ever they felt before. And heereby
doth he most fully manifest to the very enimies their
faith in his promises, their patiēce, hope, obedience, love
to his Majestie, and what they are ready to suffer for his
name. Heereby he is wont also to kindle in his people a
greater fervency in prayer, smitting them to the end to
prepare their hearts thereby, that he may incline his eare
unto their cries.Psal. 10. 1
                        •
                     . To make them able in all things to
give thanks and to rejoyce in their most grievous afflictions;Psal. 107. 
                        •
                     , 6. 11, 12, 13. 17, 18. 19.
and so to be able to sing with a holy melody, when
the fetters are about their feet.1 Thes: 5. 16. 17, 18. He waines them from the
earth and makes them long after the heavens, to be ever
in his presence,Acts, 16 24. 25. & 26. 19. where all teares being wiped▪ away is fulnesse
of joy for ever more.
               He then also useth these his poore servants, as a special
meanes of the conversion & saving of the rest of his elect
and in these to reserve a holy seed by which to renew and
in large his Church againe.Esai. 6. end.
               
               And which is well worthy our carefull observation:God hereby workes grace in some who could never be moved by other meanes.
Some, who could never attaine to any grace at all, under
the best meanes, in the daies of their prosperity, but did
run riot, as the prodigall sonne, being most rebellious
against the Lord and his word: yet when he hath
brought them into the fetters and chaines of afflictions,
then have they set themselves to seeke him; and then the
word which before they despised, hath begun to worke
in them to life.
               A notable president of his mercy herein he hath caused
to be registred in his Booke,2 Chro: 33. 1. 2. 3. for all posteritie, even
in Manasseh, who though he had so good a father, as
that worthy Ezechiah, and was so vertuously brought up;
yea, and had seene his fathers reformation, yet (as the
Holy Ghost saith) he went backe and builded up that iniquitie
which his father had destroyed.
                  ver, 20. 11. 12. He never had grace
to bethinke himselfe, nor to hearken to the word of the

Lord, untill he brought upon him the Captaines of the
hoast of the King of Asshur, who put him in fetters, bound
him in chaines, and caried him to Babel. But when he was in
tribulation, he began to seeke unto the Lord his God, and
humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his fathers, and
so God was intreated of him, heard his prayer, and brought
him againe into Ierusalem into his Kingdome. Then (saith
the Holy Ghost) Manasseh knew that the Lord was God:
and then he destroyed all the Idolatry and abhominations,
which he had bin the cause of, and restored that religion,
which he had before defaced. And to shut up all:
By these the Lord doth exceedingly advance his owne
glory in the midst of his enemies; as here he did by Daniel
and his companions, and makes himselfe and his
truth evidently knowne by their constancie, and leaves
the wicked enemies the more without excuse.
               As for those whom he takes away by death in such
times,The state of the godly, whom God takes away at such times. their death is unto them but as the gate of life. It
is a finall deliverance from all their sinnes, and from all
feare of every kinde of enemie and miserie. It is unto
them a more speedie entrance into the full possession of
their fathers joy, and of their glorious inheritance, than
otherwise nature would have afforded them. And thus
much for the godly which goe into Captivitie, or fall by
the sword, or endure any calamitie with the rest; what
the marking avayleth them; how happy their estate is,
whatsoever come to passe.
               But on the other side;State of the wicked in such calamities. for the wicked, who in such
generall calamities escape the sword, or the like cruell
death, it is cleane contrary with them: For the Lords
anger & revenging hand ever followeth them,Am
                        •
                     s 9. 4. whithersoever
they goe, untill they be destroyed from off the
face of the earth. All these miseries are but the beginnings
of the powring out of the viols of Gods wrath upon
them, to the increase of their torment, and their fearefull
expectation of further vengeance. Their calamities
which they endure, are nothing else but preparatives

and fore-runners of the damnation of hell.
               Hereby they also become more senselesse and impenitent;
they waxe more hardned and enraged to murmure
and blaspheme against the Lord. And ordinarily
they are alwaies chased in their owne consciences, as
Cain; having a sound of feare in their eares; the worme
beginning to gnaw, and their sinne to sting them to the
very hearts; and consequently to become runnegates to
the grave, and to eternall confusion. Or let the best be
supposed, that ever can befall any of them; they are but
in a lethargie or sleepie sicknesse, without sense, untill the
vengeance of God light wholly upon them, to send them
to the place of their destruction, where they shall never
finde any rest after. But for their wretched estate, we
shall see it further in another place. And thus we may
behold the estate of all both good and bad in such generall
calamities.Conclusion. Now who is there that beleeves the
word of the Lord, whom the due consideration of this
one point alone, must not needs drive to watching and
prayer; and to cause him to seeke to be prepared aforehand
in these dayes of our peace, that he may be thus
undoubtedly marked, and under this protection: yea,
that he may be thus hid in the evill day, and finde all the
comforts belonging to the godly; and that he may be
sure to escape those certaine and dreadfull miseries of
the wicked, what judgements soever it shall please him
to exercise us withall:Prov. 22. 3. for A wise man (as Salomon saith)
foreseeth the plague and hideth himselfe; but a foole goeth on
still, and is punished.
               
               This therefore may serve as a first cause to enforce us
all to betake our selves more instantly to watching and
prayer, then ever we have done, if we would be so marked,
as to finde the Lord to be a Sanctuarie, and a hiding
place unto us in the evill day; how soone soever he shall
bring it upon us for all our sinnes and provocations; and
in the meane time, to get boldnesse thereby, and peace
of conscience, against all assaults whatsoever. And more

also, unlesse we will strip our selves wilfully of his most
gratious providence and protection, and desperately expose
our selves and all ours, to all kinde of miserie and
unhappinesse, both in this life present, and that which is
to come.
               If any shall demand further,What the mark was wherewith the godly were marked. what this marke was:
we must remember; That this Vision was given according
to the capacitie of man, to shew this unto the
Prophet, that he might make it knowne to all sorts, what
care the Lord hath for his faithfull ones in the greatest
confusions, and when they seeme to be utterly neglected
and forgotten; and to this end he hath caused it to be
written for us. This moreover seemeth evidently to be
an allusion to the custome of men, who use to set a marke
on such things as they have a speciall care to preserve
heedfully. Or rather an alluding to the marking of the
houses of his owne people in Egypt, with the bloud of
the Lambe,Exo. 12. 22, 23. that the destroying Angell might not touch
any of them, when he destroyed the Egyptians. Or else
at least to the marking of Rahabs house in the Citie of
Iericho,Iosh. 2. 18. before the destruction came, for the saving her
selfe and hers.
               But if it be demanded,Quest. whether they had not indeed
some speciall marke of difference to be discerned from
the rest: we may answer truly; That there is no question,They were marked both inwardly and outwardly.
but they were marked indeed both inwardly and
outwardly: Inwardly, by the bloud of Christ sprinkling
them, and by the Spirit sanctifying them, making them
to cry, Abba oh Father: Outwardly, by a bold and constant
outward profession of the truth of God in word and
deed; and more specially by mourning and crying out,
for all the abominations, which were practised daily to
anger the Lord, as followeth after. But this is not that
marking here spoken of, much lesse is it any marking
with any outward marke or signe, as some doe vainely
and very fondly conceit; but only to make them sure, that
they might be preserved from the destroyer. The words

signifying nothing else,What y• words signifie. but marke them with a marke,
or signe them with a signe. That is, marke them surely
and carefully,Ezech: 9. 4. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   doubling the word, according to the manner
of the Hebrew phrase. And thus much also shortly
for answering those doubts. Now to our next cause,
which every soule hath, to watch and to pray.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  The propertie of the godly living amongst the wicked, in a
sinfull age, is; To sigh and cry for the abominations and
tokens of Gods anger. So what cause all Gods
servants have to watch and pray for
the fewnesse of such, and to
labour to be of that
litle number.
               
               TO proceed to a sixt cause, which yet more neerely
concerns ech of us, & cals on us all to watchfulnes
and prayer. We are all, who desire to finde true
assurance and comfort, to consider, who and what ones
these servants of God are, which are thus marked. They
are described in these words,Who are they y• are marked: viz. the mourners. 
                  which sigh and cry for all
the abominations.] They were those who were so far off
from framing themselves to the wickednesse of that evill
time, as that they contrarily abhorred, with a vehement
indignation, all those sinnes, whereby Gods anger was
so kindled, and their destruction hastned so fast: Insomuch
as that thereby they did not onely mourne in
themselves in secret, but being inforced with a zeale of
Gods glory, and indignation against all the abominations,
cryed out against them, according to their places
and callings, and sighed in secret for mercy and redresse.
               Here we must observe,The condition of Gods children living amongst the wicked, to mourne & cry for all the abominations. The Lord setting before our
eyes the condition of the true children of God living in

evill times, and amongst a people voyde of the sense
of sinne, and of the feare of Gods judgements; That
their manner is not to approve of the wicked wayes of
the ungodly, much lesse to sooth and flatter them in
their evill courses, nor to give over themselves to any
jollitie or carnall delights, as others doe; but they use to
have continually much heavinesse in themselves, sighing
for the grievous sinnes which are committed. An
example hereof the Lord hath set forth to all posteritie
in holy Lot,
                  As Lot. who living amongst the filthy Sodomites,
was thus grieved with their ungodly conversation; for
so saith the holy Apostle Peter,2 Pet: 2. 7. That he being righteous
and dwelling among them, in hearing and seeing vexed his
righteous soule from day to day, with their unrighteous
deeds. He was so disquieted with their beastly manners,
provoking the Lords most holy eyes, that his whole life,
for the time that he dwelt amongst them, was but wearinesse
and a continuall mourning. This holy man, the
Lord would have set forth as an example to all succeeding
ages, to shew the condition of all his true and faithfull
servants, living amongst wicked and ungodly men.
To him we may adjoyne that faithfull Prophet Ieremie,
                  Ieremie. who though he lived in a far better time and place, both
in the bosome of the Church, and in the dayes of that
holy King Iosiah; yea, & in that worthy reformation for
many yeeres togither, (for he began to preach unto
them in the thirteenth yeere of Iosiah, and so continued
untill this Captivitie was brought upon them) yet he
likewise is vexed continually, even from the beginning
of his prophesying. This was a daily corosive to his
soule, to see the people so backward in embracing the
truth, so senselesse and impenitent in their sinnes, in such
evident tokens of Gods vengeance rushing upon them,
so prone to the former Idolatrie, wherein they had lived,
and to all other abominations, to anger the Lord, notwithstanding
the example of their most worthy Prince,
and all the meanes used to reclaime them. This made

his very soule to faint within him, and his heart to tremble,
that no admonitions of his, nor of other the holy
Prophets, could doe them any good, although they
daily discovered their iniquities, and so proclaimed this
desolation. That beholding this and seeing that now,
there was no more hope, but that their plagues must
needs breake in violently upon them, he wisheth his
head full of water,Ier: 9. 1, 2, 3. and his eyes a fountaine of teares,
that he might weepe for them day and night, and for all
the miseries that were to come upon them. And moreover
desireth that he had (if it were) but a poore cottage
of a wayfaring man in the desolate wildernesse, to live
all alone, and never to heare of their sinnes, nor to see
their wicked conversations any more.
               More than this, we may also observe, how carefully
this is recorded in the Booke of God. That divers of
his most faithfull servants, hearing of some haynous sins
committed, to his dishonour and provocation, and considering
the judgements due thereunto, or foreseeing by
evident signes some present calamitie hasting upon
them for the same, have bin strangely humbled thereupon:
yea, how they have wept, prayed, fasted, lyen
downe on the ground, and could not be comforted. Besides
Moses,
                  Moses. who was ever thus humbled upon the new
provocations of the people, and with him Samuel, David,
and others; see Ezra
                  Ezra. his behaviour, how he rent
his clothes,Ezra 9. 1 & 10. 6. pluckt off the haire of his head and of his
beard, sate astonied, got privately into his chamber, fasted,
neither eating bread nor drinking water, mourning,
because of the transgressions of them of the Captivitie,
and fearing some new wrath to come upon them. This
caused him to be cast downe in himselfe,& 9. 2. when he heard
of the strange women, which Gods people had maried
in the Captivitie,& 10. 9. contrary to his law; how they had
mingled themselves with the prophane Heathen, which
were given to all abominations, whereby their children
began to prove heathenish also; and because the Princes

and Rulers had bin chiefe in this trespasse. And not
onely he himselfe, but the people likewise, sat trembling
for those and other sins, and for a grievous raine, which
God had sent upon them at that time, as an evident token
of his displeasure.
               
                   So holy King Iosiah, when he heard the words of the
Booke of the Law,Iosiah. which was found,2 King: 22. 11. laying to heart the
threatnings in it, and considering thereupon the wrath
kindled against them, for their owne sinnes, and for the
sinnes of their fathers,v
                        •
                     rs. 19. 13. he mourning thus humbled himselfe,
rent his clothes, his heart did melt, his eyes powred
out teares. He sends straight way to inquire, where he
could have any answer, even of Huldah, because he knew
that shee was a Prophetesse of the Lord: with which
fact of his, declaring his unfayned humiliation, the
Lord was so pleased, that he sends him this message;
That his eyes should not see the vengeance,2 King 22. 19, 20. which he would
bring on that place. He should first be taken away in peace,
before those plagues came.
               
               
                   Our Saviour also himselfe, foreseeing the last desolation
of this Citie,Our Saviour. and yet beholding the people so
senselesse in the midst of the imminent danger, when his
preaching will doe them no more good, he stands and
weeps over them thus lamenting:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      19. 41, 42, 43. 
                  Oh, if thou hadst
knowne, at least in this thy day, those things that belong unto
thy peace! But now are they hid from thine eyes; for the
dayes shall come upon thee, that thy enemies shall cast a trench
about thee, and compasse thee round, and keepe thee in on
every side, and shall make thee even with the ground, and
thy children which are in thee, and they shall not leave
in thee a stone upon a stone, which shall not be cast downe, because
 thou knowest not the time of thy visitation. And for
continuall mourning for this,Paul. the holy servant of God,
Paul,
                  Rom▪ 9. 3. calls Christ to witnesse to his soule, that he had a
continuall heavinesse and sorrow in his heart, for his
stiffe-necked and unbeleeving Countrymen, the Iewes.
And that he could have wished himselfe separate from

Christ, so that they might not have beene cast off, from being
any more a nation, or the people of the Lord.
               Finally, the two Prophets in the Revelation, representing 
all the true and faithfull Preachers of the Gospell
in the last age (even these daies wherein we live) are set
out unto us cloathed in sackcloth,The two Prophets in the dayes of Antichrist. after the manner of
mourners,Apoc. 11. 3. bewailing the strange delusions of the people
of God, by the abominations of Antichrist, in so cleare
a light of the Gospell of Christ, shining againe so gloriously.
               And thus have we seene plainly, this propertie of Gods
people, how they use to sigh and mourne for all the iniquities
of the times wherein they live.
               Now to ascend to the next degree of the griefe of the
godly for the wickednesse of the times, the Prophet saith,
That they sigh and cry; not only that they sigh, but sigh
and cry for all the abominations.
               Wherein the Holy Ghost would have all to take notice,The godly wont not only to sigh, but to cry out for the abominations of the wicked according to their calling.
that the godly at such times, have beene so farre off
from bearing with the wicked, or flattering them in their
sinnes; as that from mourning, they have come, in a zeale
of Gods glory, and in an holy indignation against sinne, to
cry out openly against the grievous corruptions and
transgressions; and have shewed thereby their detestation,
so farre as their calling would any way suffer them;
especially, when the provocations have beene hainous to
anger the Lord. To omit the boldnesse of the young
Prophet sent to Ieroboam, and of Eliah to Ahab in the
case of open Idolatrie: this was the continuall course
of these three worthy Prophets,as Esay. 
                  Esay, Ieremie, Ezechiel,
and so of the rest that lived before the Captivitie. Thus
God bids Esay to lift up his voice as a trumpet,Ieremie. to tell
his people of their transgressions.Ezekiel. And this was Ieremies
usuall tenour,Esa. 58. 1. for which all his hatred and troubles
came upon him, with earnest contention to cry out against
the fearefull sinnes of his time. These God hath
left as presidents to all his faithfull messengers to the

end of the world, to declare how they ought to carry
themselves in such evill times, according to their places
and callings.Iohn Baptist. So Iohn Baptist cryes out against the
hypocrites:Matth. 3. 7. 
                  O generation of vipers, who hath forewarned
you to flie from the vengeance to come. Our Saviour also
among the Scribes and Pharisees,Our Saviour. being hypocrites,
thunders out nothing,Matth. 23. but woe, woe. This in like manner
was the principall occasion of all the malice against him;Mat. 21. 45, 46. for that he testified in every place,Ioh. 7. 7. that their deeds were
evill; and also for denouncing Gods judgements to come
upon them.
               And to omit all other:
                     Lot a private man. That righteous Lot in Sodome,Gen. 19. 6, 7.
though a private man, yet cryes unto them for
that shamefull outrage, I pray you, my brethren, deale not
so wickedly. In a word, this hath beene the continuall
behaviour of the Martyrs and Confessors of Gods truth,The Martyrs & Confessors.
(as all Histories doe witnesse) thus to cry against the sinnes
of the times, within the limits of their calling;
whence ordinarily they have suffred such bitter persecutions.
               For crying also unto the Lord at such times,The godly have bin wont also to cry to God in such times. it hath
beene a most usuall thing with all the faithfull Prophets
and other of his servants, untill that he have forbidden
some of them, as he did Ieremie, that he should not pray
to doe that people any good,Ier. 7. 16. & 11. when as they did grow obdurate
and most extremely malicious against him:11. & 14. 11. and
alwaies the neerer they have seene the wrath, the more
vehemently have they cried unto the Lord, as Moses
and Samuel,
                  Psal. 106. 23. stepping into the breach to stay the Lords
hand,1 Sam. 7. 8, 9, 10. that he should not destroy his people.
               So that this point is likewise most cleare.Reasons why the godly so sigh and cry for all the abominations. Yet to cause
it to worke more effectually upon our consciences, it
shall not be unnecessarie, a little to ponder some of the
reasons, why the godly doe so sigh, and cry. As
               
                   First, for that they, who are the Lords indeed, doe specially
resemble their heavenly Father,Hating that wt God hateth. in hating those
things, which he hateth, with a vehement indignation;

and what sinnes they cannot reforme, nor restraine, those
they sigh and grieve for.
               Secondly, that they can no more endure the dishonors 
done unto his heavenly Majestie,That they cannot indure the dishonours done to him. according to that
measure of grace given unto them, than the Angels
which are in heaven, doe according unto theirs; and
therefore they being subject unto these passions of griefe
and sorrow, must needs in seeing and hearing vex their
righteous soules continually.
               Thirdly, because they have of the very 
                     •
                  ame spirit of 
zeale that was in our Saviour,The spirit of zeale in them. which was so fervent towards
his fathers house,Ioh: 2. 17. that to see it defiled, it did after
a sort eat and consume him.
               Fourthly, how can it be, but that they who are the 
children of God,Because of Sathan set up in Christs throne. must needs be troubled to see Sathan
set up and worshipped in the throne of their heavenly
Father; for so he is in all places where iniquitie hath
the upper hand. Or what childe is there, except he be
extremely unnaturall, that is not cast downe in himselfe,
when he seeth his father angry.
               Fiftly, because not taking to heart such sinnes, we become 
guilty of them:For that they are otherwise guiltie of the same sins. for so Paul chargeth the Corinthians
for the incestuous person, that they were therfore
guiltie of his sinne, because they had not sorrowed for it:
and saith,1 Cor: 5. 2. that they afterward by their sorrow and indignation,2 Cor: 7. 11.
testified so many wayes, upon his letter sent unto
them, did shew themselves free from his wickednes.
               Sixtly and lastly, which is the principall; because for 
the sinne of one notorious offender unpunished,For that for one notorious sinner unpunished, all y• place is in danger of Gods wrath. Gods
anger may be kindled against all the place where he is;
and that therefore all of them are in danger of this
vengeance with the rest; even every one that doth not
what he can within the compasse of his calling to reforme
it; at least by mourning for it, and crying unto
the Lord for pardon & redresse. This he shewes plainely
in sundry places of his holy word; although the contrary
practise of the world, declares evidently that very

few beleeve this point. Let us but observe two or three
places, the more to convince us and rouze our soules out
of this our deepe securitie.Evident in the law of inquisition for murder. As first that, of the case of
inquisition for murder, when one is found murdered, if
there be not the utmost endevour, both in Ministers,
Magistrates and people,Dew: 21 1, 2, 3, 4 &c. to finde out the murtherer, and
to punish him by death (according to the law against
murther) the land is defiled, as is evident both by the
strict manner of the inquisition, that was to be made, by
all the people of Israel, and by the protestation of the
Rulers in the behalfe of all the people, clearing themselves
from it; and also by the prayer, that they were
taught to make in this forme;vers. 8. 
                  O Lord, be mercifull unto
us thy people Israel, whom thou hast redeemed, and lay no innocent
bloud to the charge of thy people Israel, and the bloud
shall be forgiven them.vers. 9. So (saith he) thou shalt take away
the cry of innocent bloud from thee; wh
                        •
                     n thou shalt doe that
which is right in the sight of the Lord. Whereby we may
plainely see, that the bloud of one man thus murthered,
defileth the bordering land, and provoketh the Lords
displeasure against the people; if it be not carefully
sought out, and all holy meanes used for the avenging
of it, and taking away the cry thereof. Secondly, the
Lord declares there evidently,Num: 35. 33, 3
                        •
                     . that the Land cannot be
clensed, and the sinne pardoned unto it, but by the
bloud of him that shed it; or at least, when no meanes is
neglected, to finde it out and to punish it. Thirdly, that
innocent bloud cryes for vengeance from the earth continually,
as Abels did, untill all the meanes be used for
purging it.
               A last reason of Gods severitie is;God is more severe with his Church than any other. because it is not
with the Church of God, as with the prophane Heathen;
for he dwels in the midst of his Church, and therefore if
any defile the Land,Numb: 35. 34. where his Church is, he will either
punish them severely,Exod: 32 33. or utterly depart from them, as appeares
evidently in his threatning after the making of
the Golden Calfe:Le
                        •••
                     : 10. 3. for he will be specially sanctified in

them that draw neere unto him,Lev: 18. 24, 25, 27, 28. in such a holy profession.Lev: 20 22, 23, 26.
He is very terrible in the assembly of his Saints.
Now, as it is in this case of bloud, so every notorious sin
defileth the land,Every notorious sin defileth the Land to make it spue out the inhabitāts, as Canaa
                           •
                        .
                   and cryeth for vengeance against all
the inhabitants: the Land cannot beare it, but will endanger
all, even to spue out that people in the end, if it
be not purged, as their abominations did cause the Land
of Canaan.
               This we may see in sundry examples,The sinne of some few may indanger all. how somtimes
the sin of some of the people hath indangered al the rest;
sometimes the sinne of one city, and sometimes even the
sin of one man; when it hath not beene sought out and
punished. As to omit that sinne at the making of the golden
calfe, which although it was not the sin of all, yet it 
indangered all.As for the golden calfe. See the feare of the people of Israel, for
the suspition of the provocation, by the two tribes and 
the halfe in the erecting of the altar of witnesse,The feare of Israel at the erecting the Altar of witnesse. which
the rest of the Tribes did thinke that they had done for
sacrifice, contrary to the commandement of the Lord.
They al purposed to have gone immediatly to make war
against their brethren for the punishment of that sin;Ios: 22. 18. yet
sent messengers to know the truth of the matter before,
with this message,v
                        •
                     r: 28. That if they did rebell against the
Lord that day, the morrow next he would be wrath with
all the congregation of Israell. The like we may behold 
in the feare of the people for the villany committed by
some of the inhabitants of the City of Gibeah in abusing
the Levites Concubine and the vengeance that came not
onely upon the City wherein it was committed,The vengeance on Gibea, and all the Tribes of Benjamin. but also
upon all the Tribe of Benjamin,Iudg: 19. 25. & 20. 13, 14. because they delivered
them not to be punished, but would seeme to defend
them, for as much as they were apart of their Tribe.
And not upon that Tribe alone,On Iabesh Gilead for not helping to avenge the vvickednesse. which might seeme justly
accessary; but also upon all those who helped not to
take vengeance for that wicked fact; as on all the inhabitants
of Iabesh Gilead, becavse they came not to the war
to see Gods judgements executed upon those wicked
men.Iudg: 21. 4.
               
               
                  
To come to the sinnes of particular men.The very sinne of one alone may indanger all as Achans. Did we not
heare before of the vengeance on Israell in the dayes of
Ioshuah for the sin of Achan? How that worthy Captaine
with his valiant soldiers were not able to stand before
their enemies, untill Achans sinne was found out &
punished? Yea, the Lord tels them, he will not be with
them any more,I
                        •
                     sh, 7. 12. unlesse they destroy the excommunicate
from amongst them: which thereupon they were glad
to doe. And far be it from us to thinke the Lord to be
unjust in this, or any other of his judgements, or to have
diminished any part of his justice or holinesse unto this
day.Sauls in murdering the Gibeonites. Secondly, we cannot forget that anger that was
kindled against Israell and the famine that came upon
them in the dayes of David for three yeeres together,2 Sam: 21. 1, 2 3. for
the sinne of Saul in killing the Gibeonites to gratifie the
people,Iosh: 3. 16. 17. 2 Sam: 21, 1. 2. 6. 14. contrary to his fidelity: Though they were but
heathens of the cursed Amorites, and had dealt deceitfully
with the Israelites in making their covenant: Yet
the wrath could not be appeased or the Land purged, untill
vengeance was taken upon his bloudy house for that
murther committed so long before.Gods anger oft breaks out lōg after, for sinnes committed lōg before. And therfore sith his
anger may breake forth so long after, even for such sins,
much more for such notorious abominations as are committed
daily by them, who have given themselves over
to all manner of profanenesse and impiety; and whereof
they can have no such colour or occasion.
               This was the cheife reason of the solemne inquisition,The cause of the inquisition at fasts for horrible offences.
which was at the publicke fasts in Israell, for the finding
out both of notorious offenders and offences to have
vengeance taken of them openly.1 King: 21. 9. 10, 11. Hence was the pretence
of Iezabell for the saving of Naboth under a shew of
execution of this justice against a blasphemer to pacifie
the Lords anger.One cause of reading and preaching the word at solemne fasts. This also seemes to have bin one principall
cause, why the word was read and preached at
those their solemne fasts, that thereby the sins might be
discovered and reformed:Nehe: 8, 8. as God bids Ieremie to indite,Ier: 36. 2. 3.
and Baruch to write from his mouth and to declare to

the people their sinnes, with the plagues & judgements
due unto them, that they might returne from their evill
wayes, and so pacifie his wrath by crying unto him and
reforming all the abominations. Thus we see this point
also cleere. That the sinnes of a people, even of a few of
them not punished do anger the Lord and provoke him
against the whole land, making the land uncleane, neither
can he be fully pacified any way, but by the punishing
and taking away of those sinnes. Whereby it is
most evident to the consciences of all men, what just
cause the godly have to sigh and to tremble for all the abominations
that are committed amongst them, and especially
which being notoriously knowne do still remaine
unpunished.
               Now to apply this unto our selues;Application. And first for the
generall humiliation of us all, afterward for the comfort
of those few, that are such true mourners indeed.
               First,For humiliation to the secure. this may strike the hearts of all sorts, who imagining
that they are the servants of the Lord, yet hearing
and seeing the fearfull apostacy, coldnesse and security
of our age, even in many of the better sort; together with
Atheisme, Poperie, and all outragious and profane licentiousnesse
daily increasing in the rest, are yet never troubled
therwith. And much more may it astonish all such,
who are so far off from the condition of these mourners,
as that they can solace themselues as freely, when they
heare of all excesse in iniquity, and whatsoever can bee
devised by Iewd men, to anger the Lord and to grieve
his Spirit, as ever they were wont at other times. Most
of all may it affright and awaken those, who use all devices
to drive each thought of Gods anger or any judgement
with every occasion of humiliation and mourning
utterly out of their hearts.
               But of all other is their estate most fearfull who can
make the beastly sinnes of others their chiefest sport. Oh
you that are such, consider in your hearts! Is this the spirit
of Lot, Moses, Samuel, Ieremie, Ezra, of these mourners

heere marked? Of our Saviour or Pavl? Is this the
Spirit of the Lord? How deceive you your soules in a
vaine imagination? what will ye doe in the day of the
Lords wrath, if he let it come upon us? as we justly deserue:
Or what have ye done to turne it from us? Know,
know for certaine, that this sinne of yours will one day
undoubtedly bring you weeping enough; you cannot
tell whether even in this life, as it did to them in the
Captivity; nay, even whether this same uery day; when
you shall do nothing but weep day and night in remembrance
of this one sinne; that your hearts were so hard in
the dayes of your prosperity, that you could not mourne
at all. Besides all the other miseries, that you are liable
unto for all your sinnes, chiefly if God should give you
up for them: when you shall be utterly destitute of comfort
of the Lords mercy, protection and-favour; untill
you shall have soundly bewailed all this your sencelesse
security.
               But on the contrary;Applicatiō for the comfort of the mourners. as this is given by the Lord for
the comfort of all that mourne for the iniquities, because
they are surely marked before the vengeance come, to be
safe then: so it may serue for the sweete consolation and
cheering up even of all those of every estate and degree,
from the highest to the lowest, who find their hearts thus
affected in hearing of and beholding the abominations,
committed dayly to anger the Lord, howsoever it shall
please him to visit us. Give me leave therefore (if it
were to digresse) a little & to turne my speech to speake
to your soules, and consciences, for the confirming and
strengthening of all our hearts who are such. The Lord
heere sets before your faces the care which he hath for
you.Comfort to Godly rulers. You are surely sealed, whatsoever plagues he shall
smite the earth withall; whether you be rulers, from the
greatest to the meanest to begin with you. If your consciences
beare you witnesse that your hearts are set to advance
Gods true religion and all prety, and by all holy
meanes to suppresse iniquity, and so to turne away the

judgements threatned. And much more also if to this
end, you study to procure what good you can, to the
Church of Christ. If you mourne with Ezra for the grievous
transgressions of the people,If as Ezra.
                   for defiling themselves
with the abominations of other nations, and especially
with Popery, Atheisme and all irreligious licenciousnes.
Of if that your hearts do melt with holy Iosiah,
                  or Iosiah.
                   for the
former and present provocations, and to see how the
word of the Lord is despised. If you use to lament and
sigh in beholding the intollerable frowardnesse of men
against the Lord, that they cannot be brought to submit
themselues to his glorious Gospell: and in observing
such a strange turning backe of many of our people in
their hearts, as who will needs returne into Egypt and
Sodome againe, and so strive to provoke the Lord yet
more therby and by all other their sinnes. And if moreover
in seeing that you cannot doe that good that you
would in reforming the evils, you are not only daily
humbled before the Lord upon your faces privately; but
doe also shew your griefe openly in your places, as occasion
is offered, as this is an euident demonstration of
your unfeigned religion before the world, so it is a most
strong bulwark to your own soules against all feare of the
miseries, that can any way come upon us.
               Or secondly,Comfort to the Prophets that mourne. If you be those that succeed in the place
of the Prophets, being set to watch over, and to warne
the people committed to you, thereby to turne away the
plagues, which are tiying upon them, and doe finde in
your selves the affections of Ieremie in heavinesse and
lamentation; when you see your paines to doe so litle
good, that you people generally grow rather worse and
worse; that you labour in vaine, & spend you strength
in vaine,Isay. 49. 4. and for nothing, as Esay complaineth; that although
the bellowes be burnt, yet you melt but in vaine,
the wickednesse is not taken away: so that you may
seeme to have just cause to deeme them to be but reprobate
silver, and such as the Lord hath weighed, as Ieremie
                  
bewayleth them in his time;Ier: 6. 29. this may comfort you,
that you are of this number, that are marked. And if furthermore,
for this cause, you find your life to be a wearines,
that with Paul you have a continual sorrow in your
hearts for your people, and that you could be content to
indure any miserie for them, to save them from the
Lords wrath; this is a demonstration that the same spirit
of Paul resteth upon you. And yet further also to
comfort you; If you be such as are so far off from serving
the time, or flattering them to whom you are sent, in
crying peace, peace, That you have set your selves in all
faithfulnesse to discover their iniquities, and to cry out
against all their sinnes,Ier: 1. 8. 17. and that no feare can stop your
mouth from doing your duties in your places;Isa: 58. 1. this testimonie
of your consciences shall be as a strong brazen
wall unto you,Ezech: 3. 17. & 33. 6, 7, 8. whatsoever shall come to passe.Acts 20. 26, 27, 28.
               
               And to speake generally;Mica 3. 8. If you be private Christians,
as Lot and these mourners here marked,2 Tim: 1. 7. and in steed of
having a confederacie with the wicked in their evill
wayes,Comfort 
                        •
                     o private Christians, sighing for the iniqui
                        •
                     ie. you finde your selves vexed every day for the
evils which you heare and see, it may minister unto you
much assurance and heavenly consolation. And more
specially if your hearts be troubled for these dreadfull
sinnes: As first, for our monstrous unthankfulnesse for
the Gospell, with all our blessings accompanying it, and
for that we are most of us so weary in living in obedience
unto it: and so many on the other side, ready to live rather
under that slaverie of Antichrist, or service of sinne
and Sathan. Or secondly; If you feele your soules continually
grieved, in beholding, how many of us there
are, which make a profession of the Gospell in word, yet
denie utterly all power of it in our lives. And withall,
how ready many amongst us, (who have heretofore
made conscience of our wayes) are now to joyne hands
and run to all excesse, with the Atheist, and with every
profane and filthy person. And if aboue all this, your
hearts beare you witnesse, that you strive to keepe your

selves unspotted in this last and sinfull generation,Psal. 
                        •
                     3. 15. and
neither by Schisme run forth of the Church and communion
of the Saints;E
                        •
                     cles. 10. 4. so condemning the generation of
his children on the one hand; nor leave your places and
callings, so long as with a good conscience you can enjoy
them, to cast your selves upon the rocks of innumerable
evils: neither yet on the other hand, to decline to
the coldnesse,Psal: 
                        •
                     3. 2, 3. hypocrisie, and loosenesse of the time, this
shall be your comfort perpetually. And yet to proceed
a litle further, If you thus staying your selves from these
extremes, doe use to speake every one to his neighbour,
as the godly did in Malachies dayes,Mal: 3. 16, 17. to incourage one
another to walke more heedfully and cheerefully in the
wayes of the Lord, ech in his ranke, and within the
bounds of his calling; this shall be your witnesse before
the Lord. Or finally, If yet now, at least at the view
of our transgressions which follow, & the Lords threatnings
against us, you can feele your hearts so affected, as
those mourners, and set to continue so to walke with
your God; then this shall be unto you a gratious assurance,
that you are indeed the Lords owne servants, as
these mourners were. The same Spirit of the Lord resteth
upon you, you are surely sealed therewith, and
singled out for his Majestie. His care is as well for you,
as ever it was for Noah▪ Lot, Eliah, or any of these mourners:
for he is still the same to all who tread in their
steps; his compassions faile not. This is written now
to comfort you. Heaven and earth shall passe, but not
one jot or title of his word, untill every thing be accomplished.
He may sooner breake his covenant concerning
the day and the night, than he can with you.
The hills may sooner remove out of their places,Isa: 54. 10. than
his mercy can from you. Let none of your hearts therefore
faint, who have this witnesse, that you indevour
hereunto. But come whatsoever will, God will provide
such a deliverance for you, if he see it good. Or if he send
you into Captivitie, yet he will there lead you, his Angels

shall conduct you, his Spirit shall support you, with
joy unspeakable, even in the midst of all your tryals, untill
that your testimonie be fulfilled, your warfare accomplished,
and the crowne of glory set upon your heads;
you are written upon the palmes of his hands,Isa
                        •
                     : 49. 15. that you
shall be ever in his sight. And if he let you be taken away
by death among the rest; yet even death shall be
unto you the greatest advantage. It shall make an end
of all your miseries, that you shall not so much as see the
evils to come. Then will the Lord turne all your sorrowes
and feares into abundant joyes and securitie, giving
you the reward of all your labours, and whatsoever
else you have hoped and longed after. Then shall you
finde the fulnesse of those joyes,1 Cor 2 9. which never eye saw,
nor ever eare heard, nor yet entred into mans heart to
consider of. And this shall you injoy in his glorious
presence, with all his blessed Angels and Saints, with
whom yee shall reigne for evermore.
               But as for all the rest of wicked scoffers and profane
contemners of the Lord,Application to all profane contemners. and of all his mercifull
fore-warnings, if he in his justice should leave us up to
such a judgement, to be executed on us, through the
hellish devices of that bloudie Antichrist, (whose rage
and furie still increaseth, as our deliverances and prosperitie
have done) then must you all know from him, be
you Atheists, Papists, belly-gods, worldlings, that you
must looke for your portion to be all alike; that shift or
flie whither soever you will, yee shall never be able to
flie from his vengeance. Though you could dig to hell,
as the Prophet Amos speaketh,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      9. 
                        •
                     , 2, 3, 4 yet his hand should fetch
you thence; & although you could climbe up to heau'n,
yet thence also he would bring you downe: yea, though
you could hide your selves in the most secret caves among
the rocks,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      28. yet even there should his vengeance
finde you out: and flying to the uttermost parts of the
earth, he will still there command the sword, the pestilence
and famine to pursue you, with terrour of heart, &

trembling of conscience, untill you be destroyed from
the face of the earth. The Lord will ever set his face against
you for evill and not for good; and this is that,
that you must certainely expect.
               And even for you likewise,Application to our pretended Catholicks. that thinke you shall doe
well enough, because you have beene knowne to be so
devoted to the Catholike religion (as you terme it) and
to suffer for it, doe not imagine your cause shall be any
thing the better for this. If you beare false hearts to the
Lords annointed and to your native country; how can
you looke that vengeance shall suffer you to live? Or can
you perswade your selves that a forreine enemie prevailing,
(which evill the Lord still deliver us from) should
ever trust you, whom they found so false to your Prince
and countrey. Be it so, yet if you be knowne to be such
as have any wealth (if the Lord should for all our provocations
permit such a day) as they have long looked for,
have we not just cause to conceive, that Papist and Protestant
should be all alike? and that tho all such should proclaime
at each market crosse, that they are Catholiques;
yet that there goods would be the goods of Hugonotes;
as it was at the French massacre in Paris? would not
then all such be made Puritanes of the Parliament house?
the desperatest ding-thrifts and sharpest swords, slashing
downe and carying all away? And although the Lord
shall still at the intercession of his most faithful and deere
servants, (as sometimes of Abraham, Moses, Samuel, &
these mourners) preserve us from the bloudy hands of
our deadly and most cruell enemies, and from ever comming
under the Babilonish yoake againe (which we ever
beg and cry for) yet the estate of all you,The state of all the wicked, tho the Lord still spare us at the prayers of his servants. that are the
provokers of his Majestie and grievers of his people by
your horrible sinnes shall be nothing the better. At
death a heavier captivitie shall fall upon you, when you
shall be bound in everlasting chaines of darknesse, and
reserved unto the judgement of the great day, to be tormented
for evermore. And thus if your sleepie hearts

come once to be throughly awaked, you shall be sure to
live in continuall expectation of vengeance, being chased
of your owne wicked consciences, as 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , untill the
Lords most just decree be accomplished upon you. Then
you that could not once sigh or cry to God at all, for the
abominations and dishonors done unto his Majestie, or
in fearing his anger, but thought this foolishnesse, shall
have cause inough to call and cry continually, in feeling
and fearing his most just and heavie indignation, with
all his fierce plagues due unto you everlastingly. But of
this we shall speake yet more, when we come to the severall
miseries, which they indured in the Captivitie.
               And thus much may serve for the estate both of the
godly, mourning for all the abominations, and for the
rest. It may suffice likewise for another most just cause to
drive us to watching and prayer with continuall mourning:
seeing onely the mourners are commanded to be
marked, to be preserved from the vengeance to come:
and these are they principally that stay the judgement
from rushing upon us;Iob 22. the end. at least untill they be so marked
and made safe.
               But alas, have we not here a new cause to take up a
dolefull complaint for the want hereof?Iust cause of lamentation for the small number of true mourners. Where are
they who lament for the abominations, which we have
received from all forreine Nations, and wherewith we
have so polluted our profession, as after will appeare?
Where are those whose hearts melt to thinke how the
law of God is troden under foote, and his judgements
hastned daily by all our provocations? What is become
of Moses, Samuel, Ieremie, Paul, and of that continuall
heavinesse, which they were in, for the obstinacie of the
people? Where are the two Prophets, prophesi
                     •
                  ng after
the manner of mourners, for the prevayling of that Antichrist,
and the delusions of Gods people? That zeale of
Lot for all our unlawfull deeds? Are we not come very
generally to cry, Peace, peace, and all is well, desiring to be
at ease,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as they who trusted in the mountaine of Samaria?

of whom Amos speaketh: and those who cryed,
the Temple of the Lord,Ierem▪ 7. 4. the Temple of the Lord? Are we
not become (I meane exceeding 
                     〈◊〉
                   of us) as they
who said, The Lord will neither doe good nor evill? Doe
not our lives proclaime it? Or as those that spake against
Ieremie,
                  Our generall securitie fearefull. to 
                     •
                  ull themselves and all others still asleepe;
saying, we shall neither see sword nor famine? In a word;
Is it not with us for the most part,Ier: 5. 12, 13. as with them that lived
immediately before the floud, and before the overthrow
of Sodom and Gomorrha? Doe we not eat and
drinke, marrie and give in marriage, as they; every man
giving up himselfe to follow his owne way, and for his
owne advantage; never regarding our Noahs building
the Arke, and calling all to enter; nor our Lots mourning
& crying to all, Good brethren, deale not so wickedly?
Doe we not daily increase in our senselesnesse, and still
more harden our selves against all warnings, signes, and
tokens, untill the floud-gates of heaven be open, and the
vengeance of God come powring downe? And to goe
yet one step higher, and to adde this one demand more;
Are not very many amongst us come to that height of
impietie,Scorning at all that mourne for the evils. to scorne and to abuse by all meanes, all those
that mourne for the evils, and who will not run with us
to all excesse of ungodlinesse? And if any doe ever reprove
such, though in the griefe of their hearts, with the
greatest love and reverence, are they not ready to say, as
those unto Lot, Hence, who made thee a Ruler and a
Iudge? so to thrust them away with all disgrace. Or,
which is yet worse, if worse may be, Is not this too common
in very many places, to use them as Ieremie was
used, to load such with all opprobrious slanders, as tho
they were the vilest men, that could live upon the earth,
and those that seeke not the good of the Land but the
hurt; and as if indeed there were none to be hated but
they, be they never so peaceable and obedient. And finally,
are they not made such in many places, as Ieremie
saith of himselfe, whom every bodie curseth, though

they have neither given nor taken upon usurie, but lived
without of
                     •
                  ence or intermedling in the world. Nay, although
they be such persons, whom all the world cannot
touch; except for such infirmities, as are incident to all
the sonnes of Adam; or the matters of their God, as
Dani
                        •
                     l was? Doe we not thus adde to the increase of
their sorrowes, to kindle more the Lords anger for the
injuries done unto them, and by seeking to drive them
out from amongst us, or at least to cause them to cease
crying to the Lord for us. Which unkindnesse he can
no way indure; sith these (I meane, who make conscience
of all his commandements) are the deerest unto
him of all the people of the earth, and the onely preservers
of the rest, so long as they remaine amongst us.
               And thus much shall serve for this in like manner,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
what cause we have to watch and pray, yea, to tremble
and cry for the small remainder of our mourners; and
also to the end that we our selves may be found to be of
the number of them, so to helpe to appease the wrath, or
so to escape in the evill day.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The enemies by which the Lord threatneth or afflicteth his
Church, are his souldiers; and what cause we have
to give our selves to watching and prayer, for
the increase of them in number,
pride and malice.
               
               IT remaineth now that we shall come to shew the abominations
for the which the godly so sighed & cryed,
what and how great they were. But the handling
thereof, may be more profitably reserved unto the sixt
verse, where the Holy Ghost sets downe, how fierce his
wrath was, and how grievous the plagues were, which
the Lord threatneth to inflict upon them; that by the

greatnes of the vengeance, we may better consider the
heynousnesse of the abominations.
               Having therefore thus finished this first Commission,
which was to the marking Angell, for the preservation
of all the godly: we will come to the second commission
given to the destroying Angels, how they should deale
with all the rest, conteyned in these words following.
               
                  Vers. 5.
                  And to the other he said, in my hearing, Goe yee
after him thorow the Citie and smite; Let not
your eye spare, neither have pitie, s
                        •
                     ay utterly olde
and young, &c.
               
               Here the Lord delivering this Commission aloud,The enemies by which God threatneth his Church are his soldiers. and
bidding these destroying Angels to goe and smite, to
spare none, will have us all to consider this well: That
the enemies by which his Church is afflicted, as the Babylonian
here meant, (to whom he said, Goe yee after
him thorough the Citie and smite) are the Lords soldiers.
They come not, nor fight of themselves alone, but at his
comand: they fight also his battels, though they know
not so much, nor purpose any such matter, but doe it in
the pride and malice of their hearts.
               No point is more necessarie for us to know;The knowledg of this point most necessary, & most plainely set downe in the Scriptures. becasue
in the plots and conspiracies of wicked enemies, and in
all the rage against the Church of God, it is so rare a
thing for any man to looke at the Lord, and how he
sends and orders all; but every man almost useth still to
looke onely at the hand of the enemie. Neither is any
truth more cleerely set forth in the booke of God. We
will content our selves with two or three places, which
are past all exception, in which he hath of purpose
taught this point most fully.
               First, we may begin with the former great Captivitie 
of Israel,In the captivitie of Israel the Lord sent on them the King of Ass
                        •
                     ur. of the Ten Tribes caried captive into Assyria
by Salmanazar; which was a good space before this
captivitie of Iudah. The Holy Ghost saith, that the

Lord in his wrath sent upon them the King of Asshur to
destroy them.Is
                        •
                     y 10. 5, 6. Whom the Prophet 
                     
                        •
                     say (in speaking of
both the Captivities joyntly, and the like instruments
and reasons of both) calleth the rod of Gods wrath;The Assyrian, the rod or the Lords wrath.
because he had in his wrath prepared the Assyrian as his
rod, to whip both Israel and Iudah for their rebellion.
He termes also their staffe, meaning the weapons in their
hands, his indignation: because all their weapons were
cheifly prepared to execute his most fierce indignation.
He calls them moreover the Lords axe, whereby he cut
downe the Nations. All were the Lords instruments:
He sent these Assyrians,The Lord gave them y• charge, tho the enemie thought not so. and gave them the charge to
spoile and trample under foote the rebellious Israelites,
as the mire in the streets. But did the proud Assyrian
know thus much, how God used him as his soldier? or
did he purpose in it to execute Gods wrath, and his terrible
judgement? No, saith the Lord, he thinketh not
so, neither doth his heart esteeme it so, as to avenge my
quarrell, but he imagineth to destroy not a few nations:
that is, All that he doth, he doth in pride and malice of
his owne wicked heart; and by his owne strength, as he
foolishly thinketh. Therefore the Lord saith plainely,
That when he had used him, as his rod to correct his
people,Atter God hath corrected his Church, he wil burne his rods in the fire. first Samaria and then Ierusalem, first Israel and
after Iudah, that he would surely burne the rod in the
fire: He would visit the proud heart of the King of
Asshur, and bring downe his proud lookes, and as a fire
in his vengeance consume him utterly.Esa: 12. 17, 14.
               
               
                   And secondly for Manasseh the sonne of that worthy
Hezechiah, when he went backe from the good wayes of
his father,In carying Ma
                           •
                        ass
                           ••
                        
                      into Captiu
                        •
                     ie. and set up againe all the abominations that
his father had taken away, and had also destroyed that
pietie and religion,2 Chr: 33. 1, 2, 3. which his good father had so laboured
to build up: and finally, when he caused his people
to doe worse than the Heathen,vers. 9. 10. 17. whom the Lord had
plagued, the Holy Ghost saith, That first the Lord spake
unto him, and to his people, but they would not regard. And

when that would not serve,The Lord brought on him the Assyrian. he saith expresly, That the
Lord brought upon them the Captaines of the hoast of the
King of Asshur, who tooke Manasseh, and put him in fetters,
and bound him in chaines, and caried him to Babel. And
that then when he was in tribulatior, he prayed to the Lord
his God, and humbled himselfe greatly before the God of his
fathers; and God was intreated of him, and heard his prayer,
and brought him againe into his kingdome in Ierusalem:
then Manasseh knew that the Lord was God. So that it was
God especially that brought the Assyrian upon Manasseh,
                  God did all in it.
and fettred him, and caried him into Babylon,
and there heard his prayer, and brought him backe,
and set him againe in his kingdome: it was God that
did it.
               Thirdly, for this Captivitie, as the Prophet here foresaw 
it,So in this Captivitie the Lord likewise did all. and the Lord said, he would doe it; and like as he
bids the enemies, which are represented by these Angels,
to goe and smite; so the Holy Ghost saith plainely,
(using the very same phrase of speech,2 Chro: 36. 17. that is used concerning
Manasseh) That God brought upon them the King
of the Caldeans, who slew their young men with the sword,
and spared neither young nor old, but made this havocke of
them all. They came not meerely of themselves, but
God sent them as his executioners. This Ieremie confesseth
in his Lamentations, That the Lord did it; acknowledging
thus in the person of all Iudah and Ierusalem,Lament: 2. 22.
                  Thou hast called as in a solemne day, my terrours round
about: meaning, that the Lord had called their terrible
enemies on every fide to compasse them in, that none
might escape his wrath: wherein he shewes, how the
Lord mustered the enemies to revenge these abhominations.
And thus hath it ever bin, when enemies have
come against the Church, (as we may see cleane thorow
the booke of God, and especially in the booke of the
Iudges) it was principally, because the Lord had stirred
them up, he had mustered and brought them. For if he
but lift up his ensigne, or but hisse, or whistle for them,

as the Prophet speaketh,Isai. 5. 26, 27. they come amaine from all the
ends of the earth. They sleepe not, nor faint, unlesse the
Lord himselfe stay them or plucke them backe; putting
his hooke into their nostrils, and his bit into their jawes,
as he did to that proud Senecharib,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      29. when he came so
fiercely against Ierusalem. Although (as we heard) the
enemies themselves doe not know so much. And when
is it that the Lord brings them? Even then when his
people, whom he hath put in trust with his most holy religion,
through long peace, ease, and prosperitie, become
utterly unthankfull, and grow to loath the heavenly
Manna;
                     
                        〈…〉
                      26. 3, 14, to 26. when once they begin to be haughtie against
the Lord, and rebellious against his word and messengers
sent unto them, and they will obey it no further,
than it doth like themselves;Deut: 28. 15. to 50. when they doe waxe so
senselesse and indurate, as all his fatherly rods of scarsitie,
famine,2 King: 17. 13, 14, 15, 16. pestilence, and other sicknesse, signes and tokens
from heaven and earth, no, nor the continuall warnings
of his servants, can doe them any more good to
move them any longer.2 Chro: 33. 10. And finally, when in steed of
repenting and meeting him with intreatie of peace, they
proceede to mock his servants,2 Chor: 36. 14, 15, 16, 17. to misuse his messengers,
despising his word sent in mercy to warne them; for then
he can beare no longer, but sets up his ensignes and calls
for the sword of the enemie to avenge his quarrell, thereby
to take away religion and all the comforts of this life
in one day, for that their intollerable contempt of all his
bounty,This threatned in the Law. long suffering, and compassion. This is that
which he hath threatned in his law. That he will punish
such a people yet seven times more:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     : 9 4, 5, 6. the sword and
captivity being the last and heaviest outward plague and
oft accompanied with all the rest,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     : 26. 24. chiefly with famine,Deut: 28 25. to 48. &
most cruell and savage beasts to devoure the rebellious
people.
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      5. 17. This he did fearefully verifie in the ensamples
mentioned both in the captivity of Israell and Iudah,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      14
chiefly in this latter,2 Chr: 
                        •
                     6. 6. 13, 14. as the holy Ghost plainely sheweth,
declaring the causes of it. How, when after their former

lesse captivities and sundry plagues begun, they in generall
still increased their trespasses wonderfully, according
to all the abominations of the heathen, and withall
mocked and misused his messengers, which he had sent
unto them in compassion to call them to repentance,
then there was no remedie. But he brought upon them
the King of the Caldeans,vers. 17. to the end of 21. to execute all his fierce wrath
and vengeance upon them all. God gave all into his
hands. And this as he saith, was to fulfill the word of the
Lord spoken by the mouth of Ieremie, untill the Land had
her fill of Sabaoths. So all the dayes that shee lay desolate,
shee kept Sabaoth, to fulfill seventie yeeres. In which
words, it is most evident that the whole Captivitie, both
for the manner and continuance, was altogither appointed
and directed by the Lord. Whence we may most
plainely conclude,Isai: 54. 16. with that of the Prophet Esay, where
he brings in the Lord thus speaking of himselfe: Behold,
I have created the Smith that bloweth the coales in the sire,
and him that bringeth forth an instrument for his w
                        •
                     rke; I
have created the destroyer to destroy. If any man shall yet
doubt of any part hereof, let him read with reverence
the 26 chapter of Leviticus, and there he shall see all
this set downe in order, especially from the 14 verse to
the end.
               To apply this now to our times,Application to our selves, to behold y• Lords Armies. and to our selves; it
being now our lesson to awaken us, and to make us to
looke at the Lord, levying his Armies against us, if any
thing can stir us.
               Did that proud Nebuchadnezzar of Rome sound
out his bellowing Bulls, to move all the Lords people to 
rebell against his Annoynted?Pop
                        •
                     sh Bulls sent to move our people to rebellion. Or hath he so often practised
our destruction both openly and secretly altogither
without the Lord? Or did any of that bloudie 
League,The bloudie league. being Antichrists sworne servants, so band
themselves as of themselves, without the Lords command,
to threaten so far forth the ruinating of Christs
kingdome, and the rooting out of his Gospell? Or those

                   that came against us in the yeere eightie eight, in their
mightie Armada,The 
                        〈◊〉
                      Armada. 
                        〈…〉
                     . which the enemie, in the pride of his
heart, had named, the Navie invincible, purposing nothing
else, but the utter desolation both of this Church
and Kingdome, and to massacre the mother with the
children, to satiate themselves with the bloud of every
one of us, as their burcherly instruments of crueltie did
proclaime to all the world. Did these (I say) come only of
themselves, in the malice and hautinesse of their hearts,
and without the Lord so disposing and threatning us by
them? Could they or durst they ever have attempted
those things of themselves alone? No, no, The Lord
will have us all to know hereby, that these were his own
soldiers; it was he that mustered them; he lift up his ensigne
unto them; he bad them so to threaten us, to goe
and smite:
                     
                        〈…〉
                      26. He onely brought the insolent Babylonian
towards our Ierusalem,
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      5 15. he shewed us the edge of his axe,
he shak'd the sword at us,Yet turned backe & overthrowne at our prayers: when w
                        •
                     ndes & wat
                        •
                     rs were armed against them to take vengeance for us. to cause us to seeke him. And
so at our humiliation and prayers, which we then powred
out so vehemently, with fasting, mourning, and confession
of our sinnes, through the whole Land, his owne
holy hand plucked them backe againe. He armed both
windes and waters to take vengeance of that most insolent
and cruell attempt, whereof so many records shall
beare witnesse to the end of the world. And although
the Lord wrought this our deliverance with their overthrow,
so wonderfully by his owne mightie arme, and so
evidently with his owne right hand, that we might justly
have hoped, that they durst never have once so much,
as thought of attempting to rise up against us after; yet
doe we not see, how they have since exceeded the insolencie
of all former ages? How they have not onely
 contrived and practised sundry most bloudie treasons
since against the Lords Annoynted,Many treasons since. thereby to make
way for the butchering of us all; but even so lately devised
so new, so strange, & so desperate a stratagem against
our dread Soveraigne, with our noble Queene, our

gratious young Prince, and all that Royall Progenie;
yea, with the Right Honorable Councell and Nobilitie,
the whole state and bodie of our Nation, to consume all
at once, by that most hideous and infernall furnace? For 
what could they intend,Chiefly the infernall furnace. but to have made us all as flesh
for the cauldron, and that very day to have bin the dismall
day, both of our flourishing Realmes, and also of the
Church and Gospell of Christ, so far as they were able?
Of which most execrable fact, never shall future age keep
silence,Branding that religion for ever. to the branding of that bloudie Religion, with
the perpetuall infamie of lying and murther, the two
principall workes of the Devill, and brands of his servants,Iob. 8. 44.
as our Saviour directly witnesseth; so as none can
pretend ignorance thereof, except they will wilfully
blinde their owne eyes.
               And to draw towards the conclusion of this point; 
what meanes that increase of outrage for Popery and all
profanenesse?Increase of the outrage for Popery and all profanenesse. Their deadly malice increased, declared in all devises to divide and disgrace us. what is that so deadly malice in all those
who are so bent, to that Romish Idolatrie and impiety; I
meane their hatred against both the Gospell and all the
true professors of it? How is it that they are not afraid to
shew this openly, by all devices which they can invent
to discharge the religion of the Lord and to divide us utterly
amongst our selues, to fall by one another; and that
after so many and so late and strange discoveries of their
barbarous cruelties and Machivillian plots above all,After so many convictions. of
all other religions, that the world hath heard of; with
such notable testimony given from heaven of Gods wonderfull
protection in all the admirable deliverances of
the professors thereof among us.
               What are all these with our ungratefull abusing of
them by our impenitency.These fearefull denunciations of vengeance. I beseech you (and herein I
appeale to the consciences of all men) what are they,
but infallible denunciations of the hasting of the Lords
most terrible vengeance,And dāger
                        •
                     us prognostications of a most heavy scourge from Babylon. unlesse we repent speedily. Or
what can they, with all the former prognesticate (if we
may make a particular construction of them) but threat
                  
                     ••
                  ngs

of the bringing in indeed of that dreadful scourg,
(which he in mercy still keepe from us) which formerly
he hath, but shaken towards us, and frighted us withall.

                     •
                  ogive us either wholy into the hand of that bloudy
whore of Babylon, and so to bring our necks againe under
that cruell yoake (the common vexation of all the
people of the Lord) or at least that they should come to

                     〈◊〉
                   and tyrannize among us, and setting up their
cursed Idolatrie againe, to pollute the Lords holy religion;
and in the end to thrust forth his sacred truth, and
our selves, to live ever in horror and shame, having alwaies
the sword at our throats, as in France and other
countries,For abusing his religion. where they have so prevailed, they have had
too fearfull experience. Were not this most righteous
for our abusing that his heavenly treasure, committed to
us, beside all other our sinnes, which yet. I instantly pray
day and night, that he may prevent, by our most speedy,
and unfeigned repentance. And may not this be a just
cause, why he hath suffered these so to increase, because
howsoever we can be content with an outward forme &
name of his holy religion,Not enduring the power of 
                        〈◊〉
                     , but seeking to destroy it. which by the good lawes of
our land, we doe truly professe; yet few of us can indure
the power and practise of it in our selves, or others? We
cannot denie, but that the true practise of religion, is the
very life and soule of all religion, and yet how many doe
seeke to destroy it, in whomsoever it appeares, if all
scornes and contempt of it can possibly doe it:
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      better of th
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   for is it
not an usuall thing with many in most places, to like
much better of the profane man, that hath cast all religion
and conscience behind his backe, then of those in
whom the seedes or the least beginning of grace doth
appeare; Or which is yet worse, are not many of us in too
many places growne to this, to like much better of the
Papist and ungodly, pre 
                     •
                  rring them to be our compani
                  
                     ••
                  s,
and accounting them far honester men, then such

                     〈…〉
                   feare the Lord, making conscience to

                     〈◊〉
                   before him, in that good way wherein we al (except

the Popish sort) agree in word and generall profession?
Let common experience testifie,Experience of the d
                        •
                     slike of al true lovers of Religion. how few they are who
can brooke that man who is a diligent frequenter of the
word of the Lord, a strict observer of the Sabboth; carefull
to teach and instruct his family, that cannot like of
oathes and blasphemies, filthy speeches and excesse of
drinking or other vanities. And what may this seeme to
be,A manifest joyning hands and calling for the enemie. but to joyne hands with the enemies of God, and by
these and the like to proclaime a kind of defiance against
him that such will not have him to rule over them? yea,
even to challenge him, or at least to provoke him, to
bring in the enemies to avenge his quarrell. If therefore
the Lord of hoasts doe call for them, to rise up against us
in new conspiracies or open violence, and with them all
the crew of wicked and ungodly men, in whom we have
so delighted, to take part with those to our destruction
(as they, it is to be feared will be as outragious as the other
against all soundly fearing God) is it not just? Yea,
if he should let them to make it Bellum prodigorum,
                  How righteous with God to bring in the day of the spēd thrists. the
day of all the spend-thrifts & of al the vile persons of the
land, to have their fingers in every mans coffers, and
their hands washen in the blould of them, whom they
have hated, so soone as ever any of the Babilonish designes
shall take their effect, could we wonder as it? May
we not much rather wonder at & admire his former long
sufferings, that he hath only hitherto raised them up against
us, as to drive us to turne unto him, but suffered
them not to prevaile, no, not so much as against any one
of us.To 
                        〈◊〉
                      Gods mercy in saving 
                        〈◊〉
                     . In the midst of the fire. That though we have beene after a sort in the midst
of the hot fiery furnace; yet not so much as the smell of
the fire hath beene felt upon us, when as notwithstanding
we are so many of us so ready by our countenancing
them and joyning with them in their wickednesse,We cannot be assured to be delivered from them 
                        〈…〉
                      their waies. to
blow this fire of his vengeance; to cause it so farre as in
them lieth, to consume us utterly in one day. Can we ever
looke to be freed from the danger, untill we more
generally abhorre their waies? Or can we otherwise imagine,

but that our desperate perils must needs increase
daily by them, so long as we are still so much delighted
in them, and cast of the Lord?
               Ch
                     •
                  f we had generally so received him,And renew our vowes beginning to performe them. as our Lord
and master, as we have either entred into a solemne covenant
with him at our Baptisme, and as in words wee
make profession; then had he undoubtedly long agoe
cast such a feare upon them, as they durst never have plotted
any more against his annointed or against his sanctuarie.
Oh If we could yet but thinke of the good motions
and purposes which we have had in the midst of our
dangers, and our greatest deliverances. That for those
preservations and the redeeming of our lives, we would
begin to lead new lives,
                     
                        •
                     zech: 16. 4. 6. and become new men! Oh I say,
That we would at length set our hearts faithfully to
performe those our vowes so oft renewed with our God,Eccles: 5. 3. 4. 5.
and submit our selves cherefully to obey the heavenly
Gospell of his sonne, becomming zealous in the profession
therof! Then would the Lord soone humble our enemies;Our enemies humble by our turning to the Lord.
He would either cause their rage to cease utterly
from us, as he did sundry times in Iudah, when the people
so sought his face, or if they would still pursue us, as
the Egyptians did Israel into the heart of the sea,Psal. 81. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. wee
should not neede to feare but even stand still, & see what
he would doe for us, yet once againe in our final delivery
from them, and in their perpetuall confusion. But sith
we are daily further off from this un
                     •
                  eigned obedience to
the Gospell and grow more rebellious; certainly we can
never truly expect, that these enemies (which are his
sword drawne against us) shall be turned backe,Never til then. much
lesse can we secure our selves from them, untill we begin
to meete him with a more generall submission and intreaty
of peace. That is, untill that we doe begin to give
a more thankfull and welcome entertainement to his holy
worship and religion and bring forth better fruits of
our profession, bearing more true affection to his servants,
and giving lesse countenance unto his enemies,

we are never to looke for any peace, untill his quarrell
be avenged. He will be known to be the same mighty
God that ever he was, to hate sin as much as ever he did,
to be as true in his threatnings as ever in former age, &
as zealous for his own glory. And this especially must we
assure our selues of, if the like abominations be found
among us, which brought these cruell enemies upon the
people of Iudah, even as hethreatned them in al the daies
of Iosiah; and if he hitherto have used all other his rods
in vaine amongst us; and namely, these three of all other,
to wit, the sword of the destroying Angell, shaking and
s
                     •
                  iting in most parts of our Land, for so many yeeres together;
The sword of the bloudy enemie devouring about
us; The same so oft and so long shaken at us, and
at length so neere to have beene sheathed in the bowels
of every one of us that professe his name.
               Now then these things being so,What we should doe feeling the Lords Armies approching. It concerneth so many
of us, as whose eyes the Lord hath opened, to see the
mustering of his armies, and who it is, that bids them go
against us and smite; to doe as David and the Elders of
Israell did,1 Chrou: 20. 16. when the Angell of the Lord having his
sword drawne stretched out his hand against Ierusalem.
It is full time that each of us, who are the Lords remembrancers,
humble our selves in secret falling upon our faces,
crying unto our God and never give him any rest, untill
he be appeased. Yea that all of us, who are the Lords
watchmen doe get upon our walles and watch-towers &
still as the enemie approacheth neerer, cry lowder to awaken
us, out of our dead sleepe and to warne all. That
those in authority may more zealously command, all inferiors
more cheerefully obey▪ to the more ioyfull receiving
and professing the Lords most glorious religion,
that so his anger being asswaged, he may cease from sending
any more the destroyers against us, least otherwise
in the end, our Religion, peace, prosperity, lives and all
doe pay for it, and be utterly taken away by them togither.
And let us all humbly againe confesse with the
Prophet Amos; The Lion hath roared upon us, all sorts

have heard him (as we have so oft,Our so many confessions by authoritie, are so many principall witnesses of his threatnings by them. and so publikely
confessed) who shall not then tremble? The Lord God
hath by his threatnings many a time spoken to us, and
still speaks every day more and more (making us ech
houre to hearken for some new treacherie from Rome,
and to wonder that we heare of none of so long: and
likewise causing all of us to admire the riches of his
goodnesse, in that he hath so miraculously preserved us
all from them unto this very day: who then amongs us
can but give signification hereof? Is it not therefore
full time to doe what we can, every one with the Lord
by instant prayer, and ech with men also, stirring up
one another to turne and cry unto the Lord, that he doe
not indeed bring the enemie upon us, and give us into
their hands without any pitie, as he did this people, and
as he hath so oft and so neerely accomplished the like
wrath upon us? But this may suffice for this cause,
which the Lord gives us all hereby to watch and pray
day and night, if we would have him to stay, or to turne
from us the sword of the Babylonian, and every
other enemie & terrible plague: or at least,
if we would finde him a hiding
place in the day of his
vengeance.
               Hitherto of the first part of the Commission to the
destroying Angels, to goe and smite.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The mourners being once marked and made sure, then comes
the vengeance; for the destroyers follow at the heeles of the
marking Angell: And what neede we have therefore
to watch and pray, because we know not whether
this be not already accomplished,
or how neere it is.
               
               
                  Vers. 5.
                  And to the other he said in my hearing; Goe yee
after him through the Citie, and smite, let your
eye spare none, &c.
               
               IN this next place we are to observe, how the Lord
bids the destroyers, to goe after the marking Angell,
following him, as it were, hard at the heeles, that so
soone as ever the servants of God are marked and safe,
they should stay no longer; but presently execute their
charge, which was, Kill, kill, and spare none: for so the
words doe plainely import.
               Herein the Lord would have us all to know yet further,The mourners marked▪ then comes the vengeance.
that so soone as ever he hath gathered forth those,
that bewaile the sinnes of the times, that is, his faithfull
ones, from among the rest, or made sure provision for
them, then he will stay no longer, but presently begin
the execution of his vengeance on the rest which remaine.
               This truth the Lord hath left unto us as cleare as any
of the former;This set downe clearely, and why. that when we see him taking the godly away,
all may learne to prepare for themselves to escape,
or else be left more without excuse. To shew this in order
out of the former destructions; as being in my understanding
most fit, as so set downe, to this purpose;
and also most plainely for the simplest to conceive of.
               
                  
                   1. Noah is no sooner in the Arke, fast lockt in by the
Lord himselfe,In the old world. and so out of the danger, but presently
the sloud-gates of heaven are set open, the fountaines of
the great depths broken up,Gen: 7. 11, 13, 16, 17. destruction rusheth upon
them:Noa
                        •
                     . that 
                     〈◊〉
                   they, or climbe they whithersoever they
will, the vengeance of God still followeth them at the
heeles, untill they be utterly swept away from the face of
the earth, without any more pitie and compassion.
               
                   2. Lot is no sooner out of Sodom, and gotten safe into
Zoar,Lot. past all the danger, but (though it was a goodly
morning to see to,Gen: 19. 22, 23, 24, 25. the Sunne rising gloriously upon the
earth, as it was wont) yet the fire and brimstone came
powring downe, The Holy Ghost saith, that The Lord
rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha, brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of heaven, and overthrew all. He turned
all those filthy Cities into ashes, making them most
loathsome pits, and a terrible monument of his most
severe vengeance to all such beastly livers,2. Pet: 2. 6. to the end of
the world. All perish togither in an instant, as they were
partakers togither in the same filthy sinnes. Howling
and crying then will do no more good: no place is now
lest to repentance, nor to mercy any longer.
               
                   3. The Christians are no sooner gotten out of Ierusalem
to Pella, according to the warning;The last overthrow of Ierusalem. but presently
Ierusalem is taken, (as Iosephus reports) and then as
great cruelties are exercised,Matth: 24. as ever upon any Citie or
people before, and as great miseries followed them, according
as our Saviour had foretold.
               
                   4. And lastly, that same holy Iosiah hath his eyes no sooner
closed,This captivitie beginning upon the death of 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   that he might not see the vengeance, and
himselfe taken to his rest, as the Lord had promised
him; because his heart so melted, at the hearing of the
abominations, and the judgements denounced for them,
but straight-way,2 Chr: 34. 27, 28. even within three moneths, begins
this wofull tragedie of Iudah and Ierusalem.Ierem: 8. 7. As the
flying away of the Swallow is a signe of winter at hand;
so the departing and taking away of these mourners

forth of any Church, must needs be a fearefull threatning
of some terrible winter,Gen: 17. 10, 11▪ & 19. 22. if not a desolation, to
come upon that people;2 Cl
                        ••
                     : 34. 27, 28. especially, when we consider,
what such are for the preservation of the place where
they are. And so much first for the evidence of this
truth.
               Now that we may againe returne home unto our
selves;Application to our selves. Let us see whether hereby we have not just cause
to be awakened, & ech to betake our s
                     ••
                  ves to watching
and prayer, to stay the vengeance of God, before it be
come upon us, and it be too late. Have not many of
our Noahs,
                  Many of our Noahs pluckt into the Arke. I meane, many of Gods faithfull servants,
most famous both in Church and Common-wealth, for
helping to build and prepare the Arke, bin taken away
from us, not many yeeres ago, long before their time?
And amongst others; Did not the Lord specially pluck
unto himselfe, in a short space, togither, sundry of our
most worthily renowmed and victorious champions, so
approved against that proud Goliah of Rome? Hath he
not thus caried up these, into the Arke, not made with
hands, as accounting us thereby unworthy that they
should remaine any longer amongst us upon the earth,
to helpe to stand betweene the Lords wrath and us?
What heart was so flintie, which dissolved not into
teares for sundry of them? or which was not astonished
at the apprehension of his manifest displeasure therein,
and in a fearefull consideration of that which he
saith,Isai: 57. 1. 
                  That the righteous are taken away from the evils to
come.
               
               This yet is some comfort;Our comfort in the remnant of the mourners still amōg us. That we have still some
Noa
                        •
                     s carefully preparing and finishing the Arke, and
warning the secure and unthankfull world. All our Lots
are not yet pluckt from amongst us. The Lord of hoasts
hath as yet in mercy reserved us a remnant, who unfeignedly
feare the tokens of his wrath. He hath some that
stil lift up their voyces like trumpers,Isa
                        •
                     . 58. 1. to tel his people of
their sins. Some that lift up their hearts with their hands,

with Moses against Amaleck. Some that made continuall
intercession with faithful Abraham. Some that mourne
in secret, who wrastle and weepe with Iacob, and who
will not let the Lord goe, untill he shew us mercy and
save us, from the scourge, which we have justly deserved.
Some, I say, (for what are they compared with the rest,
or in regard of our time and meanes, or that they have
beene in sundry parts of the Land) otherwise we had bin
made long agoe as Sodome and like unto Gomorrha.)Isay: 1. 9.
And we may further say by the infinite mercy of God;And the preservation of the Lords Anointed.
That the Lords annointed is still preserved, for our shelter
and the breath of our nostrils, by whom alone under
the highest, we hitherto enjoy our safety, in the midst of
the greatest furies of our implacable and bloud-thirsty enemies.
If the Lord had ever, or yet should never so little
take away his hand for all our provocations,1 amen: 4. 20. (which evill
of all other,what could we looke for, these being taken away. he ever turne from us, like as hitherto he
hath done) sith the enemies hunt after his life and the
lives of us all continually, and our sinnes doe cry for it,
what then could we looke for? Or if he should any way
suffer the mouthes of all his faithfull messengers to be
shut that there might be none to reprove, & much more
if he once take from amongst us, those that sigh and cry
out for all the abominations, and restrayn utterly that
spirit of mourning and prayer, what may we expect then?
And is not this the thing which the Atheist and belly-God,Though the ungodly long for it, & why.
with all the company of the wicked and ungodly
do desire so much, and which the I do latrous murthering
enemies doe conspire continually? And why? Because
these are they that chiefly trouble all the wicked: these
will not suffer them to lye wallowing in their sinne; but
seeke to pull some of them with violence out of the fire,Iude. 23. others to save with feare as Iude speaketh. These are
continually watching upon their walls, crying out of iniquity
with 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , and threatning the judgements of
Gods approaching for all the crying sinnes, so to turne
away the plagues from us by turning us to the Lord.

These are still in Christs place calling Gods people out
of Babilon; discovering the filthinesse of the whore, and
warning all to get far of frō her for feare of hir burning,Apoc: 18. 4.
to beware of being partakers with her in her sinne, lest
they be partaker with her in her torment.
               And to be briefe, for that these are they, who have
stood principally in the way of the bloudie enemie, that
they could neither bewitch nor invade the Church and
Sanctuarie of the Lord, as otherwise they would have
done.These once taken away, to looke for the judgement. Well, all of us should yet consider in time, that if
these shall be once pluckt away from us, (as being unworthy
of them) and the Swallow having taken her
flight (howsoever some may conceit, that then it would
be well with us, and we should have merry times, yet)
then undoubtedly we may justly looke for the coldest
and wofullest winter, that ever the Church amongst us
felt and endured: for after that these are once marked
and made sure, what can be expected, but the destroyers
to follow after their heeles? what, but this terrible
charge,When all shall be alike. 
                  Smite, spare none. Then shall belly-god and
worlding, Papist and Atheist, be all alike; because they
have joyned alike in angring the Lord, and grieving his
servants, to make them thus to sigh and cry unto him.
And thus had it bin with them long ere this day,Thus had it bin, if God had not prevented. if ever
forraine enemie had prevayled, or any of their treasonable
practises; and much more if that late infernall devise,
had taken effect: yea, if the Lord of hoasts had not in
mercy, at the cryes of these mourners, saved us even miraculously
frō that evill day.To cry for the preservation of our si
                        •
                     elter, and all these. This may teach us therefore
to cry day and night, that our shelter may never be taken
away from us; but that it may spread it selfe more largely,
and that the candle of Israel may never be put out, but
shine still more bright, untill his glorious appearing.
This may also warne all of us, who beleeve the word of
the Lord,To make more account of Noah and our mourn
                        •
                     s. to make more account of every Noah, which
is yet admonishing and finishing the Arke: and of poore
Lot, whose righteous soule is vexed for the abounding of

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
               
            
         
      
   