
      
         
            
            A SERMON
PREACHED AT
WESTMINSTER
MAY 26. 1608.
AT
THE FVNERALL SOLEMNITIES
of the Right Honorable Thomas Earle of
Dorset, late L. High Treasurer
of ENGLAND.
            By GEORGE ABBOT Doctor of Diuinitie and Deane
of WINCHESTER, one of his Lordships
Chapleines.
            Now published at the request of some honourable persons; very
few things being added, which were then cut off by
the shortnesse of the time.
            IOH. 9. 4.
The night commeth, when no man can worke.
            LONDON
Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood for
William Aspley. 1608.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIHGT
Honorable and most vertuous
Lady, the La. Cicely Countesse of
DORSET.
            
               THere are sundry reasons (right
Honourable) which haue mooued
me to giue my consent that
this Sermon might be published:
One is to testifie my dutifull
& grateful respect towards
that noble personage now deceased,
to whom when he was
liuing, I was so much bound for
so many yeeres together: Another is, to giue satisfaction to
diuers of speciall qualitie and note, who haue earnestly intreated
me, that I will not denie this dutie to the dead, nor
such a kindnesse to them aliue, but that they may reade that
againe and againe, which they heard once with no discontentment:
A third is, that the world may truly take notice
of many excellent vertues, wherewith God had indued this
honourable man: and that as well with resolued knowledge
to compose and settle his soule religiously towards heauen, as
with rare wisdome & prudence otherwise, to digest and dispatch,
either publike businesse touching his Souereigne and
the State, or his owne priuat affaires. In the opening whereof,
as it should be vanitie to adde or amplifie any thing, so it
should be want of Christian dutie and regard, to conceale
that which is true: especially since the relation may satisfie
such as doubt, and the example may prouoke others to imitate
those good parts, which are not euery where to be found.
Now it being published, I haue as great reason to recommend

it to your honourable patronage, since you are the Suruiuer
of that worthy couple, who for so long time were ioyned together
in the bands of Christian wedlocke. And whom may
it more concerne, or vnto whom can it be more comfortable
than to your Ladiship, that there should be some memoriall
of his well-doing, whom you so deerly loued, and so respectfully
obserued, in the time of your conuersation together?
Besides, the reading of it, may peraduenture be a Remembrancer
vnto you of your owne mortalitie, when you heare of
his departure before you, who (as you supposed) might haue
ouer-liued you many yeeres. And lastly, the mention of that
which his Lordship hath left touching your selfe, may incite
you to go forward in those vertuous and Christian courses,
which hitherto you haue so singularly demonstrated, that
(besides the experience which his Lordship had, and testified
to the full) the world (which obserueth few good things,
vnlesse they be eminent) taketh great notice of them: and
therefore it neerly concerneth your Honor to persist therein:
and to endeuour yet dayly to increase those good graces; that
the end may counteruaile, yea exceed, both the progresse and
beginning. I doubt not but God who hath begun his admirable
worke in you, will accomplish it and make it perfect, so
blessing you all the dayes of your pilgrimage heere, that you
may liue to your children and childrens children an honourable
paterne of pietie, religion and vertue; and depart
from this earth in a full age, vnto the true and neuer ceasing
ioyes of his euerlasting Kingdome. Which he will alwayes
pray for, who is and long hath beene
            
               Your Honors very much bounden
GEORGE ABBOT.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A SERMON PREAched
at Westminster May 26. 1608.
            
            AT THE FVNERALL SOLEMNITIES
of the Right Honourable Thomas Earle
of Dorset, late L. High Treasurer
of ENGLAND.
            
               ISAIAH 40. 6.
               
                  A voice sayd, Crie. And he sayd, What shall I crie? All flesh is
grasse, and all the grace thereof is as the flower of the field.
                  7. The grasse withereth, the flower fadeth, because the spirit
of the Lord bloweth vpon it.
               
            
            
               HEe that looketh into this Chapter,
shall see it to be a Prophecie of the
comming of Christ: of his appearing
in the flesh, and his taking of our humane
nature vpon him, so to bring
grace and saluation to as manie as
should beleeue. And this, touching
the comming of Christ, is not nakedly
layd downe, but with an intimation
also of his fore-runner Iohn the Baptist, the very words
being vsed (to make it the more notorious) which are repeated

in the third Chapter of Saint Mathew,Matth. 3. 3. 
               The voice of a crier
in the wildernesse, prepare the way of the Lord: make his paths
straight. But to fit men so much the more, to embrace that
mercy which should be offred by him, this sound reason is
brought; that of our selues we are mortall, corruptible and
transitorie, and that therefore it is good that we should haue
something else to rest our soules vpon. For we consist but of
flesh, and that is like vnto the grasse. And if we should imagine
othermen to be better then our selues, yet they are but as we
are: for all flesh is grasse, and all the grace thereof is as the flower
of the field: Therefore it is best to trust to something els; and
that must be the sonne of God, the Sauiour of the world, the
Redeemer of mankind, the mighty God of Iacob. I shall not
at this time speake any thing concerning the comming of
Christ, but shall rather insist vpon the opening of the reason
which leadeth vs vnto Christ Iesus. Which that it may bee
the more strongly imprinted in vs, it is not barely deliuered,
but with a kinde of Preface, or solemne introduction, A voice
said, Cry: And he said, What shall I cry? The whole may be diuided
into these two parts, A preparation, and A proclamation.
The proclamation is the maine, consisting of the latter
words, All flesh is grasse, and all the grace thereof as the flower of
the field, &c. In the preparation, are two circumstances: A
commandement, what should be done: And the Prophets
composing of himselfe to the performance of it. Of all which
in their order, as God shall giue assistance.
            A voice said, Crie.
            2 We shall little need to inquire, what voice this is which
speaketh to Esay. For that, whereunto the Prophet would
hearken, is only the voice of God. That which spake out of
the mount, in the twentieth of Exodus, when the law was giuen
downe to the people of Israel,Exod. 20. 1. 
               God spake these words and
said. That which called to1. Sam. 3. 4. Samuel, in the dead time of the
night, and badde him go, and doe a message to old Eli. That
whereof Dauid could say,Psal. 29. 4. 
               The voice of the Lord is mightie:
the voice of the Lord is glorious. The veritie, the authority, the
maiestie of that which is vttered, doth declare so much. This

biddeth the prophet Crie: not speake only; much lesse whisper;
but with an extention of his voice to deliuer his message.
This must not be as that was when God passed by Elias,
1. Reg 19. 12. 
               in a soft and still voice: nor as that, where, to describe the
mildenesse of our Sauiour, it is said of him;Matth. 12. 19. 
               He shall not stirre,
nor crie, neither shall any man heare his voice in the streets: but
it is rather like that of Ionas the prophet, who entring into
NiniueIonah 3. 4. 
               cried and said, Yet fortie daies, and Niniue shall be destroied.
Or as that in our prophet Esay,Isa: 58. 1. 
               Crie aloud, and spare
not: lift vp thy voice like a trumpet. Heere must be such a noise,
as would mooue a man that were musing, would whet him
that were dull, would rowse him that were slumbring, would
awake him that were sleeping. So carefull is God, that we
should heare this lesson, and lay it vnto our hearts.
            3 Hence we may perceiue the heauinesse and dulnesse of
our nature, when in a matter so cleere, we need such a noise
to remember vs of our mortalitie. For set aside the word of
God, Philosophy and experience may informe so much vnto
vs. The Churches and Church-yards thorow which we do
passe, the tombes of other men, the going before vs of our
parents and our kinsfolkes, of our friends and acquaintance,
might proclaime this vnto vs. What should we need any
crying? or why should we lacke any speaking? We may see
this well enough
                  •
                So many men as wee meet, so many mortall
creatures. X
                  •
               rxes though but a heathen man, yet could
make this vse of his sight: For when he beheld from the top
of his high tabernacle, the huge numbers in his armie, as
Herodot, in Polymma. Herodotus writeth, he broke forth into teares, and yeelded
this reason of it, that of all that multitude (which was so great,
that for ought we reade, there were neuer in the world so
many souldiers at once compacted into one armie) within
one hundred yeres there should not one person be remaining
aliue. And if we would not see it, yet feele it we may. For as
we reade in S. Austen, the aches of our bones, the heauinesse
of our bodies, the deafenesse of our eares, the dimnesse of our
sight, the baldnesse of our heads, the grainesse of our haires,
are signes of a house that is ready to fall to the ground.August. de 12. abusionum gradibus. Tom. 9. 
               Dum

oculicaligant, aures grauiter audiunt, capilli fluunt, &c. hac omnia
ruitur am iam iam
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   domum corporis citò praenunciant. Hee
alludeth to an old house, whereof when the walles doe moulder
and fitter away, the roofe is vncouered, the timber is disiointed,
it is an euident argument, that it will not be long before
this house fall. Such tokens of the mortalitie of our bodies,
are those decaies and imperfections. But Sathan doth
so deafe vs, and the world doth so blinde vs, and our flesh
maketh vs so senselesse, that wee neither heare nor see, nor
feele that which lieth so hard vpon vs, And therefore Gods
voice must call vnto vs: A voice said, Crie.
            
            
               What shall I crie?
            
            4 The Herald is in readinesse, to doe as he is commanded.
And that is the highest part of his dutie. What God enditeth,
he writeth: what God will bid, hee will performe. So
Ezechiel was taught,Ezec. 3. 17. 
               Heare thou the word at my mouth, and
giue them warning from me. And againe,Ezec. 33. 7. 
               Thou shalt heare
the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me. In like maner
in the new Testament, our Sauiour taking his leaue of his
Disciples, biddeth them,Matt. 28. 19. 
               Go, and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and the Sonne, and the holy
Ghost, Teaching them to obserue all things, whatsoeuer I haue
commanded you. And S. Paul to the Corinthians,1. Cor. 11. 23. 
               I haue receiued
of the Lord that, which I also haue deliuered vnto you.
Thus the Minister should depend vpon the mouth of his
Master. Saint Paul could say to Timothy his scholar;1. Tim. 6. 20. 
               O Timotheus
keepe that which is committed to thee. Whereupon
Vincentius Lyrinensis very elegantly doth descant, What is
it that thou must keepe,Vin
                     •
                  . contr. haeres. cap. 27. 
               That which is committed to thee, not
that which is inuented by thee: that which thou hast receiued, not
that which thou hast deuised: a matter not of thy witte, but rather
of thy learning. If the Preacher of the Gospell doe keepe
him to this rule, he himselfe shall be safe; and as for the speeding
of it, let him leaue the euent to God. The Physicians of
Egypt, asDiodor. Antiquit. lib. 2. 3. Diodorus Siculus doth report, had this rule prescribed
to them, that they should make their practise according
to a booke deliuered vnto them from ancient Physicians,

and approued writers. If any followed the rule and prescript
of his booke, though his Patient did miscarie, yet hee
was not blamed for it. But if any went besides his booke,
though his Patient did well, he lost his life for his labour.
We that are Physicians of the soule may make some vse therof.
We must teach by the booke. The burthen of our song
must be with the old prophets, Thus and thus saith the Lord.
If he command we must speak; what he willeth, we must cry.
So much of the Preparation. And now to the Proclamation.
            
            All flesh is grasse, &c.
            5 Heere the speech is so significant, that euery word hath
his weight. Flesh it selfe intendeth corruption. When it is
likened to the grasse, it more noteth our mortalitie. When the
word All is added, it designeth the generalitie of the doome
which is giuen. When the grace and beautie is named, it demonstrateth
that there is no hope to the contrarie. The spirit
of the Lord blowing on it, sheweth the reason of the whole. Of
ech of these very briefly. When flesh is named heere, and it
is not said, a liuing creature, or a spirit, nay not so much as that
which is ordinarie in the Scripture, a man, it implieth a dissolution.
For our flesh is propagated from Adam, and of him it
was said,Gen. 3. 19. 
               From the earth thou wast taken, because thou art
dust, and to dust shalt thou returne. This continueth on his
successors, who deriued their flesh from him. It is written of
Gen. 5. 8. 11. 14. 27. Sheth and Enosh, and Kenan, and Methuselah, that they
liued nine hundred yeeres; but it is added touching ech of
them, And he died, And he died. Dauid witnesseth this for
othermen,Psal. 49. 10. 
               He seeth that wisemen die, and so doe the ignorant
and foolish. Of all flesh, that is true which Saint Bernard deliuereth,
Bern. de gradib▪ humilitat. 
               Nascimur, morimur: We are borne, and then we die.
And in another place,In festo S. Martini. 
               In terra orimur, interra morimur, &c.
In the earth we haue our beginning, and in the earth we haue our
ending, returning into that, from whence at first we were taken.
Thus God hath decreed that there should be a succession of
one man after another. And as in the greatest shewes, when
one hath had his turne, he is to be gone, and to leaue the place
to them that follow, and if he should desire to keepe himselfe

on the stage, and by no meanes to depart, he should be verie
iniurious vnto those who are to succeed: so it is heere in mens
liues; one hath his turne before, another hath his turne afterwards,
but the first must yeeld to the latter, when his time is
once accomplished; els he shall doe wrong to succession. Yet
this going away and departure out of this world, God hath
appointed to be the meanes to aduance men vnto heauen.
Our corruption is the way vnto our incorruption. For God
meaning for to crowne with the garland of immortalitie,
those that haue striuen lawfully, doth not come downe to
them to honour them vpon earth, but calleth them vp to
him, so to glorifie them in heauen. Which thing Saint Chrysostome
well considered, when he spake in this maner:Chrysost in Ep. ad Philip. Homil. 12. 
               He
would haue thee to striue below, but he crowneth thee aboue:
for the crowne is not in this place, where the striuing is; but in a
glorious place. Doe you not see heere, that such champians and
cha
                     •
                  et-driuers, whom they doe most honour, are not crowned
below in the place of trying masteries, but the King calling them
vp putteth on their garlands there. God doth take with his
children the verie selfe-same course. Their fight must be on
earth, but their reward in heauen. And thither they may not
come, till they haue put off this body. Their flesh is as a
veile which keepeth them from beholding the purity of that
secret one.Exo. 26. 31. In the tabernacle which Moses made, there was
a veile which was hanged vp betweene the holy place, and
the holy of holies. This was made of foure substances, that
is, blue silke and purple, and scarlet, and fine linnen, which
asIos. de bel. Iud. Lib. 6. 6. Iosephus telleth vs, and SaintHier. Epist. 128. Hierome after him, did
represent the foure elements, of whom our flesh consisteth.
Such aMatth. 27. 51. veile was afterwards in the temple at Hierusalem,
which at the death of our blessed Sauiour did rent from the
top vnto the bottome, at which time a man might haue beheld
the very Sanctum Sanctorum. So when our flesh, this
veile, which keepeth vs from beholding the inuisibilitie of
that mightie one, shall be rent and torne in peeces by dissolution
and by death, we shall behold our Creator, but neuer vntill
that time.Chrys. Hom. 
                     •
                  . in 2. Cor. The old house must to the ground, that so

the tenant of it, may ascend vnto God by a kinde of remooue,
till the building be new repaired.
            6 In the next place, our flesh is compared to the grasse.
Grasse, than which nothing is more common; nothing more
vile. Which groweth, and in an instant is cut downe, and
then withereth, & is either deuoured as fodder, or if it be of a
bigger size,Matt. 6. 30. is burned in the ouen, as Christ himself speaketh.
Dauid vseth the same comparison:Psal. 103. 15. 
               The daies of man are as
grasse: as a flower of the field, so flourisheth he. Which is thus
expressed by Gregory:Greg. in Psa. 5. Poenitent. 
               Man may be compared to the grasse,
quia per natiuitatem viret in carne, per iuuent utem candescit in

                     ••
                  ore, per mortem aret in puluere: Because by his birth, hee is
greene in his flesh, by his youth he is white in his blossome, by his
death he is drie & withered in the dust. Such is the shortnesse
and vncertaintie of our life. Saint Iames doth liken it to a
Iac. 4. 14. 
               vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and afterward vanisheth
away. Saint Peter compareth it to a tent or2. Pet. 1. 14. 
               tabernacle,
which is soone vp and soone downe. The oldDiod. Sie. Antiq. li. 2. 1. Egyptians
called our houses, by the name of Innes, where we lodge for
a night, and are gone in the morning. Tully termed our life
a
               In Cat. Ma
                     •
                  or. 
               lodging, Ex vita ista discedo, tanquam ex hospitio: I depart
out of this life, as out of a lodging. Iob calleth it a
               Iob. 14. 2. 
               shadow.
And in another place,cap. 7. 6. 
               My daies are swifter than the shuttle
of a weauer. Saint Basil doth liken our life vnto a
               Basil. in Hexam. Homil. 5. 
               dreame,
where a man seeth glorious shewes, and is wonderfully pleased
with them, but after a little while he awaketh, and all is
nothing. Homer compareth men vntoHomer. Iliad. 5. 
               leaues, which peepe
out of the tree, and then grow bigger and bigger; at last they
are at the greatest, fresh in shew, and greene in colour; but
then they fade and decay, and are driuen off with the winde.
Some other say, that a man is but like vnto an apple, which
if it be let alone will at length be ripe, and of it selfe will fall
vnto the ground, but peraduenture before that time, it is shaken
off by a blast, or cropped off by a violent hand. Lastly,
other haue likened our being heere in the world vnto a game
at chesse, where there be degrees of men, Kings, and Knights
and common Pawnes, amongst whom, one is caught away,

and by and by another: but howsoeuer on the boord they
differ in their degree, yet when the game is ended, and they
are swept all into the bagge, there is none better than other,
the meanest lieth aboue, and the greatest is vnderneath. Thus
both the spirit of God, and the iudgement of wise men, by
significant similitudes would riuet it in into vs, and fasten it
as with a naile into our cogitations, that our daies are but vanitie,
our continuance heere but momentame, our abode
on earth but vncertaintie.
            7 Now lest it should be said, that with some it may bee
thus, but with other otherwise, it is farther added, that All
flesh is grasse. Men are all of the same molde, and returne to
the same substance. The wise woman of Tecoah could speake
in generall to Dauid,2. Sam. 14. 14. 
               We must needs die, and we are as water
spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered vp againe. Heere
shee ioineth herselfe with Dauid, My Lord we needs must
die, you a man, and I a woman: you a Soueraigne, I a subiect.
Dauid himselfe knew this, when lying in his death-bed,
he spake thus vnto Salomon,1. Reg. 2. 2. 
               I go the way of all the earth.
Death is the way of all flesh. So holy Iob,Iob 30. 23. 
               I know that thou
wilt bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all the liuing.
So S. Paul to the Hebrewes,Heb. 9. 27. 
               It is appointed vnto men
that they shall once die, and after that commeth the iudgement.
Where the indefinite proposition is equiualent to a generall.
Death, saith Seneca, is theSenec. Epist. 70. ad Lucilium. 
               hauen, whither euery ship must go:
some come sooner, and some come later, but there they all
must ariue. Perhaps when a ship is entring into the mouth of
the hauen, there commeth a blast of winde, and driueth it
out againe; but that will not serue the turne, it must backe
to the same place. The speech is true of all,Innoc. 3. de cont. mund. lib. 1. 
               Vitaperpetuo
auolat, neque potest retincri: mors quotidie ingruit, neque potest
resisti. Life alway flieth away, and cannot be held backe: and
death daily doth grow on, and cannot be resisted. In this one
point all conditions are alike. The yoong may, and the old
must. The difference is no more, but theSen. Ep. 26 one come vnto
death, and death commeth to the other. Death, saith Saint
Bern. de conuers. ad cleric. cap. 14. Bernard, non miseratur inopiam, non diuitias reueretur, &c.

pitieth not the pouertie of one, nor standeth in awe of the riches
of another, it spareth not the parentage of any man, nor his
behauiour, nor his age; for the old it standeth ready in the gates,
for the yoong it licth in ambush. The Poet could say of death,
that it is that,Horat. Carm. Lib. 4. Ode 7. 
               Quò Pius Aeneas, quò Tulius diues & Ancus,
whether Aeneas with his piety, and Tullus with his riches, and
Ancus with his valour did go. Puluis & vmbra sumus: we are
but dust and shadow. Nay it is a thing so assured, that in a sort
a man may say we are more certaine to die, than that euer we
were borne, since there is but one way onely to come into the
world, but a thousand waies to goe out of it, asGreg. Naz. orat. 40. Gregorie
Nazianzene obserued, as, by fire, and by water, by the teeth
of wilde beasts, by famine, or sword, or pestilence, and infinite
meanes besides. And as the rule is generall for persons
and for degrees, so also is it for places; no one place being exempt
or priuileged from death. WhichXenoph. in Apolog. pro Socrat. Socrates himselfe
did rightly vnderstand, when after his condemnation being
told by his friends, that if he would giue liking thereunto,
they would by violence take him from the officers, or otherwise
conuey him away; he not onely gaue no consent to that
proiect of theirs, but also smiled at them, asking whether
they knew any place, without the territorie of Athens, to the
which death might not approch. And as pretie a speech was
that ofAmmian: Mercellin. hist Lib. 16. Sigon. de Occid. Imp. lib. 6. Hormisda the Persian, who being by his king sent
in ambassage to Constantius the Roman Emperour, was caused
by Constantius to walke vp and downe, to view the citie
Rome. There hee beheld the glorious monuments of the
place, the Capitol, the Pantheon, the Temple of peace, the
Forum of Traian, the Amphitheater, and the Bathes, with
many other matters of excellent workemanship. But being
asked by the Emperour what he thought of Rome, or what
was his iudgement concerning it, he replied, that it was the
most glorious Citie, that was in the world; and that as hee
supposed, there was not such another in all the earth: but
this, saith he, doth please me, or as other report it, this one
thing doth displease me, that I see men die at Rome, as they doe in
other places. The speech was most true, and fitteth all other

cities. We all then may resolue, that wheresoeuer we be, or
of what calling soeuer, we must come to the gates of death.
That we might not hope to auoid this, the Patriarkes and
the Prophets haue gone that way before vs: That wee may
not dread the sharpnesse of it, the Sonne of God himselfe by
sustaining death in his flesh, hath sanctified death vnto vs.
            8 A man would haue thought, that by this time sufficient
had beene sayd. But yet farther to imprint all into our cogitation,
the Prophet speaketh on, All the grace thereof is as the
flower of the field. The grasse withereth, the flower fadeth. As
if he should haue subioyned, that if in the life of man there be
any thing more faire, more amiable, more goodly, more specious,
more illustrious than the common qualitie, yet this is
but like to the flower. The flower is more sightly than the
grasse, more pleasing vnto the eye, more fragrant vnto the
smell: yet it endureth the common qualitie of withering and
fading. Yea many times the fairer and the gayer the flower
is, the sooner it is gathered and cropped off by the hand. So
it is with those things which this world esteemeth most glorious.
Authority, estimation, youth, beauty, pompe, strength,
all the delights of this earth are transitorie and vaine. Dauid
setteth men as high as possibly they may go,Psal. 82. 6. 
               I haue sayd, Ye
are gods, and ye all are children of the most High: but he bringeth
them downe as low, But yee shall die as a man: and ye Princes
shall fall like others. There be many things in this world of
high esteeme with men, goodly houses, glorious clothes,
daintie fare, curious gardens, musicke, baths, plate and possessions:
yet of these S. Austen sayd truly,Aug. de catechiz. rudibus cap. 16. 
               Quamuis insana
gaudia non sint gaudia: Although these mad and foolish ioyes are
in trueth no ioyes, yet be they as they are, and let them delight as
much as possibly they can, aufert omnia ista vnafebricula, if there
come but one fit of an ague, the comfort of them is gone. To the
same purpose Saint Basil: for when hee hath described the
glory and the ornaments of Princes and great persons, he addeth:
Basil. in Hexam. homil. 5. 
               That if there come but one ill night, one little touch of a
feuer, some paine of the side, or imperfection in the lungs, abijt illa
vniuersa scena, all the play is marred, the shew is quite disgraced.

Where wee may note, that Saint Basil doth terme our
life but a play: And so also doth SaintChrys Con
                     •
                  . 2. de L
                     •
                  zaro. Chrysostome, likening
men vnto stage-players, among whom one is a King, a
second stands for a Captaine, a third serues for a Mariner, and
other haue other parts; but this is only while they are vpon
the stage: for the shew being ended, they are then but themselues,
all fellowes, and all alike. Euen so in life there is difference,
there be degrees of callings; but in rottennesse and the
graue the best and worst are equall. There no difference may
be found betweene2. Sam. 14. 25. Absason with his beautie, andLuc. 16. 20. Lazarus
with his blaines. There it is true whichLucian. in Necromant. Lucian causeth
one to report, that when he came amongst the dead, he could
there see no difference betweene Nireus the faire, and Thersites
the foule: betweene Irus the begger, and Vlysses the
Prince: betweene Pirrhias the cooke, and Agamemnon the
king. Now if these things be so, why doe men set their hearts
on the glory of this world? Nay, why do Christian men embrace
it, and admire it, and adore it, and doat vpon it, since
Heathen men haue discouered the vanitie thereof, and done
strange things about it? ThatA
                     •
                  n. Syl
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                   Blond. Decad. 2. 6. Platin. in Caelest. 3. Saladine who was so great
an enemie to the Christians, and wan from them the Holy
land, lying vpon his death-bed, gaue charge that his inner
garment, his shirt as it may be thought, or rather his shrowd,
being put on the end of a speare, should be carried before
his coarse now going to be buried, and that a Herald should
crie, that Saladine the great Lord and Gouernour of Asia
carried nothing away with him but that shirt or that shrowd.
Where if it should be obiected that he grew to this contemplation,
when immediatly he was to leaue the world, I may
tell you of other persons, who in their strength and vigor
haue had as good meditations.Dion. Histor. lib. 66. Titus that Romane Emperour
hauing set out shewes and spectacles for a hundred daies
together, to demonstrate the magnificence of that Empire, on
the last day of those sights, in the presence of all the people
did breake foorth into teares, vpon a consideration, that all
that pompe was vanished and dissolued into nothing. It is
sayd ofPlutarch. in vit. Aemil. Paulus Aemilius, that when he had his triumph for

three whole dayes together, he ioyed no way apparantly; as
neither on the other side, he gaue testimonie of griefe for the
death of one of his sonnes, who died a very few dayes before
the time of his triumph; with which patience he also tooke
the death of another of them within a few dayes after. But
albeit in all that, he did beare himselfe with great constancie,
yet in another case hee had other cogitations. ForTit. Liu. lib. 45. hauing
ouerthrowen in battell Perseus the king of Macedonia, and
hauing chased him vp and downe, so that there was small
hope to escape, Perseus writeth letters to him, that he would
yeeld into his hands his kingdome and his person; which
when Aemilius had receiued, he could not stay from weeping,
remembring the inconstancie and mutabilitie of all states
and conditions. So did that nobleTit. Liu. lib. 25. Marcellus in his entrance
into that rich citie Syracusae, when he had long besieged it,
and at last by composition it was surrendred vnto him; the
teares trickled from his eyes, to see so woorthy a place now
brought into captiuitie.Appian. de bellis Puni
                     •
                  is. Scipio another Romane, when he
saw the citie Carthage raced downe vnto the ground, though
it had beene enemie to his countrey, yet could not forbeare
to weepe, to thinke that empires and nations were so subiect
to ouerturning. Thus did the grauest and wisest men that
were among the olde Romans, in the happiest and most glorious
things that euer did befall them while they were heere
amongst men. Such meditations as these were, would well
become Gods best seruants, to lay it vnto their heart, that
the heigth of earthly felicity being taken in it selfe, is but store
of the lightest vanitie. Grasse is no better than grasse, and
flowers are no better than flowers: these fade, the other withereth.
            9 The reason of the whole now followeth: The spirit of the
Lord bloweth vpon it. God dissolueth all at his pleasure; and
marke with what facilitie this matter is brought about; but as
with a puffe of the winde, or as with the blast of the mouth.
That breath which made the world, can marre a man in a
moment. The Lord sayth of himselfe,Deu. 32. 39. 
               I kill, and I giue life:
I wound, and I make whole: neither is there any that can deliuer

out of mine hand. Hanna the mother of Samuel, in her song
remembreth this;1. Sam. 2. 6 
               The Lord killeth, and maketh aliue: bringeth
downe to the graue, and raiseth vp. And my Prophet in
the same Chapter whence my text is taken,Isa. 40. 23. He (speaking
of God) bringeth the Princes to nothing, and maketh the Iudges
of the earth as vanitie. These things teach vs the Lords power,
and his sway ouer men. Hee setteth them in a standing
place like sentinels in a watch, and when he list he dischargeth
them: When he calleth for the greatest, there is no way of
auoiding, there is no meanes of withdrawing, there is no
place for absenting, there is no course of resisting. And so I
end this Proclamation.
            10 What I haue spoken all this while touching the maine of
my text, is verified in that spectacle which is now before our
eyes, which can not chuse but be vnto vs a memoriall of mortalitie.
For heere we are to celebrate the funerall solemnitie
of an honourable personage, a graue Counseller of Estate, a
great Officer of the Crowne, a faithfull seruant vnto his Maiestie.
Touching whom, since you expect that something
should be sayd, I shall draw the beginning of that which I
must deliuer, from a witnesse beyond all exception; and that
is the late Queene of euerlasting memorie. Her Maiestie not
long before her death being pleased, as 
                  〈◊〉
                seemeth, with some
speciall piece of seruice which his Lordship had done vnto
her, grew at large to discourse touching this Noble man, as
an honorable person, and a Counseller of Estate, in writing
hath aduertised me. Her Highnesse was then pleased to decipher
out his life, by seuen steps or degrees: The first was 
his yoonger daies, the time of his scholarship, when first in that
famous Vniuersitie of Oxford, and afterward in the Temple,
(where he tooke the degree of Barrister) he gaue tokens of
such pregnancie, such studiousnesse and iudgement, that he was
held no way inferiour to any of his time or standing. And of this
there remaine good
                  The life of Tresilian in the Mirrour of Magistr. Epist. pr
                     •
                  fix. Aulic. Barth. Clerke. tokens both in English and in Latine
published vnto the world. The second was his trauell, when
being in France and Italy, he profited very much in the languages,
in matter of story and State: (whereof this Common-wealth,

found great benefit in his Lordships elder yeeres, in the
deepest consulations that belonged vnto this kingdome.)
And being prisoner in Rome for the space of foureteene daies,
(which trouble was brought vpon him by some who hated him for
his loue to religion, and his dutie to his Soueraigne) he so prudently
bare himselfe, that by the blessing of God, and his temperate
kind of cariage, he was freed out of that danger. The third 
step which her Maiestie did thinke good to obserue was (vpon
returne into England) his comming vnto her Court, where
on diuers occasions he bountifully feasted her Highnesse and her
Nobles; and so he did to forren Embassadors. At that time hee
entertained Musitians the most curious, which any where hee
could haue, and therein his Lordship excelled vnto his dying
day. Then was his discourse iudicious, but yet wittie and delightfull.
Thus he was in his yoonger daies, a scholar, and a
traueller, and a Courtier of speciall estimation.
            11 The fourth step of his life, noted by her most sacred Maiestie,
was his imployment of higher nature, in Embassages beyond
the seas. As first, when his Lordship was sent to the French King
Charles the ninth, partly to congratulate his mariage with the
daughter of Maximilian the Emperour, and partly about other
weighty affaires touching both the kingdomes. At which time his
Lordship was so honorably attended with Gentlemen of choice
qualitie; and was so magnificent in his expence, as was admirable
to the French, honorable to his countrey, and gaue much contentment
vnto his Soueraigne.
               Holinshed An. 13. Eliz.
                The Chronicles at large relate the
maner of it. Secondly, when afterward in a seruice of tickle nature,
he was imploied into the Low Countries, where notwithstanding
the sharpe sight which by some was caried ouer him, yet
his Lordship behaued himselfe so warily and discreetly, that no
blame could be fastened on him. The fift time obserued was,
               his temper and moderation after his returns from thence, when
her Maiestie to giue contentation to a great personage, in those
daies of high imploiment, was pleased to command him vnto his
owne house, there priuately to remaine till her farther pleasure
was knowen. Where his Lordship did beare himselfe so dutifully
and obsequiously vnto her Highnesse command, that in all the

time of his restraint, for nine or ten moneths space, hee neuer
would endure either openly or secretly, either by day or by night
to see either wife or childe. A rare example of obedience, and
obseruance vnto his Soueraigne. The sixt degree which was 
noted by that most renowmed Ladie, was the time that his
Lordship was Counsellor, before that he was aduanced to that
high office, which afterward he bare, in which time he daily shewed
great diligence and sound iudgement, in her weightiest affaires.
The last of all was that space, wherein he held the 
roome of Lord High Treasurer of England, in which place
she noted the continuall and excessiue paines, and care which his
Lordship did take in her businesse, his fidelitie in his aduices, his
dexterity in aduācing of her profit. Thus it seemed good to that
Queen of blessed memory, in particul
                  ••
                discourse touching
her faithfull seruant. This was while his Lordship liued: and
since his death, his Maiestie that now is, the most religious,
the most learned, the most iudicious King, that this land
euer enioied, (as I haue beene aduertised from persons of high
qualitie) hath beene pleased diuers times to giue many excellent
speeches before the Lords concerning him, as his
Highnesse had done formerly, while this noble man did liue.
Heere, may I not say with the Poet?
            Horat. lib. 1. Epist. 17.
            
               Principibus placuisse viris, non vltima laus est:
            
            To please great Princes is not the least commendation.
            Nay I may change the verse, and alter it in this fashion:
            
               Principibus placuisseistis, ter maxima laus est.
            
            To please such Princes as these, is a very great commendation.
            And indeed, these were most gracious testimonies of two
such Soueraignes to their seruant, who desired much to
please them with loyaltie and fidelitie, with vigilancie and
care, with industrie and diligence, incredible, but vnto those
who did know it. And neuer was there any Noble man, who
with more humble agnising, with more feeling and affectionate
gratefulnesse did entertaine the fauours of his Soueraignes,
than this honorable person did, as may fully appeare
by many w
                  ••
               ds in his last will, recommending to his
posteritie, a speciall grace of his Maiestie, in sending a Ring

vnto him, which he wisheth his to keepe, as a iewell of highest
value, thorowout all generations. The words are worth
the reading, but they are too long to rehearse in this place.
            12 Now for other parts of morall vertues, how many rare
things were in him? Who more louing vnto his wife, that
Honorable Ladie, the mirrour of all true vertue? It is a most
worthy testimonie, that he hath giuen thereof, and hath left
it to beThe words which his Lordship in his last will vseth of his Ladie are these: Inprimis, I giue, will, and bequeath vnto the Ladie Cicely Countesse of Dorset, my most vertuous, faithfull, and dearely beloued wife, not as any recompence of her infinit merit towards mee, who for her incomparable loue, zeale, & hartie affection euer shewed vnto me, and for those her so rare, many, and reuerent vertues, of chastitie, modestie, fidelitie, humilitie, secrecie, wisdome, patience, and a mind
                     •
                   repleat with all pietie and goodnesse, which euermore haue and do abound in her, deserueth to be honoured, loued and esteemed aboue all the transitory wealth and treasure of this world, and therefore by no price of earthly riches can by me be valued, recompensed or requi
                     •
                  ed: To her therefore my most vermous, faithfull and intirely beloued wife, Not, I say, as a recompense, but as a true token and testimony of my vnspeakable loue, affection, and estimation, and reuerenc
                     •
                   long since fixed and setled in my heart towards her, I giue, will and bequeath, &c. recorded for those that shall come after. Who more
kind vnto his children, and to his Grand-children? Who
more fast vnto his friend? who more moderate to his enemy,
if truth were once found out, and staining imputations were
wiped away from the integritie of his Honor? Who more
true of his word? It was a noble testimonie, which a most
Honorable personage gaue of his Lordship since his death,
in a right worthy assemblie, that in much conuersation and
concurrence in many causes, of great waight and importance, hee
neuer heard him speake, or in earnest affirme that which he found
to be otherwise. What noble man in our time was more giuen
to hospitalite, and keeping of a great house? Hauing liued,
seuenty and two yeeres (for so was his age accounted) and
being married more then fifty and three yeeres, vnto one and
the selfe same Lady, he kept house for fortie and two yeeres
in an honorable proportion. For thirtie yeeres of those, his
family consisted of little lesse in one place or another, than
two hundred persons. But for more then twentie yeeres, besides
workmen and other hired, his number at the least hath
beene two hundred and twenty daily, as appeared vpon
checke-rowle. A very rare example in this present age of
ours, when house-keeping is so decaied. Who more magnificent

than than his Lordship in solemne entertainments? as (besides
other particulars) was manifested not long since abundantly
to the world, when his Maiestie with the Queene and
Prince together with a great part of the Nobilitie, spent diuers
daies at Oxford. Who was euer more desirous to doe
wrong vnto none? His Lordship bought no land, but hee
commonly paid more for it, than it was worth, yeelding this
reason of it, that it would the better prosper and continue in
his name and posteritie. In his Will how carefull was he, that
all debts should be paid? yea though there were no specialty
whereby it might be challenged, yet if it might appeare
that ought was due vnto any man, his charge is to his Executors
that they should giue satisfaction. The like also for
wrong done to any one whatsoeuer (whereof he protested before
the eternall Maiestie that he did not remember any.) And if
there should grow difference betweene his Executors and
any person demanding, his hearty praier and desire is to the
Deanes of Windsore, Westminster, and Pauls (for so his
Lordship doth ranke them) to heare, order, and determine
all controuersies depending. Which if they refuse to doe,
which he hopeth they will not, or if the partie claiming shall
not obey their award, he leaueth them to the ordinarie course
of law, but chargeth and requireth his Executors to answer
them in all Courts of Iustice immediately, without all delaies
whatsoeuer. Vnto those honorable parts, I may adde a great
many more: As his good and charitable disposition toward
his Tenants, of whom ordinarily, he tooke lesse fines by a
third part, than by other Lords is vsually accustomed; and
his Farmers held his Farmes, as is well knowen to the world,
but at reasonable rents: As his releefe to the poore in pinching
times of dearth.From the 28. of May to the 15. of August, so much as cost 154. li. 14. s. 7. d. In the yeere 1597. which was a time
of the greatest scarcitie that euer we did know, his Lordship
sent into Sussex of his free gift vnto six parishes store of
Danske Rie bought at Billingsgate. Diuers other yeeres, and
namely this present yeere 1608. his Lordship hath caused
weekely certaine quarters of Wheat, to be caried from his
owne Granary at Lewes in Sussex, and to be sold in the market

to the poore, at a farreAfter 26. s. 8. d. the quarter, when other men ordinarily sold for 40. s. the quarter. lower rate than the price which
commonly men did take. And that this his Lordships bountie
might continue after his death, by his last Will and Testament
he hath bequeathed a thousand pounds for the erecting
of a Granarie at the place which last I named, for the vse and
benefit of poore people in those parts: And two thousand
pounds as a stocke for the storing of that house against times
of dearth and scarcitie. Vnto this he hath also ioined a thousand
pounds to be bestowed on the building of a Chapell

                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                where his ancestors doe lie, and where his Lordship desired
that his bodie might be enterred. These are fruits of a
liuely faith, and so must be reputed.
            13 But because a right beleefe and religion toward God is
the highest point of all, I may not heere omit to say something
touching that. There are arguments most euident to
demonstrate vnto all men, that his faith was agreeable vnto
the word of God, and according to the profession of the renowmed
Church of England. In that famous Vniuersitie of
Oxford, where his Lordship for more then sixteene yeeres
was our Honorable Chancellor, it was his speciall care to
substitute such vnder him as were most sound for Religion,
which the wiser sort did obserue, although common men did
not marke it. As he kept downe with the one hand all nouelties,
and humours in opinions, which laboured to set trouble
in the Church and Common-wealth, so with the other
hand to the vttermost of his power he depressed the Priests
and Iesuits, which haue vsed too much to that place; not to
the Vniuersitie, which God be praised is free from all such
imputation, but to some few of the Citie, who embrace their
old superstitions. In that place this I can witnesse, that his
Lordship neither openly nor secretly did euer giue countenance
vnto any that was backward in religion. And on the
other side, that there was neuer any thing soberly and wisely
proposed which might forward true pietie, which his Lordship
did not further; as I could by many particulars make
plaine to whomsoeuer. Touching the education of those
honorable plants his grand-children, his Lordship was euer

carefull that they should be trained vp in the trueth of religion,
farre from Poperie and idolatrie. His charge was vnto
their Tutour (as I well knew in his life time) that as he would
answer him in the day of the last iudgement, before the face
of Christ, that he should traine them vp in the trueth of the
religion professed now in England. How angry would he be,
when he was at his Countrey house, if they came not duly to
praiers? He neuer could endure that they otherwise should
be matched, than where was sound religion. Concerning his
owne soule, when the last yeere he was sicke, besides ordinarie
praiers, he composed himselfe to God by
                  At Horseley. receiuing the
holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper, when he looked to depart
the world. But two daies before he died, deuoutly and
religiously he heard a Sermon at home in his Lordships owne
At Dorset house. Chapell. Nay to let all other things passe, how holily and
Christianly in his last Will and Testament doth he commend
his soule vnto God! I must professe when I saw it first, it did
very much affect me. And because it cannot chuse but giue
very full contentment to all reasonably minded, yea perhaps
may doe much good vnto other by the example, I thinke it
not amisse to read the very words, that his owne hand hath
deliuered. These they are: First therefore as a liuing creature
most bound thereunto, I heere throw downe and prostrate my selfe
in all humility and thankefulnes, at the foot of my Creator, Redeemer,
and Sauiour, rendring vnto his diuine Maiestie my most
lowly, hearty and infinite thanks, in that he hath vouchsafed to
create me a man indued and infused with soule and reason, and
fashioned like vnto the image of his owne eternall Sonne, that
might haue made me a brutish and soule-lesse beast, to haue fed
and grased vpon the earth, like vnto those irrationall liuing
creatures of the field. But especially in that he hath pleased to
make me a Christian man, whereby in this life I may ioy and
reioice with the sound and badge of that glorious name, and when I
goe from hence I may thereby, and through the mercies and goodnesse
of Iesus Christ depart and die in assurance and comfort of
my soules and bodies saluation and resurrection, and to rest at his
right hand, in the fruition of those celestiall and vnspeakable ioies

and blessednesse that neuer shall haue end. To him therefore my
most mercifull and omnipotent God, and into the hands of his inexplicable
and eternall goodnesse, I giue, will and bequeath my
soule, firmely and assuredly trusting, beleeuing and freely confessing,
That by the death and passion of his Sonne Iesus Christ, and
by his onely mercy, meane and mediation for me, and by none
other, and not by any good worke or merit of mine owne (although
I must acknowledge, that I am bound vpon paine of damnation, to
doe as many good works as possibly I can or may; all which when I
haue done, yet am I but an vnprofitable seruant, and a sinfull
creature full of all iniquitie) I shall liue and partake with his
Saints in his heauenly kingdome, of that eternall and inexplicable
blisse and happinesse which he hath prepared for his elect, of
which number (through his infinite mercy and goodnesse) I doe
confidently and stedfastly hope, know and beleeue that I am one.
            
            14 These things did God prouide should be in his Lordships
lifetime, that those who did loue and honour him (of
whom I must euermore acknowledge my selfe to be one, and
so bound by due desert) might haue the more comfort, in,
and after his death. Which must needes be confessed to haue
beene on the sudden: and yet such as hath befallen many
good and godly men; yea choice persons amongst Gods seruants.
I need not giue example, how many in a moment haue
beene drowned at sea, or in other riuers; or haue beene
slaughtered in the warres; or murthered by their enemies;
or stifled in their beds; or passing thorow the streets, haue
beene beaten downe with a tile, or slaine with a stone throwen
from aIustin. li. 25. wall, as some write that Pyrrhus was, or haue had
some such matter as the tower ofLuc. 13. 4. Siloah to fall vpon them. I
need not runne toPli
                     •
                  . 
                     •
                  at. hist. lib. 7. 7. Anacreon the Poet, who in an instant was
choaked with the kernell of a raisin, or toIbidem. Fabius, who
drinking milke was strangled with an haire. Neither need I
flie toTull. in L
                     •
                  lio. Scipio that admirable Romane, who being ouer night
so honored by his countrey-men, that the Senators and the
people of that citie, together with the Latines and other their
confederates, in solemne fashion brought him home to his
house, the next day he was found dead. I may speake of our

owne age, wherein many persons of honour, men of learning
and of great reuerence haue suddenly beene called out of the
world; touching whom for any man to giue a bitter censure,
standeth not with any rule of charitie or pietie, yea of common
Christianitie. And for the ages past, I might tell you of
PetrusNich. Hospital. in Tumulis. Castellanus, Bishop sometimes of Orleans, who being
preaching in the pulpit, fell suddenly downe and died.
I might remember you of that woorthy and most renoumed
Emperour,Matth. Paris in Richard. Frederike Barbarossa, who going for Palestina,
to recouer the Holy land out of the hands of the Saracens,
which he thought to be a seruice most acceptable to Christ,
and for effecting whereof, he left his countrey and friends,
yet by the way as he passed, in the presence of many of his
armie, was suddenly drowned in the riuer Sapheth. I might
mention the yoongerHier. Epist. 19. Tom. 9. Marcellin. Lib. 30. Valentinian an Emperour indued
with many most rare qualities: yet being on a time much offended
that the Sarmatae and Quadi, two barbarous nations,
had broken in vpon the Empire, and speaking loud and passionately
concerning that matter, he brake some veine or some
thing els within him, and presently so died. Notwithstanding
SaintAmbros. de obit. Valentinian. Ambrose making a funerall Oration or Sermon
for him, giueth him most singular commendation, and doubteth
not but that his soule was in peace and rest with God.
Yea albeit at that time Valentinian had not receiued the Sacrament
of Baptisme, yet Saint Ambrose is resolued that
propter voluntatem & votum Baptismi, for his desire and wish
that he had to be Baptised, the Lord had receiued him to mercy.
Where I may not forget a speech which he vttereth in
that Sermon, Iustus quacun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   morte praeuentus fuerit, anima
eius in refrigerio crit: The righteous man, by what kind of death
soeuer he be ouer taken, or hastily caught away, his soule shall be
at rest. I might rehearse the example of Iouian another famous
Emperour, who was the man that freed the Roman armie
from the danger whereinto Iulian the Apostata going against
the Persians had brought it. In theSocrat. Hist. Eccl. li. 3. 19. midst of their perill, the
Captains and souldiers assured both of his vertue and his valour,
proclaimed him for their Emperour. But he being a

zealous and most resolute Christian, and knowing that they
not long before, (to giue contentment to Iulian) had turned
Heathens and Infidels, made answer that himselfe professing
for Iesus Christ, would neuer take vpon him any gouernment
ouer Gentiles; which made them by and by returne to the
Christian faith. Yet this holy and worthy Emperour,Theodor. Hist. Eccl. Lib: 4. 4. like
to the Sunne breaking foorth after a fearefull storme, was
presently caught away, and taken out of mens sight. For going
in health to bed, he was found dead in the morning; and
no reason of that hastie change could be imagined, but that
either he had taken tooSolon. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 6. 6. liberall a supper, or was choaked
with the sauour of new lime on the walles of the house where
he lay, or with the smell of bad coles,Hier. Epist. 3. ad Heliod. 
               foetore prunarum, as
Saint Hierome doth deliuer it. Nay I might tell of Iosiah,
whom Ieremy did terme, the breath of their
               
                  
                     •
                  am. 4. 20. 
               nostrels, the Anointed
of the Lord, yet saith withall, that he was taken in their
nets, that is, was caught away suddenly.2. Chron. 35. 23. He went into battel
against Pharao Necho, and there was wounded and slaine.
Iustine Martyr speaking of this most godly king, and the
maner of his death doth make this obiection,Iustin. Martyr. Quaest. 79. why the wicked
did not say that Iosias was so slaine, and died in such a fashion,
because hee ouerthrew their idols and their altars.
Whereby he doth intimate, that the maner of men is to giue
a hard iudgement on the good as well as vpon the bad, if any
thing extraordinarie, especially in their death, do befall them.
SaintHieron. in Psa. 93. 
                     •
                  om. 7. Hierome noteth the same, where hee writeth thus:
Solent aliqui dicere, Some men vse to say, He who was slaine had
not beene killed vnlesse he had beene a fornicator, or had committed
some sinne. The house had not fallen vpon him, vnlesse he had
beene a malefactor. He had not suffered shipwracke, had hee not
beene an offender. But see what saith the holy Scripture, Et sanguinem
innocentem condemnabunt: They shall condemne euen innocent
bloud. Though the person be innocent, yet God sometimes
doth suffer the euill man to condemne him. This may
well be a lesson to men in our time, that they be not too
quicke, nor nimble in giuing vp their verdicts or censures of
other men. Especially since God disposeth all at his pleasure.

Since he hath said, thatEccl. 9. 2. 
               All things come alike to all: and
the same condition is to the iust and the wicked, to the good and to
the pure, and to the polluted; to him that sacrificeth, and to him
that sacrificeth not. Which is to bee vnderstood of externall
and outward things; since the parties that speake this,
haue their owne breath in their nostrils, and it may be their
owne case, if God should so determine it: it being true that
this noble man spake in another cause, the very houre that he
died,Eccl. 38. 22. Heri mihi, hodie tibi.
                
               Hodie mihi, cras tibi: It is my turne to day, and it may
be yours tomorrow. I might amplifie this point much farther,
but I end it with that saying of the Apostle Paul, What
               Rom. 14. 4. 
               art
thou that condemnest or iudgest another mans seruant? He standeth
or falleth to his owne master.
            
            15 Yet, that truth may not be concealed in the matter which
now I handle; as God dealt with this noble person somewhat
extraordinarily in taking him from among vs, so it may
be well supposed, that he gaue him more than an ordinarie
coniecture, or suspicion, that his death was not farre from
him. The last yeere when he returned after his greeuous
sicknesse, he spake it more than once to his honorable friends,
that he had setled his soule and composed it to another world,
whensoeuer God should call for him. Soone after he began
to dispose of all those worldly things, which the Lord had
lent vnto him. Of late it was his common speech, I am now an
old man, therefore this, or therefore that, as I my selfe can witnesse.
The day before he died, writing with his owne hand to
one of his grand-childrē, he more than once in that letter vsed
this or the like phrase, After my death: and, when I am dead
and gone. The last morning of his life, it was noted by those
who were neerest about his Lordship, that he was apparently
longer at his priuate meditations, then commonly hee did
vse. But the words of his will, written with his owne hand
may giue great satisfaction to a man of a hard conceit, that he
did fit himselfe to mortalitie, whereof in the former yeere he
had had a warning peece. I will read his Lordships owne
words, in which letech man iudge, whether it may not bee
thought that there was some instinct more then ordinarie.

Thus then his will beginneth: The eternall God of heauen and
earth, the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, guide and prosper
this mine intent and purpose, which in their name I heere take
in hand and begin. Because it is a trueth infallible, such as euery
Christian ought not onely perfectly to know, and stedfastly to beleeue,
but also continually to meditate and thinke vpon, namely,
that we are borne to die; That nothing in this world is more certaine
then death, nothing more incertaine then the houre of death,
and that no creature liuing knoweth, neither when, where, nor
how it shall please Almightie God to call him out of this mortall
life: So as heere we liue euery houre, nay euery instant a thousand
waies subiect to the suddē stroke of death, which ought to terrifie,
teach and warne vs to make our selues ready as well in the preparation
of our soules to God, as by the disposition of all our earthly
fortunes to the world, whensoeuer it shal please the heauenly power
to call vs from this miserable and transitory life vnto that blessed
and euerlasting life to come: Therefore, &c.
            
            16 Yet to all this I may adde, that by vs who are liuing, there
is an vse to be made of these th
                  •
               ngs: For Exempl. 
                     •
                  mori
                     •
                  ntum
sunt documenta viuentium; The examples of men dying are the
instructions of the liuing. When in this present spectacle wee
may sensibly beholde, that life is so vncertaine, that we may
say with Plinie,Plin. Nat. Hist. li. 7. 51. 
               Whereas there be in men innumerable signes of
death, there is no assured signe of safetie and of securitie in the
yongest or the strongest: let vs remember the counsell of our
Master and Sauiour,Matt. 24. 42. 
               Wake therefore: for yee know not what
houre your master will come, either by death, or by the last and
generall iudgement. Let vs be like the wiseMatth. 25. 4. virgins, euer
readie with oile in our lamps; the oile of faith and good life.
Let vs say to our selues as God sayd to2. Reg. 20. 1. Hezechiah, Put
thine house in an order, for thou shalt die and not liue. Let vs
speake thus to our soules. Let vs not weaue the spiders-web;
that is, bestow all our labour vpon that which is but vaine,
but weake, and of no profit. Let vs not fasten our selues to
this transitorie world, making that to be our ioy, our comfort
and delight; but let our minde be setled on some thing of
higher nature. Let vs daily pray to God as Moses sometimes

prayed,Psal. 90. 12. 
               Teach vs so to number our daies, that we may apply our
hearts vnto wisdome: which must be the wisdome spirituall,
celestiall and eternall. And this is so much the rather to be desired
in this life, because as we reade in Salomon,Eccle. 11. 3. 
               if the tree
doe fall toward the South or toward the North, in the place that
the tree falleth, there it shall be, that is, asOlymp in Eccl. 11. Bern. Sermon. paru. 49. Olympiodorus, and
Saint Bernard do expound it, as a man doth die, either in the
fauour or the disfauour of God, so he must remaine immutabiliter
& irretractabiliter, without changing or recalling.
Therefore men while they doe liue should cary themselues
warily, as being euer assured, that they are in the eye of God,
and that he is among them in their greatest consultations, and
most honourable assemblies.Psal. 82. 1. 
               God standeth (sayth Dauid)
in the Congregation of Princes; he is a Iudge among Gods. A
Iudge to see and examine them, a Iudge to strike and call vnto
him, whom and when it pleaseth him. Let him euer be before
our eyes, that when he shall send for vs, we may appeare
with readinesse, with alacritie and with confidence before
the Throne of his Grace. Which God the Father
grant vs for his Sonne Christ Iesus his sake: to
both whom with the Holy Ghost be
laud and praise, and glorie,
now and euermore.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               BEcause there is mention made in this
Sermon of a Ring sent vnto that Honorable
person by his most sacred Maiestie,
the humble acceptance whereof is
set downe with so gratefull remembrance of his dutie
and deuotion to his Highnesse; and because the words
otherwise imply a great deale of obseruable matter, I
haue thought it not amisse to offer them to more publike
view, as they are deliuered by his Lordship in his
last will: which is as followeth.
            
               ALso I giue, will and bequeath vnto my sayd wel-beloued
sonne ROBERT Lord BVCKHVRST
after my decease for and during his life onely, out of
those Iewels of Golde, Pearle and Precious stone,
which I keepe and reserue as Iewels for my selfe, the
sole vse and occupation only of one Ring of Golde enameled
blacke, and set round ouer all the whole Ring
with Diamonds to the number of twentie, whereof
fiue Diamonds being placed in the vppermost part of
the said Ring do represent the fashion of a Crosse; and
the other fifteene are set round and ouer all the sayd

Ring. And after the decease of my said sonne BVCKHVRST,
then I giue, will, and bequeath the like sole
vse and occupation only of the said Ring vnto my Nephew
RICHARD SACKVILLE, his eldest sonne, for
and during his life only. And after his decease, then
vnto the next heire male begotten of the bodie of the
sayd RICHARD SACKVILLE my Nephew,
for and during his life only. And so from heire male
to heire male of the SACKVILLS, after the decease of
euery of them seuerally and successiuely for and during
the life and liues only of euery such heire male seuerally
and successiuely: charging and earnestly requiring
all and euery of my said heire males before specified;
euen as they regard the last request of him by
whose great trauell, care and industrie (if the Diuine
prouidence of God that hath vouchsafed to giue it,
shall so please to continue it) they are like to receiue
the addition and aduancement of so great honor, possessions
and patrimonie, that although percase in this
strict course of the common lawes of this Realme, the
Entaile of goods and chattels may hardly stand vpright,
that yet for the preseruation and continuance of
this gift of mine intended by mee to remaine as an
heire-lome to the house and familie of the SACKVILLS,
so long as almightie God (according to the
effects of his former goodnesse vnto that house, by the
continuance thereof during the space of so many hundred
yeeres past) shall please to vpholde the same, they
and euery of them will forbeare in any sort to oppugne
it, or to bring it in question, or to brandle and controuert
the will of their so well deseruing Ancestour, and
specially in a matter so honest, reasonable, fit and conuenient

as this is, but rather with all willing, readie
and contented mindes to suffer the same to passe as an
heire-lome, from heire male to heire male, according
to the true intent and meaning of this my last will and
Testament in that behalfe. Which said Ring set all
ouer with twentie Diamonds, as is aforesaid, I desire &
charge my said sonne BVCKHVRST vpon my blessing,
and in like sort all other the heires male, whom
God shall vouchsafe from age to age to raise vnto my
house and familie, and vnto whom (if the Highest so
please) my heartie desire and meaning is, the said Ring
set with twenty Diamonds, as is aforesaid, may lineally
and successiuely descend and come for euer, namely,
that with all prouident care and heedfull circumspection
they will safely keepe, retaine, and preserue the
said Ring whensoeuer and as often as he shall come to
their hands and possession, euen as one of the greatest
gifts and iewels which (in true estimation) all circumstances
considered, I haue to leaue vnto them. And
to the intent they may know how iust and great cause
both they and I haue to holde the said Ring in so high
esteeme, it is most requisite that I doe heere set downe
the whole course and circumstance how and from
whom the said Ring did come to my possession, which
was thus: In the beginning of the moneth of Iune
1607 this Ring thus set with twentie Diamonds, as
is aforesaid, was sent vnto me from my most gracious
Souereigne King Iames, by that honorable personage
the Lord Hay, one of the Gentlemen of his Highnesse
Bed-chamber, the Court then being at Whitehall in
London, and I at that time remaining at Horsley house
in Surrey, twentie miles from London, where I lay in

such extremitie of sicknesse as it was a common and a
constant report ouer all London, that I was dead, and
the same confidently affirmed euen vnto the Kings
Highnesse himselfe. Vpon which occasion it pleased
his most excellent Maiestie, in token of his gratious
goodnesse and great fauour towards me, to send the
said Lord Haie with the sayd Ring, and this royall message
vnto me; namely, That his Highnesse
heartily wished a speedie and perfect recouerie
of my health, with all happie and
good successe vnto me; and that I might
liue as long as the Diamonds of that
Ring (which therewithall he deliuered
vnto me) did endure: And in token
thereof required me to we are it and keepe
it for his sake. This most gratious and comfortable
message restored a new life vnto me, as comming
from so renowmed and benigne a Souereigne, vnto a
seruant so farre vnworthy of so great a fauour; and vpon
whom, not long before, it had pleased his Maiestie,
yea in that very first day wherein we all had the happinesse
to beholde him, not only to bestow the honor
of a Priuie Counseller, but also without any answerable
desert or merit of mine preceding, to confirme that
most honourable place of High Treasurer of England
vnto me, which the late Queene ELIZABETH after
foureteene yeeres seruice and ten yeeres following her

Court (but not before) vouchsafed (I must needs yet
say most gratiously so soon as it became void) to grant
vnto me, and likewise within a short time after to aduance
both me and my succession to the high honor &
degree of an Earle; which is and shall be to me, my
house and posteritie, an euerliuing demonstration, aswell
of his great benefit to vs, as of our infinite bond
to him thereby for euer. The which inexplicable
goodnesse of his Maiestie towards me, besides many
lustres of his bright shining fauours, from time to time
cast vpon me, doe giue me iust cause to agnize, that I
am no waies able to merit, no not the least part of
them, but onely with the humble and infinite earnestie
of my heart in desire to deserue; which I can yet no
waies manifest, but by that faithfull testimonie which
shall neuer faile in me, namely, by demonstration of
mine incessant cares, labours and actuall indeuors for
the behoofe and furtherance of his Maiesties▪ seruices,
at the least thereby to shew that good will which
is in me, though I cannot shew that effect which is due
to him, since all that I possibly can or may doe, is but
meere debt and dutie, and so in that course to spend
such remaine of life as is left vnto me, yea euen to the
very last of my daies here, & when I am dead & gone,
if euer occasion may or shall be offered to any of my
posteritie to doe his Maiestie or any of his any acceptable
seruice heereafter, then let them hold & esteeme
themselues most happie, if with the expence of life, &
of all the fortunes that this world shall giue them, they
may actually approoue and witnesse with effect, that
they are not onely most loyall and dutifull vassals to
this Imperiall Crowne, but also the most humble,

faithfull, and thankfull sonnes and sequell of such a seruant,
as was more bound vnto King IAMES, his liege
Master, than euer subiect was vnto his Soueraigne,
especially he being such a Soueraigne, adorned with
such excellent parts of iustice, clemencie, and goodnesse,
indued with so admirable gifts of memory, learning,
and iudgement, and finally beautified with so
many other regall graces and vertues so farre beyond
all the Kings and Princes that either written storie or
this present age hath to present vnto vs, as I know not
how any greater honor and felicitie can possiblie be
added to the imperiall Crowne of and in this Great
Britaine, by his vndoubted right so happily vnited vnto
vs, than we now presently possesse and enioy in the
Royall person of this our so renowmed and so rare a
King. Beseeching the eternall God, that he and his
may euermore both rule and raigne ouer vs, yea euen
as long as the Sunne and Moone endureth: and that
I and mine may for euer and euer become more and
more thankfull, (at the least if it be possibly in me) for
so great honors, graces, and fauors, as this most clement
and renowmed King hath thus most gratiously
vouchsafed vnto me; the remembrance of which, because
it may neuer die but be perpetually recorded in
the mindes of those, that by the grace & goodnesse of
almighty God, both now are, & hereafter shall be the
lineall stirpe and succession of my house and family, to
serue both him & his: I haue heere therefore set downe
this short narration, of the true state and circumstance
of the whole matter, to the intent it may remaine to
my posterity heereafter, as a faithfull memorie thereof
euen in this my last Will and Testament for euer.
               
            
         
      
   