
      
         
            
            
            A
TRVE DISCOVRSE,
VPON
THE MATTER
OF MARTHA BROSSIER
of ROMORANTIN, pretended
to be possessed by a
Deuill. Translated out of French into English,
by ABRAHAM HARTVVEL.
            
               
                  
                     Ecclesiastic. 19. He that is hastie to giue credite, is light minded:
and shall be held as one that sinneth against his
owne Soule.
            
            
               LONDON
Imprinted by Iohn Wolfe.
1599.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT REVEREND
FATHER IN GOD,
RICHARD BY THE PROVIDENCE
of God, Lord Bishop of London, my
very good Lord.
            
               RIght Reuerend. The late notable
Accident, that happened
at Nottingham, wherein
your Lordship among others
hath taken great paines
to examine, search, and sift
out the truth, hath bred sundry
rumors, not onely in the
North, but also in the South parts of this Realme,
according to the seuerall humours of sundry persons:
some of them holding opinion, that all that
Action was true, and acted in deed by the Deuill
in the bodie of the Boy: and some others of the
wiser and more stayed sorte, remayning in a suspense
what they should thinke of it: in so much
that diuerse of the latter sort, being persons of good
Note and Qualitie, (knowing that I was well
acquainted with the matter, as hauing been an

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                or Reader of the proofes collected together,
and openly read in a very Honorable and

               Solemne assemblie) did deale earnestly with me;
that I would declare vnto them, euen in fide boni
viri, in the faith of an honest man, what I thought
thereof. And although I did truely and according
to their charming request, relate vnto them, how
plainely, euidently, and manifestly it was proued,
that the matter was a meere Imposture and Cousenage,
yet could I by no meanes settle a resolute perswasion
in some of them, that I had dealt sincerely
with them therein: neither would they be remoued
from the doubtfull humour which had vsurped
a predomination in them, but would remaine
still in the same, vntill they might vnderstand more
certaintie, of this my asseueration deliuered vnto
them. Which strong conceit (it seemeth) they
haue nourished and fostered in their minds, partly
vpon the extrauagant and extraordinarie Motions
and Gestures of the Counterfeit Cranke that acted
them, and partly vpon the Stoicall conuersation
and Holy life of the Chiefe Choragus, that brought
all those Actors vpon the Stage. To deliuer these
good minded people out of their error, it is greatly
desired by many, and by some expected, as a
thing very conuenient, that the saide collected
proofes should be published to the world; so as euery
man thereby may see, what notable practises
haue been vndertaken: but to what end, I will not
iudge. In the meane while, I am bolde to present
vnto your view and censure, this little pamphlet,
containing a true Discourse of a matter of the like

Nature, written and printed in the French tongue,
and directed to the French King: which alighting
into my hands tam oportune, in so fit a time, I
thought good to translate and publish to the world,
to the end it may be seene, that euen by the iudgement
of the best Phisitians in France, nothing was
acted by the Boy of Notingham, or this Mayde of
Romorantin, but might very well be performed
by the course of Nature, and without the helpe,
presence or assistance of a Deuill. I was once determined
to haue prefixed an Aduertisement to the
Reader, wherein I might haue made an Apologie
for my selfe, by alleadging some speciall reasons
why I translated this discourse: to answere some
curious Carpers, that may peraduenture taxe mee
for setting forth the Ceremonies and Toyes, that
are commonly vsed and practised by the Popish
Exorcists in their Coniurations: in which respect
some haue alreadie taxed mee for the Booke of
Congo. But I stand or fall to my God, assuring my
selfe, that I haue neither here nor there done any
thing, which is not auouchable by the Sacred
Scriptures; let them feed their own humour as they
list. I meant also to haue enterlaced some other histories
& examples of former times, touching such
cunning & counterfeit Possessions. But when I had
gathered them together, I found that if I should
haue followed that course, accordingly as that
cause had required, I should haue made the head
bigger then the body, and the shortnesse of the

time would not haue permitted me to finish it in
fit oportunitie. And therfore I haue reserued those
Parralleles for a longer Treatise, which as my
leasure will affoord me, I meane by Gods good
leaue and fauour hereafter to publish. In the meane
time I beseech your Lordship to accept this
little in good part, and so in all humble
dutie take my leaue. From Lambehith,
the 17. of October,
1599.
            Your Lordships assuredly at commaundement,
ABRAHAM HARTVVEL.
         
         
            
            To the King.
            
               SIR,
            
            BY the commaundement of your Maiestie, wee haue
set downe in writing, briefly and truly, that which wee
haue found in our visiting of Martha Brossier, pretended
to bee a Daemóniake, together with the aduise,
which we haue giuen therein and thereupon, in our consciences.
We present the same vnto your Maiestie, without any
Art, without any painted shew, without any flourish, but with
a naked simplicitie, the faithfull companion of trueth, which
you haue desired from vs in this matter, and which in euery
other thing you haue alwaies loued and curiously sought.
This desire, Sir, is a most certaine proofe of the vprightnes,
which you carrie both in your mouth and in your soule, as a
witnesse of your iust and holy intentions: whereby you haue
gained, and for euer confirmed the hearts of your Subiects
withdrawne from your obedience: and the amitie of forren
Nations, as much as you haue done by the terror of your
Armes: both the one and the other being as greatly assured
in the certaintie of your word, as they haue feared and stood
in awe of your inuincible courage. Receiue therefore, Sir, if
it may please you, the trueth contained in this little Treatise,
as a testimony of our most humble obedience: and vouchsafe
to honour the same with the benignitie of your surueigh,
in fauour of the singular affection that you beare vnto
the trueth, which indeede doth make you so much the more
conformable to the Diuinitie, whereof you are a liuely Image,
and which is the very Trueth it selfe. Whom we doe
humbly beseech to redouble vpon you his holy graces and
blessings, and to giue vnto you as much prosperitie, good
fortune, and health as doe wish vnto your Maiestie,
            
               SIR, Your most humble, most affectionate
and most faithfull Subiects, the
Phisitians of Paris.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TRVE DISCOVRSE,
VPON THE MATTER OF
Martha Brossier of Romorantin,
pretended to be possessed
by a Deuill.
            
               AS faith is the gift of God, and a vertue
inspired by Diuinitie, whereby
we do stedfastly beleeue such things
as do not appeare vnto vs, neither
by sense nor by naturall reason: so
is too great credulitie a vice, that
proceedeth from an infirmitie or
weaknes of a mans minde, and that oftentimes by
suggestion of the wicked Spirit. And therefore old
authors haue said,Epicharmus. 
               That not to beleeue lightly is the sinew
of true wisedome:
               1. Ioh. 4. and the Apostle forbiddeth vs to beleeue
euery Spirit. The faith of Christians is greatly
commended: but the credulitie of Magicians is much
reprehended, as being so great, that it taketh away
beliefe from all things; and is the cause, that by beleeuing
euery thing (though neuer so absurd) in the
end, men will no more beleeue any thing at all. Credulous
Antiquitie hath bin deceiued by the delusions
of Deuils, and drawne to superstition and idolatrie:
but Christian Religion hath been alwaies contrarie to
such deceits, to the end that the honor of the true God
and sinceritie of faith might be preserued. And this

was the cause, that by the craft and subtiltie of the Deuill,
Christians had an euill report, and were by these
Sorcerers and Deceiuers expelled, when they went
about to work any of their delusions; for then would
they cause to bee proclaimed 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is to say,
Foorth Christians. Faith is a sure and certeine way to
come to veritie, saluation and wisedome: but too great
credulitie is the path that leadeth headlong to falsehood,
fraud, follie and superstition. This difference
of faith and credulitie may bee shewed by many examples
of ancient times: but there is none of them
more worthie to bee written and knowne in these
daies, then the Historie of Martha Brossier of Romorantin,
pretended to bee possessed with a Spirit. Many
Prelates, Diuines, and Phisitians, all of them acknowledging,
according to the Christian Faith, that wicked
Spirits doe enter into the bodies of men, and that by
the commaundement and word of God they are cast
out, haue by a diligent obseruation of all her signes
and actions, discouered the cousonage and counterfeiting
of this woman, and haue made their report
thereof to the Parliament, the true Protector and Defender
of Pietie and Iustice. Other Diuines, Religious
persons, and Phisitians there were, which either
through credulitie, or to follow the opinion of the
people, or for some other reason, haue said and assured,
that there was a wicked Spirit in the bodie of this
woman, challenging al others for Infidels and Atheists,
which should thinke, or say, that this woman was not
a Daemóniake. The Parliament, by a solemne Decree of
the Court, hath confirmed the iudgement of the better
and wiser sort, and set downe an order, that this credulitie
and superstition should proceede no further,
to the detriment and hinderance of the Catholike Religion.
               
But to the end, that there may rest no scruple or
doubt in weaker mindes, and that such a cousinage
may be knowne to all the world: we haue briefly and
truly written the whole Historie, we haue proued the
said Martha not to haue been a Daemóniake, wee haue
faithfully described the opinion and reasons of those
which thought the contrarie, following therein the
Original-writing of their owne hands, word for word:
and haue withall confuted their arguments, as being
grounded vpon too light coniectures. We doe hope,
that those which shall reade this discourse will receiue
pleasure and profit thereby, and con them thankes,
that (without fearing the slaunder of euill speakers,
and looking to none other marke, but onely to the
trueth it selfe) haue resisted and made warre against
the Author of lyes: and that they will likewise giue
thankes to God, who hath discouered this cousonage,
whereupon there might otherwise haue followed, not
onely false miracles, but also great diuision and partstaking
among the people: as by the discourse ensewing
all men of vnderstanding may know.
            On Tuesday the xxx. of March 1599. at the commandement
of the right Reuerend, the Bishop of Paris,
there met together, Marescot, Ellain, Hautin, Riolan, and
Duret, within the Abbie of Saint Geneuesua, in the hall
of my Lord Abbat, where was brought before them
one Martha Brossier, who (they said) was possessed of a
wicked Spirit: and this was in the presence also of the
said Lords the Bishop and the Abbat, and many other
persons of Note. By the commandement of the said
Lord Bishop, Marescot (as the ancientest of the rest)
questioned with her in Latin: (for the rumour went,
that she spake all manner of languages) but she answered
not a word. Then said the Abbat, She will not

answer, vnlesse my Lord Bishop commaund her. Then
the Bishop commaunded the Deuill to speake, saying,
Adiuro te per Deum viuum, vt respondeas Dommo Marescoto.
I adiure thee by the liuing God, that thou answere
Master Marescot. But both the woman and the Deuill
were mute. She was againe questioned withall in
Latin by Marescot the Phisitian, and in Greeke by Master
Marius Doctor of Diuinitie, and the Kings Reader of
Greeke Philosophie: but she answered not a word. Then
the Bishop being very desirous and curious to discouer
the trueth: (because the said Martha had said, that this
was no place to answere in) commaunded that she
should be caried into a Chappell. Wherein, a number
of Tapers being lighted, one Priest accompanied with
two others, all apparelled in decent and Priestly garments,
in the presence of the said Lord Bishop and the
Abbat, and many other persons of qualitie, all being
together in great deuotion and at their praiers, began
to exorcise her. She, being vpon her knees praying to
God, and making the signe of the Crosse, presently tumbled
her selfe backward, first vpon her buttocks, then
vpon her backe and vpon her shoulders, and then
softly vpon her head. Whilest she lay vpon her back,
fetching her breath very deepe, and quaking in her
flankes, (like a horse after he hath runne) she turned
her eyes in her head, blared out her tongue, and tolde
the Bishop that he had not his Miter, and bid him that
he should goe and fetch it. Then they caused certen
Reliques of the very true Crosse to bee brought vnto
her, which she indured to be put in her mouth. They
presented also vnto her a Doctors whood, which shee
stoutly reiected, as though the whood of a Diuine, or
the Miter of a Bishop had more vertue and more Diuinitie
in them, then the Reliques of the very Crosse. These

things being done, and many other, which would bee
to no purpose to rehearse, the Lord Bishop commaunded,
that the Phisitians would tell him what they
thought of it. Who after that they had maturely deliberated
together, and considered all that they
thought fit to bee considered, reported to the Bishop
with the consent of them all, and by the mouth of the
said Marescot, the ancientest of them all, what their opinion
was, and that in few words, Nihil à Daemone:
Multa ficta: Amorbo pauca. Nothing of the Deuill: Many
things counterfeited: and a few things of sicknesse. And
indeed all these actions were counterfeit, as hereafter
shall be shewed. But in trueth her tongue was red, and
they perceiued some little rumbling vnder her short
ribs on the left side, proper to those that are subiect to
the Spleene.
            
            The day following, which was Wednesday the last
day of March, Ellain and Duret met together: and
when the Exorcismes or Coniurations were againe repeated,
the said Martha fell downe at the rehearsall of
certaine words, raised her selfe vp againe very lustily,
made mowes vpon the Exorcists euen to their faces,
and nothing else was then done, sauing that Duret
pricked her with a pin, betweene the thumbe and the
forefinger. After these actions diuerse times reiterated
vntill Noone, the Bishop demaunded of Ellain and
Duret, what they deemed of it. But they intreated the
Bishop, it might stand with his good pleasure, that the
other Phisitians, which had seene her the day before,
might be called, and others also with them, to the end
they might more maturely deliberate of the matter:
especially considering, that the said Martha Brossier,
being commaunded to giue some tokens of her possession
by the Deuill, had made answere, To morrowe:
               
which request the Bishop found to bee very reasonable.
            Vpon Thursday the first day of Aprill, all mysteries
were imployed and vsed: none of the remedies were
forgotten, that are proper to the driuing out of Deuils.
They setled themselues to prayers: She blared
out her tongue, turned her eyes, and at the pronouncing
of certaine words, (Et homo factus est: Verbum caro
factum est: Tantum ergo Sacramentum: that is, And he
was made man: The word was made flesh: Therefore so great
a Sacrament) she fell as before, and vsed such motions,
as they doe that are troubled with a Conuulsion. Yet
all these actions seemed to the Phisitians to be meerly
counterfeit: and therefore they would haue been
gone. But my Lord the Bishop intreated them, that
they would bestow yet a little more time for the publike
benefit. The Exorcismes or Coniurations were begun
againe: and then the woman hearing the words,
(Et homo factus est, And he was made man) she laboured
with all her strength and forces to make her gambals,
and being vpon her backe, in foure or fiue skips
remoued her selfe from the Altar to the Chappell-dore:
which indeed did astonish all the companie.A Capuchin Frier. Father
Seraphin waxed somewhat angrie, and said: If there be
any here that is incredulous, and will trouble her, the Deuill
will carie him away in the ayre. Then Marescot growing
impatient at that cousinage, said, I will take that hazard
and perill vpon me: let him carie me away, if he can. And so
set his knee vpō her knee, took her by the gorge, and
commanded her to bee quiet. She being not able to
stirre her selfe, and seeing her cousinage to bee discouered,
said, He is gone: he hath left me. The good Seraphin
approching neere vnto her, said, Indeede this is nothing
but Martha: the Deuill is departed. Then haue I

made him runne away, quoth Marescot. The Bishop being
very desirous to know the trueth, and doubting
some counterfeiting, said: Let vs begin againe, and pray
to God, that he would learne vs the trueth: let vs see if the
Deuill will torment her againe. Then they sung Veni
Creator, and the Apostles Creede. At this word, Et thomo
factus est, And he was made man, she did not fall, nor was
tormented any more: yea, when they shewed her the
holy Sacrament, she neither was troubled, nor tumbled
any more: but seeing Marescot, Hautin, and Riolan behinde
her, she said, Meddle thou with thy Phisicke. Marescot
answered her: If thou doe stirre, and play the foole
againe, I will handle thee well enough. In the meane while
they perseuered in their prayers to God. She thinking
that Marescot was departed, fell againe vpon her
backe, plaied her old trickes, and vsed her ordinarie
motions. Then Marescot, Hautin, and Riolan held her,
and staied her very easily. The Bishop began to say to
Father Seraphin the Exorcist, Good Father, command her
to rise. The good Father cried vnto her with a lowd
voyce, Raise thy selfe vpon thy feete, raise thy selfe vpon
thy feete. Marescot said, The Deuill riseth not in our presence:
and withall, because few people should take offence,
he spake alowd in Greeke, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Nothing against nature, nothing against nature. And
it is not to bee marueiled at, that the said Marescot,
Hautin, and Riolan were not afraid, because they knew
her dissembling, and beleeued in Iesus Christ, who is
the terror of all Deuils.
            
            
               Riolan, at the commaundement of the Bishop, spake
vnto her in Latin, as followeth: Misera, quous▪ perges
nobis illudere? Nunquámne cessabis plebeculam ludificare?
Agnosce culpam, & veniam deprecare. Patent enim tuae
fraudes: & nisi hoc feceris, breui tradêris in manus Iudicis,

qui quaestione veritatem extorquebit: Thou wretched woman,
how long wilt thou proceede to delude vs? Wilt thou
neuer cease to deceiue the simple people? Acknowledge thy
fault, and craue pardon. For thy guiles are discouered: and
vnlesse thou doe so, thou shalt shortly bee deliuered into the
hands of the Iudge, who by torture will wrest out the trueth.
She being demaunded, whether she vnderstood this
or no, answered in good sooth, She did not. It was
thought, that now all this businesse was done: and
the Bishop withdrew himselfe, and went out of the
Chappell, with diuerse men of good Note, and commaunded
the Phisitians, then being present, freely to
tell him their opinion and aduise. One of them assured
him for certaine, that she had the Deuill in her bodie,
because she had blared out her tongue very farre,
and had indured the pricking of a pinne. Another
amongst them said, that vndoubtedly hee had seene
very many signes of counterfeiting: but yet his aduise
was, that they should stay three moneths longer,
to the end they might be assured, whether she had the
Deuill in her bodie or no. For Master Fernelius, as he
writeth in his Second booke De abditis rerum causis, Of
the secret causes of Nature, could not certainly know a
certaine sicke gentleman to bee possessed with a Spirit,
till the end of three moneths. Sixe others there
were, that very confidently and constantly said for
certaine, all these actions of Martha were fained and
dissembled, as it was reported on the Tuesday before.
And therefore it was thought that they were now at
the end of this businesse.
            But vpon the Friday and Saturday following, being
the fourth and fifth daies of Aprill, they called other
Phisitians, (omitting the greatest part of those which
had seene her before) and then they began a new

combat with this Fantasticall Deuill. One spake certaine
Greeke wordes vnto her: and she answered in
French. Another spake in English: shee answered in
French, but yet (as some say) somewhat to the purpose.
They obserued her most violent and sudden motions
to be without any change, either in pulse, or in breath,
or in colour. The Phisitians then present, made report
in many words and magnificall termes, that Martha
was possessed with a Deuill, and signed it with their
hands. Which report wee will write out hereafter,
word for word, as it is in the Originall.
            
            While all this was in doing, the Parliament fearing,
that this concourse of people, which came to see this
new Deuill, might breede some new Mo
                  •
               ster of Sedition,
(whereunto were are all too much inclined) made
a Decree, That Martha Brossier should be committed into
the hands of Monsieur Lugoly, the Lieutenant Criminall.
Hereat, the Ecclesiasticall persons repined, and said,
that this cause, of a woman pretended to be possessed,
belonged vnto thē. The Preachers cried out alowd at
the matter. And the King, being then at Founteyne-Bell'-eau,
and fearing also, that of this sparke there
might be kindled a great flame, commanded the like.
And for the performance thereof, Martha was caried
into the Chastelet, where she continued and liued almost
for the space of two moneths, not as a prisoner,
but being entertained very mildly, and well lodged:
viewed and visited by Bishops, Abbats, and other Ecclesiasticall
persons, Councellors of the Court, Aduocates,
Gentlemen, and many Ladies and Gentlewomen, as many
times and as often as any was desirous to see her. Besides,
she was viewed by many Phisitians, that is to say,
by my Masters De la Riuiere, the chiefe Phisitian, Laurence
the Kings ordinarie Phisitian, Laffilé the auncient

               Deane of the Facultie in Paris, Le Feure, Marescot, Ellain,
Hautin, Lusson, Pietre, Renard, Heroüard, Cousinot, D' Amboise,
Palmier, and Marcés: all which did say, and signed
it with their hands, that they had not seene nor obserued
any thing, that was aboue the common lawes of
Nature. And yet many there were, who being still infected
with the old Leauen, had scattered it abroad
throughout the Citie, that in the Chastelet she had
plaied many of her Deuillish trickes: which was afterward
found to be false.
            The said Martha, being shriuen on the morow after
Easter-day, and absolued by the Curate of Saint Germaines,
or the Vicar there, receiued the Holy Sacrament,
without making any stirre, or signe, or apparance
of a person possessed by a wicked Spirit. In the
end, when al sorts of informations were most diligently
searched, and all things well considered, the Great
Parliament of Paris set downe a Decree, with great prudence
and clemencie, which wee will deliuer you in
the end of this discourse. We haue declared vnto you
the whole Historie as in trueth it was: and now wee
must shew, by what reasons we were induced, firmely
to beleeue, that Martha Brossier neither was, nor is
possessed of a wicked Spirit: and afterwards wee will
signifie vnto you, how sleight their reasons are, which
held the contrary opinion, to the end we may cleere a
matter of so great weight and of such consequence.
But first we would haue euery man to vnderstand, that
we were not any way assistant in this action, but only
being called and commanded thereunto, by the right
Reuerend, the Bishop of Paris: and that wee had none
other scope therein, saue only God and our Conscience,
not regarding what many might say thereof, nor the
harme that might redound to vs thereby. And touching

the Thesis and Generall Proposition, there was neuer
any doubt of it. For we doe beleeue, according to the
Christian Faith, that there are Deuils: that they enter
into mens bodies: and that they torment them in sundrie
sorts: and all, whatsoeuer the Catholike Church
hath determined of their creation, Nature, Power, effects
and Exorcismes, wee hold to bee true, firme and
stable, as the Pole of Heauen. But touching the Hypothesis,
that is to say, that Martha Brossier is, or hath been
possessed of a Deuill, we say, it is absurd, false, and without
any likelihood. And to proue it, we will conclude
by this generall Syllogisme.
            
            
               
                  Maior. Nothing ought to be attributed
to the Deuill, that hath not
something extraordinarie aboue
the lawes of Nature:
               
                  Minor. The actions of Martha Brossier
are such, as haue nothing extraordinarie
aboue the lawes
of Nature.
               
                  Conclusio. And therefore the Actions of
Martha Brossier ought not
to be attributed to the Deuil.
               
            
            Those that are exercised in the knowledge of the
signification and equipollence of propositions, and in
the Art of Syllogismes, will confesse, that it is concluded
very well in secundo Modo prima Figurae, that is,Celarent. 
               in the

second Moode of the first Figure. The Maior or the Proposition
is very euident, and Plato in his Apologie is of
opinion, that there are Deuils, because there be many
things where of a man can giue none other reason, but
that it is the Deuill, as being extraordinary effects, and
surpassing the forces of Nature. The Minor or the
Assumption may bee knowne by an Induction of all the
Actions of the said Martha Brossier. For what hath she
done? Mary, she hath blared foorth her tongue, she
hath roled her eyes in her head, she hath shewed diuers
motions like to Conuulsions, and being laid vpon
her backe, she hath shaken her flankes. There is neuer
a one, I do not speake of these tumblers, but euen
of the very Lackies of the Court, that cannot doe so
much. And by this reason, that excellent Dancer vpon
the rope was rather to bee counted a Daemóniake,
and possessed with a Deuill, then she is. Martha therefore
hath done no Action, that wee ought to attribute
to the Deuill, as hereafter shall be more at large declared.
Moreouer, is it likely, that after fifteene moneths
being so often vexed and tormented, she should remaine
fat and in good liking? considering that euen
in the Gospell it is noted, that such as were possessed
with Deuils, waxed drie and very slender? We are yet
at this day all of vs of one minde and opinion, that the
motions like to Conuulsions in Martha, proceeded not
of any sicknesse or disease, because while she was in
them, keeping her eyes halfe shut and halfe open, she
perceiued and saw whatsoeuer was done, and did of
her owne free will and power moue her eye, and by
consequence all her body. Againe, such as haue a true
Conuulsion indeede, vse to bite those which come vnto
them, and put their fingers into their mouthes: yea, if
a man put a cudgell betweene their teeth, they will

crack it: and withall haue their limmes so starke and
stiffe, that they cannot be bended. Martha seeing her
selfe staied and holden by any, or hearing certaine
words of the Priest, wherewith she was before instructed,
lifted her self vp lustily, as though she had had not
fit at al. These motions then proceeded not of any disease,
and therefore they were counterfeit, as wee haue
alwaies maintained: or else they proceeded from the
Deuill, as some held opinion grounded vpon verie
sleight reasons: which we will throughly examine, after
wee haue set downe the Originall report thereof
word for word, and inserted the same in this place, as
followeth.
            
               
                  
                     
                        THE REPORT OF CERTAINE
Phisitians of Paris, touching the matter
of Martha Brossier.
                        
                           WE the vnder-named Doctors, Regents in
the Facultie of Phisicke, in the Vniuersitie
of Paris, touching the matter of Martha
Brossier, a maide of the age of two and
twentie yeres, or there abouts, borne at Romorantin
in Berry, who diuerse times to some of vs, but
specially vpon Friday and Saturday, the second and third
of Aprill to all of vs in common, (sauing and excepted one of
vs, who was not there but only on the Saturday) was brought
vnto vs in the Chappel of my Lord of Saint Genenefue,
hearing Masse there celebrated by my Lord the right Reuerend
Bishop of Paris, and induring the Exorcisme, performed
on the Friday by Father Benet a Capuchine, assisted
therein by Father Seraphin, a Religious person of the
same Order, who had exercised her vpon the daies aforesaid:

and on the Saturday by Master Clerk a Lay Priest, assisted
by Father of the Order of the Feuillans.
And there, during the said time, we saw her sometimes
in constitution, countenance and speech, as a person
sound of bodie and minde: and sometimes dissigured with
diuerse foule, vnseemely and deformed lookes: and now and
then vexed and troubled with many different and furious
motions of all the visible parts of her body: All the said euill
fauoured lookes being either full of a kinde of scoffing, deceitfull,
and consining laughter: or very fierce, horrible, and
silent, and oftentimes accompanied for the most part with a
roaring. In the middest of all this, sometimes obeying and
answering the Priest, aswell in gesture as in words, vpon commandements
and demaunds that were conceiued in Greek,
Latin and English: but as farre as wee did marke, more often
and more readily to Father Benet, then to any other: we
do say in our consciences and certifie that which followeth:
                        That is to say, as it may be that all this, which is before set
downe, remaining to bee specified hereafter, must necessarily
be referred to one of these three causes, which are Sicknesse,
Counterfeiting, or Diabolicall possession. And for the
opinion that it proceeded of Sicknesse, we are cleerely excluded
from that, for that the agitations and motions which we
obserued therein, doe retaine nothing of the nature of Sicknesses,
no not of those Diseases, whereunto at the first sight
they might haue been resembled: it being neither an Epilepsie,
or Falling Sicknesse, which alwaies supposeth the
losse of sense and iudgement: nor the Passion, which we call
Hysterica or Suffocation of the Matrix, which neuer is
either without vtter priuation, or at least without restraint
of breath: (of which accidents neuer did there any appeare
vnto vs.) But to the end we be not too long, and by excluding
generalities, to exclude lik
                              •
                           wise all specialties, to him that
shall looke neere into the matter, these motions aforesaid being

found not to appertaine to any of the foure motions proceeding
of Diseases, that is to say, Shiuering, Trembling,
Panting, and Conuulsion: Or indeede, if there doe appeare
any Conuulsions, and that a man will so call, the turning
vp of her eyes, the gnashing of her teeth, the writhing of
her chaps, (which are almost ordinarie with this maid while
she is in her fits:) the confidence which the Priest hath when
he openeth her mouth, and holdeth it open with his finger
within it: testifying sufficiently that they doe not proceed nor
are caused by any disease, (considering that in Diseases, he
that hath a Conuulsion is not master of that part or member
wherein it is, hauing neither any power of Election or
commaundement ouer it: and particularly in the Conuulsion
of the Iawes, which is the most violent of all the rest, the
finger of the Priest should bee no more respected nor spared,
then the finger of another man, but should be as quickly bitten
off.) Adding hereunto moreouer, that the accidents of
Diseases, aswell as the Diseases themselues, being found to
haue their times of beginning, increasing, full force, and declination,
these torments here as they first tooke their beginning,
and mounted to their vttermost extremitie all at once,
so did they likewise cease all in a moment. Diseases and the
motions also of Diseases, (especially those that are violent)
as they leaue the bodie feeble, the visage pale, the breath panting:
this maide on the contrarie, at the end of her fittes was
found to be as little moued and changed in pulse, colour, countenance
and breath, as euer she was before: yea (which is the
more to be noted) as little at the end of her Exorcisme as at
the beginning, at euening as in the morning, at the last day
as at the first. Notwithstanding touching the point of Counterfeiting,
the insensibilitie of her bodie, during her extasies
and furies, tried by the deepe prickings of long pinnes, which
were thrust into diuerse parts of her hands and of her necke,
and afterwards plucked out againe, without any shew, that

euer she made, of feeling the same, either in the putting in of
them, or in the taking out of them: and also without any mark
of blood, (a griefe, which without Magike and without speech
could not in our opinion be indured, without any countenance
or shew thereof, neither by the constancie of the most couragious,
nor by the stoutnesse of the most wicked, nor by the strong
conceite of the most criminall Malefactors) tooke from vs almost
the suspition of it: but much more perswaded vs from
that opinion, the thin and slender fome, that in her Mad-fits
we saw issue out of her mouth: which she had no meanes to be
able to counterfeit. And yet more then all this, the very consideration
before mentioned, of the little or no change at all,
that was seene in her person after all these most sharpe and
very long pangs, (a thing which no bodie in the world did euer
trie in their most moderate exercises) we are driuen, euen
till this houre, by all the lawes of discourse and knowledge, yea
and almost forced to beleeue, that this maide is a Daemóniake,
and the Deuill dwelling in her, who is the author of all
these effects: for that next after the corporall and materiall
causes, which wee doe not finde to haue had any place in this
matter, come the spirituall and supernaturall causes, in the
highest degree whereof, acknowledging God to be the Father
of grace and mercie, and the Angels to bee ordained for the
tuition and consolation of Mankinde, as Christian Philosophers
wee haue learned and know, that there is none but the
Deuill that delighteth in doing euill.
                        Now if wee had seene that, which my Lord of Saint Geneuefue
and many others doe report, that this maide was
lifted vp into the ayre, more then foure foote, aboue fiue or
sixe strong persons that held her: it would haue been an argument
vnto vs of an extraordinarie power, ouer and beyond
the common nature and condition of man. But not being
present at that wonder, we doe giue a testimonie of our knowledge,
which is as much or rather more admirable then that

force and power was, viz. that being demaunded, and in her
exorcising commaunded, (my Lord of Paris furnishing the
Priest with questions and Interrogatories) this maide diuers
and sundrie times, by many persons of qualitie and worthie of
credit was seene and heard to obey and answere to purpose, not
onely in the Latin tongue, (wherein it had not been impertinent
peraduenture to haue suspected some collusion) but also
in Greeke and in English, and that vpon the sudden. She
did (we say once againe) vnderstand the Greeke and English
languages, wherein wee beleeue, as it is very likely, that
she was neuer studied: so that there was no collusion vsed with
her, neither could she inuent or imagine the interpretations
thereof. It resteth therefore euen in the iudgement of Aristotle
in the like case, that they were inspired into her.
                        By reason whereof, and considering also (vnder correction)
that S. Luke, who was both a Phisitian and an Euangelist,
describing the persons, out of whose bodies our Lord and his
Apostles did driue the Deuils, left vnto vs none other, nor
any greater signes, then those which we thinke wee haue seene
in this case: wee are the more induced, and almost confirmed
to beleeue and to conclude as before, taking God for a witnesse
of our consciences in the matter. Made at Paris, this third
of April. 1599.
                     
                  
               
            
            Now let vs briefly examine this long discourse: The
actions of Martha (say they) which we haue obserued,
are either counterfeited, or proceede of some Disease,
or are caused by the Deuill. Of any Disease they proceede
not, neither are they counterfeit: then are they
caused by the Deuill. The Proposition is true: the Assumption
is false: and we do deny it. How proue you it?
Mary first you proue, that they proceeded not of any
Disease; because euery motion that proceedeth of any
Disease, is either a Trembling, or a Stifnes, or a Panting,
               
or a Crampe. This diuision seemeth to bee imperfect:
because there bee diuerse motions proceeding from
Diseases, which are mixt: as for example those that are
called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Mingled of a Crampe and a trembling:
and 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , a Trembling with a Shiuering, which
Hippocrates calleth 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . And these mixt kindes are
sometimes so mingled one with another, that it is a
very difficult thing, to referre them to any one of your
simple kindes. But let vs not rest vpon this, seeing we
are all agreed, that the motions of this woman proceeded
not from any disease: and let vs examine the reasons
which you alleadge for the Deuill.
            
            The first reason is, for that she being pricked very
deepe with a pin, she neuer made any semblant, that
she felt it. Out of all question, when she was but
sleightly pricked on the side of her neck, she turned
her selfe, and felt it indeede: and then Father Seraphin
vsed his wonted excuse, and said, Here is nothing els but
Martha. Well, a little after, being pricked somewhat
deeper, she dissembled her paine: and therefore had
she the Deuill in her bodie? The Lackies of the Court,
which diuerse times will of themselues thrust a pin very
deepe into some fleshie part, as in the thigh, or in
the arme, are they therefore possessed with a Spirit?
The wise Stoike, being inclosed in the bull of Phalaris,
said that it was but a gentle torment. Theeues that
robbe by the high way doe easily endure the torture:
we haue seene many that were burned aliue, and neuer
shewed any token of paine. Plutarch in the life of
Lycurgus, saith, that the children of the Lacedaemonians
did vse themselues to stealing, with so great feare to
bee discouered in their theft, as one of them hauing
stollen a yong Foxe, hid it vnder his cloathes, and suffered
all his bellie to bee rent out with the nailes and

teeth of the beast, and yet neuer cried for it, for feare
he should haue been discouered, insomuch as he dyed
in the place where he was. Which thing (saith Plutarch)
is nothing incredible, when wee see what yong
children doe euen at this day indure. For wee haue
seene many that without either crying, or speaking a
word, haue indured to be whipped euen to the death,
vpon the Altar of Diana. Behold the very words of
Plutarch.
            
            But ye will say, that Martha was pricked, without
any blood following. Assuredly we did see a shew and
a marke of red. And ye must vnderstand, that when a
pinne is pricked directly and vprightly into a fleshie
part, wherein there is not notable veine, it will make a
very small and narrow hole, out of which blood doth
not issue, especially if the blood be earthie and melancholike.
Vpon such a like argument as yours is, wee
haue seene poore soules condemned to be burned for
Witches, and afterwards absolued and let goe by the
Iudges of the Court. A dangerous argument for such
Witches, and yet in this question now in hand much
lesse pricking then a pinne. But let vs argue by Philosophie
a little more subtilly. Galen sheweth against
Aristotle, that Sense is not the alteration or chaunge
that is made in the Organon or Instrument of Sense, but
the knowledge of that alteration. As for example,
(saith he) if I bee very attentiue to any thing, and in
the meane while one passeth before me: although his
image bee receiued into the Chrystalline humour of
mine eye, as it were in a glasse, yet for all that I shall
not see him, because the Visuall Spirit with the power
thereof is kept backe in the spring and original fountaine
of the sight: or the soule doth not send forth the
Common Sense into the eye, because it is occupied elsewhere;

and without it there can bee no Sense, and by
consequence either little or no paine at all. If I bee
very greatly busied or occupied attentiuely about any
thing, although one crie out or speake alowd that is
neere vnto me, yet shall not I discerne what was said,
because the Common Sense is hindered elsewhere. Some
haue receiued many shots of gunnes in the warres,
that felt nothing thereof. Archimedes, being busied
about his Geometricall lines, did not thinke that Syracusa
had been taken. If therefore constancie and resolution,
as also a strong imagination doe detaine the
Spirit Animall in her fountaine: if the Soule doe not
send foorth into the part her Common Sense, without
which there is either little or no feeling at all, and by
consequence either little or no paine: doe we thinke
it strange, that the patient, being very resolute, doth
endure little or no griefe, and so dissemble it? This
reason induced the Stoikes to defend this Paradoxe,
That griefe or paine consisteth in opinion: because Imagination
is the mother of Opinion: and if Imagination doe
not worke withall, there is no paine at all. Cease therfore
to conclude that Martha was possessed with a Deuill,
because she was not moued with the pricking of a
pinne: conclude rather that she was not possessed, because
she felt not the pricking. For there is no likelihood
in it, and it is a thing incompatible, (not agreeing
with it selfe) that the Deuill should quite take away
the feeling of paine, from those whom he meaneth to
torment: nay, he would rather augment and increase
the same, to make them feele the greater paine. Cease
ye also to marueile, that there followed no blood out
of the pricke: for the onely apprehension or strong
conceit of being let blood, is ordinarily a cause, why
there followeth no blood out of the issue that is made,

although the veine bee very well opened. The common
people doe vsually say, I was so angred, as if a man
had stroke me with a dagger, I should not haue bled. And
thus haue wee philosophically disputed about a pinne
somewhat too much.
            The second reason to proue, that Martha was possessed
with a Deuill, is, That there appeared in her
mouth a certaine kinde of thin foame. Who did euer
heare any speech of the Deuils foame? If it be so, there
should haue been added, that it was also blacke. For
all that commeth from him being of hell, must needes
be blacke. Yea, our good old women vse to say, That
the Deuill hath no white at all in his eye. Who can forbeare
laughter, to heare, that a woman is knowne to
be possessed with a Spirit, by her foame and spittle?
            The third reason to proue that Martha was possessed
with a Spirit, is, Because she had certaine marueilous
violent motions, without any alteration either in
her pulse, or in her breathing, or in her colour. But
truly, her motions were not so violent, but that certaine
Phisitians, which could not patiently abide this
cousinage, could very easily stay her: and so would
haue done vpon the last daies also, when she plaied
her part so cunningly, if they had been called. But,
Non patebant fores, ne pateret veritas. The doores were not
open, for feare least the trueth should haue beene opened.
Moreouer, though the motions of Martha had been
violent, yet were they very briefe and short: for presently
she raised her selfe, and then the Exorcist said,
Here is nothing else but Martha. But let vs confesse and
auow, that these her motions were so violent and sudden,
as they say, without any chaunge or alteration in
her pulse: yet this signifieth, that her blood was very
thicke and earthie, and so could not easily be kindled:

and therefore we say with Galen, that the pulse of
such people is very rare. We haue oftentimes seene,
sundrie Melancholike persons, not onely many daies
and moneths, but also many yeeres, to haue runne vp
and downe crying very strangely, and howling like
dogs, without any change, either in pulse, or in breathing,
or in colour. Againe, vse and custome serueth
greatly to this purpose. There were fifteene moneths
spent in carying of her too and fro, like an Ape or a
Beare, to Angers, Saulmur, Clery, Orleans, and Paris: in
which time they taught her to practise all these gambalds,
Et quae consueta sunt, minus afficere solent. The things
that are of vse and custome doe not breede any great alteration.
How many things are there, which we doe daily
see in Nature to be farre more strange, admirable, and
incredible, which notwithstanding are not attributed
to Deuils, but to the hidden secrets of Nature? We see
those that are bitten with a mad dogge to barke like
dogges, Men that are Warewolfes to howle and eate
mans flesh like Wolues, because they haue their Imagination
hurt, and thinke themselues to bee Wolues.
They that are desirous to know more hereof, may
reade the two bookes of Leuinus Lemnius De occultis
Naturae miraculis, Of the secret miracles of Nature. Mizaldus
and Fracastorius in the bookes of Sympathie and
Antipathie: and Baptista Porta in his Magike Naturall:
and also that which a learned man of this age hath
written touching Miracles.
            To bee short, there are an infinit number of things,
that are done by the secret power of Nature: which if
because they are secret, wee should attribute to the
Deuill: then, to vnfolde the Questions of Naturall Philosophie
and Phisicke, from the beginning to the end of
these two Sciences, we should alwaies haue recourse to

               Deuils. But this reason is of so slender force, as by the
same I may conclude the quite contrary, that is to say,
that Martha Brossier neither is, nor was possessed with
a Spirit.
            
            Those that are possessed with a Deuill, after their vehement
and sudden motions, do remaine astonished,
and haue their members (as it were) cracked, as it appeareth
in the ninth chapter of S. Marke, and by the
Histories reported by Master Fernelius in his second
booke De abditis rerum causis, Of the hidden causes of
Nature.
            
            
               Martha Brossier, after her motions, was not in that
case, but to the contrarie, remained liuely and lustie.
            Therefore Martha Brossier was not possessed with a
Deuill.
            
            Now then, build your beliefe vpon such slender
reasons as you make, to conclude a matter of so great
weight.
            The fourth reason, if it were true, would necessarily
conclude, that is to say, if she had spoken Greeke and
English, hauing neuer before learned either of those
languages, it would be a certaine and sure argument
of her possession with a Deuill. But that is altogether
false. For she neuer spake any other language, then
the French tongue, and the proper speech of Romorantin,
although false rumours haue been spread abroad
thereof to the contrarie. But (say they) indeede she
neuer spake either Greeke or English: but she answered
to the purpose, when a question was demanded of her
in Greeke. One asked her, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : How camest
thou into the bodie? She answered in French, For the glorie
of God. Now the very selfe same question in Gr
                     •
                  eke
had bin made vnto her before at Clery, as Master Lieutenant
Criminal hath seene in his informations. It is

manifest therefore that there was a collusion in it.
Besides that, she answered not to the purpose: for she
was asked the means how he had entred into the bodie,
& the answer was made of the end, that is to say,
wherfore it entred into ye bodie. Father Benet questioned
with her a long time in English: and the good old
Father asked her, What was his name, and the womā answered,
I was not at your Christning. O goodly Miracle:
Martha had heard the Bishop, that furnished the good
Father with Interrogatories (as euen the Phisitians themselues,
which though the woman was possessed, haue
written in their Reporte) and the Bishop willing him,
to aske it in English, What was his Name, it was an easie
matter for this cunning wench, being very craftie
and well instructed in such subtilties, to answere, I
was not at your Christning. But if in this woman there
had been a Diuell in deede, how commeth it to passe,
that hauing been so long a time conuersant in the
Westerne Church, where Latin is so common, it had not
in all that time learned that language? Now she did
confesse, that shee did not vnderstand vs, when wee
spake Latine: What was the reason then that she did
vnderstand rather the words of the Priests, but onely
because shee was alreadie instructed and vsed thereunto,
and so vnderstoode them, as an Ape or a Dogge
vnderstandeth his Master? And for as much as whiles
she was in the Chastelet, shee had vsually in her hands
the booke of the Deuill of Laon, which shee brought
with her from Romarantin, and which Monsieur Lugoly
caused to be taken from her: I leaue it to consideration,
whether it were not of purpose to instruct her
more and more in such Apish toyes.
            Besides all these former reasons specified, they
bring vs the testimonie of Saint Luke the Euangelist
               
and Phisician, to the end that this authoritie should be
the greater against the Phisicians: who, when he reciteth
the Histories of such as were possessed, and healed
by Iesus Christ, doth alleadge no more plaine and
euident signes of possession, then those that were seen
in this woman of Romarantin. Now let vs see whether
this bee true, and well concluded. In the first
place, Saint Luke in his eleuenth Chapter maketh
mention of a Diuell that was dombe, and driuen forth
by Christ, and doth not describe or set downe any
signes, whereby this Deuill might be knowne. The
Euangelists had no intent to describe any such signes.
For they which were brought to Iesus Christ to be healed,
were euidently found to be such persons, euen by
the confession of the Iewes, and on the behalfe of Iesus
Christ, hee knew them well enough without any
signes. If therefore wee want none other signes of
the Diuels possession, but those that are set downe by
the Euangelists, then euery person that is Epileptike, or
troubled with the Falling Sicknesse, euery Melancholike
and euery Frantike person shall haue the Deuill in
their bodies, and there will be moe Demóniakes in the
world, then there are Fooles. But let vs see, whether
Saint Luke doe not set downe more apparant and euident
tokens of such as are possessed with Deuils,
then those which Martha had. This Euangelist and
Phisician in the eight Chapter of his Gospell, describing
the man possessed with a Deuill called Legion,
(because many Deuils were entered into him) saith,
that this man Ware no cloathes, neither aboade in house, but
in graues. Martha did weare garments of a slight
coloured cloath, after the fashion of a Romarantin
Mayde. Shee was, when occasion required, at the
table of Bishops, Abbats, and Monkes. Shee did eate

and drinke as other folkes doe. This Demóniake possessed
with the Legion, acknowledged Iesus Christ to
bee the Sonne of God, whom hee neuer had seene nor
heard of, and therefore he knew things, that were otherwise
secret. But Martha did neuer any such
thing. This Demóniake, although hee were bound with
chaynes of Iron, yet he broke them, and was caried
away by the Deuill into the Deserts. But Martha
was easilie helde and stayed with a very weake
hand. Then is this authoritie of Saint Luke not well
alleadged.
            Now that wee haue confuted these slender and
sleight reasons of some of the Phisicians, let vs come
to the reasons of some others: and begin with the testimonie
of diuerse men of qualitie, which say, that
they saw her lifted vp into the ayre for a space, without
any stay to vphold her. Goe too then: Let vs dispute
by Philosophie. Whatsoeuer is moued in recta linea,
in a right line, it must haue a rest, before it take any
contrary Motion: as for example, a Ball being
throwne against a Wall, before it reboundeth backe
againe, resteth it selfe vpon the Wall, as Aristotle
sheweth in his eyght booke of Phisicks: and an Arterie,
after the Dilatation thereof, before it make Contraction,
resteth it selfe. And now you may see, why
this woman of Romarantin, leaping vp into the ayre,
rested her selfe before she came downe againe. But
this is somewhat too subtile a reason: let vs yeeld
you one that is more plaine and cleere. They tolde
vs, vpon the Thurseday morning, that they alwaies
thought this matter of Martha to be meere cousinage:
but in the after-noone, they saw her aloft in
the ayre: peraduenture because some vapours arising
vp into their braines, did breede certaine accidents

like to Suffusions, or Clowdes, in such sort as a man
shall see things (as it were) out of their place. Which
may very well bee shewed by the Arte Optike. Yea it
way possibly be, that they saw Duplicem Martham, vnam
humi, alteram in sublimi (Two Marthaes, one vpon the
ground, and another a loft.)
            Others there bee, which haue alleadged another
reason, in that Martha did lift her flankes, all the rest
of her bodie remayning vnmoued. And so Horses, after
they haue runne, when they pant in their flankes,
(which Horace termeth Iliaducere,) may as well haue
the Deuill in their bodies. I am ashamed to heare such
reasons.
            And in sooth, this which followeth is not much better.
They heard a rumbling vnder her left ribs, but it
was very little, and that onely when it was touched.
By this reason, those that are troubled with a Winde
about the short ribbes, and poore Maydens that haue
the Greene Sicknesse, and pale colours, shall haue the
Deuill in their bodies. For oftentimes the sound in
their bellies is so great, that it may bee heard aboue
from beneath, and from one chamber to another.
And by this reason also, they should not haue one Deuill
alone, but many. And in deed, if we beleeue those
Good-Fathers, Martha had, and yet still hath three Deuils
in her: one that is an olde and a cruell one, called
Beelsebuh: another that is a merrie one, which
they call Ascalon, The lester of Hell: and a third which
they call, The Skullion of Hell. And thus these reasons
march all after one tune.
            Some there be, which adde hereunto, that Martha
discouered and tolde certaine Secrets of Men, in such
sorte, as many of the assistants were in great feare
thereof. Father Seraphin, (who alwaies walked with a

good simple conscience in this businesse) demaunded
of her, What haue I done this night? Martha answered,
Thou hast prayed to God. Behold, what a goodly great
Secret this was, to tell a Capuchine Frier, Thou hast
prayed to God. Whereby a man may know that the Romarantine
Wench mocked the simplicitie of these
Good-Fathers.
            
            Some bring a reason that is more vrgent, that is to
say, That Martha did speake in her bellie, when her mouth
and her lips were shut and closed. Truely Martha spake
as another bodie did. And yet if shee had done so,
should she therefore haue a Deuill, that spake within
her bellie? Hippocrates in his fift booke of the Epidemies,
the 58. sentence, maketh mention of the wife of
one Polemarchus, which spake in her bellie. Iohn Gorraeus
in his Definitions Medicinall, sayth, that in Hippocrates,
they are called 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which talke in their
bellie, when their Mouthes and their Lippes are shut
and closed. Looke vpon Scaliger against Cardan in
the 258. Exercise, and the third part. Foetius in his Oeconomia
Hippocratica writeth, that the Great Adrian
Turnebus did say in his Reading-Chayre,
               S. Augustine also reporteth a strange dexteritie (though it be somewhat filthie) of a man, that with the winde of his hinder parts, could make what sound he listed, and that with so good measure, as you would haue thought he had sung. Piedro Mexia de Serilla, lib. variarum lectionum. cap. 26. that he had seen
a Rogue, who without opening his Mouth or stirring
his lippes, did with his bellie, make such a sound, and
vttered such a voyce as pleased him, and gained great
store of money by practising that feate. And in truth
it might very well bee done: because in closing or
shutting the breast and stomacke, there may enter
some ayre into the Arterie, which may make a kinde
of sound or voyce, not very distinct or plaine to bee
discerned at first, and yet by long exercise may bee
in a sorte perceiued: and such persons are called

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, Talking in their Bellies. Or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Talking in their Breasts. Or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , Prophecying out

of their Breasts. Calius Rhodigynus referreth this to the
Deuill, that speaketh within the Bellie. But hee is but
a Reporter of Fables, and therefore let vs leaue these
popular and common reasons.
            Those, that haue thought themselues to bee somewhat
more wise then the rest, as being skilfull in the
Law, and making Profession thereof, haue oftentimes
obiected against vs: If Martha were not possessed of a
wicked Spirit, Cui Bono? Whose benefite was it? To what
end did she all these things? To this question, it belongeth
not to our Arte to answere. Yet notwithstanding
let vs entreate this fauour, that wee may make
some gesse of the matter. To what ende doe many
runne vp and downe the streetes, and say, that They
are Emperours, and Kings, and Kings Sonnes, and Bishops?
You will then say againe, That Martha thought
herselfe to be a Demóniake. It may be so: and to the end
that she might imprint that opinion in the mindes of
Men, she counterfeited and dissembled all the rest of
her Actions. And it is not to bee thought a strange
matter, that the selfe same person should commit an
errour in one poynt, and in all the rest should be very
cunning, subtile, and warie. Melancholike persons are
craftie and malicious.
            Let vs tell you a thing that is more likely then this.
The Father of Martha, was alwaies factious; by common
report. He saw that his daughter, who (as also
the rest of his other Children did) was euer reading
of bookes touching Deuilerie, and especially and principallie
that Booke of the Deuill of Laon was a very
proper and fit Booke for these Deuilish feates and
counterfeitings: adding thereunto, that many Priests,
and namely the Theologal of Orleance, by that which
she tolde vnto vs, confirmed her in this opinion, that

she had the Deuill in her bodie. And therefore hee
caried her to Our Ladie of Ardiliers, to Saulmur, to
Angers, to Clery, to Orleance, and now at the last to
Paris: Whether this were done vpon a follie, thinking
in deed that his daughter had the Deuill in her bodie,
or thereby to make some stirre and alteration, or
for couetousnesse, God knoweth: for that belongeth
to the Parliament to looke vnto. But the very truth is,
that many bestowed Money on her Father: as namely
Monsieur de S. M. Twentie Crownes, others Thirtie:
some more, some lesse. Yea her Father being at Paris,
went vp and downe a begging Money of the Church-Men,
euen of simple Religious persons, to bring this
holy enterprise to good perfection. And it is not to
bee doubted, but if the matter had fallen out accordingly,
there would haue been good store of money
gayned by it, and shee should haue been caried from
house to house to gather a beneuolence, as was the
Mother of Frier Clement, that wicked and cursed Apostata
and Runnagate,
               The Frier that murdered K. Henry the third of France. the remembrance of whom breedeth
a horror in my soule. And thus much for those
that aske, Cuibono? Who had benefite by it?
            
            Wee haue now shewed, that Martha neither was
nor is possessed with a Spirite: Wee haue confuted the
reasons of those that helde the contrarie opinion: We
haue seene the testimonies of the wisest and most prudent
persons among them. Martha was caried to
Angers to bee Exorcised or coniured. The right Reuerend
Bishop Miron, (a man of good wisedome and well
aduised) would not Exercise her, vntill hee had first
tryed her, and knew of a certaintie that she were possessed.
He caused her to bee stayed, hee bourded her,
and for certaine dayes hee made her drinke nothing
but Holy-water, wherewith shee was neither altered

nor moued. After certaine dayes he caused common
ordinarie water, (not hallowed) to be brought vnto
her in a Holy-water stocke: and then Martha seeing the
Holy-water-stocke, layed her selfe downe, fell to her
brabling, and made her wonted Apes-faces. Afterwards,
the Lord Bishop told her that he had a peece of
the True Crosse. Hee tooke a key of Iron, wrapped it
worshipfully in Taffata like a Relike, and offered it
Martha to kisse: and presently she began to play her
Deuilish trickes. A little while after, when he sayde,
Let one bring me my great booke of Coniurations, they caused
a Virgil to be brought vnto him: and he began to
reade, Arma virumque cano. By and by, she thinking
them to be words of Coniuration, fell downe vpon the
ground, and tormented her selfe in the best manner
she could. At the last, her counterfeiting being discouered,
the Lorde Bishop sent her away, and would
not prophane those holy Mysteries of Exorcisme, to
driue away a Counterfeit Deuill. Others may imitate
and folow the wisedome of this Prelate.
            
            And what was done at Clery and at Orleans? The
Officiall there, being well assisted with the wisest of the
Clergie, did forbid all Priests of the Diocesse of Orleans,
to Exorcise Martha, vpon paine of Suspension from Diuine
Seruice. It would be a long matter, if we should
goe about to rehearse all that was done at Orleans,
for the discouering of this cousinage of the sayde
Brossier: wee will onely tell you two of the pretiest of
them. First, there was brought vnto her a great thicke
Grammar of Despanterius, bound after the old fashion
with boords, and with claspes of Copper: it was opened
and giuen her to reade. Shee lighted vpon this
place, Nexo, xui, xum vult: Texo, xuit, indeque Textum.
Which words Martha thinking to be Diabolical, began

to fall backward, (but softly enough, as we tolde you
before) and to fetch her ordinarie friskes and gambaldes.
Another pretie tricke was, that my Masters
of the Clergie in Orleans, would needes make experiment
of the graund Remedie to driue away the Deuill,
and that is called the Parfume. They did set fire
to this Parfume, and offered those villanous and
stinking vapours to her Nose, she in the meane while
being bound to a chayre, but her feete at libertie
to play withall: and then began shee to
crie out, Pardon me, I am
choaked, He is gone
away.
            
         
         
            
               
               THE DESCRIPTION
OF THE DIABOLICAL PERFVME,
TAKEN OVT OF THE
booke intituled, Flagellum Daemonum,
The whip of Deuils: and is
this.
               
                  TAke Brimstone, Assafoetida,
Galbanum, S. Iohns-VVorte,
and Rue; all these things being
hallowed according to
their owne proper and peculiar benediction,
must bee cast vpon the fire, and
the smoake thereof applyed to the Nosthrils
of the possessed.
               
                  This is an excellent Remedie ad fugandos
& fumigandos Daemones, to driue and
smoake away Deuils.
               
               
                  Of the vertue of this Remedie, I will say nothing;
but I am greatly amazed, that they mene to driue

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
out Deuils with such stinking Odours and Smels, considering
that Porphyrie & Psellus, who are Philosophers of
Platoes Sect, doe say that such Parfumes are the Deuils
Dainties. If it were lawfull for mee to amend or reforme
this Antidote or Preseruatiue, I would adde
thereunto, some Atriplex foetida or stinking Orage,
which the Greekes call 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : Some of the leaues of
Coriander, and Wilde-Rocket. For they are all Cordiall
hearbes for Deuils.
                  
                  All these things that haue thus passed, are for the
most part absurde aud ridiculous, and yet haue they
found defendors of them, not onely among the ignorant
people; but almost in euery estate: and therefore
the Parliament hauing a long time and diligently
considered of the whole matter, to appease all diuisions
and Parte-takings, that might arise thereby, did
make this Decree as followeth.
               
            
            
               
                  A Draught out of the Registers
of the Parliament.
                  THere was viewed by the Court, (the
Great Chamber, and the Tournelle being
assembled together) the Decree of the
Second Day of Aprill last past, whereby it
was ordered, that Martha Brossier, pretended
to be possessed with a wicked Spirite,
should be committed and deliuered
to the Lieutenant Criminel of this Towne.
                  
                     
The reports also of the Phisitians, of the
vij. viij. xiij. xiiij. xvij. xix. xx. and xxj.
dayes of Aprill last: of the viij. and xviij.
of this present Moneth. And likewise other
Actes and Testimonies, whereby it appeareth,
that the sayd Martha Brossier is
not possessed with any wicked Spirite.
                  
                  The Capitular Acts also of the Chapters
of Orleans and of Clery, of the xvij. of
March, the xviij. and xix. of September,
1599. Whereby Inhibitions were adwarded
to all Priests of the said Diocesse, that
they should not exorcise the said Martha
Brossier, vpon paine of Suspension from
Diuine Seruice. There were heard also
Master Peter Lugoly the Lieutenant Criminel
in the Prouost-ship of Paris, and Francis
de Villemontee, Deputie to the Kings Generall
Attourney in the sayd Prouost-ship,
touching the behauiour of the said Brossier:
together with the Conclusions of the
Kings Attourney Generall himselfe. And all
this being considered.
                  The said Court hath ordered, and now

doth order, that the said Martha Brossier,
Syluina and Marie Brossiers, her Sisters,
and Iames Brossier their Father being
now in this Towne, shall bee caried and
conueyed to the Towne of Romarantin,
(the place of their aboade) by Master Nicholas
Rapin, Lieutenant of the Short-Robe
in the said Prouost-ship: and the said Martha
Brossier shall be by him left in the keeping
and garde of the said Iames Brossier
her Father, whom the Court doth inhibite
and forbid, vpon paine of Corporall
Punishment, that he shall not suffer her to
wander or goe out of the said Towne,
without the order and leaue of M. Paul
Gallus the Iudge or Steward of Romarantin:
who was enioyned to marke and obserue
the Actions and doings of the sayd
Martha Brossier: to make verball Processes
therof, and to send the same to this
sayd Court, from fourtnight to fourtnight,
& so to aduertise & certifie, what
he shall see fit to bee done: and further in
case of disobedience herein committed

by the said Iames Brossier, to proceede against
him and others (if any such thing
fall out) by the ordinarie courses of Iustice.
And this present Arrest or Decree,
shall bee executed by vertue of the Copie
thereof. Made in Parliament, the xxiiij.
of May. 1599.
                  
                     Signed VOYSIN.
                  
               
               
                  It cannot bee expressed, with how much prudence
and consideration this Arrest or Decree was made: and
yet these poore soules (being blinded) are disposed to
confirme their error thereby: and say, If Martha had
the Deuill in her bodie, they should haue sent her backe into
the hands of Ecclesiasticall Persons to be Exorcised: But if
she had none, then should they haue punished this Cousinage
publikely, and made an example of it. But yet wee ought
to beleeue that the Bishop of Angers knew the cousinage:
that the Clergie of Orleans knew it, when they
forbad to Exorcise her: that the Phisitians of Paris, (some
few excepted) manifestly knew it & declared it: that
my Masters of the Chastelet did wholy discouer it: that
the Parliament hath seene it plainely and cleerely, and
so sent the miserable wench backe to her Father, according
to her owne desire, and promise, that they
should neuer heare any more speech of her: Wherein
the said Court vsed great mercie towards her. Why it
did not grieuously punish this Cousenage, it is not for
vs to deale or enquire any further, but to conteine our
selues within our owne office and vocation, viz. to

feare God, to honour the King, and to obey the Maiestrates.
He that resisteth them, resisteth the Ordinance of
God. In the meane while let vs praise God, and sing an
hymne vnto him. For his mercie is multiplied vpon vs, and
his trueth endureth foreuer. Amen.
               
            
            
               The Rule to coniure or Exorcise Demoniakes,
approued by the holy See Apostolike, drawne
out of the Nationall Synode, helde at
Rheines. 1583.
               ANtequàm ad Exorcismum Sacerdos se accing at, de
Obsessi hominis vita, conditione, fama, valetudine, atque
alijs circumstantijs diligenter inquirat, & cum prudentibus
quibusdam communicet. Falluntur enim aliquando nimiùm
creduli, & fallunt Exorcistam non rarò Melancholici,
Lunatici, & Magicis artibus impediti, cùm dicunt se à Daemone
possideri atque ter queri, qui tamen Medicorum Remedio
potiùs, quàm Exorcistarum Ministerio indigent.
               That is to say,
               Before the Priest enterprise to Exorcise, let him diligently
inquire of the life of the Possessed, of his condition,
of his fame, of his health, and of other circumstances;
and let him communicate the same with some
wise, prudent, and well aduised persons. For oftentimes
such as are too light of beliefe, are deceiued: and
oftentimes those that are Melancholike, Lunatike, and
Bewitched by Magicall Artes, doe beguile the Exorcist,
when they say, that they are possessed and vexed by
the Deuill, whereas for all that, they haue more neede
of the Phisitians Remedie, then of the Exorcists Ministerie.
These are the words of that Synode.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            An extract of the Priueledge.
            BY the Kings Priueledge, yeouen at Paris
the xiij. of Iuly, 1599. Signed by the
Counsell, Le Cointe, and sealed with yealow
waxe, vpon a single string, it is permitted
to Mamert Patisson, Printer of
our said Lord, in the Vniuersitie of the
said Towne of Paris, to imprint, sell, and
distribute, a booke intituled, A true Discourse
vpon the matter of Martha Brossier
of Romorantin, pretended to bee possessed
with a Deuill: With inhibition to all other
Printers and Book-sellers to imprint,
or cause the same to be imprinted,
without the good liking and consent of
the said Pattison, vntill the time and terme
of sixe yeares, to begin at the date of these
presents: vpon paine of Confiscation of
the saide Bookes, and an arbitrarie amercement.
            
            
         
      
   