
      
         
            
            
            
               THE
Agreemente of
Sondry places of Scripture,
ſeeming in ſhew to Iarre,
Seruing in ſtead of Commentaryes,
not onely for theſe, but others
lyke, Tranſlated out of
               
French, and nowe
fyrſt publyſhed
by Arthure
Broke.
            
               
                  
                     
                        ¶Seene and allowed, accordyng to the
ordre appoynted in the Queenes
Maiestyes Iniunctions.
                     
                  
               
            
            Imprynted at London, in Paules
Churchyard, at the ſigne of the
Crane, by Lucas Harriſon. Anno. 1563.
         
         
            
            The Prynter to the Reader.
            
               THE AVTHOVRS ABſence,
whoſe only coūtenaūce
wold haue feared faults, &
poliſhed a far meaner work:
pleadeth in excuſe of the apparaūt
flackneſſe, in peruſīg
this ſmal treatiſe which, as now it ſwarmes with
matter and ſinguler ꝓfite, had alſo flowed wyth
Eloquēcemought he haue enioyed himſelf, whē
the Realm thought good to cōmaūd him. But,
ſyth, euen abſent, he mought hereby benefit the
godly: though repyning to ſee his learned knowledge
racked frō Eloquēce, enforced he was, by
my oft entreaties, to leaue behinde him this orphane
Babe. Worthy in deede, for lawfull and
vnspotted doctrine, to beare his Syres Name:
howbeit, yet rough, vnmete to match with many
other his trauaylles, ſatisfieng the hygh expectation
that fame had blowen of hym. Notwithſtāding,
ſyth it is not the least tryal of mercy,
to father the fatherleſſe: what he diſdayneth
in this yoūg Imp, for it hath not yet raught the
honorable roomes of the rest: that, ye, to whō
hereby cōmodity by our meanes ſhall grow, accept
to your patronage. That, as the cauſe of imperfection,

(if any be) roſe for your ſakes, through
my meanes: ſo the ꝓtection frō the enuious
(ſitheuen much it ſhroudeth worthy enuy) may
ꝓcede frō your Curteſyes. It doing, y
                  •
               ure ſelues
ſhal ye diſcharge of vnkindneſſe, me of blame,
him of feare, Which, if by one prayſe worthye
worke, ye wyll not, ſmall encouragement hath
be, hereafter, wyth the venture of hys fame,
to tender your profyte. And I as lyght cauſe,
to h
                  •
               ſard my thanckes, in lyke importunity on
the Lerned Shame therefore be it, to neglecte
your frendes, Feare and doubt to
hynder your ſelues. Which
as ye ſhal ſeke to auoid:
ſo, in eſchuing the
Cauſes, purſue
the contrary.
            
               
SOme mē heretofore haue attempted
this ſelf maner of writyng & ye ſame
worke that is here offred vnto you:
Neyther was their labour altogether
vayne. For at the leaſt if they had but
gathered ſuche places of Scripture as
ſeme to dyſagree, and done theirendeuour
to agree thē, thoughe they haue
not yelded the true meanyng of places
which thei had takē in hand to expoūd:
yet ſo it is ye thys inuention of theirs
hath geuen a taſte & opened away vnto
ſuch other as followed thē, who were
able to geue a more certayne reſolutiō
of the ſame differences. Let euery one
haue hys prayſe: but chiefly let not the
firſt inuentours be greued y• thoſe whiche
came after holpe thēſelues wt their
inuentiō, and yt hauing a greater light
of y• ſcripture they laboured to open y•
whiche beefore was very darkly handled.
Neither let y• laſte ſort ſeke to ſet
forth themſelf to ye dyſcōmendation of
thoſe y• went before: but let both partes
ſetting abrode ſimply yt which god hath
geuen thē, bryng forth their workes wt
               
a common agreement to the glorye of
hym only whiche openeth the eyes of
men, and geueth them vnderſtandyng
and wyſedome to ſpeake well.
            Be it ſo than (frendly Reader) that
you read y• others workes yt haue treated
on thys maner, or be it y• you be deſirous
to take profite of thys preſente
worke: I pray you bring with you a ſober
& quiet Iudgement. And I hope y•
whē you ſhal haue red ye other you wil
not refuſe y• reading of this as vnprofitable.
As at other tymes it hath bene
nedeful to repreſſe the franſy of many
troubled ſpirits: ſo thinke you y• at this
day all ſuch are not yet ſo ſtilled, but y•
they geue many occaſions of terrible
frayes, ouerthrowing & corruptyng y•
meanyng of ye ſcriptures to confyrme
their opinions. And it is neceſſary that
they ſhould be withſtode. And bicauſe y•
moſte troubleſome and hard fighte of
theirs, y• we muſt abyde, is when y• aſſault
is geuē vs by ye holy▪ ſcriptures, of
which ſelf ſcriptures we muſt borrowe
al oure ſtrength & defence, it behoueth
vs in this caſe, to vſe great wiſedome
by which we may repulſe y• deceiptes &

ſleyghtes of our aduerſaries, and ſo to
applie thē to our purpoſe as neuertheleſſe
we myſtake thē not & ſo bee deſtitute
of weapon & defence. For if wee
were aſſayled by any other meane, eyther
by Philoſophye or by any other
doctrine of men, it were an eaſye matter
to repulſe ſuch aſſaults, for y• worde
of God which we make our bucklar &
defence, is of ſtrength agaynſt al doctrynes,
& is aboue al doctrynes. But
here in is al ye doubt whē by y• word mē
wil deſtroy y• word in vs and vs in the
word. There are many yt reade ye holy
ſcriptures, to this purpoſe only y• by the
they may eſtablyſh ye traditions & ordinances
of men. They ſeke in thē ſome
couer to kepe their trifling ceremonies
Ther ar other yt hauyng Imagined or
takē ſome opiniō in their head holding
wilfully and ſtubbornly, yt whiche they
haue once conceaued, they wreſt awrie
& ouerthwartly the places of ſcripture
hauyng regard to their own ambition
rather thē to y• teaching & edif
                  •
               yng of ye
ſymple ones. There are alſo diuerſe
whiche (not caring for any religiō but
rather wiſhing y• al thing wer diſordered,

& y• euery one ſhold do what ſemeth
hī beſt) wickedly take certain ſcrapings
of y• holy ſcriptures, and aſſone as they
haue foūd in thē ſome litle ſhew of diſcord,
they lay hand on y• as if they had
ouer cōme al, tending to no other end
but to brīg y• word of god to be deſpiſed
& hated & the readyng of it ſuſpected.
How is ye world at thys day fyld ful of
Epicures & contemners. Cōtrarywiſe
ther ar very fewe y• hyt y• marke, which
bryng with thē a good mynde & read &
heare ye ſcriptures to fynde Chriſt in
thē, & to cōfyrme thē ſelf in ye true faith,
& to obey God deuoutly as they ought
But theſe Hogs & Dogs wold not once
voutchſafe to opē their eies to loke vpō
one only ſillable in thē if it were not to
finde ſome Iarre in thē & to make thē
diſagree, & to haue ſome occaſiō to find
fault with thē. But ye holy ghoſt which
is ye teacher and author of ye ſcriptures
who is y• ſpirit of truth euer like to him
ſelf, alwaies faſt & cōſtant profers nor
brings forth any thing yt is contrary to
himſelfe, nor any thing to entangle or
trouble ye ſpirit of y• fathful reader, or to
make him vncertayn, or in doubt what

opiniō to beleue & what not to beleue.
For verely if there be any diſagreeing
in ye holy ſcriptures how maye a man
know what is certayne & ſound? How
ſhal a mā diſcerne y• truth frō y• whiche
is falſe, y• good frō y• il, y• certain from y•
vncertayne, the lyght frō y• darkneſſe?
Wherfore we muſt not feare that the
ſcriptures deceaue vs, as if ther wer any
diſagreeing in thē, neither nede we
doubt yt the falſe expoūders of thē ſhal
haue ye vpper hand, & reach to y• marke
y• they ſhotte at, if to y• readyng of thē
we bryng with vs a ſpirite ready to be
taught: but rather we ſhal haue wheron
to ſtaye vs, & to defende vs agaynſt
al aſſaultes. I hope yt they which ſhalbe
guyded with ſuch a ſpirit of mekeneſſe
may be holpe by this worke which as
yet is but begon.
            Thys is but only a profe offered in
haſt, at whiche if you ſhal beginne to
take profite, let vs vnderſtand it, & you
ſhal geue hym y• hath thus begon ye occaſion
to go further foreward whiche
thyng alſo he promiſeth you. Read and
profiite in the feare of the Lorde.
            FINIS
         
      
      
         
            
            1
            
               No Man knoweth
vvhether he bee vvorthye of Loue or
of Hate.
               Eccleſiaſt. 
                     •
                  
               
               I knovv in vvhom I beleue and am
ſure that he can keepe that vvhych I
gaue hym to keepe vntyl that Daye.
               Tym. 
                     •
                  . ep. 
                     •
                  
               
            
            
               
                  THE MOST IGNORANT
of al, ſo they be not ſtubborne
may eaſely vnderſtande
what Salomon
meaneth in thys part of
Scripture, to 
                  〈◊〉
               , y•
we trauail in hayne if we iudge by the
preſente ſtate, whome God loueth or
whom he hateth: for God ſheweth not
his loue continually to thoſe whom he
wil proſper, nor hys hate to them whō
he wyll afflict. And that to reproue the
vayreneſſe of mannes vnderſtanding
whiche is dull euen in thoſe thinges
which chiefly ought to be knowen.
            But thys that is ſpoken touching ye
iudgement of outward things, and ſo

farre foorth as a man may Iudge of
hymſelf letts not at al the certainty of
fayth neyther doth it cauſe a faythfull
man to be vnaſſured of y• loue of God,
and not reſolued that life is layd vp for
him in heauen. This aſſuredneſſe maketh
vs know what difference there is
betwene faith and opinion. Fayth leaneth
not on the authority of men, neither
doth it doutfully reſt on God: but
a certayne knowledge is ioyned wyth
fayth. So if according to the conceit of
men we ſpeake of things that chaunce
vnto vs, we haue no aſſurance of gods
goodneſſe toward vs. But when fayth
guydeth the ſprite of man, then man is
well aſſured what ſo euer betyde hym,
that nothyng ſhall ſeparate hym from
the loue wherwith God loueth him.
         
         
            2
            
               Seeke and you ſhall finde.
               Math. 7.
               I vvas found of thoſe that ſought
me not.
               Eſai. 65.
            
            THis commodity we haue by faith
in our praiers, y• if in faith we ſeke
God, we ſhal find him always redi

to ſuccor vs in al our neceſities, he is
preſt of hymſelf to graunt our requeſtes,
ſo that we pray to him. And his riches
ſhalbe diſplayed vnto vs, ſo that
we ſeke them and aſke them. It is certaine
that God watcheth often for the
ſafety of hys faythful when they ſlepe,
to the ende he may preuent their prayers.
For, we were more than miſerable
if in thys our brutall dulneſſe God
taried for our prayers. But bicauſe
Chriſt ſpeaketh here to hys Diſciples
he ſheweth them playnly in what maner
the heauenly father wyll make vs
partakers of his gifts. Although therfore
he geue vs all good things freely:
yet notwithſtandyng to exerciſe our
fayth, he wyl haue vs ſeke hym by our
prayers, on which he wyl beſtow that
which proceadeth from hys goodneſſe
only.
            So, God wyl haue vs ſeke hym, yet
he is the firſt that ſought and foūd vs,
which thing appeareth in that he ſaith
he was found, but it was of thoſe that
ſought hym not, which was when he
graffed vs into his houſehold by faith.

And therin he declareth that hys grace
and mere goodneſſe hath preuēted vs,
& that we brought wyth vs no deſert,
or worthineſſe at all.
         
         
            3
            
               I vvyll remēbre their ſinne no more.
               Geneſis. 3
               Verely I ſaye to thee, thou ſhalt not
depart from thens til thou haue paid
the laſt farthing.
               Math. 5.
            
            EVEN after that we haue offēded,
God notwtſtanding promyſeth to
be at one wt vs: for of nature he is
gentle and prone to pardō, ells our offences
and wickedneſſe wold ſhut the
doore and entraunce to hys bounty, yf
we had not thys thing euer ſet before
our eyes, that he eaſely pardoneth and
forgetteth our ſinnes, he kepeth not in
mind the faultes and wrongs that are
done to him: for he condeſcendeth wyllingly
and of his owne accord to fal to
agremēt. But it behoueth vs to know
that thys is not ſpoken to all mankind
indifferently, but is a priuiledge belō
               ging
properly to his Church. For it is

ſaide in Deutronomy, that God reuēgeth
terribly caſting back the faults of the Fathers
into the boſome of the Children. Gods wrath
agaynſt rebelles, vnbeleuers and obſtinate
perſones ſhall neuer be appeaſed.
And in ſome ſorte that may agree
hereunto, which Chriſt our Lord ſaith.
Verely I ſay vnto thee thou ſhalt not come oute
from thens tyll thou haue payed the vttermost
Farthing. Albeit Chriſt ſimply geueth
warning that it is very profitable for
vs euen after the maner of men to agree
with our aduerſaries betime, bycauſe
that rigorous men are often domaged
by their owne euel deſire. Yet
this ſimilitude may be well and fytly
applied to God, that Iudgement with
out mercy ſhalbe executed on him that
wil not agre or be reconciled with hys
brethren, or that ſhall ſtriue to the vttermoſt.
         
         
            4
            
               Art thou called a ſeruaunt? care not.
               1. Corint. 7.
               Yet if thou cā be at liberty, be ſo rather.
               1. Corint. 7.
            
            EVery man muſte be content wyth
hys calling and follow it: not that

men are ſo bound but ſome may lawfully
chaunge their eſtate or trade of
life: but men ought to amend their vnaduiſed
deſire, by which ſome are ſtird
to chaunge their ſort of life without any
iuſt occaſion, whether it be through
ſuperſtition or curiouſneſſe of conſcyence,
or ſome other fond motion. To be
ſhort, this ſentence bringeth al men to
thys poynt to remembre what ſtādeth
with their calling. If any be called to
bōdage ſayth Saint Paul, he muſt not
be vexed with carefulneſſe: but rather
maſſe haue his conſcience quiet. He
wil haue bondmen to be of good there
and not troubled as thoughe bondage
ſhuld let them frō the ſeruice and true
obedience of God. Notwithſtanding
he mitigateth that ſentence: for (ſayeth
he) if the ſeruaunte can fitly bryng to
pas to com into fredome, let him take
to hym that more comodious ſtate of
lyfe. He teacheth that liberty not only
is good: but alſo more cōmodious thā
bondage. This then maketh theſe two
ſentences no whitte to diſagree. For
Saint Paul biddeth not ſeruauntes to

ſteale away from theyr maiſters, or to
vſe any force toward their maſters, ſo
to ſhake of the yoke of bondage from
theire neckes: But he aduiſeth them
not to be trobled, as though their ſtate
of lyfe did take from them the Chriſtian
liberty.
         
         
            5
            
               VVhen I held my peace my bones
vvoox olde.
               Pſalm. 23.
               In cryeng and groning my bones
vvaxe olde.
               Pſalm. 23.
            
            ALthough there be ſome litle ſhew
of contrariety in theſe words, yet
they may be eaſily agreed. The poore
ſinner is ſpoken of who feeleth himſelf
caſt out of the fauour of God. And the
Prophet ſpeaketh not here of a cōmon
kinde of trial: but of an extreme rigor,
by whych ye ſinner is vtterly ouerthrowen.
As in dede if we be not drawē by
forcible means, we neuer aduaūce our
ſelf wt a very earneſt deſire to ſeeke to
be at one wt God. Therfore whether ye
ſinner ſeke eaſe by holding his peace &

ſaying nothing: or by crieng and brayeng,
his bones neuer lyn to waxe olde,
nor all his ſtrength to waſt: on which
ſyde ſoeuer he turne him, and by what
ſoeuer wil or affectiō he be led. Let his
mouth be ſhut vp that he ſay nothing:
let him haue it open to bray and fil the
aire with cries: To be ſhort, let him do
all that ſemeth hym good to finde eaſe
of his grief, yet it auailes him nothing
tyll he be come agayne into the fauour
of God.
         
         
            6
            
               Thy God is one only God.
               Deutero. 6.
               I haue appointed thee the God of
Pharao.
               Exod. 1.
            
            THIS is very true, y• there is but
one God, & the ſame very. God &
onli God y• by his ſō Ieſus Chriſt
ſhewed himſelf only wiſe, only almighty,
and wholly good, at whoſe hand alone
we muſt loke for ſafety, & all maner
of good things. He is ye true God
whō faith diſcerneth frō the vayn & foliſh
inuētiōs of mē, & embracīg him wt
an aſſured certainty, it neither boweth

nor wauereth. Yet for all that a man
may alſo ſay. Many are called Goddes
not of their own being: but by partaking
of dignity, inſomuchas God hath
made thē his vicars & Deputies in ſom
particular office, as it is ſayd in the. 83.
Pſalme. I haue ſayd you are Goddes. For
he ſpeaketh ther to Princes & Gouernors
of ye earth. By ye ſelf reaſō y• ſcripture
calleth the Angels Goddes, for y•
the glorye of God ſhineth in the world
through thē. Now this tittle conueyed
ouer from God as wel to Angels, as to
men, declareth what God doth by thē,
& what charge and office he hath geuē
thē. And yt is in ſuch ſort, that no parte
of Gods glory is therby miniſhed. For
he doth not ſo impart his force & ſtrength
to creatures, as in y• meane ſeaſon
any of his power is taken frō him. He
doth not ſo work by thē that in ye mean
time he reſigneth his own power. He
wil not haue his glory ſo ſhine in thē.
y• the whileſt it be darkned in himſelf.
         
         
            7
            
               All fleſh ſhall ſee the Saluatiō of God.
               Eſai. 40.
               
                  The vvicked ſhall not ſee the glory
or magnificence of God.
               Eſai. 26.
            
            IN ye the Prophet Eſay ſaith, al fleſh
ſhall ſee ye ſaluation of God, his purpoſe
is to ſhew yt the work of ye redēptiō
of ye Church ſhal be ſo glorious that all
mē ſhal opēly ſee yt God is ye author of
ſuch a deliuerance, & it ſhall make viſible
his Maieſty & Power. But ye wicked
& vnbeleuers haue no eyes mete ſo
to conſidre it, as it may profit thē. The
Lord by ſūdry meanes maketh his power,
his iuſtice, & bounty ſhine: and yet
ye unbeleuing & proud occupy not their
ſpirits and wits about it. So although
al may behold ye glory of Ieſus Chriſt:
neuertheleſſe few haue knowen it bycauſe
of their blindneſſe. There haue
bene but few that haue had their eyes
opened by the holy Ghoſt, to ſee this
glory in our Lord Ieſus.
         
         
            8
            
               I vvyl harden the hart of Pharao.
               Exod. 4.
               Pharao hath hardened his hart.
               Exod. 8.
            
            
               LYKE as God hath kept vnto himſelf

this liberty to haue mercy on whome
it ſeemeth good to hym, and that therin
we can finde out no cauſe aboue his
will: ſo alſo hee refuſeth as manie as
he will, and therin his wil ſufficeth for
all reaſons. Saint Paul handling this
argument in the. 9. Chapter to the Romaines,
allegeth that which God had
ſayd to Moyſes before, I wyll haue mercy
on whomſoeuer I wyll haue mercy. On the
contrary ſyde he proponeth that which
the Scriptures ſay to Pharao, Exod. 9.
I haue ſtirred thee vp euen to thys ſelfe purpoſe
that in thee I may ſhew my power, & that my
name may be renowmed through all the earthe.
Then after he concludeth y• God hath
mercy on whom it ſemeth good to him
and hardeneth whom he wil. The lord
affirmeth that it is himſelf that ſtirred
vp Pharao to this very ende that being
vāquiſhed and ſubdued whyleſt he
ſtubbournly reſiſted the power of god,
hee ſhoulde ſerue for an inſtruction to
teache howe inuyncyble the arme of
God is. Then, in that he hardened the
hart of Pharao, he is not only vnreproueable:
but alſo in hys wyſedome

and equity wonderfull. And when it is
ſayd that God hardeneth, it is not only
me it therby that God ſuffereth, but
alſo that his Godly wrath worketh: for
al outward things which ſerue to bild
the reprobare, are euident tokēs of his
angre. And Sathan himſelf which inwardly
worketh ſtrongly, is ſo Gods
miniſter that he doth nothing out by
the commaundement of God. Yet not
withſtāding this alſo is true that Pharao
hath hardened his heart God truly,
doth harden, but he doth wel & iuſtly
that which he doth. 
                  •
                an hardeneth
himſelf, but what he doth, he doth ſtubbournly,
agaynſt the will of God who
calleth him to repeniaunce and ſaluation.
            This we may ſee playnly by the exhortation
which yt holy Ghoſt maketh
in the. 95. Pſalme, when he ſayth, If to
day yee wyll heare his voyce harden not youre
heartes, He declareth that our ſtubbourneſſe
and rebellion agaynſt. God commeth
out of none other fountayn than
of our wicked will, whē we ſhut ye dore
againſt his grace. We haue alredy by

nature a hart of ſtone, and this hardening
is naturall vnto vs euen frō our
mothers wombe, and onely God may
ſoften and amend our hardneſſe. Notwithſtandinge
in that wee refuſe the
voyce of God, that proceadeth of our
wilfull obſtinacy, and not of any conſtraynt
that commeth from els where
or from without vs. Euery man may
be a witneſſe of this to himſelf: Wherfore
it is not without iuſt cauſe that the
holy Ghoſte reproueth all vnbeleuers
forſomuch as ſtubbournly they wythſtand
God, neyther is 
                  〈◊〉
                any beſide
themſelues that taught them to rebell.
Pharao may well ſcrue for a notable
crample hereof. So God remaineth
iuſt, & the naughty and hardened mā is
Iuſtly puniſhed.
         
         
            19
            
               Encreaſe and Multiplye,
               Geneſis 
                     •
                  .
               Happy are the barraine that &c,
               Luke. 
                     •
                  3.
            
            WHEN God had at the begining
ordayned mariage, he ſpake thus
to Man & Womā which he himſelf
had ioined together, Grow and multyply.
            
            
               
In geuing them hys bleſſing he wylleth
them to engendre a line, beginning
at the mariage which he had ordayned
and hallowed, he cōmeth doun
to generatiō. Such is thē the bleſſing
of God from which as from a ſpring al
mākinde is deriued. And we ought not
onli to conſider it in a generalty but in
euery one particularly: for we are frutfull
or barraine touching the begettīg
of iſſue, according as god poures forth
his bleſſing and power on ſome, and
withholdeth it from other ſome. But
when it is ſayd Luc. 23. that bleſſed ſhall
be barraine women that ſhal not conceiue.
This is not ſpoken ſymply as
though a woman were to be accompled
happy in that ſhe bringeth not forth
children, for rather therin is the lacke
of the bleſſing of God wherof we ſpak:
but our Lorde Ieſus ſpeaketh there of
the dreadfull Iudgement of God which
ſhuld come vpon the Iews, ſo y• then
the barrain womē ſhould be happy in
cōpariſō of others which ſhuld not only
feele their own miſery in their own
propre bodies: but alſo their chyldrens.

To be ſhort, ſeeing this ſheweth an extremity
of diſpaire to wiſh moūtaynes
to fall on them, to curſe their iſſue, Ieſus
Chriſt ſheweth that the Iewes ſhal
feele that they haue not had to do with
a mortal mā but with the liuing God.
         
         
            10
            
               There is no reſpect of perſons
vvyth God.
               2. Epheſi. 6. Colloſſ. 3.
               Vnto vvhome ſhall I haue regarde
but to the poore and lovvly of ſpirit,
and trembling at my vvordes.
               Eſay. 66.
            
            WHen we reade y• God accepteth
not nor hath reſpecte of perſons:
that is not to ſay y• he hath no regard
to mē, as though he wer careleſſe
of thē: but by thys maner of ſpeaking
we muſt vnderſtand that he loketh on
y• cleanneſſe of the hart, & on ye inward
innocēcy, & that he regardeth not thoſe
things which bleare the eies of men, &
are cōmonly eſtemed of them, as race,
country, dignity, riches, honor, beauty
& other lyke things. Alſo he hath no reſpect
vnto ye cōtrary thyngs which procure
diſdain & ſōtimes hate, as pouerti,

lowe and baſe ſtate. And this hapneth
ofteneſt in Iudgement, where affections
ouerthwartly reigne, whiche are
conceyued by reſpect of perſons. They
that are in any dignity flatter themſelues,
as though God ſhould ſauor them
for ſuch corruption, and think that the
little or pore ones cannot be ſo worthy
as they, that God ſhould voutchſafe to
caſt his eyes on thē to take their part:
but of what eſtate or cōdition, of what
country or kindred, ſoeuer mē be, they
ſhall bee pleaſing vnto God that feare
him and do that is right.
            Now when it is ſayd that god loketh
vpon the poore, and lowely, it is
not meante that he hath more reſpect
vnto the perſon, but to the truth that
is in the perſon whiche canne not bee
in hym but throughe the goodneſſe of
God. So he hath regard to that that is
his and not to that that men can haue
of themſelues. In this place of Eſay the
falſe opinion that men conceyue of the
ſeruyce of God is ouerthrowen in aſmuchas
they ſuppoſe that ceremonies
and outewarde, obſeruaunces are

much worth of themſelues: but God
careth not awhit for them. When mē
think to appeace & cōtent him by ſuch
ſhewes he rather caſteth his eyes on
hartes throwen down, & trembling at
hys woorde, wherebye hee ſheweth
openlye howe wee muſte beehaue
oure ſelfe to becōme acceptable vnto
God, to weete, ſo that al our powers,
& all our ſenſes be ordred to geue true
obedience vnto God, and that we attribute
nothyng vnto oure ſelues by
fonde preſumption: for the nature of
our fayth is to obey God, and cauſeth
him whē he ſpeaketh to vs, to be heard
of vs attentiuely and quyetly.
         
         
            11
            
               Thou arte not a God that loueſt
iniquitye.
               Pſalme. 5.
               He hardeneth vvhom he vvyll.
               Roman. 9.
            
            DAued in thys fyfth pſalme ſetteth
forth a confort to al the faythful, &
geues thē councel how to behaue
them ſelues as often as their enemies
cruelly perſecute them, and gylefully,
and violently oppreſſe them. Hys aduiſe

is that they ſhould haue recourſe
to the defence of God, whoe will not
fayle to repreſſe in good time, all their
crueltye. And ſeyng it is ſo that ryght
and equitye are pleaſyng vnto him, it
can not otherwiſe be but that he wold
take vengeance of all wicked and vnryghteous
men. For howe can it be y•
ſuch ſhoulde auoyde hys Iudgement,
and abyde vnpunyſhed, ſith he is the
Iudge of the world? For hys offyce is
to deſtroye all the wycked, for he hateth
all wyckedneſſe, and hath already
prepared a reward for the proud. And
although he deferre the punyſhment
and vengeance for a whyle, yet he wil
at laſte goe vp into hys Iudgemente
ſeate, & will openly declare that he is
a iuſte Iudge enemy to the wicked & a
frend to the good and ryghteous.
            Now then to agree thys place with
that other which ſayth, God hardens
whom he wyll, there nedeth none other
doctryne but that whiche maye
bee gathered out of thys ſentence, to
weete, that God hateth all iniquitye,
that is to ſaye, althoughe he woorke

by Satan and by the wycked, & vſeth
their iniquitye to execute hys Iudgementes:
Yet he is not author of ſinne,
neyther doth ſynne pleaſe hym, for alwayes
he ſetteth before hym a iuſte
& holy purpoſe, ſo that he condemneth
& puniſheth righfully & Iuſtly thoſe y•
he dryueth by hys ſecrete prouydence,
whether it ſeemeth good vnto hym.
Verely he hardeneth whom he wyll,
yet is there no vnryghteouſneſſe in
hym, for he doth nothyng but y• which
is ryghteouſly done. And not only he
foreſeeth the ruyne of the wicked: but
alſo theyr fall is appoynted by hys
councell and will. As Salomon ſayeth.
Prouerb. 16. that not onely the
deſtruction of the vnryghteous and
proude was knowen before: but alſo
they were appoynted to perdition, euen
as God by hys bountye and mercye
keepeth the faythfull, and ſuffereth
not the deuill to haue power on
them, nor them to be ſuppreſſe wyth
ſynne. So alſo, he doth not only geue
ouer thoſe and denyes them his grace

whom he wil puniſhe: but alſo he blindeth
them and geueth them ouer into
a reprobate ſenſe, deliueryng them
to the power of the deuill. Shall we
then attribute vnto God any thyng
at all in euyll woorkes bycauſe that
if he denyed not hys grace, no man
ſhoulde bee geuen into a reproued
ſenſe? It is certayne that the wicked
are geuen into a reprobate ſenſe
not only by the ſufferyng of God: but
it commeth to paſſe through hys iuſte
Iudgement, & hys vpryght order that
the wycked are vexed by thys rage, aſwel
through their own concupiſcence,
as by the force of the deuill. Yet we
muſt not lay any fault on God, for the
rootes of ſynne ar ſtil remayning in a
ſynner. Therfore, when we finde ſuch
ſentences in the Scripture, that God
hymſelf blyndeth or hardeneth ye hart
of man, they aſſigne not the begynning
vnto God, neyther do they make
hym author of euil, ſo as y• fault ought
to bee imputed vnto him. It is ſayd
that God geues ouer the reprobate to
diuerſe deſyres, is thys to ſaye that he

depraueth or corrupteth their heart?
Not ſo, for the reaſon why the hart of
man is ſubiect to froward deſyres, is
foraſmuch as it was already corrupt
and faulty. Moreouer it is ſayd that
God blyndeth and hardeneth. May a
man ſay therfore that he is the author
or mynyſter of ſynne? God forbyd, but
rather by thys meanes he taketh vengeance
and punyſheth ſynnes, & that
he doth Iuſtly wythout doyng them
wrong, in aſmuch as they haue refuſed
to be ruled by hys ſpryte. It followeth
then that the ſpryng of ſynne is
not in God, neyther may the fault bee
imputed to hym as thoughe he tooke
pleaſure in euel doyng. Thus it booteth
man nothyng to haſt with God
endeuoryng to lay hys faultes and offences
on hym. And thys is the reaſon
whatſoeuer euyll ther is, it procedeth
from the euyll appetite of men.
         
         
            12
            
               Hys mercyes are aboue all hys
vvorkes.
               Pſalm. 145.
               He ſhevveth mercy to vvhō he vvil.
               Roman. 
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
WE haue already ſene that God is
no waye beholdyng or bound to
any creature, he is free in al hys
wylls and workynges, no man hath
geuen vnto hym to prouoke hym to
recompence. If he reccaue to mercy,
and if he ſaue, it is of hys mere goodneſſe,
as alſo yf he condemne he hath
a iuſte cauſe to do it. He hath mercye
then on whom he will, and not on all,
he offereth hys grace to all, but all are
not made partakers of hys grace: but
yet hys bountye & mercy is ſtretched
ouer al his workes, that is to ſay, God
not onely of hys mercye and fatherly
bountuouſneſſe forgeueth ſynnes: but
alſo vſeth liberality indifferently towardes
al, as he maketh hys ſunne to
ſhyne vpon the good and euil. The reprobate
ar among the works of God,
in aſmuch as he formed their bodyes
and their ſoules. Althoughe therefore
the remyſſion of ſynnes be a treaſure
hydden from the wycked & proud: Yet
their iniquitye letteth not God from
ſpreadyng hys mercyes and bountyes
largely vpon thē alſo. But in ye meane

tyme theſe vnthankfull ones ſwallow
down ye liberalitye of God not taſting
or felyng it at all: Only the beleuyng
know what it is to enioye the grace &
fauour of God, as it is ſayd in the. 34.
Pſalme. Drawe you nere to hym and bee you
lyghtened & your faces ſhall not be aſhamed.
See and taſte howe ſwete the Lorde is. And
moreouer ſeing it is ſo y• our offences
& ſynnes, wrap al the worlde in Gods
curſe, his mercy likewyſe both ſtretch
euē to brute beaſtes which he helpeth.
         
         
            13
            
               God tempteth no man.
               Iacob 1.
               God tempted Abraham.
               Geneſis. 2
                     •
                  .
            
            IT is an eaſy thyng to agree theſe
two places, if we vnderſtand, what
difference ther is betwene plucking
that out which is hyd within ye hearts,
and ſtyrring the hartes inwardly to
naughtye deſyres. When Sainte
Iames ſayth that God tempteth none
it is to the end that no man ſhoulde
laye hys ſynne vppon an other, and
muche leſſe vpon God, and the reaſon
followeth, that God is not tempted

to doe euyll: But euery one is
tempted when he is drawen & takē by
the bayte of his owne concupiſcence.
He treateth then of inward temptations
which be nothing but vnruly appetites
that ſtyrre vs to ſynne. Thys
then is very well ſayd that God is not
y• author of ſuch temptations bycauſe
they ryſe from the corruption of oure
nature. Thys doctryne is ſet forth bicauſe
it is a very cōmon thing among
men to lay els wher the fault of euils
which they commyt: Yea, & they ſticke
not to charge God with it, wherein
they ſhew themſelues the very ſonnes
of their father Adam that ſayd, the woman
that thou gaueſt me diſceyued me. Thē
we ar brought, backe to the confeſſing
of our own fault and ſinne, to the end
that we ſhould not put God in oure
place as though he hymſelf dyd moue
vs to ſynne. We may not therfore remoue
our offences from vs to others,
ſeyng that we haue & carry the roote
in our own concupiſcence. For althoughe
Sathan make vs taſte hys
poyſon, and his blaſtes kyndle euil

deſyres in vs: Yet are we not dryuen
to ſynne by any outward conſtraynt,
but our fleſhe ſtyrreth vs, and we of
our own accord obey the intycementes
of it. Thys notwythſtanding ſhal
not let vs to ſaye that God hath hys
manner of tempting, as he tempted
Abraham, y• is to ſaye, he broughte him
to a true profe to ſearch the fayth of
hys ſeruaunte to the quicke. Thys
oughte to be moſte manyfeſt, ther are
alſo outward remptations which are
ſent vs of God to proue our pacience
and to trye our fayth by offryng vs
ſome occaſion to make oure mynde
knowen.
         
         
            14
            
               No man euer ſavve God.
               Iohn. 1.
               I ſavve the Lord face to face.
               Geneſis. 32.
            
            THys ſentence that no man euer
ſaw God muſt not be vnderſtanded
onely of the outwarde ſyghte
which is wyth bodily eyes: But alſo
generally, that as God dwelleth in a
light that can not be attayned to, ſo alſo
he can not be knowen but in hys

ſonne Ieſus Chriſt who is hys liuely
Image. God whiche was before as it
were hyd in hys ſecret, and profounde
glory, became as it were viſible in Ieſus
Chriſt. And ſo when the ſonne is
called the liuely Image of the father,
that belongeth to the particular benefyte
of the newe teſtament. And when
it is added the only Sonne, whiche is
in the boſome of his father, the ſame
hath told it thee, it is ſhewed how God
is manifeſted in the Goſpell and what
difference there is betwene the olde
fathers and vs, and howe we bee in
higher degree than they▪ as S. Paule
ſheweth. 2. Corin. 3. that there is no more a
veyle nowe as there was in olde tyme vnder
the lawe. But God is openly behelde in
the face of Ieſus Chriſt, not that the
auncient fathers were withoute the
knowledge of God, among which the
Prophetes euen at thys daye beare a
torch before vs to lyght vs: but in cō
               pariſon
of vs they had but ſmal ſparkes
of the true lyghte, and we at thys
day be lyghted with a full lyght. Now
as touching that, that is ſayd of Iacob

that he ſawe the Lord face to face, it is
very true that he had but a little taſte
of the glorye of God: Yet was it not
without cauſe that this holy patriarke
dyd ſet forth thys viſion aboue all the
other in which God had not ſo manyfeſtly
appeared vnto hym: Yet notwythſtandyng
in compariſon of the
bryghtneſſe of the Goſpell yea or of
the lawe it was only a little ſparke or
a very dymme beame. Iacob thē ſawe
the Lord of an vnwonted faſhion, ſo
he ſpeaketh in reſpect of other reuelations
that he had, and not in compariſon
of the apparaunce of the Goſpell
which we haue at thys day. If we wil
ſpeak of an excellent viſiō, ther is ſcarcelye
any ſuch as Moyſes viſiō which
he obtayned in the hyll, which is ſpoken
of in Exo. 33 and yet God pronounceth
expreſſely thou mayeſt not ſee my face,
only thou ſhall ſe me behynd. He ſignifyeth
by thys ſimilitude that the tyme of
the ful and cleere reueling was not yet
come. But now, let ye face of Chriſt be
takē frō vs, & ther is no meane wherby
any man be he neuer ſo excellent,

may ſee God, the ſygnes in which of
old he ſhewed hymſelf, haue declared,
that the loke of man can not pearce to
the beholding of God, whoſe beyng is
incomprehenſible, as when he appeared
in a cloude, in flame, and ſmoke.
         
         
            15
            
               The vvicked ſhall not ryſe in
iudgement.
               Pſalme. 1.
               VVe ſhall all ryſe to iudgement.
               1 Corint. 15.
            
            THere is very great diuerſity betwene
theſe two ſentences, for in
the fyrſt Pſalme ther is nothing
ſpoken of the laſte Iudgement, nor of
that ryſing vp, which ſhalbe when the
ſone of God ſhal come to Iudge both
the quicke and the dead. The Prophets
mynde is to ſhew that the ſtate
of the happy lyfe is grounded vpon a
good conſcience, wherefore it is no
meruayll if the wicked be by and by
diſappointed of the felicitie which they
them ſelfe haue imagined. They haue
their pleaſure in thys world, and they
tryumphe whyleſt al things are ful of
trouble here beneath, as theues ſkirmyſhing

in the foreſt & woodes when
the prouoſt Marſhall is farre of from
them: Yet things ſhal not be alwayes
ſo dyſordered, but when they ſhalbee
broughte into ſome good order, then
their pleaſures ſhalbe taken frō them,
ſo that they ſhall feele that they were
dronke when they thoughte they had
bene happy. The wicked then & proud
are pronounced to bee myſerable for
aſmuche as to bee bleſſed, a man muſt
haue a good cōſcience. It is very true,
that beefore they bee ſearched to the
quycke, al thyngs laugh on them, but
the whileſt none deſerueth to be called
or accompted bleſſed, except he bee
helde vp by a faſt ſoundneſſe of heart,
when the good and iuſte be tryed, thē
at length men know which is the faſt
and true pureneſſe. Thus when it is
ſayd that the proude and wicked, ſhall
not ryſe vp in Iudgement, the meanyng
is, they cannot ſtand vpright or
abyde it when they are examined by
the Iuſt Iudgement of God: And
withal, thys alſo is true, that the wicked
ſhal riſe againe in the laſt Iudgement

of Chriſt aſwel as the good: but
in a diuerſe ſorte as it is ſayd. Iohn. 5.
the houre ſhall cōme, in which all they that ar
in the graues ſhall heare the voyce of the ſonne
of God, and they that ſhall haue done well ſhal
goe into the reſurrection of lyfe, and they that
ſhall haue done euill into the reſurrection of
condemnation. True it is that in the Articles
of our fayth there is no mention
made of y• riſing of the wicked neither
of their eternall death bycauſe y• 
               
                  •
               rede
which contayneth the ſayd Articles is
a briefe ſumme of the faith of ye Chriſtians
wherin nothyng is intreated of
but that which ſerueth to confort the
choſen, ſhewing them the good things
which God hath prepared for them. It
was made to quiet the conſciences of
the faythfull in y• they haue wherwith
to mayntayne and ſtablyſhe themſelues
in y• hope of their ſaluation, which
the wicked ſhal haue no part of Brieflye,
the reſurrection of the wicked is
not to ſet them in better ſtate: But rather
to make them altogether cōfounded,
and accurſed for euer more. Howbeit
the power of God ſhal appeare in

their reſurrection when he ſhall punyſhe
euerlaſtyngly both their bodies
and ſoules, as alſo it ſhalbe ſene in the
riſyng agayne of the good and Iuſte,
when he ſhall make them wholly and
continually bleſſed.
         
         
            16
            
               Ieſus Chriſt forbyddeth vs to bee
angrye.
               Mathe. 5.
               Dauid ſayeth be angrye.
               Pſalme. 4.
            
            IEſus Chriſt leadyng men backe to
his authoritye which of ryght ought
to be ſet before al,Pau. Eph. 4▪
                auncient and repulſyng
the commō opinion of yt ſcribes,
ſetteth forth three degrees of condemnation
beſyde the violence of handes,
ſignifying therby that thys decree of
God, thou ſhalt not kill, doth not onely
reſtrayne the handes: But alſo all affections
that ar contrary to brotherly
loue, and he openly calleth them manquellers
which ſhal but be angry with
their neyghboures, or that ſhall arrogantly
mocke them, or that ſhall by
any outragious woorde offend them.

And althoughe he condemneth to the
torment of fyer only thoſe whiche vſe
agaynſt theyr neyghboures open reproches
and dyſpytes: Yet he doth not
exclude wrath and anger from thys
payne: But alludyng vnto earthlie
Iudgementes he doth wytneſſe that
God will be alſo the Iudge of ſecrete
and hydden anger to punyſh it. Now
when Saint Paule: Eph. 4. ſayth, bee
angry and ſinne not, whether he haue
therin alledged the teſtimonye of the
Pſalme eyther ells that he dyd only allude
therunto followyng the greeke
tranſlation. Howſoeuer it be, he hath
applyed thys ſentence very well to his
purpoſe: for he ſheweth therby what
a fault it is for men to ſpewe vp their
coller on other mē, ſeyng in them ſelf
they haue matter ynough to be angry
with themſelues to kepe them from
offendyng other, wherfore he woulde
they ſhould rather frett inwardly and
exercyſe their coller agaynſt themſelues,
for there is cauſe ynough for thē
to be angry and to deale dyſpytefully
with themſelues. And foraſmuch as

the infidels that haue no feare of God
nor any quicke feeling of hym runne
hedlong at al auenture. They ar warned
(if at leaſt wiſe ther be yet any hope
of helpe in thē) to cry & trēble wtin thē
ſelues. For hereof c̄ometh the preſuptiō
and foole hardineſſe of all the proud
through which they ſtick not to make
warre wyth God. They are dronke
with a vayne and fond aſſurance, and
they hardē themſelues with their own
wyll, when forgetting god and themſelues,
they follow at that, to whiche
their fond and lewd ſenſuality driueth
them. The medecine to make them ſin
no more in thys behalfe is that they
wake out of their depe ſlombre, and begyn
to ſtirre and tremble in themſelues.
So when they ſhall haue wel ſhaken
of their ſluggiſhneſſe the deſire to
ſinne ſhall ceaſſe in them, for whence
commeth it that the vnbeleuing ſorte
deale ſo ſpitefully with the good and
ſimple, and that they rayſe vppe ſo
many troubles and ſtormes? but hereof,
that they are to wel at eaſe in them
ſelf. Doutleſſe by our anger and indignation

we offend God, fyrſt, when we
are angry for euery lyght cauſe, and
ofte without a cauſe, or being moued
by the wronges which are done to vs
particularly. Again being once moued
to coller we paſſe beyond our bownds
and runne foorth withoute meaſure.
Laſtly we ſtirre vp that anger againſt
our brethren which we ſhuld ſtyrre vp
againſt our ſelues, & againſt our own
offences: but the true tempering of a
lawfull coller which cauſeth vs not to
offend is when we ſeeke the matter of
angre rather in our ſelf, than in others
bendyng our angre agaynſt our owne
vices. As touching others we muſt be
angrye wyth their faultes rather than
with their perſones, and we muſt not
conceiue diſpleaſure of faultes and offences
committed agaynſt vs: but rather
the zeale of the glory of the Lorde
ought to enflame vs to angre. To conclude,
let our anger be ſo moued in vs
that when nede is it maye be appeaſed
but let it not bee myngled wyth the
troubleſome affections of the fleſh.
         
         
            
            17
            
               Eye for eye and toth for toth.
               Exod. 21
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               If any man ſtryke thee on the right
cheke gyue him the other alſo.
               Math. 5.
            
            IN this place of Exodus, God geueth
a Lawe for Iudges and Magiſtrats
to the ende they might puniſhe with a
lyke payne the wrongs and diſpightes
that are doone. As it is reaſon that
hys bloude ſhoulde bee ſpilte that hath
ſpilt bloud. Likewiſe it is reaſon that
he that hath pulled oute another mannes
eye ſhould haue his eye pulled out
alſo, and ſo in like caſe his toth. But bicauſe
then that vnder thys cloke euery
one wold auenge himſelf and reward
wyth like, the Lorde Ieſus dooth geue
warning that althoughe it was decreed
that Iudges ſhoulde repreſſe the violence
of the Wycked and Proude
and punnyſhe it: yet euerye manne
oughte patientlye to endure the priuate
wronges that ſhoulde be doone
to them. Butte by thys ſentence,

               if any Man ſtrike you on the ryght cheke, offre
hym the other alſo, the Lorde Ieſus ment
not to ouerthrow the law appoynted
by hys father, but only ſo faſhion the
heartes of hys faythful to a meaſure &
ſoftneſſe, to the ende that when they
ſhoulde be once or twice ſtricken they
ſhould not be diſcoraged therwtall. It is
true that Ieſus Chriſte wythholdeth
as wel our handes from reuenge as
our heartes: but when any man with
out outrage and reuenge can defende
hymſelfe, and ſo keepe his goodes that
no man wrong hym, the woordes of
Chriſte forbydde not ſuch a man peaceably
and ſobrely to tourne away the
violence which he ſeeth nere vnto him.
A man may caſtlye thinke that Chriſt
would not exhorte hys faithful to whet
or kyndle foorther the malice of them
that already burne to much with a ragyng
appetite to hurt. Now to offre or
gyue the other cheeke after that one
blow is receyued at a proud mannes
hand what wer it els but to moue him
ye more? Euery one mai eaſily know at
what mark our lord Ieſus ſhoteth, y• is

to ſay that ende of one fraye wil be
the beginning of another, and therefore
the faythfull all the tyme of their lyfe,
muſt abyde diuerſe diſpites and many
iniuries by continuall degrees, when
they haue bene once harmed. By thys
leſſon he wil haue them faſhioned and
brought to ſuffre, that in ſuffring patiently
they may learne to be patient.
         
         
            18
            
               Thou vvhen thou prayeſt goe into
thy chambre.
               Math. 6.
               My houſe ſhal be called the houſe
of prayer.
               Eſai. 56.
            
            OF olde tyme the Lord wold be called
vpon onlye by the Iewes, and
therfore he had appoynted a temple
to them only, as Saint Paul ſayth
in the 6. to the Romanes. To Iſraell belongeth
the choyſe, the glory, the agreementes,
the decrees of the Lawe, the ſeruice of God, and
the promyſes. The temple then was placed
among them by a ſingular priuiledge.
Now that which is ſaied by Eſay
agreed with the circumſtance of the
tyme: for he foretelleth the callyng

of the Gentiles, for he promiſeth that
God ſhall not onely cauſe hys temple
to recouer the former magnificence:
but alſo that all nations ſhal aſſemble
ther and al the world ſhal agree in the
true religion. And til the time of chriſt
the temple was truly the place or houſe
of prayer, to wete, ſo long as the lawe
had force with her ſhadowes. And it began
to be a houſe of praier vnto al nations
when the doctrine of the Goſpell
was blowne abrode, by which al the
world hath bene vnited in agreemente
of fayth. Now then ſince all the difference
that was betwene the Iewes &
the Gentiles is at the laſt taken away,
the entry into the houſe of God is open
to al men, of what country ſoeuer thei
be. For the Chirch is ſo enlarged that
it ſtretcheth through all the regions of
the earthe: for all people are called to
pray and to cal vpon the name of God
But when Chriſt ſayth, that when we
would make our prayer we ſhould go
into our ſecret chambre, it is to teach
vs to 
                  〈◊〉
                the example of the Hipocrits
and not the commune places where

the faithful come together to pray. For
the Hipocrites are wont to pray in the
aſſemblies and in the endes of the ſtretes
bicauſe they would be ſene of men.
They groſly and ſhamfully prophane
the name of God in that they praye openly
or rather make ſhew of praying
bycauſe they would be prayſed of men.
Therefore he commaundeth thoſe that
be his to entre into their cloſets if they
wyl pray as they ought, and make ſuch
a praier as may be pleaſing vnto God.
It is true that we are commaunded in
ſondry places of the Scripture to pray
vnto God in the middeſt of a great aſſembly
and to geue hym thanckes before
all the people, and that to the end
to witneſſe our faith or to acknowlege
our ſelues vnto him, and alſo to moue
others to doe the lyke, neyther dooth
Chriſte tourne vs awaye from ſuche a
zeale and exerciſe: but onlye hee dooth
warne vs to haue God before our eies
as often as we purpoſe to pray. Thys
is not then, to ſay, that we ſhould flye
from men and that we cannot rightly
pray except we wtdraw our ſelf a part:

for he ſpeaketh by compariſon ſignifieng
that we ſhould ſeeke ſome ſolytary
place, rather than conet the preſence of
men to ſee vs pray. To be ſhorte whether
any man pray alone, or before others,
he muſte be contented with the
onely witneſſe of God, as thoughe he
were wtdrawen into ſome place apart.
         
         
            19
            
               I am the Lord and there is none other
forming the light & creating the
darkneſſe making peace & vvorking
euell, I am the Lord doing al things.
               Eſai. 45.
               VVhen the Deuyl ſpeaketh lies, he
ſpeaketh that that is hys ovvn, for he
is a 
                     〈◊〉
                   and the father of lying.
               Ieremy. 8.
            
            IN thys place of Eſay Godds prouidence
is ſpoken of by which al thynges
are gouerned both the good and 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
the mery & ſad. Here al men are warned
(wheras before they did aſſigne all
thinges to fortune & to their Idolls) to
acknowledge the power and ſtength
of God to the ende they ſhoulde yelde

to him the gouernment and glory of al
things. If thys be required euen at the
Pagans handes, let vs conſidre a little
what ſhame it ought to be to thē that
beare the name of Chriſtians to take
from him his power and to ſpoyle him
of his ſtrength and glory to the end to
giue it ouer vnto diuerſe gouernours
which thei themſelues haue forged after
their owne apetit. For God is not
acknowledged or aduoutched for God
when men attribute vnto hym a bare
name onely: but when all authority is
geuen vnto hym. Hereby we may ſee
that when it is ſayed that God is hee
that maketh peace and createth il, it is
not to be vnderſtode that he is the doer
or autor of naughty things, and the opoſition
which is heere ſhelues it more
plainly, to wete, this woord peace, for
there is a contrariety herein betwene
proſperity & aduerſity, for a mā ought
to vnderſtād by peace proſperity as alſo
by ye al aduerſity, to wete, war famine,
& al other lyke things, wher as if
ther were a cōtrariety betwene iuſtice &
euil this error might haue ſōe colour:

but the contrariety that is here ſhewes
veri wel another ſelfe, to were, that ther
is neither proſperity nor aduerſity, neither
good nor euil but that proceadeth
frō y• hād of God of whō we cannot ſay
that he is author of the fault but of the
payne. There are reſtimentes 
                  •
               now in
the holy Scripture which ſhew plainly
that the Lord ſhal 
                  •
               aue the miſcheuous
and proud to chaſten vs by them: yet
for all that we cannot ſay that he breatheth
into them the 
                  〈◊〉
                but he vſeth it
or ſerues his cour
                  •
               e with it or correct
vs, & therin doth the 
                  〈◊〉
                Iudge.
So we may conclude that God is the
only author of al things, that is to ſay,
proſperitye and adue
                  •
               ſity are ſente by
him (although he vſe the hand of men)
to the ende that nothing be attributes
to forrane or to any other cauſe.
            But euen as God tempreth not nor
ſtirreth any perſone to euel dooing as
he himſelf is not tempted to euel, ſo alſo
the Diuel burneth with a raging deſire
of doing il. God wil vſe hym & hys
wickedneſſe to proue & try vs: yet the
wickedneſſe is roted in y• ſprite of y• Diuel,

and God hath not breathe 
                  〈◊〉
                into
him: he is called a liar and a murtherer
and that he hath of his owne, he is accuſtomed
to lie and can do nothing els
but forge lies, with craft and guile, but
that he hath of hymſelfe and not of the
fyrſt creation of God: for when y• Lord
Ieſus maketh hym the workman and
author of lies he doth manifeſtly ſeparate
him from God and makes him al
together contrary to God, ſo much we
may wel ſay of al the wicked and reprobate
that are obſtinate in their wickedneſſe
God hath in no wiſe wrought y•
euel or miſchef that is in them.
         
         
            20
            
               Honour thy father and thy mother
and he that ſhall curſe his Father &
Mother let hym die the deathe.
               Exod. 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               If any com to me & hate not his Father
and Mother he cannot be my Diſciple.
               Luke. 14.
            
            THIS cōmaūdement is ſet forth
in the law of God that we ſhoulde
honor our fathers & mothers, and
this cōmaundementt requires that the

children be lowly toward their fathers
obey them, reuerence them, and helpe
them, as they are bound, and to be at
their commaundement. The true loue
is there required without which there
can be no true obedience, and as the
promiſe of lōg life is made vnto thoſe
that obei their fathers and mothers, in
the curſe is pronoūces againſt ſuch as
curſe or ſpeake ill or are ſtubborne towarde
their parentes, yea they are adiudged
to Death by the lawe of God.
Exod. 21. Leuit. 10. Deut. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                and thoughe
they ſhuld eſcape the hand of men▪ yet
God wyll reuenge 
                  〈◊〉
                in ſome ſorte although
he 
                  •
               arry long, as we may ſee it
by cōmon experience. For how many
of ſuch people die either in the warres
either in bralles, or are eueri day geuē
into the hands of the hangman or dye
ſhamefully before their age, or in ſome
other ſort: ſo that a man may perceaue
that it is Goddes hande that maketh
them dy wt ſhame. And if it com to pas
that they eſcape to the old & later age:
yet do they but pine away bicauſe thei
are deſtitute of the bleſſing of God.

Then ſeing the loue of Parentes is ſo
muche commended vnto vs, yea and
that in ſuch ſorte that whoſoeuer doth
agaynſt it eyther by rebellion, eyther
by diſobediēce, or by ſtriking, is adiudged
to Death by the certaine decree of
God. How may this agree with it, that
a man ſhuld hate his Father and Mother
to follow the ſonne of God. Our
Lord Ieſus cōmaūdeth vs not to take
away and put of the affections of men,
he doth not forbid vs to loue our parē
               tes
as we ought, but he doth decree,
that all the mutuall loue y• is betweene
men ſhould kepe his owne due ordre to
the ende that the feare of God ſhoulde
be farre aboue all. Let the houſe band
loue his wife, the wife hir houſeband,
the father his ſonne, the ſōne his father
ſo as for al yt, the loue of man beareth
not the reuerence that is due vnto our
Lord Ieſus. For if among men themſelfe
euen where the line of frendſhyp
is ſtrayghteſt, there are ſome aboue others,
is it not reaſon y• the ſōne of God
ſhould be placed before all. And in very
dede this is not a ſufficiēt acknowled
                  •
               
               
to conſidre what it is to be receaued among
the Diſciples of Ieſus Chriſt if
the price of thys honour and dignitye
haue not the force in vs to ſubdue and
repreſſe al the affections of our fleſhe.
It now any man thinke that thys maner
of ſpeach, to hate his Father is to
hard, yet it is one ſelf ſenſe, as if he ſaid
if the loue of our fathers and mothers
let vs from following Chriſt we muſt
Manfully reſiſt it.
         
         
            21
            
               Hebr. 6.
               They that haue bene once illumynated,
and haue taſted the heauenlye
gyft, and bene partakers of the holye
Ghoſt & haue taſted the good vvord
of God and the povver of the vvorld
to cōme, it is vnpoſſible they ſhould
be renevved by repentaunce if they
fall back.
               VVhoſoeuer ſhall call vpon the
name of God ſhal be ſaued.
            
            
               WHEN God pronounceth hys
threatnings vnto vs and is wylling
to aſtonne vs wyth them, he
pryckes vs forward as ſluggiſh & ſlow
aſſes to ſeke our ſaluatiō. And in theſe
Iudgements he ſetteth before vs dredful
ſigns, as though the ſūne wer altogether
dimmed wt darkneſſe, & y• Mone
tourned into blood, and al that is here
below mingled and confounded. And
alſo after that he hath ſo filled the heauen
and earth with darkeneſſe, yet for
all that he ſheweth vs the meane how
we mai openly ſee our ſaluation ſhine
before our eyes, that is by calling vpō
hys name. If God dyd but ſimply promiſe
to ſaue vs, yet that were a greate
mater: but behold here a more excellēt
and farre greater thing, when he promiſeth
this ſaluatiō among diuers bottomleſſe
depthes and gulfes of Death.
When al thynges ſhalbe confounded,
and that ther ſhal be on euery ſide fear
of death, only let vs cal vpon the goodneſſe
of God and we ſhal be ſaued. Although
therfore ther be a gulf of euels
to ſwalow in y• pore ſiner, yet a remedi

is ſet before him to eſcape. This ſentence
is generall, for without exceptiō
our good God receaueth all men vnto
hym, and by this meanes calleth them
to ſaluation. And ſeing that no man is
ſhut oute from calling vpon God, the
gate of ſaluation is open vnto all, and
ther is nothing but our own vnbeleefe
that letteth vs to entre. But although
it be ſayde al, yet notwithſtanding we
muſt vnderſtand only thoſe vnto whō
God ſheweth himſelf by his goſpel. As
in the calling vpō him ther is a certainty
of ſaluation, euen ſo we muſt be reſolued
that without this calling on the
name of God wee are more than wretches
and caſtawayes. In the meane
tyme the calling is not ſeparated from
fayth ſeeing it is grounded vpon fayth
onely: but the Praier of an Hypocrite
and of a diſpiſer deſerueth not to be called
the calling vpon the name of God.
Now to the ende that thys ſentence of
the Epiſtle to the Hebrues maye not
ſeeme to take away that which is here
ſet foorth, we muſt marke the circumſtaunces
thereof, and how the name of

God cannot be called vpon by them
which after they haue taſted heauenly
thynges becōme obſtinate, and of
what fal y• Apoſtle ſpeaketh, to the end
that ſeme not ſtrange vnto vs which
he ſayth, it is vnpoſſible that they which fall
backe ſhoulde be renewed by repentaunce, let
vs vnderſtand then that there be two
ſortes of falles, one is perticular, the
other is general and vniuerſall. Whē
a man hath commytted one fault or
many, he is fallen from the ſtate of a
Chriſten man, then how many ſinnes
there are, ſo many failes ther are, and
from this fal a man may be rayſed vp
by repentaunce through the grace &
goodneſſe of God. But the Apoſtle
ſpeaketh not of thefte, of adulterye or
whoredome, of periurie, of ſlaughter,
or dronkenneſſe: but he noteth a general
tournyng backe or vniuerſall appoſtaſle
or fallyng from the Goſpell,
when the obſtinate ſynner offendeth
God, not only in one ſort: but wholly
forſaketh hys grace for euer. But yet
we muſt note y• graces of God, which
are there rehearſed: For what may a

man loke for at hys hand that turneth
backe from the word of the Lord, that
quencheth the lyght therof, that ſpoyleth
himſelf of the heauenly gyfte, and
forſaketh the partakyng of the holy
ghoſt? Nowe ſeyng that is to refuſe
God fully, it is alſo to ſhut vp his hart
wholly in ſuche ſorte as repentaunce
whiche is one of the heauenly gyftes
ſhoulde not haue power to enter, and
yt cannot chaunce to a man excepte he
ſinne againſt the holy ghoſt. And ſuch
a faulte is vnforgeueable, as Chriſt
hath pronounced. For he that tranſgreſſeth
the ſecond table and the fyrſt
by ignorance is not yet gylty of ſuch a
tournyng backe or fallyng from God.
And God taketh awaye hys grace
from none but from the reprobate,
that is to ſaye, in ſuche ſorte as he
leaueth them no hope remaynyng.
Then they that by their pryde and
obſtinate wyckedneſſe haue caſte of
the benefytes of God, with what repenta
                  •
               nce
can they at any tyme bee
touched?
         
         
            22
            
               
                  Of my ſelfe I iudge no man.
               Ierem. 8.
               The father hath geuen all Iudgement
to hys ſonne.
               Ioan. 5.
            
            FOR the good vnderſtandyng of
the fyrſt of theſe two ſentences we
muſt alſo loke on y• whiche Chriſt
ſayd before, making anſwer to his aduerſaries.
He ſaid to thē you iudge accordyng
to ye fleſhe, he reproued them
for y• they Iudged after y• froward vnderſtanding
of their fleſh or according
to the apparaunce of y• perſon. Nowe,
wher y• eyther affections & deſyres of
the fleſh raigne or the reſpect of y• perſon
cauſeth iudgement to be geuē, we
muſt in no ſort loke y• truth and equity
may haue place, & there where the ſpirite
ruleth not, the fleſhe cannot wel &
rightly iudge. And touching him, to
ſhew vnto his enemyes yt they be raſh
& led with a fierce & proude ſpirite, he
ſayth y• he iudgeth not folyſhly as they
do. His enemies toke vpon them to
great licence to iudge foliſhlye & raſhly,
& he y• whyleſt forbare to do y• offyce
of a iudge, although he myghte iudge

without doing them wrong, and yet
they could not abyde hym. But to the
end that it ſhould not ſeme that he geueth
vp the authoritye that was geuē
hym of hys father, he addeth farther,
and if I iudge my Iudgement is true. That
is to ſaye, that hys witneſſe deſerueth
well to be allowed. So, a man may
knowe what thys ſentence meaneth,
to we
                  •
               e, that the father hath geuen all
iudgement to hys ſonne, that is, that
the father gouerneth all the worlde in
the perſon of his ſonne, and exerciſeth
his iuriſdiction vnder the rule of him:
Not that the father as a priuate man
remayneth nowe idle in heauen without
medling with any thing: for thys
manner of ſpeaking is not ſo much in
reſpect of God as of men. The father
chaunged not hys ſtate at all when he
appoynted Chriſt to be Kyng, ruler, &
ſouerayne gouernour of heauen and
earth: For being in hys ſonne he worketh
in hym and by hym: But bycauſe
that when men wil clymbe vp to God
all their ſenſes by and by fayle them.
Therefore Ieſus Chriſt is ſet before

our eyes as the viſible Image of inuiſible
God. See now how a man muſt
agree theſe two places. Chriſt iudgeth
not hys aduerſaries folyſhlye as they
did iudge him proudly and ſtoutly and
yet he myght wel iudge them without
takyng any thyng in hand that belonged
not to hym: Yet he iudgeth al the
worlde as hys father hath appoynted
hym therunto. And we muſte not
ſeke the ſecretes of hygh places, ſeyng
God prouideth for oure weakeneſſe
when he ſheweth himſelf nere vnto vs
in the perſon of his ſonne. Whenſoeuer
there is any thyng to do touchyng
our ſtate, touchyng the gouernement
of al the world, and touchyng the heauenly
defence of our ſaluatiō, we muſt
direct our ſyght vpon Ieſus Chriſt ye
ſonne of God, as in dede al power is
geuen hym and the heauenly father
appeareth to vs in the face of hys
ſonne.
         
         
            23
            
               VVho is he that hath knovvē the
mynde of the Lord.
               Roma. 12.
               
                  But vve haue knovven the mynde
of Chriſt.
               1. Cor. 2.
            
            SAINT Paule ſpeakynge of the
predeſtination of God, ſheweth vs
that if men conſider it accordyng
to their owne vnderſtandyng they ar
therein altogether blynde. And a
man can not dyſpute of an vnknowē
thyng but by greate foolehardineſſe
and fonde ouerweenyng. Wherefore
men may not ryſe aboue the Oracles
and reuelations of God, for
howe maye a man knowe hys meanyng
and councell any farther than
thoſe thynges whyche by hym haue
beene reueled vnto vs. In that
caſe men can dyſcerne no more than
a blynde man in the darke. But
yet for all that oure fayth is not a
whyt ouerthrowen, it leaueth not to
make vs certayne of Goddes goodneſſe
towarde vs, ſeyng it proceadeth
not from the fyneneſſe of mans wyt:
But from the only lyghtenyng of the
holy ghoſt. For thys cauſe in the ſecond
Chapiter of the fyrſt to the Corrinthians
Saint Paule hauing ſhewed

that as the myſteryes of God doe
farre ſurmount the conceite of oure
vnderſtandyng, by and by after he
ioyneth thereunto, that the faythfull
vnderſtande and knowe the meaning
of the ſonne of God, bycauſe they haue
not receaued a ſpirite that is of thys
worlde, but the ſpirite that they haue
was geuē them of God, by which they
are taught y• mercye and goodneſſe of
hym which otherwiſe is comprehenſible.
Al faythful ſeruauntes know by ye
teachyng of the holy ghoſt, yt which is
farre aboue ye fleſhly ſenſe ſo that they
ſpeake boldly and freely as out of the
mouth of y• Lord. Wherfore euē as by
their own abilitye they cannot cōme
vnto y• knowledge of y• hygh myſteries
of God: ſo by the grace of y• holy ghoſt
they haue a certayn and cleere knowledge
of the ſame. Now the holy ghoſt
muſt go before & we muſte folowe, we
muſt ſtaye where he leaueth vs, & ther
we muſt ſet faſt our foote. But if any
man deſyre to know more than y• ſame
ſpirit hath opened, he ſhalbe euerpreſt
wt the infinite brightneſſe of his light.
         
         
            
            24
            
               The ſame is Helye.
               Mathe. 11.
               I am not Helias.
               Ioan. 1.
            
            ACcordyng to the true interpretation
of the Prophet Malachy Ieſus
Chriſt affyrmeth iuſtlye that
Iohn the Baptiſt is Helias, if you wil
receaue hym ſayth he the ſame is Helia
that ſhould cōme. He ſhewes howe
Iohn began to Preache the good tydynges
of the kingdome of God, that
is to ſay, in aſmuch as he was y• ſame
Helias that ſhoulde be ſent before the
face of God. Then Ieſus Chriſtes wil
is to haue thys fearefull commyng of
God that was celebrated by Malachy
acknowledged of y• Iewes ſeyng that
the ſame Helie that was there promiſed,
dyd then as it were the dutye of a
porter. But Iohn the Baptiſt alſo
ſpeaketh the truth in ſaying that he is
not Helia. The Iewes knewe by the
Prophecy of Malachye y• Helie ſhould
be as it were as a dayſtarre to ſhewe
the commyng of the Meſſias. In the
meane time they held this ouerthwart

opinion that the ſoule partyng forth
of one body, ſhould enter into the body
of another man. Bycauſe Malachye
ſayd that Helia ſhoulde bee ſent, they
thought that the ſame Helie that was
in y• tyme of kyng Achab ſhould cōme
agayne. Wherfore Iohn the Baptiſt
aunſwered ryghtly and trulye that he
was not Helia, for he ſpake and aunſwered
accordyng to theyr opinion.
         
         
            25
            
               Thoſe that he hath called he hath
alſo ſanctified.
               Roman. 8.
               Many are called but fevve are
choſen.
               Mathe. 20.
            
            IT will be an eaſye matter to agree
theſe two places, ſo we vnderſtand
that ther are two ſortes of callings,
one of the whiche is ſpoken of in the
eyght of the Romaynes, the other in y•
xx. of Mathew. Fyrſt then there is one
callyng which is effectuall that is the
dyſcoueryng of the eternall election,
whē God by y• myniſtery of his word
& the grace of his holy ſpirit declareth

vnto vs & maketh vs to know perfectly
y• he is our father. Here we haue not
to do only with y• outward preaching,
which ſhoulde but beate our eares except
y• the ſecond wer ioyned to it, y• is
to ſaye, the holy ghoſt whiche cauſeth
this calling to haue his effect. And thei
y• in this ſort be called be alſo ſanctifyed,
they, poſſeſſe ye free ryghteouſneſſe
which is in Ieſus Chriſt. They bee
ſanctified, they haue alſo a continuing
of Gods goodneſſe frō y• callyng vntyl
ye death▪ Ther is another ſort of calling
 wt which god calleth al 
                  〈◊〉
                by his goſpel.
Many infected & vncleane perſōs
preace in by force which though for a
whyle they occupye a place among others:
yet at y• laſt they ar driuen out, &
drawē to punyſhment. Not al they by
a great many y• be called, or bydden, or
y• haue ſome entry into y• Church, are
made pertakers of euerlaſtyng lyfe:
but only they whō y• ſonne of God ſhal
fynd prepared, & clad in ſuch a garmēt
as is worthye of the heauenly palace.
         
         
            26
            
               He is not the lyght.
               Ioan. 1.
               
                  He vvas the burnyng and ſhyning
lampe.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            IN both theſe places Iohn y• Baptiſt
is ſpoken of. Firſt when it is ſayd y•
Iohn was not ye light, that is to be vnderſtode
of y• lighte whiche doth geue
light to euery man cōmyng into the
world. Ieſus Chriſt only is that light,
who maketh euery one of vs to feele
ſome force of his clereneſſe. And true
it is y• as he is the eternal lighte: ſo he
hath a bryghtneſſe y• is natural to him
& is not takē frō any wher els: But rather
we ar ſent backe to y• experience y•
we al haue of it. Seing our lord Ieſus
maketh vs al partakers of his brightneſſe,
we muſt alſo cōfeſſe this honor
to belong to him alone, & generally al
mē ar here cōtayned. For we know, y•
mē haue thys ſingular to thē aboue al
liuing things y• they haue reaſon & vnderſtanding,
they carrye grauen in
their hartes the difference of good and
euil. There is no man therefore but
hath ſome ſyghte of thys great & euerlaſtyng
light. Thys cannot be ſayd of

Iohn the Baptiſte nor of any other
whoſoeuer he bee, of whom it is ſayd
ryghtly y• he is not the light, to the end
hys bryghtneſſe bee it neuer ſo greate
dymme not the clereneſſe of the glory
of God. For ſome did ſo ſticke to Iohn
y• Baptiſt that they made no accompt
of our Lord Ieſus: As if a man ſhould
be aſtonned with the ſight of the dawnyng
day, or of ſome little ſtarre, and
the whileſt voutchſafe not to turne his
eyes toward the ſunne.
            Nowe as touchyng the other ſentence,
it is alſo true that Iohn y• Baptiſte
was a burnyng and ſhynyng
lampe. Thys may be ſayd of al faythfull,
that they be lyghtes to the Lorde,
as Saint Paule calleth them. Ephe. 5.
and the reaſon is bicauſe they ar lightened
by hys ſpirite. And they haue
their eyes open not only for them ſelf:
but alſo to direct and guyde other into
the way of ſaluation. The Apoſtles
alſo haue caried the torche of the Goſpel
to dryue darkeneſſe out of y• world.
Although therfore the faythfull be decked
wyth this honorable title that they

are called lyghtes, and that inaſmuch
as they haue the word of lyfe and ſaluation,
they muſt ſhyne in the world
as lyghtes & torches: Yet Ieſus Chriſt
doth attribute thys particularly to his
Apoſtles and the miniſters of his Goſpell
bycauſe they carry a lanterne before
other to lead & to guyde thē. For
ſeing we be al blynd in the myddeſt of
darkeneſſe, God lyghteth vs by the
lyght of hys worde which is ſpoken to
vs by his miniſters: Yet he garniſheth
Iohn the Baptiſte particularly with
thys title of honour, bycauſe that by
his miniſtery, God gaue a much more
excellent lyght to hys Church.
         
         
            27
            
               There is but one good, and that is
God.
               Mark 10.
               A good man bryngeth forth good
out of the treaſure of hys hart.
               Luke. 6.
            
            IT is true that men be they neuer ſo
excellent cannot deſerue ſo honorable
a title as to be called good, no not
y• Angels. For they haue not one only

droppe of goodneſſe of themſelfe: But
they haue from God whatſoeuer they
haue y• is good. Beſyde, be it in men,
or be it in the Angels, goodneſſe is but
begonne in thē, it is not perfect. Yet
we muſt vnderſtand what y• meaning
of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt is, when he
ſayth to the yong man, whye doeſt thou
call me good? There is none good but God, he
will not affirme there y• he is God: but
he bryngeth thys yong man in, to beleue
hys doctryne. He had already a
certayne affection to obey: but Ieſus
Chriſt wil haue hym mount hygher,
to heare this holy doctryne as frō the
mouth of the liuyng God, and not of a
mortal man. For as men are wont to
make of diuels Angels, ſo without diſcretion,
men cal them good teachers,
which haue no true or good felyng of
God. And ſo ar the gyftes of God prophaned.
It is no maruel then y• Chriſt
ſendes thys yong man to God to the
end he may geue authority to his doctryne.
Yet there is no inconuenience
in callyng a man good whē God hath
chaunged hys hart, whiche by nature

was ill, and when he hath prynted in
hym ſome of hys goodneſſe. So the
goodneſſe ſhalbe alwayes Gods, and
the man alſo ſhalbe good: Yet it ſhal
not be of hym ſelfe: But in that God
hath made him ſuch. So it is ſayd that
a good man bryngeth forth goodneſſe
from the good treaſure of hys harte.
Thys ſentence admonyſheth y• faythful
which made profeſſion to be Gods
ſeruauntes to examyne and aduiſe thē
diligently what they ſet forth. Nothing
wil cōme oute of the ſacke but
what is in it, as the prouerbe ſayeth,
The naughtye hart cannot but beare
witneſſe of it ſelf by prophane words,
and by wicked wordes. So a hart fearyng
God ſends forth fruites worthy
a Chriſtiā man. But we muſt returne
to thys poynt that the hart cannot bee
good but by the onely goodneſſe and
grace of God, and out of this ſelf roote
the good fruytes alſo ſhall ſprynge.
         
         
            28
            
               Mark. 
                     •
                  .
               Touching the day and houre,
none knovveth it, no not the Angels
that are in heauen, nor the ſonne him
ſelf: none but the father.
               All povver is geuen me in heauen
and in earth.
               Math. 
                     •
                  .
            
            IF all power bee geuen to our Lord
Ieſus as wel in heauen as in earth,
it ſemeth there is nothyng, no not in
heauen hyd or vnknowen vnto hym.
But by the way we muſt note to what
purpoſe he ſpake thys. Chriſt willyng
to appoynt hys Apoſtles to Preache
the Goſpell, fyrſt ſpake to them of hys
power. A meane or common authoritye
had not in thys caſe ſufficed. But
it was mete that he which ſent to haue
eternal and happy life to be promyſed
in hys name, ſhould haue an Empyre
ſouerayne, and in very dede diuine, to
thend y• al the world might be brought
in awe of hym and that hys doctryne
which ſhoulde be publiſhed ſhould bee
able to 
                  •
               ame al loftynes, and to bryng
downe al mankynde, the Apoſtles had
neuer bene perſuaded to take on thē
ſo hard a charge except they had bene

very certaine that their warrante was
placed in heauē being of ſoueraine power.
He calles himſelf Lord and kyng
as wel of heauen as of earthe, bycauſe
that in that he bringeth men ſo true
obedience, by the preaching of his goſpel
he hath eſtabliſhed and appoynted
the throne of his Kingdome on earthe.
And in that he regenerateth his faithful
into a new lyfe, and calleth them to
the hope of ſaluation, he openneth the
heauens to the end to lyft vp to happy
immortalitye with the Angels thoſe
which before not only crepe in y• world
but alſo were plunged in the dark bottomleſſe
depth of death. True it is that
Chriſt euerlaſtingly hath had with his
father al power and autority, and that
of his own right: but yet it is ſayd that
it was geuen him, to we
                  •
               e, in our fleſh.
Then he is apointed gouernor, iudge,
& ſoueraigne Prince ouer al the whole
Church, but it was not clearly knowē
tyl after hys reſurrection. For then at
the laſte he was adorned with the markes
of a ſoueraigne King, and receauing
a name aboue al names, hee had

alſo the endes of al things in his hand
                  •
               
to diſpoſe them at his good pleaſure.
But whileſt he is yet in our mortal
fleſh it is ſayd that the ſonne him ſelfe
knoweth not when the day ſhal be of
hys fearful comming. In aſmuchas he
is God nothing is vnknowē vnto him.
He hath bene euer God, neyther hath
his Manhode taken any thing frō hys
diuine maieſty. The two natures were
vnſeparably ioyned together in hym:
but it was in ſuch ſorte, that neither of
both loſt their property. Chiefly the
Diuinitie reſted and ſhewed not it ſelf
as often as it was expedient that the
nature of man did that which belonged
to it, to accompliſh the charge and office
of a Mediatour. Wherfore ther is
no abſurdity or inconuenience in thys
that the ſonne of God who knew al, yet
according to the conceyte and vnderſtanding
of hys manhoode there was
ſome thing which he knew not: for otherwiſe
he coulde not haue bene ſubiecte
eyther to griefe or to carefulnes,
or haue bene like vnto vs.
            A man may reply yt this cānot be ſpoken

of the ſōne of God that he was ignoraunt,
bicauſe ignorance is the punniſhment
of ſinn, and he ſinned neuer.
It is alſo ſpoken here of the heauenly
Angels, that this day is hidden from
them, wil any ſay that this ignoraūce
procedeth of ſinne? Though they haue
in no wiſe offēded, yet are they in ſomwiſe
ignoraunt. As touching the ſonne
of God, he hath ſo put on mans fleſhe
that he hath taken on hym the paynes
due for ſinne. And where he knew not
of ye later day according to his humain
nature, that doth no more take away
any thing from his 
                  ••
               nne nature, thā
his being mortal dyd.
         
         
            29
            
               You haue the poore vvyth you alvvays,
but me you ſhall not haue alvvayes.
               Math. 26.
               I am alvvayes vvyth you, vntil the
ende of the vvorld.
               Math. 28.
            
            THe Lord Ieſus ſpeaketh of hīſelf in
both places touching ye firſt, alowīg
y• which Mary had don, he ſhewes how
this ſeruice pleſed hī, yt is not y• he toke

pleaſure in the 
                  〈◊〉
                which had
bene poured out vpon him for the good

                  •
               auours ſake: but in 
                  〈◊〉
                reſpecte of hys
burial, bycauſe that by ſuch a 
                  〈◊〉
                he
woulde geue them to vnderſtand that
his graue ſhuld be filled with good ſauour,
as be did ſpred ſauour of life and
ſaluatiō through al the world. But ſith
that the truth of this figure hath bene
perfectly accompliſhed, and the ſonne
of God when he came out of the graue
performed with the good ſauoure and
quickening ſmel of hys death, not only
one houſe, but the whole world. It wer
a folly to begin again to do that which
ſhould be without cauſe or profite. And
therfore he ſendeth vs back to the pore
to the end we ſhuld not excuſe our ſelfe
as though we could no more occupye
ourſelues in his ſeruice: for once he requyred
ſuch ſeruice as that which Mary
did to hym. But nowe ſeeing he is
mounted into ye heauenly glory, ther is
neyther golde nor ſiluer nor precious
oyntments, nor ſumptuouſneſſe whatſoeuer
they be which we may offre vnto
hym to do hym acceptable ſeruice.

Now wher he ſayth, you ſhal not haue
me alwais with you, that is to take frō
vs al excuſe, as though he ſaid, that frō
thence forward he would nomore take
pleaſure in that which once he woulde
haue done to him. He maketh a diſtinctiō
betwene y• ordinary ſeruice, which
muſt be euer vſed among the faythful,
and that extraordinary ſeruice whyche
had an end when he went vp into heauen.
Wil we beſtow our money wel
in true Sacrifice and in holy offering?
Let vs beſtow it to relieue the neceſſity
of the poore and neady. For our Lord
Ieſus ſayth that he is no longer wyth
vs in this world to be ſerued with pompes
and outward preparations. And
we know, yea and we feele by the experience
of faythe that Chriſt is preſente
with vs by his ſtrength & goſtly grace.
But he dwelleth not viſibly among vs

                  〈◊〉
                of vs earthly honor. He ſaith

                  〈◊〉
                
               you vnto the end of the world. He
had 
                  ••
               yd that he was appoynted Kyng
of heauen and of earth. Afterwarde vs
promiſeth to aſſiſt his Apoſtels whom
he had enioined a hard office & charge,

warning them not to loke vpon that
which they could do of themſelf: but to
leane vpon his ſtrengthe and inumerble
power. The maner of this preſence
which the Lord promiſeth to his faithful
muſt be vnderſtode ſpiritually: for
it is not nedeful that he ſhould not cōe
downe from heauen to ſuccour vs ſeeing
he can help vs by the grace of hys
holy ſpirite, ſtretching forth his hande
to vs from the higheſt of the heauens.
As touching hys humayne nature it
is certaine that there is an infinite diſtaunce
betweene hym and vs. But he
not onely ſpreads the efficacy of his ſpirite
through al the worlde: but alſo he
dwelleth truely in vs. Moreouer thys
promiſſe is not made only to the Apoſtels:
for it reacheth euen to the end of
the world. Very true it is that he promyſeth
hys ayde, chyefly to hys miniſters
whyche for that they are weake
and needy in euery condition, coulde
not execute the leſt part of their office.
Seing then their charge is as troubleſome
and harde as it is healthful, aſſuredly
they haue more neede than all other

of the aſſiſtance of oure Lorde Ieſus,
to the end they may haue the victorye
of al the aſſaultes and battayles of
thys world: as in theſe dayes it is ſhewed
vs by playne experience, that
chriſt worketh wonderfully by a ſecret
manner, ſo that y• goſpel hath his courſe
though Sathan lay many lettes in the
way. But generally al the faythfull ar
partakers of thys promiſſe, to the ende
no man ſhuld be diſcoraged as though
he were forſaken.
            Let vs then make thys concluſion
that although Chriſt be departed into
heauen, yet he is not ſo departed butte
that hee euer is and wil bee to the ende
with vs. He hath taken away the preſence
of hys body from our ſight: but
he leaueth not the whyleſt to aſſiſt hys
faythfull which muſte yet liue in thys
worlde, but hee gouerneth the worlde
wyth a more preſente ſtrength. Thys
promyſſe of hys continuall aſſiſtaunce
was accomplyſhed by hys aſcētion, in
which as y• body of y• ſōn of god was lifted
vp aboue al y• heauēs: ſo his power

and efficacy is ſpred beyond al the boū
               des
of heauen and of earthe. So then
theſe two things may wel be ſaid, that
the ſonne of God is no more amōg vs,
and yet he is among vs, and ſhal be euer
vntil the ende of the worlde. He is
here no more according to the preſence
of hys humaine nature, but he is here
acording to the preſence of his Maieſty.
For a few dayes the Church had
hym preſent in his fleſh, now not ſeing
him with bodily eyes, ſhee poſſeſſeth
hym by fayth.
         
         
            30
            
               Thy vvyll be done on earth as
it is done in heauen.
               Math. 6.
               Appeaſing by the bloud of hys
croſſe the thinges vvhiche be as
vvell in heauen as in earthe.
               Colloſſ. 1.
            
            WE deſire by this petition contained
in the Lordes prayer, that al
creatures may truely and perfitly
obey God on earth, as his▪ Angels in
heauen do, and execute his cōmaūdemēts
& al his holy ordinaūces without

any gayn ſaying, and not ſeeke to dyſpleaſe
hym in any ſorte. Lyke as they
know that ther is nothing better than
that which God wylles: ſo they do readily
obey hym. And this is the cauſe
why they abide ſtil and are not ſubiect
to chaunge and corruption, and why
they haue quietnes and continual happineſſe.
To weete, bicauſe they are in
al and altogether agreeing to the wyl
of God. Seeing then there is nothyng
in them that wtſtandeth the holye and
good wyl of God, nothing that turnes
them awaye from his holye decrees,
nothing that can be deſired or wyſhed
biſide his good pleaſure, it can not be
but they enioy ſoueraine reſt and true
bleſſefulneſſe.
            Syth it is ſo that the Angelles of
heauen ſynce their creation haue euer
in al things and altogether yelded vnto
God true obedience, & by that meanes
there hath neuer bene ſtrife or hatred
betwene him and them, how commeth
it to paſſe that they had neede to
be reconciled? For in the fyrſt Chapiter
of the Colloſſians mentiō is made

not onely of men which are meant by
the things which be on earth: but alſo
of Angelles which are meant by thynges
that are in heauen. If hereupon a
man woulde ſay that the Angels haue
bene ſette at one with men, and ſo the
heauenly creatures are at one againe
with earthly things. This is not that
which Saint Paul meaneth here: for
he ſayth expreſſely that God hath recō
               ciled
thē to himſelf. The maner of mās
reconciling to God is this, that before
while they were eſtraunged from hym
by ſinne, they ſhould haue felte him to
be a Iudge to their ruine and condemnation,
if the grace of the Mediatoure
had not cōme betweene to appeaſe hys
angre. So the attonemente made betwene
God and men, is that the hatred
and ſtrifes were taken away by Ieſus
Chriſt our Lord, and ſo god of a Iudge
was made a Father. Betweene God
and the Angels there is another reaſō
for in thys caſe ther was no offence or
ſtarting backe, and therfore ther was
no ſeparation or alienating: yet ther is
two reaſons why the Angels ſhould be

attoned with God. For ſince they be
creatures they wer not out of danger
of ſtumbling, but that they wer ſtrengthed
by the grace of our Lorde Ieſus.
This now helpeth greatelye to make
continual peace with God, to wete, to
tarry in one ſteady ſtate of righteouſneſſe
ſo that ther be no feare of falling
or reuolting, or otherwyſe dooing ſo
that they might be eſtrāged from god.
Moreouer in this ſame obedience whiche
they yeld to God, it is certayn that
there cānot be ſo exquiſite or ſo perfit a
perfitneſſe as may thorowly and in al
reſpects ſatiſfie God ſo that they ſhuld
neede no pardon. And for that conſideration
is it that good Iob ſayd, God ſhall
finde wickedneſſe in hys Angels. So whatſoeuer
perfecte cleanneſſe a man may
finde out, if it be broughte before the
Iuſtice of God, it ſhall be but vncleanneſſe.
Wherefore let vs conclude that
the Angels haue not ſo perfect righteouſneſſe
as ſufficeth to 
                  •
               oyne thē wholy
with God. Wherfor they haue nede
of a peace and attonement maker by
whoſe grace they may cleaue fully vnto
God.
         
         
            
            31
            
               My fleſh is verely meate.
               Ioan. 6.
               The fleſh profiteth nothing.
               Ioan. 6.
            
            THAT is very true which is ſayd
in the 36 Pſalme, to we
                  •
               e that the
ſpring of life reſteth in God, and
no man can iuſtly vaunt hym to haue
lyfe but in ſomuch as it is breathed into
him by God But bicauſe the maieſty
of God ſhould be as a hydden fountayne
(as in dede it is farre aboue oure
knowledge) it is openly ſhewed foorth
in Ieſu Chriſt, in him we haue a clere
welſpring whereout we may drawe,
we may ſee it by that whiche is ſayed
Ioan. 6▪
                that as y• father hath life in himſelfe
ſo he hath geuen to hys ſonne to
haue life in himſelf, Wherby he ſheweth
that he only is the fountaine of life
and that by his voice and word he ſpredeth
thys life on al men, for life would
not flow from his mouth vnto vs if he
had not in himſelf the cauſe and originall
of it: for it is not ſayed that God
hath life in himſelfe only, bicauſe he ō
               ly

liueth of his owne power: but alſo
bicauſe that hauing in himſelf fulneſſe
of life, he geueth lyfe to all thinges.
So hee woulde not haue life to be as it
were hidde and buried in himſelf. And
for this cauſe he hath yelded it ouer vnto
his ſonne, that ſo it might fal downe
vpon vs. Now then this life is poured
into ye fleſh of Ieſu Chriſt, ſo that whoſoeuer
ſeeketh life els where ſhal finde
Death. The ſoules then finde no wher
but in his fleſh the meate wherwt they
are fedde into euerlaſting life. This is
a wonderful ſecret of God that in our
fleſh he hath offred vs life, wher before
there was but mater of Death, and by
that meane he prouideth for our infirmity
and weaknes, when to enioy life
he calleth vs not aboue the cloudes, but
diſplaies it v
                  •
               on earth as if he drew vs
into the ſecrete places of his kingdom.
In the meane time correcting the 
                  •
               O
                  •
               tineſſe
and pride of our mindes, he tryeth
the lowlineſſe and obedience of our
fayth. His wil is that to finde lyfe we
ſhuld ſtay on the fleſh of his ſōne, whiche
in ſhewe is litle to be regarded. As

the body waxeth weake and dryeth vp
when the ordinary fode is taken from
it: ſo if the ſoule be not fed with y• fleſh
of the ſonne of God, which is the heauenly
foode, it wil ſodainely ſterue for
hunger. When we ſeeke the matter of
lyfe in the fleſhe of Ieſus Chriſt, then
we finde life in hym. So the glory and
excellency of the children of God, is in
Chriſt crucified: for that as ſone as we
turne vs back from the ſacrifice of hys
death, we can finde nothing but death,
and there is no other meane by which
the faythful are brought to the knowledge
of his power, but by his death &
reſurrection. If then we wil the ſonne
ſhall ſhewe hymſelfe vnto vs to be the
head and authour of life, we muſte receaue
hym as the ſeruaunt of hys Father.
For we are made rich in all ſorte
of good thinges in that he empoueriſhed
and abaſed hymſelfe, hys humbling
of hymſelfe, and hys going downe into
Hell hath lifted vs vppe into heauen
by taking on hym the curſe of the cros
hee hath rayſed vppe a triumphaunte

bowe in token of glorye and victorye.
But now Chriſt hymſelf ſayeth of hys
fleſh that it profiteth nothyng. Yet in ſo
ſpeakyng bee doothe not exclude alyke
all profyte of the fleſhe, as thoughe
there were no profyte to be taken of it.
Hee ſayeth it profiteth nothing when
it is parted from the ſpirite. Whence
proceedeth it that it geueth lyfe but inaſmuche
as it is ſpyrituall? They
that ſtycke at the earthy nature of hys
fleſhe ſhal fynde nothing in it but that
that is Deade. But when wee lyfte
vppe oure eyes to the ſtrengthe o
                  •
                the
ſpirite which is ſpread vpon the fleſhe,
wee ſhall there fynde effectuouſly and
by the experience of Faythe that it is
notte wyth oute cauſe that it is called
quyckenyng. Well then wee maye
wel ſaye that the fleſh of Ieſus Chriſt
is verelye meate, and yet for al that
it profyteth nothinge. It is meate
bycauſe wee gette lyfe by it, bycauſe
that in it God hath bene reconcyled
vnto vs, bycauſe in it we fynde all the
parts of our Saluation accompliſhed.

It profiteth nothing if it be conſidered
according to it own nature and beginning.
For the ſede of Abraham whiche
of it ſelfe is ſubiecte to Deathe can not
geue life, but it receaueth of the ſpirite
that wherwith we may be fedde. For
our part, to the ende we may eate, we
muſt bring with vs a ſpiritual mouthe
of fayth before we can be truly noriſhed
or ſuſtayned by it, now the ſelfſame
fleſh is not immortal of it ſelfe. Moreouer
it belongeth not to the nature of it
in any wiſe to quickē ſouls, yet though
this vertue yrocede from els wher, notwithſtanding
it letteth not this title to
belong to it. Euen as the euerlaſting
word of God is the ſpring and foūtain
of life, ſo the 
                  〈◊〉
                that is in him in his diuinity
commeth from the fleſh of hys
ſonne euen vnto vs, as by a pipe. But
we ſhal yet better vnderſtand this, if
we marke what is the cauſe of life, to
were righteouſneſſe. Thoughe righteouſneſſe
come not but from God: yet
it cānot be clearly ſhewed vnto vs but
in the fleſh of his ſonne: for in the ſame
the redemptiō of men was fully ended,

in the ſame the ſacrifyce was offered
to wype out ſynnes, in the ſame the obedience
was yelded to God, by which
he was made at one with vs, the ſame
alſo was fylled with the ſanctification
of the holy ghoſt, the ſame fynally was
receaued into heauenly glory after the
conqueſt had of death. In the ſame
then all the partes of lyfe were placed
to the end none myght Iuſtly fynde
fault that he is depryued of lyfe, bycauſe
it is hyd farre from him.
         
         
            32
            
               He that taketh the ſvvearde ſhall
dye vvith the ſvvearde.
               Mathe. 26.
               He that hath a garment let hym
ſell it and bye a ſvvearde.
               Luke. 22.
            
            IEſus Chriſt ſpeakyng thus whoſoeuer
taketh a ſweard ſhall dye on a
ſweard, confyrmeth the commaundement
of the lawe by whiche pryuate
perſons are forbydden the vſe of the
ſweard. Whē God ſtrayghtly forbad
vs all ſlaughters & wycked murders,
hys wyll was to ſhewe therby, howe
well he loueth mankynde. So Ieſus

Chriſt would not that folke ſhould defend
thēſelf by violence & ſtrong hand
bicauſe y• god in y• law hath forbiddē to
ſtrike. It wer thē a mad folly to infer
therupon yt it is not lawful for 
                  •
               dges
& Magiſtrates to ſtrike wt the ſweard.
It is very true yt it is not lawfull for
any mā to take ye ſweard in hand to vſe
it at his fantaſie, to be ye cauſe or furderance
of any murder. But ye Magiſtrates
who ar apointed to be ye officers of
God by whō he exerciſeth his iudgements,
muſt not be ſet among ye cōmō
ſort of men. Ther is more in it thā ſo,
to wete, by theſe words of Chriſt their
power & authoritie is maintayned: for
when he pronounceth y• murtherers
ſhalbe put to death, we may very well
inferre therof yt the ſweard is put into
y• hand of ye iudges to punyſhe thoſe y•
vniuſtly haue ſlayne. It may happen
ſomtyme y• manſleyars ſhalbee other
wyſe puniſhed, but thys is y• ordinarie
meane by which god would y• the crueltie
& proud fellonye of y• wicked ſhold
be repreſſed & not abyde vnpuniſhed:
Yet for all y• hys mynde is not by the

other ſentence to arme euery one with
a ſweard to ſtrike whenſoeuer he wil.
He ſignifieth by a figure y• great and
terrible troubles were at hand, as if a
captayne in y• warre mynding to ſet
his mē in battayle a ray, ſhould cry alarum
he cōmaundeth y• laying aſide
all other cares they ſhoulde be bent to
nothyng ells but to fyght, ſo that they
ſhoulde not care eyther for meate or
drynke: for as mē are wont to do in extreme
daungers he wil haue thē ſel al
euen to their walle
                  •
                or ſcryp to furnyſhe
thē with weapon. But this battayle
to which he calleth thē is not an
outward battayle, but only vnder this
ſimilitude of fighting, he admoniſheth
thē to thynke that they muſt ſuſtayne
many fearefull & hard conflictes and
horrible charges of ſpiritual battailes.
So a man may eaſely ſee y• theſe ſentences
are not ſo diuerſe that there is
any contrarietie in them.
         
         
            33
            
               VVhoſoeuer cōmeth to me I vvill
not caſt hym of.
               Ioan. 6.
               
                  It is not of hym that vvylls nor of
him that runnes but of God, that hath
mercy.
               Roman. 6.
            
            BEfore that our Lorde Ieſus ſpake
thys that he wil caſt of none of thē
that cōme vnto hym, he had ſayd.
All that my father gaue me, &c. Where
he ſygnifyeth that fayth is not in the
wyll of men ſo as any can ſaye that it
is in his liberty to beleue or not to beleue,
or y• fayth is a thyng by chaunce
or at al aduentures. But God choſeth
his faythful to geue them to hys ſōne,
euen as it were from hande to hand.
For when he ſayeth that al that is geuen
hym, cōmeth, we maye eaſely gather
hereof that al cōme not. We may
wel ſay alſo that God worketh in hys
choſen by ſo great an efficacie of hys
ſpirit when he ſo vſeth hys free goodneſſe
that none of them falleth. For
the father regenerateth hys choſen, &
then geueth thē to his ſonne to make
them obedient to the Goſpel. Fayth
then being a free gyfte procedyng frō
the goodneſſe of God is the ſame that

openeth the way for men to goe to the
Lord Ieſus, and the obſtinate and vnbeleuyng
haue no acceſſe thither, and
they that cōme to him, cōme to him after
an other maner than by their own
force or wills. And whē they haue ſubmytted
themſelfe vnder hys defence,
they ſhall be freely receaued. Theſe
two ſentences therefore not onely doe
not diſagree: but rather one doth confyrme
the other. For where Sainte
Paule ſayth that it is neyther of hym
that wills nor of him that runnes, but
of hym that hath mercy, it is to ſhewe
that mē may runne or wil or beſtowe
all their force: but yet they cannot
make open the way of God Of neceſſitye,
God muſt work in it of his mere
mercye, he is no waye bounde to any
man, if he do good to any al thys good
cōmes of hys mere liberalitye. And
whē he hath ones vſed this liberalitye
it is ſo done as he foloweth hys worke
to the end, as muche as belongeth to
the ſaluation of the faythfull It is thē
God y• of hys mercy geueth hys faythfull
to hys ſonne whiche cōme not to

hym of their own motion but bicauſe
they are geuen to the ſonne, or as. S.
Paule ſayeth bycauſe that God hath
vſed mercy where it hath pleaſed hym
to vſe mercy.
         
         
            34
            
               I am not cōme to iudge the vvorld
but to ſaue the vvorld.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1
                     •
                  .
               I am cōme into the vvorlde vvith
iudgement.
               Ioan. 9.
            
            IT is certayne that the ſonne of God
came into the worlde chiefly to thys
end to ſaue men. Surely he was not
ſent hither without cauſe. Nowe ſo it
is that he was not ſent to deſtroye, thē
it foloweth that he came to doe the offyce
of a ſauiour. For what neded he
to cōme down to caſt vs away ſith we
were more than caſtawayes. Then
we muſt conſider nothing in our Lord
Ieſus, but y• God according to his infinite
goodneſſe would ſaue vs by him
yea vs, that wer loſt. As often therfore
as our ſynnes preſſe vs, & that Sathan
eggeth vs to diſpaire or diſcōfort, we
muſt hold before vs thys buckler, that

God wil not ſuffer vs to be oppreſſed
with eternall ruyne, foraſmuche as he
hath ordained his ſōne to be y• ſaluatiō
of y• world. And for this cauſe he ſayth,
y• he came not to iudge & to cōdemne y•
world, but to ſaue it, y• wickedneſſe of
them y• proudly retect God, is worthy
to be cōdemned. But yet he aſſwageth
y• ſeueritie which he might vſe againſt
ſuch while he ſtayeth frō pronouncing
iudgement agaynſt thē, bicauſe he rather
came to ſaue al. And although he
ſpake here of thoſe y• of a wilfull ſtubborneſſe
deſpyſe y• doctryne of y• Goſpel
whiche was offered thē. Yet for a
while leauing y• perſon of y• ſouerayne
iudge he offers ſaluatiō indifferentlye
to all, and gentilly reacheth forth his
hand to al, to the end y• al might be very
deſyrous to repent. He came to cal
all, & hauyng forgotten y• perſon of a
iudge he myndeth nothyng els but to
drawe al mē to hym, & to deliuer from
death and deſtruction thoſe that ſeme
to be altogether loſt. But in y• means
ſeaſon, thys belongeth to the proper
and naturall offyce of Ieſus Chriſt.

For where the vnbeleuyng and obſtinate
be more greuouſly condemned
for refuſyng the Goſpell, it is by accident,
and not by nature. As touchyng
that he came in iudgement, as touchyng
that he is called the ſtone of offence,
as touching that he is appoynted
for the fall of many, al theſe thynges
are accidentall: for thoſe that refuſe
the grace that is offered in him,
deſerue to feele hym as a rigorous
iudge reuenging ſo vylannous a contempt,
and ſo horrible an vnthankfulneſſe.
As much may a man ſay of the
Goſpell althoughe it be the power of
God to ſaluation to all that beleue it:
Yet the vnthankefulneſſe of many
makes it turne to thē vnto death. So
the miniſters are ready at hand to reuenge,
to breake and throwe down the
pryde of all the enemyes of the Goſpell:
when the true obedience of the
faythfull ſhalbe accompliſhed. 2. Cor. 10.
The Goſpell is fyrſt and cheiflye appoynted
to bee for the ſaluation of the
faythful. But thē afterward the ſtubborne
& vnbeleuyng ſhal not remaine

vnpunyſhed, who deſpyſing the grace
of the Lord Ieſus haue choſen to haue
hym rather the author of death than
of life. Beholde how the ſonne of God
is cōme to ſaue and not to Iudge or
condemne, and yet he came in iudgement.
Howbeit in thys ſeconde ſentence
thys word of iudgement cannot
be ſymply taken for the punyſhment
of the obſtinate and contemners of
God: for it ſtreatcheth forth euē to the
grace of illumination. Ieſus Chriſt is
cōme in iudgement, that is to ſaye, he
ſetteth agayne in good order thynges
that were out of order, which is done
by a maruelous ſecrete wyſedome of
God and beyonde al mannes vnderſtanding.
         
         
            35
            
               Yf I vvitneſſe any thing of my ſelf
my vvitneſſe is not true.
               Ioan. 5.
               Though I vvitneſſe of my ſelf my
vvitneſſe is true.
               Ioan. 8.
            
            AS touching the firſt ſentence, our
Lord Ieſus meaneth not that his
witneſſe it not ſufficient to be beleued,

for y• in other places he defendes
it ſtrongly, and earneſtly: but he ſpeaketh
as agreeing herein with hys aduerſaries,
as he ſhoulde thus ſaye wel
beleue me not, yet ar there ynough of
others y• witneſſe of me. He ſpeaketh
thē after y• cōmon faſhion of mē which
bryng thēſelf into ſuſpition when they
beare witneſſe of them ſelf, as though
he would his enemyes ſhould take the
matter as if hys witneſſe wer nothing
worth. It is certayn that y• witneſſe y•
any mā beareth of himſelf ought in no
caſe to be receaued as true & lawfull,
no, not though y• thīg y• be he ſaith be true
for in dede no man is a ſufficient witneſſe
in his own cauſe. Now although
it is not reaſon or me
                  •
               e y• the ſonne of
God ſhould be ſet among thē: Yet he
had rather geue ouer his right to conuince
hys aduerſaryes by the authoritye
of God. But yet the witneſſe of our
Lord Ieſu is of authoritye ynough of
it ſelf and hath no nede of mens confirmations
for aſmuch as he is not of
the common ſort of men. And therfore
he addeth y• he knoweth well whence

he came, and whither he muſt goe. He
exempts hym ſelf out of the common
ſort of other men. Although therefore
other be ſuſpected in their owne and
priuate cauſes, and that it is appoynted
by the lawes that a man ſhoulde
not beleue or truſt any man that ſpeaketh
for hys owne profyte or aduantage:
yet thys hath no place in Chriſt
who is farre aboue all the world, & is
not reckened to be of the cōmon ſort of
men, but hys father hath geuen hym
thys priuilege that by hys only word
he cauſeth all men to obey hym,
         
         
            36
            
               I vvill do nothyng of my ſelf.
               Ioan. 5.
               No man taketh my lyfe from me
but I leaue it of my ſelf.
               Ioan. 10.
            
            IN the fyrſt ſentence our ſauior Ieſus
Chriſt maketh aunſwere to the
ſlaūders of ye Iewes which iudged maliciouſly
of y• worke which he had done
in healyng y• man y• had ben. 38. yeres
ſicke. Thei loked only on his humaine
fleſhe, and therefore diſpyſed him althoughe
they ſawe in hym woorkes

that were in dede Godly. Wherefore
he would haue them to go hygher and
to beholde God in hym and in y• workes
whiche he wrought, to the end by
that meane they myghte be moued to
beleue hym. Thys then is not ſymply
to ſay that he can do nothyng of hym
ſelf, for he is God eternal & almyghty.
And thys belongeth not perticularly
to the euerlaſtyng worde: but to the
ſonne of God, in aſmuche as he was
manyfeſted in the fleſhe. Such is thys
manner of ſpeakyng when he ſayeth
Ioan. 14. The worde which you heare is
not myne, but hys that ſent me. It is
wel knowē that he is the eternal wiſedome
of God hys father which made
all the Prophetes & Apoſtles, & other
truſtye ſeruauntes of God to ſpeake.
But this he ſayth to lifte men vp vnto
the Maieſtye of God, which ſtaying at
y• outward loke of Ieſus Chriſt, could
not owe ſuch reuerence to the worde
as it deſerued, excepte they had bene
wel aſſured that it is God which ſpeaketh
in hys ſonne, and that the ſonne
ſpeaketh through hys father. All this

matter muſt be referred to thys oppoſition,
to weete, that they that thynke
they haue to doe with a mortall man
when they accuſe the Lorde Ieſus of
hys doynges which were in very dede
diuyne, are farre out of the way. And
therfore he affirmeth earneſtly that he
hath done nothyng in the healyng of
thys man that is diuerſe or contrary
to hys fathers will.
            And by the other ſentence, he meaneth
that men haue no power on him
to take hys lyfe from hym, but that he
could haue thondered vpon al his enemyes
if he woulde, and ſo haue conſumed
al their attempts. But in y• he dieth,
it is with his wil, he being able to
withſtande the violence of his aduerſaries:
but beyng alſo willing to obey
the will of hys father which had ordered
and appoynted hys ſonne to die to
deliuer vs. Now then not only he ſayeth
that men cannot put him to death
but in as muche as he ſuffereth them:
but alſo he exempteth him ſelf from al
force of neceſſitye. But it ſtandeth other
wyſe with vs, for we muſt nedes

dye bycauſe of our ſynne. Chriſt in
dede was borne a mortall mā, but hys
ſubmiſſion was voluntarie and not a
forced bondage enioyned him from els
where. Then let vs conclude that he
can do nothyng of hymſelf in aſmuch
as he wills that al hys works be wayed
accordyng to hys diuyne power, &
that the reſpect of his manhode ſhould
not dymme their brightneſſe, and alſo
that none of their dignitie ſhoulde be
taken away from them. In y• meane
ſeaſon he may of him ſelf in reſpect of
men geue ouer hys lyfe, obeying rather
the good pleaſure of his father, &
burnyng with the deſyre of the ſaluation
of his, than to withſtand the furious
aſſaultes of hys aduerſaries.
         
         
            37
            
               VVho is he that reſiſteth hys vvil.
               Roman. 9.
               You haue euer reſiſted the holy
ghoſt.
               Act. 7.
            
            SAINT Paule aſketh this queſtion
in the perſon of the proud & wicked
whiche cannot refrayne from barkyng
with open mouthe agaynſt the

iuſtice of God. And thus their affectiō
is very well expreſſed: for not content
to defend thē ſelf, they put God in their
place. Beſide, when they haue layd the
fault of their condemnation vpō him
they ſpeake diſpytfully againſt his inuincible
power. They are conſtrayned
to agree that he is iuſte, but it is
wyth murmuryng bycauſe they can
not reſiſte hym, as if they woulde ſaye
thus. What reaſon is there that God
ſhould be angry with vs? Doth not he
whatſoeuer ſemeth good to hym? who
ſhoulde withſtand hym, ſeyng he hath
formed vs ſuche, ſeing he doth all after
hys wyll and pleaſure, what ells doth
he in deſtroying vs, but reuenge him
ſelfe vpon hys woorke? for it is not in
oure power to warre with hym, if we
ſhould reſyſte hym yet he would continually
haue the victorye. They therfore
will conclude that it is a wronge
iudgemente yf God doe deſtroye thē.
Such are ye murmuryngs of y• proud.
And yet thys is true that no man can
withſtand the will of God, by whiche

all things are made, yea made with al
vpryghtneſſe. If the cauſes of this
good pleaſure be hyd frō vs we muſte
not therefore enquyre whye he doth
thus and thus: we muſt heare quietly
that which the Lord will ſay, and wee
muſt with al lowlineſſe and obedience
ſubſcribe to his faythful & true iudgements.
Ells what maner of madneſſe
were it, and deuiliſhe preſumptiō that
man ful of vanitye ſhould not graunt
to God more wiſedome thā to his own
fleſhlye reaſon. And when the thyngs
that are done, lyke hym not, to pleade
with hys Maſter that he ſhoulde haue
done otherwiſe. There is alſo another
will of God which is declared to vs in
hys worde, which men cannot bee ignorant
of except it be maliciouſly, & by
whiche hys grace is offered vnto all.
Whē the vnfaythful refuſe this grace
offred by the Prophets and ſeruaunts
of God, it is ſayd that they withſtand
the holy ghoſt: for thys toucheth not
ſecrete reuelations whiche God breatheth
inwardly into euery faythfull
man: but the outwarde miniſterye by

which y• goodnes of god is ſet befor mē
            
         
         
            38
            
               VVhoſoeuer aſketh hee receaueth.
               Math. 7.
               You aſke but receaue not,
               Iacobi, 4.
            
            IN the fyrſt ſentence the Lord Ieſus
offreth the grace of hys Father to
ſinners, ſignfieng that god of his good
wil is ready to heare vs ſo that we pray
to him. Hys riches are poured foorth
to vs ſo that we aſke them of him. But
this aſking and prayingmuſt be made
in fayth, elles it is neyther aſking nor
prayer vnto God. They then that beeing
void of al goodnes ſake not this remedi
to help their pouerty or nede, ſhal
haue puniſhmēt due to their negligēce
As cōtrariwyſe as many as ſhal aſk in
faith ſhal not fail to enioi y• frut of their
prayers. It happeneth truly many tymes
that the faythful ſleepe and God
watcheth for their ſaluation, and ſo he
preuenteth their deſires and prayers.
For we wer more thā miſerable cōſydering
our great dulneſſe if God ſhuld
tary tyl we open our mouthes to pray
to hym. But to ſpeake better, there is

nothing but his owne goodneſſe that
ſtirreth him to geue vs faith which go-before
al prayers both in tyme and ordre.
Yet bicauſe he ſpeaketh theſe wordes
onely to his faithful he ſheweth vs
ſimply how the heauenly Father wyll
make vs partakers of his benefites.
Although he hee geue vs al thynges frelye:
yet to exerciſe oure fayth he commaūdeth
vs to pray to hym, to the end
hee maye graunte to our prayers that
which notwithſtanding flowes frō his
mere goodneſſe and liberality.
            But bycauſe fayth only is that which
obtayneth and goeth not beyonde the
boundes of Gods will which is declared
by hys word. Saint Iames ſayth
here very well, You aſke but receaue not.
and hee addeth to it the cauſe, for that
you aſke it to the ende to beſtow it on
your deſires and pleaſures. Is it reaſō
that men ſhal make God the ſeruant
of their pleaſures and fonde deſires?
when they temper not their deſires after
the maner that God hath ordained
but with an inordinate libertye geue
them ſelfe the bridle to aſke thinges

which they ſhould be aſhamed to aſke
or to open before a man who ſoeuer he
were. It is good reaſon that they ſhuld
be denied. Certaynly ther is no feare
nor reuerence nor good opinion of god
among vs when we are ſo hardy and
raſhe to aſke of God things which our
owne conſcience would not graūt vs.
Then before we ſhal obtayne we muſt
bridle our deſires. The way to brydle
them is to make them obediente and
ſubiect to God. To conclude wee ſhall
obtayne when Fayth whych is ruled
by the holy and good wyl of God ſhall
frame our harts. We ſhal not obtaine
when we aſke according to our deſires
neyther ſhould it be expedient for vs to
obtaine in that ſorte.
         
         
            39
            
               By one onely offering he hath hallovved
for euer thoſe that be ſāctified.
               Hebr. 10.
               I fulfyl the vvante of the aflictions
of Chriſte in my fleſhe for hys bodye
vvhych is the Church.
               Colloſſ. 1.
            
            
               
AL thinges that were expedient for
our ſaluation were accompliſhed
and broughte to perfection by the
only oblation of the Lord Ieſus. And
ſurely no man can alledge anye thing
agaynſt thys. And al faythful are fully
hallowed and ſanctified in his only ſacrifice.
If the Lord Ieſus be Chriſt he
is alſo ye true Prieſt. And if he be y• true
Prieſt, then muſt of neceſſity his ſacrifice
be perfect. For els he ſhould in nothing
differ from the Leuitical Prieſtes
which were ſinners. And his ſacrifice
ſhould differ no whit from the olde
ſacrifice of beaſtes. Seeing then hys
ſacrifice is perfect, it is alſo ſufficient,
and it muſt not be offered againe, nor
ani other added to it. God hath no nede
of mennes help, neyther muſt men ſet
to their hands after him when he hath
perfected or ended any thing. Then if it
be ſo that all other oblations that haue
bene added after Chriſtes oblation are
not onely vnprofitable, but alſo abhominable,
as put to wtout & agaīſt Gods
woord. What other thing ſhall ther be
for men to offre to God by which they

may adde ſome ouerplus to the merite
of the paſſion of the ſonne of God? The
death of the Iuſt is precious before the
face of God, and chefly of hys martirs
which haue ſhed their bloud for the teſtimony
of his truth. Yet their bloud is
not ſo pretious as that it may deſerue
anye thing to fyll oure redemption as
though it had not bene altogether accō
               pliſhed
by our Lord Ieſus. But nowe
Saint Paul ſaith that he ſupplies that
whiche lackes in the paſſion of Chriſte
for the Church. True it is that y• faithful
martirs ſuffer for the church, as alſo
the ſonne of God the chiefe of martirs
ſuffred for the Church: but yet ther
is a diuerſe reaſon of their ſuffering:
For though the martirs dy as brethrē
for theire brethren: yet there is no one
whoſe bloud is ſhed for the remiſſiō of
ſinnes, which thing the lord Ieſus dyd
for vs. And he therein did ſet forth nothing
for vs to folow but for which we
ſhould geue thanks to him. And as the
ſonne of God only was made the ſōne

                  ••
               man to y• end he might make vs children
of God. So he onely being without

fault hath receaued punniſhmente
for vs to the end we myght obtayne by
him and without any deſert of oures y•
grace which we could not deſerue. So
we may ſay, y• y• faythful haue receued
crownes: but they haue not geuen thē.
Of their ſtrength and conſtancy haue
bene taken examples of patience, not
gyfts of righteouſneſſe. Their deathes
alſo were particular, and there is not
one that by hys death hath cleered any
mannes dette. Shall we then ſaye that
Saint Paul would ſay that any thing
that belonged to oure ſaluation lacked
in the paſſion of chriſt which had nede
after to bee accompliſhed and ſupplied
by the death of any other, as if that
which Ieſu Chriſt ſuffred ſufficed not
for the redemption of men? it were an
execrable blaſphemy. But ſaint Paull
ſo ſpeaketh bicauſe y• body of y• Church
muſt be made perfect by the affliction
of the faythfull when the members of
the body are made lyke vnto their hed.
Let vs then ſee how the holy martyrs
ſuffre for the Churche. Thoſe that god

hath choſen he hath alſo apoynted and

                  •
               ideſtinated to be made like to y• Image
of hys ſonne, that he may be the fyrſt
borne of many brethren. Wee knowe
that betwene the hed and the members
there is ſuche vnity, that the name of
Chriſt containeth ſomtime al the bodi.
As when Saint Paull maketh mentiō
1. Corinth. 12. of the Church, he concludeth
at the lengthe that it is wyth Ieſu
Chriſt as wyth a mannes body. As the
Sonne of God once ſuffered in hymſelf
ſo hee ſuffereth dayly in hys members.
And in thys ſorte the paſſions are
accompliſhed whych the heauenly father
hath appoynted by hys ordinance
vnto the body of hys ſonn.
            Moreouer wee muſte not ſeeke
another more faythfull expounder of
that whyche Sainct Paul ſayeth than
hym ſelfe whenne hee addeth to it that
hee ſuffereth for the Church according
to the dyſpenſation or commiſſion that
was geuen vnto hym. For he was not
appoynted to bee a miniſter of redemption,
neyther dydde hee ſheadde hys

bloud to deliuer the faythfull frō euerlaſting
death. But we know the miniſtery
was committed to hym to edyfye
the Church and not to redeme it. And
this is it that he ſaith in another place
that he ſuffreth al thinges for the choſens
ſake, that they might obtayne the
ſaluation which is in Ieſus Chriſt. And
2. Cor. 1. he ſaith that he ſuffreth al thing
for their comfort and ſaluation. Then
let vs take thys for the concluſion, that
the ſonne of God only hath ſuffred for
the remiſſion of the ſinnes of the faithfull.
The Martirs alſo ſuffre for the
Church, but it is onely for the confirmation
of the ſame.
         
         
            40
            
               Preach the goſpel to euery creature.
               Mark. 16
               Caſt not your pearle before Svvyne.
               Math. 7.
            
            THE Apoſtles had commiſſion to
Preach the Goſpel to al creatures
that wer able to heare and receiue
it, and that without accepting of anye
perſon, people, or nation, foraſmuchas
the Lord Ieſus was com to take away
all difference betweene the Iewes and

Gentiles, yt the Iewes on the one ſide
ſhould not ſhut vppe ſaluation among
themſelf, and that the Gentiles on the
other ſide ſhoulde not diſpaire as ſhut
out and baniſhed from the eternal kīgdome.
He wyl haue his kingdom publiſhed
euery where that the Gentiles
with the Iewes may be brought to the
true obedience of Fayth, and that the
Goſpell may bee a ſeale to all faithfull
ſhepheardes and miniſters wherwyth
their doctrine ſhould be ſealed. Vnder
the Lawe the Prophetes had limittes
appoynted them within the bounds of
Iury: but after that the fence was broken
the ſonne of God woulde that the
miniſters of hys Goſpel ſhould go farther
of to ſowe and ſpread the doctrine
of ſaluation throughout al the regions
of the world. Fyrſt the birthright abod
among the Iewes: yet afterward the
heritage of the happy life was made
common to the Gentiles. So the prophecy
was accompliſhed of which the
Prophets make ſo often mention that
the Meſſias was geuen to the Gentils
for a light, to the ende he might be the

ſaluation of God euen to the endes of
the earth. To thys purpoſe hee ſayed,
Goe and preache the Goſpell to euery creature.
For after that peace was proclaymed
to all the houſeholde folke, the ſame
meſſage came alſo vnto ſtraungers,
and to thoſe that were farre of. Although
that charge were geuen to the
Apoſtels: yet it behoued them alſo to
keepe thys decree, and euen at thys
day it behoueth all miniſters to keepe
it, to weete, that they geue not holye
thinges to dogges and that they
hurle not pearle before Swyne. The
treaſure of the heauenlye wyſedome
oughte to bee kepte for Goddes chyldren
onely, and not to be throwen
abroade to the proude contemners of
God. They haue commaundement
to preache the Goſpell to euery creature,
and Sayncte Paule affirmeth
that the preachyng thereof is a ſauour
of Death to the reprobate. And there
is nothyng more certayne than that it
is offered euery day to the vnbeleuing
and obſtinate by the commaūdement
of God as a wytneſſe agaynſte them,

to make them the more wyth oute excuſe.
Bycauſe the miniſters or the
Goſpell and all they that are called to
the office of teaching can not diſcerne
betwene the children of God & Swine.
Therefore theyre charge is to offre the
doctrine of Saluation indifferently to
all. For thoughe at the fyrſt they ſee
many ſelfe wylled ſtubbourne and vnapte
to be taught: yet Chriſtian charyty
wil not ſuffer vs to accompt them
as people altogether deſperate. Yet
in the meane ſeaſon we muſte ſee who
they bee that Chriſt calleth doggs and
Swyne. We muſte not at the firſt
take all thoſe for ſuche that are eyther
prophane or vncleane or that are voyd
of the feare of God and of true religion.
But thoſe that by ſure and manifeſte
tokens haue alreadye ſhewed a
ſtubbourne contempte of God, ſo that
a man knoweth that theyre malice is
out of all hope. Here then dogs and
Swyne are they whych haue already
bene as it were glutted ful with a poiſoned
dyſpyſyng of all Gods goodneſſe,
and wyll not bee refourmed.
            
               
And ſo wee muſte denye the Goſpel to
none but to ſuch as ſo proudly haue retected
it when it hath bene offred them
that a man knoweth that they themſelues
of their owne ſtubbourneſſe haue
condemned themſelues.
         
         
            41
            
               God vvyl that all men ſhuld be ſaued.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2.
               There are but fevve that are ſaued.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 14.
            
            IF the Goſpell be the power of God
to Saluation to all beleuers, it is certaine
that al they to whom the Goſpel
is offered are alſo called to the hope of
euerlaſting and bleſſed life. Moreouer
as the calling is a teaching of the ſecret
election, ſo God admitteth thoſe
to the poſſeſſion of eternall ſaluation
whych he maketh partakers of his goſpel.
For the Goſpell openneth vnto vs
the righteouſneſſe of God whiche is a
certaine entry into life. But how commeth
this to paſſe that all men are not
ſaued, ſeeing God willeth it? for who
can let the will of God? whiche as it is
very good and very iuſt, ſo is it almighty.

Thys queſtion myght haue ſom colour
if Saint Paul ſpake of euery mā.
But yet thereto a man myghte make
anſwere. For althoughe wee may not
wey the wyl of God by hys ſecret and
hydden Iudgements, yet when he ſheweth
it to vs by outeward ſygnes and
teſtymonyes, a man may ſaye that hee
hath in himſelf decreed that whych hee
wyl euery man ſhould do. But bicauſe
thys ſerueth nothyng for the expoundyng
of thys ſentence, we muſt vnderſtand
what Sainte Paul meaneth, to
wete that there is no eſtate in ye world
ſhut out from ſaluation, and from the
bleſſed life: but rather God would that
the Goſpel ſhould be offred to all. And
if we vnderſtand that the preaching of
the Goſpel is quickening, in that it reueleth
to vs the righteouſneſſe of God
which is a certaine way to geue an entrance
into lyfe, we ſhal not think that
ſtraunge which ſainct Paul ſayth that
Gods will is that al men ſhould be ſaued
ſeing he wold haue all come to the
knowledge of the truth. But heere he
ſpeaketh of ſorts of men, of eſtats and

conditions of them, and not of euery
man a parte. For the intent of the
Apoſtle is none other but to contayne
Princes in the number, and that men
ſhuld not conſidre what maner of men
Princes were at that tyme: but what
God woulde haue them to be. Saluation
commeth to vs no otherwyſe but
by Gods free liberalitye. Nowe the
ſame God which hath made vs partakers
of the happy lyfe & of eternall ſaluatiō,
may ſomtimes ſtretch his grace
euen to them. The ſame y• alredy of his
goodneſſe hath drawen vs vnto hym,
may one day bryng thē likewiſe wt vs.
            But the whileſt how many are ther
that by their vnthankfulneſſe and ſtubbourneſſe
make themſelfe vnworthye
of thys ſaluation? What coulde God
haue done of all that whiche belonged
to the ſaluation of men whiche he hath
not done? And behold the greater part
ſtoutly and proudly reiect the grace of
God. Is not thys agreable to Goddes
righteouſneſſe that ſuche ſhoulde feele
him a rigorous Iudge, whome they
would not acknowledge or accept for a
Sauiour.
            
               
If wee compare the greate nomber of
thoſe with the little nomber of the choſen
and faithful, we ſhal perceaue how
true thys ſentence is that there are very
fewe of thoſe that be ſaued. Howe
many Mahometes are heere beneath
in the world? how many Iewes? And
how many are ther which vaunt them
of the name of Chriſtians, yet are they
no Chriſtians? And among the faythfull
how many Hypocrites are there?
and what ſhal we make of the reſte of
other men? but a little grayne hid vnder
a greate heape of chaffe. Then a
man may well ſay that Godds wyll is
that all men ſhould be ſaued, yet there
are but fewe ſaued. God ſtretcheth hys
hand and arme to all men vpon earth:
but y• more part draw back as though
they had not to do with God nor wyth
his boūty, with his grace nor with hys
ſaluation.
         
         
            42
            
               God hath ſhutte all in vnbeleefe to the
ende he might ſhevve mercy to all.
               Roma. 11
               He that vvil not beleue ſhal be cōdēned.
               Mar. 16.
            
            
               
The Apoſtle ſignifieth two thinges by
this former ſentence. Firſt that there
is nothing in man whereby he deſerueth
to be preferred before other beſide
the meere grace and goodneſſe of god.
Wherfore they that already haue ſom
hope of ſaluation muſt not diſpayre of
other: for whatſoeuer they are nowe
they haue bene heretofore as all the others
now are. If by the onely mercy
and goodneſſe of God they are come
out of vnbeleefe they oughte lykewyſe
to leaue ſome place to others. Yet thys
is not to ſaye that God ſo blindeth all
men that their vnbeleefe oughte to bee
imputed vnto hym: but he by hys prouidence
ſo ordred the matter that all
ſhould be gylty of incredulity to thend
he might kepe al men ſhort and bound
vnder his iudgementes, and that is to
the end that ſaluation might come frō
hys onely goodneſſe and all deſertes
ſhould be troden vnder fote. Secondarily
that God in the diſpenſatiō of hys
grace is not letted from beſtowing it
on whō it ſhalſeme good to him. Let vs
then ſay that he hath ſhut vs all vnder

vnbeliefe to the end he myghte haue
mercy on all. That is to ſay, to the end
that none of thoſe which ſhalbe called
to ſaluation ſhould thynke to obtayne
ſaluation but only through the mercy
of God.
            Then ſeing it is ſo that God in beſtowing
hys grace, is not let from geuyng
it to whom he will, we may alſo
ſave that he is not let to exerciſe hys
iudgementes whereſoeuer it ſemeth
good to hym. The Goſpell is the power
of God to ſaluation: but that is to
the faythfull only. And whoſoeuer beleueth
it ſhalbe ſaued. But as promiſe
is made to draw mankynd vnto fayth:
ſo is there a terrible threatnyng of deſtruction
agaynſt all the obſtinate &
vnfaythfull, to aſ
                  •
               ōne them. Theſe ar
they that refuſe ſaluation that is offered
thē, which plucke vpō their heades
fearefull ruyne and condemnation.
And they are not only wrapped in the
common and generall deſtruction of
all mankynde: but alſo they beare the
fault of their owne vnthankfulneſſe.
         
         
            43
            
               
                  Iudge not and you ſhall not bee
iudged.
               Mathe. 7.
               Iudge iuſte iudgement,
               Ioan. 7.
            
            WHEN the Lorde Ieſus ſayeth
iudge not, he doth not preciſely
forbyd to iudge: but his meaning
is to heale a ſickeneſſe whiche is naturally
almoſt in al This we ſee ordinarily
that euery man geues him y• head
but euery mā buſyeth himſelf to iudge
other men ſtreight. And hardly ſhall a
man finde any one that is not tyckled
with deſyre to enquyre of other mens
faultes. Al wil confeſſe that it is an vnſufferable
euil to ſlatter thēſelf in their
own vyces, and to be ſo nere markers
of the offences of their brethren. But
there is a plage yet more daungerous
that diuerſe whyle they condemne other,
themſelf wil haue leaue to ſynne.
See then what our Lorde Ieſus doth
in ſaying Iudge not, to wete, he repreſſeth
the fleſhe and froward appetyte of
checking, tawntyng and backbyting:
yet is it not ment hereby ye the faythful
ſhould haue their eyes blynd filded

to y• end they ſhould diſcerne nothing:
but they oughte to brydle themſelues
leaſt they ſhould be caryed away with
to great a deſyre to iudge. For when
any one coueteth to iudge his brethrē,
he cannot but be ouer rigorous. Thus
when Chriſt commaundeth that wee
ſhoulde not Iudge, he meaneth that
we ſhoulde not curiouſly enquyre of
the doynages of oure brethren. But
in the meane ſeaſon he wil not haue
vs to be without iudgement or diſcretion
in ſuche ſort as we ſhould not bee
able to put a dyfference beetwene the
good and the euill or to ſaye what is
iuſte and ryghte, and what is wrong:
but he woulde there ſhoulde be a wiſe
moderation vſed, and that to iudge
well and ryghtly a man ſhoulde loke
ſimplye to the dede, and not to the perſon.
It behoueth vs to marke whye
the Lorde Ieſus ſpake thus. He had
to do with the Iewes which dyd interprete
hys workes maliciouſlie & with
a peruerſe affection though they were
forced to graunt that they wer diuine.

He ſetteth before their eyes circumciſion
to whiche they beare reuerence &
that of ryght. When they dyd it on the
Sabboth day they knewe wel that the
lawe of God was not broken, for aſmuch
as the workes of God agree very
wel one with another. What reaſon
is there that they dyd not ſaye aſmuch
of the workes of Chriſt but that
their ſpirites were occupied beefore
with a folyſhe iudgement which they
had conceaued of hys perſon. Wherefore
there ſhall neuer be ryght iudgement
geuen if it bee not pronounced
accordyng to the truth of the dede: for
as ſone as a mā ſetteth the perſons before
hys eyes, he directeth alſo his ſenſes
to them, ſo that forthwith the truth
vanyſheth.
         
         
            44
            
               VVhē you pray ſpeake not much.
               Mathe. 6.
               Praye vvithout ceaſing.
               1. Theſſ. 8. 5.
            
            OVR Lorde Ieſus reproueth a
fault in Hipocrites which thynke
they are able to perſuade God by
much bablyng and folyſhe rehearſal

of words. And the continuing in prayer
that is ſo muche prayſed and commaunded
in the holy ſcripture is not
contrarie to thys doctryne: For when
the faythful man conceaueth a prayer
and maketh it with a holy & good affection,
his tong goeth not before hys
hart. Moreouer the fauoure of God is
not gotten by an affected bablyng of
words: but rather a true faythful hart
ſhoteth oute hys affections as flying
ſhaftes which haue power to pearce euen
vnto heauen. Thys forbydding of
bablyng and vayne repetyng of wordes
in prayer, doth not let the continuaunce
of prayer, not that God on hys
behalfe hath any nede y• a man ſhould
make hym any rehearſalls, or that a
man ſhoulde offer vnto hym any remembraunces,
or when a man hath
ſpoken to hym on
                  •
               e that he hath nede
to be moued the ſecond tyme: but thys
taryeng ſtill or continuyng in prayer
is of duety requiſyte in vs. Euery mā
ought to conſider well hys neceſſities,
and howe he hath continually nede of
the ſuccour of God. It is true that he

could geue vs al neceſſarie thyngs before
we ſhould opē our mouth to pray
to hym: and ſurely if of hys goodneſſe
he preuented not oure prayers,
yea our deſyres we ſhould be more thā
myſerable: but he wyll ſo exercyſe our
fayth, and the end and vſe of our prayers
is, that caſting our playntes and
grones into the fatherlye boſome of
God, we myght be wel aſſured that he
would forſake vs in nothyng.
         
         
            45
            
               Beare the burdens one of another.
               Galat. 6.
               Euery one ſhall beare hys ovvne
burden.
               Galat. 6.
            
            THIS nature teacheth vs, when
we ſee any mā loden with a burden
which he cannot beare or vnder
which he falleth downe, to vnlode
him in ſome ſort, either els to eaſe him
with the leaſt hurt y• may be. If ther be
any gentleneſſe in vs, we muſt chiefly
ſhewe it to the bearyng the faultes of
our brethrē, which faultes ar properly
called lodes or burdens. But whē we
are cōmaunded to beare y• weakneſſe

one of another, it is not ment y• by 
                  •
               auoryng
or clokyng we ſhould noryſhe
the euils or vices of oure brethrē and
neyghboures: but rather y• we ſhould
vnlode them. Now y• muſt be done by
ſofte and quiet correction. There are
many adulterers and whoremaſters
that woulde haue Chriſt to be bawde,
Many theues that would that he were
their hider, Many folkes of euil lyfe y•
woulde make hym defendour of theyr
wicked dedes, and y• the faithful ſhould
ſerue them with their ſhoulders to diſcharge
them of their own vncleāneſſe.
But we ſee wherfore we are appoynted
to beare y• burdens of our brethrē,
to wete, to the end that in ſupportyng
them we ſhould endeuour to ſet them
agayne in the ryght waye. Nowe this
that he addeth afterwarde ſerues for y•
interpretation of that that was ſayd
before. Then we ſhalbe preſte & ready
louyngly to vnburden others when euery
man ſhal wel loke on hymſelf to
ſee what maner of one he is. And whē
he ſhall haue diligently examined hys
own worke not deceauyng hymſelf by

thinkyng that he is any thyng, or is
worth oughte. We haue nothyng of
our own wherof we may boſt but we
are ſo voyde of al good that al our glory
is but mere vanitie. If we thynke
diligently hereon we ſhall wax more
gentle and meeke towardes others.
Whence cōmeth thys pryde that maketh
vs exalt our ſelues aboue others?
whence commeth the proud and cruel
ſharpneſſe? but hereof that euery one
will be ſet a lofte, and loke vpon al the
reſt as beyng vnderneath at hys fete:
but yet bicauſe in comparyng our ſelues
with other we make other by eſtimation
to be of very ſmal value, wee
are ſent backe to the tryeng of our ſelues
to the end we ſhould not meaſure
oure ſelues by another mans yarde,
to y• end that none of vs ſhoulde pleaſe
hymſelf bicauſe others dipleaſe him:
but turnyng his loke from other, euery
one ought to ſearche out hys owne
conſcience, and to conſider liuely hys
own worke. That is no true pray
                  •
               e
whiche we ſeke to attayne by the dyſaduantage
of another mannes good

name: but that which we get without
makyng compariſon of their baſe renowne
with oure greatneſſe, and to
take from vs all pryde, the concluſion
is that euery one ſhall beare his owne
burdē. Gods iudgement is hereby ſet
before oure eyes before whom euery
one muſte geue accompte of hys lyfe,
and ther ſhalbe no compariſon made,
but euery mā ſhal there carry his own
burden: for thys is that that deceaueth
vs. He that hath but one eye or
he that is pooreblynde, beyng among
the blynde thynketh that he ſeeth wel:
but one ſhall not acquyte another frō
hys ſynne.
         
         
            46
            
               Carry nothyng on the vvaye neyther
ſtaffe nor vvallet nor bread nor
mony.
               Luke. 9.
               You ſhall carry nothyng on the
vvay but a ſtaffe.
               Marc. 6.
            
            THE difficultye is in thys that
Saint Mathew and Saint Luke
ſay that it was forbidden them to
carry a rodde or ſtaffe. And Saint

Marke ſayth, they wer ſuffered to carry
a ſtaffe. Before thys dyfficultie
bee reſolued we muſte ſee what the
purpoſe of oure Lorde Ieſus is. He
woulde that his Apoſties ſhoulde in a
little tyme viſyte all the countrey of
Iewrye, and that they ſhoulde ſpedely
returne to hym. And that thys mighte
bee done he forbyddeth them to carry
with them any baggage which might
let them from makyng haſte. And
thys commaundemente muſte bee reſtrayned
to thys vyage. They myght
well haue had wallets, ſtaues, ſhoes,
garmentes, golde and ſyluer in their
houſes: but to the end they myght bee
the lyghter he commaundeth them to
leaue behynde, euery burden y• myght
lode them. But as touchyng the ſtaffe
Saint Mathew and Sainte Luke
meane ſuche ſtaues as myghte lode
or hynder them that ſhould cary them.
But Saint Marke meaneth a ſtaffe
which they carry commonly that take
Iourneyes in hande, and they carry
them onely to ſtaye them vp and to
helpe them oute of the myer or an ill

way, or to leape a dyke as the cuſtome
and manner in olde tyme was to cary
a ſtaffe to Iourney wythall. As appeareth
by that whiche is ſayd in Geneſis.
I paſſed Iordan with my ſtaffe. Iacob
confeſſeth by theſe words that he was
not loden with ryches when he came
into Siria.
            
         
         
            47
            
               Ieſus taryed in Ievvry & baptyſed.
               Ioan. 3.
               Ieſus dyd not baptyſe.
               Ioan. 4.
            
            ONE of theſe places ſerues to expounde
the other. For when it is
ſayd in the. 4. of Iohn that oure
Lord Ieſus baptiſed more Dyſciples
than Iohn, the correction is alſo added
to wete, thoughe Ieſus baptiſed not,
but hys Diſciples baptiſed, and thys
baptyme is called the baptyme of the
Sonne of God, and that to the end we
ſhoulde vnderſtand that the baptyme
ought not to be eſtemed after y• perſon
of the miniſter but the ſtrength therof
dependeth wholly on hym that is
the author of it, in whoſe name it is
geuen, and on hys holy ordinaunce.

And thys ſerueth to comfort vs, that
we knowe that baptyme is no leſſe able
to waſhe and renue vs than yf it
were adminiſtred to vs by the very
hand of the ſonne of God. If we aſke
why he ſtayed from the adminiſtration
of the outward ſygne, the reaſon is
eaſely geuē, to were, bycauſe he would
leaue a teſtimony to all ages and generations
that the baptyme is in nothing
diminiſhed when it is offred by
a mortal man. Wherefore Chriſt not
only baptyſeth inwardly by hys holy
ſpirit: but we ought aſmuch to eſteme
yt ſygne which we receaue at the hand
of a mortall man as yf Chriſt himſelf
ſtreatched oute hys hand to vs from
heauen. Ieſus Chriſt thē baptiſed and
dyd not baptyſe. He baptyſed foraſmuch
as the baptyme that was myniſtred
by the handes of hys Dyſciples
was aduoutched to be hys, and eſtemed
ſuche as if hymſelfe had baptiſed.
He did not baptiſe, bycauſe he did not
admyniſter the outwarde ſygne but
cauſed hys Dyſciples to do it.
         
         
            48
            
               
                  Thou ſhalt hate thyne enemy.
               Mathe. 5.
               Loue your enemyes.
               Math. 5.
            
            WHen God ſpeaketh of our neighboures,
it is certayne that he cō
               prehendeth
al the kynde of man:
for as euery man is geuen to himſelf
as often as any perticular commodityes
part one from the other, the mutuall
pertaking which nature her ſelf
enioyneth vs, is forſaken, to the ende
then that we might be kept in bond of
brotherly loue, God teſtifyeth that al
men be our neyghbours bycauſe that
nature common to vs al maketh vs al
frendes among our ſelues. As often
as a man beholdeth a man, bycauſe it
is hys fleſhe and hys bone, ſo often it
behoueth hym neceſſarily to beholde
hymſelf as in a glaſſe, but bycauſe the
moſt parte departe from thys holy felowſhyp,
yet notwithſtandyng the order
of nature is not broken by theyr
lewdneſſe, bycauſe we muſt loke vpon
God who is author of thys vnitye and
coniunction. And therfore thys commaundement
by which we ar appointed

to loue our neyghbour, is general.
But it is maruell how the Scribes fel
into thys abſurdltie to reſtrayne thys
worde neyghboures vnto weldoers,
and thoſe whyche by their pleaſures
and ſeruices that they doe deſerue to
be loued. They meaſured neyghbourhode
accordyng to the affection of euery
one. Wherefore they ſayd thoſe
only were to be taken for neyghbours
whiche for their good dedes are worthye
to haue frendſhip borne vnto thē,
or at the leaſt ſuche as doe pleaſure for
pleaſure. Common reaſon counſelleth
euery one ſo, and for thys cauſe the
chyldren of the proude worlde were
neuer aſhamed to confeſſe and ſhewe
openly their hatred hauyng ſome reaſon
to make it of value: but the loue
which God commaundes and recommendeth
in hys law doth not loke vpon
that that euery one deſerueth: but
it ſtretcheth forth vnto the vnworthy,
the ouerthwart & vnthankfull. Nowe
when Ieſus Chriſt ſayeth, but I ſaye
vnto you loue your enemyes, he maketh
not a newe lawe or ordinaunce:

but he bringeth agayne the law of his
father into hys true and natural meaning
correcting the falſe and pernerſs
expoſitions and gloſes of the ſcribes,
by which they had corrupted and falſified
the pureneſſe of the lawe of God,
he leaueth then thys holy ordinaunce
in hys perfect ſtate. Thou ſhalt loue
thy neyghbour: yet he will ſhewe how
it ſhalbe duely accomplyſhed, to wete,
when we ſhal loue not only thoſe that
do vs good: but alſo thoſe that procure
our hurt.
         
         
            49
            
               Take hede thou tel it to no bodye.
               Math. 8.
               Tell all the thynges that God hath
done to thee.
               Luke. 8.
            
            
               CHRIST forbyds the leper whom he
healed to tel vnto other what was
happened vnto hym. And the reaſon
is thys, the conuenient tyme to
tell it was not yet cōme. True it is
that thys myracle oughte not to bee
hydde or ſuppreſſed: but there was
a certayne cauſe whye the Lorde

Ieſus would not that the brute of this
miracle ſhoulde be ſo ſodaynly ſpread
abrode, or at the leaſt would not haue
it done by y• leper. And touchyng that
the leper coulde not holde hys peace,
althoughe it ſeme that therein he dyd
ſhewe ſome ſygne of acknowledgyng
the benefyte: yet he was ſo farre from
deſeruyng any prayſe thereby, that he
was rather worthy of rebuke, bicauſe
he dyd not obey the commaundement
of the Sonne of God. If we were willyng
to reknowledge the healyng of
hys leproſye to hym that had healed
hym, he could not haue done it better
than by vſyng ſymple obedience which
before God is better worth than all offrynges
and ſacrifice and it is the begynnyng
of the true ſeruyce of God.
And as touchyng that he ſayth to the
poſſeſſed with a ſpirit whom he had alſo
healed, report al that God hath done vnto
thee, we muſt lykewyſe note the reaſon
why he gaue thys commaundemente.
All the miracles that Chriſt did could
not be long hyd, neyther had it beene
reaſon to ſuppreſſe the power of God

by which his will was that al ye worlde
ſhuld be prepared to life: but ſomtimes
he would that men ſhould holde theyre
peace a while bycauſe the oportunitye
was not yet come. Somtime alſo he cō
               maūded
his miracles to be publiſhed to
y• end he might be taken for y• true miniſter
& Prophet of God, & to haue autority
to teach, calling hys miracle the
work of god. For it was requiſite that
ye people which as yet were rude ſhuld
be inſtructed, foraſmuchas they as yet
knewe not his Diuinitie. And thoughe
Chriſt be ye ladder by which we goe vp
to the father: neuertheleſſe bycauſe he
was not yet manifeſted he begā wt hys
Father til ſuche time as he had a more
tipe oportunity.
         
         
            50
            
               If any man ſtrike thee on the ryght
cheke turne the other to hym alſo.
               Ieſu Chriſt ſmittē by the ſeruaūt of
the high Prieſt anſvvered. If I haue il
ſaid bere vvitnes of the il: but if I haue
ſayd vvell, vvhy doeſt thou ſtrike me?
            
            
               
THys fyrſt ſentence was expoūded
here aboue. The ſūme is that our
Lorde Ieſus woulde faſhion the
heartes of the faythful to kepe a meaſure
and vpryghtneſſe, who (althoughe
they be prouoked) ought for al that rather
to appeaſe the iniuries by patiēce
than by yealoing agayne wronge for
wrong to ſtyre vp men which alredy
were to muche ſtyred. The waye to
quench fier is not to put to it ſuch matter
as is mete to kindle it more. To repreſſe
one wrong by another wronge,
and one outrage by another outrage
what is it els but to ſet on fier y• which
already burnt to much. He wyll then
haue vs ſo to be meaſured in our paſſions
that when any outrage is don vnto
vs we ſhuld be redy to ſuffer a new
wrong rather than to wreak vs of that
which hath ben don vnto vs. Notwithſtanding
when Chriſt anſwered ſo vnto
the ſeruant of the bye Prieſt, it ſeemeth
he fulfilled not that which he appointeth
and cōmaundeth hys faithful
to obſerue for he turneth not his ryght
cheeke to him that ſtrake him on y• left.

But it is to be vnderſtand, that in chriſtian
patience it is not alwayes requyſite
that he that hath ben ſtricken and
wronged, ſhould put vp the wrong don
vnto hym withoute ſpeaking a worde:
but firſt he muſte patientlye ſuffre the
wrong that hath bene done hym. Furthermore
he muſt forget al reuenging
luſt, and endeuour to ouercōme the ill
by wel doing. The wicked are butte to
much ſtirred by the ſprite of Sathā to
hurt and endomage, and of themſelfe
they are tomuch prouoked though thei
be not otherwiſe egged forth. Therfor
this wer an il interpreting of Chriſts
wordes to ſay that a mā ſhuld by new
prouocatiō ſtyr thoſe to il doing which
are alredy ouermuch infained by their
wicked affectiō. For y• meaning of hys
words tēd to nothīg els but y• euery ōe
of vs ſhuld be redy to ſuffre y•. ii. wrong
rather thā to reuē
               
                  •
               e y• firſt. This then
letteth not but y• a Chriſten man that
hath ben ſtrickē & outraged wrongfully
may cōplain, ſo y• his hart be void of
al rācor, & his hāds clean frō al reuēge
         
         
            51
            
               
                  I am not cōme to bryng peace but
the ſvvearde.
               Marc. 10.
               I gyue you my peace, I leaue you
my peace.
               Ioan. 14.
            
            BYcauſe the greater parte of men,
not only are enemies to the goſpel:
but alſo reſiſte it maliciouſly, it is
not poſſible to profeſſe Chriſt wythout
fighting and without the hatred of many.
All the faythful therefore are warned
to prepare thēſelf to fight, bicauſe
they muſt nedes fight for the teſtimony
of the truth. But the Prophets euery
wher promiſe peace and quiet ſtate
vnder the reigne of Chriſt. Hereupon
what could a mā hope for, but that out
of hand wherſoeuer a man wer al thinges
ſhould be quiet? And ſeeing y• ſōne
of God is called our peace, and that y•
Goſpel reconcileth vs to God, what cā
a man ſay therof but that ther is a brotherly
agreemente appoynted to be among
vs. And therfore it ſeemeth not
that thys agreeth with the oracles of y•
Prophets that ſtrife, bralles, and warres
ſhould be kindled in y• world wher

peace and the Goſpell is preached. And
beſides it is much leſſe agreing wyth y•
office of Chriſt, and with the nature of
the Goſpel. But the peace of which the
Prophets make mentiō is only amōg
the true ſeruauntes and the faithful of
God, and in Godly conſciences, in as
much as it is ioyned with fayth, and
reacheth not vnto the vnbeleuing and
ſtubborne, though it be liberally offred
vnto them, and they can not abyde to
enter in fauor and couenaūt with god.
And thereof cōmes it that the meſſage
of peace rayſeth in them troubles and
greater ſtormes than before. For Sathan
that raigneth in the reproued, is
mad aſſone as he heareth of yt name of
Ieſus Chriſt, and the vngodlineſſe of
the proud and wicked is ſharpned whē
the doctrine of the ſonne of God is ſet
before them. So the naughtineſſe of
men cauſeth that Chriſte which is authour
of peace is made an occaſion of
troubles. Thus our lord Ieſus Chriſt
may wel be ſayed to leaue vs peace for
in that he wēt to his father, he forſoke
vs not: but left vs the good ſauor of his

ſpiritual preſence. It cā not be but that
peace is with vs, & that we be alwayes
happy by his bleſſing which is the frut
that we reape when we yeald true and
perfect obedience to his Goſpel, which
bycauſe it taketh away the ſilthineſſe
of the wicked, and that they cannot abide
to be clenſed to be brought to god
is rightly called a ſweard ſente to the
wicked to waken their cōſciences and
to ſtirre vp troubles againſt them.
         
         
            52
            
               VVhen you haue done all thinges,
ſay, vve are vnprofitable ſeruauntes.
               Luc. 17.
               VVee haue follovved thee, vvhat
shall becōme of vs then?
               Math. 19.
            
            BOTH we and all that we haue belong
to God by right, and he poſſeſſeth
vs as ſlaues. Therfore what
ſeruice ſoeuer we indeuour to do hym,
yet is there nothing that bindeth hym
as though we deſerued. For ſeeing we
belong to him, it is certain that he can
owe nothing vnto vs. We are no leſſe
bounde and beholdyng vnto him than
bondmen and ſlaues were in olde time

to their maſters, whiche were in ſuche
ſtate that they got nothing for thēſelf:
but were held and kept vnder the bondage
of their maſters with all their laboures,
their force, and diligence, yea
euen vnto bloud. If ſuch power be grā
               ted
to one mortall man ouer another
man, that he may make hym work day
and night, and yet thereby he ſhall not
be bound to recompence him with like
how much more ſhall it be lawfull for
God to require of vs al that we can laboure
and do in al our life as farre as
our power and abilitye can ſtretche, ſo
that notwythſtanding hee be no way
                  •
               
bound vnto vs? Althoughe it be a frowarde
arrogantneſſe to imagine that
god oweth any thing to mē, as though
they deſerued at hys hande: yet there
is no faulte more common than ſuche
pryde, for euery manne woulde call
God to a reconing. And thys is the
cauſe whye menne haue imagined deſeruinges,
and thys opinion hathe
had place almoſte in all tymes. And
thys is that that made the Apoſtels to
aſk this queſtiō, we haue folowed thee

what commoditie then or recompence
ſhal we haue? And it ſeemeth that they
haue ſom colour to aſke it ſeing ye ſcripture
ſo many times promiſeth hier and
recompence to works, to which by this
meanes it ſeemeth to attribute ſome
worthineſſe or deſert. But true it is yt
we are ſo ſubiecte to the rule of God y•
we owe to hym both our ſelf and all y•
is in vs. Now then the hyer is not promiſed
any other way but of the meere
and good pleaſure of God. For they
that by mutuall relation ioyne the deſert
with the hyer are greatly deceued
bycauſe that God is not moued by the
worthineſſe of the workes to recōpēce
them: but by his gentleneſſe and free
goodneſſe. True it is that by the bargaines
of the law God is bound to mē
but it is on that conditiō that they performe
al that is there required of them.
But bicauſe this bonde is voluntary it
is certayne and ſure that man can aſk
or require nothing of God as thoughe
he had deſerued any thing at his hand
By thys meanes the pryde of the fleſh
falleth downe flat on the ground. For

although a man had fulfilled the lawe:
yet he could not bring in any reckonīg
to God, as if he were bound to yeld vnto
him ſome ouerplus, for he ſhuld only
haue paied that which he ought. And
in this ſenſe it is ſayd that we be vnprofitable
ſeruaunts, for God receaueth
nothing of vs that commeth from elſwhere,
but onely he gathereth vp the
frute of hys demayne.
            Now the Apoſtles vaunt that they
haue left al and followed Chriſt. But
what was that all? for ſeeing they wer
handy craftes men, and poore as touching
the goods of thys world, and alſo
diſpiſed. Scarcely was ther any thīg
in their houſes to leaue behinde them.
It was then a vayne boaſte, as we ſee
ordinarily how free men are to preyſe
and value the ſeruices that they doe to
God. But howſoeuer the caſe ſtand, if
we had forſaken Kingdomes and rych
poſſeſſions to follow Chriſt, yet al our
ſeruices be they neuer ſo exquiſite and
heaped together deſerue not y• leaſte of
his graces, neither cā we bring to paſſe
but y• we ſhal remain vnprofitable ſeruaunts.
         
         
            
            53
            
               If any man clenſe himſelf of theſe thīgs
he shalbe a veſſel ſāctified to honoure.
               Timot. 2.
               God vvorketh all in all.
               1. Cor. 12.
            
            THIS ſentence is alwayes true
that it is not of willer nor of y• rū
               ner
but of God that hath mercye.
If a man alledge that it is in the power
of man to cleanſe hymſelfe and to
make hymſelf a veſſel ſanctified to honour:
it is a vayne obiection, for Saint
Paul ſpeaketh not here of the election
of men to ſhew who is the cauſe of our
election as he doth in the. 9. Chapiter
to the Romaines: but only he wyl that
we reſemble not the in
                  •
               dels which we
ſee to be borne to deſtruction. It is thē
a folly to gather of theſe words that it
is in the power of man to aſſociat him
ſelfe in the number of the chyldren of
God, and to make hymſelfe the cauſe
of hys owne adoption. If the reprobate
bee veſſells of ſhame and dyſhonoure,
they haue thys dyſhonoure encloſed
within them. But yet they diſfygure
not the houſe, neyther is the maiſter

of the houſe diſhonored by them, which
in the dyuerſytye of members ordayneth
and appoynteth euery veſſell to
to the vſe that it is worthy of. It behovs
to learne to make our ſelf meete for
more honeſt vſages. For we haue as
it were a glaſſe before oure eyes in the
perſon of the reproued to beholde that
there is a deteſtable vnhappyneſſe in
man when he ſerueth not the glory of
God, thys onelye warninge is to vs a
ſtrong buckelar to repulſe thoſe that
wil haue men to be the cauſe of theyre
owne predeſtination, as though Saint
Paul had geuen a rule to men of that
whyche they ſhoulde doe beefore they
were borne, yea, beefore the foundations
of the world were layd. Moreouer
if a man wyll gather hereof that
man hath free choyſe ynoughe to prepare
hym ſelfe to bee fourmed to geue
obedience vnto God. Although it haue
ſome likelyhode: yet they that ſo ſay do
argue verye weakely, for here an expreſſe
commaundement is geuen to y•
faithful to to clenſe thēſelf frō y• filth of
y• infidels. Foraſmuch as they muſt be
ſanctified vnto God.
            
               
There is a like commaundement euery
where in the holy Scriptures. Wee
ſee cleerly heereby that we be called to
holines. Ther is a difference betwene
the calling and the office of Chriſtians
and betwene their faculty and power.
It is certaine that the faythful are required
to purge themſelf: but God witneſſeth
ſufficiently that it is hys office
to purge when hee promiſeth to ſende
pure and cleane waters, to the end wee
may be made cleane. And therfore we
muſt deſire of God that he will purge
vs of our filthines rather thā to proue
our owne ſtrength without hys ayde.
Now hereof we will take this doctrine
that ther is no goodneſſe in men whiche
procedeth not of God. And we may
boldly pronounce that it is God that
worketh all thinges in al. True it is y•
Sainct Paul ſtretcheth not thys ſentence
to the general prouidence of god
but he ſpeaketh onely of the liberalyty
that God vſeth toward vs when he beſtoweth
ſombenefit on eueri one of vs.
So that we may gather of this ſentēce
that there is no good in men nor any
                  •
               
               
thing worthy praiſe but that which procedeth
from the goodneſſe of God.
         
         
            54
            
               They ſhall be al taught of God.
               Ioan. 6.
               Search the Scriptures.
               Ioan. 5.
            
            OVR Lord Ieſus to confirme that
which he had ſaid, to wete, that no
man cōmes to hī except his father
draw him, alledgeth y• witneſſe of Eſay
54. Chapter. Wher y• Prophet maketh
mention of ye reſtoring of y• Churche, &
promiſeth y• hyr childrē ſhal be taughte
vnder y• ſcholing of God. And hereof a
man may raſily gather y• the Churche
cānot be ſet again in good ordre vnles
y• God taking y• charge of inſtructing
y• faythful bring thē to him. This meā
of teaching ſtādeth not only in y• outward
voice: but alſo y• ſecret ſtrength &
working of y• holy ghoſt. So y• this inſtruction
of God is the inward lightening
of y• hart. Eſay ſheweth openly y•
thē y• Church is truly bylded when ſhe
hath childrē taught of god. And this cō
               ſequēce
maketh wel to y• purpoſe, y• mē
haue not yet eyes meete to beholde the

lyght of lyfe, vntyll God haue opened
them. It is certaine that al the ſermōs
ſhould ſerue to no purpoſe, if god taught
not inwardly by hys ſpirit. Neuertheleſſe
hee woulde not take awaye the
meane whiche hee himſelfe had ordayned,
to weete, to heare and reade the
Scriptures, as though it were not neceſſary
for mē to be inſtructed by y• outward
miniſtery, but y• it ſhuld not behous
thē only to wayt for reuelatiōs
from aboue. But when Chriſte ſayeth.
Search the Scriptures, he reproueth y• fond
vauntyng of the hypocrites which ſaid
they had life in them and yet they medled
onely wyth the dead letter. Truly
lyte ſhould be ſought in the Scripturs
ſaing they be appoynted for vs for that
vſe and to that ende: not withſtanding
what booteth it to think that the ſcripture
bringeth lyfe, and the whyleſt to
go away from the natural meaning of
them, and to put the light of life by peruerſe
opinions. How may it be that y•
law ſhuld quicken wtout Chriſt which
only quickeneth it? Beſide, thys place
teacheth vs that if we would haue true

knowledge of God and of Ieſu Chriſt
hys ſonne we muſt take it of the ſcriptures.
For if we forge imaginations
of God after oure fantaſyes, and as it
ſhall ſeeme good to vs wee haue but a
vayne Imagination, and a ſhadow in
ſtead of God. But the whileſt let vs remember
how we muſt ſearch the ſcriptures.
If we go to to them thinkyng to
finde any thyng in them by our owne
diligēce or wiſdome, we ſhal brīg awai
wt vs nothing els but falſe & vaine opiniōs.
But we muſt reſigne our ſpirits
to god, to ye end that he which is ye autor
of ye ſcriptures may make vs wel to vnderſtand
the truth of them.
         
         
            55
            
               Flesh and bloud cannot poſſeſſe
the Kingdome of God.
               Cor. 15.
               VVe beleeue the reſurrection of
the flesh.
            
            EMong the articles of our fayth wee
beleue that our bodies ſhall ryſe agayne:
without thys the preaching
of ye Goſpel wer vain, for if our bodies
riſe not again, chriſt is not riſē agaī &

if he be not riſen agayne, what ſhal becōm
of our hope? This is the argumēt
which Saint Paul maketh. 1. Corinth. 15.
then euery man ſhal riſe againe in his
owne body, and the fleſhe of euery one
that ſhal haue bene corrupted and ſhal
haue ſlept in the earth ſhal be fully reſtored
and ioyned agayne to hys ſoule,
when it ſhal haue put of al weakeneſſe
and corruptiō to be made like vnto the
glorious body of Ieſus chriſt. Though
ther be nothing that the vnderſtāding
of man repulſeth more: yet faith is not
deceued when ſhe holdeth aſſuredly on
the power of God ioyned with his promiſſe.
He that hath made man of nothyng,
can eaſily make him hole again
after y• he hath bene waſted. Now to y•
ende this ſhould not ſeeme ſo ſtrāge to
vs, y• ſpirit ſets before our eies an ordinary
experience. After that the corn is
caſt into the ground it ſemeth to be loſt
for it rottes and waſteth in the ground
but afterwarde it ſpringeth vp fairer.
So when the body hath ben corrupted
it tarieth the time apointed by God to
cōme out of y• earth & to be altogether
perfect.
            
               
So then euen as the corne by meanes
of the ſede taketh agayn a new ſhape,
and that more fayrer: ſo the faythfull
which dyeth and goeth to reſt with the
ſede of Ieſu Chriſt which is the ſpirite
of God, is rayſed agayne by the ſame
ſpirite which rayſed the ſonne of God
from death. Moreouer God hath geuen
a viſible certayntye hereof in Ieſus
Chriſt, ſo that is manyfeſtly ſet before
our eyes which otherwyſe ſemed vnto
vs altogether incredible. Therefore to
vnderſtand perfectly what our reſurrection
ſhalbe, we muſt ſtill loke vpon
Chriſt whoe is the myrrour and ſubſtance
of it. Lyke as he roſe agayne in
the ſelf body in which he ſuffered: ſo we
alſo ſhal ryſe agayne in the ſelfe ſame
fleſhe which we carry about wyth vs.
And alſo as after hys reſurrection he
had another glorye much greater than
he had had before: ſo we ſhall bee farre
other after our ryſyng agayne. And
thys ſerueth to expound the other ſentence,
that fleſhe & bloude cannot poſſeſſe
the kyngdome of God, to wete,
in the ſame qualitie y• now they are in,

and vntil thys corruption be chaunged
to incorruption. Before we be able to
receaue this heauēly heritage, our bodyes
muſte bee renued, in aſmuche as
they ar ſubiect to corruption they cannot
enter into the kyngdome of God
whiche is incorruptible, vnto whiche
they ſhall haue no acceſſe till Chriſt
haue faſhioned vs a newe after hys
owne Image, otherwyſe our fleſh ſhal
not be partaker of the glory of God til
it be renued and quickened by the ſpyrite
of Chriſt.
         
         
            56
            
               And he is the attonement for our
ſynnes, and not only for ours. but alſo
for the ſynnes of the vvhole vvorlde.
               1. Ioan. 2.
               I praye not for the vvorlde,
               Ioan. 17.
            
            THE ſumme of the firſt ſentence
cōmes to thys poynt, that y• faythful
ſhould be thorowly perſuaded
that the clenſyng gottē by Ieſu Chriſt
extendeth vnto all thoſe that haue receaued
the Goſpell by fayth, and that

is to the end a man ſhoulde not thynke
that thys benefyte is reſtrayned to a
fewe people onely, or to certayne ages.
A man maye replye, howe
maye thys bee that the ſynnes of all
the worlde are blotted oure. There
at certayne frentrycke ſpyrites which
vnder thys coloure receaue al the reprobates
to ſaluation, yea the deuyl
hymſelfe. But wee oughte not to
tarye aboute the refutyng of thys
monſtruous opynion. If a man
ſaye that Ieſu Chriſt hath ſufficientlye
ſuffered for the faultes of all the
worlde but that hys death hath profyted
the faythfull onely thys is ſomewhat,
but it is not all. For here is
another meanyng in the woordes of
Sainte Iohn, that is to ſaye, that thys
benefite is becōme cōmon to the whole
Church, and therfore the reprobate ar
excluded. Whē he ſayth of al the world
it is ſpoken of thē that ſhoulde beleue,
and whiche were ſcattered in diuerſe
countreyes of the world. For then we
are made trulye to vnderſtande what
the grace of Ieſu Chriſt is when it is

tolde vs that it is the only ſaluation of
all the worlde.
            As touchyng y• other ſentence wher
Chriſt ſayth that he prayeth not for the
worlde, thys worde world is taken in
another meanyng, to wete, for the reprobate.
And therein he ſheweth openly
that he will aſke nothyng whiche agreeth
not with the good pleaſure of
his father. He recōmendeth vnto him
thoſe onely which hys father loueth of
hys owne good will. For he ſayeth he
prayeth not for thoſe that are cutte of
from the kingdome of God, bycauſe he
hath not care but onely for hys owne
ſhepe which he had receaued at y• hand
of hys father. A man will ſaye that
here is an abſurditie, for the beſte rule
we haue to make our prayers by, is to
folow Ieſu Chriſt and to haue him for
our Maſter and leader. Then we are
appoynted to praye for all generally,
moreouer the Sonne of God himſelfe
prayed afterward indifferently for all
ſaying, forgeue them, for they knowe
not what they do. Very true it is that
we muſt praye for all men: Yet for all

that ſuch prayers ar reſtrayned to the
faythfull and choſen onely. We ought
to deſyre that thys man and that man,
and euery man myght be ſaued and ſo
to comprehend all mankynde bycauſe
we cannot yet dyſcerne the faythfull
from the reprobate. In the meane ſeaſon
nowithſtanding when we deſyre yt
ye kyngdome of God ſhould cōme, we
alſo pray that he confounde and beate
downe hys foes. Behold the only dyfference
that there is, we pray for y• health
of all thoſe whom we knowe to be formed
after the Image of God, whyche
haue one nature cōmon with vs. And
we leaue to the Iudgement of God the
deſtruction of thoſe which he knoweth
to be reprobates. But as touching our
Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, there is another
manner of reaſō to be alledged. Fayth
and loue make hym to pray ſo: but this
is not all, he mounteth aboue all men,
he entreth into the inner chamber of
the heauens where he goeth euen vnto
the ſecretes of hys father, and hauyng
preſentlye before hys eyes hys fathers
hidden iudgementes, he knoweth wel

for whom he ſhould pray, deſyryng nothyng
that is agaynſt the will of hym,
nor makyng any prayer or requeſt for
thoſe that are caſte backe from him, he
is the propitiation for the ſynnes of
all men, yea truly, of the choſen and
faythfull, he is not ſo for the reprobate,
bycauſe hys Father hath caſte
them of.
         
         
            57
            
               It is eaſier for a cable to paſſe throughe
a nedells eye then for a ryche mā
to enter into the kyngdome of God.
               Mark. 10.
               My yoke is fauourable & my burden
lyght,
               Mathe. 9.
            
            VERELY the yoke of our Lorde
Ieſu is fauourable: yet it wil not
ſeme ſo to vs accordyng to y• fleſhly
felyng, bycauſe of the rebellion of
oure fleſhe wee ſhall euer ſhunne thys
yoke as comberſome & harde to beare.
But then it ſhal becōme eaſye vnto vs,
and we ſhall bowe oure neckes quietly
vnder it, when beyng clothed with
myldneſſe we ſhall be made lyke vnto

the ſonne of God. And therefore it is
that he ſayeth learne of me for I am
gentle and lowly of heart. He wyl
haue vs beare hys yoke, but to the end
the vneaſyneſſe ſhould not aſtonne vs,
he ſayth learne of me, ſygnifying therby
that thys yoke wyll not bee troubleſome
when by hys example wee
ſhall bee brought to myldeneſſe and
lowlyneſſe. To thys alſo belongeth
that whiche he addeth, you ſhall fynde reſt,
for as long as the fleſhe ſhall kycke
agaynſte it wee ſhall doe nothyng but
braye and ſtorme, and they that refuſyng
to take the yoke of the Sonne of
God, goe aboute to appeaſe God by
another meane, doe but laboure in
vayne.
            But if ſo bee that among other, the
couetous wyll not bowe theyr necke
vnder the yoke of the Lorde Ieſus,
what letteth that this ſentence ſhoulde
not bee true? to wete, that it is an eaſier
matter for a cable to paſſe through
the eye of an nedle, than for a riche mā
to enter into y• kyngdome of God, not

that riches of their nature hynder vs
to folowe God: but in as muche as our
nature is peruerſe & naughtye, hardly
can it cōme to paſſe but yt they whiche
are rych and haue great aboundaunce
of goods ſhould ſtraye ercedyngly out
of the way. Couetouſneſſe is condemned
by thys ſentence as a deadly peſtilence:
notwythſtandyng there with all
is ſhewed what hynderaunce ryches
bryng. And this muſt not ſeme vnto vs
newe or ſtraunge that he ſayth that the
rych ſhal hardly fynde an open place to
enter into the kingdome of heauen: for
it is a vyce almoſte common to all to
truſt in their richeſſe. So then yt ryche
warned of the daunger wherunto they
may fall muſt take hede. The poore cō
               tentyng
themſelf with their lowe ſtate
ought not to couet that whiche maye
bryng them more loſſe or trouble than
profyte or eaſe. By thys meane, they
which haue great wealth, are as it wer
helde tyed by Sathan that they ſhould
not aſpyre to heauē: but couetouſneſſe
and all other vyces of men, let not the
eaſyneſſe of the yoke of Chriſt.
         
         
            
            58
            
               The aboliſhyng of the former cō
                  maundement
commeth by meanes of
the vveakneſſe and vnprofitableneſſe
of it.
               Hebr. 7.
               Do vve abolyſhe the lavv by fayth?
no, rather vve eſtablyſhe the lavve.
            
            WHEN the Apoſtle to yt Hebreues
ſayeth that the fyrſt ordinaunce
ceaſed ſygnifying that the lawe
and the office of Prieſthode were at an
end bycauſe this lawe was weake and
vnprofitable, he ſheweth euidently y•
he ſpeaketh in reſpecte of ceremonyes
foraſmuch as he addeth thereunto the
offyce of ſacrifycing. The ceremonyes
had no certayntie in themſelfe, and of
themſelfe they helpe not a whyt to ſaluation:
for as touchyng that the promiſe
of grace was tyed vnto them, and
that which Moyſes teſtifieth in ſondry
places that God ſhould be apeaſed by
ſacrifyces, and yt by them ſynnes ſhuld
be blotted out, it belonged not properly
to the oblations and ſacrifyces: but

it proceded from another thyng. For
euen as all ceremonyes were referred
to Chriſt: ſo thei borrowed of him their
power and workyng, or to ſaye better,
they coulde nothyng of themſelfe and
dyd nothyng: but all their vertue depended
onely vpon the Lorde Ieſus.
Seyng then the Iewes aledge them agaynſt
Chriſt, the Apoſtle applying
hys purpoſe to their falyſhe opynion,
he alſo denydeth them from Chriſt.
But what? are they ſeperated from
Chriſt there remayneth nothing vnto
them but thys weakeneſſe, and vnprofytableneſſe
of which he ſpeaketh. To
be ſhort, a man ſhal fynde no commoditie
in olde ceremonies til he be cōme
to Chriſt. Let vs ſaye then, that yt lawe
is called vnprofitable when it is without
Chriſt, of thys ſorte is the takyng
awaye of the fyrſt commaundemente.
The fyrſt lawes and ordinaunces are
aboliſhed by the latter. The lawe had
bene publyſhed long beefore Dauyd.
Then he rayned whē he brought forth
thys Prophecye of the creatyng of a
new prieſt. It is thē a new law which

abolyſheth the fyrſt. Nowe ſeyng the
fyrſt is aboliſhed by yt latter that came
after, a man myght ſay yt fayth whiche
came after, dyd abolyſhe the lawe that
wente beefore Yet we ſee what Saint
Paule ſayth in thys place, that not only
the lawe is not made vayne and vnprofitable
by fayth: but rather it is cō
               fyrmed
and eſtablyſhed, that as often
as the lawe is ſet agaynſt fayth, the
fleſhly ſenſe taketh holde byandby of
an opinion of repugnaunce, as though
one were contrary to the other. Nowe
thys peruerſe imagination hath place
chieflye among thoſe, that hauyng no
ryght vnderſtandyng of the lawe, like
nothyng ells in it but the ryghteouſneſſe
of woorkes, and leaue the promyſes.
And thys was ſayd in reproche to
Chriſt himſelf, yt he endeuored to aboliſh
ye law by his preaching. This made
him to proteſt y• he came not to aboliſhe
ye lawe: but to fulfyl it. And this ſuſpitiō
belonged as wel to maners as to y• ceremonies.
For ſeing ye Goſpel maketh
an end of y• ceremonyes of Moyſes, it
was thought yt it went about to deſtroy

or ouerthrow the miniſtery of Moyſes.
Beſyde, foraſmuche as it bryngeth to
naught all righteouſneſſe of workes, it
is thought lykewyſe that it is contracye
to ſo many wytneſſes of the lawe
where God affyrmeth that in the lawe
he hath ſhewed to the Iſraelites ye way
of ryghteouſneſſe and ſaluatiō. Wherfore
thys that Saint Paul ſayth here,
is not referred only to the morall law
                  •
               
but to al the lawe generally. For firſt,
the lawe of manners is truly confyrmed
and eſtabliſhed by the fayth which
is in Chriſt, in aſmuche as it was geuen
to the end y• it ſhould admoniſhe a
man of his iniquitye & ſo ſhould bryng
hym to Chriſt without whom it is vnperfect,
& cannot but farther prouoke y•
deſyre of ill doyng, & ſo to plucke vpon
man a greater condemnatiō. But whē
a man is cōme to Chriſt, he fyndeth in
hym y• perfect righteouſneſſe of y• lawe
whiche righteouſneſſe is becōme ours
alſo by imputatiō. Secōdarilie ther we
finde ſanctificatiō by which our hartes
ar faſhioned to y• obſeruing of the law,
True it is that thys obſeruation is yet

imperfecte, howbeit it leauelleth at the
butte. There is a lyke reaſon touchyng
ceremonyes which ceaſe and vanyſhe
by the cōmyng of Chriſt: yet notwithſtandyng
they are truly ſtrengthened
by hym. If a man eſteme them by thē
               ſelf,
they are but fygures and vnprofitable
ſhadowes. Thē only a man ſhal
fynde that there is ſome ſtrength in
them when they loke to a better end.
         
         
            59
            
               Goe not to the Gentiles.
               Mathe. 10.
               Goe through all the vvorlde.
               Mathe. 16.
            
            THE fyrſt charge that Chriſt gaue
hys Dyſciples ſtretched no further
thā to the countrey of Iewry,
his wil was y• the Iewes beyng ſtyred
vp to hope for ſaluation at hand, ſhuld
becōme attentyue hearers of Chriſt.
Afterwarde he commaunded them to
Preache euen to al the endes and corners
of the earth. But for that tyme he
would that their voyce ſhoulde be as it
were ſhut within the land of Iewrye.
And the reaſon thereof is bycauſe hys
father ſent hym to bee the miniſter of

circumciſion to performe the promiſes
that had bene made of olde tyme to the
fathers: as it is ſaid in the. 15. to the Romaynes.
Well, is it ſo that God entred
into a ſpeciall league with the lyne of
Abraham? then is it not without cauſe
that Chriſt at the fyrſt kept in grace among
the choſen people tyl the proper
& fytte tyme to publyſhe it were cōme.
But ſynce hys reſurrection he hath
poured forth vpon all nations the bleſſyng
that for the ſecond tyme had bene
promyſed. For, then the Veyle of the
temple was broken and the wall of debate
broken down At the fyrſt the dignitie
of the byrthright taryed among ye
Iewes, yet afterwarde the heritage of
lyfe was made cōmon to the Gentiles.
So Chriſt was appointed to be a light
vnto the Gentiles, and ſaluation vnto
the endes of the earth Therefore after
that peace had bene Preached to the
houſeholde folke, y• meſſage of the ſame
peace came alſo vnto ſtraungers.
         
         
            60
            
               Be ye vvyſe as ſerpentes
               Mathe. 10.
               
                  If any among you thynke to bee
vvyſe, let hym be made a foole in this
vvorlde.
               1. Cor. 
                     •
                  .
            
            BYcauſe the Apoſtles ſhoulde bee
ſente as ſhepe among wolues and
wylde beaſtes, they had nede to be
wyſe. For if they had not had wytte to
take good hede to themſelf they myght
haue bene deuoured of wolues, and ye
rage of wylde and cruell beaſtes had
letted them from doyng their duetye.
They were ſente with thys condition
that they ſhould haue ſtore of enemies.
Their wyſedome then ought ſo to bee
tempered that they ſhould not be more
fearefull than nede was they ſhould,
and to ſlacke in executing there office.
For wee ſee it cōme ordinarilye to
paſſe that they whiche wyl be accompted
very wyſe and ware, are for the
moſte parte feareful and ſlowe in their
woorke. True it is that bycauſe
of the daungers that are layed on euerye
ſyde, it behoueth greatlye the
Dyſciples of the Sonne of GOD to
bee hedefull in lookyng to themſelfe.

But becauſe there is greate domage
y• they ſhoulde be kept backe by ſ
                  •
               outh
and ydleneſſe, he wills that they ſhould
go roundly and francklie where their
vocation allotteth them. Fyrſt y• faythful
are commaunded ſo to haue care of
lyfe that they caſt not themſelfe folyſhly
into daungers and that they take
not on them to preſumptuouſly ouerhard
aduentures. Then afterward
ſympleneſſe is requyred at thery hand,
to ye end they ſhould not be ſo feare ful
and ſo letted from doing of their duety,
but that they ſhould be ſymple withal,
to the end nothyng ſhoulde bee done
raſhlye. Such is the wyſedome y• God
requireth, fyrſt in the miniſters of his
worde, then afterward generally in al
hys faythfull But when Saint Paule
ſayth that to be truly wyſe we muſt be
made fooles in thys world, he ſpeaketh
agaynſt the folyſhe preſumption of mē
that will be wyſe in their own conceit.
He exhorteth vs not to diſceaue oure
ſelues by a falſe opinion, attributyng
vnto our ſelf any wiſedome. For in very
dede al they which leane vpon their

owne wyt are greatly abuſed, and it is
ſpoken chiefly againſt thoſe which are
not content with the ſimpleneſſe of the
Goſpel, not that it is requiſite we ſhuld
altogether refuſe the wyſdom which is
geuen vs of nature, or that whych we
haue gotten by long vſe and knowlege
of things: but onely that we ſhould reduce
it to the true obedience of God, to
the ende we ſhould not be wyſe but by
his word. For to be made a fole in this
worlde, is to deſyre to geue place to the
wyl of God, and to receaue wyth feare
and reuerence all that he teacheth vs,
rather than to folow that which to our
ſelf ſemeth good and alowable.
            To the ende then thoſe two places
may be wel agreed, we muſte make a
diſtinction betweene the true wyſdome
and the falſe. The falſe wyſedome and
that whych diſceaueth vs, is when we
content vs wyth our ſelf as touchyng
the takyng of counſell in our buſineſſe
eyther to gouerne our ſelfe, or to take
ordre for that we haue to do, when wee
depend not of any other, whē we haue
not neede of the guydyng of another,

but when we think we are able inough
to guyde our ſelfe. And contrariwyſe
the true wyſedome is when we are foles
to the world renouncing our owne
reaſon and wiſdome, and as it wer hauing
our eyes ſhutte, we ſuffer God to
gouerne vs. And when diſtruſting our
ſelf we reſte vpon hym ſetting all oure
wiſdome in him, yelding our ſelf eaſy
to be taught and altogether obedient.
Thus our wiſdom muſt turn to ſmok,
to the end the will of God may raygne
ouer vs, that we be voyde of our owne
wyſedome that wee may be filled with
the wiſdom of God.
         
         
            61
            
               Greete no man by the vvay.
               Luc. 
                     •
                  0.
               Greete one another vvyth a
holy kyſſe.
               1. Cor. 16.
            
            WHEN Chriſt gaue thys cōmaū
               dement
to the. 70. Diſciples, hys
wyll was that they ſhuld vſe ſuch
diligence that when they ſhould meete
any man on the way, they ſhoulde not
tarry, no, not to bid god ſpede them, for
feare of being letted, ſo. 1. of the Kings

the. 4. the Prophet Eliſee ſending hys
Boye to the Sunanite woman forbad
hym to ſalute anye man by the waye.
Therto alſo belongeth that which ſaīt
Luke addeth that Chriſt commaunded
his Diſciples to take and eate y• which
ſhould be offred them, he doth not commaund
them onely to be content with
litle meate: but alſo while they were in
iorney to liue vpō other mens charges
to ye end they ſhould not tary to bie and
to make prouiſion of any thing for thē
               ſelf:
he wil not thē haue them to be vncurteous,
diſdaining to ſalute thoſe y•
they meete, but that they ſhould walke
ſo as they ſhould ouerpaſie al ſtoppes.
But as for that which ſaint Paul ſaith
it was a very cōmon cuſtom amōg the
Iews to ſalute one another by kiſſing,
as a mā mai ſee in ye ſcriptures. The grekes
alſo vſed it oftētimes, but it is veri
like he ſpeaketh of the accuſtomed kiſſing
by which they ſaluted ech other in
the holy aſſēblies. For a mā mai eaſly
iudge y• euē in y• Apoſtels time in y• adminiſtring
of y• ſupper thei vſed y• kiſſe.
Sins y• tyme certain natiōs diſdaning

thys cuſtome of kyſſyng, in ſteade of it
haue had a Pax which was offered to be
kyſſed. But howſoeuer the caſe ſtande,
ſeing that kyſſyng was a ſigne or witneſſe
of mutuall loue, Sainte Paules
mynde is to exhorte the Corrinthians
to beare good wyl one to another, and
to vſe ſuch ſygnes to make theyre loue
knowen, alwayes prouyded that there
be no vncleaneneſſe or faynyng. Thus
a man may ſee eaſylye that there is no
contrariety in theſe two ſentences.
         
         
            62
            
               Take heede and bevvare of the Leuaine
of the Pharyſies.
               Math. 16.
               The Scribes and Phariſies are ſet in
Moyſes chayre, all thyngs thē vvhich
they shall cōmaūd you to kepe, kepe
them and doe them.
               Math. 23.
            
            THAT whych Saint Luke addeth
to the firſt ſentence in the. 12. chapter,
is to expound it, when he ſaith
Beware of the Leuayne of the Pharyſies, whyche
is hypocryſy. But yet thys ſhoulde
not be enough if that ſhould not be added

which is ſpoken in Saint Mathew
to wete that Chriſt ſpake of theyr doctrine.
Beſide then that he warneth thē
to flie the lyfe and maners of the Phariſies,
he wylleth thē alſo to take heede
of ye ſpring of all fayned and falſe ſhew
of wyſdome or holineſſe, and the matter
of al vayne pompe and foliſh boaſt,
whyche though before men it ſeeme in
ſhew to be a great matter: yet it is nothyng
before God. Euen as the eyes of
the Lord do behold the truth. Ieremy. 6. ſo
doth he inſtructe the faythfull and teacheth
them a true and perfit holyneſſe
to the ende they may cleaue to Iuſtice
with a pure and ſounde heart.
            Contrarywyſe the ordinaunces and
traditions of men leauing aſyde y• ſpyrytuall
ſeruice haue goodly outwarde
ſhewes as though God wold be ētrapped
or diſceaued by ſuch inticementes
and allurings. Although there be great
ſhewes in outer ceremonies: yet if they
be wayed by themſelfe, they are but
ſmall trifles before God. So ſee we that
the leauains of men are puffed vp, but
before God thei haue no ſtrength at al.

In the other ſentence our Lord Ieſus
ſheweth wt what reuerence we ought
to receiue the doctrine of God. Out of
what mouth ſoeuer it proceedeth it behoueth
vs to hearken to it and obey it.
Thoughe the Scribes and Phariſies
were ill liuers and that a man ſhoulde
in no wiſe follow their lyfe: yet muſte
he frame his manners and lyfe according
to the rule of the lawe, whiche is
hard at their mouthe. It was neceſſary
for him to reproue many faults in thē
to the end al the people ſhould not bee
infected with them. They were miniſters
of the doctrine, but to the end the
doctrin ſhuldnot be corrupted through
theire faultes, the Lord Ieſus willeth
the faithful to bee diligente hearers of
their words and not followers of their
workes.
            But now we muſt ſee whether with
out making any cōſcience a mā ought
to obey al that which the Doctors of ye
church cōmaūd and ordayne. For it is
certaine that ye ſcribes of y• time which
S. Luke calleth Doctors of ye lawe did
wickedly & falſly corrupt ye law by falſe

interpretatiōs and gloſes, and did lode
the poore ſoules with vniuſt lawes and
with many ſuperſtitions depraued the
pure ſeruice of God. And loe here the
Sonn of God will haue their doctrine
kepte as though a man ſhuld not reſiſt
their tyranny at al. But it is very eaſy
to reſolue this doubt: for the meaninge
of Chriſte was to make difference betwene
the holy lawe of God and theire
prophane works. To ſyt in the chair of
Moſes is nothing els but to teach (by y•
law of God) how a man ſhuld liue. So
that a man may ſay he is ſet in Moiſes
chair which cōmaūdeth not of himſelfe
or of his own minde, but by ye autority
of God. So if a mā mark which is y• leuain
of y• Phariſies, & what y• faſtnes &
purenes of y• chair of Moſes ſhould be,
which doth not admit but ye holy ordinaūces
of God, a man ſhall finde that
ther is no cōtrariety in theſe. ij. places.
         
         
            63
            
               There shall bee one shepheard and
one flocke.
               Ioan. 10.
               He shal deuide the sheepe from the
goates.
               Math. 25.
            
            
               
THE difficulty ſhal be eaſyly reſolued
whē we ſhall vnderſtand that
in the firſte ſentence mention is
made onely of all faythful which ſhuld
be gathered together in one flock. And
in the ſecond it is ſhewed that at y• laſte
the ſheepe ſhall bee ſeparated from the
Goates where nowe they are myngled
one wyth another. As touching y• firſt,
euen as wee beleeue and confeſſe that
there is one holy vniuerſal Chyrch: ſo
it neceſſarily behoueth that ther ſhould
be a body of one onely heade. There is
one God ſayth ſaint Paul, ther is one
fayth, ther is one baptiſme, ſo we muſt
be one as alſo we be called to one ſelfe
hope: ſo it is ſayd Epheſ. 4. Now albeit it
ſeme to be deuyded into many flockes:
yet the faythful which are ſcatred here
and there through al the world, ar ſhut
within one park and cloſed within one
hedge and cloſure, for one ſelf worde is
preached to al, they vſe al lyke ſacramē
               tes,
they haue al one ſelfe rule of prayeng
to God, they haue al in one maner
that whych is requiſite for the profeſſion
of theyr fayth. Nowe the meane by

whych al the flocke of God is gathered
together, is when there is but one ſhepheard
for all, and when hys voyce onely
is heard, when the Churche is made
ſubiect to Chriſt onely and obeyeth his
cōmaundement and heareth his voyce
and his doctrin then is it in good ſtate.
But when the Lord Ieſus is dumme,
when his maieſty is troden vnder fote
when hys holy ordinances are ſet forth
to be mocked at and contemned, what
can a man ſaye of that goodly vnitye,
but that it is a diuiliſh Sinagoge or cō
               ſpiracy,
worſe and more execrable with
out all compariſon than anye waſte or
ſpoyle. There is no Church but where
Chriſt raygneth, there is no knowlege
of God but wher the honor of the ſhephearde
is geuen vnto Chriſt.
            But the other ſentence ſheweth that
al the diſorders that are thys day in the
world ſhalbe brought agayn into good
ordre. There are Hypocrites mired wt 
the true chyldren of God, they haue ſō
ſhew to be of the flock and are among
the ſheepe but when the ſonne of God
ſhall come to reſtore them, the goates

ſhall be put apart and caſt 
                  〈◊〉
               , and
the ſhepe ſhal be gathered together into
the eternal Kingdome of God.
            The ſtate of this Kingdome ſhall be
wel gouerned when the iuſt ſhall haue
obtayned the crowne of glorie, and
when the wycked ſhalbe recompenced
as they haue deſerued. Now this diuiſion
which ſhall be of goates from among
the lambes ſignifieth that nowe
ther ar wicked mired among the good,
yea, in ſuche 
                  〈◊〉
                that they liue as in
one ſelf folde. So the faithful muſt
not thinke their ſtate ouer troubleſom
bycauſe as nowe they bee conſtrained
to liue with the goates, yea, and that at
their hand they endure terrible aſſautes
and diſpleaſures.
         
         
            64
            
               God reſted the ſeuenth day from al
the vvorkes that he had made.
               Genſi
                     •
                  . 2▪
               
               My Father vvorketh euen tyll thys
houre.
               Ioan. 6.
            
            
               A MAN muſte vnderſtande what
the reſt of God is, and then he ſhal

eaſly reſolue this doubt when it is ſayd
that he reſted the ſeuenth day that is
not to ſay that he left his workes ſo as
he hath no more care of them, as if a
maſter Maſon or Carpenter hauing
finiſhed the building of his houſe ſhuld
leaue it to him that could ocupy it, not
caring any more for it, or as a ſhippe-wright
afterthat he hath finiſhed a veſſel
ſhould geue it ouer to the waues of
the ſea not caring what ſhoulde betide
of it. So the reſte or Sabat of God is
not a ſluggiſhneſſe or idleneſſe, but a
ſound perfection which bringeth with
it a quiet ſtate of reſt. God then reſted
from al his workes, that is to ſaye hee
ceaſſed from creating of new kindes of
any thing. There was ſo ſounde a
perfection that nothing coulde bee added.
Wherfore it is ſaid that God hath
ſet to the laſt hand. And that which is
recited by Moiſes is aſmuche as if hee
had ſaid, that which God was determined
to do was thē fulfilled. To be ſhort
this is ſpoken onely to ſhewe the perfectneſſe
of the building of the worlde,
ſo that heere of a manne coulde notte

gather that God ſo reſted frō his workes
that he hath left them of ſeing they
haue no vertue or force nor ſubſtance
but in hym. In the meane tyme it is
certayne that God worketh and is occupied
continualy in that he vpholdeth
the world by hys power, that he gouerneth
it by hys prouidence, that he maintaines
al creaturs in their being, and
alſo multiplies them. Thereby a man
may ſee how true thys ſentence of the
Sonne is, My Father worketh from the beginnyng
euen tyll now: for if God neuer ſo
litle wythdrawe hys hand, all thinges
ſhal peryſh in a momente, and ſhall be
ſtrayghtways brought to naught, as it
is ſayd in the. 104. Pſalme. Beſydes a
man could not well know that God is
the creatour and faſhioner of heauen
and earth except this be attributed vnto
hym that he geueth ſtrēgth and quickening
to al things, that he ſuſtaineth
the world by hys hygh vertue, that he
gouerneth it by his hyghe councel and
mayntayneth it by his goodneſſe and
ſtayeth al things acording to his good
pleaſure, as well beneath here in earth

as there aboue in heauē. Lo thē how it
behoueth vs to conclude, the makyng
of the world was perfect in ſyx dayes,
but the gouerning it dureth for euer, &
God is continualy buſied to maintayn
and cōſerue the ordre of the ſame. This
is that which Saint Paul ſayth. Act. 17
that we lyue and haue our mouyng and beeing
in God. And he not onely mayntayneth
by a generall prouidence the nature
whych he hath created: but alſo he gouerneth
and ordreth euery parte of it.
And chiefly hys faythfull be gouerned
and kept by him whome he hath receiued
vnder his defence and ſafegard.
         
         
            65
            
               It is appoynted for men that
they should once dye.
               Hebr. 9.
               VVhoſoeuer beleueth in me
shall neuer dye.
               Ioan. 2.
            
            ALthoughe we had no wytneſſe of
the Scripture, yet our own fraylneſſe
doothe warne vs enoughe of
the truth of thys ſentence, that it is ordained
that al men ſhal once dye. The
riches, the honor, the dignity & ſtrēgth

of men, nor whatſoeuer there is beſide
can redeme a man from this conditiō.
And this argument is infallible: wher
ſinne is there is death, al men are ſinners,
it foloweth then that al men ſhal
die, & we nede no other reaſon to proue
that all that went beefore vs were ſinners
but that by Death they were taken
out of this world, and that we alſo
and they which ſhall followe vs be ſinners,
but that it is decreed by the ſentence
of God that we and they ſhal die.
Death is the hyer or rewarde of ſynne. But
now that which is ſaid hetherto extendeth
vnto the Deathe of the bodie, for
the body is ſubiect to Death bicauſe of
ſinne. Furthermore we muſt vnderſtand
how Chriſt proteſteth ſo often times
that he is life and how he ſaith els
where that Who ſo beleueth in hym are now
already rayſed from Death to Lyfe, that they
ſhall neuer dye. He ſpeaketh of the ſoules
of his faithfull whiche are begotten anewe
with an vncorruptible ſede, and
whiche haue the ſpirite of Chriſt dwelling
in them by whiche they receue continuall
force. The body is ſubiect to dy

bycauſe of ſinne: but this ſpirit is life
bicauſe of righteouſneſſe. Rom. 5. Then
Ieſu Chriſt is the life bicauſe he neuer
ſuffreth the life to decay which he hath
once geuen, but conſerueth it to y• end.
Seing the fleſhe is ſo fraile, what wold
befal of men, if after they haue once obtayned
life, they were lefte to themſelues?
Therfore we muſte conclude that
there is a continuall and permanente
ſtate of lyfe grounded in the ſtrengthe
of Ieſus Chriſt, to the end he may perfourm
that which he hath once begon.
This is verye true that the outewarde
man is marred and corrupted daily in
the faithful: but they are ſo farre from
loſing by that meane any of their true
lyfe that rather it is ſoe encreaſed by
that mean: for the inward man is ther
by renued as it is ſaid. 2. Cor. 3. and (which
is more) Death it ſelf is vnto them a
freedome from the bondage of Death.
         
         
            66
            
               He that kepeth Iſrael vvil not ſlomber
nor ſleepe.
               Pſal. 121.
               Ryſe vp Lord vvhy ſlepeſt thou?
               Pſal 44.
            
            
               THys Sentence is very worthy to
be noted, that God is the keeper &
defender of all his faythful, yea, ſo
a keper that he will make them whole
and ſafe in al ſortes. Ther is great talking
of the power of God, but in the
meane tyme how many are there that
in al their talk haue this reply in their
mouth. God can if he wyll, but we are
vncertayne and in doubte of his intēt.
So we muſt not onelie attribute power
vnto God: but alſo a fatherly care
and continual watchfulneſſe. And we
oughte to haue him before our eies as
our cōtinual defender which watcheth
at al houres for our ſaluatiō to the end
we might reſt vs fafely vpon hys holy
prouidence. On one ſyde the Epicures
forge y• God hath no care at all for the
world and ſo they quench al feare and
reuerence of God. But on the other
ſyde there is daunger leaſte when a
man hathe ymagyned that God gouerneth
the world it ſhould be a confounded
ymagynation by whyche a
man were not reſolued that God hath
care for al his faythfull partycularlye:

for ſo oure ſpirites ſhoulde hang in
doubt, & ſhoulde flote in continual vnquietneſſe.
And ſurely a man can neuer
cal vpō God earneſtly nor with a good
and liuely affection, till the certayntye
of thys kepyng be well prynted in the
heart. But now ſuch complayntes are
many times in the ſcriptures, & chiefly
in the Pſalmes. Lorde ryſe or awake whye
ſlepeſt thou? The iudgement of the fleſhe
maketh vs ſo to ſpeake and thinke that
God is layed down, and that he ſlepeth
when he doth not manifeſtly exercyſe
hys Iudgements when we are afflicted
and that we fele not the remedyes
as ſone as we haue called vpon God:
It ſemeth to vs that he ſlepeth, but it is
not ſo. Thys good Lord ſuffereth vs to
lament ſo and to make hym ſuch complayntes
in oure prayers: yet it behoueth
vs to be certaynly perſuaded that
he continually and wythoute ceaſyng
watcheth for our profyte and ſaluatiō:
but bycauſe our ſpirites be ſtowe, we
conceaue not at the fyrſt what care h
                  •
               
hath of vs. The faythful then requyr
                  •
               
he ſhould ſhew in effecte y• he is neither

forgetfull nor a ſlepe. Al muſt be reſolued
that God hath hys eyes ſet on thē
though he dyſſemble: yet notwithſtandyng
bycauſe thys perſuatiō is of faith
& not of the fleſhe, they caſt familiarlye
into the boſome of God thys contrary
iudgement which they haue conceaued
of the preſent ſyght of y• dede, & by thys
meanes they caſte out of their heartes
theſe fylthy affections to the end fayth
ſhuld afterward com forth pure & clere.
         
         
            67
            
               The iuſte shall liue by fayth.
               Abac. 2
               Thys do and thou shalt liue.
               Luke. 10.
            
            THE proud confydence of the fleſh
is contrary to fayth which ye Prophet
ſayth the iuſte ſhal liue. Whē
he hath made mention of the deſtruction
of the proud, he addeth alſo that the
lyfe of the meke and iuſte conſiſteth in
fayth. But there is nothyng that maketh
a mā to line before God but righteouſneſſe.
It foloweth thē y• our righteouſneſſe
alſo conſiſteth in fayth, and
thys lyfe which we haue of fayth is not
to dure onely for a whyle: but is fyrme

for euer. For it is ſayth by which wee
mount a lofte, it is fayth by which wee
paſſe ouer al daungers of thys preſent
life, & ouercōm al myſeries & troubles,
fayth is to vs an aſſured port in ye middeſt
of y• ſtormes and tempeſtes of this
world. To be ſhort, faith maketh vs to
obtayne victorie againſt al y• world as
S. Iohn ſayth in hys fyrſt canonicall.
Wherfore let vs thus conclude yt they
which ar counted iuſte with God, liue
by faith only. Then let vs hold this, ſeing
no man can be iuſtifyed otherwiſe
thā by fayth, alſo no mā can liue but by
fayth, for life can not be but wher righteouſneſſe
is. The lawe veryly contayneth
perfect Iuſtice, ſo yt if any coulde
accomplyſhe a lawe he ſhould obtayne
lyfe bicauſe he ſhould fynde righteouſneſſe
in ye lawe ſufficient to make hym
liue: as alſo the promyſe is made in the
lawe that whoſoeuer ſhal do y• thinges
contayned in it ſhal lyue. And this is y•
which is here ſayd Do this and thou ſhalt
lyue. But in the meane ſeaſon we muſt
ſee how thys promyſe agreeth with the
free iuſtification whiche is by fayth.

For the reaſon why God iuſtifyeth vs
freely, is not for that the lawe ſheweth
not perfect righteouſneſſe: but bycauſe
we fayle in kepyng it. Wherfore al the
ſcripture pronounceth that there is no
man that can obtayne lyfe by it. The
fault is not in the lawe but in y• weakneſſe
of man, and the faulte is in oure
fleſhe. So a mā may ſay that theſe two
ſentences agree well together: for the
lawe ſheweth howe men may obtayne
ryghteouſneſſe by their woorkes, and
that no man is iuſtifyed by his works,
for the lacke is not in the doctryne of
the lawe, but in men. Beſyde, it was
mete that Ieſus Chriſt ſhoulde cleere
hymſelf of the falſe accuſyng of ye Iewes,
and of the ſlaunder which he knew
well the rude and ignorante charged
hym with, as though he had abolyſhed
the lawe in that it is the continual rule
of ryghteouſneſſe.
         
         
            68
            
               The Lavve adminiſtreth death.
               2. Cor. 5.
               Hys commaundement is euerlaſtyng
lyfe.
               Ioan. 12.
            
            
               SAINT Paule calleth the lawe not
only ye adminiſter of death but alſo
of damnation, and that iuſtly. For
where men are warned of their duety
and they heare that all they that ſatiſfye
not the iuſtice of God are curſed,
they are conſtrayned to fynde themſelf
gyltye of ſynne and death They bring
therfore from the lawe nothing els but
ſuche a condemnation: foraſmuche as
God claymeth y• to which a man ſtandeth
bound to hym. And in the meane
ſeaſon he geueth not the power or abilitye
to fulfyl it. The lawe only geues
the rule of wel liuyng, but the whileſt
it reformeth not the heartes to the obedience
of iuſtice, and it declareth eternal
death to tranſgreſſours, and therefore
it can not but condemne, or to ſay
better, the offyce of the lawe is to ſhew
the ſyckneſſe, but it is in ſuch ſort as it
geueth no hope of healyng. For ſeyng
it leaueth a man to hymſelf, it muſte
nedes be that it awardeth him to dye.
Loe, howe the lawe is the miniſter of
death.
            But to accorde thys ſentence with

the fyrſte, it behoueth to loke vpon the
oppoſition that is beetwene the lawe &
the Goſpel. For Ieſu Chriſt in the ſeconde
place ſpeaketh of hys Goſpell
when he maketh proteſtation that he
ſpake not of hymſelfe: but hys father
that ſente hym he hymſelfe gaue commaundement
to hys ſonne of y• whiche
he ſhoulde ſaye and ſpeake. And he addeth
that he knoweth well that thys
commaundement is eternall lyfe. To
vnderſtande thys oppoſition it behoueth
vs to returne to that which Saint
Paule ſayeth in the ſelf place. 2. Cor. 3.
the lawe was written in tables of ſtone. Then
it was but a doctryne of y• letter. Thys
lacke in the lawe was to be amended
by the Goſpel: for ſo long as it was engraued
in tables of ſtone it muſt needes
be frayle. The Goſpel then is holy
& vnbreakeable attonement, foraſmuche
as it was ratifyed by the holy
ghoſt. In ſteade then that the lawe is
the miniſter of death and damnation,
the Goſpel by which men are regenerated
and reconciled to God by ye free
forgeueneſſe of ſynnes, is the miniſter

of ryghteouſneſſe, and conſequentlye
of lyfe. It was ſayd that the office of
the law is to ſet forth the ſickneſſe, but
not to ſhewe what remedy a mā might
haue to heale it. But the offyce of the
Goſpel is to geue to the hopeleſſe a redy
remedy. It was ſhewed that ye lawe
leauyng a man to hymſelf geues & pronounceth
ſentence of death: but y• Goſpell
brynging vs to Ieſu Chriſt opens
the gare of lyfe. So a man may ſay at
a woorde that thys is a continual accident
to the lawe to kil, bycauſe all they
that abyde vnder it ar vnder the curſe.
But in the Goſpel the iuſtice of God is
reueled from fayth to fayth, and therefore
it is the power of God to ſaluation
to euery one that beleueth.
         
         
            69
            
               The lavve is the miniſter of death.
               2. Cor. 3.
               The lavve of the Lorde refresheth
the ſoule, the teſtimony of the Lorde
geueth vvyſedome to the ignorante,
his commaundement lyghteneth the
eyes.
               Pſal. 1
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
HERE before a mā myght ſee how
the lawe is the miniſter of death,
not that it is ſuch in it ſelf, for perfect
ryghteouſneſſe is contayned in it,
and by conſequent life is incloſed in it.
But ſuche it is in vs whiche be weake
and not able to fulfyll it, and as breakers
of it not able to drawe any thyng
out of it but death, whiche it pronounceth
to all thoſe that ſhall not do ye thinges
whiche are therin contayned. If
nowe we wil agree theſe two ſentences,
we muſt adde to them that whiche
Saint Paule hymſelfe addeth in thys
thyrd Chapter of ye ſecond to y• Corrinthians
to wete, that oure Lorde is the
ſpirite. He had ſayd before of the lawe
that the letter killeth, but y• ſpirite ioyned
with the letter quickeneth. The
doctryne of the law is litteral and not
onely dead but alſo the geuer of death.
Contrarywyſe he calleth Chriſt y• ſpirite
of it, ſygnifying therby that then it
ſhalbe quicke and quicknyng, when it
ſhal be breathed in by Chriſt. Let the
ſoule bee ioyned with the body, and of
thoſe two ſhal be made a man quycke,

garnyſhed with ſenſe and vnderſtandyng,
and mete for all workes of lyfe.
Take awaye and part the ſoule frō the
body, and it ſhal be but a carrayn dead
without any felyng at al.
            Now a man may accord theſe prayſes
whiche Dauyd geues to the lawe
with theſe ſentences of Saint Paule.
For when Chriſt is ioyned to the law
as the ſoule with the bodye, the prayſes
which Dauyd geueth it, belong to it, it
lighteneth the eies, it geueth wiſedome
to little ones, it refreſheth the ſoule.
Take away and ſeperate Chriſt from
the lawe, and it ſhal remayne dead and
the miniſter of death and damnation.
Then Chriſt is the lyfe of the lawe.
            Theſe thinges verely ſeme to be cō
               trary
altogether one agaynſt another,
that the lawe recreateth the ſoules, and
yet it is a dead letter and geueth death,
that it lyghteneth the eyes, and yet it
ſuppreſſeth the lyghte which is wythin
hauyng a Veyle ſet agaynſt it that it
reioyſeth the heartes and the ſpirites,
and yet brynging a ſpirite of bondage
it aſtonneth and agaſteth. But Dauyd

ſpeaketh not ſymply of the bare commaundements,
but he comprehendeth
al the league by which God had adopted
the childrē of Abraham for his people.
And therefore he ioyneth the fres
promyſes of ſaluation with the rule of
well liuyng, yea Chriſt hymſelfe vpon
whom the adoption was grounded.
Saint Paule whoe had to doe with the
peruerſe interpretours of ye law which
dyd ſeparate it from the grace and ſpirite
of Chriſt, doth but touch the ſymple
miniſtery of Moyſes. Now it is very
certayne that when the lawe is not
quickened by the ſpirite of Chriſt, it is
not only vnprofitable: but alſo it bryngeth
death to ye ſcholars of it. For without
Chriſt there is in the lawe nothing
but an vnintreatable rigoure whiche
bringeth all mankynde vnder y• wrath
and curſe of God. Moreouer the rebellion
of the fleſhe taryeth remaynyng
in vs, whiche inflameth in vs an obſtinate
hatred agaynſt God and his law,
and thence procedeth thys weary bondage
and horrour.
         
         
            70
            
               
                  Novv vvhy tempt you God in laying
a yoke on the neckes of hys Dyſciples
vvhich neyther our fathers nor
vve haue bene able to beare.
               Acte. 15.
               And his commaundements are not
heauye.
               1. Ioan 5.
            
            OVR own experience and the holy
ſcriptures ſufficiently beare witneſſe
y• the yoke of the law is more
thā we can beare. Moreouer it is clere
yt bicauſe the renouncing of our ſelf is
as it were a trial of the true obſeruation
of y• law. We dare not ſay y• it is eaſye
for a man to renounce hymſelf: but
rather ſeyng the lawe is ſpiritual (as
Saint Paule ſaith) & of our part we ar
nothyng but fleſhe, ther muſt nedes be
a great difference beetwene ye lawe of
God and vs. And where Saint Peter
ſayeth it is a yoke whiche not oure fathers
were able to beare, he ſpeaketh
not of y• onely which men haue accompliſhed
but alſo of y• which they myght
haue done. Neyther ſpeaketh he of any
cōmon perſons but of y• holy fathers:

ſeth he ſayth that ſuch coulde not beare
the yoke of the lawe, it appeareth that
it is impoſſible for mē to beare it. Here
he medleth not only with the woorkes
and will of men, but alſo with theyr
power & abilitye. With this alſo Saint
Paule agreeth affyrmyng that it was
impoſſible for the lawe to geue vs life,
bicauſe it was weake through y• fleſhe.
If any man can performe the lawe,
certaynly he ſhall fynde in it the lyfe
whiche was promyſed in it. But when
Saint Paule ſayth that lyfe cannot be
attayned by the lawe a man may well
conclude that in it is requyred a righteouſneſſe
ſo hygh and perfect as man
can not accomplyſhe. If a man looke
vpon nothyng ells but the ſtrength of
mans nature not only he ſhall not bee
ſtrong ynough to beare the yoke of the
law: but alſo he ſhal be vnable to moue
hys little fynger to fulfyll the leaſt iote
of it. Theſe ſentences are very certayn
and true, that al the thoughts of mans
vnderſtandyng are peruerſe euen frō
chyldehode, y• al the ſenſes of the fleſhe
are enemies to God, that there is none

that ſeketh God, and many other lyke
which ar often found in the ſcriptures
A man then may conclude that not only
mans abilitye is weake and vnperfect
touchyng the fulfylling of ye lawe:
but alſo y• he hath no ſtrength or power
at al to accompliſhe it. What is then to
be vnderſtode of Saint Iohns wordes
who ſayth that the commaundements
of God are not heauy? This is the anſwere,
that the hardneſſe procedeth not
at al from the lawe: but from the fault
of our fleſhe. Thys is that whiche was
alledged by Saint Paule, whoe after
he had ſayd it was not poſſible for the
lawe to iuſtifye vs, byandby after layeth
the fault on our fleſhe. Saint Paul
in theſe ſentences which haue ben here
aboue alledged compareth the lawe
with the faultie nature of man. Dauid
in other places which ſeme to bee very
contrary to the fyrſt ſheweth how they
are mynded and affectioned which are
regenerate by the holy ghoſt, thei take
great pleaſure in it. And in dede Saint
Iohn reſtraynes thys ſentence to the
children of God, ſaying that thys commeth

of the power of the holy ghoſt,
that it is no grefe to the faythfull to obey
God.
            Yet hereunto a man may reply that
althoughe the faythfull are gouerned
and regenerate by the ſpirite of God,
yet haue they a harde fyght to ſuſtayne
agaynſt their own fleſhe. And let them
enforce themſelues the moſt they can,
yet ſcarcely ſhal they do halfe their dutye.
And beſyde there is thys withal,
that they are oftentime ſhaken, and ar
ready almoſte to fall downe vnder the
burden. We ſee whereabout Saint
Paule that greate and excellent Apoſtle
went. He complayneth that he was
kepte captyne, & mournes accompting
hymſelf to be in miſerable caſe, in that
he can not ſerue God with a franke
will. But conſyder whye, the lawe is
called ſofte and eaſy, it is foraſmuch as
beyng defended with heauenly power
we ouercōme the concupiſcence of our
fleſhe. For howſoeuer the fleſhe ſtryueth,
the faythfull ſee that there is nothyng
that maye more delyght them,
than the ſeruyng obeying, and folowing

of God. But yet that thys may be
better vnderſtode, it behoueth vs to
Ioyne with theſe commaundementes
ye fatherly goodneſſe of God, by whiche
the rigour of the lawe is aſſwaged. So
when we knowe that God beareth fauourably
with vs although we can not
fulfyll the lawe with oure workes, yet
thys goodneſſe maketh vs readyer to
obeye hym. And thys is that whiche is
ſayd in the. 130. Pſalme. Forgeueneſſe is
with thee O Lorde that thou ſhouldeſt bee feared
and redoubted. So a man maye perceaue
hereby y• the lawe is ſofte & eaſy
to kepe. And if it chaunce y• faythful to
fal in ſome ſorte, yet their heart fayles
thē not bycauſe y• pardō holdeth thē vp.
         
         
            71
            
               No man euer hated hys fleshe.
               Epheſ. 5.
               They that are of Chriſt haue crucified
their fleshe.
               Gal 5.
            
            THeſe two ſentences are altogether
different but not contrary at all.
The Prophet Eſay willing to ſhew
what one man oweth to another ſaith.
Diſpyſe not thy fleſh, we ar bones & fleſh one of

another we ar of one ſelf ſhape & nature. We
can vſe no violence or do wrong to another
except we defile our own ſhape &
nature whyle wee ſcorne other, the rebuke
is on oure ſelfe. Though thys bee
ſpoken of the cōmon nature of al men:
yet Saint Paule applying thys ſentence
to the coniunction whiche is betwene
a man and his wife, paſſeth farther
forth, ſhewing that ther is not betwene
them a coniuntion only by likeneſſe
of nature: but alſo y• bonde of mariage
which maketh thē both one. He
then formeth hys argument bringing
it from nature it ſelf, to exhort huſbandes
to loue their wyues. For there is
no man but that naturally loueth himſelf,
& no man can loue hymſelf vnleſſe
he loue hys wife alſo, in aſmuch as his
wife is hys own fleſhe.
            What letteth thys but that we may
ſay that they which are of Chriſt haue
crucifyed their fleſhe? For is not the
crucifying of the fleſhe a hatyng it or
rather tamyng it? to the end y• it turne
not a man awaye from hys ſaluation.
And thys is our true Chriſtendome as

touching our lyfe, that we make not a
falſe profeſſion to be Chriſtians. That
is to ſay, that thys faulty fleſh be mortified
which is a worke of the croſſe of
the Sonne of God, for it is not the propre
worke of men: but by the grace of
God we are graffed in the fellowſhyp
of the death of Chriſt, to the ende wee
ſhoulde lyue no more after our owne
appetite. So then we enioy the pryuyledge
of Gods chyldren when wee are
buried with Chriſte through a true renouncing
of our ſelf, and aboliſhing of
the olde man: not that fleſh is altogether
deſtroyed: but bicauſe it may not
haue rule, but rather muſt geue place
to the ſpirit. What contrariety or dyſcorde
is there betweene theſe two ſentences?
         
         
            72
            
               They haue not receyued the promiſes.
               Hebr. 1
                     •
                  
               
               They haue obtayned the promiſes.
               Hebr. 11
            
            ALTHOVGH god remayn true,
thoughe we all ſhould be vnfaythful,
yet our vnfaithfulnes maketh
the promiſes to bee vnto vs vayne and

without effect. Faith contrarywiſe maketh
men to haue experience of Godds
truth in al hys promiſes. So it is ſayed
that the fathers obtayned the promyſes
of God. But it behoueth vs to adde
that which is there alſo added. It is ſaied
in the ſame Chapiter that Abraham
offred hys onely ſōne after that he had
receaued the promiſes. It ſeemed that
in the deathe of Iſaac al the promiſes
ſhuld ceaſſe. For it was ſayd, thy ſeede
ſhalbe called in Iſaac. Furthermore
we muſt not conſider Iſaac as ſom priuate
man among other: but as hym
that had Chriſt incloſed in hym. But
Abraham had ſo receaued the promiſes
by faith that he gaue ſuch honor to god
that had made the promiſe that he was
able to rayſe his ſonne Iſaac from the
dead. Now then he reiecteth not ye promyſſe
that had bene made: but he ſtretcheth
the vertue and the truth of it farder
thā the lyfe of his ſonne: for he limiteth
not the power of God within ſo
ſtrayght bonds, as though it ſhould be
tied or buried in ye death of Iſaac: Loe
how he was not afterward diſapointed
of ye truth of ye promiſes.
            
               
But now let vs ſee how the ſame Apoſtle
ſaith yt the fathers receaued not
the promiſſes. He ſpeaketh not ſimply,
but by cōpariſon, & ſheweth what difference
is betweene the fathers of olde
tyme and vs, where God aboundantly
poureth forth hys grace vpon vs, he gaue
them onely a taſte of it wher he ſheweth
hymſelfe as it were preſente to
oure eyes: hee ſhewed them from a
farre in the darke the Image of hys
Chriſt: yet they were at quiet and neuer
fel from the faith. The Apoſtle thē
maketh hys argument thus. A farre
greater occaſion of perſeueraunce is
nowe a dayes geuen vnto vs, therefore
if we ſhrinke wee are doubly inexcuſable.
            They from far of beheld the ſpirituall
kingdō of Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe face
in theſe dayes is ſo nere vnto vs. More
ouer they ſaluted ye promiſes frō a far,
in ſtead of that they dwel ſo famyliarly
thys day amōg vs: And yet they contynued
til the death. What a negligence
wer it, if we ſhuld not beleue, yea, how
great wer our ſicknes if we ſhuld fayle
in our fayth?
            
               
But yet a man mighte ſaye that they
could not beleue except they had receaued
the promiſſes. Vpon the whiche it
behoued neceſſarilye that their faythe
ſhould be grounded. Thys (as we haue
ſayd already) is ſpoken by compariſon,
for they were farre of from this degree
vnto whiche God hath lyfted vs vppe.
Wherefore, though on ſelfe ſaluation
were promiſed to them and vs: yet they
had not the ſame cleareneſſe of the promiſes
that we this day enioy vnder the
kingdome of Ieſu Chriſt: but they wer
content to beholde it from a farre.
         
         
            73
            
               None is gone vp to heauen but he,
vvhych came dovvne from heauen,
the Sōne of man vvhych is in heauē.
               Ioan. 3.
               O Father, I vvyll that they vvhych
thou haſte gyuen me shall bee there
vvhere I am, that they may ſee my
glory.
               Ioan. 17.
            
            AL men that thinke to mount vp to
heauen by the quickneſſe of theyre
wittes, that is to ſay, who by theyr

owne ſenſe think purely to knowe the
myſteries of God, and to be illuminated
with ſpirituall vnderſtanding, are
greatly deceiued. The carnal mā (ſaith
Saint Paul) comprehendes not ye thinges
which are of God. So then all the
fineneſſe of mans wit is farre recoyled
backe from thoſe thinges that belong
to God, bycauſe man is farre vnderneath
God. The Lord Ieſus ſayeth
that he alone went vp into heauenand
that the paſſage is ſhut agaynſt all the
reſt. Fyrſte hee humbleth vs when hee
ſhutteth the entry to heauen frō al mē.
And hyther alſo Saint Paul ledeth vs
when he ſayth that we muſte be fooles
in our ſelues if we wil be wiſe in God.
But there is nothing that we do more
vnwillingly. And when we com to God
all our wytts fayle vs and fall quite away.
But foraſmuche as Chriſt hath
openned heauen vnto vs, he offreth vs
with al the ready remedy, when he ſaieth,
that that which is denied to al the
reſt, is graūted vnto the ſōne of man.
For it is not for his owne commodytie
that he went vp to heauen, but that he

myghte be our leader and ſure guyde.
Therfore he called himſelf the ſonne of
man that we ſhould not doubt but the
entry into heauen is common to vs as
wel as to hym. He hath put on our humaine
fleſhe, that wee might be partakers
of al his benefits, yea he only knoweth
the ſecretes of hys father. But he
admitteth vs to his ſecretes whyche otherwiſe
ſhould be hidden from vs.
            Nowe to come to the vnderſtanding
of the other ſentence. The ſonne of
God deſyreth that wher he is now ther
alſo we ſhuld be. And hys deſyre importeth
an effect, that is, that we ſhal be indeede
where he is. True it is that he is
with vs vntyl the ende of the worlde,
and accordyng to hys promyſſe we enioye
hys bleſſed preſence and for euer
ſhal enioy it. But byſyde that he wil
alſo haue vs at the laſte brought to hys
heauenly Kingdome, and that we then
ſhoulde enioye the ſame glorye, to the
whych he is nowe rayſed vppe. For he
ſpeaketh of the perfect bleſſefulneſſe of
hys faythful. Hys deſire that his faithfull
ſhoulde be receaued into heauen,

ſhal not be fruſtrate. Vnto this part is
referred that whyche is added after,
namelye that they may ſee my glorye.
From that tyme forward the Apoſtels
ſawe the glory of the ſonne of God: but
it was as a litle glimpes of light, in reſpect
of that glori which ſhal be thorowlye
manifeſted in the heauenly Kyngdome,
as if one being ſhut in darknes
through a litle cleft enioied a litle light
The whyleſt, let vs remembre that euen
as no man can now go vppe vnto
the hidden counſels of God, how ſharp
ſoeuer or ſubtile hys wyt be, except the
ſonne of man whiche is Ieſus Chriſte
cauſe him to go vp: ſo no man ſhal com
vnto the heauenly glori, vnles the ſame
ſonne of man heaue hym vp.
         
         
            74
            
               I come not to cal the ryghteous but
ſynners.
               Math. 9▪
               
               Saluation is farre from ſinners.
               Pſal. 119.
            
            THE righteous are welcom to god
namely they that with a good conſciēce
do al that they may to obey
God acording to his holy righteouſnes

which not withſtanding make not accompt
of their own righteouſneſſe, but
as of dong. But here mention is made
of thoſe righteous whiche contentyng
themſelues with their owne righteouſneſſe
would not be better by the grace
and meere goodneſſe of God. And that
alſo which Chriſt ſayth here, is not only
to beate back the pride and hypocryſy
of the Scribes: but there is byſide a
general doctrine in thys ſentence, that
the grace of the ſonne of God ſhall not
profit vs except we earneſtly feele our
ſynnes and grone vnder their burden.
And that therby we be moued to come
to hym in all humbleneſſe. On the other
part the weak conſciences are lyfted
vp into a ſure truſte: for we muſte
not feare that Chriſt wil caſt away ſinners,
ſyth he is deſcended from hys heauenly
glory to call them.
            The contrariety then ſhall be taken
away when we ſhall vnderſtande that
there are two ſortes of ſinners. The
ſcripture many tymes vſeth thys word
in that ſort, and chiefly in the Pſalmes,
meaning thoſe that of ſtubbourneſſe

harden themſelf in al il and of pride refuſe
al the graces of God. And to ſpeak
at a word, which in their diſſolute and
deſperate lyfe carry a certayne marke
of reprobation. It is truely ſaid of ſuch
that ſaluation is farre from them, ſeeing
they reiect Ieſus Chriſt whiche is
author of ſaluation. Chriſt then is not
a Sauiour vnto al ſinners, as alſo it is
added that he is come to cal ſinners to
repentaunce. Pardon is gyuen vs, but
it is not to nouriſh and maintayn ſine
but to bring vs to lyue wel and Godly.
For the ſonne reconcileth vs to his father
vnder this condition, that beeing
bought agayne by hys bloud, we ſhuld
offre our ſelf as liuely ſacrifices, as. S.
Paul ſaith. Tit 3. The goodnes and mercy
of God is opened to the end that renouncing
all carnal deſires we ſhould
lyue holily. Where there is no repentaunce
there alſo is no ſaluation.
         
         
            75
            
               I vvrite you not a nevv cōmaundement
but the olde commaundement
vvhiche you had frō the beginnyng.
               1. Ioan. 2.
               
                  Agayne I vvrite you a nevve commaundement.
               
                  
                     •
                   Ioan. 2.
            
            THE commaundement that is ſpoken
of here is of charity & loue. It
is called an olde commaundemēt
bycauſe the faythful haue heard it ſpoken
of from the beginning. Long vſage
ought to make it olde, We know
wel inough that nouelty is alwayes odious
and ſuſpected. Beſide, we receue
not eaſily a yoke which before we haue
not ben accuſtomed to. Moreouer whē
we haue receaued any manner of doctrine,
if we ſee it changed or any thing
in it altered, we are troubled. To the
end then we ſhould not hate or ſuſpecte
this cōmaūdement, to the ende alſo we
ſhuld not think that any thing is added
to it. It is ſaid that it is old, not for bycauſe
that of long time ſince this commaūdemēt
was geuē to y• fathers: but
bicauſe ther is euē at this day non of y•
faithful but hath learned it, euē frō his
firſt ētrīg into y• knowlege of ye Goſpel.
Beſide, it behoueth vs not to take nor
receue ye goſpel as a doctrine forged of

late: but as proceding frō god, & as his
eternal truth. A mā muſt not meaſure
ye aūciēcy of ye Goſpel by yt ſpace of the
time, in which it was brought vs. In it
Godds eternal wil is manifeſted vnto
vs. He not only gaue vs y• rule of good
& holy life whē we were called firſt to y•
fayth of Ieſus Chriſt: but alſo he aloweth
it in all tymes, and it hath bene alwayes
abyding before hym. In dede y•
true aunciency, and that that deſerueth
to haue credire, and to bee had in reuerence
among men, is y• whiche taketh
beginning at God. For whatſoeuer p̄
               ſcription
of yeares ther be in the inuē
               tiōs
of men: yet can they not haue ſo
great autority as to bury Gods truth.
Thys ſelf cōmaūdement is alſo called
new, as y• which God (as a man would
ſay) renueth in geuing it ordinarily to
ye end ye faythful ſhuld abyde in it al the
tyme of their lyfe, bycauſe there is nothīg
y• they ought to deſire more. After
y• children haue learned their firſt rules
they lay thē aſide to geue place to more
hye & faſt doctrin. But cōtrariwiſe this
doctrine of brotherly loue is neuer out

of ſeaſō but it hath a cōtinual ſtrēgth,
ſo y• it is as wel yt latter perfection as yt
firſt teachīg. And this is that that Ieſu
Chriſt ſayth. Ioan. 13. I geue you a new
commaūdement, that is, that you loue
one another. When the lawes and ordinaunces
are new they are more diligently
obſerued, afterward they ſlippe
by litle and litle out of the remēbrance
of men, and at length are clere oute of
vſe. To the end then that Chriſt might
the better print the doctrine of loue in
the heartes of hys faythfull, he recommēdeth
as new. He wold we ſhuld continually
remember thys commaundement,
as if it were an ordinance newely
decreed. So by that which hath bene
ſayd here before, a man may ſee howe
the commaundemente of charitye and
brotherly loue is aūcient and alſo how
it is newe.
         
         
            76
            
               Gyue almoſe and beholde al thynges
are cleane.
               Luc. 11.
               And if I gyue all my ſubſtaunce to
ſuccour the pore, if I haue no loue I
am nothing.
            
            
               
IT behoueth vs to mark who they be
to whom Chriſt directeth this ſaiēg.
and to what purpoſe. He had reproued
the Phariſien hypocrites which did apoynt
cleanneſſe to be in outward waſhings:
ſayeng, you clenſe thoſe things
that are without, and the whileſt, that
which is within you, is ful of thefte, of
deceit and malice. O foles hath not he
that made that which is without made
alſo that that is within? So, accordyng
to hys cuſtome he mindeth to wtdrawe
them from ceremonies, to bring them
to true loue: ſaying opēly that it is not
water that clenſeth as wel men as the
meates: but it is weldoing. Not that he
would diminiſhe the grace of God by
theſe words, neither doth he reiect y• ceremonies
of the law as vayne and vnprofitable:
but ſpeaking to thoſe that
with ſygnes and bare figures did arrogantly
mocke God, he ſhewed that the
lawful vſe onely ſanctifieth the meate.
But haue we a wyll to knowe how we
ſhal vſe our meates wel and ryghtlye,
that ſhal be when of our plenty we ſhal

relieue the nede of the pore. Wherefore
it were farre better to giue almoſe of
our ouerplus, than to be to ſcrupulous
in waſhing our hands and veſſels, and
in ſo doing to let paſſe and forget the
pore. When he ſayth that al things are
cleane when we geue almoſe, this ſignifieth
not that in almoſe there is any
ſatiſfaction by which we ſhould be clē
               ſed
from our offences. For Chriſte debateth
not heere wyth what price wee
ſhould bye the forgeueneſſe of our ſinnes:
but he ſheweth that they that diſtribute
a part of their bread to the pore
ſhal eate their bread purely. But ſaint
Paul ſayth that though he ſhould geue
al hys goodes to be employed to the relieuing
of the neceſſity of the pore, neuertheleſſe
if he haue not loue, al that
is nothing, And thus wher is the cleanneſſe
of whych mentiō is made before?
He hymſelfe ſoluteth ſufficientlye this
queſtion when he ſayth, If I haue no loue.
Loue then maketh almoſe pure: and
almoſe well and charitably diſtributed
maketh vs to vſe wel and holylye the
meates whiche God hathe geuen vs.

There are then almoſes which are geuen
wythout loue. If a man conſyder
by it ſelfe the almoſe done to the poore
and chyeflye when a man vnclotheth
himſelfe to clothe other, it is worthy of
great prayſe. But bycauſe often tymes
one kynd of ambition goeth before and
commeth forth of another kinde of ambition,
and not of a true liberalitye, or
els when he hymſelfe which is lyberal
is deſtitute of other partes of loue (for
the inward liberalyty it ſelfe is onelye
one parte of Chriſtian loue) it may be
that thys worke that otherwyſe is cō
               mēdable,
though it be fayre before the
eyes of men and greatly prayſed, yet it
ſhal be nothing before God.
         
         
            77
            
               Rebuke before all mē thoſe that ſinne.
               Timo. 5.
               Reproue thy brother betvvyxt hym &
thee alone.
               Math. 18.
            
            SAYNTT Paul ſpeakyng of the
accuſation that ought to be made agaynſte
the Elders of the Churche,
wyl not haue it receaued vnder two or
three wytneſſes.
            
               
For ſeeing they muſt reproue the faultes
of other they ſhuld eaſily com to be
hated of other, & their doctrin ſhuld be
eaſly reiected, if a mā ſhuld eaſly admit
the accuſers that woulde blame them.
Yet leſt y• il lyuers ſhuld take an occaſion
therof to ſynne & to exempt thēſelf
from al correction, hee willeth that al
they that leade a diſſolute and offenſiue
lyfe ſhoulde bee openly rebuked. And
forthwith the reaſon is added, That other
may feare. Whenſoeuer any ordre
is taken for the good, the wycked take
holde of it and by that means wil haue
a priuiledge or freedome from puniſhmente.
Hee moderateth then y• whiche
he had ſayd of falſe and vniuſt accuſations,
to the end y• none ſhould thinke y•
vnder thys ſhadow it ſhould be lawful
for him to ſinne. That is to ſay, it behoueth
that babling tonges ſhould be repreſſed,
y• y• elders falſly accuſed ſhould
not be wrongfully blamed & defamed.
Yet if ther be among thē an il lyuer he
ought rygrouſly to be puniſhed & corrected.
And why? y• whē other ſee y• thei
which ar of degre & dignity are not for

borne, they being warned by ſuche example
ſhould be the more in feare For
why ſhould a mā geue more libertye to
thoſe whoſe ſynnes may moſt hurt, thā
to thoſe whoſe faultes ſhal not be of ſo
great offence. By the way, thys muſte
be vnderſtode of thoſe ſynnes & faultes
whiche geue open occaſion of offence.
For if any of the auncientes or miniſters
committe any lyght fault and no
notable crime, he ſhould rather bee rebuked
a parte, than blamed openly.
Now thys is ſo farre from contrarying
the ſentence of our Sauior Chriſt,
that it rather ſerueth it for an expoſition.
For when by the fyrſt ſentence we
know howe a man ſhould behaue himſelf
in rebuking open ſynnes, we may
alſo vnderſtand by the ſeconde howe a
man ſhoulde vſe hymſelf in reprouing
the faultes which as yet are ſecret and
hydde. Chriſt hauyng ſhewed how we
muſte beare the weakeneſſe of other,
ſheweth afterward howe and to what
end & howe long it behoueth vs to ſuffer
them. He geueth vs a meane, which
is, not to offende to muche, or to geue

occaſion of euil to the weake: and yet it
is fytt their ſyckeneſſe ſhuld be healed.
He geueth thys cōmaundement to his
faythfull ſo to ſpare one another that
notwithſtanding thei endeuour to correctvice
And this is worthy diligently
to be noted, for when we ſpare or beare
with mē, it can hardly be but y• we ſhal
forbeare to reproue them boldly. We
do al (welnyghe) declyne to one ſyde or
to the other, eyther we are content to
diſceaue one another by daungerous &
deadly flattery, eyther ells wee are to
ſharpe in purſuing faultes and ſynnes
when we ſhould redreſſe thē. He there
ſetteth forth three degrees of brotherly
correctiō: but hereit ſhal ſuffice to ſhew
that as a mā ought to reproue openly
thoſe ſynnes which ar open or knowen
of al. So as touchyng ye ſinnes y• as yet
are ſecret, we muſt proue this remedy,
beefore wee paſſe any further namely
whether by warnyng geuen a parte to
the offender a mā may withturne him
from hys offence. But if he cannot bee
wōne by ſuch a meane, other remedies

are ſpoken of alſo. The difference then
betwene open faultes and particular
ſynnes taketh away al difficultye.
         
         
            78
            
               I ſaye not that I praye to my father
for you.
               Ioan. 16.
               He intreateth for you.
               Rom. 1.
            
            SAINT Iohn in the ſeconde Chapter
of hys fyrſt canonical, ſayeth, if
wee haue ſynned we haue an aduocate
namely Ieſus Chriſt y• iuſte. We
are yet very farre of from the perfection
of righteouſneſſe, & beſyde we do ordinarilye
make our ſelf faultye. But
herein are we comforted that we haue
a ready and ſouerayne remedye to appeace
god, by hauing recourſe vnto Ieſus
Chriſt hys Sonne. And thys is a
thyng whereon oure conſciences may
reſte, thys is that wherein ſtandeth the
righteouſneſſe of men, and wherein is
grounded the hope of their ſaluation:
otherwiſe our tonges & mouthes ar defiled
& our prayers ſynne. But ye ſonne
of God is oure mouth, oute of whiche
we ſpeake things pleaſyng vnto God:

he is our altare wherupō we offer our
prayers in a ſacrifyce of ſwere ſauour:
he is our eye with whiche wee beholde
God a mercifull God vnto vs. So he
ſpeaketh & intreateth for vs, not that
we muſte accompt or meaſure thys increacyng
accordyng to our fleſhly vnderſtandyng.
For we muſt not thinke
that he is on his knees to make any requeſt
or ſupplicatiō, or that he hath his
handes ioyned together and lyfted vp
to pray: but bycauſe he preſenteth himſelf
continually with hys death and reſurrection
which are in ſteade of a perpetual
interceſſion and haue the continuall
efficacye and ſtrength of a liuely
prayer to get vs grace at hys fathers
hand, and to make hym graunt our requeſts.
But he is ſo our aduocate, that
we muſt aſke nothing but in his name,
& when we ſhall aſke or make requeſt
in hys name, then the treaſures of heauen
muſt be opened and liberally dealt
out. For God wil denye nothyng that
ſhalbe aſked in ye name of Ieſus Chriſt
hys Sonne. How ſayth he then that it
ſhal be no more nedeful that he ſhould

entreate for hys Dyſciples? And what
nede is there to praye in hys name, yf
he take on him the charge to be our aduocate
or interceſſour. And Saint
Paule ſayth in thys eyght of ye Epiſtle
to the Romaines that he entreateth for
vs. Saint John calleth hym our aduocate.
For anſwere, It behoueth to vnderſtande
that Chriſt ſayeth not here
ſymply yt he wil not bee our aduocate,
he meaneth that hys father ſhal bee ſo
bent to doe good to hys. Diſciples that
he wil geue them of hys owne accorde
& without muche a do, al that they ſhal
requyre of hym, for the great loue that
he beareth them. He wil preuent the
aduocate or interceſſour which (if thys
wer not) ſhould ſpeake for them. And to
conclude he addeth, the father hymſelfe
loueth you bicauſe you haue louer me,
and haue beleued y• I came forth from
God. Yet the father can heare & graūt
no prayer, neyther can he receaue any
as pleaſyng vnto him but through his
Sonne. So we are taught that when
God hath once be gonne to loue vs, his
loue is ſo great that he euen preuenteth

al that which is neceſſarye to bring vs
vnto hym.
         
         
            79
            
               My God my God vvhye haſte thou
forſaken me.
               Pſalme. 22.
               I am not alone for my father is vvith
me.
               Math. 27.
            
            THys was the chiefe fyght,Ioan. 16. and the
hardeſt of al ye to 
                  〈◊〉
                that our
Lord Ieſus ſuffer 
                  〈◊〉
                for he was ſo
farre of from ayde or fauour at hys fathers
hand to eaſe hym in hys laſt dyſtreſſe,
that he rather felt hym ſomthing
remoued and gone from hym. For not
only thys good Lord offred hys bodye
for the ranſome of our attonement wt 
God: but alſo he ſuffred in hys ſoule
the paynes whiche wee had deſerued, &
by thys meane he was truly made the
mā of ſorrowes, as Eſay ſaith, Chap.
53. And therfore we muſt not ſtaye only
at the vtter torment, for it behoued
Chriſt to preſent hymſelfe bee fore the
Iudgement ſeate of his father, bearing
vpon hym our condemmatiō, to the end
he myght make amendes for vs. Now

there is nothyng more horrible than to
fynde God a Iudge whoſe wrath ſurmonnteth
al the deathes that a mā can
deuyfe. Seyng then thys kynde of trial
was offred to 
                  〈◊〉
                Lorde Ieſus y• God
was agaynſt hym, & that by y• meane
he was as it wer appoynted to diſtructiō.
Feare and honour toke him, yea,
ſuche as had an hundred tymes ſix alowed
in al the men in the world: but he
abode a vanquyſher by a wonderfull
power of the holy ghoſt. Thys feare
made hym to make thys our crye, My
God my God why haſte thou forſaken me, not
faynedly nor after the opiniō of other:
but the inwarde heauineſſe of hys ſpyrite
was ſo violent and burnyng that
it made hym ſo to cry. Nowe then, not
onely he ſuffred the natural death, not
only his ſoule was ſeperated from hys
bodye: but as Saint Paule ſayeth,
Act. 2. he fett y• panges of death, that is
to ſay, he was preſſed with meruelous
anguyſh. It had bene a very ſmal matter
if Chriſt had eſcaped wyth a natural
death only: but it was expedient he
ſhoulde fele the rygour of Gods iudgement

that he myghte bee oure true interceſſoure
to hys father and that he
myghte ſtande beetwene him and vs
to keepe the wrathe of God from fallyng
on our heades. To do thys it was
nedefull he ſhould abyde the aſſault of
al the powers and force of hel and the
horrour of eternal death. And thys is
that that is ſayd in the Articles of oure
fayth, that he deſcended into hel when
he ſuffered ſo many vylannyes, ſo many
iniuryes & outrages, when he ſwet
bloude, when hys ſoule was payned euen
vnto ye death, when he was ſhamefully
hanged beetwene two theues as
one forſaken of God and of mē, without
helpe fauour and comfort, when he
yelded hys ghoſt vpon the Croſſe, bearyng
the curſe of the anger of God
whiche is the true hel, felyng condemnation
vpon hymſelfe, the paynes and
grieſes that we oure ſelues had deſerued
for our ſynnes and iniquityes. To
bee ſhorte when he was counted as a
worme of ye earth, & not as a mā. May
we not wel ſay y• he went down into hel
which had wel nigh ſwalowed hym in.
            
               
Synners had deſerued to be altogether
ſwalowed vp & confounded by the
iuſte iudgement of God, before whiche
they could in no wyſe ſtand. Seing thē
he repreſented ye perſon of al ſynners,
and preſented himſelf before God to abyde
the iudgemente for them, it was
nedeful y• he ſhoulde fele thys diſtreſſe
in hys conſcience as if he had bene forſaken
of God, and euē as though God
had bene angr
                  •
                with hym, ſo horrible
and feareful is the iudgement of God,
Albeit he was in al things pleaſyng to
hys father and albeit he had no waye
offended him: yet he was accounted on
the Croſſe more wicked than theues:
for Barrabas was quite and he condemned.
Al dutyes of humanitye were
denyed, yea ſuch as wer offred to other
which ſhoulde be put to death for their
myſdedes. He ſhewed then ſuche extremitye
of anguyſhe when on the Croſſe
he made thys outcrye. My God my God
why haſte thou forſaken me? It is no meruayle
then if it be ſayd that he deſcended
downe into hel, that is to ſay to the
depe gulfes of al miſeries, and myſcheuyng.

For he ſuffered the death which
by the wrath of God was layd vpon il
doers. Is not thys a terrible thyng for
a man to fele himſelf forſaken of God,
to fynde no fauoure or ſuttour at hys
hand when he calleth on hym, when a
man loketh for nothing els of him but
that he hath conſpired to deſtroye him.
            Now ſeyng it is ſo that he ſpake not
thys worde after the opinion of other
but as he felte it in dede, how is it that
he ſayeth in thys 16. of Iohn, that he
is not alone but that hys father is with
hym? Althoughe it ſeme that therein
is ſome abſurditye, that ſuch a word
of dyſpayre ſhoulde come oute of the
mouth of the Sonne of God: yet when
he felte the death and deſtruction accordyng
to the felyng of the fleſhe, he
ceaſed not to haue a faſte fayth in hys
heart, by whiche he behelde God preſent,
of whoſe abſence he complayneth.
For a whyle hys God head gaue place
to the weakeneſſe of the fleſhe in aſmuche
as touched our ſaluation, to the
end he might accomplyſhe al the parts
of our redemption.
            
               
There is alſo a dyfference betwene
the felyng of nature and the knowledge
and vnderſtandyng of faythe,
Wherfore theſe two thyngs may wel
agree, that Chriſt conceaued in hys
ſpiryte that God had forſaken hym,
and that accordyng as the felyng of
man tolde hym. And yet for all that
he had thys fyrmneſſe of fayth yt God
was gentle and fauourable to hym.
Whiche thyng he ſheweth when he
maketh thys preface that he hath recourſe
to God as to his God, & that, before
he make any mention of the temptation,
whych he beateth backe ſtrongly
and fyrmely by the buckler of fayth.
            Furthermore in thys feareful carefull
carefulneſſe, hys fayth abode ſafe
and whole ſo that complaynyng to bee
forſaken he truſted to the nere ayde of
God. But we muſt marke to what
purpoſe he ſayth that his father is with
hym. For albeit he myghte well haue
ſpoken thys woorde euen in hys anguyſhe:
yet it behoueth vs to marke
the circumſtance of the place. He
had ſayed beefore that the houre was

cōme already that euery one of hys Apoſtles
ſhould be ſcattered abrode and
ſhuld leaue hym alone. He addeth therunto
by and by thys correctiō. Though
I be not alone, but my father is with
me. He ſygnifyeth that thoughe al the
world ſhoulde forſake hym yet ſhoulde
he bee nothyng abated thereby. Hys
truth and hys glorie are grounded in
hym and depend not on the worlds beleuing
it, or not beleuing. If al ye world
forſake hym, yet he ceaſeth not to abide
whole. For he is God not hauyng any
nede at al of the helpe of any other. Let
hym be lefte alone yet hys father will
take his part: ſo that he ſhal not nede to
borrowe ought of men. Whoſoeuer
ſhal haue thys wel prynted in his hart
ſhal not ceaſe to abyde faſte though al
the world ſhoke, yea and the very forſakyng
of al other ſhal not ouer throwe
his fayth. For he which contenteth not
hymſelfe with God onely he doth hym
not the honour that belongeth to him,
howſoeuer it bee although the violence
of the extreme anguyſhe, made this cry
and this vehement worde to cōme out

of the mouth of the ſonne of God, My
God my God why haſt thou forſaken me? yet
was, it euer true that hys father was
with hym. Wherfore we ought not to
thynke y• hys father was at any tyme
agaynſt hym or angry with hym: for
howe ſhould he be angry with his welbeloued
ſonne in whō he was wel pleaſed.
Or howe could Chriſt appeaſe or
quench the wrath of God and make an
attonement betwene God and men yf
he were angry with hym.
         
         
            80
            
               The vvorlde cannot hate you.
               Ioan. 7.
               Bycauſe you are not of the vvorlde
but that I haue parted you from the
vvorlde, therefore the vvorlde hateth
you.
               Ioan 15.
            
            CHriſt in thys fyrſt ſentence ſpeaketh
of hys kynſfolke that as yet
were fleſhly (for it is there ſayd of
them that they beleued not in hym) he
ſayd to them, my tyme is not yet cōme,
but your tyme is alwayes ready. And
he addeth, the worlde cannot hate you,

he ſheweth wherein he dyffereth from
them.
            They myghte and had libertre to
ſhewe themſelf at al times to the world
and without daunger, bycauſe y• world
was frendly and fauourable to them.
But as for him he is afrayd of his perſon,
and not without cauſe, for that the
world is his deadly enemie. Therby he
openly declareth that they wer fleſhly.
For whoſoeuer wil haue peace with y•
world he muſt conſent to vice and to al
manner of wickedneſſe.
            Touchyng the other place, he ſpeaketh
to another ſort of folke, to were, to
hys Apoſtles whiche were begotten a
newe, and by that begettyng, parted
from the world. Now the true felicitye
of the faythful ſtandes herein, bycauſe
that by thys meane they are deliuered
from deſtruction. Thē he maketh here
a dyfference beetwene, thoſe that are
not regenerated and the true faythful,
which though they ſtudy to haue peace
with al men: yet they loke on y• whiche
is lawful not geuyng themſelues ouer
to y• corruptions of ye world to pleaſe it.

Thys notwithſtandyng is not to ſaye
that al they which are hated of ye world
are therfore welbeloued of God: For
we ſee thys cōme to paſſe yea ordinarilye,
that there is ſtryfe beetwene the
worldlynges, and one of them hateth
another, foraſmuche as the worlde is
full of hote debate within it ſelfe. But
here Chriſt goeth aboute to ſhewe that
the world hateth nothyng in the faythful
but that whiche is of God. Nowe
the diuerſitye of the perſons wel conſidered
in theſe two ſentences ſhal make
vs to knowe that there is no dyſagreeing.
The one ſort cannot be hated of
the world bycauſe they are of ye worlde.
The other cannot be loued of ye worlde
bycauſe they be not of it.
         
         
            81
            
               As for me I take vvitneſſe of no mā.
               Ioan 5.
               And you alſo shall beare vvitneſſe of
me
               Ioan. 15.
            
            BYCAVSE the Apoſtles of Chriſt
ſhuld be the inſtrumentes of ye holy
ghoſt and he ſhould ſpeake by their
mouth he telleth them that the witneſſe

whiche the holy ghoſt ſhall beare vnto
them, ſhal not be of ſuche ſorte as they
ſhal haue it for their priuate profyte, or
that they alone ſhoulde enioye it: but
they themſelues ſhal ſpread it a greate
way further abrode.
            Thus he ioyneth together theſe two
thynges that fayth is by hearyng, and
yet the certayntye of it is by the ſeale
of the holy ghoſt. A mā ſhould deceaue
hymſelf to thynke that naturally a mā
conceaueth fayth by only hearing. On
the other parte a man ought to caſt away
the peruerſe opinion of a heape of
fantaſtical & ſtubburne ſpirites which
diſdayne preaching, & yet in the means
ſeaſon haue their mouthes ful of reuelations,
and doe nothyng but vomyte
out heauenly Oracles. So thē, beſides
that, y• holy ghoſt muſt ſeale the grace
of Chriſt in our heartes, the miniſters
muſt declare it vs. So oure Lorde Ieſus
ſaith y• Iohn the Baptiſt had borne
witneſſe of hym and pronounced of his
Apoſtles that they ſhalbe his witneſſes
How thē ſayth he that he wil not haue
ye witneſſe of man? The anſwer is this,

Chriſt vſeth the witneſſe of Iohn the
Baptiſt, not that he on his behalf hath
any neede of his teſtimony: but in reſpect
of vs it is expedient for vs to haue
ſō cōfirmation that way. Men borrow
wytneſſe one of another bycauſe they
cannot myſſe ſuch an ayde. There is a
farre other maner of reaſon touchyng
God and his ſonne Chriſt. A man may
wel ſay that vertue needeth not to bee
ayded or ſtayed by any others: But
what hath man in hymſelf wherewith
he may vpholde the truth of God. And
Chriſt hymſelf afterward addeth that
he bringeth foorth the recorde of Iohn
the Baptiſt bycauſe of them. He ſygnifieth
by theſe words that he loketh not
ſo much vnto himſelf as to the profite
and health of men, when hee ſtyrreth
preachers of his goſpel and Herawlds
of hys word whereby he aſſureth vs of
his good wil which hee ſheweth to bee
wonderful in thys that hee tempereth
and moderateth al thyngs for our profite
and ſaluation. The ſōne of god thē
taketh not witnes of any mā in reſpect
of himſelf, & yet he taketh it in reſpecte
of vs.
         
         
            
            82
            
               The natiōs do naturally the things
that are of the Lavve.
               Rom. 2.
               Flesh is not ſubiecte to the lavve of
God.
               Roma. 8.
            
            SAint Paul not content to condemn
men by the word and to pronoūce y•
iuſt iudgement of God againſt thē:
wil alſo conuince them by euidēt reaſons,
to the end he may ſtir thē to loue
and ſeke the ſonne of God. What ſhal
it auayle men to pretend ignorance, euen
thoſe that haue not the law? for by
their workes and their owne doinges
they declare ſufficiently that they haue
ſome rule of righteouſneſſe in themſelues.
This is it that he ſayth the Gentiles
or Pagans do naturally the things
yt are of ye law. For ther was neuer natiō
ſo muche ennemy to humanity but
hath had ſome ordinaunces and lawes
to kepe them in ſome diſcipline. Seing
then all nations are inclined of theyre
owne accord to geue and to make lawes
for themſelf, not forced thereto: it
appeereth that there is a certayne vnvnderſtanding

of ryghteouſneſſe and
equity naturally emprinted in the mindes
of men. By this meane they haue
law wtout ye law. For though they haue
not the law geuen and written by Moſes:
yet are they not altogether deſtitute
of the knowledge of equitye and
right. For otherwyſe they could not
diſcerne betwene vertue and vice, neither
ſhuld they prayſe vertue nor punniſh
vice. Loe what is to do naturally
the things that are of the law, yet notwithſtanding
this letteth not the other
ſētence to be true, that fleſh is not ſubiect
and cannot ſtoup to the law of god
For ſeeing ther is in men ſome ſede of
religion althoughe they bee corrupted
they are naturally ſtyrred forwarde to
ſome kinde of righteouſneſſe to thend
they myghte bee the better conuinced,
and that no man ſhould be able to ſaye
that ignorance ſhould excuſe him. But
the corruption that is in them cauſeth
that how many thoughts, meditatiōs,
affections, or wils ſoeuer they haue, ſo
many hatreds haue they againſt God.

He hath openly declared his wil in his
law. The fleſhly thoughtes altogether
withſtand it. It foloweth thē that they
make open warre agaynſt the wyll of
God. Thys proueth that it is an intollerable
blaſphemy to ſay that nothing
is doone but that whiche is allowed of
God.
         
         
            83
            
               Cyrcumciſion profiteth true
                     •
                  ye if
thou performe the lavv.
               Rom. 2.
               If you be circumciſed Chriſt profiteth
you nothing.
               Gal. 5.
            
            CYRcumciſion was a ſigne of oure
Lordes league by which he had ſeparated
Abraham and hys ſede for
his herytage, it ſeemeth to the Iewes
that they had ſomwhat to boſt of whē
they were Circumciſed: but bicauſe leauing
the truth of the ſygne, they ſtayed
onely at the outward aparance, Saint
Paul ſheweth that by the bare ſygne
they haue nothing that they may attribute
to themſelues. The truth of Cyrcumciſion
did conſyſte in the ſpiritual
promiſſe to which Fayth muſt neceſſarily

be adioyned. The Iewes diſpiſed
the one and the other, both Faith and y•
promyſſe. Al then that they had was
but a fond and vayne truſt. Wherfore
applying hys purpoſe to this ſo groſſe
an errour, he leaueth to ſpeake of the
chiefe vſe of Circumciſion. They thought
that Circumciſion was of it ſelfe a
work mete to purchace righteouſneſſe
To ſpeake then after their opinion he
ſayth that if a man loke vpon the work
in circumciſion, he that is circumciſed
muſt ſhew himſelf a perfect and ſound
ſeruaunte of God. The worke then of
circumciſion ſhal be perfection, as if S▪
Paul ſhould ſay. If you wil haue Circumciſion
profit or ſerue for any thing
it ſhalbe when you perfitly kepe y• law.
As much may a man ſay now a dayes
of our Baptiſme if any mā leaning to y•
truſt of the water of Baptyme thynke
to be iuſtified bycauſe he hath receiued
the outer ſygne as though he had alredy
holineſſe by that worke, and that by
that meanes he ſhould not regarde the
end of Baptyme to were, that by it the
Lorde calleth vs to holineſſe of lyfe.

What ſhoulde then becōme of the promeſſe
and grace which Baptime teſtifieth
and ſealeth vnto vs, it were to cō
               tent
vs with a vaine ſigne, and not to
care for that which is ſound and faſt in
the Baptyme. Here then he ſpeaketh
not of Circumciſion purpoſely what it
is worth in it ſelfe: but he ſpeaketh to
thoſe that did falſely interprete the ſignes,
and ſendeth thē to the truth. Here
he meaneth that men muſt obſerue the
law before Circūciſion 
                  〈◊〉
                profit him.
            He tendeth to another ende in thys
place of the Epiſtle to the Galathians
wher he ſayth, beholde I Paul declare
vnto you that if you be
                  •
                Circumciſed
Chriſt profiteth you nothing, he ſpeaketh
not onely of the outward cutting

                  〈◊〉
                the ceremony but, he ſtriueth agaīſt
the peruerſe doctrine of falſe Apoſtels
which ſayd that it ought to be kepte as
a 
                  〈◊〉
                of God neceſſary for al faithful
and that in the ſame was a certain
deſert: Theſe gloſes and Diuellyſhe
inuentions made Chriſt vnprofitable,
not y• the falſe Apoſtels denied Chriſt
or would that he were altogether caſt

of, and takē away, but they made ſuch
a partenerſhip betwene his grace, and
ye works of ye law, that they did aſcribe
vnto him but ye halfe part of ſaluation.
But the ſōne of God wil not be ſo deuided
and yet he can nothyng at al profit
vs vnleſſe we receue him al whole. To
be ſhort, it is vnpoſſible to mingle the
grace of Chriſt & meritorious works together.
Circūciſiō thē profiteth if a mā
ioine ye truth to it: on ye other part if we
go about to ioine Circūciſiō wt ye grace
of Chriſt as if by it a man were helped
to get ſaluatiō, not only it is vnprofitable
but alſo it diminiſheth the grace of
Chriſt.
         
         
            84
            
               Thou shalt vvorship the Lord thy
God and him only thou shalt ſerue.
               Deut. 6.
               Abraham riſing vp vvorshipped
the people of the Land.
               Geneſis. 2
                     •
                  .
            
            IT is not nedefull to heape vp many
teſtimonies of Scripture to proue y•
only God is worthy of worſhippe: for
it is cleare enough and eaſy to be knowen.
And though in this firſt ſentence

thys word alone be not added to the firſt
part but onely to the ſecond: yet it wer
a triflyng and more than childiſh cauillation
to ſay that God ought to be ſerued
onely. But as touching worſhipping
there are other to whome it maye
wel be offred, as men ſpeak of the worſhip
of ſeruice which is geuen to ſaintes
that are dead and to their Images
and Idols, and to their bones and reliques,
but we muſt loke vpō the deed rather
thā vpō a word or two, as oft as the
ſeruice of God is ſpoken of. This ſentence
is manifeſte and playne and is
ſufficiently vnderſtode of it ſelfe. Thou
ſhalt honour the Lord thy God and ſhalte ſerue
hym onely: and if it haue nede of an expounder,
why was the Diuel (when he
would haue made chriſt to worſhip hī)
repulſed by this ſelf ſētēce, but bicauſe
y• ſōne of God gaue, to vnderſtand that
no other ought to be worſhypped but
God? The Scripture appoynteth and
commaundeth that God only ſhould be
worſhipped ſerued and honored. Wee
muſte ſee to what ende. If man take
away or breake how litle ſo euer it be,

of Gods glory, to geue it to creatures,
it is a haynous robbing of Godds ſeruice
and honor. And ſe
                  •
               we not playnly
that this is done as oft as we acknowlege
theſe benefites to com from creatures
of which God would be acknowleged
ye only autor? Nowe euen as to
ſpeake proprely, religion is ſpirituall
but y• outward profeſſion of religiō belongeth
to y• body: ſo not only ye ſeruice
and inward obedience are due to God
alone: but alſo we muſt ioyne to it the
outwarde wytneſſe. This then is
certayne that onely God oughte to bee
honoured.
            Notwithſtanding the Scripture leaueth
not to vſe the ſame word in many
places in another meaning. As in thys
ſentence we heare that Abraham worſhipped
the people of the land, of whoſe
inhabitāts he went about to bie a pece
of inheritāce for a buryīg place. Now
by this maner of ſpeaking Moiſes ſignifieth,
that Abraham did reuerence to
the people as cuſtome is to do in bowing
the knee, or by ſome other countenance
or geſture of the body.
            
               
This reuerence is done both to men
and to God, but the end is very diuers.
Men one to another bend theire knee
when they meete, or bow downe y• hed
or put of their cap: and thys is don for
good manners, or ciuile honours ſake:
but if they do it one to another for religion
or conſcience ſake, it is Idolatrie
and an outragious ſacrilege: for religion
ſuffreth no other ſeruice or honour
to be done but that which belongeth to
God. Moreouer it was the comon faſſhiō
of thoſe of ye Eaſt which wer to ful
of ceremonies as it appeareth by ye hiſtories.
Therfore we muſt not meſure
thys honor which Abraham did to this
people according to the maners of the
people of theſe partes whych are not ſo
ceremonial.
         
         
            85
            
               Eue ſpeaking of Cayn her ſonne
ſayd I haue gotten a man of the
Lord▪
               
               Geneſis. 4▪
               
               Not as Cayn vvhich vvas of the
vvicked and kylled his brother.
               
                  
                     •
                  . Ioan. 3.
            
            
               
HOwſoeuer this place of Geneſis
may be expounded, a man myght
thinke that Cayn was bleſſed of
God. Fyrſte if it be expounded, I haue
gotten a man wyth the Lord, thys is as if it
wer ſayd by the benefit or grace of god,
as if Eue imputed it to the bleſſing of
God that ſhe had ofſpring, as it is ſayd
in the. 126. Pſalme, The fruyte of the
wombe is a gyfte and bleſſing of God.
Secondarily if a man ſay I haue gottē
or poſſeſſed by the Lordes helpe, it is
as muche to ſaye as God hath don me
thys good turne that I haue a man.
In thys manner Eue ſhoulde geue
thanckes to God for that he had begon
to rayſe poſterity of her, wher ſhe was
worthy neuer to haue children, as wel
as ſhee deſerued to be euerlaſtingly deſtroyed.
Thyrdely if a man expound it.
I haue poſſeſſed a man of God, it ſhuld
be as if Eue did promeſſe herſelf already
to haue the ouercommer of the Serpent
which had bene promiſed. So
the Faythe of Eue ſhoulde be prayſed
in that, that ſhee hadde embraced

the promeſſe by Fayth that the head of
the Diuel ſhuld be cruſhed by her ſede.
Fourthly if a man receiue this expoſition
which is the moſt allowable of al,
I haue gotten or poſſeſſe a man vnto
the Lord, it ſhould be as if Eue ioyed
in herſelfe for the childe that was born
vnto her, offring it to God as the firſte
frute of her generation. Howſoeuer
this be taken, it ſeemeth that in the
byrthe of Cayne there is matter of reioicing
for aſmuchas he is of the Lord.
Eue truely not knowing what a one
her Sonne Cayn ſhoulde be, eyther
prayſeth the Lord or geueth him thankes,
or acknowlegeth the benefit of god
but y• end ſhewed euidētly that S. Iohn
ſpake very well, when entreating of
brotherly loue hee woulde haue vs abhorre
and feare the example of Cayn
whiche was the murderer of his owne
brother whoe is as a patrone of all the
wycked whych are filled with cruelty,
hypocriſye, enuye, euel wil and hatred
and ſuche as can not but ſhewe that
they are poſſeſſed of the Diuel. Cayn
then was had through the Lorde, for

was his mothers deſire in conceauing.
But the whyleſte hee was of the wicked
whyche is the Diuel, in that he
had a peruerſe hearte, and hate bare
rule in all his life: and hauing killed
hys brother for no other cauſe but in
as muche as the workes of hys brother
were Iuſte, hee ſhewed manifeſtly
that the Diuel whoe is the Father of
murtherers poſſeſſed him.
         
         
            86
            
               Dyd oure Princes knovve trulye
that this is very Chriſt? but vve
knovv vvhence this man is.
               Ioan 
                     •
                  .
               If they had knovven him they
had neuer crucified the Lorde of
glory.
               1. Co
                     •
                   2.
            
            SOme of the Iewes knowing what
deadly hatred the gouernoures and
chiefe of them bare to the Lord Ieſus,
and ſeing that he preached openly,
and notwithſtanding no mā layd hand
on him: they aſk this queſtion, howe
might it be that our rulers had knowē
that this fellowe is the true Meſſias?

Herein there is ſome ſygne of knowledge,
bicauſe that although they deſyred
to put hym to death, yet they doe it
not. Theſe Iewes aſkyng thys queſtion
thynke it to be a worke of God: yet
can they not lift vp their eyes to Gods
prouidence. So do fleſhly men. For as
ofte as they ſee before thē any ſtraūge
worke of God they wonder at it, but it
cōmeth not in their minde at al to conſyder
the power of God & to take profyte
of it. And as for theſe men that ſay
they knowe whence Chriſt is, they
know but who are his fleſhly parents:
but when they ſhould aſcende vnto the
wonderful wiſdome & infynite goodneſſe
of God whence he was ſente vs,
they are together blynde.
            A man ſeeth hereby howe not onely
me haue their eyes ſtopped when they
ſhuld iudge of thyngs y• belong to God:
but alſo they haue thys fault as it were
of nature, y• is to ſay, they ar very wittye
in forging thēſelues lettes to kepe
thē frō cōming to ye knowledge of god.
            Sathan truly offereth very often
occaſions of offence by whiche many

turne away frō the ſonne of God. But
though their way were playne and very
ſmothe, yet ſo it is that euery one
wil laye ſtomblyng blockes before his
own fete. There neded nothyng but y•
vnbeliefe of the gouernours to withdrawe
all thys preace of people from
Chriſt: but is thys let taken frō them?
yet deuyſe they a new occaſion to kepe
them from comming to the fayth. The
example of the gouernours oughte to
moue them: yet ſo farre are they from
folowing that whiche is good & ryghte
that they ſtomble euen at the fyrſt ſtep
So if the Lord conduct not and guyde
our ſteppes vntill the end thoughe wee
haue ſomthyng wel begon, yet afterwarde
wee ſhal ſtroy & looſe ſtomacke.
But Saint Paule ſpeaketh of another
manner of knowlege in thys ſeconde
Chapiter of y• firſt to y• Corrinthians.
Thys knowledge cōmeth not of fleſhly
ſight, for ſo Pilate, Iudas, y• ſcribes, &
Chriſtes very enemyes which wer led
& driuē with a mad rage to put hym to
death, might wel haue knowē hī. Ther
was another thyng in hym wherein y•
               
wyſedome of God ſhyne clearely, the
which notwithſtanding the great ones
could not comprehend. To crucifie our
Lorde Chriſt, of one ſyde were the gouernours
of the Iewes which were in
reputation of holyneſſe and wyſedome
aboue all other, on the other ſyde Pylate
and the Empyre of Rome. Herein
a man ſeeth manyfeſtly the blyndneſſe
of al thoſe whiche are not wyſe but after
the fleſhe. But for the better vnderſtandyng
hereof let vs note that there
are to ſorts of ignorance, the fyrſt is
that which procedeth from an vnaduiſed
zeale, and doth not ſymply reiect y•
which is good, but it reiecteth it bicauſe
it thynketh it to be ill. But although no
man ſo ſynneth of ignorance that the
whyleſt he is not gyltye before God of
a naughtie conſcience bicauſe hypocriſye
is euer myxed withal, or ſome pride
or dyſpiſyng: Neuertheleſſe it happeneth
ſometymes that al Iudgement &
vnderſtandyng is ſo cloked in the witt
of man that nothyng appeareth but
mere ignorance, not only to the eies of
other, but alſo of themſelf. Saint Paul

was ſuch a one beefore he was lyghtened.
For he hated Ieſus Chriſt and his
doctryne in that he was caryed awaye
with a fonde zeale not knowing what
he dyd, and yet he was not without hypocriſye
nor without pryde, ſo that he
was inexcuſable before God. But his
vyces were altogether couered wyth
ignorance and blyndneſſe, ſo that himſelf
perceaued them not nor felt them.
            The ſecond manner of ignorance is
more like to a ſtubborneſſe and wilfulneſſe
than a mere ignorance: for they
that of their own accord riſe vp againſt
God, ar as it wer freniticke mē. They
haue eyes and yet they ſee not. Theſe
gouernours were ſuche, and we muſte
not maruell that Saint Paule ſo ſpeaketh
of them, for if they had wel knowen
the wyſedome of God, they had neuer
crucifyed Chriſt. For the Scribes
and Phariſyes dyd not ſo knowe that
the doctryne of Ieſus Chriſt was true
but that in the meane tyme they erred
as doltyſhe people.
         
         
            87
            
               
                  There are many Antichriſtes euen
already, vvherfore vve knovve that it
is the latter tyme.
               1. Ioan. 2.
               Brethren, vve pray you be not ſone
moued in your vvittes, and bee not
troubled, neyther by ſpyrite nor by
vvoorde, nor by Epiſtle as from vs, as
if the day of the Lord vvere at hand.
               
                  
                     •
                  . Theſſ. 2.
            
            IT is certayne that among other tokens
the cōmyng of Antichriſt is an
infallible marke of the latter dayes.
Now the Apoſtles by y• latter dayes or
ye latter time note the raigne of Chriſt
which is frō his fyrſt cōmyng, vnto the
day of y• reſurrection, as it is ſhewed. 2.
Peter. 3 and as Saint Paul ſaith. 1 Cor. 10
y• endes of ages are cōme vnto vs. And
els where he foretelleth y• from the begynnyng
ther ſhalbe a turnyng backe,
which ſhalbe as a general euil. After y•
he ſetteth forth the aduerſarie of Chriſt
to be head of al Apoſtaſie which ſhal ſit
in the temple of God attributing Godhead
vnto hymſelf and y• honours that

be due
                  •
                God. Duryng thys tyme or
duryng the raigne of Chriſt which is y•
latter tyme ther ſhalbe many Antichriſtes:
For ſynce Chriſt, as many heretykes
as ther haue bene and authors of
ſectes, ſo many members wer there of
the kingdome which is contrary to the
Kyngdome of Chriſt.
            But yet it is not in vs to make the
tyme nere at hande or to limyte it in
certayne yeares or ages after oure folyſhe
fantaſyes and dreames. And neyther
muſt we foliſhly receaue at others
hands ſuch prognoſtications, leaſt we
might be vnaduiſedly aſtōned through
ſuch reportes, or that wee ſhoulde promyſe
oure ſelfe vaynely ſome lyghte
or ſodayne paſſage to the reſurrection
as though we ſhoulde bee exempt from
the Croſſe of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt.
There are many places in the holy
Scriptures which beare witneſſe y• the
day of the Lord is at hand, yet it behoueth
vs to conſider in what meanyng
it is ſpoken, to wete, in reſpect of God,
 wt whō a thouſand yeares ar as a day.

But in the meane ſeaſon God wil haue
vs wayte for hym from houre to houre
and continually, ſo that wee appoynte
hym not a certayne ſpace of time. And
ſo he geueth vs this warning. Watch,
ſayth he, for you knowe neither the day
nor the hour. Moreouer theſe falſe pronoſticatours
whiche are repulſed by
Saint Paule in ſteade of y• they ſhould
holde the myndes of men in doubt, to
the end the tarrying ſhould not be tedyous
to them, they would haue mē aſſured
that the ſonne of God would cōme
very ſhortlye.
         
         
            88
            
               VVho confeſſeth me beefore men
I vvill acknovvledge hym alſo before
my father vvhich is in heauen.
               Math. 10.
               Haue vvee not Prophecyed in thy
name? But then I vvill ſaye to them, I
knevve you neuer.
               Math. 7.
            
            THE ſtrength and valiaūtneſſe of
Chriſtes Dyſciples ought to tend
to thys end, that they ſhould be alwayes
ready to cōfeſſe hys holy name.

The greater part of mē make ſmal accompt
of thys confeſſion, yet the ſonne
of God doth put it among the chiefe exerciſes
of true religion & that of good
ryght. For if earthly prynces cal their
ſubiectes to beare weapon for the defence
of their glory and honour, and to
augment their ryches: what reaſō can
there be yt the faythful of Chriſt ſhould
not at the leaſt employe their tonges
to mayntayne the glory and honour of
their heauenly King. There is not one
Chriſten man alone, whom the ſonne
of God wil not haue to be a witneſſe of
hys truth.
            But to inflame our zeale he addeth
to it a ſyngular promyſe yt if we make
confeſſion of hym beefore men he will
lykewiſe aduoutch vs before his father
whiche is in heauen. When wee ſhall
haue cōfeſſed him here beneth in earth,
deſerue we that he ſhould aduoutch vs
in heauen? Who is the ſonne of God?
And who ar we? He wil beare witneſſe
of vs. And what a vyllanny ſhall thys
be of vs to refuſe to beare witneſſe of
hym. If we make compariſon of our
                  •
               
               
ſelfe whiche are mortall men and of
no value with God and hys Angells,
and all hys heauenly glorye, howe
muche more excellent is that whyche
Chriſt promyſeth vs, than that which
he requyreth of vs? For thoughe
the vnbeleuers are men and peruerſe
men, yet Chriſt oure Lorde eſteemeth
the witneſſe whiche wee beare of hym
beefore them as if God with hys Aungels
wer preſent to heare our witneſſe.
Howe then oughte thys promyſe to
moue vs to make confeſſion of hym
here beneath beefore men ſeeyng he
wyl aduoutche vs in heauen before his
father?
            But in the ſeconde ſentence oure
Lorde Ieſus ſummoneth the hypocrites
beefore hys Iudgement ſeate. For
whyleſt they occupye any place in the
Churche, they flatter themſelues, and
wythall they abuſe other. He pronounceth
then that the daye ſhal cōme
in whyche the floure ſhalbee pourged
and the ſtrawe and chaffe ſhalbee parted
from the good grayne. They ſhall

boaſte yt they Prophecyed in the name
of the Sonne of God, that is to ſaye,
done the offyce of teachyng vnder hys
authoritye or leadyng: but they ſhal at
the length know that what fayre confeſſiō
ſo euer they haue made outwardly,
it ſhal be for all that nothyng in effect,
howſoeuer men eſteme it.
            They ſhal haue confeſſed hym with
their tong, ſo Chriſt will confeſſe alſo
on hys part, that al the fayre profeſſiō
that they ſhal haue made, hath ben but
lyes and vanitye. And behold what the
confeſſion of Chriſt contayneth, that
he neuer accounted them for hys, no
not when they boaſted themſelfe to bee
the pyllers of the Churche. The Lord
knoweth well thoſe that be hys ſayth
Saint Paule, let them that call vpon
the name of the Lord withdrawe thē
               ſelf
from al iniquitye. Let vs thē make
a diſtinction betwene the true confeſſiand
the falſe, and we ſhal know whoe
they are that Chriſt aduoucheth & who
they be that he caſteth of,
         
         
            89
            
               
                  Bleſſed are they that feare the Lord.
               Pſalme. 128.
               Feare is not in Loue.
               1. Ioan. 4.
            
            THERE are two ſortes of feare,
the firſte procedeth of Fayth whiche
maketh vs apprehend the preſence
of God: and thys apprehenſion
can not bee wythout feare: notwithſtanding
that feare is not without comforte.
The wicked alſo may haue feare
and horrour of the preſence of the lord
but that feare maketh them to remayn
confounded.
            There is a goodly example of bothe in
the reſurrection of the Sonne of God.
The Soldiours that kepte the tombe
feared. The holye wemen alſo that
came to anoynt hys body were afraid.
But let vs heare what difference there
is betwene the one feare and the other.
The Soldioures whyche were inured
with tumultes and ſtryfe were for all
that ſo aſtonnied and ſwallowed vp
with fighte that they fell as half dead,
yea not hauing ſtrengthe or power to
ryſe. The wemen lykewyſe feared
but comforte followed by and by after

which rayſed thē vp from their feare &
flyghte ſo that at the laſt they began to
hope for ſome better thing. And truely
it is very conuenient that y• hygh maieſty
of God ſhould indifferently make
al to tremble, as well the good as the
ill, to the ende that all fleſh may kepe
ſcilence before hys face. But after
that the Lorde hymſelfe hath humbled
the faythfull, foorthwith he appeaſeth
their fearfulneſſe leaſte beeing ouercharged
they ſhoulde fal vnder the burden,
and not that onely, but alſo he
healeth by the mildeneſſe of hys grace
the wound and hurt which he himſelfe
cauſed. But as touching the reprobate
and proud they are ſodenly flyghted,
and wyther by little and little in
their tourmentes: as men out of theyr
wittes are agaſte for a litle whyle: yet
are they not touched to the quicke, for
by and by they forget that they wer in
feare, not that the remembraunce of
the feare is altogether oute of them,
but bycauſe thys lyuely apprehenſion
of Gods power is fallen from them.
            
               
Nowe as touching the fyrſt Feare
whiche proceadeth of Fayth, it maketh
vs to walke in all reuerence and obedience
vnto Goddes Iuſtyce. And
therefore it maketh vs happy bycauſe
God wyl neuer forſake thoſe that obey
him in feare and lowlyneſſe. Thys is
contrary to the common opinion of al
men that they that ſeate the Lord are
happy and principally in thys life. For
how many Epicures are there whiche
vomite oute blaſphemies, ſaying that
God fauoureth the wicked when they
proſper in their wickedneſſe. Moreouer
the proſperity of the wicked troubleth
and maketh the weake to wauer:
beſyde, they faint in trouble and vnquietneſſe.
And althoughe the diſpiſers
of God ar not very wel at their
eaſe, and that the ſtate of the good
is in ſome ſorte good and tollerable:
yet ſo it is that the more parte haue
their eyes blinde or ſhutte vppe when
they conſider Goddes prouidence.
But howſoeuer it be, this is very certayne
that happye are they that feare
the Lorde.
            
               
Nowe if it be ſo that true charyty
(whiche can not be withoute Fayth,
and is not but of the holy Ghoſte) cauſeth
vs to know that we abyde in God
and hee in vs: howe is it ſayed that
fea
                  •
               e is not in loue? but that loue driueth
out al feare?
            We muſte remembre the ſeconde
kinde of feare which bringeth nothing
but trembling and horroure. There
is in deede a ſeruyle feare which is altogether
contrary to willing reuerēce.
When we loue not God francklye as
our father but ar chiefely conſtrayned
by feare of punniſhment: but Saynte
Iohn meaneth another thynge: hys
mind is to ſhew that when we knowe
by Faith what the loue of god to vs is,
wee haue peace in our conſcience whyche
is contrary to this feare. And
though we cannot yet altogether driue
feare awaye, bycauſe we canne haue
but a little taſte of the loue of God towardes
vs, yet whenneſoeuer we
haue recourſe to God as to an aſſured
porte free from all feare and daunger
of wracke and of all ſtormes and

tempeſtes feare is truly driuen awaye
bycauſe it geueth place to fayth. Feare
then is not in loue, not that it moueth
not our hearts, but bicauſe it troubleth
vs not nor letteth not our reſte whiche
wee obtayne by fayth. So a man
maye ſaye of thoſe two ſayinges that
there is in them diuerſitye, but no contrarietie.
         
         
            90
            
               Touche me not for I am not yet
gon vp to my father.
               The vvemen handled hys feete
and bent themſelf dovvne before
hym.
               Ioan. 20.
            
            
               A Man may eaſely agree theſe two
places,Math. 28. if we loke vpon the affectiō
of Marye Magdalene and on the
manner of the other wemens doyngs.
Chriſt ſuffereth theſe to touche hym to
the end hys reſurrection myghte bee
certaynlye knowen. And therefore
Saint Mathew addeth that the wemen,
bowed downe before hym which

was an argumente or a ſygne of an
vndoubted knowledge. Alſo he ſuffered
hys Dyſciples to touche hym and
ſpecially Thomas to put hys fyngers
within the hollowneſſe of his wounds.
And that he dyd bycauſe it was nedeful,
to put them out of al doubt of hys
reſurrection. But when he ſawe that
Marye ſtayed at hys bodily preſence
and loked for no other happier maner
of enioying hym than that he ſhoulde
bee conuerſante in earth with them,
a man oughte not to maruell if he
were willyng to moderate and correct
thys vnaduiſed zeale. Wherefore
let vs take thys for a certayntye that
Chriſt forbad not Marye to touch him
tyll he ſawe that ſhee Importunely deſyred
to keepe hym ſtyll in the worlde.
The reaſon is added therunto whiche
ſufficiently ſheweth that whiche is very
worthy to be noted, to wete, that he
is not yet gon vp to hys father. Nowe
he wil make Marye to vnderſtand that
ſhee oughte to ſuſpende her affection
til time he were receaued into the heauenly

glorye. Beſyde thys he ſheweth
what the end of hys reſurrection
is: not ſuche as Marye deuyſed it to
bee according to her fantaſye, to wete,
that after hys reſurrection he ſhoulde
tryumphe here belowe in y• world, but
rather that by going vp into heauenly
glorye he myght take poſſeſſion of the
kyngdome that was promyſed hym &
being ſet on the ryght hand and in the
glorye of hys father, he myghte mayntayne
hys Church by the power of hys
holy ſpirite. Mary then dyd ill, foraſmuche
as contentyng her ſelfe with
the halfe of the reſurrection of Ieſus
Chriſt ſhe deſyred to haue hym preſent
in the worlde. And as for vs, if wee
will not fayle to fynde Ieſus Chriſt,
wee muſte lifte vp our ſpirites a lofte.
Moreouer, as many as endeuour to
goe to him haue nede to vnwrap thē
               ſelfe
of all earthlye affections of the
fleſhe.
         
         
            91
            
               Bevvare you doe not your ryghteouſneſſe
before men to the end to be
ſene of them.
               Math. 6.
               
                  Let your lyghte ſo shyne beefore
men that they maye ſee your good
vvorkes & may glorifye your father
vvhich is in heauen.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
            
            CHriſt warneth hys faythfull to doe
good works ſimply before god, not
hauyng care for their apparaūce
before men, which is a warnyng very
neceſſary, for it is alwaies to be doubted
leaſte ambition thruſte in it ſelfe among
the vertues: and it commeth to
paſſe often tymes that ther is not ſo cō
               mendable
woorke but by ambition is
corrupted. Chriſt ſpeaketh nowe of almoſe,
now of prayers, & both are good
teſtimonyes of the honeſtye of a man:
but when a mā dealeth almoſe or prayeth
onely to thys purpoſe to bee ſene
of men, what beelongeth to ſuche an
almoſe man or to ſuche a prayer, but
onely that he bee eſteemed of men?
We ſee then that here he goeth aboute
to cure the ſyckeneſſe of ambition, by

whiche men ſeke for glorye at mennes
handes for their wel doing. But the
whyleſt the Chriſtian vertues can not
be in a man except they ſhyne vnto other.
Thys cannot otherwiſe be. Euen
as a man fylled ful of vyces cannot be
ſo cloſe but that he ſhal be an ill example
to other: ſo the vertues can not ſo
abyde in a vertuous mā but that other
ſhal perceaue them. Yet a Chriſtian
man beyng as it were hyd in hymſelfs
ought to deſyre that men ſhould ſo ſee
hys vertues that al the glory ſhould be
geuen to God. So not onely theſe two
ſentences dyſagree not in themſelf but
alſo the ſeconde ſerueth to expound the
fyrſt. For thys ſeconde exhortyng the
faythfull to al good workes taketh frō
them al ambitition and pryde ſyth it wil
that the whole tend to thys end y• God
be glorifyed. Good workes can not but
ſhyne though we hyde vs as muche as
we wil. Saint Paule ſayth. 1. Cor. 8. The
faythful procure good not only before
God: but alſo before men. Thys ſhall
bee ſayd ells where by Chriſt hymſelf,
that it behoueth vs to withdrawe oure

ſelfe into ſecret places and into our cloſets
when we wyl do any good worke:
But it is ſayd onely to take away and
to correct ambitiō. But here he ſetteth
forth before vs another ende, namelye
the only glory of God to be our mark.
So it is not inough to do good works,
but we muſt looke to what ende we do
them. An il end wyl make that the workes
which of them ſelf are good ſhal be
corrupt, not in themſelfe, but in the perſon
of him that doth them.
         
         
            92
            
               A good sheaphearde giueth his life
for his shepe, but the hierling runnes
his vvay.
               Ioan. 10.
               VVhen they shal perſecute you in
one tovvne flie to another.
               Math. 10.
            
            THE Lord Ieſus as the chief ſhepheard
and Prince of Biſhops, ſheweth
with what affectiō he loueth
hys ſhepe whē he ſayth that he gyueth
his lyfe for them, which thing he did in
dede ſo that al they which refuſe to bee
kepte and defended of thys ſo louing

and ſo gentle a ſheepheard ſhew themſelf
very vnthankful, and are woorthy
to die an hundred times, and thei offer
themſelfe to al wretchedneſſe. Then afterwarde
he ſheweth of what ſorte the
hierling is, and he that is not the true
ſhepheard, and to whome the ſhepe belong
not. If the wilde beaſt cōme vpon
the ſhepe he leaueth the whole flock for
a pray and runneth away. They which
are the true miniſters of Chriſt in whō
he worketh by his holy ſpirit indeuour
to folow him that ſetteth them a work:
among whiche there haue bene many
that haue notſpared to ſhed their blood
for the ſafety of their ſhepe and that as
wel before his comming as afterward
But there is a perfecte patrone in the
perſone of Chriſte whiche muſte ſerue
for a certayne rule to all the miniſters
of hys Goſpel, but the hierling which
thinketh that the ſheepe belong not all
to hym, careth not for the ſcattring of
them, no not when hee ſhoulde ſee
them in the Wolues throte. Such a
one then hath nothing in hym that belongeth
to a good ſheaphearde: for hys

flyghte ſheweth that he hath reſpecte
to hys belly and not to the flocke. Let
him beare a good countenance as lōg
as he wyl whyle there is quieteneſſe in
y• Churche: but when tyme is to abyde
blowes, hee can not hyde the vntruſtineſſe
and ſlouthe that is in hys hearte.
Nowe ſeeing Chriſt condemneth ſuch
a vilannous flighte, and good cauſe
whye: howe commeth it to paſſe that
in another place he appoynteth hys Apoſtels
to flye from towne to towne
when they are perſecuted? It is eaſye
to aunſwere. In geuyng them
thys commaundemente hys minde is
not that they ſhoulde becomme hierlinges
and ſhould ſet aſyde all carefulneſſe
for theyre ſheepe, or to forſake
theire charge as if they were well and
wholy diſcharged: but he ſuffreth them
yea and he appoynteth them whē they
are hūted from one place to flie to another:
but not on the cōditiō yt they ſhuld
ſlepe or reſt thē, or leaue al: but to ye end
to endeuour to employ thēſelfe frō wel
to better. For thys happeneth but to
ofte that they which haue ſuffered one

perſecution would be willing to reſt as
foyled Soldiours. But Chriſt giueth
no ſuche time of reſt to his ſeruaunts,
but his commaundemente is that they
ſhoulde not ceaſſe till they haue ended
their courſe. And we muſt marke that
he hiddeth them not to flie into Caues
or ſecrete places: but when theyre laboure
profiteth not in one towne, hee
would that they ſhuld withdraw them
ſelfe vnto another, where other maner
of people are for y• ſaluation of y• which
they may buſy themſelfe agayne. Hauing
this reſolution wee maye eaſilye
ſoyle this doubt, to wete, if al that flye
ought to be holden for hyrelings.
            Thus a man may ſay that we ought
not without difference to condemne al
thoſe that flye: yet the whileſte euerye
flyght is not lawful. Some to preciſe
and ſtrayght haue condemned flyeng
away as if it were a kinde of denial: if
it were ſo, a part of the reproch ſhoulde
fall on Chriſt and his Apoſtels. And on
the other ſyde, if it were lawful to flye
for euerye occaſion, what difference
were there in the tyme of perſecution

betwene the good ſheapheard and the
hierling? A man may kepe here a good
meane. Let not the ſhepherd leaue his
place for feare, nor let him by his flight
betray his flock, nor let him geue example
of fickleneſſe, yet let him not wt
               oute
good aduyſement throw himſelfe
into daungers. If all the Churche bee
perſecuted, or if men ſeeke to put to
death a part of it, it were il don of the
ſheephearde to abſente himſelfe whoſe
duety was to offer foorth his owne life
to ſaue others. But ſometyme it
maye comme to paſſe that by abſēting
hymſelfe, he may appeace the rage
of the ennemyes, and ſo he maye by
departing prouide profitably for al the
whole Church.
         
         
            93
            
               Thou art perfect in beauty aboue
the ſonnes of men, grace is poured
forth in thy lippes.
               Pſalme. 45.
               There is in him neither fauour, nor
beauty and vve haue ſeene him that
he had no faſsion or forme.
               Eſay. 53.
            
            
               
WHOſoeuer was authour of thys
45. Pſalm ſpake ſo of that whiche
was worthy ſyghte in Salomon,
that the whyleſt he loked hygher
vp, to wete to the deſcription of the excellency
of the King of Kinges whiche
is our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte. Among other
thinges he prayſeth the beauty of
the face of a King and ſo beginneth.
Not that beauty for it ſelf ought gretly
to be eſtemed, ſeeing it hath no place
among the vertues: but bycauſe that
in the face oftē tymes is ſhewed a witneſſe
of a good and noble naturall diſpoſition,
as by Salomons looke onely
it myghte appeare that he was endued
with excellente graces. It is not nedeful
for vs to paſſe furder foorth to declare
other vertues and graces contayned
in thys Pſalme. It is enoughe to
ſhewe that thys beauty did more fully
ſhyne in the face of Ieſus Chriſt, than
in any other, which was a proofe that
he was filled ful of all graces beyonde
and aboue al other. But wher Eſay
ſayeth that in Chriſt was neither form
nor beauty, he mente not to take from

hym the glory whiche was euer geuen
him of hys father, but he ſheweth to
how euel and hidous a forme hee was
brought for the loue of vs. When he
bare oure langes, al hys beautye (after
the opinion of men) was layed downe:
yet that notwythſtanding hee was lyfted
vp vnto hyghe glory before hys father.
A man then ought not to iudge of
the glory of Chriſt according to the reſpect
of men, but to apprehend by faith
al that whych the Scriptures teach of
hym. And when it is ſayed that ther
was neyther beauty nor ſhape in him,
thys is not to be vnderſtoode onelye of
his perſone whiche was diſpiſed of the
world and at the laſt iudged to ſhameful
Death, but alſo of his whole raign
which in the Iudgemente of men had
neither forme nor magnificence, nor
apparaunce of beauty, nor any thyng
to tourn the eyes of men on him to beholde
any goodly ornament vpon him:
for although Chriſt wer riſen agayne.
yet y• Iewes euer conſidred him crucified
and in infamy.
         
         
            94
            
               
                  He shal reigne ouer the houſe of Iacob
for euer and his reigne shal haue
no end.
               1. Cor. 15.
               And then the end, vvhen he shal
haue gyuen the kingdome to God
the Father.
               Luke. 2.
            
            THE Prophetes in manye places
haue foretold & promiſed ye yt kingdome
of Dauid ſhuld be continual
yet did it floriſh only in the time of Dauid
& Salomō his ſōne. The third king
after Dauid, that is to ſay Robā, had
but one tribe & a halfe of ye twelue: and
ſo the ſtrength & the riches of his kingdome
were greatly diminiſhed. After
Roboam the kingdom ceaſed not to be
troubled and endaungered by mani ouerthrowes,
tyl that at the laſt it fell
downe altogether: but the Angell declareth
here, that when thys Kingdom
ſhal bee once ſtabliſhed in the perſone
of Chriſte, it ſhall not bee ſubiecte to
ruine, but ſhal bee endeleſſe. But
it behoueth vs alſo to mark that thoughe
God oughte chiefelye to bee keper
and gouernour of Chriſtes Kingdome

and of the Churche, and to ſee that it
ſhoulde neuer decaye on earth ſo long
as the Sunne and Moone ſhould laſt,
yet the true continuaunce beelongeth
to the bleſſedneſſe and glorye to cōme.
The faythful then ſuccede ſo in contynuall
ordre one after another, that at
the laſte they muſte bee receaued into
heauen where they ſhall reigne withoute
ende. Nowe thys ſeemeth to make
agaynſte thys eternitye, to were that
the Sonne ſhal once geue vp the kingdome
to the Father, and that whiche
is added by and by after, when the
father ſhal haue made all thing ſubiect
to hys ſonne, the Sonne alſo ſhal make
himſelfe ſubiecte to the Father. Howe
maye a man agree theſe two thynges,
that the raigne of Chriſte ſhal haue no
end, & that which is ſpokē here y• Chriſt
ſhal bee broughte into ſubiection. It
behoueth vs to note that al power was
geuen to Chriſte, in that that he was
manifeſted in y• fleſh. True it is y• ſuch
a maieſty belōged not to a man which
wer only a mā: but y• father hath exalted

and glorified him in ye ſame nature
in which he had bene abated and humbled,
and hath geuen him a name vnto
the which euery knee ſhould bende and
bow. Biſydes we muſt note that he
hath ben ſo appoynted ſoueraine Lord
and King that he is as it wer Goddes
Deputy and Lieutenant for the gouernement
of the worlde, not that he worketh,
and that in the meane tyme the
father doth nothing but is idle: for how
might this be ſeing the ſonne is y• wiſdom
and counſell of the father? ſeeing
he is of one ſelfe ſubſtaunce and being
with him, yea truly one ſelf God? But
y• reaſon why the Scripture teſtifieth
that Ieſu Chriſt now hath the Empire
or rule as Deputy of his father, it is to
the end we ſhould not think that there
is another Lord, Gouernour, Protectour,
and Iudge of the quicke & Dead:
but y• we ſhuld haue al our ſenſes ſtated
on the beholding of him. We acknowledge
God for our conductor, and Gouernor,
but it is in ye face of Ieſu chriſt
a man. Yet ye ſōne ſhal then reſtore the
Kingdō which he hath receued to y• end

we may cleaue wholly vnto God. And
in this doing he wil not depart frō this
Kingdō, but he wil trāſport it from his
manhode vnto his glorious Godhead:
for thē y• acceſſe ſhalbe opē to vs frō which
now we ar put back by meās of our
weakneſſe. So Chriſt ſhal becōme ſubiect
to his father: for then ye veile ſhalbe
taken away & we ſhall openly beholde
God in his glorious maieſty, and ye mā
hode of the ſō ſhal be no more betwene
both, to make vs ſee the face of God as
through a glaſſe.
         
         
            95
            
               I am not ſent but to the loſt sheepe
of the houſe of Iſrael.
               Math. 10.
               I gaue thee to be a lighte vnto the
Gētils to the end thou mighteſt be my
ſauing helth euē to the ēds of the earth.
               Eſai. 49.
            
            SAynt Paul in the. 15. Chapter to the
Romaines, ſayth that Chriſte was
apointed to be ye miniſter of Circū
               ciſion.
He himſelfe teſtyfieth here that
he was appoynted to be the miniſter
of heauenly grace only for the Iewes.

Hereon he argueth that he oughte not
to ſuccour ſtraungers: but this is not
to ſay that the grace and vertue of the
Lord Ieſus was continually ſhutte in
within ſo ſtraight bounds, but bycauſe
the reaſon of the tyme ſo would that he
ſhould begin with the Iewes, and for
that time geue himſelf only vnto them,
for the wall was not broken before the
reſurrection, ſo that the Sonne of God
himſelfe might proclayme peace vnto
the Gentiles which were baniſhed frō
the Kingdom of God. This is the reaſō
why he forbode his Apoſtels to ſow
their doctrine any where but in Iewry
onely, yea for that time. And therefore
he ſayth here truly & iuſtly that he was
not ſēt but for y• Iews vntil at y• lēgth
y• gētils ſhuld ſucced alſo in their ordre.
            For a time he gaue hymſelfe to the
Iewes, but after that by his reſurrection
he had broken the wal, he ſheweth
in dede that he was not onely cōme to
preach peace to thoſe that wer at hand
but to thoſe alſo that were farre of: & he
was apoīted to be y• light & ſauing helth
of y• Gentiles as well as of the Iewes.

So the trauayle of Chriſt and of al the
Church had not their efficacy towarde
the Iewes onely but alſo towarde the
Gentils. And moreouer ſeing that the
Iewes dyd take no profite of the preaching
of the Goſpel, but dyd obſtinatly
reiect our Sauiour Chriſt, therfor the
Gentiles were put in their place. Loe
nowe how Chriſt was geuen to be the
lyght of the Gentiles, and how his ſauing
health was manifeſted euen vnto
the fardeſt endes of the world.
         
         
            96
            
               VVe vvere by nature the chyldren
of vvrath as others.
               Ephe. 2.
               Othervviſe your children shuld be
vncleane but novv they are holy.
               1. Cor. 7.
            
            IT is certayne that al men withoute
exception are worthy of condēnatiō
til they be quit by ye ſōne of God wtout
whom ther is no righteouſneſſe or ſauing
health nor excellēcy, for when. S.
Paul ſayeth that we were children of
wrath, he meaneth that wee were loſt
and woorthy of eternal Deathe. For
thys woorde wrath ſignifieth Goddes

Iudgemente, as thoughe hee ſayed
that we were condemned before God.
And we were ſuch by nature, that is to
ſay from our byrth and from our Mothers
wombe. And if the Iewes were
for a while the bleſſed ſeede yet as touching
nature they wer like vnto other:
the difference was onely herein, that
God dealing graciouſly with them deliuered
them from diſtruction: but
thys was a remedye that followed the
il. But howe ſoeuer man eauyl, the
Holye Ghoſte pronounceth that there
is neyther Iewe nor Greeke but are
al by nature ſubiect to condemnation:
And if we be of nature worthy of condemnation,
it followeth then that
ſinne hath the firſte and chiefe place in
euery one of vs, for God is not angrye
but agaynſte ſynne. And the
other ſentence of the ſeuenth Chapiter
of the fyrſte to the Corinthes, tendeth
to a diuerſe end: for it is ſpoken of the
holineſſe of Mariage. The band of mariage
is ſingular: The wife is the half
part of the houſeband, there be two in
one fleſh, there the houſebande is the

wiues hed, ther the woman is her huſbandes
fellow in al things. It ſeemeth
thē that a faythful man cānot dwel wt
an vnfaythful wyfe, or contrarywyſe,
but that by ſo ſtrict a knotte the faythfull
muſte bee polluted: but Mariage
leaueth not therefore to bee holy, neyther
muſte thou feare the infection, as
though the beleuing part were defiled
by the vnbeleuing. And beholde the
argument is brought from the effecte.
If the Mariage were defiled the chyldren
which ſhould come of it ſhould be
vncleane: but they be holy, it foloweth
then that the Mariage is holy. Euen
therefore as the vnbeliefe of the one of
the twayn, either of the father or of the
mother letteth not but that y• children
are borne holy, ſo alſo it letteth not but
that the Mariage is holy.
            How then ſhal we agree this ſētence
with the other that of nature wee are
the children of wrath? or with this ſentence
of Dauid? Beholde I am conceyued in
ſinne. As it hath bene ſayed before, ther
is an vniuerſall encreaſing of ſynne
and Damnation in the ſeede of Adam.

All then from the fyrſt to the laſte are
ſhut in vnder thys curſe whether they
be deſcended from the faythfull or frō
the vnfaythful: for the faythful get not
children accordyng to the fleſhe in aſmuche
as they are regenerate by the
holy ghoſt There is therfore in al one
equall ſtate and condition of nature ſo
that they are ſubiect as wel vnto ſinne
as to eternal death. But where the holy
ghoſt geueth here a ſpecial pryuilege
to the faythful, that procedeth from the
benefyte of the league: and when thys
grace foloweth, yt former courſe of nature
is blotted out, and they which before
were prophaned and foule of nature,
are now ſanctifyed and halowed
to God by grace.
         
         
            97
            
               Clenſyng it in the lauer of vvater
by the vvord.
               Ephe. 5.
               The bloude of Ieſu Chriſt clenſeth
vs from al ſynne.
               
                  
                     •
                  . Ioan. 1.
            
            WE muſte not let paſſe that whiche
was ſayd before, to wete, that the
Sonne of God gaue himſelfe for

hys Churche, to the end he might ſanctifie
it from al vncleāneſſe, which thing
is done throughe the forgeueneſſe of
ſynnes, and by the regeneration of the
ſpirite, the ſanctifycation is inwarde
but hee addeth an outwarde ſygne in
which the cōfyrmation appeareth, that
is, that the pledge of this ſanctification
was offered in baptiſme, but it is not
ment that we ſhould make vs an Idol
of baptyſme. We are waſhed & cleane
ſayth Saint Paule by baptyſme, but it
is bycauſe God in it geueth vs a teſtimony
of our waſhyng, and in y• ſame
inſtante doth that whiche he repreſenteth
vnto vs. For if the truth were adioyned
to the ſygne, thys were no fytt
manner of ſpeakyng to ſaye baptyſme
is a waſhing of the ſoule: for who is ſo
blockheaded to graunt that ye outward
ſygne which is water hath in it y• power
to clenſe the ordures of the ſoule, if
there wer nothing els in the baptyſme
but water. And a man could not truly
ſaye that baptyſme is the waſhyng of
ſoules. The true and onely waſhing of
them is the bloude of our Lorde Ieſu,

which is applyed vnto vs by y• power &
grace of y• holy ghoſt. And we muſt beware
yt we geue not ouer to the outwarde
ſygne, to the figure, or to ye miniſter,
y• which belongeth to God only.
The miniſter ought not to be accounted
y• author of thys waſhyng, nor water
to bee eſtemed as the waſhyng of
ſoules, for y• belongeth only to y• bloud
of the ſonne of God. Beſyde, we muſt
take hede y• we in no wyſe truſt eyther
in ye element, or in ye man, ſeyng y• only
& lawfull vſe of ye ſacrament is to leade
vs ſtraight as it were by the hande to
Chriſt, & there to ſtaye vs. So. S. Iohn
ſayth, that it is the bloud of Chriſt that
waſheth vs from all vncleāneſſe, he excepteth
nothing to the end y• no part of
oure waſhyng howe little ſoeuer it bee
ſhould be attributed to any thyng ells.
For thys is y• cauſe of our clenſyng y•
Chriſt hath blotted out al our offences
with hys bloude, to the end y• faythfull
ſhould be aſſured y• they are pleaſyng
vnto hym, bycauſe he is appeaſed towardes
thē by ye ſacrifyce of ye death of
his ſonne. And this ſacrifyce cōtaineth

vnder it clenſyng, waſhing, and ſanctification,
wherfore y• power & workyng
of al theſe thyngs belongeth onely to y•
bloud of Chriſt. But albeit it be God y•
clenſeth by the bloud of hys ſonne, and
that it is not lawfull to tranſporte hys
glory to ye ſygne, or to impart it to the
figure, neuertheleſſe ther is no inconuenience
or abſurditie in ſaying y• God
vſeth y• ſygne as an inſtrument, not yt
ye power of God is incloſed in y• figure
but bicauſe according to the conceiuīg
of ſmalneſſe & weakneſſe he dyſtributes
his vertu by ſuch an aide. And God
ſo workes by y• ſygne that the whyleſt
al the vertue and efficacye of the ſygne
dependeth on the ſpyrite of God, and
that is to the ende we ſhoulde not feare
that any thyng is taken from the holy
ghoſt whiche belongeth vnto hym:
for ther is nothyng therby attributed
to the ſygne more than that it is an inferiour
inſtrumente vnprofitable of it
ſelf, ſauyng in aſmuch as it borroweth
hys vertue els where.
         
         
            98
            
               
                  
VVho can forgeue ſynnes but only
God.
               Marc. 2.
               VVhoſe ſynnes ſoeuer you haue
forgeuē they are forgeuen, & vvhoſe
ſoeuer you haue kept they are kepte.
               Ioan. 20.
            
            CHriſt hauyng healed the gowtye
ſayed to hym, man thy ſynnes are
forgeuen thee. The ſcribes & hypocryte
Phariſies hearyng it, althoughe
he had ſpoken nothyng but what the
Prophets were wonte to ſay whē they
bare witneſſe of the grace of God, they
murmure notwithſtandyng, & blame
Chriſt as thoughe he had ſpoken blaſphemy
and of a myſcheuous deſyre to
ſlaunder they aſke thys queſtion, whoe
beſyde God only can forgeue ſynnes?
But although this came out of malicious
mouthes: yet moſte true it is that
onely God hath power & authoritye to
forgeue ſynnes, as he onely can condemne,
ſo only he can quyte. But whē
in thys. 20. Chapter of Saint Iohn
Chriſt geueth charge to hys Diſciples
to forgeue ſynnes he geueth not ouer

vnto them that which is propre to himſelfe.
It is propre vnto him to remytte
and forgeue ſynnes, whiche honour he
reſygneth not to them, in aſmuch as it
belongeth to hym: but he wil haue thē
beare recorde in hys name of the forgeueneſſe
of ſynnes and offences: ſo
that it is he ye reconcileth men to God.
To bee ſhorte it is he alone to ſpeake
fytly that forgeueth ſynnes by hys Apoſtles
and miniſters. Howe commeth
it then to paſſe that hee aduaūceth ſo
hyghly their dignitie, ſeing that he appoynteth
them only for witneſſes and
declarers and not for authors of the
benefyte. Thys is done for the greate
eſtabliſhyng of oure fayth. As in dede
there is nothyng that more profyteth
vs, than that we reſolue and perſuade
our ſelf that our ſynnes cōme not into
Iudgement or accompt beefore God.
Zachary in the firſt Chapter of Saint
Luke calleth thys knowledge of y• forgeueneſſe
and pardon of ſynnes the
knowledge of ſynnes.
            Nowe ſeyng the good pleaſure of
God is ſuch to vſe the witneſſe of men

for to allowe thys forgeueneſſe of ſynnes,
then wee ſhall quyet our ſelues,
when wee ſhall knowe that it is God
himſelfe that ſpeaketh to vs in the perſon
of hys miniſters. For thys cauſe
Saint Paule ſaieth, we exhorte you to
be reconciled to god, as if Ieſus Chriſt
hymſelf made obteſtation by vs.
            The faythfull then ought to be ſo
reſolued, that what they heare touchīg
the forgeueneſſe if ſynnes, is ratified,
and ought noleſſe to eſteme the reconcilyng
or attonement whiche is declared
vnto them by the voyce and worde
of men, than if he hymſelf ſtretched his
hand to them. Now marke two things
which it behoueth vs to remēber. Firſt
that a treaſure is offred vs, but it is in
little veſſels, thoſe are men, which are
ſente vs to offer and open thys treaſure
vnto vs in the name of another,
not as theyr owne ryches but as hys
that ſente them vs. Nexte that we
oughte to eſteeme thys treaſure no
whyt the leſſe bycauſe it is in dyſpiſeable
veſſells, but rather wee haue occaſion

to geue thankes vnto God in that
he hath dealte ſo fauourably with men
that they repreſente hys perſon and
the perſon of hys Sonne, when they
heare wytneſſes of the forgeueneſſe of
ſynnes: ſo God onely forgeueth ſynnes,
yet he confyrmeth that whiche
men appoynted by hym declare vnto
vs touchyng the forgeueneſſe of
ſynnes.
         
         
            99
            
               Call no man on earth your father
for ther is but one that is your father,
vvho is in heauen.
               Mat. 23.
               Honour thy father & thy mother.
               Exod. 20.
            
            THe Lord Ieſus had ſhewed before
y• thys honor belonged to no other
to be called Lord but to God only.
If this ſeme to hard foraſmuche as he
himſelf hath appoynted men to be our
Maſters & teachers, y• anſwer is eaſye.
True it is ye Chriſt hymſelf whē he yet
dwelt on the earth choſe his Apoſtles &
appoynted thē to y• offyce of teachyng

and if the ſtryfe be for the title, it is very
certayn that when Saint Paul named
hymſelf the Maſter teacher of the
Gentils, hys mynde was not wickedly
to ſteale from Chriſt the honour y• belonged
vnto hym. Neyther is Chriſtes
meanyng any thyng ells but to bryng
euery man vnder hym from the greateſt
to the ſmalleſt, to reſerue his right
wholly to hymſelfe. He careth not then
with what tytle they be adorned which
haue the charge of teachyng, only hys
wil was to kepe al mē wtin theſe boundes
that no mā ſhould vſurpe any rule
ouer ye fayth of hys brethren. Nowe in
the ſame ſenſe the honour of the name
father belongeth to God: for men haue
not geuen to themſelfe that name, but
it hath bene graunted them of God.
And it is not ynough to ſaye that men
which haue children are fathers according
to the fleſhe and that God alone is
father of the ſpirites. True it is that
ſometime a mā ſhal finde thys diſtinction
in y• ſcriptures as in the. 12. Chapter
to the Hebrues. But ſeing Saint
Paule calleth hymſelf very often a ſpiritual

father, it behoueth vs to ſee how
this agreeth with ye words of our Lord
Ieſu, loe then what we muſt ſay. The
honour of father is falſely geuen vnto
men when by that name the glorye of
God is darkened, that is when a mortall
man ſeperates hymſelf from God
to be accompted a father, ſeyng that al
degrees of kyndred depend of God only
by Chriſt, and thoſe degrees are ſo
knytte together, y• to ſpeake fytly God
is alone the father vnto al.
            The whileſt God willeth and commaundeth
vs to honour our fathers to
reuerence them, to obeye them, and to
loue them, and thys commaundement
is confyrmed by threates, and by promyſſe.
The threate is that al ſtubborne
& dyſobedient children to their fathers
ſhould be punyſhed by death. The promyſſe
is that they that ſhal honour and
obeye their father ſhal liue long on the
earth. Yet notwithſtandyng we muſte
haue thys reſolution before our eyes,
that a man neuer ought to turne aſide
from the will of God.
            Nowe touchyng that the fathers

haue rule ouer theyr children it is for
thys reaſon, bycauſe God hath choſen
them, impartyng to them ſome parte
of hys honour. The ſubiection then
that children owe vnto their fathers
ought to bee vnto them as a ſtayre to
leade them to the reuerence and obedience
of God, whoe is the chiefe father.
But if the fathers wil make their children
to withſtande God, they are nomore
theyr fathers but ſtraungers,
whiche woulde tourne them from thys
true obedience, which they owe to their
true father.
         
         
            100
            
               Abraham beeleued in God and it
vvas imputed to him for ryghteouſneſſe.
               Gene. 5.
               VVas not Abraham oure Father
Iuſtifyed by hys vvoorkes vvhen he
had offered hys ſonne Iſaac vpon the
aulter?
               Rom. 4.
            
            SAINT Paule to the Romaynes
the. 4. Chapter,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 2. to ſhewe that Abraham
was not Iuſtifyed by hys workes,

maketh thys argument. If Abraham
were Iuſtifyed by hys woorkes,
he maye beaſte of hys deſerte: but ſo
it is, that he hath nothyng whereof to
boaſt beefore God. It followeth then
that he was not Iuſtifyed by his workes.
But thys is hys glorye, & the thing
he may boaſte of, that he embraced the
goodneſſe of God by fayth.
            Fayth maketh a man to cōme
oute of hym, and leadeth hym to God.
So the glorye of Abraham was not
in hys woorkes nor in the worthineſſe
of hys perſon: but in the mere goodneſſe
and grace of God. For when
a man will trulye boaſte hymſelfe, he
muſt bryng nothyng of hys owne, but
the knowledge of hys owne myſerye,
throughe whiche he may cōme to ſeke
the goodneſſe and mercye of God. And
ſurely the ryghteouſneſſe whyche is
of faythe is the onely reſkue that the
poore ſynner hath beyng deſtitute of
all workes. So then Abraham, in the
promyſe that was made to hym dyd
apprehend the goodneſſe of god whiche
was offered hym, by which he felt that

righteouſneſſe was imparted vnto him.
            Let vs nowe ſhewe howe he was
Iuſtifyed by workes. It is a thyng eaſye
for euery man to know that Saint
Iames intreateth not how mē obtaine
righteouſneſſe, for if we loke narrowly
to hys meanyng, we ſhal fynde that he
medleth not at al wt the matter of Iuſtification:
but he goeth about to ſhew
what yt profeſſion of fayth is worth wt
               out
works. The proues which he bringeth,
ar to be applyed to thys ſentence,
that fayth is but dead without workes:
and that good workes are euer ioyned
with fayth. To ſolute at a woorde thys
doubt, we muſt vnderſtād y• double ſignification
of thys word Iuſtifie. Whē
S. Paule teacheth y• wee are Iuſtified
by fayth, he ſygnifieth nothyng els but
yt we obtayne this cōmoditye, yt we are
accompted to be iuſte before God. But
S. Iames loketh to another marke,
namely whoſoeuer ſayeth he is a beleuer
it behoueth he ſhuld ſhewe by workes
ye truth of his beliefe. It is certaine
that. S. Iames mynded not to ſhewe
whereon the truſt of Saluation ought

to reſt, wherin Saint Paule reſteth
only. Thys worde then Iuſtification,
accordyng to Saint Paule, is the imputyng
of free ryghteouſneſſe beefore
God or before hys Iudgemente ſeate.
And according to Saint Iames it is
a declaration or approuyng of ryghteouſneſſe
by workes or by effectes, and
that before men: as alſo a mā may gather
it of yt he ſayeth, Shewe me thy fayth
wythoute thy woorkes, and I will ſhewe thee
my fayth by my woorkes. In thys ſenſe
a mā may cōfeſſe without gaynſaying
yt man is Iuſtified by his workes, as if
any man ſhould ſay of ſome other yt he
is becōme riche ſynce y• he ſaw him bye
a good & ryche inheritance, foraſmuch
as hys riches which before were hiddē
were ſet to ſight. This is ye concluſion.
Before God mē ar Iuſtified by faith, y•
is ſo ſay counted Iuſte, before mē they
are Iuſtified by their workes, that is to
ſay declared or approued Iuſte.
         
         
            101
            
               Ioan. 18.
               I ſpake nothyng in corners, I ſpake
openly to the vvorlde, I haue taught
in the aſſembly and in the temple.
               Math. 10.
               That vvhich I tell you in the darke
tell you it in the lyght, & that vvhich
you heare in your eare, Preache it on
the houſes.
            
            THe doctryne of ſaluatiō is offered
to men to diuerſe endes. Chriſt
ſpeaketh to many after ſuch a ſort
as though hys word wer vnto them a
language altogether ſtraūge & barbarous,
& as though it ſerued to no purpoſe
but to beate their eares wt a diſordred
& confuſed ſound. True it that the
word of god is euer clere of it own nature,
but y• lighte of it is choked by the
darkneſſe of mē. As touching the lawe
though it wer couered with a veyle, yet
Goddes truth was manifeſtly ſhewed
forth in it, ſauyng that many had their
eies blynded. Touching y• Goſpell it is
not veyled but vnto y• reprobate, as. S
Paule witneſſeth, whoſe eyes & vnderſtandings
ar blynded by Sathan. We
muſt then holde this, that the worde of
God, is not darke but in aſmuch as the

worlde darkeneth it by hys ſtubborne
blyndneſſe. But though Chriſt ſay that
it is not geuen to al to heare y• ſecretes
& myſteryes of the kyngdome of God,
& that therfore he graunteth yt grace to
none but to hys Dyſciples: yet notwithſtandyng
ſo it is y• he wil that that
which he hath ſayd to thē in darkneſſe
or in their eares, ſhoulde be publyſhed
openly. He wil yt hys Goſpel be ſpread
euery where, & that it paſſe ouer al the
lets & ſtoppes of men. This is a prouerbe
or a cōmon ſaying, y• there is nothing
ſo hid, but at ſome time it is opened:
but thys oughte to be ſpecially reſtrained
to ye doctrine of ſaluatiō which
be victorious, as y• ſonne of god promiſeth,
whatſoeuer men obſtinatly go aboute,
to oppreſſe it. It is certaine that
Chriſt preached ſomtimes in ye temple,
but bicauſe his doctrine was reiected it
was yet as it were hid in certain darke
corners: but he affirmeth y• the tyme
ſhal cōme yt it ſhal be high & clere, and
publiſhed ouer al. which we know cāe
to paſſe in S. Paule very ſhortly after,
for a man neuer heard thonder ſounde

lowder in any part of ye world, than y•
voyce of yt Goſpel was heard throughout
al y• earth. So then whē the Goſpel
had no great blaſe or ſhew of magnificence,
it ſeemed that Ieſu Chriſt ſpake
as it wer in the darke & in the eare.
            In the meane tyme notwithſtandyng
true it is that there is nothyng
ſayd in corners. It behoueth vs to
marke to what purpoſe he maketh this
proteſtation. Cayphas the Prieſt
calleth hym to accounte as if hee had
had to doe with a ſeditious man that
had deuyded the Church by Scyſmes
and factious gatheryng Dyſciples together,
and as if he had had to doe with
a falſe Prophet whiche had endeuored
to corrupt the fayth and true religion.
Chriſt hauyng exerciſed the offyce of a
teacher entreth not into a newe, neyther
wil he let ſlippe any thyng that belongeth
to the defence of the truth: but
he ſheweth that he is ready to mayntayne
that which he taught. But in ſo
ſaying he debateth not what is lawful
or not lawfull, as if it bee lawfull to
Preache ſecretlye or openly but hys

minde is to repulſe the proud vnſhamfaſtneſſe
of the Prieſt that inquired (as
of a thing doubtfull) of a thing whyche
was very openly knowē. So, to make
theſe two places agree, wher he ſayth,
hee hath ſpoken nothing in ſecrete, it
oughte to bee referred to the very ſubſtaunce
of the worde which hath euer
bene like though the forme and maner
of teaching hath bene diuerſe. He hath
oftentimes taught thoſe that were particularly
hys. He hath many tymes
taughte in the temple openlye, but
he hath taught nothing pryu
                  •
               ly, as
touching the ſubſtaunce, but that
which he hath taught openly. He did
not thys of crafte, as if of ſet purpoſe
he woulde haue kepte cloſe or hid from
the people things which he ſayd to very
fewe in ſecret. Wherfore he myght
boldely proteſt with a ſafe conſcyence
that had frely ſpoken, and purely publiſhed
the ſūme of his doctrine.
         
         
            102
            
               The ſonne shal not beare the vvyckedneſſe
of hys Father.
               Ezechiel. 18▪
               
               
                  I vvill viſite the iniquitie of the father
vpon the childrē euen vntill the
thyrd and fourth generation.
               Exod. 20.
            
            IT ſemeth ther ar many places in holy
ſcriptures which ſhew y• God ſomtimes
punyſheth the innocent, whiche
thing is greatly agaynſt al equity, and
chiefly againſt ye equitie of God, who is
not a God willing or allowing iniquitye.
And yet a man might thinke yt this
were ſignifieng by theſe words y• God
wil viſite yt iniquitie vnto the thyrde &
fourth generatiō. What hath he deſerued
y• is not yet? If a mā conſider y• cō
               dition
of mankind thys doubt ſhal eaſely
be ſoyled. No mā can loke for any
thing els but yt the wrath of God ſhold
fal on hys head, and yt ſhoulde cōme to
paſſe of very right: for we ar al ſinners
and vnworthy of yt fauour of God. If
God leaue vs as we are what occaſion
haue wee to complayne to hym? It is
not ynough to ſaye that children ſhall
abyde temporall paynes for the ſynnes
and offences of their fathers. For thys
is farther extended, & the reuenge or

puniſhment which he threateneth here
can not bee reſtrayned to the preſente
life, but as it is a ſigne of his loue whē
he bleſſeth hys ſeruauntes children, ſo
when he leaueth the ſede of y• wicked in
hys curſe, it is a witneſſe of his vengeance
on them. In thys maner, ſeing al
yt nature of man is worthy of condemnatiō,
they to whō God ſheweth no fauour
can loke for nothyng els but the
deſtruction which is prepared for thē.
What cā a father forſaken of the holy
ghoſt do but liue wickedly? Lykewyſe
his ſonne forſakē of God, what can he
do but followe ye trace of perditiō? And
they y• ſhal folow, what ſhal they do but
goe after into ye ſame ruyne? By thys
meanes a mā may ſee yt euery one peryſheth
by hys own iniquitie & not by
yt vniuſte hate of God. Touching yt the
chyldren are punnyſhed for the offences
of their fathers, it is bycauſe they
followe thē, and though they be warned
yet they amende not. But as
touching that Ezechiell ſayeth in hys
18. Chapter, that the ſonne ſhall not
beare the wickedneſſe of hys father,

that was a cōmon prouerb in ye mouth
of the Iſraelites, that their fathers had
eaten ſower things, and their teth we
                  •
               
on edge with it. They ſignified therby
that their fathers had cōmitted y• fault
and that they endured ye il and pūnyſhment
wtout deſeruing it. But the Prophet
Ezechiel pronoūceth yt they ſuffer
for their owne faultes, and yt it is in no
ſort agreing wt the iuſtice of God that
the iuſte and innocent childe ſhould be
pūniſhed for y• faults and offences of another.
Neither is it ment by this ſentence
yt he viſiteth the iniquity of ye fathers
in their childrē: for touching that
the curſe falleth vpō their head, it is bicauſe
they follow y• condicions and the
tracte of thoſe that wente before them.
And therfore are puniſhed as their fathers
were. And althoughe God leaue
them in curſedneſſe, before they come
into the world, yet he doth thē no wrōg
neither cā they accuſe him of vnrighteouſneſſe.
         
         
            103
            
               Pſalm. 5.
               Thou shalt deſtroy thē that ſpeak Lies.
               Geneſis. 12.
               Abraham Lied and vvas not deſtroyed.
            
            
               
GOD ſo often forbidding Lieng in
the holy Scriptures, and witneſſing
that Liars are not welcome
vnto him, ſheweth ſufficiently how he
wil puniſh al Liars: for ſeeing y• truth
is in ſuch ſorte natural to him that wt
               out
it he wer not God, 
                  〈◊〉
                ſhould he
leaue Lies vnpuniſhed, ſeeing they he
altogether contrarye to his righteouſneſſe
and truth? And hereupon we gather
that a man ought not to excuſe any
maner of Lie with what fayre color
ſoeuer a mā couer 
                  〈◊〉
               . It is not inough
to reiect or condemne Lies that ar domageable,
or ioined with forſwearing,
but thoſe alſo that are called pleaſaunt
Lies or Lies for recreation, or thoſe
that may ſerue to ſaue the lyfe of anye

                  •
               an. As 
                  •
               ruth cannot be but of God,
ſo a Lie what one ſoeuer it be cānot be
but of the Diuel. In this place of the
fyft Pſalme, Dauid ſpeaketh more ſpecially,
he ſetteth forth the iudgemente
of God vpon thoſe that geue themſelfe
to deceyte Lieng and vnrighteouſnes
And therwithal he cōforteth the faithful
to the end that as often as they ſhal

haue occaſion to beare the oppreſſion
of the vnryghteous they ſhould wythdrawe
themſelf toward God whoe abhorreth
all vnryghteouſneſſe. For it is
a good conſequent. God hateth al the
vnryghteous, it followeth he will puniſhe
al the vnryghteous.
            But as touching Abraham who lied
ſaieng Sara his wife, was his ſiſter.
Truly a man can not excuſe his fault,
for God had had other meanes to ſaue
his life than by his endangering his
Wifes chaſtitis by help of a Lie. Hee
excuſeth him ſelfe after, that he hath
not lied, and that he forged nothing
contrary to the truth. This was ſurely
a great fault, for it was not lōg of him
that his Wife was abādoned ouer to
adultry. If he were carefull of his life
(which thing was lawfull for him and
right) at ye leaſt he ſhould haue caſt his
care on God. True it is that the prouidence
of God letteth not the faithfull
from prouidyng for them ſelfe: but it
ought ſo to be done that they paſſe not
the limites which God hath ſet for thē:
It is their certayne that Abraham offended:

but what reaſon were it to put
thys holy patriark in ye ranck of ye wicked,
whiche haue al their delite in dealyng
deceiptfullye wyth theire neighbors,
& lying, yea, before ye eies of god.
Abrahams ly, & Iſaacks hys ſonnes, &
the lyes of al other faythful are worthy
of blame, yea, and of punyſhment: but
wher faith hath place, there is alſo forgeueneſſe
of ſinnes. And God ſuffereth
not a faythful ſoule ſo to ſtraye in ſuch
impietie, yt at the laſt dyſtruction ſhuld
followe, yet notwithſtandyng ye grace
that is geuē to the faythful ſhal not let
the truth of thys ſentence, that will deſtroye
al Liars.
         
         
            104
            
               Thou haſt layd the earth from the
beginning O Lord, and the heauens
are the vvoorkes of thy handes, they
shal perysh but thou art euerlaſting.
               Pſalm. 21. Hebre. 1.
               The earth abydeth for euer.
               Eccleſiaſ. 1.
            
            WHEN it is ſayed the earth abydeth
for euer, it is in reſpect of mē
yt their vanitie might be rebuked

and their pride beaten downe. One generation
paſſeth and another cōmeth
on, and the earth ſerueth for a continual
dwelling place for men, euen to the
ende of ages. The ſeaſons haue their
ouerturnings, and the nightes follow
after the dayes, there are diuerſe chaū
               ges
and wonderful, which a man ſeeth
to com ordinarily: and al that doth not
make the earth to waſte or to ſtir oute
of her place The 
                  •
               louds of the ſea rore
and ſwel, as it were to ſwallow al vp
and yet the earth ceaſeth not yearly to
bring forth her frutes, and to ſerue mē
for their abode. Such is Gods excellēt
workmanſhyp, ſuch is his wonderful
goodneſſe toward mankinde. For how
commeth it that the earth is aboue the
waters, but that God would of purpoſe
prepare a lodging for men. The Philoſophers
themſelfe confeſſe, that ſeeing
the Element of water is aboue ye earth
it is againſt al ordre of nature, that in
al the worlde there is left any one coū
               trey
dry and habitable, as alſo it is ſaid
in the. 28. Chapter of Iob▪ that God repreſſeth
the violence and flowinges of

the ſea, to the end the earth ſhould not
be couered, and ſo followe an horryble
confuſion. Yet this abideth true that
heauen and earth ſhal periſh. And it is
ſpoken in reſpect of God, for if a man
make compariſon of al the world with
God, it is but a figure that vaniſheth
away. In reſpect of vs what is the aū
               ciency
of heauen and earth? Our lyfe
paſſeth, or rather flieth very faſt away
But how many ages of mē are paſſed
while the heauens kepe their nature
by continual mouing? how many generations
haue periſhed ſince the earthe
abode faſte? Neuertheleſſe there is nother
aunciency nor excelent ornament
that keepeth Heauen ond Earth from
periſhīg. And this ſhal not be a ſufficient
expoſition to ſay that there ſhal bee
onely a chaūge whiche ſhalbe as a certayn
kinde of ruine: for though Heauē
& Earth ſhal not be altogether brought
to nothing, yet the chaūge of nature
ſhal conſume y• which is mortal or corruptible,
ſo y• the Heauens & earth ſhal
becō altogether other than they are. If
this content not, let vs heare what. S.

Paule ſayth. Rom. 8. Euery creature is ſubiecte
to vanitie not of it owne accorde▪ but bycauſe
of hym that made it ſubiecte in hope.
For alſo the creature ſhal be delyuered
from the bondage of corruption to be
in the freedome of the glory of the children
of God. We know y• al creatures
mourne and trauail, as to bryng forth
yong euen till nowe. Heauen then and
earth ſhal peryſhe in aſmuche as man
throwyng hymſelfe downe headlong
pluckt all the world with hym into diſſtruction.
         
         
            105
            
               He vvill not breake the brokē rede.
               Eſay 43 Mathe. 12▪
               
               Thou shalt brooſe them as the potters
veſſel.
               Pſalm. 2.
            
            THE Prophetes deſcribe in many
places the ſoftneſſe & gentilneſſe of
Chriſt, and by ſuch ſimilitudes as
thys is which is here ſet forth, they declare
y• he ſhal hold vp ye feble & weake.
He wyll not breake altogether thoſe
that are halfe cracked: but rather will
eaſe and ſtrengthen them ſo that he wil
conſerue and encreaſe the good that

is in them, and will helpe their weakeneſſe.
For where there is any ſparke
of true religion he keepeth it, and maketh
that to ſhyne which was halfe put
out: where if he woulde vſe rygour we
ſhould be brought to nought. Wee are
lame and do but halt & ſtagger, we are
broken and taken out of our place: yet
he caſſeth vs not ſodaynly away as altogether
vnprofitable, but he long ſuffereth
vs to the end he myght make vs
more conſtant and ſtronger. There
was a ſygne of thys myuldneſſe geuen
from heauen when the Sonne of God
was conſecrated and appoynted to execute
hys charge, for ye holy ghoſt was
ſent on him in ſhape of a Pigeon which
repreſenteth nothing els but mildneſſe
& ſoftneſſe. Now thys terrible ſaying,
y• he ſhal breake as an earthē pot, is not
cōtrary to y• ſoftneſſe & gentilneſſe wt
which the Lord Ieſus entertaines his
faythfull: for as he ſheweth hymſelfe a
louyng ſhephearde, to thoſe that are
quyet ſheepe: ſo it beehoueth hym to
handle the wild beaſtes roughly, to the
ende he maye correcte or at the leaſte

repreſſe their wickedneſſe and cruelty.
Alſo in the hundred and ten Pſalme,
after that the true obediēce of the faithful
hath bene prayſed, Chriſt is armed
with force and ſtrength to deſtroye in
the day of hys angre all the Kings, and
al the armyes that ſhal contrary hym.
And in dede both the one and the other
is proprely attributed to hym. The father
ſent hym, that by the ambaſſade
of reconciliation he ſhould make glad
the poore and miſerable, vntye and let
go the captiues, heale the ſicke, drawe
the afflicted oute of the darke ſhaddowes
of Death, and leade them to
the light of life. But bicauſe many
prouoke him to vengeaunce by theyre
ſtubbourneneſſe and vnthankfulneſſe,
therfore he playeth a new part to daūt
their ſtowteneſſe. He vſeth (then) a
Scepter of yron to breake and brooſe
the pryde of rebelles: hee hathe hys
ſheephoke to ſtrengthen and ſtay hys
faythful, and in ſhewing them hys fauourable
ſtaffe, he turneth their ſorow
fulneſſe into Ioy.
         
         
            106
            
               
                  He hath ſet me at large and hath de
liuered me bycauſe he loued me.
               Pſalm. 1▪
               
               The Lord hath revvarded me according
to my ryghteouſneſſe and hath
yealded me according to the cleaneneſſe
of my handes.
               Pſalm. 1▪
               
            
            DAuid hauing proteſted that he had
bene drawen out of the lowe depthes
by the onely hand and power
of God, confeſſeth at the laſte, that nothing
hath moued him to deliuer hym
but his good pleaſure, to the ende that
al the prayſe ſhould be geuen him. But
herewithall alſo it behooueth to note
that hee ſpeaketh of the good pleaſure
of God, loking on hys calling, & chiefly
reſting thereupon, that al the battailes
that had bene ſet againſt him wer not
ſtyrred vp for anye other cauſe but bycauſe
he had ſimply obeyed the calling
of God. And ſo the ſuccor of God was
euer ready and at hand, foraſmuche as
he did not thruſt in himſelf of his owne
motion, but had bene anointed before
by the hand of Samuel, whiche was a

figure of the free choiſe of God. But
ſoone after he ſayth that God hath yelto
hym acording to his righteouſneſſe,
and according to the cleaneneſſe of his
handes. It ſemeth at the firſt ſight that
he is contrary to hymſelfe. He had attributed
al to the good pleaſure of God
now he vaunteth that he hath bene recompenced
as he deſerued. But a mā
may eaſyly agree theſe two ſentences.
He had firſt proteſted that he cam not
into the hope of the Kingdome but vnder
the admiſſion and conduct of God,
and that men had not geuen their voyces
to heaue him vp to this dignity, neither
had hee thruſte himſelfe in by his
owne motion: but foraſmuche as the
good pleaſure of God was ſuch. Both
were neceſſary. Fyrſt it behooued that
God ſhould preuent his ſeruaunt with
his free fauour and grace, and that he
ſhould chooſe hym to bee King, and
then after ſeeing Dauid on his part obeyed
hym with a good conſcience, and
receiued the Kingly dignity which god
had offred hym. whatſoeuer his enemyes
deuiſed to ouerthrow his Fayth, he

followed conſtantlye the ryghte courſe
of his calling. Then not onely theſe
two ſentences do not dyſagree, but one
of them very wel anſwereth the other:
Moreouer Dauid doth not here preſēt
himſelfe before God as beeing armed
wyth whole and perfit ryghteouſneſſe,
he offereth not here hys whole lyfe to
be examined, whether there were any
thyng in it to be found fault wythal or
no, and that therfore he ought to obtayne
grace and to be accoumpted iuſt.
But willyng to defende hys innocency
before God agaynſt the ſelaūders and
falſe reproouinges of hys ennemyes,
he affyrmeth that in thys caſe hee had
borne hymſelf purely and vpryghtlye:
foraſmuche as he had enterpryſed nothyng
farther than God commaunded
hym and whatſoeuer conſpyracye hys
aduerſaryes had made agaynſte hym,
yet he kept himſelf with the bounds of
hys calling.
         
         
            107
            
               Math. 
                     •
                  
               
               I vvyl not henceforth drink of this
frute of the vine, vntyll I shall drink
it nevv vvyth you in the Kyngdom
of my Father.
               Act. 10.
               VVe ate and drank vvyth hym after
that he roſe from the dead.
            
            TRVE it is that Chriſt after hys
reſurrection had no neede to eate
and drinke, he had in dede taken
his body agayne, but it had ſuch quality
that it was no more ſubiecte eyther
to hunger or to thyrſt. But when it is
ſayd that after his reſurrection hee ate
and dranke, it is to ſhewe what care he
had to prouide for ye rudeneſſe of thoſe
that were hys, abacing hymſelf ſo low
that albeit he was adorned wt heauenly
glory yet hee dyd eate and drynke as if
he had bene a mortal man, and that
was to the ende his reſurrection ſhuld
not be darke or doubtful vnto vs. If
curious men aſke what became of that
meate, the aunſwere is, that as it was
made of nothing ſo it was eaſly brought

                  •
               o nothing by the power of the Sonne
of God. The meate which is taken for
the nouriſhmēt of the body is digeſted:
but we knowe that Chriſte tooke that

meate to nourriſh our fayth. If a man
replye that only he ſeemed to eate and
drynke, what had ſuch a ſemyng proſtted?
It is not thē nedeful to ſuch ſcapes
or ſtertyng holes: for whan it is ſayd yt
the ſonne of God was not by his owne
nede to eate & drinke, but was willing
to helpe the weakeneſſe of thoſe that
were his, it is ynough to cutt of all the
triflyng gloſes of men. But when in
the other place ye Lorde Ieſus ſpeaketh
by an Allegorie he warneth his Diſciples
as well of hys death that was at
hand, as alſo of the heauenly life which
he calleth newe. For how much nerer
the death of their Maſter, was ſo much
the more ought they to be confyrmed,
to the end they ſhould not be altogether
dyſcouraged. Moreouer ſeing his purpoſe
was to ſet forth hys death before
their eyes in the holy Supper as in a
glaſſe, it is not without cauſe yt he ſayth
he ſhall ſhortlye departe oute of this
world. Now bicauſe they wer troubleſome
newes he addeth ſtrayght after a
comfort that they ſhould not be afrayd
to dye, ſeing that after death that ſhall

haue a farre better life. His death was
nigh, but from thence he ſhould pas to
happy immortality, and ſhuld not liue
alone in the Kingdome of God, but his
faythfull beare hym company in thys
heauenly lyfe. By thys meane hee leadeth
hys faythful as it were by ye hand
to the Croſſe, and from thence he lyfteth
thē vp to ye hope of ryſing agayne.
If a man ſay that eating and drinking
belongeth not to the Kingdom of God,
it is to no purpoſe, Chriſt meaneth nothyng
but that hys Diſciples ſhalbe very
ſhortly depriued of his preſence, ſo
that he ſhal liue no more with them tyll
he and they together ſhal enioy the bleſſed
& heauenly lyfe. He ſayth that then
there ſhalbe a new maner of drink and
meate. And this is ſpoken ſymplye and
without a figure in Saint Luke til the
Kingdom of God come. Laſtly thys cā
               not
be vnderſtode of the tyme be twyrt
hys reſurrection and his aſcention duryng
whiche hee ate and dranke with
his Diſcyples as it hath bene ſayed before.
It was then a ſtate or meane conditiō
betwene the courſe of the mortal

lyfe and the marke of the heauenly life
And then the Kingdome of God was
not yet opened, and therfore he ſayd to
Mary I am not yet gone vp to my Father.
And withal the Diſciples wer not
yet entred into the Kingdome of God
to drink of the new wine with y• Sōne
of God beeing made partakers of one
ſelfe glory. Then to take away al ſhew
of contrariety that myght be betwene
theſe two ſentences, that hee wyll not
drink and yet he hath dronken he ſpeaketh
not preciſelye of eating and drynking,
but of the conuerſation of thys
preſente Lyfe.
         
         FINIS.
      
      
         
            ☞ Imprinted at London, in
Paules Churchyarde at the ſygne
of the Crane, by Lucas Harryſon.
Anno. 1563.
         
      
   