
      
         
            
            
            AN
EXPOSITION
VPON THE LORDS
Prayer, compared with the Decalogue, as it
was preached in a Sermon, at Oatelands: before the
moſt Noble, HENRY Prince of Wales.
            Aug. 13. Anno 1603.
            VVith a Poſtſcript, to advertiſe of an error in all
thoſe that leaue out the Concluſion of the Lords Prayer.
            Alſo, the Creed is annexed, vvith a ſhort and plaine explication
of the Article, commonly called:
He deſcended to Hell.
            BY HVGH BROVGHTON.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN
Reader Grace and Peace.
            
               HAving in my cuſtodie (Chriſtian
Reader) a coppie of M. Broughtons
Sermon on the Lords Prayer: I
found it upon peruſall, to conteine the
Summe of all Divinitie: eſpecially
being ſo fitly compared with the Decalogue,
which maketh the ſence more
heauenly, and the harmonie more ſweet:
and being compoſed together with much plainenes and brevitie,
and alſo garnished with much learning from the auncient
Rabbins, which the New Teſtament alloweth: which
when I had wel conſidered, I began to reaſon with my ſelf,
why ſo worthy a worke should be hidde from the world, and
not rather be communicated to all, for the common good of
all: eſpecially conſidering that it was his continuall deſire, &
conſtant endeavour (not to hide his learning, but) to ſpende
him ſelf, and his whole estate, in the ſervice of Christ, by advancing
the Goſpell, and expounding the Holy Schriptures,
both the Hiſtorie of them, and alſo the Doctrine of
them.
            And firſt, for the Hiſtorie of the Scriptures, he compoſed
it, in a moſt plaine and profitable manner, into one ſhort
viewe, which he called A Conſent of Scripture: and herein

he did carefully explaine three neceſſarie Circumſtances,
that is to ſay, Tyme, Place and Perſon: without the
knowledge of which Circumſtances, the Hiſtorie of the
Bible can never rightly be underſtood: and therefore with
great paynes, and no leſſe learning, he made many ſeverall
Treatiſes, upon theſe three Circumſtances; firſt, proving
the truth of them by Scripture: and ſecondly, in
defending of that Truth, against the manifold Errors of
former Writers: and alſo againſt the manifold cavilations
of ſundry late Oppoſers. And therefore all thoſe that
upbraide his learned paynes with the terme of needleſſe Genealogies,
and unprofitable Chronologie, they are worthy
to beare the burden of their owne ignorance: for howſoever,
they thinke in their owne conceite, they know much,
yet in deede & in truth they might know more, to their greater
joy and comfort, if they did not deſpiſe the Holy Rules,
(I meane the afore-named Circumſtances) wherewith God
hath garniſhed his bleſſed Word, as a ſpeciall help to guide
everie wiſe hearted Reader in the true underſtanding of the
ſame.
            And ſecondly, this Learned Divine of bleſſed memorie,
hath alſo declared his ſpeciall loue to the Church of God,
in adding much help, for the better understanding of the
Doctrine of the Bible: although his manner was not to
make large Common-place bookes: becauſe the moſt
Writers doe imploy their paynes about it: therefore he
thought it more neceſſarie to imploy himſelfe, in giving
Rules for the true underſtanding of the Scriptures, and for
the right expounding of ſome Common places, wherein
many Writers doe not agree, becauſe the ſcope of the Scriptures
is not rightly underſtood: and therefore he hath
giuen us warning, how to underſtand many Common places:
as about Predeſtination, & the Sufferings of Chriſt:
               
and about the Article, commonly called Chriſtes Diſcent
into Hel: &c. Alſo he ſpeaketh much, and to great light,
upon the myſterie of the Holy Trinitie, and of the Incarnation
and Reſurrection of Chriſt: as alſo of the Fall of
Man, and of the great myſterie of our Redemption: and
of many other weighty poynts: as appeareth in this inſuing
Treatiſe: and in many other of his Works: as in Iob,
Eccleſiaſtes, Daniel, and his large Commentarie on the
Appocalypſis: &c. Now if this be true, as it is moſt evident
in the aforenamed books, then it ſhould ſtop the mouthes
of all thoſe, that ſlander his learned paynes, becauſe ſay they,
he teacheth no Sanctification: but they doe litle conſider,
when they ſay ſo, that the Ground of Sanctification conſisteth
in the Holy and right knowledge of the Word of
God, which muſt firſt be ſeated in the minde & conſcience,
before it can be practiſed in the life and converſation.
            O but, ſay ſome, his writings are not worth the reading,
becauſe they are ſo difficult & hard to understand: I anſwer
with S. Peter, that many things are hard to be understood in
Pauls Epiſtles, 2 Pet. 3, 16. ſhall we therfore not count them
worth the reading, becauſe they are ſomewhat difficult? no,
no, God requires the paines of the mind for the understāding
of his word, for it is a treaſure hid in the ground, & therfore
they muſt take paynes to digge for it, that will haue it: ſo if
men could but endure the paynes of the minde, they would
ſpeake more reverendly of this mans Writings: but becauſe
men loue ſuch eaſe, they cannot ſee the drift of his Writing:
and therefore well may his great Learning lamente, becauſe
ſo fewe regarde it: for it is almost ſollitarie and unknowne
to his owne Nation, becauſe fewe doe knowe, what his learned
paynes may further, which is more precious then
Rubies: Yea, therefore, his knowledge doth powre
teares downe her cheekes, becauſe ſhee is understood of

none. But I would to God, that ſome Learned man would
take the paynes to contriue al his Workes in to one Volume,
that ſo his great learning might not periſh in Oblivion:
but that the ages to come may haue it in Record for their
help and furtherance in Divinitie ſtudies, who wil doubtles
reape more fruit by them, then we doe, by reaſon of our vnthankfulnes,
and ſo the God of all peace be with thee Chriſtian
Reader; and the Lord giue thee understanding in all
things. Amen.
            
               The wiſe wil vnderſtand.
               
                  Dan. 12.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
Sermon on the Lords
Prayer, preached at Oatelands, before the
moſt Noble HENRY, Prince of Wales.
            
               TO THE KINGS MAIESTIE.
               I Preſent vnto your HIGHNES, an Expoſition of the L.
Prayer, recorded in S. Mat. 6. euen as I ſpake it for ſumme
of matter. Many were deſirous to haue it printed. And for
that I thought your MAIESTIE the fittest judge, for the commoditie
of your people. For a Rabbin who wrote from Conſtantinople
ſeuen yeere agoe, to be taught from England, I would
print it in Ebrew, if your MAIESTIE will giue me leaue to goe
to Germanie, where my Librarie yet is; and ſome works which
our Printers can not ſet forth for want of ſkil & letters. And
I moſt humbly craue leaue to goe thither, & to print for truth
of Religion, all that my occaſions ſuffer, for Engliſh, Ebrew, &
Greeke.
               
                  Your MAIESTIES ſubject Hugh Broughton.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  OUR Speach with God requireth all the
grace that words can afford:Firſt, generally of the prayer and Decalogue. and becauſe of
our ſelues we haue no ſkill that way: the
Sonne of GOD teacheth us, what words we
may ſafely uſe; and declare that the holy
Spirit was out teacher.Iohn 1. 4—9. So we may judge by the light that
God planted in our ſoules, when we came into the world:
by which we may trye, what is light, and from God: and
what is darknes, and from Satan.
               
                  
When God ſpeaketh, he ſpeaketh to the heart of all
men:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , 29 and as an hammer breaketh ſtones, ſo his word maketh
hearts to yeeld: that appeareth in all parts of Gods
word, ſpecially in this Forme of prayer. It hath the Conſent
of al natiue light, for the open phraſe; & more nerely
of the Iewes Scribes for Divinitie, and truely the ſumme
of Chriſtianitie: euen as the two Tables had of old.
               The Law commandeth all good: and here we craue
 grace for to doe all that is good: That we may hold GOD
 to be our God, and only
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  : That we regarde him as not
reſemblable by any Image, but as dwelling in light that
none can come to; nor imagine what ſhould be like unto
 him: That we neither thinke nor ſpeake lightly of him,
or of his Word, that teacheth of his Nature; but haue ſkil
to honour his Name: That we may reſt from our owne
 works, and keepe a continuall Sabbath to him: having his
kingdome amongſt us: as on high he maketh peace, and
the mightie Angels doe his wil.
               Theſe Petitions we make for thoſe things which concerne
Gods honour principally.
               
                   Then follow others for our neceſſitie:5. That we haue a
moderate portion, & neither want in ſcarcitie, nor abound
in ſuperfluitie, but ſuch as ſerveth our houſhold: that the
Officers as Fathers, and the reſt as Brethren and Children
may liue together without ſorrow and diſtres.Eſai
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     9, 2. 
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . 8. 9, 10. Now, our
ſinnes make a partition between GOD and us: by Rancor,
Luſt, Theft, Untruth and Avarice: therein, we craue pardon
and Gods lenitie, as we be ſoft to ſuch as uſe as amiſſe.
And confeſſe our owne weakenes under the Aegyptiacall
ſlaverie of Satan: and under Tyrantes: ſuch as the Iewes
felt by Babel,
                  Daniel all. 
                  Madai, Iavan with Seleuco-lagidae; which
as four Beaſts made a ſea of troubles, till CHRIST brought
his kingdome, power and glorie over all the world.
               
                  
This in ſumme the Lords Prayer hath: and the two
Tables haue the ſame; and as the Tables be anſwerable
one to the other,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   ſo is our Lords prayer unto both. The
Law commandeth all that may be knowne on done: and
this prayer deſireth full grace for ſo much. And as all the
fiue Books of Moyſes,Matth. 22, 40 yea, & the Prophets, are but a Commentarie
upon the Law: ſo all the New Teſtament is a
Commentarie upon the Lords Prayer▪ and both are pure
as ſilver tryed ſeauen tymes in a veſſel of fined earth:Pſalm 12.
wherefore we muſt examine what is droſſe here, (by our
corrupterror) and remoue all ſuch from the pure Metall,
that is from God.1 Corinth. 3. And we ſhall neede fire of tryall, for
the Hebrews, the old Scribes and Rabbines with their ſide,
who haue continued over the world, a great part of them
dealers with the Law, and to which tenor of ſpeach the
New Teſtament if fitted; they hold the phraſes all, as all
the termes of the Law, no leſſe then we doe: but they
deny the powre of them. Therefore they muſt be better
examined: and that will we doe by Gods helpe in this
ſorte.
               Firſt, conſidering the knowledge and honour of God
                     •
                  
next, our neede and diſtreſſe: and ſtill compare the Lords
prayer with the Dealogue.
               Our firſt ſpeach here,Now particularly of every Petition compared with the Decalogue. is of GOD: how, we doe acknoledge
him: we ſay, O our Father: much try all there muſt
be of this world, before the pure meaning appeareth. The
Heathen Philoſophers could ſay; Zeup
                        •
                     te
                        •
                      Iupiter, the
Father 
                     〈◊〉
                   yet they were godleſſe in this world.This entra
                        •••
                      to prayer [to our Father]. Is the cry of all Gods children, & therfor they that haue other Gods againſt Our Father. Alſo the
Iew ſayth good words from holy Moyſes, but not 
                     〈◊〉
                   underſtood:
Thou art our Father, Iſa. 63
                     •
                   10. and againe:
Is not he thy Father
                        •
                      De
                        •
                     t▪
                   3
                     •
                  , 
                     •
                  . yet both theſe ſorts petiſh
for ever becauſe they knowe not the Father.
               
                  
Now,1 Iohn. 5, 7. the firſt degree of Father is moſt holy in this ſentence:
There be three, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit,
and theſe three be one: ſo the Father is relatiue to the SON,
called the WORD, as in Prov. 30. Who went up to heauen, and
came downe, who gathereth the winde in his fiſt, who bound up
the waters in a garment: who hath ſet the borders of the
earth: what is HIS Name, and the Name of his SONNE, if
thou knowest it. Here we haue Father in the higheſt degree,
and the SONNE coeternall: who with the SPIRIT
aeternall, all three, one infinite Nature created the world.
They that miſſe of Fatherhood in this ſenſe, knowe not
God: and they can not be ſaved.
               In another ſenſe, Father, is the ateribute of God, without
diſtinction of Perſon, as IEHOVAH (in Ebrew) &
ELOHIM: which two names muſt be expounded, that
all three may be better underſtood.
               ELOHIM is the firſt name,Gen. 1. 1. that the Creator of all
hath in the Scripture: and in notation it betokeneth
MIGHTIE, and in forme a pluralitie; EL-HEM one mightie
nature be They. They Iew, Rabbi Bochai upon Gen. 1.
confeſſeth ſo much, and bringeth the like myſteries from,
Eccleſ. 1
                        •
                     . Remember thy CREATORS in the dayes of thy
youth. &c. and from Iſai. 54. IEHOVAH thy MAKERS.
Of old tyme the Scribes of Doctors of Iehuda held the
Trinitie, untill ſtubborneneſſe againſt the Redeemer drew
them to extremitie of blindneſſe: Since, they diſturbe
all, and they bred Arrians. But the old Rabbins held it
not ſtrange to heare of Father,Hag. 2, 6. Sonne, and Holy Spirit, in
the Vnitie of Godhead, and in ELOHIM, EL-HEM one
mightie Nature be they.
               IEHOVAH, likewiſe is of them held in moſt high and
holy reverence: and where CHRIST the great GOD
ſayth, Deut. 18. Thou ſhalt perfect with IEHOVAH thy
                  
GOD, he ſayth, Matth. 5. Ye ſhall be perfect euen as your
Father in heauen is perfect. So we ſee Father to be uſed
for IEHOVAH. Now, the terme IEHOVAH muſt be conſidered:
though no tongue can tell fully the force of it;
Being, and giving the Being to all things, and ruling all in
order, and performer of promiſe, doth it betoken. In the
narration of Moſes, how all the frame of the world was
made, ſtill untill the whole hoſt of heauen and earth was
finiſhed, the name ELOHIM only was uſed: But when
the perfect Being had appearance,Gen. 2. then the Creator is termed
IEHOVAH ELOHIM.1 Tim. 6. 16. S. Paul tranſlateth it, Who
only hath immortalitie, as Elohim, who is only Mightie.
               
               
                  Euſebius hath from ſome ancient Grecian, the ſweeteſt
Epigram, that ever was made, which can not be referred
to my knowledge, but to Iehovah, though in Greeke it
can not be ſounded. Thus it ſtandeth as from God ſpeaking
of himſelf.
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  Seauen ſounding letters prayſe me God the great and eternall:
                  The Father of all things,Eſa. 40. 28. that never is wearie.
                  And I am the immortall viole of all things,
                  Which tune the Concent of the heauenly melodie.
               
               Some holy Iew that reſpected, the thrice holy Name
IEHOVAH, ſeemeth to be the Father of this Epigramme:
(as they had of auncient tyme verie learned men in the
Greeke tongue) cited in Clemens, Euſebius, and in Anthologia.
               Now by this which hath been ſpoken, we ſee the terme
Father, the terme Elehim, and Iehovah, how they be all
one.
               
                  
Alſo that IEHOVAH is ſpoken of CHRIST, Iſat. 6,
9. and Iohn 12, 41. doe ſhew: and that CHRIST is Iehovah,
euen the Talmud granteth from Ier. 23, and againe
31. I wil raiſe unto David the Brightnes the luſt: and the
name by which they ſhall call him, is Jehovah our righteouſnes:
ſo we ſee how the firſt word in holy Prayer, & of the Decalogue,
to be all one.
               Here we acknowledge the true God, the Eternal of Nature
and counſel: Creator and governor of all things: and
holy Iuſtice, and unſpeakable mercy: and all truth in all

                     〈◊〉
                   honoureth theſe names
                     •
                   as errors and haereſies, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   argue
their authors not to knowe the name of God.
               Now for the terme Father, in reſpect of Creature, wee
muſt weigh the uſe. The Starres (the Angels) be called
the ſonnes of God, Iob. 3. 8. When the morning ſtarres were
glad together, and the ſonnes of God ſhouted. So the Angels,
which were created with the light the firſt day: they
are the ſonnes of Them; the Mightie, the Trinitie. Theſe
Angels ſaw the frame of Meteores, and diſtinction of waters,
fiſh, fonles, and beaſts, how they could not ſerue their
turne. And when man was made, though of the ſlime
of the earth, yet in ſoule equall he was to Angels, in wi
                     •
                  re
to giue names to Creatures. And therefore, when God
gaue his Angels charge to ſerue man, that he ſhould not
hurt his foote againſt a ſtone;Pſ
                        •
                     l. 1. 
                        •
                     4. all ſhould haue knowne,
that he made his Angel ſpirits, and his Miniſters a fla
                     •••
                   of
fire. But ſome of them diſdained to marke, how all was
made for man, and rebelled againſt IEHOVAH E
                     •
                  OU
                     •
                  M; &
diſturbed all the courſe of wiſedome,Gen. 1. 1
                        •
                     . 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 8, 12. and brought man to
rebellion, and all the Creature ſubject unto groning: wherupon
a new courſe is manifeſted; that the SONNE of God
ſhould take the nature of man, to be our brother, that God
might be his Father, as he is man, and ours for him, who

came to performe obedience unto death, to giue life: preſently
for our ſoules paſſing hence to heauen when they
leaue the body, as he through the Vaile of his fleſh entred
into the joy of the Father: and they who ſtubbornly deny
that,1 Corint. 15. can haue no hope of ſalvation. And by his Reſurrectiō
our bodies ſhal ariſe in the later day; al of both ſots:
as in our death of body al ſoules returne to God that gaue
them, to abide judgment for every hid thing good or evil.
               On high, be places of light and joy, called heauen: On
high, be places of torment called Hell: the ſeparation is
large enough, that the one can not paſſe to the other. The
general name is cōmon to both, THE WORLD OF SOVLS,
to the Iewes, who knew that all ſoules aſcend out of this
world: & HADES, or unknown place, to heathen, who knew
not any thing out of this world, but thought, there were
beyond the gates of the ſunne, as Homer ſpeaketh, or out of
the light of the ſkie, places of diſtinct ſtate, garden for the
godly, and Tartarus priſon for the wicked. Then Heathen
took not Heauen as we doe, for a place of Gods glorie, out
of this world, but for ſome part of the ſtarrie ſkie; as Iuſtin
Martyr diſputeth againſt them. But the Scripture lifteth us
aboue the heauen of the aire, and heauen of ſtarres, into a
third heauen: unto that our Lord w
                     •
                  nt from the croſſe:
unto that S. Paul was taken up:2 Cor. 12, 4 and all ſaythfull ſhal haue
a Tabernacle there,Luc. 23. 43. when this earthly dwelling is diſſolved.
The Thiefe knew, that our Lords ſoule ſhould goe
hence thither as all juſt: and our Lord doth confirme him
therein.
               This courſe the Creater tooke, taking our nature unto
him,Rom. 8, 15. to be our brother, that we may by his ſpirit cry, Abba
Father. In this ſenſe we cry Abba Father, and Elohim,
and Eternall,
                  Pſal. 65. 2. and O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee ſhall all
fleſh come.
               
               
                  
Iſrael felt by an outward bleſſing of deliverance from
Egypt,Exod. 20, 2, 3 the ſpiritual deliverance from Hel, by IEHOVAH,
the Eternall: which none other could performe, that he
ſhould be their Father, and they ſhould haue no other
Elohim,
mightie defender but him: & that he only ſhould
be the hearer of their prayer. and thus the terme Father,
and Iehovah, and Elohim, our mightie Iudge and defender,
ſound one and the ſame thing.
               We treſpaſſe deadly, when we pray to any other againſt
the Law: Him only ſhalt thou ſerue; upon which Law, the
Scribes ſitting upon Moſes chaire, ſay thus: we haue bene
taught from age to age, that this worſhip is Prayer: David
confirmeth this,Pſalm 50. ſaying: Call upon me in the day of trouble,
and I will heare thee: and thou ſhalt worſhip me: and our
Lord more expreſly in this chap.Matth. 6. 
                  When ye pray, pray unto
your Father which is in heauen. And neither the holy Apoſtles
ever, not the common Iewes at this day, in their Synagogue,
pray but unto the Creator. The Iewes know him
not: yet hold the generall of praying, only to God, as the
holy Doctors, Simeon, Zacharie, and our Lord his Kinred
in S. Luke chap. 3. and Matth. 1. profeſſed openly. And
as he that ſacrificed unto any, but unto God, was to be deſtroyed
as curſed: So, the greater ſubduction of honor
from God, maketh one more curſed. But prayer is more
then ſacrifice. Therefore the giving of the greater to a
Creature is more curſed.
               By this, the Pſeudo-Catholiques muſt confeſſe they haue
no hope of ſalvation:Matth. 6, 7. darkening knowledge by words wil
nothing help their turne: Their heart telleth them that
they haue ſmall hope in God, that ſeeke to Creatures:
whereas God dwelleth in light, that none can come to: &
Creatures know not the heart of man, nor how God pittieth
or hardeneth, to ſhew his moſt wiſe government of

the world. So they can not call upon him, whom they
knowe not: and miſſe of the true Father, as Baſtards: and
they miſſe wilfully: and grope like the blinde at noone
day.
               Now the terme our, proteſteth, that we will haue no
other Elohim, but him: none other Patrons for our life
and ſoule, but him, who is our Creator: by him we came
into the World: to his providence only we commit our
ſtate: his Angels pitch their tents about us, when he commandeth:
but not any our ſupplication to them. When
Abraham with his owne family fought againſt four kings,Geneſ. 14. Eſai. 41.
he truſted only in God: and as God would, the Angels
fought for him; not by any prayer unto them: Neither
did he pray eure unto Adam, or Henoch, whom he knew to
be in Paradiſe: but made God only his Iudge.
               On earth Ciuil Magiſtrates be Elohim: and the Angels
alſo be ſo called, as Pſal. 97, 7. Let all the Elohim worſhip
him. But for Civil Officers, ſo farre they muſt be followed,
(euen the heathen) as they hold the Law of nature.
               In aſſemblies of Gods people,1. Corint. 
                        •
                     . which may make judges
of their owne; it is unlawfull to plead before infidels:
Moſes Bxod. 18. telleth that; where the Rulers muſt be
men of religion towards God: & alſo the Talmud teacheth
the ſame: and God confirmeth it, 1 Cor. 6. ſaying, Dare
any of you plead before Infidels.
               
               But here come doubts,Deut. 1
                        •
                     . Ezek. 17. 13. 14. 15. & 21, 23. becauſe God ſayth: Thou ſhalt
make unto thee, a King of thy Brethren. The Iewes held
it unlawfull to obey heathen: and often rebelled againſt
oth: as did Zedekiah againſt Nebucadnetzar: and Theudas
and Barcoſba againſt the Romans: yet the Talmud taught:
that whē the Iewes admitted once the coine of any prince,
therein they acknowledged him their governour: and our
Lord confirmeth that acknowledgment,Luke 2
                        •
                     . 2
                        •
                     . 
                  upon the image &

ſuperſcription of Caeſar. And full often doth S. Paul teach,that obedience,Rom. 13. Tit. 3. 1 Petr. 2, 13. & S. Peter omitteth not the ſame doctrine:
both foreſaw, that as the Iewes rejected Governours, becauſe
they would judge in their owne lawes: ſo in tyme
Scholers would among us: pretending that Politicians in
heathon ſtudies were not fitt. But Chriſtianitie having no
new matter, but the Incarnation of the Angel of our Covenant,
the Eternall king of glorie, and his Reſurrection:
having, I ſay, no new matter but that, wherein the world
would ſtaggar, ſuffereth not Scholars to beare ſuch ſway:
but requireth others, Politiciās always to be Biſhops in their
Paroches, to cenſure the Meſſengers of the Church; who
ſhould read learnedly the Bible: (which few can doe, and
which labor ſpendeth all a mans youth) And all the ſage
ſhould ſpeak upon requeſt: and the reſt judge. In ſuch
aſſemblies, one day might open all the Bible: while plaine
matters be only touched, and only difficulties be handled.
But men loue darkenes: and will haue other Elohim then
God willeth.
               And wheras God ſayth: Thou ſhalt not make unto thee
Elohim of, gold, Elohim of ſilver. The Scribes ſitting in
the chaire of Moſes truly conclude, that Governours that
buy their places, fall to be Elohim of gold and ſilver. And
Epiſcopi of Elders in policie of Gods people made by money,
may no more be honoured then an Idol.
               The heathen knowen ſlaues of Satan had outward obedience,
till God by Civill Policie, and Conſtantinus might
did fell them: and ſo Elohim of gold may haue in Courts,
but as men ha
                     ••
                   of all true hearts; and men hateful unto
God, as Idols. But the true Officer is worthy of double
honour:A
                        •
                     lo
                        •
                     . 1. 1. as the Prince Theophilus to whom God, dedicated
two parts of the N. Teſtament: that all ſhould follow
ſuch a Biſhop, and haue no Father, nor Rabbi, but God and

his Vicars: wherof Kings & Rulers are the chief Epiſcopi
and Elders: and the Readers of the word, which ſhould be
or rare ſkill: yet are ſuperiors only in diligence.
               Al Iewes townes had Ros Ielibah, an head of their councill,
Epiſcopus, Tzophe: as Antigonus ſucceſſor to Alexander
Macedon, was holden Tzopheh, or Epiſcopus of Aſia.
But none of the Iewes Epiſcopi ruled ſaving for one voice;Dio. Sicul.
and ſo farre he was Elohim.
                  Act. Rab. Abr. Ben David in Cabala. When Ananias went further,
S. Paul gaue him over to Gods eternall curſe: and he and
his ſonne Eleazar authors of Rebellion, brought Ieruſalem
to be Iebus againe, and troden down, while they knew not
Elohim.
               
               And thus much for the names that warn of right knowledge
of God.
               For God his honour two warnings are giuen:Which art in heauen: & therfor by Commath. 2. not to be faſhioned by any thing in heaven or earth. the one
for the eyes, the other for the tongue: but both depend
upon the heart. Now God dwelleth in light, that none
can come to: and would by the frame of the world teach
us of his eternall powre and Godhead. But our ſloth, admiring
the Creature, will worſhip him by that. So the ſtars
were Heathens gods; ſo the forme of a mans bodie is the
Papiſts: againſt that, CHRIST engraved the Law in ſtone:
Thou ſhalt not make unto thy ſelf any grauen Image or likenes
of any thing, that is in heauen or earth, or the ſeas, which the
ſhore keepeth in the lower chanel.
               
               God requireth the paynes of the minde to thinke upon
him, and to follow his Word: and none of that courſe can
abide Idols: neither did Idol-knights ever admire Gods
nature or loue his Word.Pſalm 89. Nothing in the aire, our next
heauen, or among the ſtarrie heauen, is like unto him: but
we muſt aſcend into the third Heauen, aboue all this viſible
world, unto an unſpekable light, to think wel of God:
and in that light God is inviſible, and thence bringeth his

hid Counſels into light, for them that in minde worſhip
him: others be Batts and Mould-warts.
               
               And when we ſay, that our Father is in the third heauen,
we proclaime rejection of all that worſhip images, as not
being the children of God. So we here goe aboue all eyeſight:
and aſcend in our minds, aboue this viſible world,
unto the world of Soules: whither all aſcend, either to joy
in the light of God, in heauen, and Paradiſe: or to woe of
darknes of Hell and Torment. All that in light of minde
wil not aſcend to heauen, ſhal aſcend to the throne of God
to heare condemnation, & to haue on high a place of woe
for ever and ever.
               In the dayes of Enoſh men corrupted the calling upon
Gods name,Gen. 4. 
                        •
                     6. giving ſtarres his glorie: but the flood taught
them the penaltie,1. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 16. 1 Pe
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     , 19. when their bodies became wrinkled by
waters: and their ſpirits went up to eternall priſon. So
Babel was built to the worſhip of ſtars, becauſe men that
made their bellies their god, would, and could not with
their heavie hearts aſcend the heauens, but by tongues exhorted
unto Idols name, & eaſie devotion: For that, God
did cutte them off from Adams tongue, and hope of his
life for ever: ſaving the few that would endure the minds
paynes,2. Corin
                        •
                     . 5. to ſearch how God in Christ reconciled the world
unto himſelf. And God ſo hated the heathen, that he gaue
by Moſes an hedge of Lawes to keep Iſrael from amitie
with them: euen for the verie powling the head, that they
ſhould not be like the Arabians, as Maymony full well expoundeth
that Law,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Levit. 19. and all ſhould ſtill ſhunne
the garment polluted by the fleſhly minded men.
               A further paynes of the minde,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   is required for the honour
of God: to ſanctifie his name: and the Law forbidding
to take his Name in vayn, includeth that in a Commandement,
Now all Gods doctrine is called his Name: all holy

ſpeaches of him: In his LAW ſhal the nations truſt.
Iſa. 42.
In his NAME, ſayth Matth. 12. The Attributes,
ELOHIM,
IEHOVAH, EL-SHADDAI, ADONAI, 
                     •
                  AH, TZVR: the
Mightie, the Eternall, the All-ſufficient, the Stay of the
World, the Giver of life and breath, the Rock, & ſuch: theſe
are abridgements of the Bible, and the Bible a Commentarie
upon them.1. Tim. 6, 1. So, by NAME, all holy doctrine is conteyned:
and we pray for knowledge in it; as the Law maketh
all guiltie, that taketh his NAME in vayne.
               Herein ſtandeth the greateſt care of true Chriſtian Policie:
how all congregations may haue many Biſhops to
ſanctifie Gods Name: to know the truth, and to ſpeake it
with fear and care. In this ſtandeth only the joy of our
ſoules: and it were better for us, that we were never born,
then to miſſe of this: for the price is Gehenna.
               While the families, that hoped in Chriſt were few: that
one Biſhop might teach them, the Law was not written:
Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Heber, Abraham, and his ſonnes by
Returah, (whence Iob was) Iſaac, Iacob, Ioſeph, taught
theirs the redemtion by word of mouth, & equitie by the
Law of nature. But when Iſrael multiplied, a few ſuffiſed
not to be Biſhops, then a Law was written: and all Iſrael
fortie yeeres had leaſure to learne it. And Levites were the
common Biſhops in the land: as Biſhop Eleazar, ſpeciall
one. PAKID, a man of charge, is Epiſcopus in the LXX. &
1 Timoth. 3. But not Levites onely were learned. Al Paroches
through the twelue Tribes had their Doctors of
their owne: and all of Iſrael often, and no Levite: as ſome
were only of Levites in their 48 townes lotted to Levi:
and the high Councill might be all of Iſrael, or all of Levi, as
it ſhould fal out. The Synagogues or Paroches had nothing
to doe with ſacrifice: nor had any ceremonie of Levi: no
cope of Linnen, as Aaron, neither linnen: only one ſhirt, a

Girdle, and a Cappe, as Levites in the Temple. Neyther
might they any more imitate Aharons attire, then they
might ſacrifice there.
               In their Synagogues they read the Law, and all ſaving
hand-laborers, thrice a weeke from Childhood frequented
Divinitie-ſcholes. Of them the chief were choſen to rule,
and to teach after Angelus Eccleſiae had read: or they might
by ſage leaue read: after reading, the choſen to rule: and to
teach, called Elders or Biſhops, deſired the beſt in eſteem to
ſpeake: or, after often approbation they might offer their
payns. And this Policie, Luc. 4. and 1 Corin. 14. alloweth.
So reaſon bred this policie: and the holy Nation practiſed
the ſame 1400 yeres; knowing it a hard point to ſanctifie
Gods Law: and to beware the taking of Gods Name in
vayn.
               Many high poyn
                     •
                  s ſtand herein. The truth of the Texts
of both Teſtaments: for the purenes of Coppies, and the
right helps for underſtanding, & the ſufficiencie of Gods
Word for ſalvation: theſe be the chiefeſt: and all deceived
kingdomes are curſed for miſſing herein: and the beſt may
begin to looke better about them. And all of wealth muſt
know, that their bent muſt be to know, how to ſanctifie
Gods name: As raſh ſwearers ſo al deceived doe take Gods
name in vayn. Wherfore all that are of abilitie, ſhould
from youth know the Law: and all wel might by ſkilfull
guides: and a kingdome of Glorie muſt haue many glorious
in it: and they be ſimple, that hope by bare hearing
of Sermons to become learned. As many Gentlemen
ſpend their tyme to ſanctifie Gods name, ſo all ſhould, &
the moſt part would, if Teachers learned before they
taught.
               The effect of this maketh the kingdome of heauen to
be amongſt us:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , thy will be done on earth as it is heaven:] as when the ſabba
                        •
                     th is duly ſanctified, then Gods kingdome is advanced Command. 4. that men ſhould obey God in CHRIST on

earth, as the Angels obey, being ſent out miniſtring ſpirits
for them, that ſhall inherit ſalvation. For that, we haue
one day in the Law, the ſeauenth day, which Adam kept,
and all the Fathers, til in Egypt they forſook Gode. Then
they found by Manna not rayned, that day which was the
ſabboth: and they are commanded to remember, and keep
that Day holy. And that day our Lord reſted wholly in
the graue, and ſo finiſhed the Ceremonie. And his reſurrection
bringing light into the world, made the day where
in God ſayd; Let there be light; as it was the firſt in order,
to be alſo the firſt in dignitie.
               In the beginning,Gen. 3. 21. Apoc. 13. 
                        •
                     . the firſt day after Adam fell, Adam
beſtowed in ſacrifice to meditate on Chriſt his Reſt: and
the firſt day, after performance of that Reſt, became the
LORDS DAY: which Angels with moſt comfortable joy
celebrate in the Goſpell: and in which our Lord often
ſhewed himſelf, wherefore the Church kept it Act. 20. and
Apoc. 1. our Lord appeared unto Iohn in Patmos, and took
away the covering from all the Bible, on that day, being
called the LORDS Day. So the ſame authoritie, which appointed
Adam, the next day to his fall to Reſt in hope of
Christ: appointeth us the next to our Lords Reſt performed
moſt abſolutely.
               
                  Adam was to ſtudie upon the Creation, which his fall
brought under vanitie, and upon the hope of better Reſt.
And we are to joy in the day of our Light manifeſted unto
the world, and a plaine token of the new world. So the
Iewes Sabboth and ours, tende both to one and the ſame
purpoſe, though the day be altered.
               And their univerſal conſent ſtandeth from Moſes playn
narration, for the word of not eating of the Tree of knowledge
of good and evill, and Satans reply, and the eating,
and ſentences, and loſſe of Paradiſe; that all fell the ſame

day, the firſt day of man: and accordingly at noone day,
our Lord on the tree began the Combat with Satan, and
at the cool of the day went into his kingdome, through the
vaile of his fleſh; leaving this world, which the Latine heathen
call, Deſcendere ad Inferos: the Grekes, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
the Iewes to returne to God, or, to aſceud. And
they are barbarous babes, that know neyther Latin, Creek
nor Ebrew, nor Divinitie, whither juſt ſoules were to goe.
               The terme Kingdoms, is taken in three degrees: 1. For
Gods powre over all: 2. for his mercies manifeſtation:
and 3. for the happie ſtate of glorie in heauen. But all
goe by knowledge together: they which know God aright
as Governour, will embrace him as a Redeemer; and ſhal
finde him an eternall comforter. For theſe degrees wee
pray;Deut. 
                        •
                     0. 12. Rom. 10. 6. but the ſecond is moſt of difficultie for the minde to
goe up to heauen to bring Christ downe, and to goe to the deep,
to bring Christ from the dead: and to dye with Chriſt: and
to ſeeke thoſe things which are aboue: Therefore Gods
powre in Chriſt, is by the nobleſt part called, the kingdome
of Heauen.
               And the government in the Goſpel affaires to cheriſh
and rule men in the Church is the policie of heauen. The
Iewes though they, many of them, knew not the perſon of
Chriſt; yet they had & haue all, that the Apoſtles teach:
and therefore therein no ſtrife was in al the N. Teſtament:
both ſides held the ſame minde for the old Teſtament: and
differed not for one letter. Both held the ſame Common
places from Moſes: and agree, ſaving in Traditions, and
about MESSIAH: but for government they agreed: Archyſynagogus,
Readers of the Law and prophets, the qualities
of a Biſhop or Elder, the providing for the poor, the manner
of excommunication, and abſolution, the Laws to bridle Elders
from tyranny: all theſe are the ſame in both: and reaſon

requireth ſo much, and will ſuffer no more in effect.
               And our Policie might ſoone come in equitie nere this,
if all Biſhops were as many be: and they which worſt may
would not be holden the Candle. A tranſlation by conſent
& ſtudie of all, & prayers from verie Scripture might
be ſone afforded, and unlawful, imitation of Aharons attire
might be left with eaſe: and theſe points moſt vex us,
wherin many Biſhops never made any ſtirre.
               Both equally held that the Veſtments of the Temple
might not come into the ſynagogue; and for the Temple
all were put away, when our Lord was put in graue. So the
Lawes of this Kingdome be playn. But the ſtudie of the
Word for the Hebrew Teſtament, and the Greeke Teſtament,
as we carie our courſe is inſinite: yet by conference
of the N. Teſtament with Hebrews, moſt eaſie & pleaſant.
And a learned Iew would tell whom the Apoſtles expreſſe
in all their ſpeachcs: ſo ſhining be the Teachers of this
Kingdome.
               And thus much for the Petitions: and Precepts tending
directly to the knowledge and honour of God.
               Order biddeth to handle next,[Giue us this day our dayly bread, leaſt 
                        〈◊〉
                      want we 
                        〈◊〉
                      againſt 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and againſt all 
                        〈…〉
                     . the things that ſuccour
all our diſtreſſe: For which we pray that abilitie be giuen
us, by giving good, or forgiving ill: as the Lawe giveth
charge, ſo to doe. We are commanded, to honour our
Father and Mother: that is to ſhew them all care, and performance
of good. So Abraham ſhewed Terah how the
God of glorie appeared unto him; and drewe him from
Meſopotamia to Haran, to goe for Chanaan, to be partaker
of all his good. So Moſes tendered Iethro, and ſhewed
what good he ſhould haue by joyning to Iſrael.
               Now this can not be performed between kindred, unles
outward abilitie be reſonable: for that, we pray for ſufficient
food, that neither aboundance driue us to height of

minde; nor want, to anger againſt God: Agur the ſonne
of Iakeh, ſo prayed, Pro
                        ••
                      30 Provertie or riches giue me not:
nouriſh me with bread of fitte meaſure for me. That verie
phraſe the Holy Spirit tranſlateth from the Proverbs to
this place 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   by a new fram'd word, playn by
Compariſon, with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  aboundant, and by 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  abſence, being between both, as limited by both. Agur
giveth a reaſon of his demand, for meane wealth: ſaying,
least I be full, and lye, and ſay, who is the Lord: or least I be
poor and ſteale: and contemne the name of my God.
               
               As every particular ſhould reſt in meane wealth, whole
ſtates ſhould doe the like. Iſrael learned that, by the Manna,
where the much diminiſhed, and the litle ſufficed. And
all Iudahs pollicie required the ſame: that the rich ſhould
help the poor: ſo that riches could not be great. And the
Heathen Porphyri, cited by Euſcbius teacheth that of the
Iewes pollicie, the content of riches was practiſed in the
whole tenor of it. Yet the miſtruſtfull heart of man, is
wholly ſet upon ſtoring up. And the Phariſies pretending
contemt of the world, loved ſilver notably: to whom the
Parable of hoſpitall Abraham and Lazar or Eleazar, that
made God his helper, and of the Rich in flames was propounded.
And upon this matter our Lord ſpeaketh much
hereafter, in the ſweeteſt ſpeaches that ever were ſpoken:
as,Matth. 6. Luke 12. 
                  Store not upon the earth: but ſtore in heauen: care not for
meat, drink and clothing: look upon the foules, & conſider the
lilies, ſeek for the Kingdome of heauen.
               
               The enemies of Chriſt in the Talmud Ieruſalemie, haue
this ſaying ſtollen from our Goſpell, in theſe words of
Monabaſes ſonne to King Agrippa, in abridgment thus;
The friends chide him for giving all to the poor: He ſayd▪ My
Fathers ſtored for earth, I ſtore for heauen: my Fathers ſtored
where hand hath ſtroke; I ſtore where hand hath no ſtroke; my

Fathers ſtored Mammona; I ſtore for ſoules: This ſayeth
Ieruſalemie ſtealing witte from our Goſpel.1. Tim 5, 4. So we deſire
our dayly food in competent ſort, to recompence them,
whoſe care preſerveth us; as our Parents, and the ſtate
wherin we liue.
               Againſt this we treſpaſſe, when by pretence of Religion
we overthrow civill pollicie, as the Pope doth, and all that
holy and whit of his in part. Religion ſhould be ſo cleared,
that all by twentie yeeres of age might be eunning in
all the Bible: that everie Officers ſhould be as duetie and
name requireth a Biſhop. One howre would utter many
more direct Poſitions for the Bible, then all our Biſhops
yet knew: if hatefull dealing hindred not, and unthankfull
envie. If one will, one will hazard all upon this.
               Further Treſpas is in Covet, in all trades: and the greateſt
in Students: who commonly for errors become wealthy:
men of true learning litle care for wealth, becauſe
they regard God: as Ioſuah, that ſought for himſelf no
part of the Land: and for the contrarie, S. Iames told the
Iewes, how they fedde themſelues, as to the day of ſlaughter.
So the true regard of honouring Parents and the State
ſhould define our dayly bread.
               And men of State are equally limited by Law: the King
may not multiplie horſes, not multiple money: but as all
Iſrael truſted in God to keepe their townes, when thrice a
yeere they went to Ieruſalem: And God taught Heathen
by Pharaoh and Senacherib, not to ſeek deſtruction: ſo
Gods favour, not horſes ſhould be the ſtrength of a Kingdome.
The Ebrewes limit the Kings money, euen ſo much
as payeth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the wages for his ſervants: ſtore will be
a ſore.
               
                  Iſaiah blameth Iudah in Azariahs dayes for multiplying
horſes and money. And in his laſt yeere telleth of tenne

calamities and utter ruyn, which haſtened one after another,
moſt vehement upon the truſters in their owne
ſtrength:Se the Concent, for 10. calamities further touching the ſla
                        •
                     e. 
                  Ahaz loſt 120000 in one battel: Ezekiah
twice felt Aſſur heavie: Manaſſeh was in Babel priſoner;
Ammon died by ſword: good Ioſiah by an arrow: Ioachaz
ſoone is captiue, and dead: Ioakim is buried like an Aſſe:
Iehojachin had 37 yeres impriſonment: & Zedekiah would
ſee nothing, till he had his eyes pluckt out: And the whole
nation loſt their Temple, Citie and Land: wealth & pride,
for horſes and money brought all this. So al States ſhould
reſt in their dayly bread to honour the whole government
in competent ſort.
               An other extremitie is here,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Contemt of due care: Idle
folk and hinderers of the common good, be as hurtfull, as
covetous deceitfull Scholars: & ſhould be holden as wicked
as they, and each one, & Publique men chiefly, ſhould
ſweate, to imploy all to the beſt. And hence floweth that
care for Colonies, for which India giveth place: And an honourable
thing it is, for our ſolie the ends of the earth, the
poſſeſſion of Chriſt,Pſalm. 2. to benifite others and our ſelues: when
our Teachers be learned in troupes, as many be in deede:
this courſe will avoyd a courſe.
               And thus much for our diſtres, holpen by giving good.
Forgiving ill, commeth after it.
               The Law ſayth:
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Thou ſhalt not kill. Thou ſhalt not commit
adulterie. Thou ſhalt not ſteale. Thou ſhalt not beare falſe
witnes. Thou ſhalt not deſire, &c. For all this the Law is
ſpirituall: and unjuſt anger is guiltie before the high Sanedrin:
& the Lust by ſight is adulterie: & deceit by ſleight,
as in Preachers chiefly is theft: and all Covet in condemnation.
For this we condemne all of Adam, that they offend
us, and we them: and we pardon them, conſidering the
common miſerie: and ſo craue pardon of God, as we

pardon them. And herein we conſider the cauſe of our
fall: for murdering hate: for adulterous deſire: for thieviſh
ſophiſtrie, for lying falſehood, and deſiring more then
our owne.
               Outward occaſions tempt our weake natures; and to
God we pray,Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evill. that he would deliver us from them. God
tempteth no man to ill: but he tempteth all men by outward
tryals:Iam. 1. and unles God help us, by Satans whelps we
will be ſoon caught: from him we pray to be delivered: as
in all things he is brſie:1 Pet. 5. 1 John. 2. Iam. 4. by reaſon that all in the world, Is
the deſire of the eye, the deſire of the fleſh, and the pride of life:
whence we are at warre with our ſelues. And thus, prayer
for grace, and commandement for duetie haue been compared.
               Now followeth a concluſion of moſt glorious ſtile:For this Concluſion of the kingdom, power
and glory of Chriſt, ſe the Poſt for, following.
                  For thyne is the kingdome, the powre and glorie, for ever and
ever: this Concluſion commeth moſt goodly, and moſt
godly: and when we marke whence it commeth, a world
of knowledge commeth with it. But firſt we haue a great
Combat for the poſſeſſion of it. The Pope his Latin Tranſlation
hath it not: he diſputeth that it ſhould be a trifling
addition by Gregory Martyn: & his Arabique Tranſlation
printed at Rome hath it not and our Communion book
(for which our Right Reverend Fathers too much contend)
hath it not. And one Greeke Coppie in the French
Librarie, cited R. Ste. had it not: what ſhall we then
ſay to it, if it be no part of the Bible, it is wicked to ſay,
our Lord ſpake it: and by our BB. ſubſcription it is evident
that we haue not a new Teſtament. The ſewes ſay for the
Teſtament in Ieruſal. Saned. A Teſtament that fayleth in
part, fayleth in all. Wherefore our Biſhops muſt herein
leaue the Pope: and he muſt looth himſelf.
               And thus ſtandeth the Caſe: ſtrong by coppies, and

ſtronger by matter: firſt, of ſixteen Coppies in the French
Librarie, cited by Ro. Stephen fifteene had this clauſe: and
reaſon might tell, ſome trifler left it out, eyther by the Latine:
or by not knowing why S. Luke left it out: But all
of judgement know, that abridgers in Scripture be ſhort.
And S. Luke in the bleſſings hath but fiue of the whole.
And from the firſt Narrator, matters are to be had: as euen
the Pope ſtandeth to his Latine for S. Matthew.
               Beſides, the Arabique written Tranſlations, one which
I haue, brought lately from the Eaſt: an other which the
worthy renowmed Arias Montanus lent the learned
Printer Raphelingius, theſe haue the ſaying: Thyne is the
Kingdome, the powre, and glorie, for ever and ever.
               
               And here commeth the Pope to judgment, how his
Arabique Coppie ſhould not agree with the Greeke: ſeing
other Coppies doe: if Coppies common haue that ſentence,
how ſhould his miſſe it. The Arabique notation is
plaine, and voyde of ſchooltricks: and ſeing their Tranſlations
that are abroad haue this clauſe, reaſon telleth that
the Greeke Originals, that went over Arabia had it: as all
the uſuall in the Weſt. Beſides the Chaldi Ethiopian
printed at Rome hath this: and the nation was large, reaching
over Eaſt & South. So millions of Originall Greek
Coppies in thoſe quarters are ſuppoſed to haue the ſame.
Alſo the Siriaque Tranſlation hath, Thine is the Kingdome,
the Powre and Glorie, for ever and ever: ſo millions then
held it part of the New Teſtament: and hold the Pope a
Corrupter. And Theophilact in Greeke printed at Rome
1542, hath the ſentence. So by number of voyces it
ſtandeth as Gods word.
               And better by matter; for when the four fierce beaſts,
Daniel 7. had taken away the holy Iewes Kingdome,
One like a SONNE OF MAN commeth in the clouds of heauen:

and goeth againe to the everlasting in dayes: and to him is
giuen kingdome, power, and glorie over all nations. There
is a plaine prophecie of the Incarnation and Aſcention of
our Lord: and ſoone after,Dani
                        •
                     l. 9. 24, the yeere of his death is told:
and withall a returne from Babel, by hope in his blood:
as from Egypt by the blood of a Lambe. And ſo this ſentence
conteyneth all the Goſpell. And if God had not
ſpoken it,Amen:] this is the ſubſcription to prayer
                        •
                      ſo Iſrael ſubſcribed to the law Deut 1
                        •
                     . 15. &c. & 5. 27. Thus Prayer & the Decalogue haue beene compared. man had never thought of it. But now we ſee
a moſt glorious Concluſion, and fitte for his wiſdome,
whom all Nations, People, and Tongues ſhould honour.
To whom be all glorie for ever. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            A POSTSCRIPT.
To all that wiſh to be
heard in prayer.
            An Advertiſement of the Lords Prayer,
wounded from the Popes Tranſlation: againſt
Gods Greeke, the onely Anchor of
our Hope.
            
               TWO things we are to uſe for Religion: if
we will be voide of wavering: and we ſhould
be vigilant for them: for we haue been greatly
deceived: and hurte by negligence & ignorance
herein.
            Firſt this, we muſt hold: that we haue a pure Bible
to every letter, when coppies are wiſely examined: though

particular coppies jarre; yet alwayes ſome hold that, which
reaſon telleth the Author wrote.
            The other is, that we be able to ſhewe for all that wee
hold, to be the Bible againſt all adverſaries: that the words
beare the wiſdom of God: and that no man could ſpeake
to ſuch wiſe purpoſe, as all ſage will ſtill confirme by ſure
conſent.
            Againſt both theſe we treſpas in the communion book,
for the Lords Prayer, of which we ſhould eſteeme more
then of all the Iewels in the world: we leaue out from the
Lords Prayer in S. Matthew, as the Popes Latin Teſtament
doth, this ſaying, Thine is the kingdome, the powre and
glorie for ever and ever: being in the Greeke Originall,
which only is properly the New Teſtament: and being
taken by our Lord from Dan. 7. where his kingdome lightneth
al the world: more then the Chalcedon of Iudah gaue
light in the choſen or right Care in Aharons breaſt.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . The
greatnes of our error in both, muſt be weighed in Goldſmiths
ballances: if we care to avoyd the wrath of him,
which peyſeth the mountains in weight.
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            Firſt we betray our ground of fayth, & make our ſelues
aſcoffe, to the Iewes, and Turkes: the Iewes hold it to be
impoſſible for God to be a giver of the New Teſtament, &
not a preſerver: all creatures God preſerveth in their kind,
and to the Iewes the old Teſtament, that no one letter can
be loſt, by a worke of many a thouſand eyes and hands, as
a dictionarie for this purpoſe. And if we cannot defend,
that we haue a pure New Teſtament: for everie word in
ſome coppie, they will, and wel may thinke, that we haue
but quickſands, for the ſtay of our Religion: ſo the Iewes
would damne us. And as Arias Montanus recordeth,
the Turkes make this their ground, that the Scripture is
corrupt, and Machumed an author of uncorrupt wiſdome,

gaue them Conqneſt by his ſkill.
            But the Pope preſſeth nearer, for thus he reaſoneth.
            
               If the Scripture be corrupt, the Church muſt judge:
               But the Scripture is corrupt:
               Therefore the Church muſt judge.
            
            For the proof of his aſſumtion, euen the Lords prayer
is brought: a Text dayly in uſe, ever ſince the Apoſtles
tymes: and if he can perſwade corruption to be therein,
he may better doe for other places, leſſe in uſe. In his Latin
Tranſlation this ſentence is left out: and in his Arabik,
powre, and glorie, for ever, Amen. And we follow him &
his Latin coppie ſtill, in our Common Prayer Book, made
from his Latin Tranſlation, and not from the Greeke Original:
to make this ſure againſt our ſelues, That the Church,
not the word ſhould judge: that ſo often as we ſay the Lords
Prayer, ſo often we ſhould help the Pope, for the Churches
authoritie againſt the Kingdome, Powre and Glorie of Christ
and his Word.
            Hence Gregorie Martin the Popes Factor, doth triumph
againſt that ſentence: and doth call it by Eraſmus teſtimonie,
a trifling Addition: and well might he be bold:
againſt us; ſeing we joyne with him againſt our ſelues.
And if we had once uſed the ſentence, as S. Matthew doth,
& in repetition left it out, as S. Luke doth: & all abridgers
in Scripture alter ſomewhat in ſpeach, according as their
argument, and preſent ſcope requireth: then we had neyther
holpen the Pope, nor hurt our ſelues.
            In S. Matth. chapt. 5. 6. 7. our Lord his ſermon handleth
the Talmudique Common place, for the kingdome
of MESSIAS:
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
                upon this Law: You ſhall make you a King
over you of your Brethren: he ſheweth that his kingdom is of
the poore in ſpirit, for the meeke, for the mourners, for the
hungrie after justice, for the perſequuted, and ſuch: And in

the Prayer lappeth the Kingdome, from Dan. 7. where the
poore Iewes are defended againſt the four Beaſts, that
come out of the Seas, and periſhed before our Lord his
comming in the fleſh. So to this ſenſe, the ſentence was
moſt glorious: but to bare prayer, as the Apoſtles required
a forme, it was not eaſie to conſider it, without further
diſcourſe,Marc. 10. Act. 1. for men that looked for glorie on the earth:
and ſo S. Luke omitted it: becauſe it was ynough to be
ſpoken once: if we had followed now the one, and now
the other, we had honoured both: But now we joyne
with the Popes Latine Tranſlation of mans wit and ſlight
mayming of the Bible, and that which hath no authoritie
againſt the holy Greeke Original, which hath the powre
of him,Iob 26. that framed all the World, and bewtified the
heauens by his ſpirit.
            Profeſſed Scholars, that cannot ſee how they following
the Pope, betray their forts and holds to the enimie;
may wel be holden Batts and Mouldwarts.
            
            The Greeke Teſtaments, all the printed, euen among
Papiſts damne the Latine: as that of Theophilact printed
at Rome: and the Ethiopian, or Chaldean printed there:
and the Syriaque printed at Vienna and Antwerp: ſo the
ſtrength of trueth is invincible: but that wee betray out
ſelues to our enemie: and all the glorie of Chriſt his
word. And thus much for the purenes of the Text, tryed
againſt the Popes greateſt hope.
            Now for the other poynt of judgment, to diſcerne
what is more then mans witte could breede. Here wee
haue occaſion to marke how this ſaying, Thyne is the kingdome,
the powre, and glorie for ever, telleth that God not
man ſpake it▪ and that it is no trifling Addition, but a
moſt heauenly Concluſion of him, that in the Creation
had nothing idle,
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . 1. nor imperfect.
            
               
And here we may conſider two moſt profitable matters:
the one, the light this ſaying giveth to the Prophets:
the other, how it perfecte
                  •
               h the fitting of prayer to the
Decalogue.
            All men ſhould marke in the New Teſtament where
the like ſaying were in the old: that will bring ſweet meditation.
The Phariſies ſay,Luke. 20. 14. 
               This is the heire: come, let us
kill him: ſo ſayd the Patriarks of Ioſeph, leaſt he ſhould
rule,Geneſ. 37, 20 
               Come, let us kill him: we ſee the end: God turned
both the evils to ſalvation.
            Elias is termed of bad Achab (like his Father Omri)
Diastrephon, a Deſtroyer: ſo of the Scribes our Lord is
called Diastrephon,
               Luke 23. 2
                     •
                  
                a Deſtroyer: yet Elias was taken up
in a fierie Chariot: and our Lords Aſcention ſent fierie
tongues, and a fire on the earth: and we know the ende of
Achab and the Iewes: & may remember a ſweet harmonie
in Gods judgments, old and new alike.
            So S. Paul in his terme, of better Reſurrection, in the
Machabean Martyrs,Hebr. 11. taking his phraſe from the 12. of Daniell,
teacheth plainly, how that chapter ſpeaketh of Antiochus
Epihanes, and not of the ende of the world: and in
one word doth, being marked, ridde us from errors matching
the Lybian ſands. We had never dreamed of the
Romans, to be a fourth Monarch there, if we had well
marked S. Paul. But as Antiochus the vile was there
ſpoken of, in the end of wrath, as in the litle horne, chap. 8.
ſo he not a Roman ſhould haue beene holden the litle
horne, chap. 7. and the laſt mightie Tyrant of the fourth
Beaſt: by ſuch light, we may judge God the author of
ſuch words. Bur that is moſt manifeſt in this kingly ſaying,
Thyne is the Kingdome, the Power, and Glorie for ever
and ever. In Dan. chap. 7. when the fourth Beaſt is caſt
into the fire, one like a SONNE of MAN commeth with

the cloudes of heauen, and againe aſcendeth to the everlasting,
and is brought before him, and to him was giuen kingdome,
power, and glorie, that all nations ſhould ſerue him.
            
            The verie Iewes to this day Iarchi and Sadaias upon
that place confeſſe MESSIAS,He ſpeaketh as S. Luke recor
                     •
                  eth, the Angels 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Luk 2 13. to be there, The ſonne of
Man. And Sadaias noteth that by, with clouds of
heauen, the Angels are meant who ſhould attend MESSIAS
coming into the world: and the Iewes might know
thence, that when the Grecians were overthrowne, MESSIAS
ſhould be borne: and we ſee in the Goſpel, that the
wicked euen then talked as the godly for the tyme, being
inſtructed by Daniel. Now Dan. chapt. 9. it is plainely
ſpoken, that Meſſias ſhall be ſtaine: and not for himſelf, but
to
               
                  
                     •
                  o ſ
                     •
                  ale 
                     •
                  eſpaſſe. 
               finiſh ſinne, to wake expiation for iniquitie, as being the
most holy, in whom the Prince of this world could finde nothing,
and who was a Sacrificer for our ſinnes. And to
this day the Iewes confeſſe, that MESSIAS: NACID, or
Prince, or Leader, is the Redeemer, called Nagid, or Leader,
or Commander of Nations: Eſai. 55. A Commenter that
of late wrote upon Dan. 9. confeſſeth that: But the Incarnation
and Reſurrection paſſeth fleſh and blood;
               Roman. 10. 
               which ſayth,
Who can goe up to heauen to bring Chriſt downe? Or who can
goe into the deepe, to bring Chriſt from the dead.
            
            
               Aben Ezra, the Iew, who 500 yeeres agoe, in the Iſle
Rhodes commented upon Daniel, confeſſeth that Gabriels
490 yeeres began at Daniels prayer, & ended when MESSIAS
was ſlayn: and Rambam confeſſeth, (as Galatin us citeth
his words) that the holy of holy is MESSIAS the ſanctified
from the ſonnes of David. Such helps to ſalvation
breaking out Iewes confeſſion, as yron breaketh our fire
from flint ſtones, by the Viſions of Daniel, chapt. 7. and
chapt. 9. for the ſonne of MAN.
            Now the Concluſion of the Lords prayer doth call us

directly to Dan. 7. and thence to chapt. 9. therefore it calleth
into minde. all that thoſe Viſions haue: ſo the end of
the fourth Kingdome is ſeen to be a litle before our Lord
his Incarnation: ſo his moſt glorious incarnation celebrated
by Angels, ſo his Aſcention attended by the ſame: ſo
the name MESSIAS, and death of the Iuſt for the unjuſt;
and Covenant for manie in the Lords ſupper, and yeere of
death and Iubilie, and ending of Moſes Ceremonies; all be
called into minde by this ſentence: Thyne is the Kingdome
power and glorie, for ever and ever. And as the morning
ſpreadeth over the Mountaines, and light flitteth from Eaſt
to Weſt; ſo this ſentence ſpreadeth over all the Doctrine
of the Kingdome:Matt. 5. & 7. that the ſubjects of MESSIAS are poor,
and in the Sea, but builded upon the ROCK.
            And thus much for the Divine light, by which this ſentence
may be knowne,2. Tim. 3. 15. to be no trifling addition, but breathed
from God, and a moſt heauenly parcel of the New
Teſtament; which the Popes barbarous Latine Tranſlation
would diſannull; & others allowance of it would make
to be no part of the New Teſtament.
            Now for the ſecond poynt, how it abſolveth the harmonie
of the Prayer and Decalogue, the meditation will
haue profitable matter: but all muſt be conſidered together.
            
               God ſayth: I am the Eternall thy God: Thou ſhalt haue no
other Elohim (God and judge) but me.
            
               We pray, O our Father: to thee onely we pray and flye.
            
               God ſayth: Thou ſhalt not make to thy ſelf any grauen
Image, nor the likenes of any thing, &c.
            
            
               We ſay:
               Iſai. 40. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                Thou art in Heauen; in light that none can come
to, nor thinke to what thou canst be likened.
            
               God ſayth: Thou ſhalt not take the Name of the Eternall,
thy God in vayne.
            
               
               We pray: Sanctified be thy Name.
            
               God ſayth:
               Ezech. 20, 20 Remember that thou keep holy the Saboth day:
as Gods kingdomes badge.
            
               We pray: Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done, in earth
as it is in heauen.
            
               God ſayth: Honour thy Father and Mother, that it may
be well with thee.
            
               We pray: Giue us; all estates, our competent nouriſhment.
            
               God ſayth: Thou ſhalt not kill. Thou ſhalt not committe
adulterie. Thou ſhalt not ſteale. Thou ſhalt not beare falſe
witneſſe against thy neighbour; Thou ſhalt not covet.
            
               We pray: Forgiue us our treſpaſſes, as me forgiue them
that treſpaſſe against us: and lead us not into hard tryals, but
deliver us from evill.
            Now the Proem of the Decalogue, and end of the Prayer
are to be viewed.Thyne is the Kingdome, the power & the glorie for ever. God ſayth: I am the Eternall thy God;
that brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: that was with
great glorie: and with the blood of the Lambe▪
                and overthrow
of Pharaoh and his Hoſt in the Redde Sea; and terror
of Nations: and plague of Amalek, (that would fight
againſt his Couſins in Izhak) and ſhaking of the earth, and
flight of the Sea.
            Ieremie telleth, that the Deliverie from Babel, ſhould
be more glorious: and what perſwaded 49000 Iewes
to leaue Babel, but the hope of him, which ſhould come with
the Cloudes of Heauen, and haue Kingdome, power and glorie
for ever.
            
            In the firſt yeere of Bel-eſh-zar they ſaw, that Bel, and
Idols bred but fire and ſorrow, and eternall Reſt was in
the kingdome of Chriſt: and they knew when the kingdome
ſhould fall, and Cyrus deliver them, and all Nations
heare of their demanding of the way to Sion, upon the
hope of the Sonne of Man comming to ſhew the Kingdome

of heauen to all Nations: and to ſhake euen the heauen of Moſes
pollicie: ſo that hope turned to the worlds ſalvation by
Christ: wherefore that ſpeach was worthy to be in the
Lords prayer, to light our hearts in Chriſt; without whom
we haue no right at all to ſay, Abba Father.
            
            Wherefore they that denie this glorious ſentence to be
part of the New Teſtament, or countenance the denyers,
are in moſt haynous blame: and ſhould amend all that is
amiſſe. Everie blemiſh wherewith wee ſtaine Scripture,
wil grieue the ſage: eſpecially the mayming of the prayer,
which firſt the Holy Ghost gaue for the verie ſyllables, to
be a perpetuall forme in the Church. If our ſacrifice be
herein blemiſhed, God will not ſo willingly heare us.
         
         
            
               
               I Belieue in God the Father Almightie, maker of heauen and
earth: and in Ieſus Christ, 
                  〈◊〉
                ſonne our Lord, who
was conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin
Marie, ſuffred under Pontius Pilate, was crocified, dead, and
buried, heOr, [He went to God.] as all faythful goe to God in ſoul, when they dye. went to the World of ſoules: theChriſt was to riſe the third day to fulfill the Scriptures: & to be the firſt fruits from the deall: and after ſortie dayes he aſcended both in ſoule and bodie own to the Father. And we through his reſurrection ſhall at the laſt day aſcend alſo in ſoule and bodie into heauen, and ever be with the Lord. third day he
aroſe from the dead, and aſcended into heauen, and ſitteth at
the right hand of God the Father: from thence he ſhall come,
to judge both the quick & the dead. I belieue in the Holy Ghoſt,
that there is a holy Catholique Church, the Communion of
Saincts, the forgiuenes of ſinnes, the reſurrection of the bodie,
and life everlasting, Amen.
            
            
               A direct Explanation of the Article of our
Lords ſoules departure from this world.
               
                  THE Holy Ghoſt teacheth plainly, that our
Lord his ſoul went from his bodie into the
hands of God, for ſo he ſayth: O Father into
thy hands I commend my ſpirit. And ſo the
faythfull Thief believed, when he ſayd: O
Lord remember thou me, when thou cemest in
to thy Kingdome. He as the Scribes and Doctors believed,
that all faythful ſoules goe from this world unto the joyes
of God, which place they call Paradiſe. And that belief
our Lord confirmed, ſaying: This day ſhalt thou be with me
in Paradiſe. And S. Paul ſpeaketh to the Hebrews: that,
through the veile of his fleſh he went into the holy Place, into
Heauen.
               
               Common ſpeach called the place of the ſtarres, Heauen:
and becauſe it is the bewtie of the viſible world, they held
it the fitteſt terme to expres the world, where God ſhewed

himſelf, to the bleſſed in joy, before his throne: And the
curſed which are there, haue a place of torments; called by
a borrowed ſpeach, Gehinnam, the Valley of Hinnom; that
was properly a place neere Ieruſalem, where children were
brent to Molesh: and being a moſt miſerable place was fit
to ſhew the ſeat of them, which haue aſcended hence to
Gods throne, to abide a judgment unto eternal paynes: &
be tormented before God and Lam for ever and ever.
               All ſouls of men aſcend: and none ever deſcended: but
as death his inferior to life, it is termed a deſcent: and the
going from a place lower of eſteeme, is called a deſcent: as,
from Ieruſalem to Samaria.
               That which Chriſtians call, the world to come, is called
of the Iews in their common writings, the world of ſouls:
and of the Grecians of all ages, Hades: And the Philoſophers
hield it a moſt happie thing, for a juſt man to goe
from this World to Hades.
               The Apoſtles Articles of belief was written in Greeke,
& according to the Greek it muſt be expounded. There is
Hades, the World of ſouls: where be diſtinct places of joy,
(for our Lord, and Abraham, & Lazarus, and all the holy)
called Heauen: and of ſorrow, called Hell. The ſouls of the
one place, know the caſe of the other. And when we ſpeak
of the juſt, that he is gone to Hades, we meane, that he is
gone hence unto the joyes of God. And ſo would all Grecians
in the world underſtand the Chriſtians Symbolum,
or badge of our Profeſſion.
               When men ſpeak of a horſe loſing life: they would ſay,
He is dead: when of a man, that hath an immortall ſoule,
He is dead and gone to Hades: the one for the bodie, the
other for the ſoule.
               And Heathen had no greater ground of incouragement
to dye for their Counttey, then the hope of good in

Hades. And hence we muſt note that our Lord twice
aſcended: once in ſoul onely from the Croſſe: the other
tyme in bodie and ſoul into the ayre, and unto the place
of joy, where all glorie ſhineth.
               The Engliſh, He deſcended into Hel; is as cleane contrary
to the Greek, which is our ground herein, as black is to
white: and as we take Hell, therein we deny our Lord to
be the holy one of God, and our foregoer into joy: for he
hath ſayd, that none ſhall paſſe from the damned, to Abraham.
And if we be found to haue contrarie rules of fayth,
God will judge us wicked, for profeſſing as Trueth matter
diſagreable.
               The mainteyners of the tranſlation, He deſcended to Hell,
ſhould be forced to revoke that, and the high ſcholars to
tranſlate it aright. And as holy Matrons, many of old
were prophets, & openly did good, ſo alwayes they ought
to know the truth: and to require where they may, the
contrarie to be removed.
               
                  The wicked will be wicked ſtill: and no wicked will underſtand:
But the wiſe will underſtand.
               
               
                  H. B.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Faults eſcaped in the printing.
            Page 3. line 18. and in other place
                  •
                for povvre, read povver. Page 11. line 4.
for 
                  〈…〉
                Page 17. line 4. for holden, read holding.
            
            
         
      
   