
      
         
            
            A Defence of the Booke entitled A Cōcent of Scripture, for amendment of former Athean moſt groſſe, and Iudaique errours, which our tranſlations and notes had:
            Againſt the libel, ſcoffing a Scottish miſt: and ſlaundering that the Iewes Epiſtle ſent from Byzantian Rome, was a forged worke, and not in deed ſent thence.
            By HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
            1609.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A PETITION TO THE KING TO HASTEN ALLOWance for Ebrew INSTITVTION of Ebrevves.
            
               YOVR Majeſtie, gracious King, being moved the laſt winter by a letter, for allowance to open the New Teſtament in Ebrew by Thalmudiques, to ſatisfy Iewes deſire, and Turkes expectation, ſayd readily, as Syr Th. Overbury told, you would give 500. poundes annuitie that way: that I leaft D. Bilſon and your Bishops all. Becauſe my age fleeth, I humbly requeſt ſo much ſone to be performed: and I will beſtow every ſicle upon Moſes tabernacle: and after the firſt payment, never medle with your BB. Yf Banecroft can kepe himſelf ſo ſilent, as doth D. Bilſon; who is a thouſand times of oftener reading in Ebrew and Grek then he. But yf Banecraft his wit, as Phaeton, cannot rule his high ſeat, your highnes cannot be offended, yf the thunderbolt of a pen ſtrik all his wittes out of his brain. I ſhewed

in my former Ebrew bookes quietnes for all chriſtians: and ſo I would goe forwards; but yf Banecroft joyne with Iewes, I will ſone tel your LL. of him: & yet go forward with Ebrewes, to ſatiſfy, as hitherto the beſt learned in the world, & to my power, increaſe the honour of your Kingdome, to the glory of God, & bleſſing of your familie.
            
               Your Majeſties moſt humble ſubject Hugh Broughton
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORDS OF HIS MAIESTIES most honorable privey Counſell.
            I have ſet forth (Right Honorable) ſundry bookes, inſtitutions for 
                  〈◊〉
                was in our Chriſtianity. Two, of Epiſtles, printed afore A. D. 1599. and the one in ſeaven languages. The other Arch. VVh
                  •
                cauſed to be tranſlated. The matter of them I need not to tell. An other work is but part Ebrew: in a commentary vpon Eccleſiaſtes: & that is tranſlated ſo much as in Engliſh might be. An other

is joyned in argument▪ th
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                family ended in the Kinge
                  •
                and th
                  ••••
                Nathans was afflicted: even unto the afflicting of our Lord: and of Chriſtian
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊◊〉
               . That, I have tranſlated into Greeke: and into Latin for Europe. And I think that no Romiſt, or Law of England wil blame any poſition of it. An other is altogeather againſt the Iewes, for diſturbing the holy ſtory wilfully, that the redēption tyme ſhould not appeare. That work neded not to be tranſlated for England: becauſe I opened every poſition of it to England afore. All theſe bookes I made for the honor of the King: that all Iewes and Gentiles bettered by them, ſhould pray for the King and the Kinges children. And them I commend to your Lordſhipes care, to be regarded according to the ſage honour of his Majeſties governement.
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt humble▪ Hugh Broughton.
            
         
      
   