
      
         
            
            
            AN
APOLOGIE
IN BRIEFE ASSERTIONS
DEFENDING THAT
our Lord died in the time properly
foretold to Daniel.
            For ſatisfaction of ſome ſtudentes in
both Ʋniuerſities.
            H. BROVGHTON.
            
            LONDON,
Imprinted by WILLIAM KEARNEY
dwelling within Creeple-gate.
1592.
         
         
            
            
            To the right noble Lord, Sir Peregrine
Bertye Knight, Lord
of VVilloughby and Eresby.
            
               
                  ARiſtotle the wittie philoſopher
(right Honorable) noteth, that as
the eyes of Battes are affected towardes
the light in the day: ſo is the minde of
our ſoule to thoſe things, which of Nature
are verie manifeſt.
            That appeareth in all our ſtudies: wherein, after manie
yeeres paines, we get but that which in the ende we
ſee to haue been cleere in the firſt, if our eyes had been
opened to behold them: and finde that we may ſoone
ſhewe vnto others, manifolde obſcure points quicklie,
which our ſelues were long in ſearching.
            Your Lordſhip by experience in my ſtudies, may bee
a fit example herein. For, whereas I ſpent manie yeeres
labour in ſearching the Concent of holy Writers, which
haue penned for vs the Booke of Truth, cleering the
Prophecies vnto their euents, through the right Famylies
and courſe of times, and to compell other Hebrewes
and Greekes to ſerue them: your Lordſhip learned after
little direction, that which I could not finde in paines of
long continuance: and that no leſſe for Scripture, than
for old Heathen ſtories.
            And euen as I was long in contriuing of them into an
order, which ſoone might haue been ſeene: ſo others, in

ſtudie my Ancients, of great fame and deſert, for matters
triable by ey-ſight (and thereupon euident vnto all,
who will reſt vpon Gods authoritie) either will not, or
can not ſee that, which now I beholde as cleere as the
Sunne in his greateſt brightnes: and I knowe that your
Lordſhip doth no leſſe.
            Yea, who would not be our ſuretie? when the ſtriuer
is confuted with the verie title of the Defence, THAT
CHRIST our Lord died in the time properly foretold
to Daniel. Alſo, who would not acknowledge the
weaknes of mans minde, when this Apologie is found
extreamely needfull, for satisfaction of ſome Students
in both Vniuerſities? One learned man of the one Vniuerſitie
told mee, that an aduerſarie had turned all againſt
mee, all of all degrees: in ſo cleere a caſe, that hee
preſently was driuen to yeeld vnto mee, as ſoone as he
heard the proprietie for which wee ſtroue. For when I
told him of Gabriels prophecie, I asked him, whence the
time muſt be counted, and whether? He ſaid, from the
ſpeaking, and vnto our Lord his death. I bad him tell
their D. that he muſt doo ſo too. So he doth, ſo he yeeldeth
vnto mee, ſo our cauſe had been determined by the
ſtriuer, if the blindnes of ſome had not ben meruailous:
who hauing loſt their hold, (not three daies before they
perceiue it, as the Babylonians) but three yeeres, yet triumph
of a victorie: ſo that ſome of the other Vniuerſitie,
began a little to triumph with them. Hereupon this
Apologie I write in defence of my ſelfe, of Daniell the
wiſe, of Gabriel the angell, and of mine Aduerſarie, againſt
himſelfe: that the middle ſpace cannot by religion,
learning, arte, or wit, be holden vncertaine: neither
hath he Heathen concent anie thing worth, but in the
parts deſpiſed, by all Writers vpon the Prophetes and Apoſtles,
and alſo by prophane Greekes, the moſt ancient,

and the lateſt. Theſe two poynts end the controuerſie.
I commend to your Lordſhippes protection my cauſe:
which (I thinke) ſhall more neede authoritie, than skill
to defend it. Art careth not for the manie of Aduerſaries:
yet to bridle manie ſtriuers vnſeaſonable and
vnreaſonable, authoritie of high perſonages,
(who priuately maye deale) is now
for mee ſpecially requiſite.
            
               Your Honours to commaund:
Hugh Broughton.
            
         
         
            
            The Autor to the Reader.
            
               TOuching the iudgement of thoſe Diuines,
which I cyte, for their expoſition of Daniels
prophecie, it were long to bring their whole
ſtyle: the ſumme is this, That from the end
of the Babylonian captiuitie, the firſt ſeauen
muſt be reckoned: and the laſt hath
in it our Lords death. With that mure aduerſarie once agreeeth:
yet goeth againſt himſelf, ſaying, that the Angel meant
no certaine time: and that 107. yeeres are betwixt the returne,
and the building of the Temple. 75. more than I
hold, and 5, leſſe thence to Tiberius than I make. The whole I
make 70. ſeauens, and ſtand to that: he once 70. and againe 80.
and againe a number vncertaine: which he thinketh, that Olympiades
can bring to certaintie of, not 490. yeeres, but 560.
preciſely. And he thinketh for this to diſanul the common iudgments
of Iewes and Greekes vppon the Scripture: and that
accompts from Olympiades with Romanes and Chaldeans
can make his cauſe good. This I am to ouerthrow, by that wit,
learning, and religion, vtterly forbid to hold vncertainty, where
the limits be certain in Daniel for our Lords redemption. And
that particulers from the Prophets, holden of Church and Synagogue,
as I doo, are holden aright; and that prophane teſtimonies
faile him. In handling prophane teſtimonies: The fall of
Troy, Olympiades, Cyrus Monarchie, Xerxes warre, Lyſanders,
Alexanders: the diſtaunces of theſe I am driuen to
handle, & proue that in all theſe, euen faithles Greeks diſproue
them, whom mine aduerſarie followeth: and alſo they whom he
moſt alloweth, do him vtterly confute. He reading among men
yong in yeres, yonger in theſe ſtudies, and not putting in print
his Lectures: I entered abruptly into the cauſe, to meete with
ſtriuers, haſtie to broach ſtreames of errors.
         
      
      
         
            
            A DEFENCE OF I. CALVIN,
our notes vpon the Geneua Bible, Emmamanuel
Tremelius, Matthew Beroaldus, Henrie
Wolphius, and Romists yeelding vnto them, Gilbert
Genebrard, and others: for the beginning,
ending, and certeintie of Daniels ſeauens, conteined
in Gabriels ſpeech, the key of the old
Testament, by H. B. of the ſame
opinion in Conc. Ser.
            
               
                  THeir beginning is ſo cleare by the Text,
that the ſharpeſt aduerſarie is driuen to
grant this for their beginning, as followeth:
Quod ad rationes attinet è ſcriptura
ſacra, etſi mihi quidem maximè videatur
rationi eſſe conſentaneum, ut verbum exiſtimetur
id ſignificare quod verſibus ſuperiorib. Gabriel commemorat,
verbum Iehouae eiuſque decretum, uti explicauimus:
quoniam tamen referri poteſt ad illud tempus quores ipſa
implenda fuit, non tamen quo primum enuntiata eſt, idcirco
relinquatur nobis liberum, ut potuiſſe iudicemus id tempus
deſignari, quo Cyrus Iudaeis libertatem conceſſurus erat
è Babilonica captiuitate redeundi, & instaurandi Hieroſolyma.
Pag 150. Taken out of a Lecture booke written.
            
            And alſo this much for the ending of them: Septuaginta
ſeptimanis completis exciſus eſt Chriſtus. A man
would haue thought, that he who was driuen to graunt
ſuch a carefull limitation for beginning & ending, ſhould
not ſeeke an impoſſibilitie for a greater ſpace in the middle
partes than the whole is.
            
               
               Notwithſtanding his ſtrife is againſt Art, himſelfe,
Daniel, all men, and againſt an Angell, in theſe wordes:
Si Angelus dixiſſet poſt octies ſeptuaginta annos excidetur
Chriſtus, hic quidem praeciſe & proprie loquutus eſſet Angelus:
quoniam preciſe ab eo tempore interceſſerunt anni 560.
            
               This is farre worſe: Conſtat per ſynecdochen certum numerumpro
incerto poni, ita in hoc ipſo Danielis loc reſtatiam
nobis confirmandum: non poſſe praeciſe intelligi annos 490: ſed
alium aliquem numerum, incertum per certum. Firſt take
this much againſt his vncertainty, for propriety. Afterwardes
againſt his account of 560. yeres.
            
            1 The proprietie of Scripture whereupon actions of
men muſt be altered through all the worlde, is ſurer than
heauen and earth, which ſhall paſſe: but it ſhall not.
            2 He that granteth an Antichriſtian, that the fulnes
of time for redemption, differeth 70. yeres from the Angels
ſpeech, turneth the proprietie of Scripture againſt
our faith, and ſhaketh Gods word: whereby prophaneneſſe
onely will beare ſway, and the Goſpell ſhall be nothing
worth.
            3 He maketh the Angell a greater deceauer than euer
Apollo was: ſpeaking ſo, that of two thouſande
yeres none euer, Iew nor Gentile vnderſtoode him vntill
1590. in a matter touching a principle of faith.
            4 He maketh Daniel not to vnderſtande his owne
prophecie: who yet ſaith, he vnderſtoode, and that the
Angel came to teache him knowledge: and profeſſedly
confuteth Daniels meaning. He ſhould haue found vpon
his victorie farre more glorie, if he had plainely tolde his
hearers, that he would teach Daniel better to vnderſtand
the Angel: though he told them not obſcurely in diſputing
that Daniel vnderſtood it not: and granteth or muſt
grant that Daniel thought it properly ſpoken: and ſo is
the prophet of mine opinion and with me confuted.
            
               
5 The charge to vnderſtand Daniel Math. 24. were
in vaine for a time indefinite: for ſtill the mind would be
vnquiet, if 70. yeares before the worde required, that all
things ſhould be performed.
            6 Seauen in a trope ſignifieth many: ſo ſeauenty ſeauen
muſt ſignifie an exceeding great number. So extreamitie
of Iudaiſme ſhoulde be eſtabliſhed. For the Iewes
looke yet for Chriſt to come, and hold him bad that preſcribeth
a time.
            7 The ceremonies haue no warrant from expreſſed
wordes, when they ſhoulde ende: but cleane contrary,
are long to continue, for any word of prophet, if Gabriels
ſpeech be indefinite.
            8 It were in vaine to lay downe ſo exact a Chronicle
from Adam to Cyrus, that Iewes or Gentiles of olde
haue rightly helde thoſe yeares plainely, the learned of
them, if from Cyrus to Chriſt, where moſt neede was, a
certaine ſpeech ſhoulde be vttered, but an vncertaine
meaning left, and no Scripture handle the cauſe.
            9 Iewes and Gentiles hitherto vnderſtood Gabriel
in proprietie: and a ſmall Librarie wil affoord a hundred
ſeuerall writers witneſſes hereof.
            10 The deadly enemie Aben Ezra granteth, that the
time is from the word to Daniel, vntil the Meſſiah is ſealed:
and alſo that it is 490. yeares.
            11 The Phariſees might haue obiected Scripture againſt
Chriſt, Matth. 16. touching the time, if it had not
properly fallen out: when our Lord doth blame them for
not knowing the time.
            12 Herod had not feared: nor the ſage Magy come to
Ieruſalem: nor after, Andrew, the Samaritans, and they
Luk. 19. Act. 2. or they that were in Barcozbas daies, looked
for a Meſſias: but by Scripture. If proprietie had bin
caſt off 70. yeares further, ſome ſimple, 70. yeres ſooner

would haue looked for Chriſt. But none did.
            13 Auctor Chazon Moed and Barbinel ſhould iuſtly
accuſe all Chriſtians of extreame ignorance in this text,
if all haue bin deceaued, who thought that Gabriel limited
the time for Chriſt.
            14 To part an indefinite time, reaſon can not ſuffer,
and no author euer went about: therefore it paſſeth reaſon
to make not onely the ſeauentie ſeauens vncertaine,
but the 7. alſo, the 62. alſo, the one alſo in his two partes.
            15 Daniel knew before Gabriel came to him euerie
point of that which the angel ſpake of, ſauing the time
when our Lord ſhould dye. Wherefore either that is it
which he taught him: or he ſpake vntruly in promiſing
to teach him knowledge.
            Concluſion. Seauentie ſeauens of errours may be obiected
againſt the inuentor of that opinion: wherefore it
muſt be aboliſhed.
            
               Obiections of aduerſaries.
               1 The 400. yeres Gen. 15. are not exact: ſo Gabriels
yeares, may be taken for a number vncertaine.
               2 Likewiſe the 300. yeares Iud. 11.
               3 Alſo the time of the three dayes, and three nights
tolde by our Lord for being in the graue, are not iuſt ſo
fully.
               4 Likewiſe many expoūd the Angel as in his commentary
or ſecond ſpech, cutting of his laſt ſeauen in the
middle, and ſome of the aboue named ſo do: therfore it
is not preciſely. 490. yeares.
               5 As autor Concentus maketh the three yeres and
halfe which are in Apoc. 13. to be ſpoken by a ſynecdoche:
ſo may Gabriels ſeauens be.
            
            
               Anſwers.
               The firſt is exact, and alwayes hath ſo ben taken, from

ſince Iſmael perſecuted Iſaak, vntil the departure from
Egipt: yeares preciſely 400.
               Moreover, if by a prophet from the old teſtamēt any
could proue it contrould, he ſhould helpe himſelfe nothing:
for God by propriety ſhoulde tel what he meant,
and give warrant for a trope.
               So the ſpech of Iephte for the. 300 yeresis controld by
Scripture, and was ſuch as the cauſe required. For wheras
the king of Ammon complained of iniury done at the
comming from Egipte, not knowing, or not regardinge
the. 40. yeares continuance in the wildernes, it had ben a
curioſitie for Iephte to be quarreling for that which nothing
altered the pley: and ſo he ſpeaketh of the time
from their owne ſuppoſition. 305. it was. But who in that
caſe woulde be trifling for the od fiue.
               For the three dayes, and three nightes, the Euangeliſts
make the meaning plaine, ſhewing that the ſixt day
our Lord was buried, and aroſe the firſt day.
               The fourth obiection is twiſe faulty. For it woundeth
the obiecter more ſharpely. For if the angel ſaid 490.
yeres ſauing three yeares and an halfe, he calleth to a
moſt ſtraight reckoning.
               Moreouer, how can he make vp 560. preciſely, if the
angel cut of three yeres & an halfe. But that the angel in
his commentarie croſſed not his owne text, many lerned
old and new ſhew: and to ſtriue for ſuch quirkes it is no
grauitie. The vſe of the text is to ſhew the time of redemtion
expreſsing a redeemer. If men further will contend,
the Church of God hath no ſuch cuſtome.
               Laſtly if the 3. yeres & half & Gabriels ſeauens be equal
concerning trope & propriety: by a conſequent the
Pope ſhuld be freed frō being Antechriſt: by the general
teſtimony of writers, that hold Daniels ſpech to be proper:
& ſo a learned mā that ſo thinketh by his owne voice
ſhuld diſgrace his learned works writtē againſt the Pope.
            
         
         
            
            THAT THERE WAS NO
cauſe why 560. yeares ſhould be imagined
betwixt the deliuerance by Cyrus, and
the death of our Sauiour.
            
               For the whole time.
               
                  IF twentie from Nathan to Salathiel, &
much the like in Salomons houſe: for
that Ezekias might haue been a grandfather,
at Manaſſes birth: if theſe two
houſes had but 430. yeares, for twenty
or as twentie: the twentie in Sainct Luke from Zororobabel,
by all likelihoode can not without warrant from
God come ſo farre, as to make vp Daniels 490. yeares,
much leſſe 560.
               If twentie can hardly bring vp ſo much: much leſſe
would an heathen gather from ten Matth. 1. ſo much, by
ordinarie courſe: none can affirme anie omitted.
            
            
               For the Perſians 130. yeres.
               The fiue generations (from Ioſua excluded) vnto Iaddue
by common ſucceſſion, hardlie make vp one hundred
and thirtie, much leſſe may mans counters ſummon
them to double, almoſt.
               And if Nehemiahs gonernement and Sanballats open
dealing ſaw the whole 5. that are after Ioſua: it is ſtrange
that his gouernment ſhould be longer than all theirs, in
ſo ſmall recordes of doings.
               Nehemiah, by all Ebrewes and Greekes, and all that
read the Bible as ſufficient in it ſelf, is the ſame Ez. 2. Ne. 1.

So he muſt ſee all the Perſian times. For Iaddue who met
Alexander and Darius the laſt of Perſian Monarchs is in
his booke chap. 12. 22. and his owne dealinges againſt
Manaſses brother to Iaddue ſonne in lawe to Sanballat,
who ſaw Alexanders warres. Ioſeph. 11. ant. 7. & 8. conferd
with Neh. 13. 28.
            
            
               Obiection.
               Bellarmine the Ieſuite from Beda, ſaith that Nehemia
                     •
                  
numbreth the high Prieſts vnto Iaddue, becauſe he touched
the infancie of Iaddue, who was aged when he met
Alexander.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               1 Manaſſes the younger brother of Iaddue, marying
Sanballats daughter cauſed Nehemias troubles: therfore
he ſaw their mans age.
               2 He ſaw alſo Darius Codomanus. N. 12. euen by the
confeſſion of M. F. Iunius.
            
            
               An other obiection in Wolphius vpon Nehemias.
               It may be that ſome after Nehemias death wrote the
catalogue of thoſe high Prieſts.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               1 We ſhoulde not imagine one worke to be of two
auctors, though Deut. 33. hath the laſt eight verſes written
after Moſes death: by Ioſue Baua Batra pag. 15. or
ſome other. For there euident mention of death went afore,
but no ſuch thing is here.
               2 Alſo that of Darius and Manaſſes, doth aunſwer
him. And thus Nehemias age controlleth all that extend
the Perſians rule vnto two hundred yeres and more: and
grant him borne at the firſt returne, as all antiquitie, and
the late that I know, do, ſauing one or two.
            
            
               
               A third obiection.
               Nehemias placed third amongſt the names expreſsely
named (Ezr. 2. 2.) is not he who is neere in gouernment,
Neh. 1. & of that the Geneua notes auctoritie might haue
warned. For that Nehemias was young, as circumſtances
proue: ſpecially that he knewe not that Ieruſalem
was deſtroied.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               1 It is ſtrange that Nehemias a Iewe, wittie and
learned, coulde be ignoraunt of Moſes, Eſay, Micheas,
Ieremie, Ezekiel, Obadias, Pſalm. 137. Daniel:
whoſe praier he ſo expreſſely followeth touching Ieruſalem:
of Cyrus decree, of Zor
                     •
                  babels companie, of
Ezras, and after fiftie thouſande returned to their countrie,
ſhoulde not know that. A childe ſeauen yeares olde
hardly would haue beene ſo ſimple. Marke what ſtrange
expoſitions a falſe Chronicle breedeth.
               2 All circumſtances proue him aged: his heauineſſe
of foure moneths for Ieruſalem: his office of truſt for the
kings life: his policie: yeelding an idean of a politician.
               3 The notes on the Bible dedicated to her Maieſtie,
as they now ſtand proue the contrarie: and vtterly reſiſt
the citer of them. So vnleſſe Romiſtes and Proteſtantes,
and the olde fathers will reſiſt their owne ſelues: Nehemias
wil driue them all to condemne the Greeke ſuppoſed
agreement of Chronicle: and to followe Gabriels.
For what a vanitie and vexation of ſtudie, hath it wroght
among men that would ſeeme to commend Scripture as
plaine? To what inconſtancie hath it driuen men: to
make their owne writings to croſſe themſelues: and to
wreſt Scriptures, beyonde all reaſon of common iudgement.
            
            
               
               Of Ezra.
               A like ſtrength to the cauſe bringeth Ezra. Ebrewes,
Greekes. Latines all commonly, vnleſse ſome one forget
himſelfe, helde Ezra ſonne to Saraias; which was killed
when the temple was burnt. So he liuing nigh to their
laſt times, controulleth the ouerreachers by their owne
conſent.
               So do, Sal. Iarchi vpon 1. Chron. 5. Abrabbaneel vpon
Aggei: Rambam and zakuto in their ſucceſſions, & Megilah
in the Talmud maketh him ſuch: as Baruchs ſcholer,
& Simeony vpon Ezra named Neh. 12, from Talmud
Sanedrin, maketh him the Scribe: as nothing further
doubting. Athanaſius or other Greekes neuer moued anie
doubt. Latines more expreſſely mention it: as olde
Ierome, whome alſo H. Bullinger citeth▪ as Lyra, Lauater,
Pellican, Sixtus Senenſis, Tilemanus Stella, and Romiſtes,
in apparatu Bibliorum and vpon 2. King. 25. and
all who like of 4. Eſd. 3. Whereas none yet for that point
controll the auctor: none that I could heare of. Only the
Rabbin zakuto forgetting the text, maketh him ſonne to
Ioſedek, though in an other place he ſhewing how manie
of his anceſters Ezra omitted, placeth not Ioſedek
as one. And M. F. Iunius in priuat ſpeech with my ſelfe
(though hereby he ouerthroweth his cauſe and my aduerſaries
by his grant) maruelled that any woulde doubt
of it. For his death, whether we holde with them that
bring him to the Perſians end of Monarchie (as they do,
who either make him to be Malachie, or to write Nehemias
ſtorie) or to dye ſomewhat ſooner: we neede not
to ſtriue for the extremitie of his olde age.
            
            
               
               Obiection againſt that Eſra ſhould be
properly ſonne to Saraias.
               The terme ſonne may be for any poſterity: and Eſra i
                     •
                  
                  
                     
                        •
                     bnepos to Saraias: that is in the fifte deſcent from him.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               1 He is very ſimple in deede, & knoweth not Chriſt
to be the ſonne of Dauid, who is ignorant how ſonne
may ſignifie any poſteritie. But we muſt hold the uſuall
ſignification of termes, vnles ſcripture driue us to ſeeke
others that be further of.
               2 It had ben a ſtrange dealing in Eſra to deriue Saraias
to Aaron. 1. Chro. 5. (who is knowen vp to Adam)
without omitting any one, if betwixt him and Saraias he
would ſo pen the matter, as to deceaue his owne nation
continually. Greekes alſo and alſo Latiniſtes commonly.
None heretofore euer thought him abnepotem Saraiae, nor
borne after the Captiuity.
               3 It can not agree with any mans nature, to haue him
in record next himſelfe, who is the firſt ſtaine of his houſe
if he had any betwixt to record. but to Efra Saraias was
ſuch, the firſt of his line that died in open wrath, therfore
he would neuer haue him next himſelfe, if any further
kinred were betwixt.
               4 The lerning and authority of Eſra argueth that he
was of that age; wherin ebrew was purely kept. For he
could not haue bin counted a principal man amongeſt ſo
many thouſandes, vnles in ebrew ſtudies he had bin of
the ebrew prophets education: as the talm
                     •
                  d maketh
him ſcholler to Barue, & the Iewes generall conſent holdeth,
and the Greekes with Latines much in the ſame

                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
Touching the obiection that as Eſra ouer ſkippeth in
one cataloge certen generations, (by Zacuto ſeauen, in
dede but ſix) ſo well he might omit ſome betwixt Saraias
and himſelfe, it may ſone be anſwered, that as the one
is ſure by a ſcripture, ſo ſhould the other haue bin, if any
ſuch matter were. but it is not. therfore I will no more
beleue any to be betwixt Saraias and Eſra, then betwen
theſe, Salmon, Booz, Obed, Ieſsai. Betwixt them, ſome
haue imagined ſome: none of accompte, any betwixt
theſe two.
            
            
               Obiection.
               Nehemias ſhould exceede common old age, and Ezra
ſpecially.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               Suppoſe Nehemias aged but twelue yeres: according
to Ioſephus recorde (antiq. 11. 4.) for the youngeſt in the
roules of the returned. So he might ſee Alexanders
warres vnder one hundred and fortie, younger then Galen.
Neither was that age anie where ſtraunge.Geſnerus out of Bale
                        •
                     . Dauid
Meneuenſis ſaw yeares one hundred fortie and fiue. A
Beuerley man of late was reported to dye at one hūdred
thirtie and fiue yeres, of whoſe age great examination by
great mē was ſaid to be had. Plinie recordeth many aged
betwixt a hundred thirtie and fiue, and a hundred and
fortie, found together in ſmall quarters of Italie. By Epimenides
of a hundred fiftie and ſeauen in Plinie, Phlegon,
Lucian, with Arganthonius of a hundred and fiftie,
in thē frō Anacreon and Herodotus, & M. Aponius well
knowne of that age in Plinie lib. 7. cap. 49. by them Ezras
caſe will not be ſtrange. For if prophane late matche
or paſſe Iſmaels old age: it ſhould not be thought ſtrange
that one as Ezra an other Moſes for law, ſhould for olde
age come neere Iſaakes yeares: when a prophecie from

God, zach. 8. 4 had promiſed that olde folke vſing ſtaues
in their handes, ſhoulde ſit in Ieruſalems ſtreetes. That
prophecie might warrant vs that ſome ſhould be found
verie aged. Through Europe a forged Philo hath long
ben receaued, cited in commentaries infinitely, in which
Mardochai is aged a hundred ninetie eight yeares. The
countries who receiued him ſhould not hold▪ Ezras yeres
ſtrange. Codomans imitatour that maketh Obed and
Ieſſai new fathers at a hundred ſixtie one, may not blame
this. But I ſee no neceſſitie why we may not thinke that
Ezra died ſome twentie or thirtie yeares before Alexanders
Monarchie, as I haue before handled: though for
the common opinion we place him in the laſt times of
the Perſians exactly. So his age ſhall haue no vnlikelihood
in it: euen to an heathen iudgement. And thus by
two good witneſſes the Perſians Monarchie is drawne
within the compaſſe of one hundred and thirtie yeares,
from the ſuppoſed two hundred or more.
            
            
               For the ſpace betwixt Cyrus and Aggai, prophecying:
that it is nothing neere 107.
               From the temple built vnto Tyberius his eighteenth,
D. R. hath fiue yeares leſse than I lay. That ſpace by our
agreements is paſt fauour to his part: wherefore the ſpace
betwixt Cyrus and Aggei remaineth to be tried. That it
is nothing neere 107. yeres, nor more than 32. weigh all
proofs, of coniectures manie, ſome ſurer and better ſtanding,
ſome demonſtrations may be ſeene.
               1 Mardochei is held then aliue, captiued with Ieconias:
ſo held al the milliōs of Ebrewes & Greeks, all that
our lād bred, all ſimple that are turned to the text: & that
proofe, or none, is enough, his age and his vncles daughter

ends the controuerſie. By my account he ſhoulde be
a litle elder than Daniel was the third of Cyrus.
               Bellarmine had rather grant him yeeres one hundred
ſixtie fiue than to deny him to be captiued: for which
point Paulus Burgenſis and Caietanus haue been continually
reiected which opinion is reuiued by Druſius,
Scaliger, Iunius and Pererius: but againe reiected of
later.
               Againſt that, for Romiſtes Bellarmin vpon Eſters
booke hath arguments acceptable: de verbo Dei.
               For Ebricians, theſe auctors cite the Iewes common
opinion, Talmud in Megilah, Midras Megilah, Aben
Ezra, Salomoh Iarchi, Ralbag, Maharam Garma. R. Eleazar:
Salomoh Ben Elkabez, Iacob ben Nahum, Geon,
Eliſai Galico, the large Chaldean paraphraſtes, all theſe
vpon Eſter: ſo Bochai vpon Exod. 17. bringing Mardochai
of Saul and Kis. None haue one ſyllable ſhewing
that any of their nation euer doubted whether Mardochai
were captiued.
               It can not ſtand with modeſtie to refuſe the vniuerſall
conſent of a nation, for iudgement in a narration in their
owne language, & of their owne common weale: whereof
yerely two thouſand yeeres they haue kept a remembrance
and continuall meditation in their common place
bookes and praier bookes.
               Theſe tranſlaters in the Latine tongue the beſt in Ebrew
skill, Munſter, Vatablus. Pagnin, with Montanus,
Boderianies, Raphelengius: Tremelius the moſt exquiſit
of anie, whom Iunius in the margent keepeth vnaltered:
and commentaries all that I haue ſeene, ſauing the
few aboue named: theſe cut of the doubt.
               So do manie Chroniclers, though to their owne whole
ouerthrow for the Perſians two hundred yeres or more:
mans teſtimonie is ſtrongeſt againſt himſelfe. Take theſe

Lucidus, Maſſaeus, Curio, Bucholcherus, Bunting, Bullinger,
Chytreus, Funſchius, Vignier, Schubert. Codoman:
all confeſse either in worde or ſo placing Mardochai,
as with Iechonias he might be captiued. When ſo
manie learned confeſse that wherby they fall: can one in
their companie proue that they confeſse erroneouſly?
               2 The returned built the temple. Ezra. 6. 14.
               3 The children which had been in captiuitie, prieſts
Leuites, and the reſt, celebrate the dedication. verſ. 16.
               4 Zorobabel and Ioſuah are expreſsely named returners
and builders: two in office together neuer were
107. yeares.
               5 Aggei (2. 4.) by the iudgement of all commenters
ſpake of man that had ſeene the former temple in age of
diſcretion, 90. yeares aged they ſhoulde be by mine account.
That I trow is enough, not 160. as for the obiection
that his ſpech is a wiſh, none euer had ſuch a ſpeech
in vre: as who of you: for O that one of you: a prouoker
ſhould not go againſt the whole ſtreame of learned.
               6 It can not ſtande with reaſon that God ſhoulde
bring 50000. home in fauour and of 107. yeres tell them
nothing of redemption, but delite in their ſonnes vnafflicted
for his truth: while yet ſucceſſion of prophets was
to continue. And the like breaking of was not ſince Adams
time: to haue times vnrecorded and without anie
action touching God.
               7 No Iew nor Gentil brake of the ſucceſſion of prophets
betwixt Samuel and Malachie: but from Daniel to
Aggei 107. yeares ſhould breake it of.
               8 The Ebrewes generally hold it but as 70. yeares
from Sedekias fall to Aggai. Abenezra goeth foureteene
yeares further as I doe. I neede not to regard Sadaias
vpon Dan. 9. iarring from all his owne nation. They be
followed by Greekes, Theophilus, Theodoretus, and

Clemens, daſhing therein the heathen accompts of Cyrus
and Cambyſes, held onely for a thing of toleration
in talke to Heathen, not of exactnes.
               9 S. Ierome alſo, and after him Latines full many,
follow the Ebrewes.
               10 He ſhould not pretend defence of antiquity, which
hath it more againſt him then I am.
               11 The whole tenor of Aggai argueth a ſpeech uttered
to the returned, rather then to a new age: as their
thinking that it was not time to build: and the famine
while they intermitted, and all ſcarcity, and ſuch: without
any one ſyllable betokening a new age.
               12 It were ſtrange that Aggai ſhoulde in fiue prophecies
four times record the day of the moneth: and
one day twiſe, if 2. of Darius ſhould be ſtragling, & haue
not any for to ioyne it to ſtory. But by the 20. making vp
50. from Cyrus it hath, a certaine ſumme: euen 32.
               Many learned rightlie marke and Ebrewes generallie
cited by Aben ezra vpon Ezra. 6. 14. that Darius and Artaxaſt
are the names of that king vnder whome Aggei
prophecieth and Ezra returneth: and who ſo thinke otherwiſe
will make a ſtraunge penning of Ezras ſtorie.
That being ſo holden, the troupes of them that ioyne
Artaxaſt his 20. to the 50. from Cyrus firſt, ſet his ſecond
at 32. of which point more ſhall be ſpoken hereafter.
And ſo Aggei conteineth as fit a ſpace both for the returned
from Babylon to be yet of actiuitie about his
temple, with their children alſo of iudgement and
ſtrength: as the men of middle age at the ſtarres appearing
when our Lord was borne, & with thē their children
of his age, might together ſee the temple of his bodie,
after two & thirtie yeres, raiſed vp. God chooſeth times
reaſonable, likely, and like: for his dealings: and eaſie in
ſtorie to be conſidered and remembred.
               
                  
13 When they built an altar a prophet was to teache
them from God:Talmud in Iebamoth. pag. 21. b. Abrabba neel flieth frō the Talmud to a fable of Ioſephus Ben Gorion: of fire hid and made like oyle: yet he diſdained to accomp
                        •
                     anie thing of the ſecond of the Machabees for his ſtrength vpon Aggei. howe without fire from heauen they
might ſacrifice, by ordinaire fire (I ſee no better opening
of that action) but in any record none haue we amongſt
them but Aggai and Zacharie, & Zacharie is called Naar,
a luſtie man or young man, which for one much aboue
fiftie would be a ſtrange ſpeech: ſo he ſhoulde be about
twentie at his comming home.
               14 Zacharie telleth of their fathers conſumed: which
to the returned may be ſpoken but not of the returned.
               15 Alſo the faſting for Ieruſalems deſtruction, and
the naming of the famous anger for the ſeauentie yeres,
that will admit none other ſenſe but the ſeauenty of captiuitie:
famous to be knowne by that generall name,
which if ſeauentie more had beene paſt, it had beene an
vnfit ſpeech: that was miſtaken by antiquitie to be ſeauentie
from Sedekias, and all circumſtances might agree
well with the eighteene yeeres ſince Cyrus, as Ebrewes,
Greekes and Latines gueſſed, but that a flat Scripture
calleth for thirtie two yeres: eighteene more making vp
fiftie.
               16 The people were generally ſo tractable vnder
Aggai and zacharie as neuer any ſuch number: and ſuch
as captiuitie might well be thought to tame.
               17 As Laertius noteth that Epimenides was fiftie &
ſeauen yeeres a ſleepe. So here all Iuda ſhall be longer a
ſleepe, without any one ſillable in record, what any one
doth all the while: by the hundreth and ſeauen yeres.
               18 Nehemias demaunded in what caſe they were
at Ieruſalem which were the remnant of the captiuitye:
in the 20. yeare of Artaxerxes. wherfore the ſpace thence
to Cyrus was ſuch as mans age from the captiuity might
yet fuffer ſome good ſort aliue.
               19 If Ieruſalem had bin vnwalled aboue 120. yeares,

Nehemias would not, as he did, take a ſodaine griefe, for
ſo ſtale a matter. But for ſeauen ſeauens now ending, and
touched by Gabriel for the building of Ieruſalem, he
might by iuſt lykelihoode take a griefe.
               It was neuer found in anie auctour, that an whole being
laid downe, partes ſhoulde be ioyned to in quantitie
iuſtly making vp the whole: and yet ſhoulde not belong
to that matter, but to an other. Wherefore the Angels
partition of ſeuen ſeuens, ſixtie two, & one: from the going
foorth of the word vnto building of Ieruſalem, and
thence vnto our Lordes healtie paſſion, muſt not onelie
make vp the whole, but muſt haue ſome cleere reaſon
for the firſt and laſt part: otherwiſe the partition had bin
without iudgement. But for the laſt part: a defender in
common conſent is needleſſe: wherefore the troubler
of the firſt part ſhould ſeeme troubleſome, againſt art.
               20 That Nehemias had relation to Gabriel for building
of Ieruſalem (for which worke ſeauen ſeauens are
ſet a parte Dan. 9.) the whole imitation of Daniels prayer
which Nehemias followeth, more then euer Virgil
followed Homer, or Tully Demoſthenes, that imitation
maketh plaine, that to Daniels Chronicle he had relation.
               21 No other reaſon can be rendred, why 49. yeares
ſhould be ſpoken of alone Dan. 9. but for the time of the
chiefe worke for building Ieruſalem: and ſo much is grā
                  ted
by many, as by Maiſter Scaliger himſelfe, who yet
can not ſee howe from that partition to make vp the
whole ſumme of Daniels foure hundred and ninetie
yeeres.
               22 The 46. yeares Ioh. 2. for building the temple,
which was begon in the firſt, and hindered in the third of
Cyrus▪ fitly agreeth with this accompte. For Nehemias
finiſhed great workes about the temple: and it is doubtles

that the rancorous Iewes which for a four yeres continued
worke, bring 46. to cauſe our Lord his ſpeech
hatefull, woulde omitte no whit that touched the Temple,
               23 Aben Fzra vpon Dan. 9. he the deadlieſt enemy
for Chriſte ſo caſteth the time: and ſaith that he had record
of Perſians for that time.
               24 Ioſephus likewiſe in Euſebius Demon. 8. hath the
like time: whom Clemens following, againſt his account
for the ſeconde of Darius, giueth 49. yeeres to the laſt
building of the temple. Cedrenus alſo muſt ſo be conſtrued:
or to ſpeake nothing.
               Clemens can not otherwiſe make theſe words reaſonable:
That in ſeauen ſeauens the Temple was built, it is
manifest: for that is written in Ezra. Nowe what Oedipus
coulde euer gather that from Ezra, but by referring
Nehemias ſadnes to Daniels ſeauen ſeauens: and thereby
gathering the chronicle of Ezra? And it appeareth by
him that this was a common opinion in his age: otherwiſe
no man can ſee by anie particulars in him howe to
bring that about.
               25 Moreouer Cedrenus citing Ioſephus for 480. yeres
thence to the ruine of the temple, ſheweth how in loſeſephus
daies this account was receaued.
            
            
               Obiections.
               Why admit I not Ioſephus for further times: agreeing
with heathen?
            
            
               Anſwer.
               Becauſe when hee writeth in Greeke he will often
ſpeake as common prophane Greeks record: yet cloſely
in certeine places will ſhew what he meant: but if Ioſephus
teſtimonie may ſerue, the cauſe is ended. For he
maketh Nehemiah to be of the captiued.
            
            
               
               Obiection againſt Cedrenus.
He is of as great authoritie as Legenda aurea.
Anſwer.
               The ſimpler the man is and in a matter of difficultie agreeth
with Scripture againſt him ſelfe for other places,
the more it appeareth that others better learned left vnto
his handes a tried account, or ſheweth how the angels
wordes brought that about, which otherwiſe mans vncertainty
woulde hardly haue found out: and I dare beleeue
Cedrenus and Ioſephus, if Daniel and Gabriel be
their ſurety before 185000. Chaldeans or Olympiques, of
whoſe vanitie we will ſpeake anone.
               That none ſhuld thinke it aboue the ſpace of a Iubilie
from Cyrus firſt to Nehemias gouernment: twelue men
of twentie two returned with Zorobabel liuing to Nehemias
gouernement, will bring a reaſonable proofe.
Theſe be the men, chiefe men in the ſacrificers courſes.
Firſt Seraiah. Seconde Amariah. Third Malluc. Fourth
Chattaſh. Fifth Shebania. Sixth Charim. Seaueth Meremoth.
Eighth Ginnethon. Ninth Abia. Tenth Miamin. Eleuēth
Bilgai. Twelfth Shemaiah. By a iury of ſuch twelue
men ſoone might it be tried, whether it could well be aboue
fiftie yeeres that Iuda ſhoulde be at home hindered
without the poſſeſſion of a walled citie. Their ſonnes &
more continuing in their office thence vnto Darius the
laſt, and luſtie Sanballat hauing a daughter a matche for
Iaddues brother, theſe may make all agree with Maiſter
Scaliger: and M. Iunius my aduerſaries: now my partners
for the reſt of the Perſians times, that it can not be anie
longer than I make it. Hereby it appereth that not the third
part of 107. are frō Babels fal to the erection of the temple: nor
aboue one Iubelie to Nehemias gouernment 18. yeres later.
               
               And thus much for arguments out of Scripture, ſome

I brought touching Heathen, as Anaxandrides, Polycrates,
Epimenides and other ſucceſſions of liues. Them I
wil cleere more brightly. Alſo I ſpake againſt the credit
of the prophane Greeks, & Olympiades, & Chaldeans, &
therein of Chronicle from Romes antiquity, which hereafter
I will purſue: and confute ſome others alſo.
            
            
               Of Anaxandrides and Leonidas.
               In Sparta Anaxandrides is of Croeſus age: his couragious
ſonne Leonidas fighteth againſt Xerxes, examine
the diſtance, and firſt ſtories. Thales Alyattes, Laby-net
or Nabu (cad) net are of one age. Croeſus Anaxandrides
and Ariſton alſo in Sparta ſetled in the kingdome.
Therefore ſome thirtie yeares might well be ſpent betwixt
that & Babels fall. Now at Xerxes wars, Demaretus
ſonne of Ariſton was yet ſo young that he could trauell
to Perſia, and Leonid as a luſtie ſouldier.
            
            
               Obiection.
               They might beget them in their olde age, and they
might alſo be old.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               Strange ſhifts for ordinarie examples are needeleſſe.
            
            
               Of Polycrates.
               Polycrates wealth he was Amaſis frende in Socrates
old age, was granted Iſmenias. Plat.
            
            
               Obiection.
               That Polycrates was a Theban by Suidas, not of Samos:
nor the man familiar with Amaſis.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               If Suidas fragmentes may ſerue in Anacreon, the Samian
Polycrates flouriſheth 108. yeeres after Cyrus

beginning. Wherefore Cyrus muſt ſpende muche of his
time before Baltaſars death: and ſo by Suidas the concluſion
ſhall come to the ſame paſſe, by Polycrates the
Samian, whether plato meant, it may be doubted.
            
            
               Of Epimenides in Laertius.
               Epimenides antiquitie matcheth Solons, which may
by great argument touch Nabucadnezars. If his olde age
reach vnto Nicias of Niceratus, who was kild in the Peloponneſian
waries: the ſpace from Babels fall to Nicias
can hardly be more than I caſt it.
            
            
               Obiection.
               It may be Laertius was deceaued.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               For the record he ſhould hardly be, ſeeing for it as famous
Theopompus is cited not only by him, but alſo by
Plinie, by Phlegon, and by Lucian. Moreouer Gnoſij giuing
him three hundred yeares of life, confirme the other
opinion. I grant him one hundred and fiftie by my
limites, by the ſame limites the prophane account will
make him drawe toward three hundred: ſo this ſheweth
that Theopompus ſeemed to ſpeake vpon ſome great report.
            
            
               Other ſucceſſions of liues.
               From Dropides brother to Solon of Ioſias time are
deſcentes: Critias, Calaeſchrus, Critias one of the thirtie
tyrantes after the end of Peloponneſian warres. Without
great reaſon we can not giue aboue two and twenty
yeres or thereabouts to a ſucceſſion, as ſhewes Euſebius
by common courſe of Examples. Therefore this example
of Platoes kinred may pacifie the ſtrife. The verie
ſame which my learned aduerſarie brought againſt
me.
            
            
               
               Of Apryes, Amaſis, Pythagoras, Lyſis,
and Epaminondas.
               Apryes (Chophra in Ier. 44.) reigned in the eight of
Nabucadnezar. Clem. 1. ſtrom, and Marianus Scotus. Amaſis
ſucceedeth him, with whome Pythagoras was familiar.
Lyſis was Pythagoras ſcholler, and he taught Epammondas:
in youth fellowe with Philip of Macedon.
who died but ſeauen and fortie yeeres olde. Iuſt. 9. he
that would haue aboue two hundred yeeres for fiue ſucceſſions,
whereof three ſeeme almoſt equalles, muſt ſeeke
for ſtrange corners to picke ſome colourable matter.
               From the ſame Apryes we may gather how, much of
Cyrus times were ſpent vnder the Babylonians. For
Cambyſes married Apryes daughter Herod. 2. ſhe would
haue been a verie ſtale maide for a Perſian Monarch, about
ſeauentie yeeres after her fathers reigne. Adde vnto
this, that in Herod. 1. Darius Hyſtaſpis was ſome twentie
yeeres aged when Cyrus went into Tomyris warres. betwixt
which and Babels fal Herodotus and others place
not much time. he liued in all but fortie and three yeeres
Creſ. Therefore after the taking of Babell about three
and twentie yeeres, would ende Cyrus, Cambyſes, and
Darius Hyſtaſpis reigne. where ſome haue ninetie and
three: for Cyrus, thirty & eight as Theophilus: for Cambyſes,
nineteene as Clemens 1. ſtrom. thirtie and ſix for
Darius, as Herodotus. And we differ but this much.
            
            
               Of Cyrus.
               If this ſerue not reaſonably, ſee whether Cyrus age
onely will not ende the controuerſie by the teſtimonies
of Greekes. Cyrus liued yeeres one hundred by writers
Aſſyriake, Perſike, Oneſicritus, Lucian in Macrob. About
ſeauen and twentie he was made General: as Xenophon

doth teach, vs to gather. 1. paed. he liued but three yeeres
after Babels fall. Seder Olam. Scaliger, Iunius, Schubert,
and Chytreus giueth him no ſole gouernment ouer Iuda.
So ſome ſeauentie yeres he ſhould ſpend in conquering
Eaſt and Weſt countries, whereof Cteſias recordeth manie
Eaſt, Herodotus manie Weſt. And as Daniel and he
died much neere in time, ſo ful wel they might be borne
neere in time. And this is agreeable to Gods comfort:
that ſendeth a medicine before the ſore: as Mardochai
prepared for Haman: ſo Cyrus, a comfort againſt Babel.
Medes & Perſians help Babel, as ſomwhat inferiors: & at
the laſt being victors plead that they were neuer vnder
thē
                  ▪ Wherby for the monarchs the ancient Greek writers
before Alexanders time count not Babylonians anie of
power but Aſſyrians: and Medes foure ages or leſſe: and
next the Perſians.Dionyſ. Halicar. 1. antiq. Now the Perſians reigned litle aboue
two hundred yeeres ſince ſubduing of the Medes, which
was in Cyrus firſt dealinges. Wherefore about ſeauentie
yeeres of two hundred for Perſians gouernment ouer the
Iewes may be ſubducted: and then our number of one
hundred and thirtie will pleaſe heathen.
               Lilius Giraldus, in treating of Poets: liues and placing
Darius Hyſtaſpis in Olympiad 80. ſheweth alſo muche
of the Perſian ſway, and the Babylonians to be ſoent together:
whereby heathen that ſkant heard of the Babylonians,
as I ſhewed, might well giue that time of Empire
to the Medes. in Strabo Nauocodroſor is likened to
Hercules▪ for conqueſt euen to Spaine: Geogr. 15▪ which
thing might well be done when thirteene yeeres his ſhips
beſieged Tyrns: that then Spaine rude and unarmed
might be ſomewhat viſited by his campes, yet Nabu
                     •••
                  
                  nezar
as a winged Lion▪ ſoone came vp: and by his ſeuen
yeres madnes was in ſuch diſgrace: that Greekes the babes
(as plato recordeth in Timmo) hauing not at home

in Solons age anie ſtorie of a graye heade, ſcant coulde
heare of anie great Empire Eaſtward of his. And Cteſias
who pleadeth Perſian court-rolles for his monumēts doth
paſſe ouer the Babylonians as vnheard of. This beeing
duely conſidered the Greekes will be frendes to me, for
old acquaintance: who of a childe was more acquainted
with them than with Latines: and will confeſſe that they
neuer meant to trouble me for the Perſians rule ouer the
Iewes: but to ſhewe what the Perſians in their glorie
claime, ſince Cyrus youth, and firſt ſucceſſe in warres.
If they will not ſtand with me thus: I will bewray them,
and ſhewe the worlde that commonly they deſerue but
ſuche credit as Epimenides their prophet and Paule our
Apoſtle giueth to the Cretes, that: Cretes are aey lyars.
            
            
               Of Greekes nullitie.
               I might diſgrace their ſkil for antiquity in their great
diuerſitie, for Homers age, who hauing written fortie
and eight books with mention of moſt townes in Grece:
yet hath halfe a ſcore of auncient writers differring ſome
foure hundred yeeres from others when he ſhoulde liue,
by gathering his diſtance from the warres of Troy,
which, Greeke diuines as Tatianus, Clemens Africanus,
Euſebius, ioine to Salomons times. But I will combat
with them touching matter moſt litigious in my caſe: for
their diuerſitie after Alexander ſonne to Amyntas of Darius
Hyſtaſpis age: which Alexander kild Darius Ambaſſadours
and was with Mardonius Xerxes Generall.
Him Perdiccas did ſucceede: of whom Thucidides writeth
that he died in the third yere of the Peloponneſian
warres. That Perdiccas reigned yeres by Nicomedes fortie
and one, by Theopompus thirtie and fiue, by Anaximenes
fortie, by Hieronymus eight and twentie, by Marſias
and Philochorus but three and twentie. This difference

citeth Athenaeus mentioned in a moſt learned aſſemblie
of men moſt ſkilfull in Greeke auctours. As was
Maſurius a Lawier, Monius a Poet, famous Plutarch,
Leonides Eleus, Aemylianus Mauruſius, and Zoilus a
moſt fine Grammarian. Alſo philoſophers manie: Pontianus,
Democritus and Philadelphus: Oratours manie,
with Vulpian that woulde not admit one worde
without authoritie. If theſe heathen Greekes of all countries
and profeſſions knewe no certeintie nor regarde
Grekes for their owne age: ſhould we to diſturbance of
all diuines reuiue their fame? Neuer by my conſent.
            
            
               An obiection from Thucidides.
               Thucidides an Athenian being aliue in the Peloponneſian
warres maketh it fall out fiftie after Xerxes wars:
he for ſo late times might ſee the truth. Thuc. bell. 1.
            
            
               Anſwer.
               M. Ioſeph Scaliger noteth that ſomtime writers ſpeake
againſt their owne knowledge touching times.In emend temp. Conceits
beſt knowne to them ſelues moue them. And Thucidides
might hope that his citie of Athens might in time be
thought a long ruler of Greece: and thereupon woulde
not ſticke to ſpare ſome vntruths. Or otherwiſe as men
buſied ſlippe muche in plaine matter, he might likewiſe.
And if all were granted him: yet from other partes ſo
much maie be ſubducted as we neede. But I will bring an
inſtance from the tripping of a greater man, for times
neere him. Plato is the man: euen the ſtatelieſt of all
Greeke prophane auctours.
               Athenaeus bringeth in one that checketh Plato for
mentioning, of Pericles death as paſt a litle tine while ago:
& of a matter in the ſame ſpeech done the laſt yeere

afore the telling, which yet was foure and twentie yeres
after Pericles death. If Piato was knowne to be ſo negligēt
in marking times, Thucidides alone hath no great
authoritie: againſt whome I will haue more, if I ſee occaſion
to examine by partes, Eratoſthenes account.
            
            
               Thucidides condemnation of Greekes.
               He blameth the Athenians as groſſe for report of late
and moſt famous matters of Athens: as not knowing
& miſtaking which of Piſiſtratus ſons was kild by Harmodius
and Ariſtogiton: yet they were kings in Athens.
Likewiſe he blames other Grecians for manie famous
preſent thinges, and not forgotten by reaſon of time: in
which (as touching kinges of Lacedemon) writers extreamelie
miſſed. There he laieth downe this ſentence:
That the moſt parte take no paines in ſeeking the truth:
And blameth euen hiſtoriques for fauouring acceptation
of the hearers more than the truth: amongſt whom, his
commēter noteth that he nipped Herodotus. We might
as well thinke him touched with the errours of his times.
            
            
               Pauſanias testimonie.
               He blameth them no whit leſſe. For this report he affoordeth
them: that Greeke recordes for the moſt part
differ one from an other: and for the moſt thinges
Greekes haue ſundrie opinions, in Arcad. pag. 280. and
Boeot. pag. 294. and Meſſen. pag. 112. of the Greeke printed
in 1584.
            
            
               Plutarchs testimonie.
               Plutarch in Solon ſheweth that Greeke Chroniclers
thought by reaſon of times difference that Solon coulde
neuer be with Creſus: whome he anſwereth that their
chronicall cannons coulde neuer be brought to agreement

(by anie thing commonly acknowledged) for all
the paines beſtowed in the kind.
               And in Numa he ſheweth that times gathered from
Olympionicae deſerue no credit.
            
            
               Continuall diſagreements.
               The differences betwixt Phaneas, Ephorus, Timeus,
Clitarchus, Eratoſthenes and Duris in Clemens Alexandrinus
from Trois fall that is from Salomons reigne vnto
Alexanders voiage, is tedious to be repeated. By Duris
it is one thouſande yeeres, whereof by Scripture about
410. are paſt by Nabucadnetzars reigne: and ſo by a
conſequent the Perſians ſhould reigne not one hundred
and thirtie yeeres, but aboue fiue hundred. So Greekes
haue from Adam to the flood in him two thouſande two
hundred fortie and eight, for one thouſande ſix hundred
fiftie and ſix, from Sem to Abraham one thouſande two
hundred and fiftie for foure hundred & fiftie, from Iſaak
to the partition of the land yeres ſix hundred & ſixteene
for foure hundred fiftie & two. Thence to Samuel foure
hundred ſixtie and three for three hundred & fiftie, and
for the kings, fiue hundred ſeauentie and two (that came
ſomewhat neere. About fiue hundred and tenne it was)
and for the Perſians one hundred thirtie & fiue. If when
Scripture directeth to a moſt exact ſumme, men miſſe ſo
much: we ſhould hold only the plainenes of Gods word
as in the Ebrewe text it was moſt purely kept, and not
mans opinion, our ſquare. Neither ſhould we maruell at
heathen miſſing for the Perſians, as we expounde them:
when Greeke Chriſtians who haue ſcripture to direct
them giue the iudges foure hundred ſixtie and three,
whereas from the Lambe vnto the temple all is but foure
hundred and foure ſcore. 1. Kinges. 6. 1. whence muſt be

ſubducted fortie for the wildernes; ſeauen for conqueſt,
fortie for Samuel and Saul, fortie for Dauid, and three for
Salomon.
            
            
               A kinde of helpe.
               But as diuines haue bin deceaued for the Iudges, reckoning
the oppreſſors yeeres ſeuerall from theirs, which
were within theirs in deede, and ſhoulde nothing haue
augmented the ſumme: euen ſo were prophane Greekes,
as we vnderſtande them. both for reckoning Paras firſt
times ſeuerall from the Babylonians, which yet fell out
together: and afterwardes fellow rulers as ſeuerall. And
the curing is not hard, with tractable iudges. Iudge what
I ſay.Cteſ. conferred with Herodot. Darius Hyſtaſpis liued about ſixe and twentie
yeeres while Iaddue was vnder Perſia. After his death
two breethren haue the famous gentle ſtrife. Iuſt. Xerxes
in warres reigneth, Artaxerxes at home, the ſame
time: otherwiſe Themiſtocles coulde not flie to them
both. Artaxerxes reigning one and fortie yeeres, dieth
in the ſeauenth of the Peloponneſian warres. Thucid. &
Diod. Thereby Thucidides is contrould for making the
Peloponneſian warres fiftie yeeres after that of Xerxes:
wherein Ariſticles the iuſt bare ſwaye: whoſe daughter
Socrates married (Suid. in Socrates) and he was but ſeauentie
at ſeauen and twentie yeres after that warres when
he died.Laertius. Though by a ſhift one ſay that he might beget
that daughter in his olde age, at the warres end: yet ſhe
ſhoulde be ſeauen yeeres elder than Socrates. without anie
reaſon of likelihoode. Nowe to this Artaxerxes Ioſeph
Scaliger will no
                     •
                   ſticke to ioyne preſently Artaxerxes
Mnemon with Darius Nothus, which Mnemon commeth
within nine yeeres (in Clemens) of Alexanders
monarchie, and reigneth yeres but fortie and two. Thus

ſcantly wil that be made vp which might make the reſt
vnder Greekes and Romanes three hundred and ſixtie to
agree with Gabriels foure hundred and ninetie yeeres.
Therefore Plutarch to fill vp the common ſumme giueth
him ſixtie and two yeeres of reigne and ninetie foure of
life. not knowing Daniels viſion againſt the Perſians at
ſharpe ſwift Tigris: not bookes opened before the firie
throne iudging the Perſian beare: nor comparing Leuites
a ſcore Neh. 12.Thucid. bok. 2. with the Perſians: nor yet Amyntas
king in Macedon the thirde of the Peloponneſian
warres: whoſe ſonne Philip reigned but twentie yeeres.
Athen. and Alexander but ſix before his monarchie.
               Moreouer Amyntas him ſelfe reigned but few yeeres,
two of his elder ſonnes not long: Philip died at ſeauen
and fortie, who was brought vp in Epaminondas fathers
houſe. Thus the Perſians by Greekes will not exceede.
            
            
               Against Eratosthenes account.
               This ſtanding thus: howe can Eratoſthenes ſay true,
whom in Clemens pag. 126. (though Clemens reiecteth
him as deceaued) yet ſome great men greatly follow? He
hath theſe diſtances. From Xerxes voiage to Archidamus
warres eight and fortie yeeres. That ended at ſeauen and
twentie. There Athens loſt the ſuperiority of Grecia and
Lacedemon, by Lyſander gate it. which they loſt at Leuctra,
where Epaminondas the Theban victor died after
34. yeeres. And thence to Philips death, who died 47.
yeeres old, he reckoneth yeres 35. But how could he be a
fit companion for Epaminondas: or yet ſonne to Amyntas:
reigning young and but a little while. Polybius granteth
the Lacedemonians but twelue yeeres of quiet ſuperioritie
pag. 1. & Iuſtine abridging Trogus Pompeius
maketh Amyntas ſon to Menelaus brother to Alexander

who reigned in Darius Hyſtaſpis daies. whereby it appereth
how little credit old Latines or ſome Greekes gaue
the other Greekes for theſe times▪ and how Plutarch had
iuſt occaſion to condemne the Greeke Chronicles.
            
            
               Of Olympiades, Romes antiquitie and
Chaldeans.
               This threefold thred was ſpunne againſt me: though
I had cut the knottineſſe of them: as Alexander did the
Gordian knot. For Olympiades Phlegon is the moſt famous
auctour whom Chriſtians cite: ioyning his Olympiade
two hundred and two in the fourth yeere to our
Lord his death. If I grant anie thing good in this account
I muſt bring Cyrus reigne ouer Iuda vnto Olympiade
the eightith. For the vſe of ſtudentes I will affoord
Phlegons whole treatiſe: that young men may ſee what
ſtuffe men bring againſt proprietie of Scripture: afterwards
I will ſhew further their nullitie: & how the citers
of them by their owne auctours are condemned. I will
abridge and tranſlate anone ſo muche as I neede. The
Grecian may take all.
               He ſhall finde their antiquitie not greatly farre from
Hercules: whoſe ſonne Tlepolemus was Agamemnons
ſouldier. whereby Cyrus may well be caſt to Olympiad
eightie or yeere three hundred & twentie after their beginning,
which thing will finiſh this combat. Yet I loth
that helpe, where Apollo is the counſeller of the games:
a peſtilence ioined to their beginning: a ſpiders webbe
couering of their garlande: and Choraebus the firſt man
(in Pauſanias) whence the accoūt is fetched. And I maruell
at my aduerſarie who counted my doctrine againſt
Choraebus and him, to be Chorebus harnes. The defence
of this Olympike ſtuffe beſt deſerued that name. But
now looke to Phlegon.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        . 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
               
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Here Lycurgus is the tenth from Hercules: he vvith Jphitus
reſtored Olympikes. Koroebus is the firſt gameſter though not expreſſely.
Apollo gave counſell: at the firſt they neglected the game.
A famine follovved. For that vanitie ſay I that it vvas at all begun:
for contempt of it, ſaid Apollo: Of vvhome ſundry counſels
they tooke: of vvhich this vvas one, that they ſhoulde not make
the garland or crovvne of a fruitfull tree, but of a vvild olive, beſet
vvith cobvvebs: of vvhich kinde one among many vvas found in a
vvood there: and was vvalled about for to be kept ſtill.When the Printer had ſet thus much, which onely was in my purpoſe to abbridge and tranſlate: I was further mooved by the request of a learned friend, to make Phlegon 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of the heathen fol.
               
            
            
               
               OF THE OLYMPIA,
by Phlegon, freeman of
Adrianus Caeſar.
               I Thinke it behooveable to tel the cauſe why the Olympia chanſed
to be ſet up. And this was it. After Piſus, and Pelops, and alſo
Hercules, the firſt erecters of the ſolemnitie & game in Olympiades,
the Peloponneſians left off theThe prophane were as carefully bent to this vanitie, as to a thing divinely commanded. Wherin wisdom would that Chriſtian ſhould let their memory periſh, and not intangle the bible with ſuch toyes. religion a certain time, for which are
numbred 28 Olympiades unto Iphitus & Choroebus Eleus. When
they had thus neglected the game, a ſedition aroſe in Peloponneſus.
Then Lycurgus the Lacedaemonian the ſonne of Prytaneus, of Europus,
of Soſus, of Procleus, of Ariſtodemus, of Ariſtomachus, of
Cleodaeus, of Hyllus, of Hercules and Deianira: And Iphitus ſonne
of Aemon; or (by ſome) of Praxonides, a man of Elis, of Hercules lineage,
& Cleoſthenes ſonne of Cleonicus a man of Piſa, willing to
reſtore the people to amity & peace, derermined to renue the Olympique
ſolemnitie, & to keep the gymnike game. Then ſome are ſent
unto Delphos to conſult with Apollo, whether he alſo adviſed to
doe thus. Apollo ſaid, it was beſt to doe it: & commanded to proclaime
truce for the cities that would be partakers of the game. After
which proclamation paſſing through Hellas or Grecia, a table was
written for theHere he differeth frō Pauſanias in whom Iphitus himſelfe the game, and Ox
                        •
                     tu
                        •
                      houſe: and not Hellanodica dica of a long time. Pauſonias I will 
                        〈◊〉
                      hereafter. Hellanodicae, according to which they ſhould keep
the Olympia. When the Peloponneſians had no great minde to the
game, but were unwilling; a peſtilence fell, and a corruption of fruit
plagued them. Then theyThe Greeke copie seemeth to have 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      corrupt for 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      though Xylander followe the copie in his Latine tranſlation. ſend Lycurgus againe to ſeeke ſome end
and truce. Then the Pythia uttered theſe wordes.
               O dwellers in Pelopeis, the noble caſtle for all the earth,
theElis gate a name frō Eliſa the eldeſt ſonne of Iavan: of whome alſo all Grecia in Greeke beareth the nam
                        •
                      Hellas, and the people Hellenes. Iaon and Ladon old named. Rivers (is) in Di
                        •
                     niſ. de 
                        〈…〉
                      Peloponneſus ſeeme to remembrance Java
                        •
                     
                     gen. 10. and Lud. 
                        〈…〉
                      Strab
                        •
                      calleth Elis 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      the foundation of Graecia, it ſeemeth that there Iavans hou
                        •
                     s;e in Elita: & fame of Lud firſt ſetled their ſeates. eldeſt of all mortall wightes, and the beſt
conſider from me the oracle of Apollo, which I wil ſpeake.
               
                  Iupiter is angrie vvith you for the ceremonie: and executeth vvrath
                  Becauſe you diſhonour the Olympia, among the people of the King
                  IupiterIupiter Ol
                           •
                        mpius was the god of theſe gameſters. Tull Tuſc. 2. Pauſanias recordeth his tē
                        ple in Achaia. His Image at Olympia in Eliac. and in Attic. and ſundry other places. That Idols Image Antiochus Em
                           •
                        ma
                           •
                        ies erected in the temple of Jeruſalem. Mach. & Ioſ. Bengeorion. Again, that might warne in left we pollute our holy Prophetes with honouring Iupiter Olympius monuments. The honour of vvhich first Piſus ordeined and ſet up.
               
               Afterwardes Pelops making Hellas popular, ſet up a myndey
and maſtrie for dead Oenomaus. Third among theſe, the boy
of Amphytrio Hercules made a myndey and game for his uncle

Pelops Tantalides: which ſince that timeI geſſè that the corrupt Greeke muſt ſo be amended. ye leave: even the Ceremonie,
for which he (Iuppiter) angred to the heart, rayſed famine
and peſtilence: which you may ſtay reviving the feſtivitie a-newe
againe.
               This being heard was tolde unto the Peloponneſians. They
miſtruſting the oracle, ſende againe by a common decree, to aske
more diligently of Apollo concerning the oracles. The Pythia
ſpeaketh thus:

                     O Peloponneſus dwellers, goe about your altars,
                     Sacrifice and obey all your Mantes commandements:
                     I meane the freers of Elis, keepers of the fathers custome.
                  
               
               After theſe Oracles, the Peloponneſians ſuffred the men of Elis
to diſpoſe the Olympia, and to proclaime a truce to the cities. And
when afterwardes the Eleans would have holpen the Lacedemonians
beſiegingA ſea towne of the Lacedemonians. Hom. odyſſ. 2. & Pauſin Laconic. Helos, they ſent to Delphos to aske counſell: and
the Pythia thus anſwered.
               
                  Save their countrey: but refraine from warre.
                  (Teaching the Hellenes a common friendſhippe)
                  Vntill the amiable twelve-moneth coms echThe Olympiades kept everie fift yeere, have full foure yeres betwixt them. So it is called of Ovid Quinquennis Olympia. five yeeres returning.
               
               After theſe oracles they ſure ceaſed from warre: and looked to
the Olympikes, and for five Olympiades no man was crowned. In
the ſixt, they thought good to aske the oracle whether the victories
ſhould be crowned: and they ſend King Iphitus to that Chappell.
Then ſhee looſed her mouth into theſe wordes.
               
                  Iphite bestowe not an apple-tree like grouth on the victorie.
                  But bestowe what a wilde Olive beareth abundantly:
                  which nowe is covered with the fine webbe of the ſpider.
               
               He thereupon comming into the Olympia ground: among many
wilde olives being in a wood, he founde one beſet with cobwebbes:
about which he made a wall;
                     
                        •
                      Strabe his ancient (for Strabo wrote in Auguſtus and Tiberius time) be ſayeth that untill the 26. Olympiad none more crowned. and of it a crowne was
given to the winners. Daicles Meſſenius was the firſt that was crowned,
who in the ſeventh Olympiade wanne the ſtadion: if the authoritie
of this fragment prevaileth.
               
                  
uayleth. 1 Thus by Phlegon, Iphitus Olympiades can hardly
be aboue 300.For Iphitus is the tenth from Hercules. Now by Herodotus and Clemens, three generations wyll not go aboue 100. yeeres. yeeres after Troyes fall: or rather
hardly ſo much. Conferre with Phlegon Eratoſthenes,
who placeth Lycurgus at 300. after Priamus
warres, and then you may ſee how he differeth from
Phlegon one hundreth yeere in foure: whereby alſo
Cyrus is caſt a hundreth yeeres further off Alexander,
that is ſo much more afore hym then Phlegons accompt
woulde place hym, and equally the Perſians
gouernement ſtretched 100. yeeres.
               2 This euident caſe moued me to accuſe Olympiades
of ſo great deceyte, whereby Chriſtians haue been
conuicted to make for the very ſame age neare double
ſo many yeeres for Grecia, when they reckon by prophane
Greekes, as they do for Iudah, when vpon particulers
they ſhew theyr minde vpon Ezra, Eſter, Nehemias,
Aggai, Zachary, yea and ſomewhat of the
As for Saraias father to Ezra, 2. king. 25. and 1. Chro for Ioſuahs family & others. Kinges and Chronicles.
               3 Poetes in Phaetons guyding of the Sunne out of
his courſe, to the burnyng of Mountaynes, and drying
of Riuers, neuer imagined more ſtrangenes, then our
wordes in deede draw: when the ſame Sunne for Sion
maketh one hundred of yeeres: and in the ſelfe ſame
tyme and ſpace for Olympia Piſa, or Elis 200.
               4 Vnder Ioſuah and Ezekias, the ſtaying and turnyng
backe, was not for Chanaan onely, but alſo for the
whole worlde. The fables of the nyght made longer
for Herculus byrth, and Egyptians recordes in Herodotus
of Senacharib, ſhewe that Heathen kept a remembraunce
of it. Our dealing maketh Iewes to reiect
all Chriſtianitie. Theyr wrytinges teſtifie that,
vpon Daniel. cha. 9.
               
                  
My Aduerſary herein was to be commended, who ſaw that
eyther the vniuerſall iudgement of Diuines, Ebrewes, Greekes,
and Barbarians, vpon the last Prophetes must be altered: or the
Heathen muſt be reiected.
               But his choyſe I cannot commende: who had rather bryng to
writers ancient, in phraſes open to all eyen, a new meanyng, which
former ages neuer did, and reaſon neuer can admit: then he
woulde relinquiſh one accompt of Olympiades, which he thought
vniforme. Marke ſundry opinions di
                     •
                  gracing one an other.
               6 Plutarch in Homers lyfe doth ſhewe, that theyr accompt
was taken from 100. yeeres after the Troik
fyghtes. In Romulus he foloweth an accompt farre
vnlyke: in Numa, he condemneth all gatheryng of
tymes from Olympiades, as I touched. Where let any
Logician iudge whether he muſt meane Olympiades
or not, by the tymes gathered from Olympionicae?
Mine aduerſarie wold hane Olympionicas not Olympiades
vncertayne. I loue not many wordes, to defende
agaynſt Anaxagoras, that ſnow is white.
               7 Conſider Phlegons difference from Plutarches, and
that of Eratoſthenes from his: both mentioned aboue:
and thinke that Agamemnon neuer ſawe his Nobles
ſo ſtandyng amazed lyke ſtagges, as a carefull reader
wylbe amazed, that men of rare learnyng ſhoulde ſo
forget them ſelues, as with ſuch reedes to fyght: not
as Pigmeanes with Cranes, but as Poulydamas with
that which no handes can reſiſt.
               8 Suidas woulde make Phlegon diſgrace him ſelfe.Hom. 2. lib. 3. Pauſ. in Eliac.
For in him Phlegon placeth famous 
                     •
                   hales in Olympiade
the ſeauenth. He myght as well place Solon or
Iakim king of Iudah in the ſame Olympiade. And
Plutarch toucheth this, where he bryngeth gatheringes
from Solons antiquity, whereby many artificiall
Chroniclers iudged, that Solon reached not to

Croeſus tymes.
               9 To fortifie Suidas and Phlegon, burnyng all theſe
recordes, take Diuines agaynſt them ſelues, euen thoſe
Diuines who haue brought firſt this learnyng to the
Church: not of an yll intent, but as then the tymes
gaue occaſion to deale with Heathen: 
                     •
                  atianus,
Africanus, Clemens Fuſebius, Theophilus, all from
troupes of ancient Greekes proue that Meneiaus came
to Chanaan in Hyrams tyme, or Salomons. Now
Olympiades beginne 405. yeeres after that, by theyr
owne accompt: and by Scripture Babylons captiuitie
408. after Salomons Temples foundation. So full
well Suidas myght place Thales in Olympiade the
ſeauenth.
               10 Somewhat neare this commeth that accompt of
Suidas in Anacreon, where Cyrus and Cambyſes are
in the Olympiade the 25. But by Phegon he cannot
be Monarch, before the 80. Olympiade. And that
woulde I wyllyngly admit: and for this much Ellanodicae
woulde geue ſentence with me, that euen my
Aduerſaries teſtimonies marre theyr pley.
               11 Apollodorus placing Anaximenes byrth in Olympiade
63. by collection placeth Cyrus as Ido: Laertius
writeth that: in whom Chilon the ſage, by Pamphila
being Ephorus Olympiade the ſixt, by Soſigenes
fifty ſixt (a full 200. difference) proueth a great
diuerſitie receiued in theſe accomptes, which being
graunted, all this worke of Olympiade reckoninges,
by fyre of iudgement wylbe conſumed as ſtraw.
               12 Africanus twiſe ſtriketh hym ſelfe, For he beginneth
Olympiades 1020. from Moſes. In Euſ
                        •
                     b prae
                        ••
                     
                  
and in Dem. 8. geueth the Macedonians 370. yeeres of
geuernement. VVith ſuche thornes do they pricke
theyr eyen, who mary Scriptures to prophane Heathen,

and marre the lyght of our happy Redemption.
               13 Thus it appeareth what the teſtimony is worth
which ſo certaynely placeth Cyrus reigne in Olympiade
55. which is fortified by the names of Phlegon,
Thallus, Caſtor, Diodorus, and all that handle Olympiades.
Euſeb. praep. 10.Cyrus by Phlegon & Lucian might be borne neere Olympia 53. and take Babylon at Olympiad 80.
               
               14 By ſome Heathen who make hym lyue 100. yeres,
the matter commeth neare ſome famous reckonyngs
for his fyrſt princehood, but not for his laſt yeeres:
VVhere olde Diuines cite Heathen agaynſt theyr
meanyng. For Heathen place Cyrus fyrſt tymes in
Olympiade 55. and not his Monarchy, as doth Euſebius.
And ſtoryes make hym reigne 70. afore that, as I
haue touched afore: But I wyll more fully handle
Cyrus, with Olympike confuſion, after I haue once
briefly gon through vnto Alexanders tymes.
            
            
               Of Darius Hyſtaſpis.
               Darius Hyſtaſpis reigne by Lilius Gyraldus, toucheth
Olympiade 80. whereby Cyrus (after Phlegon) commyng
to the ſame tyme, it myght ſeeme by this, as by
other argumentes, that Cyrus and Cambyſes laſt yeeres
were at Babylons fall. And they alſo be holden true, who
thynke that Darius Madai is no other then he whom
Greekes call Darius the fyrſt. And reaſon would gather
that his warres agaynſt Scythia in reuenge of Cyrus
death, and agaynſt Athens vpon his returne, ſhoulde be
ſoone after: of whiche the later was tenne yeeres afore
Xerxes voyage into Grece. And that wyll ſomewhat
agree with Cteſias and Horod. conferd for Darius tyme,
and it may drawe Xerxes warres within leſſe then 30.
yeeres of Babels fall.
            
            
               
               Of the Olympiade 75. ioyned
to Xerxes warre.
               1 By the former it may appeare that Xerxes warre falleth
not in any agreement ſtablyſhed, on Olympiade
75. for which tyme Pauſanias hath a ſinguler example
of vnposſibility in this kinde. For Oebotas
an Olympionike, wan the race in Olympiade the ſixt,
and fought agaynſt Mardonius in the 75. that is neare
280. yeeres after. Pauſanias demaundeth: And howe
can that be? and telleth, that he muſt recorde as he findeth,
but muſt not beleeue all. Thus the recorder of
them woundeth them, with as great a blow as euer
Lygdamis or Poulydamas gaue in them.
               2 Pindarus ſcholiaſt maketh hym 40. yeere olde at
Xerxes warre: to lyue in all 55. yeeres, to dye when
Bion, or Abion was Maior at Athens in Olympiad 86.
And this commeth ſomewhat neare the 80. yeere for
Cyrus and Darius.
               3 Suidas placeth Iſocrates byrth in Olympiade 86.
and after the Peloponneſian warres: whereby the
confuſion of Greekes appeareth. But I had rather
place Iſocrates birth nigh Xerxes warres: and that by
an other collection I can proue. He lyued by his
owne reckonyng neare 100. yeeres, and Plutarch maketh
hym to ſpeake that apopthegim to Sophocles,
the praiſe whereof Tully gaue to Pericles:1. Offie. That a Senator
muſt as wel bridle his eyen as his handes: which
fitnes of age woulde not ſuffer well done, vnleſſe he
were borne about Xerxes warre.
               4 The ſame Suidas placeth Socrates byrth at the Peloponneſian
ſtyrres, who was borne neare Xerxes, and
lyued 60. yeeres at the leaſt: his death is knowen:

vnder the 30. Tyrantes: the next yeere after Lyſander
at Helleſpontus Aegoſpotamos, and Attens ouercome
the nation. Socrates byrth by Suidas was in
Olympiade 77. VVhat can we make of ſuch Greeke
recordes, whiche care not what they vtter? Yet this
much may be gathered hence, that Xerxes and Archidamus
Peloponneſian troubles, were nothyng neare
50. yeeres, as I hucidides woulde haue it, whom Demoſthenes
agaynſt Neaera foloweth. VVhat they
meant, or cared for trueth I wyll tell hereafter.
               5 Lyſias byrth by Plutarch is in Olympiade 82. the
ſeconde yeere, when Philocles was Maior: whoſe maioralty
falleth out 8. yeeres ſooner by Diodorus.
               6 Pliny booke 35. Cha. 9. blameth ſome who place
the paynter Xeuxis opening of his trade in Olympiad
89. whiche he woulde haue to be in the fourth yeere
of the 95. marueylyng at 24. yeeres difference. But he
myght marke that 24. or rather 30. yeeres be added
more betwixt Lyſander in Olympiede 94. and Philip
Macedon, then euer the fyery maſſe of the Sunne
lyghtened.
               7 So in Pliny hymſelfe Mauſolus whom Demoſthenes
commenter maketh alyue when that Rhetor accuſed
Timocrates in Philip Macedons dayes: Pliny
placeth his death in Olympiad 100. the ſecond yeere.
               8 In the ſame ſort Suidas placeth Philips agones, or
triumphs in Olympiade 100. which by Athenaeus accompt
(in whom Philip reigneth but 20. yeres before
Alexander, whoſe reigne began the 111. Olympiade)
ſhoulde be Olympiade 106. So in Zeuxis, Mauſolus
and Philip, the theeuyſhe Olympiades fallyng out,
bryng trueth to lyght.
               This ſpeciall matter I would aſke, yf Antiochus Epiphanes
dyed in the 154. Olympiade, and Alexander in

the 114. the fyrſt yeere? How coulde Antiochus in the
ſixt yeere of his reigne ſet vpon Ptolomy Philometor,
made king 143. after Alexanders death, by the Mathematician
Ptolemy lib. 6. cap. 4. Philometor ſhoulde be
king 6. yeere afore Antiochus?
               In the ſame errour is the beginnyng of the Greekes
Kingdome from the 14. yeere after Alexanders death.
For in the ſeauenth yeere of his kingdome. Mach. 1.
in 143. of the Greekes he ſetteth vppon Egypt: Seeing
the ſame is the number from Alexanders death to Philometors
reygne, the ſame begynnyng alſo muſt the
date of the ſame number haue: and preſently from
Alexanders death muſt beginne the date of the Greekes
kingdome, as Codoman ryghtly prooueth. And here
moſt haue lymp
                     •
                  ades deceyued our beſt learned, the
late and aucient.
               Alſo here Liuies copies would Codoman haue amended
that for 488. the yeere afore the firſt Punik warre
he woulde naue 476. put in all copies, that the famous
Eclipſe which was at Aemylius victory ouer Perſeus recorded
when it was, might haue agreement of Antiochus
ſixt yeere which is ioyned to Aemylius victory. So all
copies muſt be amended, and iudgementes reformed, and
playne made rough, or Olympiades muſt be holden but
games.
            
            
               Cyrus, in particularitie ſpecially
conferred with Olympiades,
diſagreeing extreamely.
               I Wyll returne to ioyne ſome of theſe former tymes
which I haue touched, with others extreamly ſtriuing,
at ancient Cyrus tymes: whereupon a great part of our
debate ſtandeth: that not onely by a particuler vew of

all the Greeke times ſome lytle in each, but in the chiefe,
vnſpeakable diſcorde may appeare euen by theyr teſtimony
who haue been the principall folowers of them.
Afterwardes I wyll ſhew ſome further ſtore of abſurdities
bred by them in other matters: But chiefly muſt
his age be examined.
               For the moſt vſe of diuerſitie diſanullyng Olympiades,
wylbe about Cyrus: for thoſe whole troupes
that haue been thought to agree, that he reigned in
Olympiade 55. Thallus, Caſtor, Phlegon, Polybius,
Diodorus, and all that handle Olympiades. Africanus
in Euſebius is authour. Now marke their diuerſitie.
               1 Africanus placeth Cyrus dimisſion of Iudah in the
ſame tyme, as I mentioned aboue.
               2 The rare man M. Ioſeph Scaliger ſomewhat correcteth
it. He would haue Cyrus to reigne 27. yeeres
of his 30. before Zorobabels gouernement.
               3 And I ſhewed my mynde, that prophane wryters
regarded his fyrſt reigne, not his Monarchy, who
heard not before Alexanders tyme the name of any
Babylonians, who reigned ouer Iudah: but otherwyſe
then Scripture doth recorde them, and farre in
an other number.
               4 By Euſebius admittyng Menelaus to be of Salomons
tymes, and Olympiades about Nabuchadnezars,
(ſo I proued that the accompt of Diodorus doth caſt
them) Cyrus being after Olympiades 220. yeeres in
the 55. Olympiade he ſhould be as late as Alexander.
Clemens and Africanus be in Euſebius blame alſo.
               5 Africanus former counters twiſe marre his ſummes.
And whereas he fortifieth hym ſelfe, by makyng
Ogygos and Phoroneus of Moſes tymes, and all
three 1020. yeeres afore any Olympiade, by his owne

collection, & by Acouſilaus, Hellanicus, Philochorus,
by Caſtor and Thallus, by Diodorus and Alexander
Polyhiſtor: this fortification of his, maketh Cyrus to
be as lately as Iudas Machabaeus.
               6. Moreouer, yf Africanus former number of the Macedonians
370. yeeres be not corrupt for 270. whyle
he geueth Perſians 230. By deſcendyng from Tiberius,
and by the Romanes 60.60. 230. 370. 660. That ſhoulde be the 20. yere of Ezekias. Sanacharibs fall was 666. before the reſurrection of our Lord. Africanus ſhoulde place Cyrus reigne where Eſay doth name Cyrus. yeeres of empire, by the
Macedonians 370. and by the Perſians 230. he wyll
caſt Cyrus to Ezekias dayes, in their eyes which admit
Daniels ſeauens properly ſpoken, as he doth, and by
myne aduerſaries graunt, of certayntie in the limittes.
Ad thus the Greekes helpe for tymes count, beyng
layde in a ballance, wylbe lyghter then vanity it ſelfe.
               7 Or yf we ſay that Africanus number of 370. be for
270. of the Macedonians, whiche from Alexanders
death Ptolemy maketh to be 294. he doth ſhorten
it 24. yeeres. And more then the Iewes in Seder Olamdoe:
And ſo Cyrus ſhoulde take Babylon in Olympiade
61. by collection from hym.
               8 Neare that accompt commethTheophil. 3. Theophilus, who
placeth Cyrus death in Olympiade 62. where Diodorus
lib. 2. placeth Cambyſes reigne.
               9 Alſo neare that accompt commeth Clemens by a
conſequent: in whom as (for an other purpoſe hereafter
I wyll ſhew) Iechonias captiuity is in Olympiade
48.This Olympiade 48. ſhall ſerue hereafter for diuerſe purpoſes. ſixty two yeeres more wyll make more then
other 15. Olympiades, and all 63. Olympiades. Herodotus
bringeth Croeſus fall to that tyme. For Gyges
is king in Olympiad 18. by Clemens, Olympiad 23.
by Tatianus: After 170. yeeres, by Herodotus or 42.
Olympiades Croeſus becommeth poore Irus: when
Cyrus had taken him.
               10 The reader may remember how Suidas placeth

Cyrus with Cambyſes at leſſe thenAt the. 25. halfe 55. Olympiades,
and Polycrates at 52. and agayne Cyrus taking
of Sardis at Olympiade 55. whiche dealynges
myght well be in Nebucadnezars dayes. And whereas
Lilius Gyraldus in Anacreon blameth Suidas copy:
and ſo doth my aduerſary, and VVolphius to, though
all printes agree: and yf they were faulty, Suidas muſt
be amended not onely for Cyrus, but for Polycrates,
and for Thales alſo: Here it may be ſeene what force
theſe games haue in theſe ſaddeſt wittes, that for them
all the courſe of writers muſt be altered: but where
they beſt agree with Scripture, as Phlegons 100.
difference from Diodorus, caſteth Cyrus fitly for Daniel.
I coulde wyſhe that Satans teſtimony ſhoulde
ſtande onely when he is forced to ſpeake for the
Sunne of God: and not when all trueth and ſtory by
it is troubled.
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Laſtly yf Solon was borne (by Suidas) in Olympiade
fifty ſixe, and was doubtles farre ancienter then
Cyrus Monarchy, how ſhould Cyrus reigne in Olympiade
55?
               The concluſion touching Cyrus.
               And thu
                     •
                  , I turne for that testimony, thought vnuincible, of
Thallus, Caſtor, Phlegon, Diodorus, Africanus, Euſebius,
and all: I turne Thallus agaynſt Thallus, Caſtor agaynst
Caſtor, Phlegon agaynſt Phlegon: to ſet them all on flame:
and all, agayn them ſelues all. And the grounde of this I layde
in my firſt Booke after the yeere of the worlde 3000. vnder
Salomons reigne, hereby well myght I deſpiſe Olympike numbryng
of the Sunnes iourneys, damned by the approuers of it.
               And yf I woulde deſcant vpon Cyrus name, fitly myght I
compare the name of Cyrus with this. For Greekes expounde
his name to ſignifie the Sunne. It falleth out, that men myght
as well deny the Sunnes courſe, as deny the proprietie of Daniel
                        •
                     
                     
Seauens, for the courſe of the Sonne of Iuſtice, to ſhyne to
all ſoules: euen from Cyrus firſt yeere vnto the Redemption.
And as nothing is more enemious to ſaluation, then gameſtery:
ſo experience teacheth, that nothyng hath hurted the prophecies
more, then a gamelyke and negligent accompt of prophecies tryall,
from gameſters accomptes of Olympian Belial-like playes.
               
                  Aratus the Greeke Poet, prayſeth God diuinely, for his workes
of the Creation, and placing the Starres for a fit vſe of humane
lyfe: for ploughing and digging, for ſowing and planting: and
therein holdeth God a ioyfull father, a great helpe for men.
               To Athenianes S. Paule citeth Aratus, euen in a cauſe
wherein by their wicked lawes he was gilty of moſt hygh puniſhment.
For they helde it death to ſpeake agaynſt their Goddes:
and Socrates felt that, though afterwardes they mourned for
killying of him. Now Athenians onely of Grece to accompt of
diſturbe (though they diſturbe them ſelues alſo) yet they disturbe
our accomptes. To whom I will oppoſe the witt of the plougher
and ditcher, who folow the playne experience of that, that by nature
is planted in them. The ſame iudgement for propriety of
ſpeech in Daniel alwayes holden, ſhoulde preuayle: that he who
neuer deceyued the ploughmen or ditchers in courſe of the yeere,
ſhoulde not deceyue them, that from Gabriel and Daniel tolde
when the Figge tree ſhoulde b
                     •
                  dde, and the voyce of the Turtle
ſhoulde be hearde on mountaynes. I muſt depart from theſe ioyfull
ſpeeches, to the lothſome errours of Olympiades, whereby our
youthes haue a mynde to pleaſe them ſelues, rather then to lyue
by Moſes and the Prophetes: whyle they deeme of ſome deepe
ſkill in prophane writers: wherein I trow it wyll not fall out that
they can be thought able to alter lew and Gentile from the meanyng
which bytherto they haue had, for the laſt Prophetes, or the
ordinary courſe of lyneall ſuccesſion of Abiud and Rheſa.
For whom I am ſory that my aduerſary tearmed them,A digreſſion to a collaterall matter, of our Lordes family. 
                  Autoris
(Concentus) obſcura ſy
                        •
                     era. Where the age of Irus▪
                   or
Therſites would ſerue, if their lyne were in recorde for poſterity.

The ſonnes of Dauides kingdom, of whom all the worlde is, and
was alwayesSome ful badly haue taught, that S. Paule condemneth Genealogies of Scripture. That woulde make the holy Apoſtle a blaſphemer, & a ſpeaker agaynſt God, and a ſhaker of the ſtars in holy writ. He meant no ſuche matter: but to checke the Talmudiſts feigning genealogies: wherewith they flow full foolyſhly. bound to take notiſe▪ they may not be holden obſcure▪
but to ſhyne as the Moone among the Starres on nyght: and they
do diſgrace ſo many erroneous authours, that all copyes of thoſe
which haue been written or printed, myght be thought enough to
fyll Paules church all from the floore to the roofe. Such glory
and ſuch vſe the wyſedome of Christ hath contriued into the lyne
of his kinred: euen for profe of that prophecy which ſo directly
calleth vs to a moſt certayne yeere of his death, and reprofe of all
Heathen tyme-rolles: and ſpecially the Olympike paſtymes.
But I haue more plentifully, then briefe aſſertions ſuffer, enlarged
this blame of that witnes, whiche woulde bryng Cyrus and the
Sonne out of his courſe, and make Phaeton ruler of the Chariot.
Now I wyll purſue other wandringes, and come to others,
of whom Heathen haue ſtore: which lyue before their elders
were borne, or dye themſelues afore euer they ſaw the ey-liddes of
the mornyng.
            
            
               A Cataloge of further impoſſibilities
in Olympike reckonynges.
               1 By this variety of accomptes Clemens Alexandrinus
maketh Aggai Zachary and Malachy to prophecy
afore Ezekiel. For he placeth Iechonias captiuity in
Olympiade 48. (Ezekiel prophecied not vntyll fyue
yeeres after that. Ezek. 1.) and Aggai, Zachary and Malachy,
doth he alſo of reſolute purpoſe place in Olympiade
48. makyng them elder then Pythagoras,
though his familiarity with Amaſis myght haue warned
him better. Yea Thales alſo is hereby made their
puny. Theſe be the wonderful wordes of Clemens.
It is cleere, that they who prophecyed vnder Darius Hyſtaſpis
in the ſeconde yeere of his kingdome Aggai, Zachari, and
he who amongest the twelue is called Angel (Malachi he

meaneth) in the firſt yeere of the 48. Olympiade, are elder
then Pythagoras, which was in the 62. Olympiade, and
elder then I hales, which was in the 52. Clemens runneth
into this blame, no leſſe culpable then yfa man
ſhoulde place queene Mary afore king Richarde the
thyrde: or (to ſpe ke prouerbially) all the Cartes in
London before their Horſes. But Clemens muſt be
ſpared. Come to Heathen recordes.
               2. Parmenides floryſhed in Olympiade 29. But his
ancient Anaximenes ſaw not the Sunnes lyght vntyl
the Olympiade 63. nor Pittacus the olde ſage, vntyll
the 54. nor Thales vntyll the 56. though by other he
dyed afore he is borne, by ſome. Laert. Solon alſo by
Laertius floriſheth when by Suidas he is yet vnborne.
Dracon alſo by 
                     •
                  atianus being in Olympiad the 30.
the olde law-maker ſhoulde be as late as Parmenides.
So the Poet Sophocles farre elder then Plato, ſhoulde
floryſhe with Eudorus Platoes ſcholer at the 73.
Olympiade Laertius and Suidas.
               3 Zenon was a boy, and Socrates a young man, when
Parmenides was very aged, that is 65. yeres olde, and at
the ſolemnity called Panathenaea, they diſpute, in Platoes
Parmenides. Yet Socrates is borne in the 77.
Olympiade (as before I touched from Suidas) & Zeno
the younger in the 70. by Laertius.
               4 But Plutarch hath no fellowe for this purpoſe: for
in one mans lyfe of a tyme well knowen, and courſe
of lyfe, differyng twyſe, from common reckonyng.
               5 Lyſias by Plutarch is borne in Olympiade 82. the
ſeconde yeere, when Philocles was Archon at Athens.
The Olympiades by Diodorus were 80. vnder Philocles.
In Plutarch the ſame Lyſias after 63. yeeres,
is in the 90. Olympiade. 40 yeeres woulde haue
brought hym from the 82. vnto the 92. He lytle

cared for that accompt, that ſo doth ſpeake. Neyther
may the print be blamed, vnleſſe the Baſil and Stephens
in the lyfe of Lyſias be blamed at once. A Chaos
of confuſions haue Greekes in this kinde, that Apollo
the wicked ſpirite myght well be counted witty, in
appoynting a Tree beſet all with Spiders nettes, for a
garlande of theſe games. For the houſe of a Spider
wilbe their confidence, which entangle Diuinitie and
humanitie with theſe toyes.
               6 A great deale of foule play about Alexander the great
hath this gameſtery wrought in ſad wryters. Our
countrey man Florentius VVigorienſis burieth Alexander
in Olymprade 110. By Diodorus at 111.
he entreth Aſia: and by 114. the firſt yeere, by Arrianus
he dieth, And hereupon belyke Duris placeth
his death (in Clem. 1. Str.) where others place his voyage
fyrſt.
               7 And vpon this confuſion alſo it may be ſayde, that
ſome make Alexanders reigne after the Perſians to be
of 18.Ptolemy hath 294. yere from Alexanders death to the laſt Cleopatars and Clemens alſo elswhere: but by 
                        •
                     06. he muſt gieue Alexander 18. yeeres. yeeres, where Clemens maketh the whole Macedonians vnto Cleopatras fall to be 306. Ouides
Iupiter was neuer ſo frighted with Phaetons running
of the Sunne out of his courſe, leaſt all ſhoulde be
brought by flames into the olde Chaos: as the courſe
of the holy ſtory is diſturbed by ſeeking helpe at theſe
forlorne Olympike recordes. But I muſt haſte to
ende this Olympike differing abſurdities. Yet Pindarus
the harping Poet, who wrote of the Olympian
gameſters, and his commenters, they may not be omitted:
He, as he thought, no Starre bryghter then the
Sunne on the day tyme: ſo he thought no gameſtery
better then the Olympike.
               1 Fyrſt for Pindarus, if in hisHerodotus alſo mentioneth many nobles, Olympionicas, but not hauing any number of a certen Olympiade. time any accompt had
been knowen of theyr number, the Poet ſo witty, and

ſo farre fetchyng antiquities, woulde hardly haue
omitted that.
               2 The commenters vppon hym bryng a reckoned
number of the Olympiades vppon two gameſters:
Xenophon and Pſaumis: Xenophon Corinthius
wan the ſtadion, by Triclinius in Olympiade 79. yet
the ſame Xenophon Corinthius in Pauſanias wan the
ſtadion in Olympiade the 29. when Archimedes was
Archon, not Archidemides, whom Diodorus bringeth.
And yet the ſame Pauſanias for the 29. Olympiade
(whiche he maketh to be ſoone after Gyges
reigne, when Ardys graundfather to Croeſus reigned)
maketh Miltiaden to be Archon. But the print may
not be blamed. For Pauſanias hym ſelfe bryngyng
vnreconcileable word
                     •
                  s of Olympiades, telleth what
he muſt recorde: but muſt not beleeue. Beſides the
Latine tranſlater in both places fo
                     •
                  oweth the Greeke,
as lytle caryng for the authoritie of the games. Thus
for Xenophon the commenter & Pauſanias diſagree.
               3 For Pſaumis the gameſter two commenters, more
fall out. Pindarus doth commende him, of his towne
Camarina: which towne he tearmed the New-towne.
Thereupon thus doth the commenter ſpeake. Camarina
was buylt in Olympiade 45. deſtroyed in the 57. buylt
agayne in the 85. lately before Pſaumis gam
                        •
                     ſtery. This
the ſame ſpeaketh alſo: Camarina was buylt of Gelo
in the 42. Olympiade as Timaeus wryteth. But Philiſtus
ſayth, that in the thirde Olympiade Gelo buylt
it. So Gelo ſhoulde be about 160. yeeres differing
from hym ſelfe. Trichinus ſayth thus: Camarina
was buylt firſt in the 45. Olympiade, and was ou
                     •
                  rthrowen
in the 57. and was buylt in the 82. Olympiade
at Pſaumis victories. Now the former commenter
ioyneth the taking of it to the tyme of Darius

us Hyſtaſpis warres. And how coulde that be agreeable
to Cyrus 55. Olympiade, or to Xerxes warres
in 75. which was but tenne yeeres later then the former
of Darius? Cornelius Agrippa myght fitly haue
brought olympike recordes into the vanity of ſciences.
For nothyng can be ſo vayne.
            
            
               The cauſes of differing by Olympiades,
ſundry games, and ſundry game-rulers
               1 Pauſanias in Eliacis doth ſhew, that a full doſen of
ſeuerall games were ſet vp, at ſeuerall tymes farre
diſtant: and yet he omitteth ſome that others haue.
               2 The Stadion or foote race was the firſt: whence of
late men tooke their accompt.
               3 But the moſt ancient reckon from other gameſters.
Thucidides declareth that: the moſt ancient to
my remembraunce that taketh any note of tyme
from them. Thus he noteth the fourth Sommer of
the Peloponneſian warres. It was the Sommer in which
Dorieus Rhodius the ſeconde tyme wanne. VVhat game
they wanne Pauſanias teacheth, who ſayth, that Diagoridae,
the ſonnes of Diagoras, whereof Dorieus was one,
practiſed Championry. Now this family of Diagoras was
moſt famous: whence two ſonnes in one day wan
games, whereby Diagoras thir father was counted an
happy man. Tully recordeth it, and Pauſanias: yet
none of this family practiſed runnyng.Tuſc. lib. 1. Eliac. lib. 2.
               
               4 Lykewyſe he marketh the Sommer of the twelfe
yeere thus: It was the Sommer in whiche Androſthenes
Arcas the first tyme wanne the Pancration. Pauſanias of
late, not of olde, hath a number kept of it.
               5 The Race was the baſeſt, and fit for poore men: others
were of more eſtimation: wherefore the Race

being an obſcure play no reaſon mooued the moſt ancient
to keepe accompt of it.
               6 Iſocrates commending Alcibiades▪
                  Iſocrates de Bigis. ſheweth that he
and Alcmeon his mothers great anceſtour wanne
the game of the two * Horſes, and helde that worthieſt
for Nobility. Neyther doth Iſocrates any where
bryng any number of that▪ or mention of the foot
                     •
                  
race: yet his argument woulde well enough haue ſuffered
hyme. And I thinke y
                     •
                   an accompt had ben kept
and knowen, it woulde haue holpen the glory of his
client, Alcibiades the younger, to haue Alcmeo
                     •
                   in
ſuch certayne recorde.
               7 So Au
                     •
                  us Gellius record
                     •
                  th from ſome Chronicles,Gell lib. 15. cap. 16. An Olympiad
                        •
                      18. from ſtadion, called the firſt. See Pauſ. Eliac. 1. where Euribatus, not Milo is victor.
that Milo Crotonienſis the wreſtler, was crowned
in the firſt Olympiade. Now the firſt Olympiade for
wreſtlyng, as of late accomptes goe is 18. Olympiades
about 7
                     •
                   yeeres after the Stadion. And thus dyuers
pleyes ma
                     •
                  re the Chronique pleyers:
            
            
               Of ſundry game: rulers.
               1 And other cauſe of the diuerſitie is, that the rulers
were much altered. Pausanias alſo recordeth that.
And in the very recordes accomp
                     ••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   vntunable
confuſion. His letters do ſpeake thus.
               2 The order of the Game-rulers which was at the first, continued
not vnchanged, vnto our age. But Iphitu
                     •
                   alone did
rule the Game: likewyſe after 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               3 In the fyftieth Olympiade; two choſen 
                     〈…〉
                  
of Elis did rule: and ſo for along lyme the number of two
Game-rulers continued.
            
            
               Nor marke the cart before the horſe in
                     •
                  
Pauſanias reckonyng.
               4 In the 25. Olympiade 
                     〈…〉
                   ruled. The 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Olympiade after that, a tenth was added. Here the 25. 
                        •
                     an
                  
not be vnderſtoode, but from a new beginnyng after
the fiftieth. So Pauſanias holdeth on.
               5 The 103. Olympiade, twelue of the ſeuerall twelue tribes
of Elis ruled. But when ſoone they were oppreſſed by the
Arcadianes, and loſt part of their grounde, they were diminiſhed,
of ſo many tribes, as dwelt in that loſt grounde.
               6 And in the 104. Olympiade, their tribes being brought into
eight: the Ellanodicae were eight, out of them.
               7 In the 108. Olympiade, they returned againe vnto the number
of ten
                        •
                     e: and that continued vntyll our tymes. Thus
Pauſanias writeth. He, and Phlegon, both lyued vnder
Emperour Adrianus: in which age Pauſanias had
as ſuer recordes of number in Olympiades, as Ouid
had of Actaeones houndes: or the Chaldeans for monumentes
of foure hundreth thouſande yeeres, or
70000. more by Diodorus and Tully. Or the
Egyptians in Laertius for the tyme betwixt Vulcane
their Philoſopher, and Alexander Macedon, of yeeres
48063. Or Arrianus and Pliny for the Indianes
153. kinges (betwixt Dioniſius and onePliny hath the ſame number of kings & yeeres from Bacchus, or Dionyſius to Alexander the great, & three monethes forſooth. lib. 6. cap. 17. Androcotus)
and their yeeres 6042. Men acquainted with
deceyuing, can put in 
                     •
                  ummes odde, to make babes
chinke that they haue caſt it ſo exactly, and haue ſure
teſtimony for all.
               Pauſanias vtterly ouerthrowen by himſelfe.
               1 By Eratoſthenes Lycurgus floryſhed 300. yeres after
Hector. By Pauſanias no leſſe then by Phlegon Iphitus,
and Lycurgus were both of one age, in Eliac. lib. 1.
Yet Pauſanias foloweth Eratoſthenes, who maketh
Iphitus later by an hundreth yeres. Strom. 1. Dionyſius
alſo and Diodorus agree with Eratoſthenes, whom
Pauſanias folowyng, differeth an hundreth of yeeres
from him ſelfe.
               
                  
2 Alſo Pauſanias bryngeth a monument of a ſonne of
Iphitus, ſaf returned from Ilion, buried at home. Schedius
his other ſonne dyed at Troy. Pauſ. in Ph
                        •
                     . As
posſibly as they coulde be buried 300. yeeres afore
they were borne, by the former teſtimony: ſo eaſely
can Olympiades be brought to a certaynty, and agreement
in Pauſanias.
               3 And yf the teſtimony of two can ſerue agaynſt their
owne trade, Pauſanias and Phlegon diſanull Eratoſthenes,
Dioniſius, and Diodorus, and proue them more
differyng from them two, them myne aduerſary doth
from mee. And Pauſanias no leſſe then Phlegon
caſteth Cyrus to Olympiade 80. whereby fitly the
Olympiade 202. may ende 400. yeres for our Lordes
redemption. And ſo Pauſanias diſgraceth all this
olympian doctrine, no leſſe, or rather much more apparantly,
then Plutarches teſtimony in Solon doth
caſt off all Grecke Chronikes: And yet Pauſanias is
the ſpeciall man that plentifully writeth of Olympiades.
But of thoſe famous Olympionikes whom
Herodotus handleth (without any number from the
firſt game) he I trow, hath none but Cliſthens of Sycion,
in, or neare Olympiade 48. in Phoc. 223.
But let vs come to the fyrſt recorder of them, to Hippias
Eleus, of them, and hym, Plutarch in Numa thus
wryteth.
            
            
               Plutarch of Hippias.
               They ſay that Pythagoras Spartiates, winnyng the Olympian
game the Stadion in the ſixteenth Olympiade (in the thyrde
yere whereof Numa reigned) came to Italy, was acquainted with
Numa, and holpe hym for the orderyng of his Kingdome. And
a lytle after. It is a hard thyng to bryng the tymes exactly, and
ſpecially them which are gathered from the game winners Olympi
                     ••
                  ike:
the table whereof (they ſay) was but a late inuention

                  of Hippias Eieus, grounded vpon no argument that might
forte credite vnto it. That Plutarch, by tymes gathered
from the Olympionicae, meaneth Olympiades, it is cleere
by hym ſelfe: which calleth that, the ſixteenth Olymprade,
which he gathereth from Pythagoras victory.
Of Hippias worthyneſſe Plato hath prety floutes.
            
            
               How Plato ſetteth out Hippias.
               Socrates in Plato diſputyng with Hippias, telleth
hym, that he heard hym boſt, how commyng to Olympia
he tolde, that he made with his owne handes all that
he had about his body: his Ring he had engraued, his
Shooes he had ſowed, his Coate and Shirt he had wouen,
yea and platted his Girdle Perſianlike for brauery, and
had workes poeticall, tragoedies and dithyrambes, and
proſe of all cunnyng. This Hippias may as well be
thouht to haue Olympiade accomptes of his owne making:
as Plutarch recorded. And yf he were alyue now,
to anſwere agayne to all demaundes he ſhoulde be aſked:
not as he was by Socrates, whether Achilles or Vliſſes
were the better, but what authority he had for his
Olympian table? And not Plato onely for hym ſhoulde
make a Diologe of lying, but others alſo, vnleſſe he gaue
a better anſwere, then the matter ſeemeth to ſuffer.
            
            
               Of the authoritie of others of Elis,
citizens to Hippias.
               Pindarus commendeth gameſters from their townes
fame. So can I commende Hippias authority from his
towneſmen. This of them Pauſanias reporteth. Elei
worſhyp Bachus most of all the Goddes, and for him keepe a
feaſt called Thyia, Outrage, and ſay, that their God commeth to
their feast. Into a chamber they put three empty pannes; 
                        〈◊〉
                      the

preſence of ſuch as wyll beholde: they ſeal
                        •
                      the doores: on the
morrow they finde the pannes full of Wine, the ſeales being
whole: and this they ſweare to be true. So true do I holde
their reckonyng of Olympiades.
            
            
               Obiection.
               But Xenophon reckoneth by a certen number.
            
            
               Anſwere to Xenophons Olympiade 93.
               1 Xenophon in deede ſeemeth to countenaunce Hippias
Eleus a litle. For he reckoneth Ellanic. 1. the Olympiade
nynty three. But with a great number of other
notes: and by the game of two Horſes coched, fyrſt
ſet vp for a game: and called Xynoris.
               2 The next Olympiade after, he forſaketh all numbryng,
& barely by the gameſter Crocmas Theſſalus,
deſcribeth it.
               3 His number eyther was not of olde in his copyes, or
of ſmall eſtimation: yf Suidas folowed authours of
accompt, by whom Philips triumphes fall to Olympiade
100. or, rather Philip was nygh the ſuppoſed
93. Olympiade, how ſo euer to others it can truely
be ioyned, and both, for ſo much, may well ſtande
the 93. and the 100. Olympiade, to ſhewe the meane
time, to be but lytle aboue 24. yeeres.
               4 Timaeus and Philiſtus for tymes not long afore,
whom for Camarina I cited, lytle regarded olympian
ſummes, after Xenophons reckonyng. Neyther can
laterAs Dionyſ. Diod. Plut. Athen. Laert. Gell. &c. men bryng any authority for them, when Hippias
neuer founde two of his age embracers of his
Olympian table.
            
            
               
               Of Solons age, and Philip Macedons, to
be of the lyke diſtaunce by Heathen,
as Iakim and Iaddue are caſt
from ſcripture to be.
               A Gaynſt ſuche as lyke of Olympiades.Solons lawgeuing, and Nebuc. 1. I may bryng
them, and that well for Solons age, whom Tatianus
placeth in Olympiade 40. Now in the 48. Clemens doth
place Nebuchadnezars 8. yeere, and captiuity of Iechonias.
VVherefore Solon ſhould be of Ioſias tyme.
               Laertius placeth Solons Lawgeuing in Olympiade 46.
that is, about Iakims reigne. Let vs holde on then to
Athens fall, in theſe iourneys.
               Piſiſtratidae ruled Athens 40.Piſiſt. of Sedekias tyme. 
                  Iſocrat
                        •
                     de biga.
               
               About Euilmerodachs twelfth yeere they myght be▪
caſt out, and Miltiades made by them ruler of Cherſonelus,
myght be then ſome 40. yeeres olde.
               Marathon fielde 20.Marathon fielde about the 13. of Zorob. and Xerxes war was about 23. of Zorob. or not much more. yeres after that, when Mardonius
was there: ſoone after for enuy Miltiades baniſhment of
ten yeres ſeemes to folow. That Andocides mentioneth.
               Xerxes warre was ten yeeres after that. There the
principality of Athens grew: whiche I woulde reckon▪
from Xerxes praeparation, when Grecia conſulted of defence,
and knew that which way Athens tooke, all would
fall.
               Miltiades in his ten yeeres banyſhment,Andocid. de pace. is a meane
of truce betwixt Athens and Spart. And this can hardly
be 7. yeeres after: but graunt ſeauen.
               
                  Thuc. 1. Helen. 2. Andocides of Piſiſtratides times ſpake for it, the grandfather to the oratour. Thence the truce kept of 13. yeeres enſued.
Then ſone after a peace of 30. kept, 14. by Thucidedes,
15. by Xenophon: yet Aeſchines and Andocides ſpeake,
that Athens kept that peace 30. yeres, but Thucidedes &
Xenophon expound their meaning. And they expound
Thucidedes and Demoſthenes, who make 50. yeeres betwixt

Xerxes warres, and Archidamus: which in propriety
was little more then halfe ſo much: and Iſocrates giueth
all Athens principallity but 65.Iſocr. in Panath. which principallity
ended not vntill Lyſander of Lacedaemon tooke Athens,
after 28. yeeres warre.
               In that warre,That was in ye 1. of Pelop. war. Thuc. 1. Atrometus father to Aeſchines the oratour,
loſt his wealth belike through Archidamus, when
Attica was ouer-run. So he might well be borne at Xerxes
warres, & yet he was but 94. when his ſonne pleaded
for his life againſt Demoſthenes. Aeſchines alſo ſerued
vnder Alcibiades. Socrates and Alcibiades were killed
neare that warres ende. Aeſchines by the iudgement of
As Demetrius and others in Apollonius. ſome, heard Socrates. He ſhould be as Pamphilus in
Terence paſt minoritie that heard Philoſophers. Graunt
him ſome twentie fiue yeares of age then. He died after
Alexander, about 75. So Philip ſhould dye after Alcibiades
about 40. yeares:Alcibiades & Socrates died nere together after Liſanders victorie, ouer Athens. then was the father of Aeſchines
aliue and his mother, who had fled at Lyſanders victorie:
his elder brother was aliue, his yonger, his Children were
yet but yong, & then Demoſthenes reckeneth but 240.
yeares from that time a little afore Philips death vnto Solon:
who by the way ſtickedAgainſt Neaeram. not to take 50. for litle more
then halfe fiftie.
               To Solons laſt times, about 200. by Scripture compared
in Iakim and Iaddue, with Solon and Demoſthenes,
may well be graunted, and the whole 240. vnto Solons
firſt yeares.
               Yea the generall ſpeach of Grece in Socrates time maketh
Solon very ancient: whereby he might well match
Pharao Nechoes antiquity. Yet theThe Greek terme I keep: not hauing another certaine. hulkes of Nechoes
ſhippes made by his authoritie, abode vnto Herodotus
dayes: which argueth ſomewhat the ſhortnes of the time,
to be not aboue a mans olde age of 150. yeares, when
Henodotus might write that.
               So by Olympiades, the beſt that they affoord, beſt

agrees with Scripture. Otherwiſe they appeare to be nothing
worth: and I may iuſtly blame my aduerſarie, for
defending that they are not moſt v
                     •
                  certaine.
            
            
               Of Romes Chronicle noted in latine
A. V. C. anni vrbis conditae: the yeares
ſince the Citie was built.
               ROmes antiquitie alſo is as one thred of the three:
which can not ſoone be broken. But Clotho the
daughter of Night in Heſiod, ſeemeth to be the firſt ſpinner
of it. Or as Penelope twiſted & vntwiſted her thred,
to keepe aloofeHomer in Odiſſ. her louers: ſo is the antiquitie of Rome
ſpun: What one twindeth another vntwindeth, and for
any purpoſe ſome thing hence may be brought:Dionyſ. 1. antiqui. The oldeſt
Romane writer being about 500. yeares later then
Romulus is, ſuppoſed and recorded builder of Rome:
and extreame diſagreement ariſing herein.
               Onuphrius wondreth at the varietie of opinions, by
whom and when Rome ſhould be built: and citeth a full
tedious ſort. To him I referre yong ſtudents.
               Ennius in his time, from ſince Romulus built Rome,
holdeth it about 700. yeares.
               Varro in Tullies age beginneth a new accompt, and
maketh it then ſcant 700. yeares olde.
               For compariſon, after Troy and afore Alexander: and
by ſubduction with Cyrus take this.
               Gellius by Cornelius Nepos and Caſſius, maketh it
built about 300. yeares after the Troyan horſe, and 400.
afore Alexanders birth. Nowe Trogus in Iornandes
maketh Cyrus to be in Tomyris warre 630. after Priamu
                     •
                  
death. Wherefore Cyrus ſhoulde be aboute the 300.
A. V. C. and about 100. afore Alexanders birth: and that
ſhould I graunt. Thus Rome helpes nothing.
               
                  
So we may compare the Romane kinges with Iakim
king of Iudah, and with Cyrus. For by 300. yeeres from
Priamus to Romulus, andCommonly noted vpon Liuy. 244. from Romulus to Tarquinius
and Brutus death: Romes kinges ſhall be founde
to ende afore Iudahs, whereby Cyrus ſhal be nothyng
further from Alexander then I place hym.
               Iornandes is holpen by Democritus in Laertius, who
was borne in Olympiade the 80. and when he wrote
Micron Diacoſmon reckoneth it after the Troikes 730.
yeeres. How true it is, I wyll not diſpute. By the ſame
accompt I made Zeno Iumor to Socrates, thoughIn Parm
                        •
                     
                     nide. by
Plato he were elder: and for to daſh here agayne humane
authority lyfted agaynſt God, I may cite Democritus,
no leſſe helpyng me then Iornandes.
               Ephorus Cumaeus helpeth more, who maketh 750.
from Heracliae, returnyng vnto his tyme: later a lytle
then Democritus. So Iornandes hath a dooble helpe.
Now Heraclidae came to Peloponneſus the 80. year
                     •
                   after
the Troikes by Thuci
                     •
                   lib. 1. and by Eratoſthe
                     •••
                  in

                     〈◊〉
                   ſtrom. 1. Apollodoms, and Diodorus▪ lib. 1.
               Iſocrates geuing Lacedemon 700.Confer Panegyric & Panathenaic. yeres 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
ſince Heraclidae there ſeated, of whom they
                     •
                   kinges came,
runneth in the ſame way with the other Greekes, to
place Cyrus no ancienter then I place hym, by Iornandes
accomptes.
            
            
               Extremities in ſhortnes.
               1 Vergil the Poet, the glory not onely of Mantu
                     •
                  , but
of Rome alſo, he commyng after M. Varro, whoſe accompt
(I thinke) myne aduerſary foloweth, controlleth
hym,aeneid. 1. and Chytre
                        •••
                      Chron. and maketh Rome younger then Hectors
ende, not 430. yeeres but 360. as Chytraeus noteth:
whereby Iornandes placing Cyrus in 630. and Gel
                     •
                  ius
placing Alexanders by 
                     〈◊〉
                   400. V. C. 70. not 100.
ſhalbe left betwixt Cyrus ende & Alexanders byrth.

So Vergils accompt ſhoulde fauour the Iewes.
               2 Iulian the Emperour, though prophane, yet learned,
and compelled to honour Chriſte, euen in his deſtruction,
he alſo daſheth all Heathen honour.
               In his Saturnalib.Iulians Caeſars. Romulus maketh a feaſt for the
Romane Emperours, and ſome others. All theyr notable
ſaultes he ſetteth foorth in that diſcourſe. And in
ſpeeches of the Emperours, Iulius hath a principall
place. He commendeth hymſelfe of his citie Rome:
that it beginning of 3000. men within leſſe then 600.
yeeres came by conqueſt to the earthes ende: he meaneth
his owne conqueſtes.
               Now if we graunt Alexander to be A. V. C. 400. the
ſpace thence to Iulius wilbe far les then the very Iewes
in the other extremity of ſhortnes do affirme.
               3 Hector Pintus▪ who boldly defendeth Daniel in plaine
propriety,Hector Pintus vpon Dan. & for that ſhorteneth the Grekes, where he
thought that the Perſians could not be ſhortened, he
may haue lulian agaynſt his will to fight for Daniel.
               4 The ſame Hector deſerueth this commendation:
that where Heathen neyther deſerued nor ſought
glory of ſkil in times before Daniel, he would graunt
them none, where God in letters to be ſeene layeth a
certayne number of yeeres, with a moſt heauenly preparation
diuidyng and ſubdiuidyng the whole ſum.
VVho ſo herein wyll not lyke of him, neuer coulde
reuerence Scripture.
               For, although he knew not wherein to croſſe Heathen
by heathens beſt conſent, yet in caſtyng of all
authority of Heathen, who neuer agreed for two
kinges togeather in all this tyme: he did that whiche
true learnyng commaundeth and ſheweth Gods word
to be aboue humane controlment.
               5 I am ſory that I muſt ſo much blame myne owne

friende, one of my olde familiarity, who calleth Daniel
to tryal of his trueth before Heathen writers: of whom
that may be ſpoken commonly that Aeſchines ſpeaketh
of Demoſthenes, that they can not ſpeake true,
neither vnwares nor by compulſion. And when wold
he thinke to make our ploughmen ſkilfull in particulers
ſo many▪ & yet vnknowen to prophane Heathen?
Shal we, as Iſrael loathed Manna ready for them,
loath Gods worde for tellyng playnely the trueth?
               6 Quintus Fabius Labeo in Tully off. 1. being vmpire
betweene Neapolitanes and Nolanes for limittes of
grounde, leaueth that which was in the myddle for
Rome. The arbiterment there was not for a meane betweene
two extremities. He
                     •
                  e not Labeo, but iuſt vmpires
woulde goe ſafeſt in, the middle: neyther with
the oldeſt, nor lateſt age of Rome: but as olde Casſius
with Nepos and Virgil caſt it, hauyng extremities on
both ſydes.
            
            
               Of Iakim, Solon Piſiſtratus, Tarquinius ſuperbus,
and Cyrus chyldhood, touching the ſame tymes.
               MY aduerſary helpeth me in all diſtreſſe, not onely
for beginnyng and endyng ryghtly Daniels ſeauens,
whereby my cauſe hath enough by any Logicianes iudgment:
but alſo in particulars, where he moſt fyghteth,
he moſt caſteth downe hym ſelfe. Thus he compareth
ages in Mardochai. Iechonias, Cyrus, Kis: Salathiel, Cambyſes,
Semei: Pedaiah, Darius Iair: Zorobabel (by him Prouepos
Iechoniae) Xerxes, and Mardochai. And this fitneſſe
he compareth with Archimedes meaſures. Thus any
may ſee that he maketh Cyrus firſt yeeres match Iechonias,
and Zorobabels with Mardochais, full ſoone to ſee
Xerxes fall.Aeſchylus
                        ••
                      Perfis. For Aeſchylus tolde him and mee, that
Xerxes was young in his warres of that great ouerthrow

And what needed he to broche a new opinion for Mardochai,
which Greekes, Hebrewes, Englyſh neuer knew:
when by hym ſelfe he concludeth for mee. For ſoone
after Xerxes fall, the Temple aroſe. And that muſt be in
Zorobabels yeeres, or Mardochaies few after the returne,
Xerxes theyr ſuppoſed equall yet being young.
               Now Tarquinius Superbus being later then Solon, and
as ancient as Pythagoras, familiar to Amaſis, equal in Clemens
to Iechonias: the ende of Superbus, and Cyrus firſt
tymes, fall out moſt fytly to ſerue Daniel. So when
Heathen ſtudies be throughly tryed, they as Gybeonites,
are glad to ſerue the Temple.
            
            
               A digresſion vpon occasion of the
aduerſaries phraſe.
               VVhereas I folowed, in makeing a Concent of Scripture,
not onely trueth, but alſo famous agreement of Iew
and Gentile: myne aduerſary continually croſſyng mee,
is founde alſo to croſſe trueth lykewyſe, and common
agreement:The prouoker fayleth in all his gaineſayingès. to omit other poyntes, where in all differynges
from mee I holde hym deceyued: for Zorobab
                     •
                  
one phraſe did flee through the hedge of his teeth, which
myght marre all Religion. This was the ſpeeche. Fuit
(Zorobabel) vt audiuiſtis Pronepos Iechoniae. Iechonias was
great Grandfather to Zorobabel. Leaſt his hearers hereby
appeare enemies to their owne fayth, I wyll largely
cleere the cauſe: and myne aduerſary, by his expoſition.
I was greeued to ſee Zorobabel made of Iechonias blood,
for theſe cauſes.
               1 God ſware that none of Iechoniahs ſeede ſhoulde ſyt
vpon the throne of Dauid. Ier. 22.
               2 S. Luke bringeth Zorobabel to Nathan, not to Salomon:
whereby yf he were of Iechoniahs, S. Luke miſſed
in brynging CHRIST from Dauid: and his
Goſpel ſhoulde peryſh.
               
                  
3 Moreouer, it is the deadlieſt poynt for ſtory of al Iudaiſme.
For the Iewes make this an article of fayth, that
the king (Meſſiah) muſt come of Salomon: and that,
who ſo deny that, deny Gods word. Talmud San. art. 12.
               4 Beſides,S. Mathew hath ben commonly myſtaken: by not regarding a terme: whiche he was to vſe as commonly it was ſpoken, and to mean
                        •
                      as his nation did. it hath been our common errour, and crept
into our notes: which I redreſſed, not onely by ſkill,
but by publique approbation. For I wrote particularly
of that to the chiefeſt of Subiectes, dealer in this
kinde, that vpon full aduiſement, the correcting of
the errour came forth: not as one thing ſhuffled amongſt
many, but examined carefully.
               5 Hereupon I by meſſage demanded of mine aduerſary,
what he ſhoulde meane to ſpeake ſo? who anſweared,
that he meant ſucceſſion, not natural lineage: which he
mightI allowe not his phraſe, but take his yeeldyng, and fight not forwords. well do:Quid Metan
                        •
                     . 15. As Auguſtus Caeſar is the progenie,
the ſeede, the begotten of Iulius: though he be not of
his line, but in ſucceſſion. Now leaſt his hearers ſhould
by his manifold iniurious & erroneous controlments
herein alſo folowe his wordes, and not his meanyng, I
thought good to warne them, and wiſh them due care
oftime, place, and perſon, in all narrations, leaſt they
ſoone pull downe all theyr owne buylding. But now
let vs returne to our care ouer Rome, that it worke no
harme in this behalfe to the Goſpel.
            
            
               Cauſes why Romane teſtimonies ſhoulde be rather
loathed, then honoured, to controll all antiquitie
for holy prophetes.
               Speciall cauſes ſhoulde moue to refuſe Romane late
wryters, in this caſe.
               1 They being neare our Lordes dayes in the fleſhe:
(when Iewes noyſed ouer al the worlde, their expectation
of the heauenly Monarch) they were to be geuen
vp vnto further errour, that would not loue the light

kindled: and enquire, as touching that king of glory.
               2 When Tully proflac. & prouin conſ. mentionyng Ieruſalem,
calleth the Iewes religion a barbarous ſuperſtitiō:
and them a nation borne to bondage: he can not deny
but he had herd of their religion, & of their long bondage.
And he myght haue founde his paradoxe true:
that the wyſe man euen in tormentes is happy, yf he
would haue read the 70.The Greeke tranſlation of the 70 matched the moſt ancient Latines, & might be read of the. and Eſay. 53. as he did Demoſthenes.
His tongueDion. Rom. hiſt. l
                        •
                     b. 47. was worthy to be prickt with
needles, that ſo diſpitefully would ſpeake of the nation
of our Lorde, who gaue him all his eloquence and
worthily ſuffered he all that punyſhment, which in
Plutarch befel him.
               3 VergilAegl. 4. the Poet, that heard of a chylde commyng
from heauen to bring a golden worlde: ſinned againſt
his conſcience, in drawyng that to Rome, which all
rumors drew to Ieruſalem.
               4 Auguſtus ieſting,Macrob. lib. 2. that Herodes hog was happier then
his ſon: & knowing Herodes murthering: which was
to preuent, the king looked for of the Iewes, coulde
hardly be gyltles. And Carneades might haue taught
him, yf not the Magi, to haue left the Iewes a King of
their owne nation, and right family.
               5 After open mention to Tiberius of our Lord his reſurrection,Euſeb. Ioſeph. Cedrenus. Tacitus Su
                        •
                     tonius.
& a plaine prophecy, by which al the eaſt,
at that time, looked for a king, and after, of the name of
Chriſte, kilde vnder Pontius Pilate, all dealinges of
Romane writers were much to be ſuſpected: either as
more forlorn of God: to croſſe vnawares that prophecy
famous euery where: or of malice fortifiying with a
conſpiring rancor ſuch Grekes as might wholly diſturbe
yt prophecy of the time of the general monarch.
               6 Yf they dealt not maliciouſly, how could they being
late men, agree in the ſame ſyllables, for the times betwixt

Xerxes and Alexander,In Panathaen▪ contra Leocrat preciſely: though Iſocrates
& Lycurgus, men of that age, differ 25. yeeres:
where they make the whole but 48. and others after
the Peloponneſian wars differ about halfe in halfe?
            
            
               How the common table of Archontes, though forged,
yet was exquiſitely honored of the Antichriſtian Philoſophers,
not without ſuſpition of malice.
               The late Greekes vnder the Romane Emperours,
Pauſanias, Plutarch, Phlegon, Laertius, for the yeerely Archontes
or Maiors of Athens: and vnder which of them
famous men were borne or dyed: do ſo agree, as though
they had lyued in their olde tymes, and had ben recorders
of purpoſe: yet olde writers haue (as I thinke) not twenty
of thoſe 140. Archontes, but full many others in theyr
roomes: as Demoſthenes in oneDe corona. oration hath 8. Maiores
of his owne towne: whereof the table which the Emperours
ſcholers would fortify, hath not one. Lyſias hath
ſome of his tyme likewyſe there not found. And Grekes,
Chriſtians, as Suidas and other commenters, vtterly diſgrace
them. I finde in Thucidides two: Pythodorus, beginnyng
the warres and Alcaeus: Xenophon hath a Pythodorus
ending it: and Lyſias the ſame. Alſo Euctemon
is in Xenophon, Euclides in Lyſias, in Demoſthenes about
Socratides, Aſtias Polyzelus, Cephiſodorus Chion, Timocrates, Chariclides, Euander, and Charondas: but no two of theſe can be certaine for our purpoſe. Tully ſeemeth to ſettle Charon. 4. 7. afore Philips death. 9. twoThemiſtocles and Theophraſtus. I finde in Aeſchines: other may haue ſome,
or they ſome more. Therefore in late men this agreement
can hardly be voyde of ſuſpicion of malice.
               1 Thoſe open enimies are more openly gylty, in admitting
thinges by them ſelues vnposſible. For Plutarch
caſting Lyſias borne vnder Philocles, and to lyue
72. yeeres, and admittyng his oration for Iphicrates
when Elpinicus was Maior 103. off: that ſhal deſerue
true credite when 72. can be 103. This might then
tell that about 30. Maiors and yeeres are forged: and

malice, not dulnes, hath authoriſed theſe recordes.
               2 VVhen Ptolomy mentioneth Eclipſes vnder Phanoſtratus,Lib. 4. cap. 11.
& the next yere vnder Euander: here their conſpiracy
fayleth.Diod. lib. 5. pag. 457. Dem. contra Timocr. ſee his commenter For in Diodorus, Menāder is, not Euander
at all. Euander is a Maior in Demoſthenes, but as,
neare the time of Timocrates affayres, & a late Maior.
Beſides, al Greekes know that Euander and Menander
be too far off in force, to take the one for the other.
               3 Touching Apſeudes in Ptolemyes Eclipſes,lib. 3. cap. 2. I trow,
ſauing from Diodorus table, neuer no man was ſo called.
As neuer no Englyſh man was called Vn-lying,
and the name myght tell, that the autour ieſted.
               4 VVho woulde not ſuſpect forgery, ſeeing thoſe
three Maiors together, Lyſi-ſtratus, Lyſ-anias, Lyſi-theus:
and nere, Lyſi-crates, Lyſimachides, and Lyſ-anias againe.
Or theſe, vpō A, halfe a doſen together, Amynias Alc
                        •
                     us,
Ariſton, Aristophylus, Archias, Antipho, and next ſaue one,
Aristomneſtus. Any may thinke that an open forger,
turning to ſome Alphabete table bred theſe.
               5 Like are theſe in the termination rare in ides. Theagenides,
Archidemides, Phaſiclides, Timarchides, Lyſimachides,
Myrichides, Glaucides: and all theſe neare togeather.
Where both Iſocrates & Lycurgus differ ſo much: and I
ſhew the time ſhorter by the one halfe, or there about,
then the forged tables accompt. VVherefore Gellius,
Plutarch, and ſuch, who by Gods curſe, cannot ſpeake
the trueth (as Aeſchines taunteth Demoſthenes) no not
vnwilling,Enemies of Chriſt ſhoulde not be cited againſt hym. that is vnwitting, or do of malice repreſſe it:
let them packe. But their malicious forgery wyll moſt
notably appeare, for kinges which are feigned to lyue
with the kinges of Iudah, from autours neuer heard of
tyll the Romane Emperours kilde the holy Martyrs.
They are the thirde thred. I wyll put the ſimple reader in
minde agaynſt them, what holy prophecy is wounded
for them.
            
            
               
               Of the Chaldeans.
               CFrtayne reportes of ſuppoſed Chaldeans in our
age firſt haue been of eſtimation, to teach men how
to expounde Daniel, touching that text wherevpon
we are tearmed Chriſtians. For in Daniel
firſt and onely of the olde Teſtament, the tearme Chriſt
is meere proper: in other places 32. the ſkilfull in Adams
tongue know the tearme to be appellatiue. For to vnderſtande
Daniel the better, ſome late woulde ſeeke
helpe from men whom they thinke to be Chaldeans.
And by an accompt from them, my aduerſary woulde
make me beleeue, that Gabriel appoynting 70. ſeuens of
yeres for al the world to loke for Chriſt his death, meant
not 70. but 80. ſeuens. His dealyng is ſtrange: ſtrangeneſſe
yet herein made ſome men boyſterous: But the
aged and learned knew before, how in the ende the matter
would fall out. In London Prentiſes maruel at Vniuerſitie
Scholers,Certayne of & in an vniuerſity reported to two of Innes of Court lately, that I was aſhmed of my cauſe, and relinquiſhed the defence of it. They knew not that they cōdemned our whole ſtate & religion, otherwyſe they would not willyngly nor could wittily haue done ſo. for thinking that Chaldeans might
force them to an other meaning of bibles ſold in Paules,
then euer was knowen eyther to Iewes who wrote the
Prophetes, or to the Queene of Englande and Burgeſles
of our Parliament: who thought that all myght and
muſt aduenture their ſoules vpon the proprietie of Gods
worde, and thereby ſetled vs lawes for Religion. VVe
may not diſpute agaynſt our owne groundes, our owne
frame, our owne pyllers, our owne whole buyldyng, for
triall or brauery of ſkill, from colored old Aſtrologers.
               This matter ſhalbe made ſo playne, that euen the
ſimpleſt may ſee the weakeneſſe of that iudgement,
which leaneth vpon ſuch rotten reedes. Ptolomy was a
man cunnyng in the courſe of the yeere: which men
are taught to meaſure by the courſe of the Sunne. His

dexteritie was late. For his dayes were about 130. yeeres
after our Lord his redemption: yet to make his art honorable,
he bryngeth to vs recordes not heard of before
his tyme of Chaldeans, commyng neare the antiquitie
of a thouſande yeeres. For he nameth not Robbin-hood,
but Nabonaſſar, yet one of Vtopia, or no place, matching
in ancienty Ezekias king of Iudah. His firſt yeere of
gouernement he placeth 424. yeeres before the death of
Alexander Macedon. The ſame Ptolomy hath an accompt
from Nabonaſſar to one Darius the firſt, whoſe
yeere of reigne 31. he maketh to be 256. from Nabonaſſar,
and by a conſequent 168. before the death of
Alexander. Thus ſtandeth Ptolomyes teſtimony.
            
            
               How an aduerſary doth cite this agaynst the
proprietie of Scripture.
               Thus the aduerſary doth reaſon.
               IF from Darius that folowed Cyrus ſonne Cambyſes,
who reigned 7. yeeres after Cyrus tooke Babylon vnto
Alexanders death yeeres be 168. it muſt needes be granted
that the Perſians reigned aboue 130. yeeres ouer the
Iewes: and ſeeing 360. thence are agreed vpon to our
Lordes death: and the limites of Daniels ſeuens agreed
vpon alſo, betwixt both parties: it muſt needes be that
the Angell meant vncertenly.
            
            
               Anſwere.
               Many thinges for this teſtimony muſt be explaned.
Simply this wyll ſtande: That neuer any Darius was beginnyng
to reigne 7. yeeres after Cyrus tooke Babylon,
whoſe reigne was 168. yeeres before Alexanders death.

But for ſhewyng how the teſtimony is nothyng worth,
theſe poyntes may be layde downe.
               1 A teſtimony vnknowen or deſpiſed neare 1000.
yeeres, and afterward deſpiſed more then 1000. yeeres,
is more vayne then vanitie. Such is this of ſuppoſed
Chaldeans.
               2 Chriſtians may admit no teſtimony (where proprietie
muſt beare ſway) agaynſt Scripture. For playne
ought that to be, which playneth the rough. But by
Daniel, Darius the firſt came none after Darius the
Mede▪ who tooke Babylon. 
                     〈…〉
                   who then
was 62. yeeres olde. But his age 
                     〈◊〉
                   not 
                     〈◊〉
                   this
accompt of 32. yeeres reigne 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               3 The Queene of Englande ſworne to the Goſpell,They who blame in mee nouelty, where all our Church was and is of the ſame mind, muſt be warned of groſſe daeling. is
to ſatisfie her ſubiectes, and they in obedience to ſatisfie
her by proprietie of Scripture. To regarde the
moſt lying nation of Chaldeans (neuer before cited to
croſſe proprietie of Scripture) it is no part of the
learned and godly. This might haue warrented mee.
               4 A Shypmans hoſe wyll not elegantly diſtinguyſhe
and ſet foorth the legges. But this Chaldean teſtimony
is ſuch. For of Nabonaſſar, and Nabopollaſar Scal.
1584. condemneth al former opinions. Chriſtmannus
holdeth them forged names.In Alfrag. Genebrarde thinketh
them forged or corrupt:In Chronal H. Wolphius learnedly
damneth all ſuch helpe from Heathen for Scripture.
A ſounde iudgement ſhoulde not trouble his Countrey
with ſuch ſtuffe.
            
            
               Obiection.
               But Clemens 1. Strom. hath a Darius the firſt after
Cambyſes: Therefore Chaldeans onely are not to be
blamed.
            
            
               
               Anſwere.
               1 The Grecians could not ſo well take notiſe of Chaldean
kinges, as Chaldeans myght: For whom Daniel
had penned his ſixt Chapter in the Chaldy tongue:
but they meant the firſt Darius that they heard of.
               2 That Darius Hyſtaſpis cannot be meant by Darius
the firſt, Herodotus conferred with Cteſias wil proue.
For Cteſias a Phyſician in the Perſian court, and hauing
(as Diodorus writeth of hym) the court rolles
for warrant, recordeth that Darius Hy
                     •
                  taſpis liued but
fourty three yeeres, and reigned from his princehood
at twelue yeeres of age but 31. yeeres. Now Herodotus
in Clio maketh him about 20. yeeres olde when
Cyrus preſently vppon Babels conqueſt prepareth
Tomyris warres. And this vtterly ouerthroweth my
Aduerſaries cauſe.
               3 Maximinus Monachus ſomwhat folowyng Grekes,A Greke wryter, which I haue in written hand ſomwhat of him M Scaliger hath put foorth.
yet more reuerencing the open phraſe of moſt holy
Scripture, and lothing rediculous diſtinctions, where
playneneſſe ought to be, he maketh Darius that foloweth
Cambyſes to be Darius the Mede. But to differ
from the Chaldeans, either forged autours or forgers,
geueth hym in all but twenty eyght yeeres.
               4 Aben Ezra vppon Daniel the 9. teſtifieth, that he
ſaw recordes for the Perſian kinges, by whiche he
founde from the ſurpryſing of Babel vnto the twentieth
of Artaxerxes fourtie nyne yeeres. Theſe be
his wordes: And beholde, Ninteene yeeres were of the
reigne of Cyrus and Achaſhueroſh, and two of Darius, and
he reigned twelue. And ſo it is written in a Booke of the
Kinges of Paras, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      yeeres of Artaxasta the king:
So beholde the whole is 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſeuens vntill Nehe
                        •
                     ias came,
as it is written in the booke of Ezra. Thus teſtifieth Aben

Ezra, who liued aboue 400. yeeres ago: a great Aſtronomer
in Sebaſtian Munſters iudgement, whereby
he coulde not be ignoraunt of Ptolomyes Chaldeans.
A deadly enemy he was to Chriſt, and therefore deſerueth
better credite, ſpeakyng for vs agaynſt his
owne purpoſe, then Chaldeans, more wicked and
perpetuall haters of Daniel.
               5 All they who make 49.The one spe
                        •
                     he of ſeuen ſeuens Dan. 9. graunted commonly the tyme ſeperated for buylding Ieruſalem (which muſt be the fyrſt part in the partition) forceth an yeelding to a plaine declaration of Gabriels Chronicle for our redemption. yeeres for the buylding of
Ieruſalem, who are full manv, wyl be founde as well
damners of theſe Chaldeans: whereof amongſt Romiſtes
in Spayne Hector Pintus gaue the ſame reuerence
to Daniels playnnes as dyd Iohn Calum in Geneuah,
and careth not for humane credite, where
Greekes thought them ſelues ſtrongeſt. And the Diuines
in the laſt Frenche edition, haue deſpiſed this
Chaldy dreame. Genebrard for the French, Romiſtes
is no ſmall man (honored now as I heard at Rome)
whom Adricomius folowed in the Chronicle ioyned
to his Mappes. Henry VVolphius is a learned, godly,
and zelous reuerencer of the Scriptures playnnes,
who friendly controlleth M. Scaliger, and confirmeth
Beroaldus, departyng euen from his owne Fathers
iudgement for the holy trueth. Agaynſt all this muſt
it be my particuler lot, in ſo many of myne opinion,
to be onely counted new?
               6 Learned men by them haue gon too farre. For I. Sc.
condemneth all the thouſandes of Diuines, who do
thinke that Darius the Mede. Dan. 5. gate Babylon by
conqueſt. A ſtrange thing. Such wryters ſhoulde be
hated, who deceyue ſo learned men, as M. Scaliger is
knowen to be of all Learned men.
               Two more deceites from theſe Chaldeans, deceyuing him and
an other Scholer wel deſeruing of learnyng, ſhould make vs thinke
no better of theſe ſta
                     •
                  e Chaldy forgery, then 
                     ••
                  iamus ſhoulde

haue done of Epeus wordy Horſe, and hurtfull Sinons tale.
Cateles Vcalegon his houſe, with others, was not more ouertaken
thereby of Vul
                     •
                  anes flames, then our wrytinges ſhoulde be, yf
thoſe Babylonians might beare ſway. Take fyrſt an example,
of Ezekiel where he writeth in this manner, Ch 
                     •
                  , 1. In the thirteth
yeere I was in the Captiuitie. From whence he beginneth
his reckonyng it may ſoone be diſcuſſed. For this was in the
fift yeere of the Captiuitie of Ioachin, adde vnto that all Iakims
tyme, eleuen yeeres, ſo we haue 16. and of Ioſias 31. ſo many as
wyll with 16. make 30. that is 14. then you climbe vp vnto
the 18. of Ioſias: that moſt famous yeere the middle of a Iubilee,
hauing that noble Paſſeouer, and Moſes copy hid from Manaſſes,
founde agayne and read before the king, by which it was
knowen that captiuity was at haude: which when Iewes captiued
woulde not beleeue, but that they might haue ſhunned it,
Ezekiel hath relation to a famous denouncing of it 30. yeeres
afore, and by that teſtimony woulde both calme the captiued, and
aduiſe Zedekias not to reſiſt the Babylonian. And this of ancientie
Iewes did ſee, Ionothan, Iarchi, Kimchi, Abrabbaniel. Olde
father Ierome taught the ſame among Latines, and Theodoret
among Greekes, yet M. Sc. thinketh that Ezekiel had relation
to Nabopollaſar, whom his Chaldeans in Ptolomy haue. In defence
of my ſelfe, whom ſome by him woulde diſgrace, this
much I wyll ſay.
               Chaldeans deſerue ſmall thankes for playing faſt and looſe,
yf that which by playne reaſon for Scripture, Hebrewes, Greekes,
and Latines, haue hytherto helde faſt, now muſt be holden looſe.
               Yf for the firſt verſe of Ezekiel all Diuines haue been bereft
of iudgement, how great is our darknes? and who wyll euer regarde
our skil? The regarding helpe from Aſſur hath wrough
                     •
                  
vs this diſgrace.
               Whereas H. Wolphius his friende, the next yeere after he
wrote, corrected that, & he ſemeth to like wel of it: He first ſhould
defende his Chaldeans, and not his folowers, where he is ſilent.
               
                  
For an other Learned man: M. F. Iunius is deceyued as much.
Marke what he writeth vpon thoſe textes. Ezra, 4. 5. & 24.
They hyred counſellers agaynſt them, to diſſlolue theyr
counſell all the dayes of Cyrus king of Paras, vnto the
reigne of Darius king of Paras. This Darius is (in the learned
mans worke) Darius Hystaſpis, and him be maketh to reigne
ten yeeres after Cyrus firſt yeere. Now for the verſe 34. of the
ſame Chapter marke Ezra. Then was hindered the worke,
and continued hindered vntyll the ſeconde yeere of the
reigne of Darius king of Paras. Though it hath been doubtles
with Iewes and Gentiles, that one and the ſame Darius is
meant in both places, yet he maketh the later, an other, Darius
Nothus, later by 98. yeeres. So theſe Chaldeans make vs breede
of one Kis two, of one Ezra two, of one Nehemias two, of one
Darius the firſt two, of one other Darius § three: & for two yeres
in him to make 100.D. Artaxerxes, D. Hyſtaſpis, and Darius Nothus.
               
               The ſaw wherewith Manaſſes did cut Eſay the iuſt into
peeces, had not worſe teeth then theſe Chaldeans, who make vs
rent with our teeth the holy worde, from that playnneſſe which
is in Chriſt. The Troianes which did pull downe their owne
Walles to receyue enimies to burne their Citie, are not ſimpler
then they who wylbe triumphing agaynſt a defender of their
owne nations Diuines, and wyll pull downe their owne Walles,
made not by Neptune and Apollo, as Homers Pergama, but by
Diuines of all learned languages. And this for Chaldeans, being
not a dead Horſe, but in Scripture language, dead Dogges.
               I could haue wyſhed that Learned men had not been brought
agaynſt mee: whom I turne more enimies to my aduerſary, then
I am, vpon his grauntes, and turne them to be vpon condemners
of his iudgement. I woulde haue been loth to caſt any blot of
their owne Incke vpon their Papers, yf I myght haue been vnprouoked.
This any may ſee, that M. Fr. Iunius vpon Hoſea,
differeth lytle from myne accompt, where he makes 680. yeeres
from the ſixt of Ezekias vnto our Lordes death. I make ſeuen

leſſe then be, leſſe, becauſe I holde that the Captiuitie was but
70. yeeres, which begun from lech
                     •
                  nias by him ſhould be 77.
but no ſillable of Prophet will warrant that. After I haue him
with me against my aduerſary & him ſelfe alſo. Let them for that
thanke the Chaideans.
               He had neede of a bolde corage,Oppoſe this to al their rumors, who by theyr owne teſtimonie blame a cauſe whiche they know not. and many tongues
to ſpeake for him, that woulde haue all the worlde to
ſhrinke from an Angell and Daniels meanyng, for ſo
vile, baſe, obſcure, tryflyng ragges of Vtopian Scriueners.
And this for them, or nothing is enough.
               This harme is not lytle, that our common people▪ to
whom Bibles are propounded as playne vppon often
readyng, muſt be caried to mistruſt the playne text. But
herein I must not be vehemet agaynst my Aduerſary,
who leſſe regarded Chaldeans then Olympiades. For
staying of ſuch as wyll needes win hym avictory, against
his hope I haue written, and must, more then I wyſhed.
               Whereas ſome ſtumble at Diuinitie for diuerſitie of
myndes in playne Stories,Papiſtes blame vs for differing, though Bellarmin and Genebrard differ in the ſame rate, without particular blame of them. wherein the striuers knowe
that any vppon paynes due, may ſee the trueth: Suche
stumblers may ſoone finde their condemnation iust.
It was alwayes vſual to try trueth by diſputyng. And as
no man thinketh Arithmatique hard: nor law: For Merchauntes
pleading vpon accomptes, when ſummes with
their authority are brought togeather: So none ſhould
here thinke the Bible hard, when the ſummes of it are
cleere, yf they wyll examyne Heathen, how their testimony
is nothyng. The Christians that folow them deſerue
report of humane readyng. But all wryters vpon
Scripture may not be diſgraced Proteſtantes Romistes,
and Iewes, & euen they thatWho graunt ſome poyntes which ſubdue al their diſſention to the trueth. ſtriue, all may not be counted
ſenſeleſſe, when Scripture is cleere, and vpon Scripture
they ſpeake. And Heathen ſhoulde not ouerrule
Religion, when euen by other Heathen Scripture preuayleth:
               
                  
THus I haue ſufficiently cleered the ſpeech of Gabriel:
in defence of the late Diuines, of England wyth
Scotland: of Spaine, Fraunce, Hiderbeg, Tigurin, Geneua:
checking the old error of Greekes, making the Sunne go
backe 100. yeres.
               1 The matter hath been ſo poliſhed: that for the limites,
the aduerſarie yeeldeth vnto me: & for the parts
to be greater then the whole: he fighteth not againſt me
but againſt himſelfe, art, all men, and poſsibilitie.
               2 Touching the reaſon that droue him into theſe
ſtraits: the opinion that the Jewes were vnder Perſia 70.
yeares more than Gabriels portion 130. of 490. vpon examination
that is found more vnlikely, than any thing in
any count of time. For we both, and the two famous lerned
M. Iunius and M. Scaliger, (the onely in that on hys
ſide) we all foure, graunt the exceſſe of yeres not to bee
after the building of the Temple. Now, that it cannot
be 107. afore, betwixt Cyrus and Aggeis Prophecie, but
32. onely, whole ſtreames of reaſons I haue ſhewed: &
Ebrewes, Greekes, Latines make it but the ſixt part of this
time, that is, 17. or 18. yeres. Now, to blame another for
not going ſixe fold beyond the common opinion, this
dealing might be counted ſtrange.
               3 This one argument amongſt whole troupes, this
one alone might quiet all: that the returned, which were
once 49000. built the Temple.
               4 Touching the prophane, by particulers it was ſhewed,
that from Cyrus Babilons warre to Xerxes, (euen by
heathen) 30. was the moſt that likelihood would grant:
that from Xerxes warre to Alexanders, of the ſuppoſed
140. by Grekes of that Age, in ſure and plaine reaſons 40.
full clearly might, to the ſatisfaction of any heathen, bee
quite cut off.
               5 Touching heathen diſturbances, I turne them to
ſerue the Church: in Olympiades, about Rome, and ſuch.

                  Phlegon fighteth for vs: whoſe whole fragment, becauſe
few had it, I cauſed to be printed, for Scholers vſe.
               6 Pauſanias likewiſe againſt himſelfe exactly for my
ſumme: and the Greke Diuines I brought againſt theyr
cited Olympiades: yea, Iulian and Lucian are brought to
ſerue Daniel.
               
               7 The table of Archontes, the malice of Philoſophers,
the vanitie of the Chaldeans haue been detected.
               8 Theſe points hee that holdeth not profitable for
helping to ioyne Moſes, Daniel, Matthew, Paul, and all
together: and ſpecially the Iubilees, beginning from the
partition of the Land by Ieſus, vpon driuing out the heathen,
ending at the entring for vs into heauen, by our
Lord and Sauiour Ieſus, by texts cleare and plaine: hee
that would deſpiſe this, hath courage not following, but
running afore learning: and I thinke, with none well aduiſed
can finde commendation.
            
            
               Obiection.
               But this ſhould not be put in print to the diſgrace of
a learned man: priuate conference ſhould rather end the
matter.
            
            
               Anſwere.
               This Obiection may be caſt off for manie cauſes.
               1 Mine aduerſarie conferred priuately with me, before
I wrote of the Scripture concent: and vpon occaſion
of ſome ſtrange points in his Author, whereby his accompt
made yeres three-ſcore for bare three: he told me
that he had not ſtudied theſe points: and requeſted me
to write of them.
               2 Preſently vpon the comming forth of my Booke, he
falleth a confuting it in open lectures, amongſt yong ſtudents
vnable to iudge: who as Nero ſang the deſtruction
of Troy, when he ſet his own Citie on fire: ſo thoſe yong
ſtudents triumphed, when Daniel, and Gabriel were in

confuting. If this partiality be tolerable in him: to ſpeak
to yong men, & not to print that all may iudge: they wil
grant me good leaue to defend that truth in print, which
the Aduerſarie did requeſt me for to print at the firſt.
               3 My learned frend told his Auditorie, that hee was
bound to honor the truth, more than our frendſhip: and
therefore would not ſpare, euen a follower of a vniuerſall
opinion. He that will not thinke the ſame as lawfull
for me, will ſeeme blinded with finiſter partialitie.
               4 Vpon a ſhort Epiſtle to one A. T. prouing Mardochai
captiued, whoſe life would diſcuſſe our controuerſie:
mine aduerſarie promiſed to take the blame on him,
rather than I ſhould print more: yet ſoone after falleth
on confuting it, with ſome dealings, that none indifferent
would like off: & his admirers being called to their
owne iudgement vpon Eſter, ſaw that they were deceaued:
and ſaid that the fame of the learned man carried
them to conclude as he wold. Now, all ſuch as condemn
all Ebrewes, Grekes, Engliſh and their owne hart, muſt bee
warned to deale better: and other warning would they
take none, till I came to this, manie did I ſend them.
               5 Another D. of Diuinitie, who abridged Codoman,
flowing with errours: yet condemning mine Aduerſarie
in all our chiefe differences, & granting me full manie
points, wherby mine Aduerſarie would tell him that
he ouerthrew himſelfe: vpon certain demands daſhing
all his paines, tooke a right courſe: he confeſſed that he
had no skill in theſe matters, and would yeeld vnto him
whom he prouoked. One Maſter Jackson a merchant, can
teſtifie that to him it was ſpoken: and the Gentlemen of
Grayes-Inne know reaſon why that was his beſt way. And
this mention would I haue ſpared, but that one D. Ch.
would haue him anſwered, as though he had wonne the
ſpurres: the man himſelfe tooke the beſt way. I dare aſſure
mine Aduerſarie that he ought to haue done ſo: if

euer by reſiſtance he make his cauſe good: let the Reader
thinke me of ſmall iudgement.
               6 So many are infected with error vpon his Lectures,
to hold the Scripture vncertaine: that not onely Printing
muſt correct them, but alſo he muſt be moued to acknowledge
his ouerſight.
               7 It is great pitie that one ſo well deſeruing of the
Church, ſhould be ſuffred by vnreaſonable reuerence to
build vp Jericho: wheras in frendſhip iuſt reproofe bears
great ſway, which muſt be giuen grauely, and taken patiently.
               8 We tooke Vmperes, the Archbiſhop of Canterburie,
and the Biſhop of London. By their arbitrement hee
doth know or ſome may, that neither hee nor anie will
ſoon foile any ioynt of that Scripture Concent, but for going
about will take foyles manie. When after their cenſures
yong men ſhall ſing as at Neroes flames, what man
of courage with learning would abide it.
               He that wrote of Scripture Concent to her Maieſtie, vnles
for ioining Ebrew and Greke ſtudies he knew himſelf
commonly holden inferior to none: he might be blamed
of imprudencie, with taking away the firſt letter of Rhetorique:
that which Tully ſaid, Demoſthenes could hardly
pronounce, for the boldnes of his enterpriſe, taken before
BB, and DD. as a Doctor of Cambridge anſwered for
him: vpon commending the weight of the matter, when
one demanded, why then the BB. or the DD. meddeled
not with it. He that in ſo weightie a cauſe would ſuffer
rumors to quel the truth: and yeeld to men not acquainted
with his ſtudies, ſhould not be thought of iudgment
or loue of the truth.
               Thus I truſt the godly wilbe ſatisfied, the fame or infamie
from the bad, ſhould moue none of iudgement.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            The amending of faults eſcaped.
            THe number of ſheetes are not duely marked by the
letters, by reaſon that a fragment of Phlegon printed
in Greeke was the worke of a Printer dwelling farre
off, and of another then the other: and latelyer printed
then the ſheet of theWhich was printed in Octoebr, the other in Februarie. Chaldeans, which by the vnheedines
of the Printers, both haue their reckoning amiſle, the
one A. the other I. But for amending faults they may be
noted thus: Phleg. and Chald. the other leaues be in order.
Through all, thus amend faults, D. page 6. line 12.
and 13. twenty three yeares while Ioſue was vnder Perſia.
InIn the Greek the firſt note of the text corrupted, muſt be referred to the former page. Phlegon line 25. reade end & cure of the plague.
In the next page in the margent reade Homer Iliad. 2. 595.
for Odiſs. 2. F. 1. the ſecond page in the margent rede Homer
Iliad. 3. for lib. 3. In G. 2. line 1. reade ſunne of iuſtice
for ſonne. on the next page line 13. reade ſunne for ſonne.
In H. 3. page 2. line 16. reade the mede Datis for Mardo
               
                  •••
               s.
In the next page in the marget rede Demetrius Phalereus.
In I in the margent rede 4. y. that is yeares, for 4. 7.
In Cald. line 7. reade places, 30. for 32. and line 20. reade
either knowen, for knowen either: And line 21. reade
or thought vpon to the, for or to the, and in the margent
wittingly, for willingly. And page 7. line 29. open, for
vpon. In L. line 3. reade Hidelberge. And page 3. line 9.
reade ſiniſter for ſiniſtred. And line 10. for prouink, reade
prouing. And page 4. line 14. in ſome copies reade ſone
may, for ſome may. Let the gentle reader of him ſelfe amend
other ſcapes by the matter.
         
      
   