
      
         
            
            
            A
Declaration vnto the
Lordes, of the Iewes deſire theſe
fiftene yeres for Ebrew explication of our Greke Goſpell:
hindered by a braſe of wicked ſelly D.D.: wherof
the God of Iewes & Gentiles hath payd
the one: & will pay the other: when
he hath detected who he is.
            
            1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            I heard, R. H. of a moſt honorable
bent of the K. for clearing in Ebrew & Grek by the Apoc. all the
Bible: & my deſire that way is ſtird by newes from Graecia. One
Edw. Crain a ſhipper of N. Caſtell: was long in Thrace: where
Iewes dayly reioyced of our knowledge in the law, hoping to
learne from vs ſalvation. And one came with him to Venice, for
Leyden, hearing (by the Poſt of Collen belike) that I meant ſtay
there. He wold be fully inſtructed of me: that hee might returne
to ſaue his nation. And I whole fiften yeres craued allowance to
ſhew Chriſt through the Bible. But Satan hindred all hitherto.
Now I hope the ſting in the Dragons tayle ſhalbe pluck vp: that
no libellers crew ſting more. They ioy that I ſhew Ieſus not Ioſeph
ſon to Ely: Luc. 3. Iechonias, Matth. 1. only by Kings phraſe father
to Salathiel, by all Rabbines vpon Ier. 22. & Parted Macedoniens
the fourth Kingdome in Daniel: & Daniels 490. yeares ſeauen
times the captiuity ſpace, begon at the Angels meſſage & drawen
exactly vnto our Lordes death. Euen by Aben Ezra their
owne Doctor: forced to overthrow their owne Thalmudiques all:
by clear ending of Moyſes. Alſo this was acceptable, that I ſhewed
Pſ. 16. That▪ Chriſt ſayd, that thou wilt not leaue me to the Graue
till the body ſee corruption. & ſo Act. 2. & Crede: crucified dead &
buryed: & went to God: wher 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                hath heauen for the Godly,
& Gehenna for the wicked: both on high. They thought we in
England held a going to Hell. As Chryſologus now 1200. yeres:

& Rome confuted by Iſaac Ben Arama. fol. 205. that ſo our Goſpel
could not be from God: yf it taught that the Fathers could mis
of Paradiſe hence or Meſſias. The very Deuels & Porphyrie their
Angel in Euſeb. Apod. Euang. 3. ſay: our Lordes ſoule was the
Godlieſt of all ſoules: & the ſoule of the godly goeth into the ſoile
of heauen: wher Ieſus & all iuſt bee. This much the very Deuels
confeſſed: But our tranſlation Pſ. 16. thou wilt not leaue my ſoule
in Hell, & the ſame Act. 2. is more ſhameles then any part of the
Alkoran. And a ſixt poinct cheared the text of the holy Grek: wher
Beza 60. yeres checked the text & milliones after him. Hence they
thought God never gaue it. For as in the courſe of nature God
preſerveth all his creatures & all the letters of the Law: ſo he wold
haue kept euery letter of the New Teſtament yf he gaue it. But before
me none defended the general purenes & eloquēce to be from
God. So longe they ſtaggered: But now reioiced vncredibly. Fiue
Hebrew litle works the moſt Eloquent Rabbin of all the worlde,
as prage cenſured, Rabbi Ruben ſent into England for me. Beſide
that which I printed to the delite of all Chriſtendom: But the libellers
crew that libelled I forged the firſt of ſix: bezelled them
that poor Ruben died in vnperfect hope. A copie of one a merchand
hath in Ingland. And the Turky marchants might find who had
them. I wold requeſt the K. to try who were the Atheiſtes that
durſt ſo deale to hinder the glory of Chriſtendome: & ſalvation of
Abrahams ſonnes. I haue lately complayned to your Lordſhips a
litle: But I reſerue this to myne owne complaint to his ſacred Maieſtie.
To whom I haue to ſhew the original of Abraham Rubens
Epiſtle printed: for a memoriall againſt them that libelled I forged
it. The one died horribly. Men may mark the others end. I haſten
home to inſtruct the K. & Pr. yf it pleaſe them in few houres in
all the Bible: & groundes of Diuinity ſtudy. And then I may detect
the barbarous atheiſme & brainſick profaneſſe of the libellers,
ſcoffing the ſcottiſh miſt & brettiſh nation, as the mate wold ſcoph:

for theſe poinctes: That he turneth Atheanly, for the Popes vſe,
our Lordes wordes in 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                to damne heathen Governours
of tyranny. Wher our L. Prov. 8. telleth that by him Princes decree
right. But he wold teach that our Lord taught againſt Caeſar:
to bee gilti by Humane Lawes. And for Grek in 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                he is
to be accuſed of extreme blindenes, twelue times the 70. haue the
word: but the Ebrew anſwerable never ſignifieth tyranny: & old
Heathen never vſe it. So his raving is againſt the cōcent of Scripture,
which God gaue: I did but ſhew: & his denying Meſſias to bee
Chriſt our Lord in M. Liuely, vpon Dan. 9. & time of his baptiſme
or death: which endeth Moſes, to be plain in prophecy: & his aſſertion
that Sacrifice was Lawfull in Emperour Veſpaſians dayeſi:
this croſſing of all ſalvation worſe then Machumedean ſhalbe obiected:
& his Lunatique ſcoffing of the concluſion of the moſt famous
Syllogiſme of Archb. whit & B. Winton, concluding vnvincibly
that in the Crede to deſcend to Hell is to go vp to heauen:
this ſhalbe vrged to diſgrade him: or to ſend him to Biſhop the
wild in Virginia. And wheras he beſtoweth: the terme Aſſe on me:
The K. may ſet him to diſpute whether the libeller or I ſhall beare
that name. Yf it pleaſe the K. to try my vein: yf in 24. ſermons I
make not his court better in all the Bible, & rules of Diuinity:
then the libeller will euer be: I will be greved at no diſgrace. I ſtay
to heare of the Iew ſent from 15. yeres zeale of his folk: who giue
me ſuch wordes, all, for hebrew eloquēce, & the moſt, for perpetual
orthodoxie, that wold make Barre Loe to burſt their panches for
envy. Yet yf the wind ſerve I will haſten to ſalute his M. & will take
order to haue the Iew ſent to England after leaue that he may come.
being yet vnbaptized. I wiſh him to heare before the King all the
Bible in one Hebrew Sermon: & then Baptized.
            
               Your Lordſhips moſt Humble
H. BROVGHTON.
            
            
         
      
   