
      
         
            
            
            AN ADVERTISEMENT OF CORRVPTION IN OVR HANDLING OF RELIGION. To the Kings Majestie.
            By HVGH BROVGHTON.
            1604.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            To the Kings Maieſtie.
            
               GREAT and deadly errours (most Gracious Soveraigne) runne currant in England: as good Divinitie: for which God, from whom ever treſpas receyveth iust recompence, doth and will plague the deceavers and deceaved. They which know the errours may not be ſilent: though the errers haue ſhewed teeth of Iron and hard faces against their warner for better counſell. And only your Maiestie can, and you must force the deceavers to confeſſe before all the world, how they haue bene led amiſſe.
            
               Of accuſing the holy text, most pure, and expreſsing Gods wiſedome.
               
                  MOſes telleth that Abraham bought a buriall place in Hebron, for price of money, and that Iacob bought a field in Sychem for lambes: and Iacob was buried in Hebrō, and the Patriarkes in Sychem. Now if a man ſhould ſay that Iacob was buried in Sychem, he reiecteth Moſes, & all the authoritie of God. Or if he ſay that Abraham bought the field which Iacob bought, and ſay that Abrahā
                   bought Sychems plot for money, The vntrueth is augmented: yet all this doe our right reverend Fathers. In theſe wordes from Act. 7.16. and 17. as they would make the ſimple to beleeve: And Iacob deſcended into Egypt, and dyed, both he, and our Fathers, and were caried over into Sychem, and layd in the ſepulchre that Abraham bought for money of the ſonnes of Emor, the ſonne of Sichem. By this Iacob ſhould be caried to Sychem, and be buried there: and Abraham ſhould be the

purchaſer, and for money, and Iacob and the Patriarches ſhould be buried together. So the Iewes would ſay that Machmad makes no greater madnes in his Al-koran: ſeeing Abrahams purchaſe was in Hebron, & for 400. ſickles: and that of Sychem was Iacobs, & for an hundreth lambes. And Iacob was buried in Hebron, as was told, & the twelue ſonnes in Sychem. The Biſhops ſawe that this was moſt falſe: & runne from euill to worſe. And thus their margent note ſpeaketh, vpon verſ. 16. For (B) money. Here appeareth an errour. For Abraham ſeemeth to be put in the text in the ſteed of Iacob. For Iacob bought the ſepulchre of Emor, and not Abraham, who bought before a field of Ephron. Thus we accuſe the holy Ghoſt for giuing vs a corrupted New Teſtament. And our countries heard not that any Greke copy from the firſt to the laſt differed here. So the firſt ſhould be corrupt: & ſo Machmad ſhould ſay truely, that we had not a pure N. Teſtament. Alſo the Iewes rule ſhould condemne vs: a comon rule & generall: in Thalm. Ieruſ. San. fo. 20. Diathece ſe batelah Mikzathah batelah cullah. A Teſtament which faileth in part, faileth in the whole. This our errour is not firſt ours, but old, and knowen to Iewes: whereby their millions deſpiſe the Goſpell, and hold S. Stephen no martyr: as miſſing in Moſes plain ſtory. Whereas in trueth S. Stephen meant thus: Iacob died in Egypt, the Patriarkes died in Egypt: Only the Patriarkes were caried to Sichem: Iacob and the Patriarkes were buried: Iacob in Hebron: in ground which Abraham bought, and bought for money, and not for Lambes: The Patriarkes were buried in Sichem, in ground which Iacob, not Abraham, bought, & not for money, but for an hundreth lambes. Saint Stephen meant all this: which all, we pervert to cauſe millions of millions to reiect the New Teſtament,

and to runne to eternall flames. The rare elegancie of S. Stephens wordes would haue made a Iewe know that he ſpake in the Prophets ſtyle, & ſhortnes: but his ſpeech would be harſhe, to one not longe acquainted with the Prophetes maner. To vnderſtand this, three rules muſt be deliuered. One, that Vau the Ebrew, is ſometimes, which: as in Malach. 3. and Mark cha. 1.1. which ſhall prepare thy way: And often in two members ioyned, in other tongues by, AND, it is omitted in the Prophetes, as that in Pſ. 133. Like the dew of Hermon, which falleth vpō moūt Sion. For, like the dew of Hermon, AND that which falleth vpon mount Sion. A third Hebrew matter commeth, hard even for Ebrewes, and often noted by the holy Ghoſt among the 848. margent notes, vpon moſt exact text wordes, but worthy of notes: As Hande, for the handes: barre, for the barres: Sonne, for the ſonnes. So, grave, Act. 7. for, The graves: The ſingular being put gerally for the plurall. Theſe things being conſidered, Saint Stephen will cleare him ſelfe to all learned Iewes admiration. For, thus the Greek, Hebraizing, meant: Iacob deſcended into Egypt, he, and our Fathers which were caried to Sichem. And they were put in Graue: that which Abraham bought for price of money: AND that from Emor the Sichemite. Any acquainted with the Ebrew ſtyle would thus vnderſtand Saint Lukes Greeke. And ſo the New Teſtament ſhould be farre from blame, and in high admiration, and Iacob ſhould not be left vnburied in Saint Stephen, nor buried with the Patriarkes: nor Abraham a purchaſer in Sychem, nor Sychem purchaſe made by money, and not by lambes. This our ignorance muſt be noted, for the thouſands or rather millions of copies diſgracing our ſelues: though in the paynes expected it may be

amended. For copies vnrevocable ſold now 46. yeres, our darknes muſt be hightened: and the ſcripture muſt be defended, as pure all, and moſt ſyncere. None that haue any ſparke of grace will envy that, but wiſh it withall might maintayned.
            
            
               Of perverting the holy text of the old Test. in 848. places.
               THe old Teſt. in Ebrew hath in the margent words of warning for others in the text 848. times, yet alwayes the text word is exact, and the margent warneth of ſome matter profitable for the depth of Ebrew ſkill, or helpeth in a doubtfull phraſe: or telleth of the like elſwhere vſed with ſome little difference: or in propre names which mē gaue vnfit, layth a fitter to be read: or for brood ſpeeches readeth ciuiller. And both the text is exact, and the margent profitable. But the margent readings are omitted in many copies: And none without great blame alter the text. Amongeſt Ebrewes David Kimchi was found raſh herein in his preface to the booke of Ioſuah. But hee was ſharply taken vp by others: yea and he calleth backe himſelfe in particulars. Kimchi ſaid: that the Bible was corrupted in Babylon, and the margent was a correction. That his opinion is ſhewed to be moſt fooliſh and deadly againſt Gods word, by Elias Levita praef ad Maſſorita. Biblia: and it might daſh all authoritie of ſcripture. Alſo Barbinel the moſt curious that euer, I trow, handled the tongue, though not the ſoundeſt: yet herein he ſoundly confuteth Kimchi in his praeface to Ezekiel. Yet a learned man of Cambridge, M. Edw. Liuely, maketh the margent the right reading, for Dan. 9. penned after Babell fell: and by Daniel full of wealth, and able to keepe his owne bookes. That

his dealing is extreemely dangerous to the authoritie of Scripture. For if in fiftie two yeares in Babel after the Temples fall, Moſes and the Prophetes had ſo many corruptions in longer time more would grow. The learned man dealt here not learnedly. A proſeſſour of Ebrew 30. yeares might haue ſhewed that the text was ſtill moſt exact: and in many places far the more curious Ebrew: and he ſhould not weaken the glory of Gods providence, whoſe watchfulnes hath preſerved every letter of all the holy Hebrew that his Prophetes wrot for the vſe of all ages. Many booke-prophetes wrote for the vſe of Iſraell, while their tongue, families and townes ſtood: which afterwardes would not profit, when Iſraell periſhed: and heathen ſhould be vexed in ſearching ſtories not plain.
               Thoſe bookes the laſt Prophetes extinguiſhed, and made vp an abſolute pithie ſtorie fit for all ages. And ſo much we muſt defend to every letter. Eccleſiaſticall authoritie in a certen libell commendeth M. Livelies booke. Biſhops that know Ebrew will not aſſent, nor any who vſe adviſement. Authoritie ſhould make Lively recant. This blamer knoweth that he hath read thriſe mo Ebrew auctours then he, and will defend each of the 848. words blamed by M. Lively. And a worke titled Tiphereth Iſrael, would haue told M. Lively more thē he knoweth for this matter, and much more, to ſpeak better of the holy text. And the right reverend fathers ſhould write of the Bibles pureneſſe firſt, how the text is ſound, before they diſpute of further matter. All thinges muſt be done in order in the Church of God. And if men regard money not learning, Gods face will be vpon them.
            
            
               
               Of Tzau, an Ebrew worde in Hoſee, raſhly blamed.
               
                  IEroboam the firſt, bade Iſraell worſhip calues at Dan and Bethel: vpon his word they did ſo. That Hoſee touched in one ſyllable, Tzau, a charge. M. Liuely writeth that the text is corrupt: Shau by him it ſhould be. No Ebrew told him ſo. Only he told him ſelfe ſo. By equall authoritie he might make a new Bible of his owne head. Hee bringeth the Lxx. for his warrant. They tranſlate: Vaine thinges, as Shau: The anſwere is eaſie. They tranſlate cō
                  monly for Heathen capacitie: where Iewes ſtories would be hard for them So they entitle the bookes of Samuel, The Kings. Becauſe Heathen would not ſoone perceaue how Core his ſonne ſhould haue ſuch a title. So Heathen would not ſoone ſee how Oſee ſpake of Ieroboams charge: and therefore the Lxx. take for Tzau, Shau; for Charge, Vain things, dealing moſt wittily. This work of M. Lively is ſolde in Paules. But the auctor ſhould amend that: We may not croſſe our owne ground: that the Scripture is all pure & cleare, in one copie or other: and here in all that haue bene ſpokē off. And M. Liuely alone fighteth againſt all the world: But that our Eccleſiaſticall authority fighteth in his allowance, for him againſt our good.
            
            
               Of Daniels ſeauens: the right meaning and corruption commended by our Eccleſiasticall, and Stationers.
               SInce Adamfell, on the day of his creation, and brought death before he walked in any obediēce, to kindle Gods anger to the full, yet God in mercy vſed many meanes to breed faith in the redeemer: beſide the warnings of his

word. The flood deſtroyed all but eight, & of all the men nothing remaineth but ſpirites in priſon, except eight ſaued in the Arke. That ſeverity might haue made them all wiſe. Yet Cham was not bettered: but his race called out Idolatry and Babels Tower for that. wherevpon God bereft theſe builders of the tongue that ſpake of hope in the redeemer, that they ſhould no more heare of him, till Babel ſhould fall by Sem in Cyrus and by Iapheth in Darius, when Perſians and Medes tooke Babell. And amongſt his owne people he reckoned the worldes age to that time, moſt exactly and plainly, yeares 3470. And then his Angell telleth Daniel for Darius and Cyrus, and all nations, of the kingdome of Salvation: and nameth the redemer the moſt holy: Meſſias the Governer: Meſſias that ſhall confirme the covenaunt with many: and telleth of his kingdome, how it ſhalbe in ſufferings. Iudah ſaw the fall of Salomons kingdome, their hope: and the fall of Babel the glorie of nations▪ and now firſt experience might teach that the kingdomes of this world vnder the ſun, had nothing but vexation of ſpirit. At that time it was fit to tell all the world of the kingdome of heauen: when Iewes & Gentiles ſaw all the earth curſed. The Iewes kingdome had fallen: and they were told they ſhould never haue an earthly kingdome more: and Hethen kingdomes were ſhewed to be as ſavage beaſtes coaming out of the great ſea toſſed with many windes. So in that opportunitie an Angel, called Gabriel, the mighty man of God, whom Daniel had ſeene before, cometh in the Evening to Daniel praying for a return home, for his people to reſtore their religion: and telleth him that his prayer was heard, that Ieruſalem ſhalbe reſtored, as Eſaie foretold Cyrus ſhould do it, that mount Sion ſhould haue ſacrifices ſeaven times

the ſpace of ſeaventy yeares captivity, that is, 490. yeres. But exactly then the Son of God would conſecrate him ſelfe to end Moſes and to bring in an Eternall redemption: and as he had Oxen and ſheepe in ſacrifices for his body, and their blood for the blood of his covenant: hee would confirme a covenaunt for all nations. As the Goſpell recordeth what he hath done, leaving bread for his body in ſeale of covenaunt, and wine for the new teſtament by his covenant: So at his death he ſhould end Moſes Lawes, and all Leviticall function: that no Moſaicall ſacrifice ſhould afterwardes be lefull. And the time of all this matter is clearely and ſtrictly ſet downe: that Cyrus & Darius knew when the ſonne of God would worke redemption: in which hope 49000. Iewes leaue Babel for Ieruſalem, and ſo many of Iſrael as had hope of Salvation, thought of Ieruſalem in all countreys where they were ſcattered. Alſo the Sonne of God is called by Gabriel, as was ſaid, Meſſias: in ſuch Ebrew as it muſt needes be a propre name: which it is not againe in all the old teſtament: and Saint Iohn for Meſſias cha. 1. and 4. forceth vs to looke vnto the Angells ſpeach: and ſtill the name of CHRIST through the new Teſtament: in ſo much that to deny MESSIAS here to meane Our Lord and Saviour, that is nothing els but to deny all the New Teſta. Beſides, for certainty of all: God telleth that by the tenth part of this time exactly, from the leaue to returne, Ieruſalem ſhalbe walled, but not without much adoe: ſo forty nine yeres are ſet alone, with the ſtories of 4900. thouſand Iewes interlaced, leaſt Heathen lyes ſhould break the trueth of the Chronicle. When God had given Cyrus all the kingdomes of the earth, then he maketh a decree to build the Temple: and to giue a ſubſidie throw 120. nations,

to helpe the Iewes home. Long warres had Cyrus afore he became ſo great. Eſay did name him by his name, and foretold of his victories. And Heathen doe record them: and Lucian recordeth, that Cyrus liued 100. yeares: and Xenophon, that he very yong began warre: ſo his glory might well by Greekes begin where ſcripture placeth the Chaldean: to whom Heathen Greekes giue no ſuperioritie over the Perſians. After Cyrus tooke Babel, he reigned three yeares: when Daniel faſted becauſe the building of the Temple was hindred by letters written to Artaxata named in Ezra 4. and called Prince of Perſia, Dan. 10. And ſoone Cyrus might dye. Otherwiſe Daniel would ſtirr him to further his own decree: and Herodot bringeth his death neare Babels fall, by Scythian Thamar. Artaxata or Cambyſes had reigned ſo long with his father, that he had put to death all the chief Nobility: By Lucian citing Perſique writers: and after his hinderance of the Temple, Chriſt with his eyes, like a flame of fire, Dan. 10. would rewarde him according to his workes: being Can-byſhes, a Prince of ſhame: and Herodot ſheweth his badnes and quick death after his ſole governement. And as counſellers prevayled al his dayes to hinder the Temple, which counſels hardly could be long vniforme, that record in Ezra 4. argueth, that he reigned not long ſole Emperour: though Heathen in Clemens giue him 19. yeares, which might be almoſt all vnder his Father. Next cometh the King which maried Atoſſa Hester famous in Hellanicus for inventing Epiſtles, as he thought. Mardochai telleth of her Letters through 127. Provinces for the Iewes ſafety: And of them Hellanicus might ſpeake. Hester was maried to him in his ſeaventh yeare. So her ſonne Darius Artaxasta mentioned Ezra 6: ver. 14. might be ſix yeares old in his fathers twelfth, mentioned

by Mardochai then actiue, though he were caried to Babel with King Iechonias. This King Esters huſband is called Darius in Herodot, and Cteſias: and he liued by Cteſias 43 yeres, and by Herodotus he was 20. when Cyrus went to Scythia, vpon the taking of Babel: and dreamed of his Empire. So if Cambyſes called Artaxata by his Imperiall name, reigned after Babels fall 7. yeares. Darius had 16. who by his Imperiall name is Oxyares, Aſſuerus or Xerx. Two ſonnes he left, who gently ſtrove for the Empire, while neither ſought to defeate the other, as Iustine recordeth: and Herodot recordeth that Athoſſaes ſonne borne after the father was Emperour, prevailed. The wiſedome of Mardochai and Nehemias and Ester, might cauſe that quietneſſe: Seeing Mardochai was a chief in the kingdome. And ſomwhat the yong yeares of Atoſſaes ſonne: ten at his fathers death. So the other brother hath his fathers Imperiall name Xerx, Est. 10. by the Ieruſalem copy in the Maſſoreth. This Xers ſix yeares prepared warre for Grecia, in his brothers minority. When he was in Grecia, then was Atoſſaes ſonne 16. and might well licence the building of the Temple: and take the other Imperiall name Artaxasta, being king of Aſſur, or Babel: before he was ſole Emperour, and mention prayer for the Kinges ſonnes: and acknowledge Gods wrath in the overthrow of Xerx, for hindering the Temple. And the ſtyle of Aggei ſheweth that he exhorted the returned whereof ſome had ſene Salomons Temple, to build before the King gaue leaue: otherwiſe exhortation were cold. And ſeeing Heſter was of Beniamin, in whoſe tribe the Temple was built, Sems ſonne by Elam and Arphaxad was fit to be the builder. And God proſpered him and his ſonne, and his grand child. No other would ſo favour Iuda: In his ſecond

he authoriſeth the Temple, with great charges for ſacrifice, & with menacies vpon the hinderers: in his ſixt it is built: In his ſeaventh he ſendeth Ezra to ſet forward lawes, with great giftes from the Perſian worthies: being taught with the King the religion of God. In his twentieth Nehemias the third in the Cataloge of the returned, walleth the City: by ſeaven ſeavens from the ſeaventieth of Babel. And Ieruſalem is not more walled by ſtones, then trueth of ſtorie: to check Heathē, by the Chronicle. Whē 49000. Iewes teach vs to make frō 
                  Cyrus decree to build Ieruſalē
                   vnto the building but 49. yeres, wher Perſians haue ſince their own chalēge of Empire 149. So that 100. muſt be cut off: when we examine their time as they touch the 490. yeares, told vnto the Kings of Sem and Iaphet, for perſuading Iapheth to dwell in the tentes of Sem: And there the Heathen deceyue, where prophets moſt clearly correct their deceipt: that Daniels ch. 10. and 11. and Ezra 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And Nehem: and Ester, and Aggei, Zacharie, and Malachi, chaſe their errour, who can not ſtick to Heathen, but will wreſt Gods word more groſſely then any thing is ſpoken in all the Alkoran. Yet our Eccleſiaſticall bragg what Maiſter Liuely hath done againſt all theſe holy bookes. Particular texts and ſtories of Kings ſhalbe compared with his learning: and our right reverend fathers ſhal ſee who be the lyers againſt all duty, and raylers againſt all honeſty, foming out their owne ſhame as the raging waves of the Sea, they ſhall reſume their owne phraſes: and by their eares heare their tongue.
            
            
               Of 2. Chro. 36. or Ezra 1.
               THus ſaith Cyrus King of Paras: The Eternall the God of heaven hath given me all the kingdomes of the

earth: and hath commaunded me to build him a Temple in Ieruſalem which is in Iudah, Who is amongſt you of all his people, The Eternall his God be with him: and let him go vp, &c.
            
            
               Of Cyrus first yeare, what it meaneth.
               SEeing Cyrus came vp as a warrier vnto all the kingdomes of the earth, reaſon would tell that in his firſt yeare of reigne in Perſia, he overcame not 120. countreis: but his firſt yeare of Empire aboue all mightie is meant: yet our Eccleſiaſticall make the FIRST, here the firſt of Cyrus thirty: in M. Liuelies thirty yeares ſkill for Ebrew writers▪ when he bringeth one Ebrew of his minde, the Earth ſhall beare ſtarres, and the sky ſhalbe plowed.
            
            
               Of Ezra Chap. 3. ver. 8.
               IN the ſecond yere after returne vnto the houſe of God in Ieruſalem the ſecond moneth, Zorobabel ſonne of Salathiel, and Ieſus ſonne of Ioſadak, and the reſt of their brethren the Sacrificers and the Levites, and all they which came from the captiuity, to Ieruſalem, began to lay the foundation of the Temple, &c. then this Epiſtle was written to hinder the building to Artax. King of Paras, Ezr. 4.12. Be it knowen to the King, that the Iewes which are come from him to vs, are come to Ieruſalem, and builde the rebelleous and miſchevous Citie: &c. And ver. 24. Then the worke of the houſe of God was ſtayed. For this ſtaying Daniel faſted, as he writeth, Cha. 10. v. 1. & 2. And the Ebrewes that write vpon Daniel, would tell M. Liuely ſo. And reaſon telleth that this Artax. was ruler whē the Iewes vnder Cyrus came home.
            
            
               
               M. Liuelies corruption.
               
                  Cyrus reigned 30. yeares.
               
                  Cambyſes 7.
               
                  Darius 36.
               
                  Xerxes 21.
               
                  Artaxerxes 40. And by him the Temple was hindered by M. Liuely: So he would make about 100. yeares of a few monethes, and Zorobabel and Ieſus aliue all the while: and the Temple without going forward, ſo long where none hindred. Neuer any authour was made ſo ſenſeles as M Liuely would make Ezra. And in deed the Artax. whom he maketh the hinderer, was the builder, Ezra 6. Such thankes M. Liuely giueth him, where God did moſt highly renowme him: & calleth his nobles WORTHIES.
               
               In the ſecond of Darius Nothus the Temple goeth forward: by M. Lively, ſo, Zorobabel & Ieſus were 137. yeres together in office: and further abſurdities folow: as againſt Ezra. Ch. 6. The Elders of the Iewes builded by the cō
                  mandment of Darius Artaxerxes. In his ſecond yere, they beganne to builde, and proſpered by the prophecy of Aggai and Zacharie: in the ſixt of King Darius the returned from the captiuitie celebrate the dedication of the houſe of God, and the returned from captiuitie, celebrate the Paſſeover: So 49000. of the returned (Ezra 2) ſhould be aliue and actiue the troupes of them 138. in midle age. And this is more ſtrange: In the ſeaventh of Artax. Ezra (ſonne to Saraias kild with Sedekias children 52. before Babel fell, 2. King. 25.) cometh from Babel 26. after Aggei prophecieth, by M. Liuely, aged at the leaſt by him 216. yeres. Since ages were halfed vpon the building of Babel not many liued ſo longe: yet Ezra ſeeth many deſcentes of

high Prieſtes after all this. So by M. Liuely and our Eccleſiaſticall auctoritie, Ezra ſhould liue longer then any borne ſince Babell fell: ſo ready he is in Ezra, by 30. yeeres profeſſion. Such a cunning profeſſour ſhould not halt before creples.
            
            
               Of Nehemias. Chap 1.
               
                  In trueth but 14. but 25. by M. Lively.
                  NEhemias walleth Ieruſalē
                   after Ezraes returne 25. yeres, and in Perſia before his returne, he aſked his brethrē: how his brethren did, the remnant of captiuitie by M. Liuely twenty yeres after the end of the Peloponneſian warres, that is in propre Greeke trueth tenne yeares before the reigne of Alexand. Macedon. And the returned from Babylon ſhould be then at home 175. yeare. and 187. when hee walleth Ieruſalem: which ſpace the holy Ghoſt hath made but ſeauen ſeavens: that men might ſoone ſee a tenth of 490. in their preſent age performed in moſt noble ſtories, if they had any mind to marke the word of God.
            
            
               Of Aggei diſgraced.
               
                  AGgei ſaith, ch. 2.3. who is that remaineth among you, which ſaw the former Temple. If the demaunded were ten yeares old when they ſaw the former Temple, they ſhould be by M. Liuely when Aggei ſpake 200. yeares old. And who can beleeue that; Ninety they were: and ſo well might be: and the trueth hangeth without abſurdities: but vntruthes will ſone iarre from ſcripture.
            
            
               
               Of Zacharie diſgraced by our Diuinity.
               
                  ZAchary ſpeaketh to Zorobabel in the ſecond of Darius, and in his fourth: and in all his ſpeaches as to the returned from Babel. And he ſhould be thought of vs, as of all the Thalmudiques, a Prophet at the returne when the altar was built: and yet he is called a yong man, Chap. 2.4. An Ebrew profeſſour ſhould not go againſt all Ebrewes, that ever profeſſed, and the comon iudgement of all men.
            
            
               Of Malachie.
               
                  MAlachie prophecieth after the Temple was built, and not with Aggei & Zacharie. For Ezra would not haue omitted him when he nameth the other two, furtherers of the Temples worke, if he had prophecied amongeſt them. But as the Temple licenced by Darius alias Artaxasta, in his ſecond yeare, was finiſhed in the ſixt of Darius: and in the ſeaventh of Artaxasta, Ezra cometh from Babel to reforme matters: as mariages with infideles: and ſuch, fit for beginning a new comon weale: So Malachy ſpeaketh nothing of the Temple, but of maintenance for the Levites, & of ſtrange faithed wiues, and all, for matters fit for a new beginning comon weale: and not to later ages as many as Nestor had ſeene in Homer; which thing M. Liuelies Perſique ſkill would import But Hebrewes vniverſally agree, that he was preſently in action vpon rhe building of the Temple: ſo that many held him to be Mardochai, captiued of old time with Iechonias, or Ezra, ſonne to Saraias kild when Nebuchadnezar brent the holy Temple. Now M. Liuelies Perſique Chronique ſkill would make all Iewes amazed, how an Hebrew profeſſour ſhould ever dreame againſt all Hebrewes,

all, every mothers ſon that Malachies ſpeach ſhould be applied to times ſo farre from the returne from Babel: and that, to daſh the ſet time for the redemption of the world.
            
            
               Of all the Perſian Kings: How the Scripture ſpeaketh of them: or leaueth them.
               DARIVS the Mede, who made a proclamation of worſhip to Daniels God, is celebrated, Dan. 6.
               
               CYRVS, who decreeth to build Babel vpon his own charges: and paſſeth a Decree to build Ieruſalem, is mentioned, Dan. 10.2. Ch. 36. Ezra 1. and 4.
               
               
                  As in Iſachar for Iſachear San, or S
                        ••
                      is omitted: for San, or S. in Artaxata for Artaxaſta in Grekes and Latines.ARTAXATA, vnder whom the Iewes are ſayd to returne, Ezra 4. who yet returned in the firſt of Cyrus. All theſe three muſt needes be holden to reigne together, and but a very ſhort time.
               OXYARES, as Greekes would name him, or Aſuerus, or Xerx, by the copy which the Iewes keepe in golden letters at Ieruſalem. Mardochai being 63. yeares in Babel: and actiue in his twelfth: argueth that time to be neare the returne. And Esther Atoſſa his wife, famous in Heathen, telleth that he is DARIVS HYSTASPIS in Grecians. Alſo Hathac the Eunuch attendant vpon Esther, and in Cteſias miraculouſly affected towardes Darius, he telleth who that Aſſuerus was. See Photius Cteſias. In the copie of Henry Stephen Nathac is put for Hathac: But the Anſpurge copie agreeth better with Esther: And geueth greath light to know what King was Atoſſaes huſband. And Aaechylus
                  
in his tragaedie for Xerx his flight: maketh Darius plainly huſband to Atoſſa. She is Esther.
               
               XERS, that bare his fathers Imperiall name, he is noted in Dan. ch. 11. to ſtirr all againſt the kingdome of Iavan. But he medled not with the Iewes.
               DARIVS called in Ebrew by Imperiall name Artaxasta: by Cambyſes Imperial name, with differēcie of one letter: as to keepe the court Recordes diſtinguiſhed: & then in Greeke by both Artax-Erxes is made from the imperiall name of Cambyſes in Ezr. 4. And that of Darius Hyſtaſpis ſon: Xers: Eſter thenth: in ye Goldē copy kept at Ieruſalē: which the weſt Iewes folow. That made ſom Greeks hold Artaxers S. to Xerx: & Ioſephus to hold him to be great Xerxes. 
                  Artaxerxes: he is ſet foorth in Ezra, Ch. 6. by two names Darius & Artax: by the vniverſal cōſent of Ebrewes, & moſt ſtrong reaſons, & ſo to be Eſters ſon: & ſo of Beniamin: and fit to build Gods Temple. And none Heathen but he euer favoured the Iewes entierly, & Nehemias was his cup-bearer, as likeſt to be moſt faithfull to him: and obteyned authoritie to wall Ieruſalem: and after twelue yeares returned to the King: and his Nobles are called Valiant Worthies, Ez. 7. And he tamed the Grecians moſt of any Perſian: and he knew al his Predeceſſours were plagued for hindring the building of the Temple: as he cloſſely confeſſeth, Ez. 6. of him being one man, and continuing favour towardes the Iewes, the Ebrew profeſſour againſt Ebrewes all, I trow, doth make two men, and putteth others betwixt him and him ſelfe. Ochus and Longimanus Nehemias paſſeth over, and cometh to DARIVS the laſt, Neh. 12. And for all theſe the holy laſt Prophetes haue ſuch argumentes, that no Iew commenting vppon ſcripture, could thinke that Iuda was in Babylon aboue 130. And their millions will rather come ſhort, then come ſo farre as 130. yeares. And M. Livelies 
                  It is hard to perſuade Iewes yt Perſia ruled 130. yeres: and that Nehemias ſaw all their times, M. Livelies 230. wil be as the Alkoran: and iuſtly. 230. marre the ſtrongeſt prophecie for the ſalvation of the world, and light of the New Teſtament. So the holy ſtory doth receyue extreeme diſgrace.
            
            
               
               What kinde of testimonies M. Liuely bringeth, to rent all the last holy Prophetes: the ſtretch the liues in them 100. yeares more then their liues will ſuffer.
               MAiſter Liuely citeth Iulius Africanus, for Cyrus firſt yere, to be in Olympiad 55. And ill ſet by Beroldus in Olympiad. 80.
            
            
               Aunſwere to Olympiades.
               MAiſter Liuely hath ſeene or might, three treatiſes iuſtly checking them which holde Olympiades in any accompt: or accompt by Rome: or the Archontes of Apollodorus, or the diſtances which Exatosthenes maketh betwixt Cyrus and Xerx, & thence to The Peloponneſian warres: and how Thucidides and Demosthenes make fifty yeares for 35. And how from Lyſanders vnwalling of Athens, he maketh 34 yeares, where Iſocrates & Strabo with Lyſias would make but ten: & twelue thence to Phil. Macedon for never an one. And the true accomptes of Greekes living in Perſicq times, were brought forth againſt one that had better ſkill then M. Liuely in Greeke: and did all that Greeke could doe for defence: that he might well ſay as Hector in Vergil:

                     Si Pergama dextrâ
                     Defendi poſſent, etiam hâc defenſa fuiſſent.
                  
And as careles VC-alegon had ſoone his houſe on fire for reſiſtance paſt all hope: ſo M. Liuely might haue ſeene what would become of his Librarie.
            
            
               For Olympiades this was part.
               
                  EZekiel prophecied in Olympiad 48. by Clemens, and by him, Aggei ninety yeares after in Olympiad 48 So

our Eccleſiaſticall ſkill maketh Ezekiel and Aggei of one age. This wilbe ſmall commendation for right reverend Fathers that haue taken ſo many hundreth thouſande poundes ſterling for teaching Diuinitie: To make Ezekiel prophecying in the fift of King Sedekias kild by Nabucodonoſor & Aggei that built the Temple by his tongue, to be of one and the ſame Olympiad in ſad trueth, and trueth to examine an Angels prophecie. Reuerend Fathers ſhould haue dealt more reuerendlie then to check Gods word for the very houre of our redemption, ſet in Daniels time ſure for all the world: more reuerendly they ſhould haue dealt then to alter the borders which Prophetes and Angels had ſettled. More of this ſtuffe ſhalbe ſhewed. Xexes in of Eſthers time and Oebotas a Greeke, and Gelo King of Syracuſa were of one time: and dealers in the ſame warres.Pauſa nias in Eliac. Yet Oebotas warred then in Olympiad the ſixt: and ſo Gelo built Camarina in Olympiad the third by the commētarie vpon Pindarus. So by our Eccleſiaſticall men King Cyrus ſhould be in Antiochus Epiphanes dayes: Or Xerxes in King Ezekias time. Thus we corrupt religion by ignorance of all groundes of ſtudy. This ground is ſure & worthy of all interteynment: which Thalmud Ieruſalemy citeth: but cōfirmed afore in the Goſpel Ein dibre Thorah zaricin chizuk: Thaaniut fol. 66. col. 1. The words of the Law need no fortification. So our Lord ſayth: I receaue no testimony from men. When Abraham ſaw Iſmael perſecute Iſaak, he knew that that time four hūdreth yeares Iſrael ſhould come from Egypt, as well as Moſes, in the end. So Ezekias knew fiftine yeres afore he died, when he ſhould die, ſo well as they that ſaw his death: So Ieremy knew ſeauenty yeares before Babel fell, when it ſhould fall: as well as Daniel that ſaw it fall: ſo Daniel knew that 490. yeares from his prayer, Chriſt our Lord ſhould confirme

the covenant for Heathē: as well as the Diſciples knew that it was done. And all Iewes, of any religion in the Goſpell, looked at the ſame time for the kingdom of heaven to appeare by the plain proprietie of Gods word. Further dotage in Olympiades may be wayed.
               
                  Chilon the wiſe, the Old Lacedemonian of Solons age, was Ephorus in Sparte in the fiftie ſixt Olympiad: of Solons age: and much ancienter then Cyrus. Soſigenes in Laertius is the authour. By Pamphyla, a learned Romane woman, which wrote of Olympiades, whoſe worke Photius honoreth in his Librarie: it was the ſixt Olympiade when this Chilon was Ephorus. So by Olympiades there is a doubt of 200. yeares (that is 50 Olympiades) when Chilon one of the ſeaven ſages, floriſhed. Whoſe time without Olympiades helpe, is knowen wel enough. So for the deceaved: theſe Olympiades, if they be not farre enough out of the way by them ſelues, theſe Olympiades would prick them forward. And it muſt needes be counted a moſt grievous iniurie againſt the Maieſtie of God, to torment all the Byble by them, and to deny the gracious light of Salvation: whiche the holy Angel Gabriel left as mount Sion that can not be mooved. And as the mountaynes are about Ieruſalem, ſo are holy Scriptures about that oration of the holy Gabriel: who taught all at Babels fall, that 490. yeares after that yeare, the King of Glory ſhould be kild: but death ſhould not holde him, but his iuſtice ſhould appeare by his Reſurrection: that he was kild not for him ſelfe, but to make reconciliation for our ſinnes, and to ſeale Viſion & Prophet: and to make Heathen ſyſſoma one body with Iſrael. The Lord knew, that as plain a prefixed time as time could bee prefixed was needfull for all the world. And the holy Angel might not ſpeake deceipt as Iuppiter in Homer, by a dreame,

deceaved Agamemnon, by the word NOW: ſaying: Now thou ſhalt take Troy. Agamemnon tooke it for, THAT DAY: but Iuppiter meant that yeare: and ſo cauſed for amendes to Achilles, infinite ſlaughter of Greekes. By M. Liuely the Angel deceaued all that ever read his wordes: till M. Liuely came to teach their right meaning, and he ſhould no more be an holy Angel then Iuppiters dreame was a God. Our reverend fathers might haue ſpared the Princes authoritie frō cōfirming ſuch Agamemnonean dreames. They that adventure their eternall ſtate on this: that they will with all hart, might, and ſtrength, that Gods grace will graciouſly afford, further the trueth and light of the Goſpell, will not reioyce to haue their authority vſurped to the Eternall deſtruction of their People and them ſelves. This coſinage to check the holy Angel by Olympiades, to turne the prophecy from light to darknes: from trueth to falſhood: from Chriſt his name to prophane Atheiſtes: from his covenaunt in the Lords ſupper: vnto a covenant of Romane dogges with as dogged Iewes: from the times beginning certen and cleare to all heartes of ſage, vnto one never knowen afore M. Liuely told: and to end not at our Lordes death: to ende Moſes there, but to ende at Ieruſalems fall: and ſacrifice to be lefull ſo farre: this matcheth Eves fall by the Serpent: and paſſeth the building of Babel. And Eſay thought and taught, that by Cyrus Decree Ieruſalem ſhould be built. And ſeeing he gaue them vnder letters Patentes leave, to returne to Ieruſalem to builde the Temple, the Decree for City and Temple muſt needes be at that time: and ſo Daniel would vnderſtand him: that from that yeare all the world might date their writinges thus: Dated 490. yeares afore the kingdome of Meſſias Cyri primo: Dated 460. Darij Artax. 20 when Aggei prophecieth:

Dated 442. viceſimo Artax. before Meſſias kingdome: when Ieruſalem was walled. And as Men on a iourney knowen, know ſtil how fewer miles they haue to their Inne or reſt: ſo all the world yere by yere, ſince the Angell taught Daniel, might know, how neare they were to the opening of the kingdome of heaven by our Lord his moſt holy ſoule going through the veile of his fleſh into heaven, by Saint Paule, into Paradiſe by the Goſpell, into Hades by the Greeke, (but in Hades to the Gardens of the godly, and not Tartarus) to make reconciliation for vs, having found Eternall redemption. Such limites are fitt markes for a Chronicle: The firſt yeare of Cyrus Empire, who had revenged Babel that oppreſſed Gods children 70. yeares: that yeare which ſaw an Angell tell Daniel of an Eternall kingdome, in hope of which 49697. leaue Babel for Ieruſalem ſure to be ſtill in affliction: and a Proclamation of the God that made the heavens over ſix ſcore nations: and a willing ſubſidie from ſo many for them that goe to Ieruſalem in this hope: Such noble ſtories ſhould be the mark of a Chronicle for Chriſt: chayned from Adam 3470. yeares thither: and thence ſeaven times the captivities length, that is 490. yeares, vntill the King of glory doth open freedom for all: when the ſun darkened three houres: when the earth trembleth: when the ſtones burſt: when the curtine of the Temple rent: as a Draper would part a peece of cloth: when the dead aroſe: when our Lord forty dayes was ſeene of the faithfull, to ſend his ſpirit and a fiery law to teach all nations. Such noble markes ſhould the Angel Gabriels Chronicle haue: and not obſcure dennes of Cacus to bring errours in numbre as the leaues of a foreſt.
               And yet let vs more conſider the vanity taken by the Games of Olympia: renued every fift yeare: having full

foure yeares to an Olympiade: That by a fuller diſcourſe ſuch wicked toyes might be baniſhed for ever: and made a lothſomenes to all men of iudgement.
            
            
               Olympiades miracles for Thales the wiſe man.
               
                  THales Mileſius was well knowen that he liued in Solons times, & Croeſus King of Lydia, whom Cyrus cōquered: and yet Croeſus was of King Ioſias times, as Greekes cōferred, will convict. This Thales is ſaid by ſome to be borne in the thirty fift Olympiade, and to floriſh in the ſeaventh: that is about 120. yeres afore he was born. And this ſtuffe is goodly to obſcure the time of Salvation, ſhining in Daniel more then doth the ſunne in his greateſt brightnes. Mast. Liuely hath drawne Olympiades into our Eccleſiaſticall authoritie: to make vs a ſkoff to all Iewes of the world: that wee looke by them how to vnderſtand an Angel of light, ſent by the grace of God to teach all the ſimple world: into whoſe lippes if grace were not powred, to be vnderſtood as ſoone as he ſpake: heathen would ſay Daniel ſawe no Angel. And M. Lively neuer heard of any Iew that more regarded Olympiades, thē we regard Lucianes true ſtories. And if he had read ſuch Grecians as marke them, how they iarre, he would haue helde them as weake as Cobwebbes which a fly would breake.
            
            
               Of Cyrus and Cambyſes to what Olympiad M. Lively might apply them.
               
                  Suidas in the name Anacreon, the Poët, ſayth: he liued in the dayes of Polycrates the tyrant of Samos in the fiftie two Olympiade: But others place him in the twenty fift

Olympiade vnder Cyrus and Cambyſes. So by Suidas Cyrus & Cambyſes reigne togeather. And by Olympiades an hundreth yeares ſooner then M. Liuely would: and almoſt an hundreth yeares before Nebuchadnezar: if Ezechiel prophecieth in Olympiad 48. as Clemens of Alexandria writeth he did. And ſo the Ebrew profeſſour may ſee to what paſſe his Muſae Olympiades bring Ebrew writers, if his penne were regarded.
               The recordes of his Eclipſes are leſſe regarded: of Iewes and Grekes: and of Arabians cited by Christmannus vpon Alfragan: which euen from great Alexander (whence Greekes better agree) make leſſe yeares by much then Ptolemies recorders of Eclipſes. And they from Nabonaſſar, Mardocempad, Nabopollaſar, Cambyſes, Darius the firſt, compared with King Ezekias calling back of the ſun, & Esthers time, can haue no poſſibility of agreement, or likelyhood. Galen vpon Hippocrates ſayth well: that the moſt part of the bookes in Alexandria Librarie were forged: And Laertius telleth of forging many thouſand yeres with pretenſe of marking eclipſes, & odde monethes and dayes. Chryſostome the learned regarded them not: Maximus Monachus bringeth other reckonings, Epiphanius other, and Clemens of Alexandria infinite varieties, and yet no care of thoſe calculations: and expreſſely telleth there was no Chronique obſervation in record before Eratosthenes, vnder the Ptolemeis times, cōpiled one. ROME alſo is brought in Chronicle, who before great Alexander had no writers. And Onuphrius Panvinius wondereth at varieties, when & by whom Rome ſhould be built. Alſo ARCHONTES or Maiors of Athenes are brought to fight with an Angel. Three writers wrote of thē: Demetrius, Steſichorus, & Apollodorus: the third auctour was late: and of Chroniclers that would ſeeme

exact, folowed. But their names many together running vpon a letter, ſhew that from ſome Alphabet table, they wee fetched: and very vnlearnedly. For many extant in Demoſthenes, Aeſchines, and Lyſias, oratours ſpeaking of their owne times, are not in Apollodorus. And beyond the times of Xerx, there is no table of them extant. As Athenes ſaw not to what purpoſe they ſhould keep any record of times. And Apollodorus hath about 40. where the life of Euripides the Tragique will confute him. That ſhalbe ſhewed in few wordes. Of Euripides thus writeth Suidas in Euripides. Euripides, &c. was borne the very ſame day that Greekes turned the Perſians vnto flight, &c. he lived ſeaventie five yeares. This writeth Suidas in the terme, EVRIPIDES. And in the terme Timotheus thus: Timotheus the Lyrique, was in the dayes of Euripides the Tragique, when Philip Macedon reigned. So it is a ſure demonſtration that Xerxes flight, & Philip Macedones reigne are not ſundred aboue 75. yeares. So M. Liuely is convicted to bring about 40. Mayors of Athenes for Euripides life time, more then his dayes ſaw there. It is great pity that our Archepiſcopall authoritie ſhould check the Date for ſalvation to all the world, with ſuch Acherontean bables: where even Greekes fight for ſcripture.
            
            
               Of the distance from Xerxes flight, to the taking of Athens by Lyſander, to be 65. yeares: and thence but ten to Philip Macedon.
               WHen the Athenians dealt moſt manfully againſt the Perſianes, they had the ſuperioritie of Grecia commē
                  ded vnto them. That, they helde till Lacedemon vnwalled their towne: after 27. yeares warre. That ſpace of rule is in Lyſias in Epitaph. and in Iſocrates Panygyrico 65. yeares.

And both they being Athenians, ſhould know their owne ſtate: being aliue in that very time. Then began the Lacedemonians ſuperioritie over Grecia. Leuctra field ended Laced mons ſuperioritie. Strabo noteth that plainly. Then Epaminondas the famous Theban, brought vp with Philip Macedon, and equall in yeares, wan the field, yong and vnmaried about 27. yeares old. And at the ſame time did Philip Macedone reigne. For he reigned at 27 yeares. So the Lacedemonians loſſe of governement being knowen how long it continued, telleth how to ſettle the time of Leustra field. Now Iſocrates in his epiſtle to K. Philip, ſayth: The Lacedemonians ruled but tenne yeares ouer Grecia: that is, after Lyſander vnwalled Athens. Therefore tenne yeares thence reacheth to Philip Macedones reigne. So Suidas for Euripides life, is ſtrengthened by men of that age: in plain wordes. Many profes herein I ſhewed of old: which I neede not now to repeat. Philip Macedon reigned 20. yeares by Atheneus: and Alexander his ſonne, ſix before his Monarchie. So by Greekes yeares from Alexan. the great vnto Xerxes warre: and his brothers reigne at home, are not mo thē 100. And the time thence to Cyrus, by moſt ſtrong proofes of ſcripture, and by all the millions of the Iewes over the earth, which all folow the Thalmud, yeares are not aboue 30. And even by the perpetuall conſent of Grecians skilfully read, the ſame is proved. So the Perſians overrule Iuda, but 130 yeares: and M. Liuely ſhould better haue marked firſt the authoritie, next the meaning of Greeke authours for antiquities. The Medes in Agathias haue after the fall of Aſſur, 300. yeare dominion. That is by Scripture trueth, not one day. For Nabucodreſor overthrew Aſſur: not the Medes. And King Manaſſes was caried to Babel, by the commaundement of the King of Aſſur: not long before the

captivitie of Babel. And the Perſians extinguiſh all Babels empire. Only Nabycadnezar was a
                     •
                   
                  Hercules to goe as farre as Spain, in Stra. 15. but in the Eaſt the Perſians ruled: & chalendge al that time to themſelues which Iuda ſpent in Babel: and reckon with the largeſt to augment their yeres: all yeares from yonge Princehood: as yeares of Empire. So Cyrus hath 30. where after Babels fall our men, as M. Scaliger giue him but 3. Cambyſes hath nyneteene in Clem. Alexan. 1. ſtrom. For 7. by M. Liuely: from Herodot, for bare foure of ſoule governement, by true examination. Darius Histaſpis hath in Herod 36. for bare ſixtene in truth▪ and in Cteſias 31 from twelue yeares of age: ſo from eight he might haue about 36. For vnder the mighty Perſianes many Kinges & their ſonnes Princes lived at once. And the Greekes could find no certenty of them: not ſo much as for their names. Aeſchylus in his Perſis, where he vttered all that Graecia knew, ſheweth that: ſpeaking of times late: and differing much from later writers. So Mast. Liuely might haue ſpared vexing of all the Bible: citing auncientes reiected moſt ſtrongly by both teſtamentes, true old Greekes, and all Churches now. And Learned Chriſtians ſhould bend to finde a concent, not a diſſent in holy ſcriptures: to ſhew light, not lightnes: order, and not diſorder: ioyance, not anoyance: right paſſing rumors, not might of conceited humors, about matters of ſalvation.
            
            
               How the first chapter of Saint Mathew is diſgraced by Maister Liuely.
               WHen Daniel was taught how many yeares ſhould be from the tyme of his prayer vnto our Lord his confirming of the covenant for many: and how long hee

ſhould teach: even half a ſeaven: and knew from Moſes Law, Num. 4. for the Levites to begin their office at thirty, that our Lord was to doe ſo to: and by Ezekiel 39. that the legges of the Image in Egypt and Babel, muſt be broken by the yeare of our Lord his coming into the world, and by his owne ſeaventh chapter, where the fourth beaſt is caſt into the fire before the ſon of man cometh in the clouds: and ſo could and did teach Darius and Cyrus all his booke, and ſumme of both Teſtaments, he perſwades kinges to graunt authority for all Iſrael to returne and reſtore Ieruſalem: and moved his nation therevnto. then was Zorababel of Salathiel of Nathan of King David the Patriark and Father to the ſonne of God after the fleſh, governour of the People. His familie will teach vs to meaſure the time, ſpecially marking the time from Davids death to that yeare 480.If 23. generatiōs draw but 480. ye. eleuen Mat. 1. ſhould not haue aboue 490. wont warrant frō God. Nor yet ſo many 590. would make a Iew reiect the N. Teſtament. iuſt ſo many they were. Now from Nathan ſonne to David, to Salathiel be 23. generations. This being conſidered, we muſt flee to a miracle of Gods power, to make vp from Zorobabels governement vnto our Lord his 32.6. monethes 490. Or to his birth 437. without conſideration of Gods counſell none would beleeue the number were ſo great in the yeares. For, the Generations betwixt our L. & Zorobabel, are but tenne: to draw mo yeares then 20. aboue did. So we haue much adoe to perſwade that 490. yeares were betwixt the fall of Balthaſar the Tyrant, for Satan over the Church: and the fall of Satan by the obedience of our Lord vpon the Croſſe: in anguiſh of his ſoule more then ever all ſoules felt in this world. And M. Liuely ſhould haue ſpent his time to fortifie Saint Mathew againſt all the millions of the Iewes: who make the time ninety yeares ſhorter then the Angell meant. And the exceſſe is by M. Liuely in Ezra his life time almoſt all. Where Iewes make him die

at 100. yet he lived 150. at the leaſt: and about 250. as M. Liuely ruleth the ſunne in Phaetons place. So Saint Mathew vexed for lengthning liues 80. aboue ordinary, is vexed by M. Liuely for 100. in an other extremitie: as not able to make them vp. And if that ſumme of 490. be vnlikely but for Gods authoritie: and ſhorter by the Thalmud by 90. who would bring without Gods auctority, 100. more: and differ from Iewes 180. and almoſt all in the life of one mā? Iewes that catch an Ebrew profeſſour ſo ſimple, would little eſteeme of Chriſtian skill.
            
            
               The whole ſpeach of the Angell: with expoſitions ancient vpon it.
               THe matter wilbe clearer by laying downe the Angels oration: Thus the holy Gabriel ſpeaketh to gracious Daniel, chap. 9. ver. 22. I am now come foorth to teach thee knowledge. At the beginning of thy prayers came foorth the woord, and I am come to ſhew it vnto thee. For thou art greatly beloued. Perceaue therefore the word and conceaue the Viſion.
               
               SEAVENTIE SEAVENS (of yeares) are cut out, for thy people, & for thy holy Citie: to conſume wickednes, and to I folow ye margent Ebrew. The text is: to Seale, & the 70. folow that & our Biſhopps. And ſafely▪ The text is true: And ye margent▪ An expoſition, for playnnes. aboliſh ſinnes, and to make reconciliation for iniquitie, and to bring righteouſnes everlaſting, and to ſeale Viſion and Prophet, and to ſhew CHRIST the HOLY of HOLY. Know then and marke: from the outgoing of the Worde, to reſtore and to buylde Ieruſalem, vnto CHRIST the governour, ſhalbe ſeaven ſeavens (of yeres) and ſixtie and two ſeavens: In t'hother it ſhalbe reſtored & builded, Sreete and Wall: and troublous ſhall theſe times be. In that after the ſixtie and two ſeauens CHRIST ſhal be killed: and not for him ſelfe: therevpon the Citie and

holy place ſhall he deſtroy, the GOVERNOVRS owne people to come: and their ende ſhalbe with a Flood: and at the ende of warre, it ſhall haue a finall iudgement to deſolation. But he ſhall confirme the Teſtament for many the laſt Seaven: when in HALFE THAT SEAVEN he ſhal ende the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterwardes by an Armie abominable, he ſhall make a deſolation: even till vtter deſtruction and finall iudgement or come: by the 7
                        •
                     . & the Goſpell. flow vpō the deſolate.
            
            
               The heades of the Angel Gabriel his ſpeach.
               
                  DAniel is taught how long Sion ſhalbe holy for ſacrificing: how long Circumciſion, Sabbates, the Paſcha of Lamb or kid, and all ſacrifices ſhal continue at Ieruſalem: how many yeares, even to the houre of the day from his prayer, are vnto the death of our Lord for our eternall life: to confirme the Teſtament for many: and to end all Moſes lawes, that Iewes and Gentiles may be one body. All this the booke called, A true Chronicle, commended by I.C. dedestroyeth: whoſe wordes with the folio ſhalbe ſhewed.
               
            
            
               A deniall of the main vſe of the prophecie, fol 170.
               
                  
                     M. Lively pitieth vs for beleving that our L. his death is prefixed to an exact yere, by an Angel.
                  It is a great pitie that the meſſage of the holy Angel, conteyning a most excellent Prophecie from Gods owne mouth, ſhould be ſo perverted and depraved as it hath bene by thoſe whiche pick out this ſenſe, as though he ſayd, there ſhould be from the outgoing of the commaundement to Meſsias, 69. weekes (483. yeares) in all· A ſtrange interpretation, and ſuch (I dare boldly ſay it) as by the Ebrew text can never be vpheld.
            
            
               
               Reply, for Meſsias,
               HEre M. Lively ſheweth as litle learning as euer did any that profeſſed Ebrew: & as little Chriſtianity as euer any of faith, and as litle modeſtie, as any can ſhewe: that one man ſhould check all Churches.Meſsias denyed to bee Chriſt. By I. C his vſu
                        •
                     
                     ded auctority againſt ye oth of Q.E. to the Goſpell. The Hebrician denyeth Meſſias to be CHRIST our redeemeer: & would make it an adiectiue. Therein firſt his Hebrew cometh into queſtion. Either Meſſias is neuer a propre name, of here it is a propre name, and here twiſe. In all other places a pronowne is affixed, or a ſubſtantiue in the genetive caſe. As myne annointed, thy annointed, his annointed, the annointed of God, the Prieſt which is annointed. Here Dan. 9. twiſe there is no pronown, and here it muſt be a propre name Meſſias or Chriſt: And it is neuer vſed for an adiectiue, being ſet before the ſubſtantiue: as here Meſsias Nagid Meſsias the King. And hence Saint Iohn tooke the name.A very Iewe taketh Meſsias Dā. 9. yet by I. C. England denyeth all theyr owne faith: and ſold in Pauls their denial. And hence all the Talmudikes in all their commentaries: though cōmenting vpon this place they directly do it not. Yet Rabbi Iuda commenting vpon Daniel, here ſaith: Meſsias Nagid is Meſsias the hope of Iſrael Nagid, forgoer & cōmander of the natiōs, Eſ. 55. The very Iew cōfeſſeth this much. And the Zohar vpon Geneſis talking of the ſerpent, ſaith, By the ſerpent Meſsias ſhalbe kild, and many of Iſrael with him. And al the churches in Chriſtendome hold Meſsias here to be the ſon of God our Redeemer: and our England helde that the laſt ſeaven of 70. had our Lordes preaching. Our Church, Scotland, Fraunce, Spaine, Heydelberg, Geneva ſo doth. M. Liuely ſhould liue in more modeſty then ſo to pitie vs for holding the rock of ſalvation as the Angel taught this. ſaying, In the end of Seaventie ſeavens from Daniels prayer,

                  CHRIST, or MESSIAS ſhalbe ſlaine, & not for him ſelfe: but conſecrating him ſelf for the redeemed: or anointing, or ſhewing him ſelf the ſonne of God. For that doeth the terme annointing ſhew in that place. M. Liuely dareth deſpiſe all Chriſtendome where he is moſt vnlearned and ſenſeles, & borowed the oth of Q.E. by I.C. to his iudaiſme
            
            
               Of a bad tranſlation, and fooliſher ſenſe, fol. 156.
               Ver. 25. from the going forth of the word, to build againe Ieruſalem vnto Meſsias the governour ſhalbe ſeaven weekes:
                     M. L. dreameth that 13
                           •
                        . yeares after the returne Ieruſalem was 
                           ••
                        built and it continued but 
                           〈◊〉
                         yeres 
                           〈◊〉
                         hee dreameth. He 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                   (he meaneth ſeaven ſeavens of yeares, but loveth darknes) & three ſcore & two weekes it ſhalbe builded againe ſtreet and wall. Thus he tranſlateth. And having differed extreemely from all Christendome, and all reaſon, thus he would overcome by boldnes.
            
            
               Maister Livelies boldnes. fol. 171.
               THat interpretatiō which I haue made, leauing 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   a ſtay or rest at ſeuen weekes: as the halfe ſentence being paſt, and continuing the 62. weekes with the other part of the ſentence following to the end of the verſe, & not referred to the former, as part of one whole number with them, by the Hebrew text is most ſure and vndoubted and iustifiable against all the world: contayning that which God himſelf in his owne words hath vttered, neither more nor leſſe, but the verſe ſame which Gods Angell deliuered to Daniel by word, and Daniel to the Church by writing in the holie tongue, and this once againe it is; From the going forth of the word, to b
                     ••
                  ld againe Ieruſalem vnto 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Meſsias the gouernour ſhallbe ſeauen weekes,
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         that Ieru
                           •
                        alem was in trouble euer ſince it was builded by the returned
                   and threeſcore & two weekes it ſhallbe builded againe ſtreet and wall, and in troubleſome times. Marke the words, conſider their order, and weigh well the reſts. As I finde in the Hebrew ſo I

haue Engliſhed, that is, the trueth of interpretation, 
                     A bold aſſertion of a 30. yeares profeſſour: againſt all learned Ebrewe ſpeach and Chriſtianitie. Yet by boldnes hee hath deceaved, where lerning was 30. yeares to ſeeke.
                   bee it vnderſtood as it may.
            
            
               Reply.
               MAiſter Liuely ſetteth ſuch a face vpon errour, as never was heard in Chriſtendome, to diſturbe the graunted rule of ſalvation. And it is great pitie that ſome tooke him not in hand, that know bitternes of ſtyle, and are eloquent in that kinde. His outfacing of the trueth and Chriſtianity drew Iohn Cant: to ſubſcribe vnto him. He might with as good learning haue ſubſcribed to the Alkoram. Machmad bragged that Gabriel taught him: And chalenged Daniels name Chamudoth: whiche the Angel Gabriel gaue him. Machmad and Chamudoth in Ebrew bee all one. The falſe prophet had ſome other name. Or by ſome cloſe iudgement of God his parents gaue a name helping to deceipt: As for my poore skill in reprehending the deceaued extreemly, I hartely confeſſe that I want due vehemency, & will borow Ovid as 
                     Non mihi ſi linguae certū ſint ora
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         centum.
                   
                  Vergil, tranſlating Homer to confeſſe how I come ſhort of abilitie to blame the ſubſcribing to M. Liuelies Ebrew, Divinitie, Hiſtorie.

                     Non mihi ſi centum Deus ora ſonantia linguis,
                     Ingenium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         capax, totum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Helicona dediſſet,
                     Omnia proſequerer.
                     Si vox infragilis, pectus ſi firmius eſſet:
                     (Both poëtes, both the beſt tranſlate Homer iliad 2.)
                  
Could I tell how to ſhew how much I. C. his ſubſcription to M. Liuely hath iniuried Chriſtianitie: and particularly the Church of England. Poſitions of old graunted: & new doctrine from Maister Liuely ſubſcribed by I. C. ſhalbe laid downe.
               
                  Firſt, The Church of England beleeved that the Angell Gabriel told Daniel of a Decree paſt in Gods word and to enſue by Cyrus preſently to reſtore and builde Ieruſalem. And that, from this Decree & from Daniels prayer, ſhould be 70. ſeavens of yeares vnto our L. his death. Whether he ſhould die in the middeſt of the laſt ſeaven: or laſt yeare: that doth not ſhew much difference. This much 46. yeres England held: that in the laſt ſeauen our Lord ſhould die.
            
            
               M. Livelies difference.
               BY M. Liuely yeres 137. paſſe before the decree of building Ieruſalem doth come forth: ſo that Gabriel could not be vnderſtood of Daniel, nor of any Angel in Heauen, when the accompt began. The preſent age, and M Liuely breaketh of ye holy Chronicle▪ and ſo diſturbeth all the olde Teſtam. all, everie whit, and the ioyning of it to the N. T. & I. C. by publique auctority confirmeth this. 
                  Nestors two, the later begotten in his fathers laſt had bene dead before the time ſhould begin. And the thirty yeares profeſſour neuer heard of a company of men to liue ſo long: ſince Iſrael beleeved the 10. ſpies to miſbeleeue Gods promiſe for the land of Chanaan: when 600000. at once caſt of God. Then mans ordinary old age was brought to 70. by Moſes Pſal. 90. So M. Liuely contemneth our Church: befooleth the Angel as ſpeaking paſt all capacity: and befooleth Daniel, as ſeeming to know that which his wordes cary otherwiſe.
               Secondly,Neſtor lived thre
                        •
                      ages 30▪ 
                     
                        •
                     0.30. actiue▪ double more doe the returned liue actiue by M. Lively. Chriſtendome holdeth Meſsias to be the Redeemer of the world, and Nagid or Governour his attribute from Eſay 55. which Aben Ezra the very Iew citeth vpon the ſame text.
               But thus M. Liuely writeth. IN The times before the destruction of Ieruſalem by the Romanes there were two rulers of the citie, one of their owne people a Iew by profeſsion or birth after their mā
                     ner

anointed to the governemnt of the cōmon wealth amongſt them here named in the verſe going before Meſſias Nagid, the annointed Prince, the other a ſtranger appointed Deputy by the Roman Emperour called Nagid Habba, a ruler not borne in the countrey, or one of the ſame nation, but a ſtranger come from an other place.
               
               
                  Thus writeth M. Liuely: TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD his very honorable good Lord my Lord the Archbiſhop of CANTERBVRIE his grace.
               And Dux gregis ipſe capex de errauerat, to lend Q.Chriſtianitie denied in England, by publyque auctority. 
                  Elizabeths oth to the Goſpell, and auctoritie, to extinguiſh the name Meſsias where only it ſtandeth propre in Ebrew, and to referre it to a common Iew officer. And his G. could not ſee, that ſo the realme denyeth their own chriſtianitie. Beſides the Iewes had not alwayes ſince the return, one their own, an other, a ſtranger to gouerne them. Againe M. Liuely feigneth from his owne head, newe matter againſt all Ebrews. He ſayth the civill officer was annointed in Iuda. None of Ebrews ever heard that Zorobabel was anointed or Nehemias. And of Dauids houſe we read of none that bare ſtroke, beſides them. For heathen ruled till the Machabees of Levi vſurped an vnl
                     •
                  full & ill government. And thus by M. Liuely the Angel ſhould talke of idle matter: in ſteed of Meſsias, Chriſt our Lord. And Maymoni, the beſt of al about the Talmud, noteth that, Halacoth Melachim Perek 1. That no King but the firſt of the family was annointed: as Saul, as David: or vpon ſtrife: As Salomon, for Adonias: Ioas for Athalia: Ioachaz, for his elder brother Ioakim: But Ioſua, the firſt King next Moſes, was not anointed. So M. Liuely wilbe farre to ſeeke in Rabbines.
            
            
               
               Of the word Ba: To come: ill meant, A STRANGER.
               THe Ebrew word BA vſed by the Angel, Dan. 9. is, To come: & never vſed for a ſtranger: but in men: the age or coming in company, Gen. 4
                        •
                     . folowing. And ſo the Angel meant: that Chriſt in the age folowing would deſtroy the Iewes, his owne kindred, the vnbeleeving. Tremelius might haue wiſed M. Liuely.
               
            
            
               Of accentes whereby M. Liuely bringeth a bad tranſlation, and farre a worſe ſenſe.
               THe holy Ebrew hath kingly accētent 19. and ſervants eleven. The kings ſtay vpon the chief woord in argument: the ſervantes haſten, being on leſſer in force of argument. Any king for the moſt, will make a full ſenſe: as we expreſſe them in other tongues: and ſome times not ſo much as a comma. Athnah is in Gen. 1. ver. 1. and hath not the force of a comma: And Rebiang, Ezr. 4.8. hath a pauſe. Vpon new ſuppoſed force of theſe two accentes, M. Liuely would one accent turned to marr all the Bible. pervert all the Angels oratiō. to make by the later aboliſhed from ſtay: this ſenſe. Dan. 9. ver. 25. vnto Meſsias the governour there ſhalbe ſeaven ſeavens: and 62. ſeavens the city ſhalbe builded againe. That is, (by him) it ſhall cō
                  tinue builded. And he ſetteth 137. yeares afore the ſeaven ſeavens: as though 137. and 49. that is 186. it were not built. To be ſhort, the Angel ſpoke matter of ſalvation, plain and fortified by all ſcripture, by learned expoſitions receaved in our Church, But by M. Liuely, Iudaique trifling and falſe matter. The Church ſhalbe iudge. The Angell continueth the Chronicle. M. Liuely doth break it of 137.

yeares: to be gathered by Heathen. The Angel telleth of our L. his paſſion: M. Liuely denyeth that. The Angell nameth the Redeemer of the world, Meſsias. M. Liuely doth vtterly deny that. The Angel ſaith Meſſias ſhall confirme the covenant for many: that is, for all nations: as in Dan. 12. Many ſhall ariſe: that is, All. And Rom. 5. In Adam many died: that is, All. And our L. in the ſupper, for his blood, ſhed for the Iewes & many, that is al nations, expreſly toucheth the Angels phraſe. By M. Liuely he tolde a tale of a ſure covenant betwixt the faithles Romanes and faithles Iewes. The Angel preſcribed for our Lord his preaching three yeares and an halfe. And that is the cōpaſſe of Saint Markes Goſpell. And Saint Iohn hath bene noted by the Greeke Church: as Euſebius noteth: calling back his errour, which M. Liuely would quicken: that by four Paſchata: after our Lord his baptiſme, and manifeſting him ſelfe to much glory, he ſhewed the half ſeaven applyed vnto his function. And Venerabilis Beda noteth the ſame: and telleth that in the Apocalyps alſo the ſame is taught. And Carthuſianus foloweth Beda vpon Apoc. 11.12.13. All this M. Liuely diſgraceth. The Angell taught how long Ieruſalem ſhould be an holy Citie, for vſe of Sacrifice: that God ſhould be ſought there: and how long from the day of Daniels prayer. M. Liuely telleth, how long the ſtones ſhall ſtand in building vndiſturbed: after his gueſhed 137. yeres: as though the Citie were not reſtored and builded by the decree of Cyrus. And to be ſhort: he, by ſtrong cōſequents denyeth that our Lord his death, did end ſacrifice and offringe.
            
            
               An open denyall of the New Testament.
               THus M. Liuely writeth for a l
                     •
                  full continuance of ſacrifice, after our Lord his death:Fol. 219. 
                  When Veſpaſian was come

into Iudea and wasted the countrey: then the vnruly rebels aboliſhed the lawfull custome of ſacrificing, &c. And ſoone after, fol. 220. Not without cauſe in my iudgement, may thoſe wordes of Daniel, touching the ſacrificse ceaſing in the middest of the last weeke bee referred vnto theſe times of this warre: wherin by meanes therof the ſacrifices of the Lords houſe were
                  Our Lord his ſupper is our oth that we beleeue his death to haue ended all ſacrifice & oblation. And M. Lively with his commē
                     der teacheth apoſtaſie frō that faith. 
                  hindered ſo many wayes: ſome were quite aboliſhed, and others done either not by thoſe to whom they perteyned, or not ſo ſafely and freely as they ought. Iulian the Apoſtata only, or one no better, and no true Chriſtian, would ſubſcribe to this. And this denyall of the N. T. might ſtirre all Chriſtendome to reiect the Biſhops of England, as Iewiſh. For when this doctrine was commended by publike auctoritie, ſtrangers thinke all Biſhops that openly confute not this, to be of the ſame minde. M Liuely muſt recant: otherwiſe he will breede blame to all the Biſhops: of whom, I hope, none now aliue, gaue conſent to his worke. And this much for M. Liuely: laboring to diſturbe all concent of Scripture.
            
            
               Of our enemies testimonie, evill cited to disturbe the trueth: where even they ſpeake for it.
               
                  ABen Ezra expoundeth Meſsias Nagid from Ier. 23. Behold a King ſhall reigne, &c. whiche is doubtles ſpoken of Chriſt. And to the ſame he referreth theſe wordes: He ſhall build me a Temple, 2. Sam. 7. But referreth all this to Nehemias. Wherein M. Liuely ſhould haue taken all that he ſpeaketh well: and as trueth forced him: and not to follow him where he is moſt ridiculous. This dealinge is a great corruption in our handling of Religion. This much Aben Ezra is forced to confeſſe: That the 490. yeares are from Daniels prayer vnto the ſealing of the Meſſias. And this is

all that we neede to deſire. And the ordinarie phraſe to annoinct he learnedly expoundeth to ſeale: and he ſaith Meſſias is the Holy of Holy: euen as the Angel meant & ſpake. So Aben Ezra ſhewed that 490 yeres are frō 
                  Daniels prayer vnto the time when Meſsias ſhalbe ſealed, that is, manifeſted (as to the Centurion) that hee was the ſon of God. Although the faithles Iew ſayd in his hart: Who can climbe to Heauen to bring Christ downe: Or who can goe into the deepe, (as Ionas to the Whales belly) to bring Christ from the dead? And did not beleeue that God was in Chriſt reconciling the world vnto him ſelfe: and that when hee was made dead in the fleſh, he was the third day made aliue hy the Eternall ſpirit, which preached by Noe: (who firſt of all the fathers is ſpoken too ſince Adams firſt day, or the day of his fall) although the Iew beleeued not this: yet his wordes fall vpon the maine trueth: by the ſtrenght of the Angels ſpeach. And when Iewes ſpeak for Chriſtianitie then we ſhould cite them: & not cite our enemies againſt our ſelfe. There is neither Chriſtianitie nor wit in that dealing. Though I. C. borowed Arch. auctoritie to commend the fighters againſt our owne faith.
               But belike ſome Chapleyn who made ſmall conſcience of the Goſpell, deceyued him: whom iuſtice ſhould reward for teaching to deny our owne Chriſtianitie. All that doe not their beſt to pay him, that may fitly mooue your M. are to blame.
            
            
               Of further grauntes by ſpeaches of Iewes profitable for the Goſpell.
               
                  ABen Ezra ſayth of the tenth part of Gabriels yeres that is 49. of 490. thus: Behold the expoſition of: marke & vnderſtand: from the going forth of the word to reſtore

and to build Ieruſalem vnto Meſsias the governer, be ſeauen ſeauens of yeares: The ſeauen ſeauens are vnto the coming of Nehemias to Ieruſalem in the twentie of Artaxasta. This agreeth with the trueth: and ſuch citations ſtrengthen our cauſe And for the three yeares and an halfe: This is written in Midras Tillin: Pſ. 10. and cited by Galatinus. R. Iohn ſayth, Three yeres and an halfe was the Maiestie of God ſtanding vpon mount Olivet and preaching: Seeke the Lord while he may be found▪ But they did not regard him. This teſtimonie is not plain hiſtoricall: Yet to no better ſence then to our Lord his preaching can it be applyed: as Chriſtians haue vſed it: who referre the 49. yeres to workes about Ieruſalem: and one part of ſeauen ſcore, to the preaching of our Lord. Whome all to diſgrace Master Lively, hath written a whole worke: called a true CHRONICLE. And the Hebrician differeth in Religion from all Chriſtianes: in Hiſtory for the Ebrews Temple from al Ebrewes vniverſally. And in Greeke from all Grecianes that liued in the ages whereof doubt is moued. And your M. muſt compell him & his commender to recant:Both works printers ſoone deſcended to HELL. God called quickly for both Printers to anſwere for the work: and for the commendation.
            
            
               A further hinderance concerning the time when the Redeemer of Iſraell ſhould come into the world.
               THe Lord ſhewed full many times in the Prophet Daniel that vpon the fall of the Macedonians, which ruled in Egypt & Syria, the redeemer would come into the world. And ancient Graecians▪ long hid from vs, whom I printed at Baſil, ſo vnderſtood the legges of the Image and the fourth beaſt: and expreſlely the Buck, Dan. 8. is named the

end of wrath. And Chryſostom moſt learnedlie ſheweth that Daniels laſt Chapter ſpeaketh of Antiochus Epiphanes: and the Iewes vniverſallie hold, that the Sainctes of the moſt high, from whome the heathen in Dan. 7. take away the Kingdome, are Iacobs houſe: & Salathiel his houſe, heirs to the Kingdom: whoſe Kings by right be the laſt 14. Math. 1. and next, Rheſa with the reſt to Ely. Yet of a longe time we haue made the Romanes the Images legges: wherby the Iewes hold yet, that the true Redeemer is not yet come: and dayly pray for his coming in Cether Malcuth, and all their comon prayers: in our expected tranſlation we muſt be wiſer.
            
            
               Of the time when our Lord ſhould be borne.
               SEeing that all Chriſtendom holdeth that our Lord was borne in Winter, the altering of the day would breede great diſturbance. But ſpeaking an vntrueth before God will breede anger. The Feaſtes in Moſes foretold his times. The Paſſeover, his death: Pentecoſt when the FierDeut. 33. of the Law was given, the ſending of the Spirit in fier:Act. 2. And September had moſt dayes of meditating Gods dwelling in the Cloud: and then the firſt Adam was made: and then was the Feaſt of Tabernacles: the memory of Gods dwelling among Iſraell. And our Lord at Eeaſter had an odd half yeare in his age: for euen beginning thirty he began his three yeres and an halfe.
            
            
               Of the harme that cometh by the errour.
               WHeras a modeſt & a learned Iew of Constantinopole,
                  R. Abraham Ruben holden to be the beſt learned Iewe in the world, hath ſought chriſtian inſtitution from England: and your

Maieſties higheſt preferd are higheſt bound to performe ſuch weighty matters: they muſt be warned that by errour herein they diſgrace not all the Goſpell. Where God omitteth no help to faith. A Iewe would not ſoone beleeue that a wiſe Emperour, as Augustus was, would command poore men to come in winter to their owne townes. And the eternall ſonne would not require his mother after the fleſh, to take more toyle then need was: neither was it the fit time for ſheepheardes to be all night in the fields. And as baptiſme was according to his birth moneth: It was not holſome for men to goe vp to the head in water, in midwinter: And by theſe our vnlikelyhoods, we haue cauſed the Goſpell to be miſbeleeued, over, almoſt all the world.
            
            
               Of the erroneous ground that cast amiſſe our L. his birth.
               AN old Greek Oration fathered vpō 
                  Iohn Chryſostome, citeth Ioſephus the Iew, for a work foūd once at Rome, but neuer ſhewed to any againe: wherein he writeth that Zacharie miniſtred in the ſeuenth moneth: and then was ſpoken to by the Angell Gabriel: and ſoone went home: and his wife conceaued, and bare Iohn, ſix moneths elder then our Lord, after the fleſh. This auctoritie though it were true, were nothing. Scripture ſhould be our ground. And ſeeing God telleth not the day, we ſhould not ſay, that according to our feaſtes, the trueth of ſtories fell. And if we relyed vpon Ioſephus, we ſhould haue kept his workes.
            
            
               Of confounding S. Mathew, and S. Luke, and the Kings.
               A Table is prefixed afore the N.T. which daſheth al the Goſpell if it be regarded: in theſe wordes it ſtandeth.
               
                  
                  
                     A Table to make plaine the difficulty that is found in S. Matthew and S. Luke, touching the generation of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of Dauid, and his right ſucceſſour in the kingdome: which deſcription beginneth at David and no hygher, becauſe the difficultie is only in his poſteritie.FOR better vnderſtanding of the contents of this Table, ye ſhall note, that the Evangeliſts S. Matth. and S. Luke, haue diverſly recited the generation of our Saviour Chriſt, according to the fleſh, and yet tende both to one end: that is, to prooue, that (according to that which is written of him in the propheſies) he is diſcended of the royall blood of David, & rightly ſucceeded him in the kingdome. So the diverſitie of the ſayd recital conſiſteth in this: that Saint Matthew ſetteth forth the ſaid generation deſcending from father to ſonne, and S. Luke aſcending from ſonne to father, which comes all to one end. But to ſhewe the agreement of Saint Luke with Saint Matthew, wee haue here ſeth foorth the generation by him deſcribed, deſcending after the order of Saint Matthew: to the end that the one may bee conferred with the other. Furthermore, Saint Matthew deſcribeth the generation of Ioſeph, though it belong nothing to Ieſus Chriſt, after the fleſh, and Saint Luke, that of the virgin Marie: for it was very neceſſary to recite both, foraſmuch as women were commonly reputed of the line or kinred of their huſbands: and ſo aſwell on her huſbands ſide, as on her owne ofſpring, it is manifeſt that ſhe was of the royall line of Dauid.
                     
                     
                        
                           Saint Matthew.
                        
                         
                        
                           Saint Luke.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           David begate
                        
                     
                     
                        Salomon king.
                         
                        Nathan the kings brother.
                     
                     
                        Roboam.
                        The poſteritie of Solomō leaft in Ochoſias, wherby the kingdom was tranſported to the line of Nathan, in the perſon of Ioas ſonn to Iuda.
                        
                           Mathatha
                        
                     
                     
                        Abia.
                        
                           Menna.
                        
                     
                     
                        Aſa.
                        
                           Melcha.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ioſaphat.
                        
                           Eliacim.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ioram.
                        
                           Iona.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ochoſias.
                        
                           Ioſeph.
                        
                     
                     
                         
                        
                           Iuda.
                           
                              Iuda of the line of Nathan, engendred Simeon, called Ioas, which came to the royall ſeate, becauſe the poſteritie of Solomon fayled in Ochoſias: and therefore the kingdome belonged to Nathans poſteritie, according to the ordinance of David, as Philo reciteth, that is, the yongeſt of the children of Berſabe (which was Solomon) ſhould raigne after him, & that, if the poſteritie fayled, the kingdome ſhould come to the poſteritie of the next younger, which was Nathan, and therfore Nathan was called Ahiſchar, that is to ſay, Brother of the Prince, & they of his poſteritie Ahiſcharim, that is to ſay, Brother of the Prince, and Mathitim, which ſignifieth, giuen to ſucceede. The ſaide Philo reciteth, that the poſteritie of the ſayd Nathan, was ſo honored of the King Ioſaphat, that he called his children the brothers of Ioram his ſonn, and their children the brothers of Ochoſias his Nephewe: and this is the cauſe why the Scriptuere ſaith, that Ioas was the ſonne of Ochoſias, though he were not his naturall ſonne, but the ſonne of Iuda deſcending from Nathan.
                              Note, that Saint Matthew going about to deſcribe the generation by fouretienes, did firſt leaue out Ioas, Amazias, and Azarias, which are ſett in betweene Ochoſias the laſt of the race of Solomon & Ioathan. Further, he hath left out Achaas, and Ioacim placed betweene Ioſias and Iechonias. All which we haue here ſet in their order, to make the ſame deſcription more perfect and plaine.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Simeon called Ioas, which begate
                        
                     
                     
                        Amaſias.
                        The names here conteyned, aſwell on the leaft ſide, as on the right, iſſuing frō Ioas, haue diuers names, & yet are all one perſon. Therefore note, that the perſons on the leaft ſide, named by Saint Ma. are the very ſame that are otherwiſe named by S. Lu. on the right ſide, till Salathiel.
                        
                           Leui.
                        
                     
                     
                        Azari
                              •
                           
                        
                        
                           Matthat.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ioatham.
                        
                           Ioram.
                        
                     
                     
                        Achaz.
                        
                           Eliezer.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ezechias.
                        
                           Jeſu.
                        
                     
                     
                        Manaſſes.
                        
                           Her.
                        
                     
                     
                        Amon.
                        
                           Holmadā.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ioſias.
                        
                           Coſan.
                        
                     
                     
                        Achaas.
                        
                           Addi.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ioacim.
                        
                           Melchi.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iechonias.
                        
                           Neri.
                        
                     
                     
                        Salathiel.
                        
                           Salathiel.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                           Zorobabel which begate
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              Abiud.
                              Eliacim.
                              Azor.
                              Sadoc.
                              Achin.
                              Eliud.
                              Eleazar.
                              Mathan.
                              Iacob.
                              Ioſeph the huſbande of Mary the virgin mother to our Sauiour Chriſt.
                           
                        
                        After the people were returned in to the land with Zorobabel, being delyuered from the captivity of Babylon, he governed the ſame people 58. yeres, & left diuers childrē, among whō 
                           Reſa and Abiud were the cheefe. So the governement & rule ouer the people, remayned to Reſa & his poſteritie, vntill Janne, and thēce diſcended the virgine Marie, as is declared in the generatiō deſcribed by Sa. Lu. & Ioſeph
                           ▪ her huſband deſcended frō the ſaid Zorobabel, by Abiud, brother to Reſa, as S Matt. delareth in the generation by him deſcribed.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Reſa which governed 66. yeares.
                              
                              
                                 Ioanna. 53 yeares.
                              
                              
                                 Iuda, 14. 
                              
                                 Joſeph. 7.
                              
                                 Semei. 11.
                              
                                 Mathathias. 12.
                              
                                 Nathat. 9
                              
                                 Nagge. 10
                              
                                 Heli. 8.
                              
                                 Naum. 7.
                              
                                 Amos. 14.
                              
                                 Mathathias. 10.
                              
                                 Ioſeph. 66
                              
                                 Ianne. 16.
                              
                                 Melchi. 
                              
                              
                                 Leui.
                              
                              
                                 Matthath
                              
                              
                                 Hely, called Ioachim. Foraſmuch as it ſeemeth that S. Luke maketh no mention of the generation of Marie, but rather of Ioſeph: for hee vſeth theſe wordes, That Ieſus was counted the ſonne of Ioſeph, which was of Heli, that is to ſay, the ſonne of Hely: we muſt vnderſtand that in this place the name of ſonne is taken for the name of ſonne in lawe, and that Saint Luke meaneth that Ioſeph was the ſonne in law to Hely, for that he tooke to wife the Virgin Mary, daughter to the ſayd Hely, which maner of ſpeach is common in the Scripture: for wee finde that Noemi called Ruth her daughter, which was but her ſtepdaughter, her ſonnes wife.
                                 
                              
                              
                                 Mary the mother of Christ.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           IESVS CHRIST.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of the faultes conteyned in this Table.
               THE cockles of ſea-ſhores, and the leaues of a foreſt, and the granes of the Popy may as well be numbred as the groſſe errours of this Table, diſgracing the ground of our owne hope.
            
            
               That Salomons houſe ended not in Ochorias.
               THat Ioas was ſonne to Ochorias properly, we may bee ſure: becauſe 2. King 11.2. cha. 13.1. ch. 14.13. 1. Chro. 3.11. 2. Chro. 22.11. cha. 23.3.ſix times the Scripture termeth him ſo. And if he had not bene ſonne in proprietie the repetitions muſt haue opened that. Prophets repeat not narrations without ſome change, if the matters could ſuffer. And if Salomons houſe had there ended, ſome ſpeach had bene of it in the holy ſtory. And all the Thalmudiques holde that the kings of Iuda vnto Sedekias were of Salomons loynes. And if our Goſpel croſſed the plain ſtory, all Iewes would ſweare God neuer penned it. And well might they. So our Diuinitie giueth ſtrong occaſion to reiect the Goſpell of our owne ſalvation.
            
            
               That King Ioas, Matth. 1. is not Simeon, Luk. 3.
               1 SAint Luke writing of the true light, was to refuſe darknes. But if hee had called king Ioas, Simeon: all the world would haue ſayd hee loued darkenes. Ioas was famous, Symeon was not heard off, but in priuate record.
               2 Again, if Salomons houſe was ended for badnes in Ochoſias, he that firſt of Nathan ſhould ſucceed, had bene a

good man. As God changeth dignities for a better to ſucceed. But Ioas the king was worſe then Ochoſias. For he fell to ſtrange Gods: and kild Zacharie the ſonne of Barachias, or Iehoiadagh. And our Lord Mat. 23. maketh him as a new Cain. And the Iewes in Ieruſalemy, in their treatiſe of poenance fol. 69. hold, that for his ſinn the temple and nation was deſtroyed, and 80. thouſand ſacrificers deſtroyed for the blood of Zacharie.
               
               And thus they augment the matter, ſaying fo. 69. Col. 1. Seauen tranſgreſsions Iſrael tranſgreſſed that day. They kild a Prieſt, and a Prophet, and a Iudge, and ſhed innocent blood, and polluted the court betwixt the altar and the Temple (as our Lord telleth them the ſame) and it was the expiation day. And when Nebuzaradan came thither he ſaw the blood vpon the pauement: and aſked whoſe blood was this. They ſay, the blood of a Sacrificer, and a Prophete, and a Iudge which prophecied against vs all that thou hast done vnto vs: and we ſtood vp against him and kild him Then he cauſed 80000. youthes of the ſacrificers race to be there killed for him. Thus they write: in their Rhetorique amplification of murthering the prophet, as their maner is: feigning narrations to make lively ſhort ſpeaches. And this much doeth the Scripture ſpeake: 2. Ch. 24. of Zacharias and Ioas.
               
               The ſpirit of God came vpon Zacharia the ſonne of Iehoiada the prieſt, which ſtood by the people, & ſayd vnto them, thus ſayth God, Why tranſgreſſe you the cōmaundements of the Lord, that ye can not proſper? For becauſe ye haue forſaken the Lord, he alſo hath forſaken you.
               And they conſpired againſt him, and ſtoned him with ſtones, at the commaundement of the King, euen in the court of the houſe of the Lord.
               And ſo Ioas the king remembred not the kindneſſe which

                  Iehoiada his father had done to him, but ſlue his ſonne: and when hee died, hee ſayd, The Lord looke vpon it and require it.
               And when the yeare was out, it came to paſſe that the hoſt of Siria came vp againſt him, and they came againſt Iuda and Hieruſalem, and deſtroyed all the Lords of the people from among the people, and ſent all the ſpoyle of them vnto the king to Damaſcon.
               
               For the Sirians came with a ſmall company of men, and the Lord delyuered a very great hoſt vnto their hand, becauſe they had forſaken the Lord God of their fathers: and they gaue ſentence againſt Ioas.
               
               And when they were departed from him, they left him in great diſeaſes, and his owne ſervants conſpired againſt him, for the blood of the children of Iehoiada the prieſt, and ſlue him on is bed, and he died: and they buried him in the citie of David, but not in the ſepulchres of the King.
               Thus ſhamefull King Ioas lyeth in the holy Scripture: and yet our right reuerend Fathers would make him Father after the fleſh to the King of glory: who was to make his true Fathers the patrones of vertue in their ages: and the Scripture well vnderſtood, ſhewed that in all places. But weake is the hart of our teachers: to make him father to our Lord, who was a Cain to the Prophete that taught of our Lord his kingdome.
            
            
               Of Ioachaz a younger brother made Father to Ioakim two yeres his Elder.
               NO better maſters of art be our Doctors in this Table for Amaſias, Achas, Manaſſes, and Iehaiakim: men extreemly

hated of God. And one thing is of moſt vntolerable groſnes: that Achaaz (by true print, Ioachaz ſonne to Ioſias made king at 23. and after three monethes removed by Pharaoh: who preſently made Iehoiakim king being 25. yeres old): that this Ioachaz is made father to his Elder brother.Greater meanes then ever Ovid ſpake in fables: brought vpon our holy Ghoſpell. And Saint Luke muſt be in the ſame dotage: that Addi muſt be Ioachaz a younger brother, and Melchi both his ſonne, and elder brother. Machmad, Lucian, Ovid, & all narratours of monſtrous are not ſuch in their faculties, as our right reuerend Fathers, in giving occaſion to make the Goſpell worſe thē the Al-koran. And yet worſe foloweth.
            
            
               How the Table blaſphemeth the oth of the Lord.
               THE Lord ſware thus: Ier. 22.24. As I liue ſaith the Eternal though Coniahu the ſonne of Iehoiakim king of Iudah, were a ſignet vpon my right hand, yet thence I would pluck thee: and I will giue thee into the hand of them that ſeeke thy ſoule: and into their hand of whome thou art afrayd: into the hand of Nabucadraeſar King of Babel, and into the hand of the Chaldaeans. And I will cary thee away: and thy mother that bare thee, vnto an other Land: and there ſhall ye die. And vnto the Land vnto which they lift vp their ſoule, they ſhall not returne. Is this man Coniahu a vile idol, beaten into peeces, is he a veſſel of diſhonour; wherefore are they caryed away hee and his ſeed, and cast into a land which they know not; O earth, earth, earth heare the Worde of the Eternal. Thus ſaith the Eternal, write ye this mā
                   Childles, a perſonnage that ſhall not proſper while he liveth. For no man ſhall proſper of his ſeed, to ſit vpō the Throne of David, or to beare rule any more in Iudah.
               
               This vehement ſpeach ſhould haue taught our right reverend Fathers: that Iechonias as a man ſhould beget no

Children, though as a Prince he begate his ſucceſſour▪ even his owne Vncle Sedekias. That doeth Ezra teach 1. Chron. 3.
               
                  And the ſonnes of Ioſias were his firſt borne Iochanan, the ſecond Iehoiakim, the third Sedekias, the fourth 
                  He is Iochonias. Sallum. Now before I goe to the next verſe, notes vpon this verſe may be profitably cited. Thus D. Kimchi a principall Rabbin ſpeaketh vpon: And the ſonnes of Ioſias the first borne, was Iochanan: Hee was Ioachaz whom Pharaoh Necoh tooke, and caried into Egypt, and there died he: and he had two names. And how is he ſayd, The firſt borne; was not Iehoiakim elder then he by two yeres, as it is written, Twenty three yeares old was Ioachaz when he 
                  And he reigned but 3. moneths. 2. Chro. 36. 
                  reigned, & it is written: Twenty fiue yeares old was Iehoiakim when he reigned;A ſpeach of ſonnage to a kingdom ſtrange to vs. The one was not ſonne of a Kingdom: for the kingdom. So our DD. of bleſſed memory, doe expound it. S. Matth. to ſuch would not be heard.
               Here wee ſee how ſonnes to Kingdomes are in other gate ſpeach then naturall ſonnes. Thus Kimchi the principall Grammarian noteth the Scriptures phraſe and the Talmudiques, for ſonnage in Kingdome.
               The like ſpeach we haue for ſonnage in Kings, in the next wordes, verſ. 15. For the ſonnes of Iehoiakim: Iechonias was his ſonne: Sedekias was his ſonne. Here the Vncle, by nature is ſonne by the Kingdome: as the moſt learned Tremelius well noted. And touching Iechonias and Salathiel, thus writeth Ezra the learned Scribe. And the ſonnes of Iechonias
                  The Vncle called ſonne for ſucceſsion: as Salathiel 37. degrees of being heirs is called ſonne 
                  aſsir, (that is kept in ſtraite priſon:) Salathiel was his ſonne: and Malchiram and Pedaiah, &c. Here the Babylonian Thalmud in Sanedrin expoundeth the word, Sabtile Kimchi to diſturbe all the N. Teſt. taketh aſsir for Aſsir, a mans name, and not a priſoner. Wee ſimple ſoules follow him to overthrowe our foundation: that Salomons houſe is not gone, for Nathans to come in. 
                  aſsir, not for a mans name, but for, kept in reſtrainct of priſon: as Iechonias was 37. yeres in priſon. And Nabuchadraſar meant to haue deſtroyed the line of the kinges of Iuda:

as he killed the ſonnes of Sedekias: So Ezra the ready Scribe ſheweth, as commenting vpon Gods oth in Ieremy. 22. aboue cited, that Iechonias had no Children: bringing Sedekias his Vncle, for a ſonne: and Salathiel to be his ſonne: when he was Aſsir: that is: was, in moſt ſtrait priſon The Babylonians were not of Chriſtian modeſty: Herodotus lib 1 telleth of the Babyloniās honeſtie. that wiues might come to their huſbands: And if they had humanitie that way, any ofHerodotus lib 1 telleth of the Babyloniās honeſtie. 
                  Thiſbe ladies ſhould as well ſerve. In that forth Ezra ioyneth with Ieremy in his ſtyle, to tell all the world: The earth, the earth, the earth: that as Ieremy foretolde. So Ezra did record, that Iechonias died Childleſſe: & that in him all Salomons houſe did fall: & that all the Iewes hope for an earthly Kingdome was become vanity of vanities: and that Salomons Kinges overtherw the world: but for Gods hid mercy: ſeeing Manaſſes did ſaw into peeces Eſay the glory of heauenly eloquence, and was caryed to Babel: and Amon for idoles was kild: and the godlieſt Ioſias was too good for the world, and his ſonnes vnworthy of the world: that in them the Iewes ſhould ſee the laſt ſceptre bearer, while the ſun ſhined: that they might looke better vnto the ſun of iuſtice.No bitternes can be bitter againſt Iudaique, Atheiſme▪ and mockers of Scriptures concent. And our Biſhops errour herein ioyneth with moſt ſtubburne, blind and mad Iudaiſme: againſt the main purpoſe of the N. Teſtam. which teacheth that the kingdome of Chriſt is not of this world: but of men poore in ſpirit, to poſſeſſe the Kingdome of Heauen. But the Iewes haue yet their belly their god, & looke for a moneyfull King, and him, of Salomons race: & make it an article of damnation, to deny In the Thalmud Babylonian in R. Aſer fo. 18. B articule 12. that: and if they catch vs therein, to deny Iechonias poſterity failing; and to continue it to Salathiel and Zorobabel they are ſure, and wel may be, that they haue overthrowen S. Luke, ſo farr as our Biſhops graunt hath auctoritie, and by them all the New

Teſtament, for which Iudaiſme, they ſhould in open Parleament, or before your M. confeſſe, that as God ſtroke the Iewes with Madnes, Blindnes, and Aſtoniſhment of hart, Deut. 28. So herein the right RR. FF. are in equall caſe that betray the Goſpell to Iewes: and agree with the enemies of our L. which expect, to this day, the pompe of Salomon, that it ſhall be reſtored vpon mount Sion. But they conſider not the lamentations of Ieremy: to what end they were penned. The ſcope of that booke was to teach the Iewes that Salomons glory was not the high bleſſing that Moſes propoundeth. But Chriſt was the end of the law. And as by the blood of the Paſcha Lambe or kid, Iſraell was ſaued in Egypt: ſo the ſonne of God in the fleſh ſhould ſaue vs by his blood: whom men by ignorance would crucifie, being king of glory: who made Heauen and Earth. This was their firſt confirmation: wherewith Moſes the firſt king of Iſraell ſtrenghtened them. They rebell. A law is giuen, promiſing all earthly bleſſings, even to the higheſt honour of a kinge. But menacies are added, Leu. 26. that they will fall from God continually: & continually they ſhall be beaten: euen till theyr King ſhalbe caryed captiue: and they ſhall be in theyr enemies land ſeauenty yeares. And then God will remember his covenant: when they pray, as Leu. 26. preſcribeth: confeſſing theyr ſinnes and the ſinnes of theyr fathers: Then God would remember his couenant with Iacob, Iſaak, and Abraham, and how he brought Iſraell from Egypt. This the law telleth: and the ſtory ſheweth: that the Kings failed quite from the earth. And prophecies ſhewe, through Daniel, ſeauen times repeating the ſame matter, that Chams houſe Sems houſe, & Iaphets Grekes ſhall rule Iuda till Chriſt cometh. And that he ſhall giue him ſelfe for the ſinnes of the

world: and bring to earth the kingdome of Heauen. This Daniel ſaw: and abridged Ieremies lamentations: which after the Kingdomes fall, the Iewes ſtudied for the ſpace of a Iubily in Babylon. And when Iechonias was dead, and in him all Salomons houſe: and Zerobabel of Nathan was chief of Dauids houſe: then Daniel is told at what day Moſes policy ſhall end: & Gentiles ſhall be equall in the couenant: where no Iewes might hope for an earthly ſuperioritie, ouer the kinges of the earth. And all this gold is made dimme, by our deriuing of the Salathiel from Iechonias. So, all that euer cōmented vpon the Kings or Chronicles will ſay: that we muſt bring our Lord from Salomon: and ſo we openly deny Saint Luke: that bringeth our Lord of Nathan: And confirme the Iewes article touched before: which, to teach our ſimple▪ ſhalbe ſet out with the Iewes further opinion.Fol. 18. of the cōment. 
                  Rabbi Aſſer vpon Sanedrin articule the twelueth writeth thus.
            
            
               The Iewes faith.
               
                  
                     The Iewes yet looke for Chriſt to be borne.
                  THE twelft articule is concerning the dayes of Meſſias: & that requireth a constant beleef that he ſhall come: and a man may not thinke that he will differ: ab. 2. if he linger expect him: and a man may not preſcribe him ſelfe a time: & gather vnto himſelfe opinions by occurrantes, to bring furth the time of his coming. And our learned ſay: Let the ſpirit faint in them that account the limit. Alſo a man must beleeue, that he ſhall haue excellencie and dignitie: and glory aboue all the kinges that euer haue bene. As of him prophecied all the Prophetes from Moſes who reſteth in peace our Doctor vnto Malachi, who resteth in peace. And who ſo doubteth of him or holdeth his honour ſmall, denyeth the lawe. For ſo the lawe testifieth of him, in the meaning of Balaams prophecy:

and in the meaning of the ſection: you ſtand here all (Deut. 29. and 30.) And this is a rule of foundation,
                     The Iewes ground to overthrowe all the New Teſtament is graunted by our right reverend Fathers, that alſo the table prefixed to the Goſpell.
                   That Iſrael ſhall haue no king, but of the houſe of Dauid, and of the ſeede of Solomon only. And who ſoeuer willbe a ſchiſmatique against this familie, he denyeth the name of the bleſſed God, and the wordes of his Prophetes.
            
            
               Of our yeelding vnto this wicked article against the ſcope of the Old and New Testament.
               
                  DAniel, as I ſhewed, was taught by the Angel Gabriel, the very exact and ſtraight day for the kingdome of Chriſt: and to diſgrace that prophecy, M. Liuely wrote a great book: full of dotage from the beginning to the end: yet highly cōmended by our Arch. auctoritie, in the Libel, written againſt the Scottiſh miſt and Brettiſh nation. Alſo the laſt fourtene which are in S. Matth. cha. 1. all of Nathan; Salathiel, Zorobabel, Abiud, Eliakim, Azor, Sadock, Achim, Eliud, Eleazar, Matthan, Iacob, Ioſeph, Mary, Ieſus, Theſe were termed Dan. 7. The Kings of the moſt hige God: which ſhould poſſeſſe a kingdome for euer: And for vrging thoſe to bad religion and vexing of them the four Beaſtes were caſt into fier.The houſe of Nathan ſhould haue had more pompe then Salomons if the Kingdome of Chriſt had bene of this world. And theſe had not ſo bene vſed if Chriſt his kingdome had bene of this world. And Balaam ſpake of Meſsias, that ſhould vnwall all the ſonnes of Seth. Which terme Iekarker in Ebrew, to pull downe the walles, S. Paul expoundeth 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfarr are not carnall, but mighty in God: to the pulling downe of ſtronge holdes, pulling down thoughts, and euery high fort, that exalteh it ſelfe againſt the knowledge of God: and captiuing euery thought into the obedience of Chriſt. Thus graciouſly Saint Paul expoundeth

                  Balaams terme of pulling downe the wall. But while wee deny Salomons houſe to end in Iechonias, and make Salomon the youngeſt of Bethſebaes ſonnes, and Nathan his elder, and Patriarch: and inferiour to his younger: and againe giue yeares of gouernement to Rheſa,- without all ſtory, and bring the Kingdomes right to marie: and talke of Iewes mariage in their tribe for profe of kindred, by this pretenſed help of reconciliation, we haue diſturbed all the Bible, and become a ſkorne to all the Iewes. But one word of your Maieſties gracious mouth will baniſh that Table for euer.
               
                  Now that the ſimple may perceaue S. Matthew and S. Luke: their purpoſe ſhalbe told briefly. S. Matthew would teach Herodians & Pilateans concerning Christ the king of the Jewes: that earthly emperours ſhould feare no leſſe from him: for that his kingdome was not of this world. That may be kowen by conſidering his owne ancestours, from 
                  To Abrahā firſt Chanaan was promiſed. 
                  him to whom Chanaan was promiſed: & after the kings, which were not of his line: & againe his ancestours
                  Salomons kings were farre from our Lordes kindred off: 1000. yeres. 
                  two: and their houſe. From Abraham to Dauid all the fathers were godly: and Thamar, Rachab, Ruth and Bathſuagh, examples of faith, for all. David in rest had nere ouerthrowen his houſe. But Solomon with his houſe ſoone brede ruine, fewel for Ieremies lamentations: and funerall verſes for the buriall of Salomons race in Iechonias. Then cometh in Nathans houſe in Zorobabel and Salathiel fathers 
                  Salathiel and Zorobabel. 
                  two to our Lord, after the fleſh: but turneth in Abiud &c. out of our Lord his line, yet all were godly and poore: and the ſaincts of the high Trinity, Dan. 7. For whom God overthrew the iron legged Macedonians and the former partes belly, breſt and head of the image.
                  Abiud Eliakim, &c were kinges by right: but farre from our Lord in kindred. 
                  And ſo telleth how in pouerty ſtandeth the kingdome of heauen: and Kings need not to feare loſſe by Christ. K. of Chanaan, receaving thence no peny, but vexed at his comming into the world. Now S. Luke going to ſhew his victory over Sathan bringeth him by Mary and Ely to Adam, taught in his firſt day who ſhould destroy Sathans workes. This meaned the Evangeliſt whom the former Table reiected: A right and plain Table ſhall follow.
               
               
                  
                  The right reconciliation of Saint Matthew and Saint Luke.
                  
                     
                        DAVID.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Salomon the eldeſt ſonne of Bathſheba.
                                 Roboam.
                                 Abia.
                                 Aſa.
                                 Ioſaphat.
                                 Ioram.
                                 * Achaziah.
                                 * Ioaz.
                                 * Amaziah. 
                                 Ozias.
                                 Ioatham.
                                 Achaz.
                                 Ezekias.
                                 Manaſſes.
                                 Amon.
                                 Ioſias.
                                 Iehoiakim.
                                 Iehoiachin or Ie-Chonias.
                              
                              Here Salomons houſe ended, as though it had never bene.
                           
                           
                              
                                 Nathan the yonger & next brother.
                                 Mathatha.
                                 Mainan.
                                 Melea.
                                 Eliakim.
                                 Ionan.
                                 Ioſeph.
                                 Iuda.
                                 Simeon.
                                 Levi.
                                 Mattha
                                       •
                                    .
                                 Iorim.
                                 Eliezer.
                                 Ioſe.
                                 Er.
                                 Melchi.
                                 Neri.
                                 Salatthiel.
                                 Elmodam.
                                 Coſam.
                                 Addi.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  * Theſe bad three: and worſe Iehoiakim Saint Matthewe omitteth.
                  
                     
                        ZOROBABEL.
                        
                           
                              
                                 Abiud. Abiud or Meſullam 1. Chro. 3. to whom the Crowne belonged: and from whom Heathen toke it.
                                 Eliakim.
                                 Azor.
                                 Sadoc.
                                 Achim.
                                 Eliud.
                                 El
                                       •
                                    azar.
                                 Matthan
                                 Iacob.
                                 Ioſeph. * Ioſeph ſhould haue bene King, if Tyrants would haue given all men their right: and our Lord, his Sonne by lawes eſteeme, ſo had bene Kinge of the Iewes: And would haue it in no other right: that his heavenlie Kingdome might bee knowne.
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 Rheſa. Ioanna.
                                 Iuda.
                                 Ioſeph.
                                 Semei.
                                 Mattathias.
                                 Maath.
                                 Nagge.
                                 Eſsi. 
                                 Naum.
                                 Amos. 
                                 Mattathias.
                                 Ioſeph. 
                                 Ianna.
                                 Melchi. 
                                 Levi.
                                 Matthan. 
                                 Eli father in lawe to Ioſeph: only ye note was good in the former table
                                 Marie IESVS our Lord
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Thus the Table neuer had doubt. For ſeeing Salathiel was the ſonne of Neri (by S. Luke) a priuate man: who muſt needs be a father naturally, & not as K. Baaſa, whoſe family was rooted out, was father to King Achab, in the ſpeach of King Benadad: and ſeeing God ſware that Iechonias ſhould dye childleſſe: as auctour of the Kingdomes ruine: there, and not in Ochoſias ſhould the Iewes place the Catachreſis of begetting. Our Lord doeth nothing but he telleth his ſervants the Prophetes: But he told not that hee would end Salomons houſe in Ochoſias, and would not paſſe ſo great a matter in ſilence: a matter the greateſt for the kingdomes of this world. Therefore Salomons race ended not in Ochoſias
                     ▪ but our right Reuerend Fathers are vnſpeakably to ſeeke for the trueth of holy ſtory. And Aggei with Zacharie help S. Luke to be vnderſtood. Aggei bringeth wordes from God for Zorobabel, that he ſhalbe a ſignet vpon the finger of God at the day of glory when the Macedonian kings ſhould be ſhaken: and our Lord ſhould come into the world 29.Rabbi Nehumias in Pet. Gal told: This time 50 ye. Meſsias ſhal be borne. & ſo thē m
                           •
                        ght all the natiō haue tolde by Moſes & Dan 9. yeares (by Num. 4.) before hee entred into the worke of the Tabernacle. And ſo by Moſes and Daniel, in Aggeis time his nation knew in what yere the weſt Cittim named Num. 24. generally, and Dan. xi. more diſtinctly, ſhould haue a full token of Empire & the Macedonians ſhould be vtterly beſtript of all gouernement. Then Zorobabel in Chriſt ſhould be a ſignet vpon the finger of God. Zorobabel a poore gouernour of 49000. captiues which left Babel, hauing litle but what Daniel gote by his wiſedome, to help the Iewes home: Zorobabel, poore in ſpirit, and looking for a citie whereof God was the builder: & ſoone called away from Sion to Suſan, as a Pilgrome and ſtranger on the earth.
                  But God ſware (as was noted from Ier. 22.) that if Iechonias
                     
were a ſignet vpon the finger of the Lord, he would pluck him thence.
                  Therefore Salathiel may no further be ſonne to Iechonias then a ſucceeder in governement, as Achab is ſonne to Baaſa: rooted out, 1. K. 20.34. Heathen vſed Adoption: but Ma. tom. 4. tract. de regib. 
                     Dauids houſe was bound to the next man of kindred. And in adoption the terme begetting is vſual as in a naturall father: So Ovid, the mirrour of plaine Latin ſpeaketh of Iulius and Augustus. Metam. 15. being of ſeuerall families by the father ſide: and Augustus is progenies of Iulius: and,

                        — Nec enim de Caeſaris actis,
                        Vllum maius opus quam quod Pater extitit huius.
                     
And againe:

                        Scilicet aequoreos plus est domuiſſe Britannos, &c.
                        quam tantum genuiſſe virum.
                     
As they are very ſimple in learning, that know not Britanie famous 2000. yeares agoe: Before Brennus ſpoiled Delphos and Graecia with his A Britane word for three horſes to every captaine: vſed in Pauſanias 
                     Trimarchiâ of our Britanie, and are bare Chorographers that know not all borne within our Iland ſeas to be:
— Penitus toto diuiſos orbe Britannos
So they haue litle ſtomake againſt Italy, that would not remember this place of Naſo. And as the Emperours are famous Diui: So the firſt beginning in Diuus Iulius and Diuus Augustus is famous, thus:
Ne foret hic igitur mortali ſemine cretus
                     Ille Deus faciendus erat. Hence to all learned and ſpecially to vs, the terme of begetting for a ſucceſſour ſhould bee familiar. Thus I ſpeak only for the ſimple: as for our right Reverend Fathers they doe take it for ſucceſſiō in all after Ochoſias: as begotten of him by ſucceſſion: and all that like of them for the phraſe there cānot miſlike the Catachreſis

in Iechonias and Salathiel. And all muſt graunt that Salomons houſe muſt be brokē off: vnleſſe they will make two Salathiels and two Zorobabels: the one couple fathers to Ioſeph, the other to Mary: So doe ſome learned, but vnlearnedly. For Zorobabel Aggei 2. was both heyr to Salomon, and father to our Lord. And they had bene raſh namegeuers that ſhould name a couple of ech family with the ſame names to diſturbe all the world. Now that Zorobabel the gouernour in Salomons houſe cometh of Nathan, Zacharie ſheweth: naming Leui, and his chief family, Simeon, & Dauid with Salomon had no
                           •
                         ben omitted, if Zorobabel had come of him. 
                     Nathan: as chief in his family, Ch. 12.10. So this cauſe is paſt doubt to cleare the Table: that in Iechonias not in Ochoſias Salomons houſe was buried: that family & kingdome ſhould end togeather. That Ier. 22. & all lam. might be plain And an other as great a dotage as any euer came from brainſick head haue the right reverēd Fathers ſold to torment the ſimple who over the realme haue marked them: how they make Ochoſias to be two yeares Elder then his Father: and many yeares Elder then his Mother.
               
            
            
               Of Ochoſias or Achaziah made Elder then his Father.
               OF King Ioram thus it is written, 2. Chr. 21.20. When he beganne to reigne he was thirty and two yeres old: and reigned in Ieruſalem eight yeres, and liued wretchedly. Howbeit they buried him in the city of David: but not among the ſepulchres of the Kings. And the inhabitants of Ieruſalē made Achaziahu his youngeſt ſonne King in his ſteed: for the men of warre that came with the hoſt of the Arabians, had ſlayne all his eldeſt ſonnes: and ſo Ahaziahu the ſonne of Iehoram King of Iuda was made King.
               
                  
                  Which is to be vnderſtand that he reigned twenty yeres his father yet liuing, but after his fathers death was confirmed King, whē he was fourty and two yeares old. Two and fourtie yeares old was he when he began to raigne, and he raigned one yeare in Hieruſalem: his Mothers name was Athalia, the daughter of Amry.
               
            
            
               Of the errours how many very groſſe follow vpon one.
               1. OChoſias is called the youngeſt, and made king by the people. That had bene needles if he had reygned twenty yeares afore.
               2. Beſides his father reigned but 8. yeres: And foure of them with Ioſaphat. And it were ſenſeles to make him reigne 16. yeres or 12. at the leſt afore his father.
               3. Mōreover, nether was Ioſaphat king in Iuda: nor Achab king of Iſrael: nor Ioram borne 42. yeres afore Achazias death. So, elder then his Father and Mother and Mothers houſe ſhould he be. For Omri was not thē ſetled King: but only made King by his ſouldiers: vpon the death of Zimri. And Tibni was made King by his men: and foure yeares were ſpent, before the people made Omri King. Now by our Biſhops notes Achab and Ioſaphat ſhould bee in affinity by their Children, Ioram and Athalia before they were borne. This note of 42. yeres hath troubled Britanie 42. yeres and more. And here again the terme ſonne, referred to the kingdom of Omri, which ſtood 42. yeres, into which yere Achaziahu fell being of his owne age but 22. yeres, the terme ſonne cauſed the diſturbance. The Ebrew Doctours many hundreth yeres agoe in Seder Olam warned the world of this phraſe. And Levi S. to Gerſon vpon the text: in the great Maſſoritique Bible: the beſt work that euer by mans witt, came into the world: which if your Maieſty would cauſe

all that you would preferre to know readily, you ſhould haue in few yeres lerned Diuines: by that & other Ebrew helpes. But very few in the world vnderſtand it: for the 848. margent readings: and further it is hard. Yet one profeſſour might ſoon make a 1000. kunning.
            
            
               Of the terme Kingdome, tranſlated reigne how it maketh K. Baaſſa warre ten yeres after that he was dead.
               IN the third yere of Aſa King of Iudah began Baaſſa to raigne ouer Iſrael twenty and four yeres, 1. K. 15.33. So he died in the ſix and twentieth of King Aſa. Yet in the ſix and thirtieth yere of the reigne of Aſa came Baaſſa King of Iſraell againſt Iudah: By our Biſhops tranſlation: that Machmadiſtes may by our Diuinitie look for their falſe Prophete to reviue, as did Baaſſa by our Bible. When Gentlemen find ſuch matters in our Bibles they ſee no hope of knowledg, & ſome haue turned to deny God to be the auctour of it. Ezra (1. ch. 16.) meant by Malcuth the kindome of Aſa: parted from Iſrael then ſix and thirty yeres. Wherein the twelue tribes thriſe twelue yeres forgat the glory of Davids houſe: ſo that Iuda it ſelf was plagued. God caſteth the Chronicle & other numbers into pleaſant and ſenſible meditations of his providence. And therefore Ezra tooke his accompt frō the Kingdome of Iuda, which Aſa held. In the ſame tenour of number of 3000. ſouldiers Ioſ. 7. for Achans theft, even thirty ſix were ſlaine: thriſe twelue. And after vengeance vpon Achan twelue thouſand of men, women and Children were ſlaine, by the 12. Tribes.
            
            
               
               For the booke of the Iudges.
               THE actes of the Apoſtles are drawen no better vnto the booke of Iudges: to corrupt many other bookes: euen where S. Paules wordes would haue found moſt high admiration: and vtterly damne the Thalmudikes of extreeme blindneſſe in the Iudges ſtory. Our errour ſhalbe firſt handled: And afterwardes S. Paules plainnes ſhalbe ſhewed: if God will.
            
            
               Of Act. 13. v. 20. perverted to ruinate many bookes.
               OVR tranſlation thus ſpeaketh: Hee gaue vnto them Iudges about the ſpace of 450 yeres. Here Beza ſayd, the text was corrupted: to deny that we had a New Teſtament: and the Popes tranſlation turneth back from Ioſua to Iſaaks birth: without all reaſon. S. Paul meant: after a ſort 450. yeres. Proprely 339. from Ioſuahs death to Elyes. Within which times Iudges of puniſhment oppreſſe an hundreth and eleuen yeres: ſo ariſe 450. And 19. textes belonge to that text of Saint Paul. Which anone ſhalbe layd downe. Our Biſhops abſurditie thus appeareth: yeares are from the coming frō Egypt vnto the building of Salomons Temple, 1. K. 6.480. Now if the the Iudges had 450. Thirty of the wildernes would make vp the number: that the ſtoryes of Ioſuah, Samuel, Saul and Dauid ſhould bee all fables: and no time for David to be in the world. So our Biſhops Bible might wel giue place to the Al-koran peſtred with lies.
            
            
               
               Of wrong to Matth. 1. Luk. 3. Ruth. 4.1. Chr. 2.
               
                  RAchab Booz, Obed Ieſſei, are anceſtours to David: borne ten yeares after Elies death. And Ioſuah reigned 17. yeres. Though Rachab were new borne when Iericho fell: yet ſhe muſt be about 120. when ſhe bare Booz, and hee 120. muſt beget Obed: and he 120. muſt beget Ieſſe, and he nere that muſt beget David. By the true Chronicle they were incredibly old, but for Gods auctority. And to adde an hundreth & eleven yeres moo, to four perſons, that is a matter of extreeme overſight. And thus the actes ill tranſlated brought our right Rerevend FF. to diſgrace many holy bookes with incredible groſnes in overſight: where they might haue made all the world admire the Apoſtles learning: how, to ſhew the diſturbance of the times, as though the heauens were troubled, he reckoneth the oppreſſours yeres alone: although they were within the cō
                  pany of the defenders times.
               Theſe many are ioyed to the defenders: not as though they defended ſtill the people ſo long, but becauſe their laſt dealings were ſo long from the former ſtate.
               
                  
                     Othoniel 40.
                  
                  
                     Ehud 80.
                  
                  
                     Barak. 40.
                  
                  
                     Gedeon 40
                  
                  
                     Abimelech. 3.
                  
                  
                     Thola, 23.
                  
                  
                     Iair, 22. Iephthe, 6.
                  
                  
                     Ibſan, 7.
                  
                  
                     Elon, 10. Abdon, 8.
                  
                  
                     Samſon, 20. Ely, 40.
                  
               
               The whole ſumme is 339.
               
                  The puniſhing Iudges haue within this time Cxj. yeres thus.

                     
                        Cuſan, 8,
                     
                        Moab, 18.
                     
                        Siſera, 20. So 339. and 111. make 450. after a ſort: wherein Saint Paul regarded the Iewes manner of ſpeaking to the phraſe: as I will ſhewe by two examples.
                     
                        Madian, 7.
                     
                        Ammon, 18.
                     
                        Philistines, 40.
                  
               
            
            
               How Samſon that iudged but 20. yeares is ſaid to Iudge Iſrael 40.
               THus writeth Elias Leuita, (the best learned Iew that ever holp Christians) in his preface to Bomberges Bible in Hebrew with the Maſſoreth and chief Rabbins. We find in the Ieruſalemy, (the eldeſt volume of the Iewes Pandectes or Doctrinale is ſo called) that Samſon iudged 40. yeares. It teacheth that the Philistines were afrayd of him 20. yeres after his death: as in his life time. And in all the copies that we haue, it is written: TWENTY yeares. Thus farre goeth the commentary. Now I ſee there is no doubt touching the text, in this of Samſon. For the right ſtandeth, as the Draſſ, or comment vpon the phraſes telleth: WHEREFORE is it ſaid twiſe, Iud. 15. vlt. and Iud. 16. vlt. and he iudged Iſrael 20. yeres. Rabbi Acha ſaid. The text doeth teach: that the Philistines were afrayd of him 20. yeres after his death: and 20. yeres in his life time: and ſo ariſe, FOVRTY by two ſeverall times. But the Thalmud ſaid not that the text hath, and he iudged Iſrael fourtie yeares: but that he iudged Iſrael 40. yeres according to the manner of ſpeaking to the phraſes. And here cometh a ſweate elegancy: which is worthy marking. So farre goeth the Thalmud and commentary vpon it. Theſe wordes the learned Elias bringeth againſt ſome ſimple: who might thinke the

text corrupt: by reaſon that the Thalmud differed. To whom he ſheweth, the ſpeach to regard the phraſe, and not proprietie of the text.
               
            
            
               How the Septuaginta alter the very true text for Elyes 40. yeares to agree with the Iewes manner: reckoning after the phraſe
               
                  Lxxii are in ſhortnes called Lxx.THE auncient Lxxij. tranſlaters gaue Ely but 20. yeres, as notes warne vpon the Romane edition of Xystus: & that with Euſebius teſtimonie. But later copiers ſeeing the Ebrewe ſure, & not knowing how the 70. hid their mind: alter the tranſlation, & giue Ely fourty yeares, as the Ebrew hath And thus the Lxx. teach that the Iewes highly regarded the phraſe: for memory of ſtory, to make their nation ready in the numbers vſed in the holy Scripture.
            
            
               How Ioſephus reckoneth the Iudges times as Saint Paul doeth.
               IT is moſt certen that Iſraels age ſince God called them frō Egypt, at the laying of Salomons Temples foundatiō, was 480 yeres. As Noahs whē he began the Arke. And like matters doeth God caſt into like times, through the Bible, And Ioſephus could not bee ignorant of the time. Yet in ſteed of 480. yeares he reckoneth 592. taking Cxj. from the Iudges and beginning from Moſes going vnto Pharoah. So it is to be ſeene, Ioſeph Antiq. 8.2. This ſheweth that S. Paul was brought vp at the feete of Gamaliel: that ſpake thus learnedly, to ſhew the Iewes that he knew Rabbiniques as well as the beſt of them: but held Chriſtianity the only

learning: which to the perfection of ſtory ouer matching all euen in ſchole elegancy, addeth the logique, that draweth vnto the life in Chriſt.
            
            
               How S. Paul further ſettled the Iudges times and Ioſuahs, whereby a table added to ſome of our Bibles appeared: bad and all Thalmudiques, The Ieruſalemy: The Babylonian: Seder Olam, and Maimoni in Beth-Bechira, and all be reproued.
               WHere S. Paul ſaith, God gaue them Iudges after a ſort 450. yeres, vnto the time of Samuel the Prophete: our tranſlation ſpeaketh thus, Act. 3.20.By not marking the Ebrews ſhortnes, we ſeemed to Abr. Zac to giue Saul fourty yeres. So the Iewe deſpiſeth the N. Teſtament by our fault. 
                  And afterwards they deſired a King, and God gaue vnto them Saul the ſonne of Cis, a man of the tribe of Beniamin forty yeres: Here we can not wel be vnderſtood. Saul reigned not 40. yeres. For David when he fought with Goliath in the beginning of Sauls reigne ſhould be aboue 20. and at his 30. Saul kicked againſt the ſpur of his owne ſpear. The Apoſtle foloweth the phraſe of the Iudges: where a ſmall King maketh a Period, as where we ſay: And ſo the land reſted forty yeres: the playner were, And ſo the land reſted. Forty yeres as Tremelius hath: Quieuit terra. Haec gesta quadraginta annorum. S. Paul meant that Samuels dayes & Saules made 40. yeares, and Samuel came to the laſt of them. And dyed but 4. monethes afore Saul, by the Thalmud in Themurah. And the Rabbines can confeſſe that, when they will. For thus they write in Middras pſ. 25. It is ſayd:And in Kimchi vpon Pſ. 99. 
                  Moſes and Aharon were among his prieſts, and Samuel among them that call vpon his name: Thou ſhalt find all that is written of the one, written of the other: The one

was of Levi, the other was of Levi: the one made a Pſalm, the other made a Pſalme: the one reigned over Iſrael, and the other reigned over Iſrael: the one reigned 40. yeares, and the other reigned 40. yeares: the one made warres, and the other made warres: the one kild Kings, and the other killed Kings: the one built altars, & the other built altars: the one offred, and the other offred: the one prayed for Iſrael, and the other prayed for Iſrael: the one ſerved as a Sacrificer, the other ſerved as a Sacrificer. Thus ſpeaketh the Old Rabbin, agreeably to S. Paul: But litle pleaſured his owne ſide. And that note of Midras muſt needes be holden Old. For ſince the Eldeſt Thalmud was compiled, ſoone after great Constantines dayes, the Iewes Rabbines conſpired to croſſe the Apoſtles in ſtorie, that their people ſhold not embrace Chriſt. Maymony praef. ad Miſnah cōfeſſeth in effect why the Thalmud was made: he wrote Miſnah 423. yeres agoe, the greateſt Rabbin of the faithles that ever was: who plainly openeth all the Iudaique to ſuch as can overrule him. In the Thalmud Ieruſalemy 1200 yeres old, in Megilah fol. 72. Col. 4. from the partitiō of the land to Samuel, are 376. yeares: yet in trueth Ioſuah had but tenne after that: and in all, but 17. as it was told. And the Thalmud giveth but eleven to Samuel and two to Saul: yet the Rabbines haue cōſpired theſe 1200. yeres to overthrow the New T. by checking S. Paul for Ioſua, Iudges & Samuel: as S. Lu. for Salomons houſe. And if they could prevaile in eyther, they had gotten the victorie: whiche our right reverend Fathers gave them without all entreaty: & graunt them more fortifications then of them ſelves they durſt ever chirp to ſpeak for. My poore ſelf haue aunſwered this in Ebrew print, as the Lords know, & Europe & Aſia: & infull many Ebrew written treariſes, ſent to Byzantium
                  
by poſt from Francfort to Venize. thence by ſhip: and the Rabbin there is reported of our Marchants to accept, & commend dayly vnto noble Grecians, that he had from England a greater light then ever he expected from Chriſtians. And at Francfurt in the cōpany of many, a Iew being preſent, I ſaid to the company in French, which they all vnderſtood, that by, 1. Sam. 7.3. I would make the Iew confeſſe afore thē all, that the Rabbines were but as Elymas Magus. Thē I ſpake to the Iew in Ebrew this much: Rabbi, this you know, that all muſt ſanctifie the name of God, & beare witnes to the truth continually: or feele flames eternall: yea, ſaith he, that wote I well, and am ready to doe all that toucheth me. Then ſaid I, read this verſe, 1. Sam. 7.3. Since the time that the Arke ſtayed in Kiriah Iaarim, the dayes were many, they were twenty yeares: and all Iſraell with hearty ſighing ſought after the Eternall. And Samuel ſpake to all Iſrael, ſaying: If with all your heartes ye returne vnto the Eternal, remove your ſtrange Gods, &c. Doeth not this text tell plainly, that 
                     •
                  0. yeares paſſed after Elies death, before Samuel medled in governmēt; yea ſaith he, that is plain: ſo much I fully hold, and none can deny it. Then I told the by-ſtanders what I demaunded, and what he graunted: and how vpon his graunt, al his Thal. fell. And how, ſayd I, cā your Rabbines giue Samuel from Ely but eleuen and Saul but two & David ſeauen in Hebron: that hee ſhould within 20. of Ely call thence the Arke frō 
                  Kiriah Iaarim by this text. Then he anſwered me nothing, but to the by-ſtanders wordes of high reverēce to his teacher: exceedingly beyond all that Chriſtians would thinke, a Iew would ſpeake. So to all vs Saint Paul affoordeth ſuch weapons, in one ſhort ſentence, to ſettle al the book of Ioſuah, Iudges, & firſt of Samuel in a moſt

Divine frame: by 450. yeares after a ſort, for the Iudges, & 40. for Samuel. That one ſentēce of S. Paul, is more worth then a mountayne of Gold, to ſhew the harmonious frame of the holy ſtory from ſince Ieſus of Nun gave poſſeſſion of the lande vnto Ieſus death, when he did make his own name Nun:
                  Midr ſp. 72 frō his name Nun: teacheth that Meſsias ſhal raiſe vp the dead. that is, by Midr. Pſ. 72. raiſer of the dead. Even the very Midras noteth that Meſſias ſhould doe ſo: and by alluſion to Nun Pſ. 72. in the Ebrew: as they holde no ſyllable idle in ſtrange termes touching Meſſias. All theſe times haue an eaſie account: by S. Paul, and in all the reſt by Iewes thus: Seaven yeares the Lande had for conqueſt and partition: wherevpon the next yeare Iubilies were to begin. Seaven Iubiles Ioſephs houſe had the Arke, till Sylon loſt it: thence the Philiſtines did cary it: & after ſix monethes Iuda had it in their power. Thence are ſeaven ſeaventies to the firſt of Nebuchadraezar: when hee tooke Ieruſalem, and caried King Iehoiakim to Babel: whom he ſoone ſent home againe.Daniel and they ye quenched the fyer are the glory of the firſt captivity. And caried thither Daniel the Noble, the Godly, the Wiſe, the wealthier then the King of Tyrus, the beloved of Chriſt and his Angells, and cariried the three noble men that quenched the fire. So, that part of Iudahs ſtory hath famous Limites: and old Theodoret, and Iewes when they are not malicious, generally hold the diſputable partes aright: when as we, they ſay, The Temple ſtood R. Abraham Ben David in Gabalah 427. yeares. And very many of our men here ſpeake trueth, even folowing particulars, & not marking how (Ezekiel 4.) God bringeth all paſt doubt, by paynes in particulars they agree with a trueth vnknowen: So hitherto we haue a pleaſaunt meaſure of times Now the captivitie of Babel was but of 70. yeres from Nebuchadrezars firſt yeare. Three captivities there were. The firſt of king Ioakim, when he was ſent home. The ſecond, when

he was taken vpon rebellion and caried for Babel, but was caſt away vnburied, as an aſſe, by Gods iudgement, Ier. 22. for burning Ieremies Lamentations: then was his ſonne made king, and after three monethes caried to Babel with many thouſands: among whom were Ezekiel and Mardochai,
                  Ezekiel and Mardochai, ar the Gold in the ſecōd captivitie. who made Hester mother to the Perſian King Artaxerxes that a Perſian king of Beniamin his Iaſper, Exo. 28. ſhould be the firſt foūdation of Ieruſalem: as Iapis hath place, Ap. 21. This ſecond captivitie was 8. yeares after the firſt,Darius borne when Nabycadnezar would be making a King over Gods people. Then to him a revē
                     ger is borne that Madi & Elam of Iapheth and Sem may puniſh Cham. and then was Darius borne, to proclayme Daniels God when he was 62. yeares old, and tooke Babel. The third warning brought flames to the Citie and Temple, and captivitie: tenne yeares after the former. Then the Arke and golden Covering were ſpoyled by Babel, and the Candleſtickes, and the Tables broken with fire. For ſeeing wee haue no other record of them, we muſt hold that the Temple being ſet on fire, the heat would breake the Tables: that goodly monument graving by the finger of God. And as Moſes for Idol-worſhip of few, brake the firſt tables, Gods anger deſtroying the kingdome for comon Images, wold much more breake the ſecond tables. And full 18. yeares are ſpent in theſe three captivities. The third captiuitie is glorious by Ezra. For Ezraes record of life, confuteth al heathen millions that giue Elam aboue 130. yeares over Iuda. 
                  Ezra maketh famous the third captivitie: Being an other Moſes drawen out of the waters of troubles: when Saraias his father was kild by Nauocodroſor king of Babel, with king Sedekias children. And Ezra lived to Philip Macedons times, ſeeing he ſaw the Perſians later times: & by the record of his captivitie, hee captiveth Heathen writers: and by his record of kindred vp to Adam, he cōfuteth Aristotle that denieth the worlds creation. This third captivitie was but of 52. yeares, and the whole from the firſt 70. As Moſes, Levit. 26. and Ieremie 25. foretold. And Daniel cha. 9. & Ezra, 2. Chr. 36. &

Zach. 1. and 7. obſerve what fell out. Then Daniel ſtopped the Lions mouthes, and Darius Iapetionides proclaymeth the God of Daniel over 120. nations: and the Angel Gabriel which beginneth the firſt ſpeach of the New Teſtament to Zacharie at the Altar of incenſe, and telleth Mary that the Power of the Higheſt will ſhadowe her, otherwiſe then the Tabernacle, Exo. 40. where the ſame phraſe is vſed, Gabriel twiſe named in the New Teſtamēt, a teller of comfort, and twiſe in Daniel, a teller of affliction for comfort, terming Daniel a man full of Grace, ſheweth (when Daniels prayer was like the evening offring,) of Chriſt his offring of all offringes: that the captivitie time ſeaven times being meaſured, ſhall ſee the redemption to life eternall for Iapheth, for Elam, and all: when the Iewes haue ſerved Heathen at home, & learne obedience, hating ſtrange Gods, ſo long as they ruled at home: but never could rule them ſelves from ſtrange Gods but only vnder David: againſt whom yet they rebelled. This geometricall frame of Temple S. Paul doeth force vs to acknowledge: ſeaven yeares of conqueſt, ſeaven Iubilies for Ephraims glory: ſeaven ſeaventies for Iudahs glory: ſeaventy for captivity, to feele Ieremies Lamentations: and againe the former meaſure of time ſeaven times 70. or 490. yeares to finde comfort in ſervitude: whiche none but the poore and mourning will euer find. Alſo this laſt part Aben Ezra doeth confeſſe, full ſore againſt his will, putting full many long Parentheſis into one litle ſaying:Aben Ezra a malicious Iewe as it was noted expoundeth Daniel well againſt his will. that he ſhould be vnſpied of Chriſtians, how vpon his graunt all Iudaiſme fayleth. Now as David 27. times in Pſalme 137. repeateth of God: that his mercy endureth for euer, ſo I may well iterate the teſtimony of Aben Ezra for our ſtrenght: vpon Dan. 9. THE SEAVENTIE

SEAVENS are from the beginning of Daniels prayer vnto ſealing Meſſias (which is Chriſt) the Holy of Holy. This much Aben Ezra confeſſed: the moſt head-ſtrong and moſt learned Rabbin, and moſt bent to his ſkill to overreach vs. And the commentarie vpon Daniel he finiſhed in the yere 4916. by the Iewes65. in Gen. 11.17. in ye Kings, & 90 from Daniels 490. 172. yeres they ſteale from the Scripture, to diſturbe vs. So he wrote in Rhodus city in the 5088. in October as he recordeth: 423. yeares agoe, for we are now in 5531. The plain trueth, forced him as Balaam: & yet we miſſed: vntill good Calvin brought the trueth into the open Church: with a ſound hart, though he could not anſweare all obiections of forged aſtronomers: whoſe fragmentes the great aſtronomer Aben Ezra held but fables, and of Greak toyes, never heard while Graecia was free in glory and eloquence.S. Paules one ſaying, Acto. 13. keepeth all the Bible in a right frame. Which yet wee corrupt to diſturbe all. And but for ſaint Paul, we could never haue brought about the Iewes conſent, from Midras Rabba, for Iudges and Samuel, from Abraham ſonne of David for the Kings: and from the Thalmud for Babels 70. and from Aben Ezra, the time thence to our Lord his death: without S. Paul we could neuer haue found the heauēly meaſures of the time. And this much for our diſturbance of all our owne building by bad vnderſtanding of S. Paul, and as ill tranſlating, of a moſt rare heauenly ſentence, worthy to be written in great characters of gold, that they who paſſe by, may read it with delite: how God gaue Iudges offenders and defenders after a ſort 450. yeares: and not about 450. vnto the time of Samuel, and then God gaue them Saul. Forty yeares, this much of theſe poinctes: where one text euill tranſlated and expounded marreth all Moſes.
               
            
            
               
               Of Moſes fiue bookes diſannulled by ill tranſlating of one verſe, Exo. 12.40. and by ſpeaking the ſame in the argument of the ſame.
               THis was the text. The dwelling of the children of Iſraell, while they dwelt in Egypt, was four hundreth and thirty yeres. Now in the argument this cometh. 40. They dwelt in Egypt four hunderth and thirty yeres. This one errour overthroweth all Moſes.
               
               1. He writeth of Cohath his grandfather that he was one of the Lxx. ſoules that came with Iacob into Egypt, Gen. 46. & that he liued but 133. yeres. And his ſonne Amram, but 137. Exod. 6. and Amrams ſonne but 120. Deut. 33▪ All maketh but 390. And ſo Moſes had deſcended to the dead: ad inferos, as Heathen ſpeak, and had left ſuperos, the living: forty whole yeares before Iſraell left the ſoyle that Nilus watereth. And he from whoſe hand the fiery Law came, the Creatour of Heauen and Earth ſhould no more ſpeak with Moſes, then Iuppiter in Creet ſmake with Minos. This overſight is exceedng great: that our Doctors and Biſhops ſhould make Moſes forget him ſelfe: his owne age, his Fathers, and his Grandfathers. And if euery treſpaſſe receaue iuſt recompence: much of Gods anger that hath fallen vpō our nation, hath fallen for this corruption of the Law.
            
            
               Of S. Paul, diſgraced with Moſes.
               AND S. Paul diſputing of the promiſe made to Abraham which was made preſently vpō the death of Tarah faith, that the Law came but fourhunderth & thirty yeres

after the promiſe: ſo we ſhould corrupt the fame of Saint Paul by our tranſlation: and deny that he wrote by the ſpirit of God. And no ſimple can reade S. Paul Gal. 3.17. and Exod. 12.40. But will ſay in his heart, Who can goe vp to Heauen to bring a ſolution of this knot: and who can goe beyond the ſea to fetch a reconciliation of ſuch diſagrement: whereas the word, as Moſes meant, for the peregrination which concerned Iſraell, which was ſpent in the land of the peregrination of their fathers, as in Iacobs ſtory it is named, and in Egypt when Iſraell had ended their dwelling there was fourhunderth and thirty yeares to the very exact day.
               And our right Reverend fathers might haue learned ſo much of the Lxxij. tranſlaters, which tranſlated thus: The peregrination of the children of Iſrael while they and their Fathers dwelt in Egypt, and in the land of Chanaan: they & their Fathers, was four hundreth & thirty yeres. Here any may marveile that ſo learned men for Latin cōtroverſies,Obiections wt anſwere. ſhould never reade the Lxx. But they will ſay the Lxx. are not extant now. Pure and ſound they haue not bene theſe 1200. yeres: but are now infinitely maymed: with patches frō 
                  Aquilas, Simmachus, Theodotion, and two others whom Origene did ſet togeather with the Ebrewe double: in Ebrew letter, and in Greek letters but Ebrew wordes. This eightfolde worke was called Octaplun, and from ſundry tranſlations the Lxx. which now we haue, is corrupted. A freend of myne bought at Alexandria in Egypt for me a Lxx. writen in Diocletians time and the Arabique Bible thriſe over. But left all with our Engliſh proconſull, who turned Turke, ſeeing diſagrement in our Bibles trāſlation, and ſoone deſcended to Hell, and Turkes his executours reteyned the bookes, yet 40 poundes was ſent to buy thē again, and they are expected. Such a Lxx may be the true

one:The Criſtiā Aarabique foloweth ye Lxx. euen where they hid theyr mind. to bring yeares a thouſand & many hū
                     dereths in Gen. 5. and eleven, moo thenever the ſun meaſured. and the Arabique commonly, the Chriſtian Arabique foloweth it. But not R Sadaias Arabique.
               But indeed as the Lxx. now ſtandes with vs, it is corrupted: that well our learned Fathers might ſuſpect it. And in the Babylonian Thalmud in a pleading before Alexander the great, where Egyptians complayne that Iſraell robbed them, a Iew pleadeth deſert for wages of 430. yeres ſervice in Egipt. And Gilbert Genebrard holden a great Ebrician, placeth Iſraell 430. yeares in Egipt: defending the Latin tranſlation. Whom Adricomius in a braue worke doeth folow. And Genebrard ſaith that Moſes might leaue out ſome of his anceſters. And S. Paul might ſpeake of ſome later promiſe. And one Thaddaeus Dunus ſayth, that Moſes text for his fathers yeres might be corrupt. Seeing ſo many haue perverted the text and other Scriptuers: ſo much more dangerous is our learned fathers agreement with them. Whereas they might eaſily be anſweared. The Thalmudiques ieſted: as Heathen, that knew not Abrahams peregrination, would vnderſtand Moſes: & Genebrard forgate that S. Paul made the promeſſe of his accompt elder then circumciſion, and no ſence can beleeue that Moſes Chronicling his anceſtours yeres al to Adam, ſhould leaue out ſome perſonages: when the perſon is more then the time of a perſon. And Dunus blaming of the text would be hatefull to all the Maſſoreth: full of auctority, now 2000. yeres. And our Septuagint in this place, may not be ſuſpected. For the Thalmud Ieruſalemy in Megilah, fol. 71. Col. 4. teſtifieth that the Lxx. tranſlated the text of Ex. 12.40 in this manner. The peregrimation of the children of Iſrael while they dwelt in Egypt and in all lands, was four hundred and thirty yeres. So no colour of obiection can bee rightly brought. And S. Paul muſt be

holden the right expounder: that the law of the paſſeouer was exactly 430. yeres, after the promeſſe of Chriſt drew Abraham from Charan to Chanaan.
            
            
               Of the fourhundreth yeres of perſecution.
               IF one member ſuffer, all ſuffer with it.The mocking is expounded by Saint Paul a perſecution. So here the ſtorie of the 400. yeares perſecution is perſecuted. As ſoone as Iſaak was come to iudgement, to heare of the bleſſing, Iſmael would be mocking him. And when he was in his ſixt yere, both he might know what a mocking meant, and then Iſmael might grieue him by mockes: and all the perſecution by Iſmael the Egyptian and Pharaoh is but of 400 yeres in the limits, and thirty full after the promeſſe it began: as S. Paul expounds the text. But by our Biſhops work, all that cometh to nothing.
            
            
               Of an exceeding groſſe overſight.
               ALſo a ſtranger impoſſibilitie cometh from our right RR.FF. notes vpon Gen. 15.13. Know this of a ſuritie,
                  An opē ro
                        •
                     
                     ſing of the 430. yeares, ſpēt falſly by our Church-Bible, not at all by trueth of time in Egypt with a
                        •
                      othermo
                        ••
                      groſſe imposſibility and dotage. 
                  that thy ſeed ſhalbe a ſtranger in a land that is not theirs: & ſhall ſerue them, & they ſhall entreat them euill (k) four hundred yeres. There the note is: K. reckon not theſe yeares from Iacobs going downe to Egypt but from Gods promeſſe to the promulgating of the law. This note is moſt ſenſeles: if it begin the time at the promeſſe, Iſmael ſhal afflict Iſaak long before ether was born. Iewes & Gentiles hold that Iſmaels mocking of Iſaaks is the beginning: which ſome referre Iewlike to Iſaaks birth: ſo the promeſſe that called Abraham ſhould be fiue yeares in his fathers life time: and again S. Stephen ſhould be croſſed. Others rightly referre it to the

ſixt of Iſaak, or fift fully complet. Moreover if Iſraell dwelt in Egypt 430. yeres the promeſſe 215. yeares elder: can not be within 400. of the law. This groſſe contempt of trueth and iudgement hath cauſed our nation to loth Gods worde: and God to plague the nation. But your M. will heale all.
            
            
               Of Gods harmonious diſpoſing of times, in other places and here
               THE Lord who framed the world in ſuch order that al hath called and ſtirred arts: who made the world for the iuſt, ſheweth an order in their times pleaſant to conſider and eaſy to remember. So Moſes ſaved in his Ark, liued 120. as Noah ſpent ſo much about his Ark. And Moſes parted his life into three equall partes. He ſpent fourty in the court of Pharaoh. So much S. Stephen durſt affirme: from the vſuall manner of God to governe matters in ſortes equall, for equall matter. So Moſes had time enough to ſee what court life was, full 40. yeres. And the Rabbins agree with S. Stephen. As Symeon Ben Iochai, being nere S. Stephens time: in Siphri. fol. 63. & Col. 251. And Midras vpon Gen. 50. fol. 115. Col. 3. of the Crake edition. And Midras Exod. fol. 118. Col. 4. and again, fol. 119. Col. 1. where this ſaying is added. Ben Ambaim Sanah Le Bynah. He ſhould be fourty yeres of age that ſhould be of ripe iudgement. Now ſeeing he ſpent forty with Pharaoh, and 40. with Iſraell, the remnant for Madian or Iobs nation was fourty: and well might he be acquainted with Iobs, Eliphaz, Sophar, Bildad and Elihu. For Iobs ſorowes fell about Moſes birth. Doubtleſſe he was not idle in the land of Madian: but vſed all meanes for mans ſalvation. So for court Moſes was tryed 40. yeares: for quietnes

in tending ſimple ſhepe, 40. yeres: and 40. yeares in being a ſervant to Iſraell. That phraſe SIMMESS, he ſerved: is vſed Mat. 20. Let him that is the geateſt of you, bee the ſervant of all. And thus in Moſes God ſheweth how fitly for mans memory gracious wiſedome diuideth times.Who ca
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      but 70. ſoules into Egypt. So God gaue Chanaan 215. yeres to learne faith of Abraham and Iſaak, and Iacob, and gaue Egypt 215. yeres to beholde multiplying vnto ſix hūdred thouſand valiant men, beſides women and children. Theſe heavenly diſtinctions of times ſhould not be confounded. And the like be through the old Teſtament: and by vs confuſed alike: though God be the God of order, and not confuſion.
            
            
               Of the miracle of multiplying, extinct by our tranſlation.
               WHereas of Abraham there were but 70 ſoules, of the line of grace and promiſe to ſee Egypt in 215. yeres: it was a great miracle that 600000. men ſprang in the ſame ſpace that only ſeaventy ſprange. So they muſt multiply like fiſh. But to multiply ſo in 430. yeares, that had bene no miracle at all. For after the flood 427. yeres was Abrahams calling: and many countreys were full of people. And many mighty Kings made warres with great companies. Now by vs all this grace of multiplying like fiſh were extinct. And endles be our abſurdities that a ſimple reader may ſay that of Naſo:

                     Tot premor aduerſis, quae ſi comprendere coner
                     Icariae numerum dicere coner aqua.
                  
For the ſea-waues may as well be numbred as the groſſe errours of our moſt reverend and right reverend Fathers. But ſo reverend and ſo learned Fathers will not ſtand in them, but yeeld a tranſlation, that ſhalbe ſquare: ſettled and ſure

how ſoeuer it be turned, to be examined. And further warning in other matters will doe no harme.
            
            
               Of S. Stephen croſſed by the Geneva: both the tranſlation and notes: where the Church-Bible hath the right.
               OVr Church-Bible noteth very well that Abraham was not borne at the ſeaventieth of Tarach: (which yet the Geneva held:) but 130. yeres later, and ſo it tranſlateth that the promeſſe of Chriſt might well be after Tharahs death, as S. Stephen telleth that Abraham was called to goe himſelfe to Chanaan from Charan after his Fathers death preſently: being 75. yeres old: ſo his Father was 130. elder then hee. This matter is of great importance, to defend S. Stephen, where the Thalmudiques haue to this day moſt deadly conſpired to haue him counted a lyer: that he might be counted no martyr, and the N. Teſtament no Teſtament. They ſay truly, that if it hath any vntrueth it is not from God that cannot lye. But they, not S. Stephen, are the wicked. And their owne Greek Philo, the true, not the forged auctour, fighteth for Saint Alſo Midras Rabba vpon Gene. 11. fighteth for S. Stephē againſt their and our de
                     
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     ed. 
                  Stephen in this teſtimony following.

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Idē de Abrahami aetate. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . fol. 284.
Which wordes in Britane ſound this much: It is not like that any who haue reade the law can be ignorant how Abraham first remooving from the Chaldean land ſtayd in Charan: and when his Father dyed there, hee remooved alſo from that land: that now he hath left two places. And ſoone after. Hee leaueth it being ſeaventy fiue yeares olde. This auncient teſtimony of

old Philo, who was Ambaſſadour from his owne nation to Caius Caligula, and might as well haue ſeene S. Stephen as Paul did, doeth confute all the Thalmud: euen where they goe about to confute all Chriſtendome, and in perpetuall date of the worlds age, lay an accompt that being accepted, denyeth moſt ſurely the New Teſtament. To ioyne with the Atheiſt Iewes againſt our ſelues, this was in the Latin Church an exceeding blindnes.
            
            
               Of two further errours, in the Genevah.
               THey who place Abrahams birth at Tharahs 70. croſſe S. Stephen and deny the new Teſtament: So doe they that make Iſaak mocked of Iſmael at his birth, & 400. yeres before Iſraell came from Egypt: for ſo they aſcending thirty higher bring the promeſſe fiue yeres into Tharahs life. Yet by the promeſſe Abraham was called from Charan, as it hath bene ſhewed & after his fathers death. So theſe poinctes muſt be held all alike.
               1 That Abraham was 130. yeres yonger then his Father.
               2 That he liued 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   an idolater by S. Paul and Philo: and Maymony 40. yeres. Tom. 1. tract. de idol.
               3 That God appeared vnto him in the vale of the Chaldeans, and ſayd: Get thee from thy countrey and kinſfolk. S. Stephen gathered that ſpeach by the argument from Gen. 15. and citeth not Gen. 12.1.
               4 That Abraham taught his Father of Gods appearance: that his Father took him, Sara and Lot, Harans children, and they two went furth with THEM two: Abraham being indeed principall of the iourney.
               5 That Tharah going for Chanaan ſtayed in Charan ſome few miles off from V R: and not another countrey,

(both were Abrahams countrey) & aged, & ſick, & dyed.
               
                  The Iewes diſgrace the N. Teſtam. among the blind by falſe date of the world: ſubducting 65. yeres in Ab. 17 in ye kings and 90. from Dan. 490. if wee dated in all our bookes 5531. with 1604. wee ſhould proteſt a right plain trueth of Chriſtianitie to comon good, and clearing of much Scripture.6 God continueth the iourney, ſaying to Abraham: Goe thy ſelfe from thy countrey, kinſfolk and Fathers houſe (that is from faithles Nachor) vnto a land which I will ſheew thee.
               
               7 That from this iourney to the Paſcha be 430. yeres.
               8 That the firſt thirty are to the ſixt of Iſaak. & 400. thence from Iſmaels perſecutiō or mockage of Iſaak for his hope vnto Pharoahs laſt perſecution.
               9 That Abraham, Iſaak and Iacob, ſpent in Chanaan halfe 430.215. & encreaſed but vnto 70. ſoules: Theirs in Egypt 215. & multiplied like fiſh into ſix hundred thouſands valiant men, beſides women and children. Theſe poſitions being holden, great light and delight cometh to the ſtory: and ſome to the tranſlation.
            
            
               Of V R: that it is in the propre Meſopotania, and that our notes are idle for defending S. Stephen, where the Iewes defend him.
               THE terme V R is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Act. 7. and in Philo: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in the Lxx. Ghemek or Bikeghah that is vale, or valley, in Salomoh S. to Melec Sat. a learned writer vpon all the old Teſtament, & in vpon Eſ. 24.15. 
                  Kimchi and many moo. The Iewes ſay: The Chaldeans entroched vpon Arams ground: as vpon Aſſur: and encreaſed idolatry euen to force of deceaving Thara and Abraham. And no reaſon can be rendred why Abraham ſhould be ſo farr as Orchoe beyond Tigris: or take Charan in his way thence for Chanaan. And Don Barbinel, though full of rancour, yet herein defendeth S. Stephen: that the Chaldeans vale was very neare Charan: that both be called the countrey of Nachor. And the field of the Chaldeans they call Syria
                  
or Aram of the two Riuers, and Charan, Aram of Nachor: and againe they haue in Ebrew letters the Greeke word Meſopotania of V R, and Meſopotania of Charan. So the Rabbins defend S. Stephen, better then Europaeans: who by weake defence, would overthrow him.
            
            
               A digreſsion to defend S. Luke for the 75. ſoules.
               
                  GRegory Martyn a Rhomiſt, but a man of our nation, ſayth: That Luc. Act. 7. for 75. cannot be reconciled with Gen. 46. where Iacob with his ſonnes are but 70. And Theod. Beza blameth Act. 7. and the Lxx. Gen. 46. as corrupted, and corrupt ſome what lately. Beza muſt thus be aunſweared: That not only the Lxx. in Gen. 46. hath 75. ſoules. but alſo in Exod. chap. 1. and yet not in Deu. but only 70. As Philo of olde teſtified, how the Greek ſtood: alluding vnto the 75. yeres of Abrahams age: and Beza never heard of Greeke copy that in Gen. 46. or Ex. 2. ſtood otherwiſe, nor of any Greek, Act. 7. He would haue cited them if he might. And as he cōfeſſeth the Arabique and the Syriaque: and as I am ſure the Ethiopian hath ſeaventy fiue ſoules. And modeſty would not think that all ages would bee deceaved. Wherefore Beza and Gregory Martin ſhould haue confeſſed ignorance: and not haue blamed the providence of God, or iudgement of nations.
            
            
               How S. Luke Act. 7. is defended.
               THE Lxx. tranſlated as Paraphraſtes, who as commenters, may for explication take one text to explane an other▪ 
                  Ioſeph, Gen. 50. is noted to haue ſene ſonnes to the THIRD generation, and there a GREAT MEM

is in the Ebrew. To make that plain, they bring beſides Manaſſes and Ephraim: which onely were borne vnto him when Iacob came to Egypt: fiue of their children & grand children. To Manaſſes, Machir & Galaad: To Ephraim, Sutale, Tahan and Eden. Fiue in all, (where four would haue ſerved:) in honour of Abrahams age, when he receaued the promeſſe of Chriſt. And none could be ſo dull, as to think that Ioſeph could in nine yeres haue the ſecond & third grand children: & any might note for explication of what text Ioſeph only hath addition, aboue the Ebrew. S. Luke was to folow this: and all nations of old might ſee the reaſon plain. Beza belonged not to my blame now. But as with Gregory Martin of our nation he was to be handled. And this much for diſturbance betwixt the promeſſe and the lambe. Many groſſe overſights muſt bee oomitted: as that Iochebed though ſhe had bene poſt-huma, ſhould at 257. yeares beare Moſes and Ezron, Aram, Aminadab, Ruth. 4. 1. Ch. 2. Mat 1. Luk. 3. ſhould haue incredible old age, at father-hood. The troupes of errours noted would weary any hart: and the Bibles ſhould be called in, or they will work much grief to God and man.
            
            
               Of Sem made the Elder.
               OVR Lord, making the younger brethren famous by his dignity, never cometh in Scripture record of the eldeſt. Seth was borne when Eue had borne children 130. yeres, Iapheth was 100 yeres old at the flood: and Sem 100 two yeres after, Abraham was 60. younger then Haran: Iacob and Iuda, had elder, and Zerah his hand came once to light afore Phares: And David was the ſeaventh, & Nathan was younger then Salomon, and Malchiram was elder then

                  Zorobabels Father, Pedaiah, & Abiud, then Rheſa: yet againſt all grammer and plain accompt and the Lxx. 2000. yeres old we make Sem eldeſt, that all his bleſſings might be referred to naturall dignity: without the praerogatiue of Chriſt, and all the Greekes and moſt Iewes ſhould be deceaued, & moſt learned Greek homilies in this argument ſhould be nothing worth. This errour paſſeth all that can be ſpoken, yet this, which I am to ſpeak, matcheth it.
            
            
               Of the first generall Apostaſie wherevpon the destruction of the old world folowed, that all, whoe periſhed in the flood, periſhed for euer: how this Apostaſie by our tranſlation is turned to the We tranſlate: Then men began to call vpon the name of God. clean contrarie.
               THE firſt day that Adam was made, he diſobeyed: as all may ſee a continued narration for Eue and the Serpents ſpeach, and temptation, and iudgement for curſe vpon all the earth: and the vniverſall wittes of Ebrewes cited by Maymonides, cited by me vpō 
                  Daniel, doe confeſſe, paſt all reply, in their reaſons and conſent. Then was the earth curſed, to beare but briers and bramlers: and in ſignification ſuch mindes. And Ebrewes, 6. All that eate not of the tree of life, are in the ſame caſe. But the firſt iudgement vpon the curſed earth ſhould appeare by the flood. And our mother Eue being a principall prophetiſſe, in the name of our Father Seth, ſheweth how he was ſett againſt the flood: that Balaam, Num. 24. might wel ſay, that we all are the ſonnes of Seth. So he named his child ſorowfull Enoch: and he his wofull Kaynan, and he his waterflowed Mahaleel: and hee his deſcending Iared. But he conſecrated to God, the ſeventh, with holy vnderſtanding:

And nameth him conſecrated Enoch. And the event proved his faith. For he walked with God: and in his infants name told when the flood ſhould come. Euen when he ſhould dye. That was handled in the name of Meth-v-ſelach. He dyeth, & then that ſhalbe ſent which the firſt day was told Adam. And Meth-v-ſelach nameth his ſonne Lamec, that is: Borne in times of ſtroke. For in his dayes all the fathers left this world. And he learned of them all, the heauy curſe that ſhould oppreſſe the earth. And at the birth of Noe, ſheweth his pouerty in ſpirit his mourning and his meake hart, mentioning how God curſed the earth: and how Noah, ſhould be the comforter, named by notation that way: Noah is a conforter. And thus the Patriarks in their names told of the wrath of God for the flood, haſtened by mans impiety, yet by Gods patience differred longe, as hee would haue none to periſh, but all to come to the knowledge of the trueth, as he giueth the open occaſion to all. Otherwiſe his cloſe counſell hath determined to how many he will giue his ſpirit. So, all the Patriarks preached in their names the curſe of the earth.Seth ſhewed that bad calling vpō the name of God ſhould bring the flood▪ by the name of Eno
                        •
                      vpon opē apoſtaſie. And Seth, the cauſe, for all vs the ſonnes of Seth: at the birth of ſorowfull Enos. As Moſes writeth, Gen. 4. where it is written. Alſo to Seth a ſonne was borne: and he called his name, (ſorowfull) Enos. Then ſprang corrupt calling vpon the name of the Eternall. So the ſway of Ebrews take it: in the Thalmuds reckoning Dor Enos, the mē of Enos time in the firſt Apoſtaſie. The Cataloge of their teſtimonies would occupie much paper. Yet the malicious of them who know that we bring the hope of our Saviour from the promeſſe, told Adam on his firſt day, that Chriſt ſhould deſtroy the workes of Satan, would fayne haue the 2000 afore circumciſion to be but a Chaos or confuſion: that in

                  Abraham their glory might begin: and all afore to be but ſome ſmall calling vpon God: and that men began at Enos birth to call vpon God. Aben Ezra is of this ſort, & later, David Kimchi, in his Spaniſh tranſlation: but in his Dictionary he bringeth firſt that which I firſt here layd downe. And Kimchies owne hath vntrueth and open folly, and a iarring from all Moſes purpoſe. Firſt, it is vntrue that vntill Enos birth men called not vpon the name of God in 235. yeres. They who beleeved that the Eternall word would be made fleſh, were from the beginning, and were many: as we reade that troupes were called the ſonnes of God. And Cainites the ſonnes of men: and how theyr fayr Daughters deceaued the better, that they tooke to prophane Religion. And Seth the iuſt for this cauſe might name his ſonne ſorowfull Enos: for a perpetuall memory of the firſt Apoſtaſie: But not without open folly: if men then began to call vpon God. Now we ſee that through the Bible in the Ebrew and Chaldy part of Daniel, man as ſorowfull is called Enos, after our fathers name. Whereby we might better conſider the firſt Apoſtaſie. And Moſes ſhews how the curſe vpon the earth haſtned by mans curſidnes the deſtruction by the flood: without any offre to amendement: as our Father Lamec complayned 1056. yeres after the fall, of our wicked workes euer ſince God curſed the earth: hopeleſſe but for Noes few ſaved by water: for that Noe called vpon God with right knowledge. Where the corrupt invocation brought the deluge. To this agreeth the Arabique tranſlation old, & allowed ſo far as Arabique goeth: that is as farre as Daniels image of old reigned. Thus it ſpeaketh in Britan letters, chinid thebadallah el daghva be iſm allah. Then was corrupted the calling vpon the name of God. The root Badal here is vſed

Gen. 49. to the Hebrew chalal to corrupt. So the Arabique is manifeſt, and the ſence is clear: and we haue obſerved the firſt Apoſtaſie: and reaſon why all men be called ſorowfull Enos in the toung of Adam and Aram. And thus An epilogie of our many particular errors, & tranſition to ſome as infect further. our particular errours haue diſturbed all the Bible. Some that reach through it all may be briefly conſidered.
            
            
               Of Aharons Ephod.
               OVR tranſlation giveth to the Ephod bleew ſilke, purple, and ſcarlat and white twined ſilke. The Iewes vniverſally hold that wolle threed bleew and purple, and ſcarlate and white linen and golden plates cut as threed made the cope: not the vncleane worme: and they will & may well holde vs Battes and Moulwates that cannot ſee that, for the tongue and ceremony by their ſo plentifull and agreeable writings. And of touching a worme thus they Ieruſalemy Thalmud, fol. 65. col. 1. v. antep. write. Yf a worme bee in a mans hand, though hee waſh him ſelfe in the waters of Siloam, or in all the waters that God made, he ſhall not find abſolute cleannes. Now the worme vnclean, by Ceremony, might not be in Ceremony figuring holineſſe. This errour our reverend Fathers will amend.
            
            
               Of the twelue Stones.
               THe holy Ghoſt tranſlated all Aharons twelue ſtones: with fourfold Greek, the Heathen, the Lxx, the Apoſtles vſing of an Heathen terme fitter, and the Thalmudiques that is, by a Greek terme made from the Thalmud. The heathen and Lxx. agree for eight of the ſtones, and the Lxx. giue Iaſpes to Zabulon, though the Ebrew Iaſpeh falleth to beare engreauen the name of Beniamin, where

their tranſlation would diſturbe conference with the Hebrew. So to Beniamin doeth the holy Ghoſt giue Iaſpis. Alſo the ſtone of Iuda is called Anthrax: which terme in Gen. 2. in the Lxx. was an other ſtone. The ſame in Chaldy is Cadcedona, in Ebrew Exo. 20. Nophech, and in Ezek. 27. Nophech or Codcod was brought from Aram to Tyrus Mar
                        •
                     . As Thargum Ieruſalemy would expound Ezekiel. And as Kimchi noteth vpon Eſ. 54. in the Iewel Codcod. Thence the holy Ghoſt maketh Chaldy to be Greek: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The Iewel that bare Nepthaly was Achates: SHEBO in Ebrew, Iohn calleth it a Chryſopraſe, named of a golden liſt and greenes in the white Achate.
               
               In the Septuaginta Sardius was the firſt, and Onychion Beniaminus the laſt. Sardonyx compounded of both names pleaſeth Zabulon for his Iaſpis taken from him.
               Now by the New Teſtament,An help them th
                        •
                      will trāſl
                        •
                      Exod. 28 thus ſhould Moſes be turned to our language, Exo. 28. v. 9. and 10. And thou ſhalt take the two Beryl ſtones, and graue in them the names of the ſonnes of Iſrael: ſix of their names vpon the one stone, & the names of the ſix that remayne vpon the other ſtone, according to their 
                  The Babylonian Thalmudin Sotah fol. 36 maketh this plain, as did Philo, of  wc poinct more ſhal
                        •
                      ſpoken. 
                  birth: That is, as their mothers firſt bare, but all of one mother togeather: That Iſachar & Zabulon come next Iudah: though they were borne after the four of the two hand-mayds. And we haue no preſcription of order but here: wherby each Patriarks ſhould haue his fitt ſtone, whereof a little ſhalbe ſpoken anone. verſ 17, &c. And thou ſhalt emboſſe it with Emboſment for ſtones: four rowes of ſtones: a row of Sardius, Topaz, and Smaragd, the first row: and the ſecond row of Chalcedon, Saphir and Sardonyx: and the third row of Hyacinth, Chryſopraſe & Amenthyst. Leſhem or Hyacinth, befell Dan: a token that Leſhem the Towne ſhould bee his, by his conqueſt mentioned Ioſ. chap. 18. and Iud. 19. And the fourth row of

Chryſolite, Beryl and Iaſper. Thus the holy Ghoſt teacheth vs to tranſlate Moſes. Alſo by the order in the revelation the Saphir muſt be for Iſachar the noble Leahs ſonne, & not for Dan of Rachels hand-maid: though by birth in age Dan ſhould haue it: and the ſecond foundation in the holy city: and Iſachar ſhould be the laſt: where in trueth Gad is laſt. And the Greek Philo endeth the ſtrife: who liued in Caius Caligulaes time, & ſaw the ſtones and tribes names ingrauē. He ſayth Iudah was in the Anthrax (Chalcedō
                   Apo. 21) & Iſachar in the Saphir, fol 37.One teſtimony of Philo for Iſachars Saphir, is worth 1000 Saphirs to ſtrengthen trueth. That one word diſcuſſeth all the doubt: in what ſtones each Patriark was engrauen: that is all of one mother togeather: & as the mother firſt bare. So Chizkum learnedly expoundeth the terme birth vpon Exod. 28.
            
            
               Of the Patriarkes order in the Iewels.
               THus the ſtones held the Patriarkes: where the noble Matrones ſonnes Leahs & Rachels were in their own ſtomake as Lords aboue the hand-maides: all but the blemiſhed as Ruben and Symeon: who were made as the baſeſt.
               ODEM. Sardius in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare engrauen, Ruben & he was placed vpon the Hagarens, & a red ſtone was a prophecy that he ſhould haue a warrier Frontiers place: & God fighting for his Church, Ap. 4. is like the Sardius, defending of his Martyrs againſt the Caeſars.
               
               
                  PITDAH Topaz, in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare Symeon, and is found in Cuſh, or in South Arabia Iob. 28. in the iſlle Topaz: by Pliny. A flaming ſtone, by Dioniſius: 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . By Eustathi. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a clear ſtone flaming brightnes. By Andreas vpon Apo. like a Carbuncle. And this was for place and colour fit for Symeon, the frontier, and vpon

                  Cuſh and Amalek. As he was worſt in cariage for Sychem, & for Ioſeph, ſo his Tribe was Num. 24. & affoorded no Iudge: but the flabled Iudith, in a ſcholers declamation. So his Topaz hath not the ſecond but the ninth place: Apo. 21.
               
                  BAREKETH Smaragdus in the 70. and Apo. 21. bare Levi: who in his Doctrine was to ſhine like the ſunne: as (Ovid. Met. 2.) In ſolio phoebus claris lucente Smaragdis. Becauſe Levi taught the covenant for the Heathen given by the rain-bow, Gen. 9. In Apo. 4. that is ſignified by the rain-bowe like a Smaragd being about the Throne: The Goſpell for the Heathē is meant therby.
               
                  NOPHEC Anthrax in the 70. and Philo, but Chalcedon Ap. 21. of Cod
                        •
                     od or Chalcedon, bare Iudahs name▪ 
                  Pyropus, The Carbuncle by Kimchi in his Spaniſh tranſlation: a fit Iewell for Iudah in Chriſt the Sun of Iuſtice in Malachie. To whoſe kingdome the Poëts wordes may well be borowed: how in Scripture

                     
                        Regia SOLIS erat ſublimib. alta columnis.
                     
                     
                        Clara incante auro Flammaſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            incante Pyropo.
                     
                  
               
               In Apoc. 21. The Chalcedon our Lord his ſtone, hath the third place: the place of Levy, to tell that our high Sacrificer hath ended Levies place. And Levies Smaragd hath Iudahs place: The very placing of Iudah in Levies place, telleth that in all the Bible Chriſt was our ſacrificer, and that none but God could ſo wiſely place the twelue Tribes. The learned R. Abr. Ruben admired that.A. Rabbi the Archiſynagogue of Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  SAPHIR in Ebrew & Lxx. & Apo. bare the name of Iſachar: the noble ſon of Lady Lea: a Lady by Arabique policy aboue Dans mother: & the Saphir bare not Dan. which opinion for Dan would ſhake all the Bible: when the vniforme providēce of God is examined: & our Bible 
                     •
                  arreth.
               
                  Now the Saphir may be knowen by a phraſe of Exo. 24. The God of Iſrael had vnder his feete, as it were, a pauement of Saphir like the colour of the Heauens in purenes. God him ſelfe ſpeaketh the like, Iob. 38.37. Who could haue made the cloudes of Heauen like the Saphir. And wheras the groūd of a wiſe Policy is meditatiō of Heauen: as the old Evāgeliſt Eſay teacheth in all his booke, ſhewing how the ſhew of this world paſſeth; in wordes purer then ſnow, whiter then milk, ruddier then any Iewell, whoſe pulliſh paſſeth the Saphir, ſo hee boroweth the Saphir to ſhewe that our 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or civill cariage muſt be bent to Heauen, ſaying: I will make thy foundation of Saphir. Iſachar had this reward: for his belief in Chriſt: Eſ. 54. This was fit for Iſachar, that ſhould with Zabulon ſuck the richeſſe of the Sea: where Coelum vndique, as Maro ſpeaketh: & nothing about, but the Saphirlike cloudes. And this Saphir might wel haue Symeons ſecond place: Apo. 21. where the Shoam or Beryll ſhould haue had the firſt: But that Ieroboā
                   of Ioſeph marred the grace of it. As the precious Shoham & Saphir come together in Iob. 28. ſo in the Apo. 21. they might haue come.
               
                  IAHALOM Iaſpis in the Lxx. but Sardonyx, Ap. 21. bare Zabulon not Nepthali. A fit badg for a Sea man. Halam is, to BEAT: as in Vergil: Feriunt mare. and in Homer, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Iacob told of Zabulon that he ſhould border vpon the Seacoſtes, and haue hauens for ſhips: and his ſtone ſpeaketh the ſame: & Moſes Deut. 33. doth make it more famous: when Levi, Iuda, Iſachar had their places, Ap. 21 Zabulon by order hath his. In the Lxx. Sardius was the firſt, and Onyx the laſt. When Iaſpis was taken from Zabulon to the laſt, to Beniamin his Onyx, and Iaſpis was made firſt as of old Sardius: Zabulon hath both dignities in Sardonyx: and the tongue ſheweth S. Iohn to be the ſonne of the thunderer.
               
                  
                  LESHEM, Hyacinthus Lxx & Apo. 21. it bare Dan, who wan the Towne LESHEM, called DAN, in Abrahams time: and Leſchem, for that the ſtone LESHEM was found there: and called DAN, Ioſ. 19. & Iud. 18. The old name DAN, and LESHEM in the Iewell told Ioſuah and the Seniors that to DAN LESHEM ſhould be given: in notatiton, folow God. The dumſtone ſounded to the deaf eares to beware corrupt calling vpon God. But all in vain.
               
                  SHEBO Achates Lxx. Chryſopraſe, Ap. 2. The white Achate: which hath one ſide greene, and the golden liſt: the braueſt of all Achates. Nepthaly was grauen in it: who dwelt by the Sea of Genneſaret: or princely Gardens. The ſun-ſhining-face of the Sea is in Greek, Gold: as the ſhining ayr in Iob 37.22. So the dumſtone Chryſophraſe ſpake to Nepthaly, as Moſes tongue, that he ſhould poſſeſſe a Sea, and the South From Leſhem, or Caeſarea Philippi.
               
               
                  ACHLEMAH Amethyst, Lxx. and Apo. 21. by notation, God will keepe ſafe. Troupfull Gad, named of a troupe, for Leas troupe, Gen. 30.10. troupfull Gad whom troupes would trouble, Gen. 49. but hee ſhould trouble the Hagerenes in the end: when Gad had good truſt in God. 1. Chr. 5.10. troupfull Gad was grauen in this faith workfull ſtone, the bloudy Amethyst, fit for one ſet againſt Hagerenes in open fieldes, to defend his brethren, as Homer ſaith: Il. 5.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               
                  Through ſlaughter, through dead, through pikes & black blood.
               
               As hee was next after the two aboue, and as they, of hand-maydes, ſo he is laſt, Apo 21. and next after the other two. By our Biſhops Noble Iſachar never ſpecially infamous ſhould haue that place: and ſo it would be doubted whether God penned the revelation.
               
                  
                  THARSIS, by notation the Sea, Lxx. and Apoc. 21. CHRYSOLITE, as the Sea in the ſun beames is Golden. Happy Aſer was grauen in it: whoſe barres of gates or holdes by Sea were of braſſe and Iron, Deut. 33. The name might tell Aſer, what part he ſhould haue.
               And theſe three, Iſachar Zabulon and Aſer, were told by their dum ſtones that they ſhould be Sea men. And the packes of Eaſt commodities conveyed to the Weſt, tooke lodging for ſea, in their tribes, that they might chooſe of all. ANNA the Daughter of PHANVEL, who ſaw Phaneel God in Chriſt, face to face: and ſpake to all Iſrael, Phanuel, behold you, God: came of the happy Tribe of ASER. For which ANNA the Chryſolite is preferred from the laſt of the hand-maides-ſonnes to be their former, and alſo afore Symeon, and Ieroboams Ioſeph.
               
               As the Sea in trope, is affliction in allegory: and notably Dan. 7. where four beaſtes ariſing out of the Sea, afflict Chriſt his kindred, in whoſe affliction hee had affliction: and being the Angell which had the name of God in him, Exo. 23. and Eſ. 63. he ſaved them: and expounding Daniels ſeaventh in chap. tenth, He hath his body like Tharſis: as partaker of ſorow with Daniels people: till ANNE of ASER ſhould be in mind the daughter of Phanuel. And ſee that Chriſt tooke a body, to paſſe the aerumnoſum vitae ſalum, euen to the death of the Croſſe.
               
                  SHOHAM, is by notation, in which they ſhalbe. Adam the Prophet which ſaw in ſpirit all that ſhould com, might ſo name it: as ſeeing that they, The twelue ſtarres of the world then, ſhould be grauē in it. Beryl. Lxx. Exo. 28.20. and Apo. 21. The Lxx. tranſlate this ſtone ſix wayes: leaſt the fooliſh Heathen ſhould ſkoff how Ioſeph
                  
bare them all.When Iſrael fel away, Ioſeph bare none but all ſaue Iudah to deſtructiō
                   By variety they hinder thē for ſearching the caſe. Thus it is in them: Praſimus, Sardius, Soom, Onyx. And Smaragdus, Ex. 28.10 where it beareth the twelue names, and Beryllus where it beareth Ioſeph alone. Ioſeph for his cariage might heare, that, which Albinovanus writeth of kingly Mecoenas. Vincit vulgares, vincit Beryllus arenas: And well be holden a Citizen of Eden or Paradiſe: firſt for his owne caſe: next for holding all the houſe in life & faith: euen that his dead bones and his brethrens buried togeather at Sichem, whence they ſold him, ſhould keepe them in expectation of Chriſt, & heauenly brother-hood. For this he is grauen in the Heavenly clear Beryll: and his brethren are engrauen in two of the ſame: in memory that he to his death held them in expectation of God in Chriſt, reconciling the world vnto himſelfe: And made them all to be of Eden, as Ezekiel telleth.
               
                  IASPEH Onyx Lxx. Apo. 21. Iaſpis bare Beniamins name. The colours of it be many: but the operation one in open triall of all ages: that a woman in hard trauell having two Iaſpers tide to her legges, ſhall ſo farr as art helps, haue ſpedy travell. That of old Dioſcorides noted: and in Francfurth of late, it was notably manifeſted, 1602. the Mother of Beniamin, becauſe ſhe was ſomwhat idoliſh in her Fathers Theraphim, died as ſoon as twelue ſtarres aroſe to Iacob. The tribe for their mothers calamitie, might look to dye firſt: in trauels of ſtate: and for the mothers idolatry, as Ioſephs wife left ſuch a ſpice as 600 yeres after overthrew Iſrael. For that, Beniamin hath the Iaſpis in allegory: and the Temple in hiſtory built in his Tribe, & half Ieruſalem: and Mardochai and the Empereſſe Atoſſa the Mother of the great Artax: who built the Temple, and cauſed his Nobles to help Iudah: wherefore Ezra calleth

them valiant Worthies: and God maketh them, to tame the Graecians, proud for Xerxes flight, & not knowing that the hinderance of the Temple, & not the force of Grecia, cauſed all thoſe Calamites. Such is Paul, that trauelled of the Galathians and Heathen Theraphim, to haue Chriſt formed in them, and in body, wonderfully: and hath half Ieruſalems N. Teſtament vnder his ſh
                     •
                  bet or Pen. And he only telleth of his Tribe, of all the Apoſtles: that we may know how worthily, whē 
                  Ioſeph, who took Rubens dignity, and civilly was right heyre, by the firſt bethrothed when Ioſeph loſt his dignity, Beniamin was to hold the firſt place.
            
            
               Of Ezekiel.
               AND Ezekiel ſheweth that thus the ſtones were to beare the tribes names, chap. 28. when he telleth the late Kings of Tyrus, in what dignitie old Chiram of David and Salomons time, was; In the Garden of Eden: or policy of Iſrael, in the holy mountaine of God, or Ieruſalem, among the fiery ſtones, David and Salomon. Chiram was a Cherub, an uncted protector: all precious ſtones covered him. The Sardius of Ruben the eldest: the Topaz, of Symeon, the ſecond: the Sardonyx of Sabulon his borderer, the Chryſolite of Aſer his borderer, the Beryl, of Ioſeph as a King of old, the Iaſpis of Beniamin, in whoſe Tribe the Tēple was built: to which he performed Ceder trees: the Saphir of Iſachar his neighbour, and the Chalcedon of Juda his confederate in the Kings: and the Smaragd of Levi, in whoſe office as a proſelyte he ſacrificed. Thus doeth Ezekiel reiect DAN and Nepthaly, of whom cometh Chiram the workman, mentioned 1. King 7.2. Chro. 2. and 4. A Tyryan by dwelling, of DAN by his mother, of Nepthali by his

Father: which Father is deſcribed to excell in all worke in mettalles, tymbre, and tincture: that the ſon may be the better eſteemed for ſuch a teacher: And the ſon Chiram is commended by teſtimonie of experience: his workmanſhip to old King Chiram. And the ſonne after his workes ended, hath the teſtimony of working according to his Fathers ſkill.Our trāſlation & notes herein wander to great blame and folly. Now when a poore dweller of Tyrus had all glory that Dan with Nepthali could affoord, the Prophete might not obiect vnto a King conſort with hand-maides tribes: excluding Iſachar vtterly, & Zabulon from his place: to exclude Aſer a borderer vpon Tyrus. And thus our learned ware not the breſtcare of iudgement with Vrim and Thummin, when thus the ſtones of the ſanctuary are confounded: which dum ſtones tell what lott each tribe ſhould haue: whoſe ſtories fall ſtill in the ſame tenour: as the holy Ezekiel and the ſonne of thunder doe make the dum ſtones to thunder it out: though we be deaf as the dwellers at Nilus Catadupa or downfall: who by too much noiſe looſe the ſence of hearing.
            
            
               Of further warrant for this ordering of the ſtones.
               AS Chiram the artificer is commended by his teacher, ſo all dealers in divinitie ſhould make good their cauſe by auncient: who ſhould haue ſkill in that kind, wherof they entreate. Now in this argument one doubt reſolueth all. Whether Iſachar whom his brother Zabulon muſt immediately folow, cometh afore the hand-maids ſonnes being his elder: that all Leahs ſonnes come togeather: or Iſachar muſt come after them: to haue the Amethyſt: and Zabulon the Chryſolite. Which in dead is Aſers: That

ſhould our Biſhops Bibles inferre. Againſt whom this heape of witneſſes I call togeather. Firſt, the teſtimony of Philo touched aboue: and now the wordes of the Babylonian Thalmud in Sota fol. 36. Rabbi Annas the ſonne of Gamehel, ſayth: The twelue ſtones were ordered, not as the Patriarkes be ordered in the book of Numbers, but as they be in Ex. 1. The ſonnes of Leah togeather, in the firſt ſtone: and in the ſecond ſtone,
                     
                        〈…〉
                      tranſlator. according to their birth and age. This note of the Thalmud endeth this controverſie. And the commentary there is to the ſame ſenſe, for ſuch as know not the Babylonian tongue.
            
            
               Of Thargum Ieruſalemy.
               AN old trāſlatiō of Moſes hard pointes in the toung that the Iewes vſed in the Apoſtles time, called Thargū Ieruſalemy, thus ſettleth fully the ſtones order, to the Patriarkes engravement in them: In the firſt row was Sardius, Topaz, Smaragd, & in thē was writen plainly the name of the three Tribes:I take the 
                        〈◊〉
                      from Apo. 21. 
                  Ruben, Symeon, Levi. And the ſecond row was Cadcedona▪ Saphir, & Sardonyx. There was written vpon them plainly, the name of three Tribes, Iudah▪ Iſachar, & Zabulon. And this endeth the ſtrife againſt our Biſhops. And the third row was Hyacinth, Chryſopraſe, and Amethyſt. There was written vpon them plainly the name of three Tribes, Dan, Nepthaly, and Gad. And the fourth row was, Chryſolite, Beryll, and Iaſpes. There was written vpon them the name of three Tribes, Aſer, Ioſeph, and Beniamin. Thus ſayth an old auctour, not vnknowen to the Eloquent Cyril, nor deſpiſed of him.
            
            
               
               Of Thargum Cant. Chap. 5.
               AN other Chaldy paraphraſt vpon the Song of Songs, though hee agreeth in no Chaldy name to the vndoubted Ebrew ſtones order, yet hee applyeth the Patriarks to them iuſt as the former did: ſeeing how ſo the Tribes armes told them what part of the land each one ſhould haue, and dignitie according. Whoſe record keepeth vs from faſtening folly vpō 
                  Ezekiel, by our blindnes, and from moving the ſimple to deſpiſe the revelation.
            
            
               Of Midras Rabba.
               
                  MIdras Rabba is a moſt curious work for the depth of the Ebrew tongue, bringing witty fables to teach memory of ſentences. This Midras vpon Exod. 28. telleth of the Patriarks engrauement in the twelue ſtones, iuſt as Thargum Ieruſalemy doeth: and is an auctour of high eſteeme, and drawing the conſent of many. So this auctour here may fight for Dan with his Leſhem, to keepe all ſtories togeather by right ſettling of one Patriark to his ſtone.
            
            
               Of Maymonides in the holy Iewels.
               
                  R. Moſes Ben Maimon, often cited, he moſt curiouſly handleth the ſame in two workes: one not yet printed, written vpon the myſteries of the twelue Iewels, and to the former order. An other printed, and famous, in tract of the holy implementes. Him alſo R. Moſes M. kozi citeth, though he would haue bred a confuſion to Moſes, Ezekiel, and all the Bible: he citeth him as miſtruſting his owne iudgement.
            
            
               
               Of R. Eleazar Wormatienſis.
               
                  MAymonides in Spain, Egypt, & Arabia, was knowen 
                     •
                  423. yeres agoe, as was mentioned, and Eleazar; a Rabbin at Wormes, about the ſame time. He hath writtē vpon the Law: and on Exod. 28. folowing the former order. For L
                        •
                     ſhem and Dan he handleth Gods providence & Dans dulnes very ſharply, even to the letters: LE, SEM, follow God: and turned into Semel, Idol.
               
            
            
               Of Salomoh Iarchi.
               
                  SAlomoh Iarchi is elder then both them. Hee liued in the time of the holy warre. As Barbinel recordeth vpon Obadias. Vpon Iud. 18. thus he writeth, Laiſha was the name of the city. And in the book of Ioſuah they called the name of it Leſhem. Becauſe they found there a precious ſtone called Leſhem: & it was ſet in the breſt care of iudgement, for the Tribe of Dan, & he knew that in trueth that ſhould be their inheritance. Thus writeth this old Rabbin, whom Elias Mizraki and Chizkuni follow and vrge vpon others that would confound the Iewell of all holy ſtory.
            
            
               Of R. Iſaak Karo.
               ONE Rabbi Karo keepeth the ſame order: and writeth brauely in applying the ſtones notation or nature to the ſtory. Specially in Achlemah: I WILL KEEPF SAF, how needfull it was for Gad to haue that precious promeſſe.
            
            
               
               Of R. Bechaiah.
               ONE R. Bechaiah writeth very many good things. This one that all euer glorious in the Fathers came by Faith. And convicteth Abraham of want of Faith, that obiected Sara to daunger: and of other great imperfections. But that this Rabbi ſaith in his hart, Who can goe vp to Heaven to bring Christ downe, or who can goe to the deepe to bring Christ from the deepe of the earth: (as Pſ. 71. ſpeaketh) but that the incarnation and reſurrection was incredible to him, hee had ſoone learned our doctrine. This Rabbin foloweth the Thalmud, Thargumes two, Maimony, Eleazar, Iarchi vpō Iud. 18. and the true light of Scripture: to be a frontyer againſt thoſe late men, that to vndermine the New Teſtament, would not ſtick to cōfound all their glory.
            
            
               Of the contrary, with confutation.
               THE Iewes of late haue put foorth vpon Moſes a ſhort paraphraſt: a forged work: bearing the name of Ionathan the old moſt learned paraphraſt: who wrote vpon the Prophetes. Of whom the Iewes ſaye, that he wrote not vpon the Law. He was no leſſe ancient then the holy Apoſtles. Yet the forged Ionathan mentioneth Conſtantinopole vpon Num. 24. This forged work breaketh the ſtones order: and ſome of the malicious and willing to diſgrace our Teſtament follow him. The true Ionathan bare ſway ſo great that no Thargum nor Thalmudiſt durſt check him: and whereas he tranſlateth nyne ſtones Ezek. 28. onkelos vpon Exod. 28. followeth him in every one of

them. Againſt this Elymas I cited this troupe, that troupes ſhould trouble them, and they be troubled vnto their end.
            
            
               Of the Onyx ill ſet for Beryll in Exod. 28. by the Biſhops Bible.
               THE Lxx. naming Ioſephs ſtone Beryll, being allowed of the holy Ghoſt, Apoc. 21. ſhould not haue bene refuſed. Yet our tranſlation hath Onyx. Though the enemies to the New Teſtament haue the Greek plain, or by tranſpoſing of one letter. The Chaldy of Iob. ch. 28. hath Berylin. Ionathan Ezek. 28 Byrela, onkelos in Gen. 2. and Exod.Gen. 2. Exod. 28. 28. Byrela. And Aben Ezra citeth the Syriaque comon auctority, for Byrela. And by tranſpoſition the Arabique hath, Belyr: in Sadaias, in the Perſian Arabique, vpon both places, and in an old Ebrew Arabique dictionary that I haue brough for me from Arabia. Alſo a moſt learned commentary of Sal. S. of Melec Sat. recordeth Belyr to be the Arabique. Thus the enemies favour S. Iohn. But we haue not marked how the New Teſtament is the beſt auctour for the Ebrew tongue: and haue refuſed to follow God: and obſcured the Symphonie of Moſes, Ezekiel, & Iohn, and made all three to ſpeak as ſounding braſſe no diſtinction of matter. The learned tranſlaters will amend this.
            
            
               Why the Lxx. ſet Smaragd for Shobam, Exod. 28.10. where Beryll is in v. 20.
               AS the Greek Philo doeth apply Aharons attyre to deep ſignifications, ſo did the former and the later. Now Ioſeph ſtood in glory 600. yeres, in Egypt his houſe

bare ſway: and Ieſus or Ioſuah was King after King Moſes dyed: and conquered the land: and Ephraim and Manaſſe of one Patriark made two Tribes. And 350. yeres the Ark was in Syloh. Beſides, Debora, Gedeon, Abimelec, Iephthe, Abdon, defended the People, and halfe Manaſſes ioyned with Ruben and Gad and found glory in Sauls time over Hagarenes. Thus Ioſephs Beryll might well beare all names, on Aharons ſhoulders, as he like Atlas, bare all the peiſe on his ſhoulders. For this, Iſrael ſaw a plain reaſon why the Shohā
                   of Ioſeph ſtill ſhould beare ſway. And Ephraims kingdoms fall told that Iudah ſhould fall, and Heathen come in their rowme: as Heathē only in Iobs time ſtack to God. But Heathē could not ſee a reaſon of this. For their weakneſſe the Lxx giue Levies ſhoulders his own ſtone. Chryſoſtome in Photius thought Moyſes truth did ſo, whence Patriarches & Popes willbe Shoham: which ſtone is the Kings.
            
            
               Of an open betraying of our Lord and redeemer, and befooling the rock of ſalvation.
               THE Paſcha was to be kild not in private townes, whē altars were free as in Samuels time: but where God ſettled his name: as in Ieruſalems Temple. And there the Lambe could not be kild, but by the generall conſent of the nation. And he that ſhould kill the Paſcha, ever ſince Ieſus cōquered Chanaan, in a priuate houſe had bene held an enemie to all trueth of God. So the day of ſacrificing the Lambe could not be prevented. But all muſt kill it on one and the ſame day. Now we ſay our Lord prevented the Iewes one day: vpon S. Math. 26. So we teach that hee ate a Paſcha not kild in the Temple: and make him a

deſtroyer of Salvation. Iewes never did caſt greather blaſphemies againſt our Redeemer. The Biſhops ſhould doe well to publiſh repentance of that note, before they giue ſleep to their eyes, after they ſee this reproofe: or with all ſpeed. If not, they ſhall ſee him whom they haue pearced, Apoc. 1. For the treſpas is doubtles treſgrand.
            
            
               Of a ſlaunder caſt vpon the Iewes: which they retort vpon the holy Ghoſpell.
               THus we ſay to S. Mat. 26. Our Lord Ieſus celebrated not the Paſſeouer the ſame day that the Iewes did. But he with his Diſciples ate the Lamb the fourtenth day of the firſt moneth (which is March) but the Iewes celebrated the Paſſeouer the day following, at euen, after ſun ſet, Ieſus Chriſt being in the graue. Theſe be our wordes the very poyſon to all the Ghoſpell. Which errour the Iewes blaſe (for of old ſcholemen through Europe broched it and Iewes read it) and wee by this and ſuch are holden dogges.
            
            
               How confidently the Iewes protest that they kill him which paſſeth the fourtenth day: for the killing of the Lamb or kid Paſcha.
               THat the fourtenth day of Niſan the whole nation kild the Paſſeover, thus Rambam or Maymonides recordeth that: in corban Paſch. From the Law. Exod. 12. It is an expreſſe commaundement, to kill the Paſcha in the moneth Niſan, in the fourtenth day of the moneth: and hee that breaketh this commaundement and killeth it not the 14. day, being not defild nor in a far iourney, by contempt is

guilty of being rooted out. Thus doe the Iewes proteſt againſt our ſlaunder, old, & not ours firſt, aboue 423. yeres old: or the time that Rambam made againſt vs his Thalmud: againſt vs Rambam doeth proteſt the day neuer to haue been altered: while wee pretend S. Iohns Paſcha cha. 18.28. for our warrant, we draw errours vpon errours.
            
            
               How our note checketh the expreſſe woord of our owne Ghoſpell.
               THus it is written Mat. 26. You know that after two dayes the Paſcha is kept: and the ſonne of man is giuen vp, to be crucified. This ſpeech importeth a generall agreement for the Paſcha. And ſo much ſayth S. Marc. chap. 14. On the firſt day of vnleavened bread, when THEY ſacrificed the Paſcha, two of his Diſciples ſayd: Where wilt thou that we goe and prepare that thou mayſt eate the Paſcha. This text telleth expreſly that our Lord and all Iewes kept one and the ſame day, for the Lambe: to kill it on the fourteenth day, and to eat it on the fifteenth: the night that followed, that yeare, thurſday. Friday night by the Iewes. So the Goſpell telleth how groſſe we are.
            
            
               Of the Paſcha called Chagigah, or holy day Feaſt, or peace-offring with the Lambe, of Oxkind, that might be eaten two dayes.
               THE New Teſtament ſearcheth all the Thalmud: and in few wordes telleth of the Paſcha called Chagigah, ſo much as the Iewes in many leaues. Moſes ſaith Deut. 16. Thou ſhalt ſacrifice a Paſcha vnto the Lord: of the flock & of the heard. The practiſe came notable in Ioſias, 2. Chro 35. Ioſias gaue the people flockes of ſheepe, & kids, all for the Paſſeover,

and three thouſand Oxen. This paſſeover is handled pla
                     •
                  nly by Aben Ezra, (vpon Deut. 16.) comparing the Law with the ſtory. And thus ſayth Iarchi there: If to a Paſſeover many belong, they adde to it Chagiga, Oxen, for the holy day Feaſt. And ſoone after. The propre ſence of the Scripture is: The fleſh of the Chagigah Paſſeover, which thou doeſt ſacrifice in the evening, ſhall not continue through the firſt good day, vnto the morning of the ſecond: But it is eaten the fourtenth day and the fiftenth. And ſo it is handled in the Maſſeceth or treatiſe of the Paſſeouer: in the Babylonian Thalmud: Limmed Al chagigath Arbaa eſſer neeceleth le ſene iamim ve lailah echad. He teacheth: The Paſcha Chagigah of the fourteenth day, is eaten for two dayes & one night. And of this addition the Law Deut. 16. ſpeaketh. And thou ſhalt reioyce before the Eternall thy God: and thou ſhalt be throughly mery. Wherin was vſed all feaſtiuity, as men doe to chere vp them ſelues. Now for the Lamb Paſcha, they worked half the day, as the Ieruſalemy and the Babylonian noteth: and if it fell vpon a Sabbath, they did kill it, and doe all the Temples duty: but did not roſte it at home that day: for the Law, Thou ſhalt not kindle fire on the Sabbath. Wherefore our ignorance is vnſpeakeable, the eare can not bee filled with the hearing of it, nor the ey with beholding. That ſhall appeare better by laying downe S. Iohns wordes. ch. 18.28. It was morning, & they went not into Praetorion, that they ſhould not be defiled, but might eate the Paſſeouer. This ſheweth not the Lamb but the Ox, an addition for ioy, here ioyned. And to make S. Iohn yet more plain, the wordes of Maymonides in korban Paſcha, ch. 10. ſhalbe tranſlated.
               Thus hee ſaith: When they offred the Paſcha in the firſt moneth, they offred it with the peace offrings of the fourtenth day: Oxen or flock beastes, great or litle, male or female, as all the ſacrifices of the peace offrings, &c. The Chagigah was not offred:

if the Lamb ſufficed the company: and it was a voluntarie: not of commaundement: and it was eaten for two dayes and one night. Thus Maymonides cleareth the Ghoſpell: and telleth that Saint Iohn ſpake from the depth of the Thalmudiques knowledge.
            
            
               Of HEL, Helliſh in our Creed.
               IEwes ſeek no more nor euer ſought, thē that we ſayd our Lord went to HEL. Therevpon they adventure their ſalvation and ſafely may, that ſo he ſhould not be the ſonne of God. For his own wordes ſay: Luc: 16. That none cā paſſe frō the one place to the other. Yet in England the Princes Religion was diſturbed. Our Princes ſwear to the Goſpell. And it is Atheiſme to ſay that it is not plain, to the Godly. Paradiſe, the hand of God, the Holy, Heauē, receaued our Lords only holy ſoule going hence. By the Greek Creed Hades: as Hades hath for the godly, euē by Heathen, the medowes of the godly. And by the Latines: Apud inferos, the good haue: Certū in coelo & definitum locum. D. Bilſon diſturbeth all. He graunteth, that our L. went, not hence to Hell, but hence to Heauen. And we never heard of contention but for one of theſe two poinctes. The firſt he pretended to defend: but hee betrayeth that: and agreeth with his aduerſary, reformed Churches, and moſt conſtant trueth. After all he inventeth new, & rageth vpon him that forced him to faith, in theſe wordes: in his Sermon booke againſt M. Iacob, folio 419. Tell then your abettor that all the Realme will take him not only for a rayler againſt all honestie, but a lier againſt all duty that voucheth ſo confidentlie: King Edw. the ſixt and his ſubiectes held that Chriſt his ſoule neuer went to Gehenna: and the Realm knoweth the Qu. oath, as alſo the

Q. adventureth her eternall ſtate.
                  A mā wold not thinke that a reaſonable creature would ſo rage againſt one for the comō opinion of Chriſtendome. With the ſame ſkil hee maketh S. Paul Rō. 10. ſpeake matter ſenſeles: and Abyſſon nether after Heathē, nor Lxx Pſ 
                        •
                     1. (wc place he regarded) nor any Ebrewe, nor Thalmu
                        •
                     iques: but after the Deuels Luc. 8. and Diueliſh Zoh
                        •
                     t vpon Gen. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Theſe be no ſtates to come within his vnclean mouth. He may doe wel to remember who they be of whom it is written: They deſpiſe governement: and ſpeake ill of them that be in authority, as raging waves of the ſea, foming out their own ſhame. Now to confute him the Zurick confeſſion ſhalbe ſufficient: it was allowed in England. Thus it ſtandeth. Per inferos intelligimus non locum ſupplicij deſignatum impijs, ſed defunctos fideles, quemadmodum per ſuperos adhuc ſuperstites in vitâ. Proinde anima Chriſti deſcendit ad inferos, id eſt, delata eſt in ſinum Abrahae: in quo collecti fuerunt omnes defuncti fideles. Ergo cum Latroni ſecum crucifixo dixit, hodie mecum eris in Paradiſo, promiſit ei conſortium vitae, & beatorum ſpirituum. Licet enim Dominus deſcendiſſe dicatur, fit tamen ex more loquendi. Confitemur in hoc articulo animas eſſe immortales, eaſque protinus à morte comporeâ tranſire ad vitam. To this may come his own wordes, fol. 219. Wee haue no warrant in the word of God ſo to fasten Christes ſoule vnto Hell for the time of his death, that it might not bee in Paradiſe before it deſcended into Hell. And for his new, theſe: fol. 154. The ſenſe of the Creed may & muſt be, that Chriſt after his body was buried in ſoule, deſcended vnto that place which the Scripture properly calleth (Hades) HEL. The Lybian ſandes may aſwell be reckoned as Bilſons hereſies vpon this courſe. His pen telleth all learned, he is a babe: and he deliteth to ſhew his folly. Archb. WH. could confeſſe errour: & ſend Geffrey King his Chaplein for Baſill to confeſſe ſo: when he ſaw, all the world ſhould force him. D. Bilſon hath a mind to be famous for millions of errours. But your Majeſtie will make him yeeld. Francfurt mart would make all loth him. If it pleaſe your highnes that ſhall diſcuſſe the Queſtion. I will defend your Maieſties Religion: and accuſe him of ſtrange, new fangled, and moſt deteſtable hereſie.
            
            
               
               Of a greater iniurie to Chriſt and his nation.
               THE Archiſynagogue of Byzantum or Constantinople, ſent an Epiſtle to England, deſirous to be taught in the conference of both Teſtaments: and how all things falling out in our life may bee diſcuſſed without traditions, which Iewes ſay, Moſes gaue by word of mouth to Ioſuah or Ieſus: and ſo man vnto man ſtill. Vpon this, all the Thalm. ſpeaketh. And his demaund argued a ſcholer: who knew that none of witt would medle with him, that knew not the Prophets & Thalmuds as well as he. This Epiſtell was ſent to England: thence to me to Baſil. There I printed two impreſſions. And gaue the copies to be diſperſed quickly ouer Europe and Turky: And I printed in Ebrew and Greek to Archb. WH. and his brethren, how they might honour Chriſtianity, handling ſuch and ſuch poinctes learnedly. And I continually ſent treatiſes to Constantina, ſhewed afore to Iewes of Germany. For this a libell was allowed, againſt God, & againſt your M. termed the Scottiſh miſt: & aganſt my poore ſelfe, that the printed Epiſtle was forged by me. For this I gaue I.C. the Anathema Maran Atha: and if he had done ſo in Germany, an axe had cut off his head. His G. proteſted he never ſpake, never dealt againſt me: and turned the Anathema vpon his Chaplein. This contempt of Chriſtianitie was the greateſt that euer hath bene heard in Chriſtendome: and a Greek Oration complayning of it to all Chriſtendom was allowed by the Lords of Francfurt, a little before Q. Elizabeths death: vpon that, not printed: that if iuſtice be ſhewed at home, forrain complaintes may ſurceaſe. God will plague all that put vp ſuch iniuries againſt Chriſt: and the clearing of all the Bible for Iewes and Gentiles: wherein our Machmadean errours haue bene detected to be ridiculous to all Iewes.
            
            
               
               How the Iew ſhould be anſwered.
               THE Lords of Bearne in Zuitzerland offred me a good place of profeſſing Ebrew and all my charges for Printing aunſweres to this Iew: But with this addition. No ſtranger that meaneth not to dye amongſt them, ſhalbe preferred: who afterwards may greue them, in opening of their affayres. That I refuſed: and told of my hope in your Maieſty. Now if it be your highnes will to allow me a penſion to buy all Hebrew and Thalmudiques helpes, and to hyre comon Ebrew ſetters at Venice or Baſil, the Bible and the Thalmud ſhalbe opened by Gods help, to the contentment euen of the Rhomiſts: or if your highnes graunt me but your princely letters of fauour to Germanie Princes, they will deffray my charges. A Prince to whoſe anceſtors all the Iewes of the Empire payd for their dwelling: ſauing them of Francfurt, & hath many of them now his tenants, would willingly haue employed me that way. But without your highnes leaue, I could not then reſolue.
            
            
               Epilogue.
               THVS I haue ſhewed your Highnes of our corrupt dealing againſt our own Religion. And your Maieſties bare word may cauſe the Biſhops to put furth ſome litle book: as amending faultes eſcaped. Seeing many thouſand copies tranſlations of the Ebrew and Greek Teſtament haue bene ſolde, their eſcapes will vex many, vnleſſe particular warnings be given of

thē. Only the time of our Lord his birth as we hold it: where the conception ſhould be, this comon errour can not & nedes not to be amended: Seeing we reckon frō the conception. And the memory of ſtory we may celebrate, as we hold it convenient But he that ſhall defend S. Luke muſt be circumſpect herein: Iewes haue long examined what to obiect. I hope your M. ſhall ſee that by the right handling of this cauſe, Iewes ſhal more cōfeſſe that your highnes kingdome, in the ends of the earth, is a chief poſſeſſiō of Chriſt: and hath a Cherub, an oincted defender of faith in the Garden of Eden, in the holy mountain of God, Sion the Heauenly: & fiery ſtones of noble Princes: where one is the Beryl that beareth all the Tribes: and the flaming carbuncle overſhining all: and that ſuch ſhalbe in your glorious Maieſty, and in your moſt noble poſteritie, while the ſun ſhineth.
               
                  Your Maieſties moſt humble, harty and faithfull ſubiect, HVGH BROVGHTON.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Amend the faultes thus.
            A. pag. 8. hightened read lightened.
            B. pag. 4. Athoſſkes, read Atoſſ. pag. 8. Alexander read Philip.
            C. pag. 2. greath reed great. pag. 3. for, in Babylon read vnder Perſia. pag. 4. the ſtretch. read to. Exatoſt read Erat. pag. 7. line vlt. for 10▪ rede 20.
            D. pag. 3. wee fetched. reed were.
            E. pag. 1. of here, read or. Eraunce read Fraunce.
            F. pag. 7. Ocharias, read ſtill Ochoſias.
            G. pag. 1. is bed. read his. pag. 2. in the marg. meanes read Madnes. pag. 7. hige read high. pag. 8. kowen, read knowen.
            H. pag. 5. in the margent for vnderſtand, read vnderſtood.
            I. pag. 3. appeared: bad. read appeared bad, in k. pag. 1. for 423. read 543.
            K. pag. 2. ſmak read ſpake. pag. 8. for 130▪ read 60.
            L. pag. 5. for ſorowfull Enoch, read Enos. pag. 8. for Iaſpes read Iaſpis.
            M. pag. 1. Beniaminus read Beniamins. pag. 6. dnm read dum.
            N. pag. 1. dead read deed. pag. 2. Gemehel, reed Gamaliel. pag. 8. greather read greater.
            
         
      
   