
      
         
            
            
            A Cenſure of the late tranſlation for
our Churches: ſent vnto a Right
Worſhipfull knight, Attendant
vpon the King.
            
               THE late Bible, Right Worshipful,
was ſent me to cēſure: which bred
in me a ſadnes that will greeve me
while I breath. It is ſo ill done. Tell
his Maieſt. that I had rather be rent
in pieces with wilde horſes, then any ſuch tranſlation
by my conſent should bee vrged vpon
poore Churches. I will article.
            
               I.
               My advertiſement they regarded not, but ſtill
make SETH a foole to name his ſonne ſorowfull
Enosh: whē, as they tranſlate, men began to call
vppon the Name of God. All the ten Fathers
names beare ſadnes that the ſeede of the ſerpent
would bring the flood. Thus Moyſes meant.
SETH called his ſonne ſorrowfull Enosh: (becauſe)
Then ſprange corruption in ſteed of calling
vpon God with good vnderſtanding, as
1. Pet. 3. handleth the cauſe. And the Babel Thalmud:
and Iarchj 600. yeares old: & 900. Arabiq
Sadaias: and the late Iewes Pagnin, & Tremelius.
This ſtubburne errour deſerved all punishment:

dashing all the vein of the old world.
            
            
               II.
               Where IESVS is called the ſonne of God,
Luke cap. 3. and Luke should shew by whom,
& had nothing to doe with Ioſeph, they in fiftene
verſes bring fiftene ſcore idle wordes for
accomptes in the day of iudgement: and bring
Ioſeph to bee the ſonne of all the men there:
where thus Saint Luke meant: IESVS was called
of the Father My Sonne, beeing ſonne of Ioſeph
(as men thought) Filius not Filij, Eli filius,
to each vp, filius Adam, filius Dei: ſo ſeaventie
five men are by Saint Luke above the Angells
(as Iewes ſay commonly) the Iuſt is above
the Angells. And heere we have a cleare record
how Chriſt came of David: and Heathen for
Saint Luke, and Theophilus kept no leſſe then
Iewes this moſt royall Genealogie. Now when
ours ſay, ſeaventie five times which was the ſon
ſeaventie five times, they trifle. The relation of
each is to Chriſt: and ſeaventie five times they
obſcure the comfort of mankinde. A Iew of Amſterdam
obiected the Bishops errour to deny the
New Teſtamēt: that omitted how Chriſt should
come of David. Therevpon I cleared our Lordes

Familie. Bancroft raved. I gave the Anathema.
Chriſt iudged his owne cauſe. The New edition
croſſeth me, I require it be burnt.
            
            
               III.
               It denyeth David ever to have bene in the
worlde, and ſo by a conſequent Chriſt him ſelfe,
Act. chap. 13. verſ. 20. where they ſay: God gave
them Iudges about the ſpace of foure hundred &
fiftie yeares. It is but foure hundred and foure
ſcore yeares from the Lambe to the Temple.
Now David was not borne before Elies death,
but ten yeares after. About 30. of the fourty yeres
in the Wildernes, with about foure hundred and
fiftie yeares, will make foure hundred and foure
ſcore yeres. So by our Bishops all the holie ſtorie
should bee a lye. My warning was large herein.
And two and twentie yeares agoe admired by
French in London, and by them to Zurick, how
by Iewes I cleared the text: and by my enemies
in London, as my friends wrote vpon the advertiſement,
to ſuper-admirable report: that none
before me did, nor would after match my heed.
And what a prank is this: That tranſlaters sould
ſo mocke with the King. This meaneth S. Luk:

God gave them Iudges after a forte (of Law accomptes
in troubled ſtates) foure hundreth and
fiftie yeares. King Edw. the IV. and K. Henry the
ſixt did breede ſuch yeares. I humbly deſire the
King to bid the BB. anſwere to this.
            
            
               IV.
               I warned how Baaſa K. of Iſraell was a warrier
againſt Aſa, being ten yeres dead: and Ochozias
was made two yeares elder then his Father,
and twentie yeares elder then him ſelfe. The Bb.
will not take the warning. The K can iudge.
            
            
               V.
               Iewes denie the New Teſt for theſe lies, Act. 7
               
                  1.
                  Iacob died and our Fathers, and were caried
over into Sichem. The Iewes obiect: If the N.
Teſtament ſo ſpeak, God never wrote it. Iacob
was caried to Hebron not to Sychem. S. Stephen
and S. Luke have trueth. The BB. have not.
               
               
                  2.
                  And they were put in the grave which Abraham
bought. S. Stephen & S. Luke never meant
that all thirteen were put in one grave. They
meant that Iacob was buried in Hebron: and the
Patriarks in Sichem: and who would thinke that
ſcholers should be ignorant of this? and that after

open advertiſemēt in two impreſsions? what
vſe shalbe of opening trueth, if men may deſpiſe
it?
               
               
                  3.
                  Abraham bought no ſepulchre in Sichem. And
the ſepulchre there was bought for sheep. Thriſe
the terme Keshita is vſed, and ſtill in the Chaldie
and Greeke for sheepe. The margent note for
sheepe burneth the hart of the Tranſlatours: who
bade them put the errour in the text, and right in
the margent?
               
            
            
               VI.
               The Angel Gabriels meſſage to Daniel the goodlieſt
of men, is the Lampe to both Teſtamentes:
But the trāſlation now, as the former, maketh it
bitter: and foolish. By it Chriſt was to end Moyſes
after ſeauentie weekes: that is foure hundred
and ninetie dayes. The Angel ſpake of yeares.
And why should the Church bee vexed with a
doubtfull terme? And what can this meane? Hee
shall confirme the covenant with many for one
weeke. The Covenant is perpetuall: not a covenant
for week. Beſides, Prince there twiſe is Meſsias:
and his People were the Iewes: ſo the
Iewes should deſtroy their owne Citie. and many

more vnlearned ſpeeches darken the Angell
ſpeaking of the Angel of the Covenant: who wil
not beare with our ſinnes, Exod. 23.
            
            
               VII.
               In Chap. 11. 38. They leave atheiſme in the text:
blaming worship of the God almightie: & put
my tranſlation in the margent, and would make
the Angells ſpeach vncerten, about the name of
God.
            
            
               VIII.
               The precious twelve ſtones, Exod. 28. be everie
one tranſlated by the Ho. Ghoſt, Apoc. 21. So
that the dumbe ſtones ſpeak of the Bibles ſtorie.
This made a learned Rabbi affect the goſpel. And
I have handled all often, to approbation of the
beſt learned. They who can cite Rabbines varietie
to diſturbe the New Teſt. & to croſſe opened
trueth, muſt be told they halt before a cripple. I
will ſuffer no ſcholer in the world to croſſe me
in Ebrew and Greek, when I am ſure I have the
trueth. Men that meant quietnes, would never
have dealt thus.
            
            
               IX.
               The H. Ghoſt ſhould not be cōtemned in Greek
ſpelling of Ebrew, as in Ragau, Luc. 3. after the 70
Gen. 11. It is barbarouſly perverted into Reu.
            
            
               
               X.
               Sadik and Ain in Chaldea had one forme and
ſouud, as in Daniels Chaldie: the Ebrew S. is expreſſed
by ain. and ſo Saint Peter calling Balaam
the ſonne of Boſor, sheweth that he was then in
Chaldea: where ain was expreſſed by an S. as
Thalmud Ieruſalemy in Megilah and R. Azarias
in a learned treatiſe noteth. This was a litle before
Saint Peters martyrdome: and as from Babylon
he wrote his firſt Epiſtle, shewing that
God had his Church there, as was tolde Pſal. 87.
So from Babylon he wrote his ſecond. And being
a Prophet he would not goe to Rome to
Saint Paules Bishoprick to be kild, where he had
not taught. The Bishops had fell the bridgemaker
of Rome, by one letter Ain pronounced S in
Chaldea and Arabia only: if they had followed
the Holy Ghoſt to call Baalam the ſonne not of
Beor or Boor, but of Boſor: ſo it had appeared
that he was never neare Rome. And Origen in
Euſeb. the firſt auctor of his being there: yet telleth
that be kept in Aſia til a litle before his death.
And if Peter ever had bene neare Rome, he being
a Prophet, & ſeeing what ſtirres would ariſe, had
written ſome note of his being there: and of the

occaſions of his cariage 
                     •
                   that hated Citie that
killed Chriſt, as S. Luke and Paule shew Pauls occaſiō.
but not one ſyllable hath he bent that way.
And Balaam the ſonne of Boſor had beaten Italy,
no leſſe then whē he ſayth: and that people shall
afflict Heber (whereof Chriſt was more then all
the reſt together) and shall hold on to deſtruction.
As Iohn moſt grammatically tranſlated the
Ebrew.
            
            
               EPILOGE.
               I blame not this that they keepe the vſual ſtyle of former
tranſlations in the Church: that the people ſhould not
be emazed. For the learned the Geneva might be made
exact: for which paynes whole 30. yeres I haue bene called
vpon, and ſpent much time to my great loſſe by wicked
hinderance. When you find the K. at leaſure ſhew his M.
this ſhort advertiſement. And if his Highnes bid me again
as once by the Earle of Pembroke, ſhew faultie places. I will
in a few ſheetes tranſlate what I blame moſt: that they may
be ſent to all Churches, that haue bought Bibles. So all
may be well pacified. The K. meant Royally: but froward
would be froward: who haue felt it: as I was ſure they
ſhould. Of late by Mr. Pat. Balfour I heard of moſt Royall
bent: and many of Germanie write me the ſame. Tell his
H. it ſhall not be loſt, by Gods helpe.
               
                  Your Worships in heartie reverence, H. BROVGHTON.
               
               
            
         
      
   