
      
         
            
            
            AN EPISTLE OF
AN EBREW WILLINGE TO
LEARNE CHRISTIANITY: SENT
by him to London: & thence, by the
Archb. of Canterburies aduiſe, to Baſil:
thence returned vuith ſome
further ſpech vpon
it vnto
the
Quene of Englandes moſt excellent
maieſty.
            
            BY HVGH BRVGHTON:

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
               Rom. 9. 4.
            
            PRINTED AT BASIL. BY
CONRADVS VVALDKIRCH
1598.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            TO THE MIGHTIE PRINCE
ELISABET BY TE GRACE OF GOD
Quene of England, Fraunce & Ireland, deſendour
of the fath, &c.
            
               FROM the ſeas of ELISA, ſouerain lady, & from the
city built by the ſonne of the Bretan Helena, there
came to your highnes King dome, an epiſtle from a
Lerned Ebrew, full of Eloquence, & rabbi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                skill:
iudged to conteyne ſparkes of matter, which with
due nourishment might geue occaſion to kindle far off the light
of the Goſpell, winninge ſuch fauour of migthy ſtates that it
might turne to the comon good of Chriſtendome. This Iew ſemeth
by his epiſtle to be of great autority, not only amonge
Iewes, which are in Conſtantina the chiefeſt of the world, that he
carying them after him, the reſt over the eaſt will ſoner folow: but
alſo with the greateſt there: of whoſe affection nothing may be
ſpoken, vntill it pleaſe him ſelf to open his mynde. He writeth in
the tongue that was firſt vſed in the world: in which all the holy
prophetes bookes are written: and all diuinity graduates muſt
know, or bethought to ſee with other mens eyes: & by English
vniuerſities they are bound to know: ne ther may plead ignorance:
but as they are higheſt in your maieſties praeferment, ſo the
care to awnſwer toucheth them principally. His epiſtle penned
with exquiſite care sheweth in his firſt entrance, skill putting all
to the tryall, ether to overmatch Chriſtianes by Iudaiſme, for all
theyr groūdes, yf they graunt his, & paſſe thē ouer as not dashing
all faith: or, yf by modeſty & dexterity he be taught, how both
Talmudes wilfully diſturbe the Bible, that the Light of Chriſt
should not shine to them being in Satans darkenes: he cannot
by Lerning lenger reſiſt: but by all Turkes iudgement, vpon his
owne groundes of Scriptures auctority, he shalbe vtterly overthrowen.
After his begininge, he continueth ſundry poinctes in
Lerned reuerence: Firſt commending, matters of England: next,
requeſting ſome petitiones of inſtruction. Our diuinity is in his
ſpech highly eſtemed: as ſtanding vpon the clear power of Gods
hand: & removing weedes: ſuch as I think he blameth in Grekes.
For as the Iewes, ſo they, haue overwhelmed all the Scripture, as
with netles: which being vncutdowne, the thrueth cannoth be
ſene. Then he thinketh that N. hath great occaſion to reioyce for a
greate nomber that he hath broght on to the knowlegde of God:

from which help he alſo the Iew him ſelf ſtretched out his hand: &
caught an Omer full: while he ſtandeth behind the wall: looking
through the lattice, & knocking at the gates of vnderſtanding.
After this he slideth vnto commendation of your highnes Ligier,
at the city of Conſtantine, for his great care to ſettle him in
Chriſtianity, And after this praeparation he floweth moſt plentifully
into your maieſties commendation: that by your ſpeciall
tendering haue diuines ſo ready in the Golden candelſtick of the
Law for the generalles to bring them vnto few heades: & for the
particulares, the bowles, Knoppes, & flowres. Others he commendeth,
as may appeare in his Epiſtle: and after, he cometh to
his requeſtes: wherin firſt he sheweth a fervent deſire, & moſt
harty affection to haue N. ſent to teach all the ſynagoges in Conſtantina,
promiſing that he shalbe receaued as an Angel. But firſt
he wold haue the ſum of all the Scripture plentifully handled:
& endeth his Epiſtle with à Lerned ſonnet. This Letter was
brought vnto my Lordes grace, to croyden: where he should be
beſt at leaſure. But his grace ſeing an English Endorcement, and
ſaing that he could rede no further, bade the bringers ſend it to
me. Others alſo counted ready in the tongue of diuinity, could or
wold ſay litle to it. Here vpon it returned towardes the eaſt, not
with ſmall hazard: yet▪ by Gods goodnes, it came ſafe to me to
Baſil. I durſt not returne the Letter: being of ſo weighty importance,
to abide new daunger. But I printed an awnſwer to my Lordes
grace: shewing the principall effect: thinking that his gr. wold
haue ſent for an whole copy or haue written: that in this ſo
weighty byſines, to doe good to all the world, no shadow of negligence
or delay should appeare. But becauſe that is not done, I
haue printed the whole Epiſtle vnto your M. whom the care
should chiefly touch: & will shew, according to my leaſure more
then others had hereyn, my poore opinion of proceding: yf your
highnes geue me leaue. My care is the greater: for his G. dealinges
in as great matters about the Bible, Labored in, ten whole
yeres, vpon your M. word: & croſſed after all that labour, & charges
of ſo great time, by his Graces will & autority. I shewed his
G. how, vpon Dan. 11. 38. vnskilfulnes, allowed by his skill, betrayd
Gods name, & whole religion, to Satan. Yet there, three Greke
translationes, yf they had bene knowen in England, might haue
geuen light vnto à ſure trueth: beſides the moſt ſtedfaſt certenty
of the Ebrew terme: So Polychronius the Greke, might for all
Daniel. Then his G. yelded: with high Promiſes. Since a new differēce
as great fell. That, this Iew may end: whoſe Epiſtle foloweth.
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                           
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
THvs your M. ſeeth the Epiſtle: deſired of many ſent to Englād:
thēce to Baſil: of one made many: that all may ſee it. The
awnſwerer should be, my L. G. for Lerned fame & auctority.
A Greater cauſe his G. never dealt in: then to open all te bible,
both Teſtamentes in Ebrew. And yf his G. knoweth nought in
Ebrew: Greke will doe as well, for Byzantium: and better for England:
to calme waues blowē of late, to the ruine of all religiō, & lerning,
which this Epiſtle to the Iew will quiet: & brede a windeleſſ
Cymatolegen. His G. knoweth who ſtirred a diſſention: for the
principal article of the Crede: for Chriſt his paſſion, wether his
ſoule went from his body. The Greke tongue, in ſpech to this Iew
will cut off all cōtrouerſy: as Lerned linguiſtes & the ſure in Scripture
groundes know that all was euer plain to the Simpleſt. The
Euangeliſtes told that Chriſt his ſoule should goe preſently from
his body to his kingdome, to Paradiſe, to the hand of God; euen
through the veile of his flesh into heauen. This the Euangeliſtes
taught: and no one ſyllable in te Prophetes euer taught otherwiſe.
Now the prophetes phraſe of all ſoules departing this life is: a
deſcendinge to Sheol, or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                And in ſpech of full death amonge
ſuch as held the ſoules immortality in an other world: with the
bodies death, they mentioned the ſoules deſcent to ſcheol, & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
Inferos, Hell So Homer V. 3. for thouſandes: ſo Demoſthenes for
4000. slain at one fight by K. Philip. yet they held them to be in
happy caſe: & with theyr Goddes. So the Crede is penned by a
phraſe vnwreſtable: plain to all Iewes & Gentiles: till the Barbarous
wold Lerne Diuinity, as from Dauus in the market, againſt
religion & all Lerning. This all his G. may cure ſaffely by writing
in Greke, wher none may ſay that Chriſt deſcended to Gehennuo:
& wher 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , to him & all good, is Paradiſe. So his Graces

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , wold win him Eternal fame. And I truſt your M. will not
appoint a meaner then his G. to this charge But, I muſt leaue that,
to your Maieſties wiſdome. yet I hope, all in a caſe of ſo weighty
importance, may doe well, when occaſion forceth them to deale,
then to ſpeak in humble care, ſomwhat touching te weight of
Lerned buſines: wherin they haue beſt occaſion to ſee the right:
and what should be done. Thus I wish your M. all good meditationes,
and one that conteyneth all: how God ſitteth on à fiery
throne, & that all men muſt 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . where 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
that there not Gehenna but paradiſe may be your bleſſed reſt.
            
               your Maieſties moſt humble ſubiect.
HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
            
         
      
   