
      
         
            
            The ſecond part of the Marchants Daughter of Briſtow.
            To the tune of the Maidens Ioy.
            
               WElcome ſwéet Maudlin from the ſea,
               where bitter ſtorms & cruel tempeſts did ariſe:
               The pleaſant banks of Italy,
               We may behold with ioyfull eies.
            
            
               Thankes gentle maiſter then quoth ſhe,
               A faithful friend in al my ſorows thou haſt béene
               If fortune once doth ſmile on me,
               My thankfull heart ſhall well be ſéene.
            
            
               Bleſt be the land that féedes my Loue,
               Bleſt be that place whereas he doth abide,
               No trauell will I ſticke to proue:
               Whereby my good will may be tride.
            
            
               Now will I walke with ioyfull heart,
               to view the town wheras my darling doth remaine
               And ſéek him out in euery part,
               Untill I do his ſight attaine.
            
            
               And I quoth he will not forſake,
               Swéete M. in al her iorneys vp and downe
               In wealth and woe thy part Ile take,
               And bring thée ſafe to Padua towne.
            
            
               And after many weary ſteps,
               In Padua they ſafe ariued at the laſt,
               For verie ioy her heart it leapes,
               She thinkes not on her perills paſt.
            
            
               But now alas behold the lucke,
               Her own true loue in woful priſon doth ſhe find,
               Which did her heart in péeces plucke,
               And gréeude her gentle mind.
            
            
               Condemnd he was to die alas,
               Except he would his faith and his religion turne:
               But rather then he would go to maſſe,
               In fiery flames he vowed to burne.
            
            
               Now doth faire Maudlin wéepe and waile
               her ioy is changd to wéeping ſorow gréefe & care
               but nothing can her plaints preuaile,
               For death alone muſt be his ſhare.
            
            
               She walkes vnder the priſon walles,
               where her true loue doth ly and languiſh in diſtreſſe
               Moſt wofully for foode he calls,
               When hunger did his heart oppreſſe.
            
            
               He ſighes and ſobs and makes great mone
               farwel ſaid he ſweet England now for euer more
               and al my friends yt haue me known
               In Briſtow towne with wealth and ſtore.
            
            
               But moſt of al farewel quoth he,
               My owne true loue ſwéete M. whom I left behind
               For neuer more I ſhal thée ſée,
               Woe to thy father moſt vnkind.
            
            
               How wel were I if thou waſt here
               wt thy fair handsto cloſe vp both theſe wretched eys
               My torments eaſie would appéere,
               My ſoule with ioy ſhould ſcale the ſkies.
            
            
               When M. heard her louers mone,
               her eies wt tears, her hart with ſorow filled was,
               To ſpeak with him no means was known
               Such grieuous 
                      _____ 
                   on him did paſſe.
            
            
               Then caſt ſhe off her Ladies attire,
               A maidens weede vpon her back ſhe ſéemly ſet
               To the iudges houſe ſhe did enquire,
               And there ſhe did a ſeruice get.
            
            
               She did her dutie there ſo wel,
               And eke ſo prudently her ſelf ſhe did behaue
               With her in loue her maiſter fell,
               His ſeruants fauour he doth craue.
            
            
               Maudlin quoth he my hearts delight,
               To whom my hart in firme affections tide,
               Bréede not my death through thy diſpight,
               A faithful friend I will be tride.
            
            
               Graunt me thy loue faire maide quoth he,
               and at my hands deſire what thou canſt deuiſe,
               And I wil grant it vnto thée,
               Whereby thy credite may ariſe.
            
            
               O ſir ſhe ſaid how bleſt am I,
               With ſuch a kind and gentle maiſter for to meete,
               I will not your requeſt denie,
               So you will grant what I do ſéeke,
            
            
               I haue a brother ſir ſhe ſaid,
               For his religion is now condemnde to die
               In loathſome priſon he is laide,
               Oppreſt with care and miſerie.
            
            
               Graunt me my brothers life ſhe ſaid,
               And to you my loue and liking 
                     •
                   wil giue
               That may not be quoth he faire maide,
               Except he turne he may not liue.
            
            
               An Engliſh Friar there is ſhe ſaid,
               Of learning great, and of a paſſing pure life
               Let him be to my brother ſent,
               And he will finiſh ſoone the ſtrife.
            
            
               Her maiſter granted this requeſt,
               The mariner in Friars wéed ſhe doth aray
               And to her loue that lay diſtreſt,
               She doth a letter ſtraightway conuay.
            
            
               When he had read her gentle lines,
               His heauy hart was rauiſhed with inward ioy
               Where now ſhe was ful wel he finds
               The friar likewiſe was not coy.
            
            
               But did declare to him at large,
               the enterpriſe his loue for him had taken in hand
               The yongman did the friar charge,
               His loue ſhould ſtraight depart the land.
            
            
               Here is no place for her he ſaid,
               but woful death and danger of her harmles life,
               Profeſſing truth I was betraid,
               And freareful flames muſt end our ſtrife.
            
            
               For ere I wil my faith denie,
               And ſweare my ſelf to follow damnde antichriſt,
               Ile yéeld my bodie for to die,
               To liue in heauen with the higheſt.
            
            
               O ſir the gentle friar ſaid,
               For your ſwéete loue, recant and ſaue your wiſhed life
               A wofull match quoth he is made,
               Where Chriſt is loſt to winne a wife.
            
            
               When ſhe had wroght al means ſhe might
               to ſaue her friend & that ſhe ſaw it wold not be
               Then of the iudge ſhe claimd her right
               To die the death as well as he.
            
            
               For looke what faith he doth profeſſe,
               in that ſame faith be ſure that I wil liue & dy
               Then eaſe vs both in our diſtreſſe,
               Let vs not liue in miſerie.
            
            
               When no perſwaſion would preuaile,
               Nor change her mind in any thing that ſhe had ſaid
               ſhe was with him cōdemnd to die
               And for them both one fire made.
            
            
               And arme in arme moſt ioyfully,
               theſe louers twain vnto the fire then did go
               The mariners moſt faithfully,
               Were likewiſe partners of their woe.
            
            
               But when the iudges vnderſtood,
               the faithful frindſhip in them al that did remaine
               They ſaude their liues, and afterward,
               To England ſent them home againe.
            
            
               Now was their ſorrowes turnde to ioy,
               and faithful louers had now their harts deſire
               their paines ſo wel they did imploy,
               God granted what they did require.
            
            
               And when they were in England come,
               And to mery Briſtow arriued at the laſt,
               Great ioy there was of al and ſome,
               that heard the dangers they had paſt.
            
            
               Her father he was dead God wot,
               And eke her mother was ioyful of her ſight
               their wiſhes ſhe denied not,
               But wedded them with hearts delight.
            
            
               Her gentle maiſter ſhe deſirde,
               to be her father, & at church to giue her then
               It was fulfild as ſhe requirde,
               Vnto the ioy of all good men.
            
            FINIS
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London for William Blackwall.
         
      
   