
      
         
            
            
            THE
GHOST
OF
RICHARD
THE THIRD.
            
               Expressing himselfe in these
three Parts.
               1 His Character.
               2 His Legend.
               3 His Tragedie.
            
            Containing more of him then hath been heretofore
shewed,; either in Chronicles, Playes, or Poems.
            Laurea Desidiae praebeturnulla.
            Printed by G. ELD: for L. LISLE: and are to be sold
in Paules Church-yard at the signe of the
Tygers head. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            RICHARD
THE THIRD.  HIS CHARACTER, LEGEND, and TRAGEDY. Expressing more than heretofore, either Chronicle, Play, or Poem.
            
            
            Printed by Geo: Eld for Lawrence Lisle, and are to be sould in
Pauls Church-yard at the Tygers-Head, 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
WORSHIPFVLL SIR
IOHN 
                  •
               ROMPTON, KNIGHT; WITH
HIS MOST WORTHY LADY, THE
LADY FRANCES.
            
               SIR,
            
            
               MY simple disposition could neuer make
cunning obseruance of any, whose deserts
most bound me to their respect and
honor; not more out of my Nature,
then Iudgement; since commonly the worlds obsequious
Insinuations in Trifles, proue their obsequies
of no more Importance. Nor can the
weightiest duties, in my poore habilities, sway much
more the Ballance of the World; because the
notice that the world takes of mens noble Loues



to Vertue, and good Name, impresseth nothing
the more, but oftentimes their les
                  •
               e price in onely
profit and selfe-louing estimations. Notwithstanding,
since I know your true Noblesse, out of the
common way, in all honored Inclination to the
acceptance, and grace of Goodnes; I haue beene
bold to publish this Poem (intending allurement to
Goodnes, by deterring from her contrarie) to your
right generous countenance, and gracefull protection:
Wherein, least a single and consortles
                  •
               e disposition
might perhaps grow cold, by the too many
companions that encourage the death of it to all
respect of vnprofitable Vertue; You haue taken
into your Bo
                  •
               ome so free and gratious a loue to
it in my most honor'd Lady; that the comfortable
and nourishing flame of it, can neuer want fuell
to maintaine and keep it euer at full. To both whose
one-light, for the direction, and progression of
all good Endeauors, belonging and consecrate
to all true Worthines and Dignitie; I offer this
well-meaning Materiall; hoping that such as haue
no matter to Iudge it, shall bee farre from enclining
your Apprehensions to condemne it: And



rather establish, then diminish in you Vertues
encreasing encouragement. To which, in all resolu'd
seruice, I humbly submit; euer abiding,
and desiring to my vtmost, your most respected
commandement.
            
               C. B.
            
         
         
            
            The Epistle to the Reader.
            
               
                  AN Epistle to the Reader is as ordinary before
a new Book, as a Prologue to a new Play; but
as Plaies are many times exploded, though the
Prologue be neuer so good, and promising; So
(Reader) if thou findest not stuffe, in this Poem, to fit
thy humor: If the wit with the fashion, hold not some tollerable
proportion; this Enducement (though nere so formall
and obsequious) would little preu
                  •
               ile with thy acceptation,
but thou wouldst coniure my Ghost downe againe,
before his time, or torment him vpon earth, with
the Hell-fire of thy displeasure. Therefore it matters not
whether I humor thee with complement, or in
                  •
               inuate with
glozing Epithites. I know (in a play or Poem) thou lik'st
best of Satyricall stuffe; though perhaps thou seest therein
thine own Character; and not without some shew of
Reason are things bitter, the better: For the Gluttonous
Sences (the Eye and Eare) so cloi'd and surfeited, with



variety of effeminate pleasures; the rough Satyre doth
sometimes not vnfitly enterpose such Courtly delight,
which growing a Burthen to it selfe, his entermixt vaine
with the others vanity, giues entermission to the humor,
and proues no lesse tastfull to the Gallants iudgement,
then tart sauce to whet his dull'd appetite. And of this
kind I haue enterlaced something, naturally rising out of
my subiect; where (by way of preuention) if any shall obiect
that I haue not amplified the Legend to the full scope
of the Story; I answere; I should then haue made the volume
too great, to the discouragement of the Buyer, and
disaduantage of the Printer; let it suffice I haue the
substance, if not the circumstance; and when I vndertook
this I thought with my selfe: That to draw Arguments of
Inuention from the Subiect, new, and probable, would
be farre more plaucible to the time, the
                  •
                by insisting vppon
narrations (made so common in Playes, and so notorious
among all men) haue my Labour slighted, and
my Pen tax't for triuiall. The Generous Censor (as hee is
Ingenious or Ingenuous) I reuerence; likewise the Crittick
(as he is knowing, and learn'd) but when his censure
shall be leuell'd with neither of his good parts, but fauour
more of Spleene, then Braine; of Disease, then Iudgement



I doe hartily appeale from him, with all of that
faction; And though many did inly wish, that this (not
the meanest Issue of my Braine) might haue prou'd an Obortiue,
and seene no comfortable light; Yet they see it is
borne, and (without preiudice to Nature) with Teeth too,
to oppose theirs, that shall open their lips to depraue mee;
but whether to lye vpon the Parish, or the Printers hand
that rests in clouds; howsoeuer, I haue got sheetes to lye
in, (though they be but course) and am sure to be cherish't
in good Letters▪ if I be entertain'd in the world, and
proue a companion for the many, I know I shall not be
much chargeable; if not, yet this is my comfort, there
will be some vse made of me in this land of waste; In
which Resolution, I set vp my Rest.
            
               Thine if thou wilt.
            
         
         
            
               
               To his Ingenuous, and much lou'd Friend,
the Author.
               YOu now amids our Muses Smithfield are
               To sell your Pegasus, where Hackney ware
               (Rid by the swish swash Rippiers of the Time,
               Pamper'd and fronted with a Ribband Ryme)
               Though but some halfe Houre soundly try'd, they tyre,
               Yet sell, as quickned with Eternall Fire.
               All things are made for sale; sell man and all
               For sale, to Hell: There is no Soule, to sale.
               Your flippant sence-delighter, smooth, and fine,
               Fyr'd with his Bush Muse, and his sharpe Hedge Wine,
               Will sell like good old Gascoine. What does then
               Thy Purple in graine, with these Red-Oker men?
               Swarth Chimney sweepe, that to his Horne doth sing,
               More Custome gets; then in the Thespian Spring,
               The thrice bath'd Singer to the Delphia
                        •
                     
                   Lyre,
               Though all must needs be rid heere; yet t' aspire
               To common sale, with all turne-seruing Iades,
               Fits Pandars, and the strong voic't Fish-wife Trades.
               Affect not that then, and come welcome forth,
               Though to some few, whose welcom's 
                     •
                  omthing worth
               Not one, not one (sayes Perseus) will reade mine;
               Or two, or none; 'Tis Pageant Orsadine
               That goes for gold in your Barbarian Rate,
               You must be pleas'd then to change gold for that.
               Might I be Patterne to the meauest few
               Euen now when hayres of Women-hated-hew
               Are wither'd on me; I delight to see
               My Lines thus desolately liue like me,
               
                  Not any thing I doe, but is like Nuts
               At th' ends of Meales left; when each Appetite gluts.
               Some Poet yet can leuell you a Verse
               At the Receipt of Custome; that shall Pierce
               A sale Assister; as if with one Eye
               He went a Burding; strikes Fowles as they fly,
               And has the very Art of Foulerie.
               Which Art you must not enuie; be you pleas'd
               To hit Desert; fly others, as diseas'd,
               Whose being pierst, is but to be infected;
               And as bold Puritans (esteem'd elected)
               Keep from no common Plague, which so encreases;
               So these feed all Poeticall Diseases.
               Best Ayre, lest dwellers hath; yet thinke not I
               Fore-speake the sale of thy sound Poesie;
               But would in one so worth encouragement
               The care of what is counted worst, preuent;
               And with thy cheerefull going forth with this;
               Thy Muse in first Ranke of our Muses is.
               
                  Non datur ad Musas currere lata via.
               
               
                  GEOR: CHAPMAN.
               
            
            
               To his worthy and ingenious Friend
the Author.
               SO farre as can a Swayne (who then a Rounde
               
               On Oaten-pipe no further boasts his skill)
               I dare to censure the shrill Trumpets sound,
               Or other Musick of the Sacred hil:
               
                  The popular applause, hath not so fell
               (Like Nile's lowd Cataract) possest mine eares
               But others songs I can distinguish well,
               And chant their praise, despis'd Vertue reares;
               Nor shall thy buskind Muse be heard alone
               In stately Pallaces; the shady woods
               By me shall learn't, and Echho's one by one
               Teach it the hils, and they the siluer floods.
               Our learned Shepheards that haue vs'd tofore
               Their happy gifts in notes that wooe the plaines,
               By rurall ditties will be knowne no more;
               But reach at Fame by such as are thy straines.
               And I would gladly, (if the Sisters spring
               
               Had me inabled) beare a part with thee,
               And for sweet groues, of braue Heroes sing,
               
               But since it fits not my weake melodie
               It shall suffice that thou such meanes do'st giue
               That my harsh lines among the best may liue.
               
                  W. BROVVNE.
Int: Temp.
               
            
            
               Ad Lectorem de Libro.
               HIc nihil inuenies quod carpas; mentior; ecquid
               Carpere quod pigeat, tam bonus Hortus habet?
               Hinc carpat, quisquis gratos vult carpere Flores;
               At Dextrà carpat, carpere si quis amat,
               FR. DYNNE. Int: Temp:
               
            
            
               
               To his friend the Author vpon
his Poem.
               NOt for thy Loue to me, nor other merit,
               Doe I commend thy Poems forme or Spirit,
               For though I know thou art a Friend of mine,
               I praise this for it owne sake, not for thine.
               Here haue I seen Character'd the Condition
               
               The Life and End, of a meere Polititian;
               
               From which, I learne; Tis no good Policy
               
               On any termes to part with Honesty.
               And the Opprest may view (to his content)
               How sweet it is to be an Innocent.
               
               Or by contraries learne with what deare rest,
               The Soules of harmelesse dying men are blest.
               So may the bloody Tyrant heere attend,
               What Horror and Despaire pursues his End.
               
               And those that (liuing) loath their faults to heare,
               May (reading this) perhaps repent for feare.
               Since though reproofes they scorne now here they dwell,
               Thus their owne Ghosts proclaime their shames from Hell.
               
               
                  George Wythers.
               
            
            
               To the Author vpon his Poem.
               
                  I know thou art t
                     ••
                   knowing to enq
                     •
                  ire
               This Title to thy Praise, which doth require
               A Hart so constant, and a Brow so chast,
               That vertue must not fall, how e'r
                     •
                   low plac't,
               
                  Who this way merits 
                     〈◊〉
                  , must looke to bring
               Onely a Flower to an intemp' rate Spring;
               Which hows
                     •
                  e' 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               Must feele the Earth-bred Blasts in barren wants,
               Of ruder Elements oft suffring spoile,
               To snew such Hearbs grow not on naturall soile,
               Nor can't be aptlier said of Verse, and Rimes
               They are but Strangers to these wau'ring Times;
               For as men shift their fashions for new Shapes;
               They are in Soules the same (Inconstant Apes)
               Which each Bo
                     •
                  k
                     •
                  -seller knowes; for as to day,
               Your Pasquill like a mad-cap runnes away;
               To morrow Playes; the next day History;
               
               Mor strange another time, Diuinitie:
               
               And in my Age (which is indeed most rare)
               I haue knowne Gallants buy vp Bookes of Prayer;
               
               But they were Gamsters, loosing a
                     •
                  l in swearing
               Try'd a contrarie way in their vprearing:
               To this my common obseruation, Thou
               Hast tooke a course (which I must needs allow)
               T' include them all in one, to catch their Eyes,
               That soone are dym'd without varie
                     •
                  ies;
               Wherein I will not flatter thee to tell,
               Ther's much of good; and what is worst, is well.
               
                  ROBERT DABORNE.
               
            
            
               
               To his friend the Author vpon
his Richard.
               VVHen these, and such, their voices haue employd;
               What place is for my testimony void?
               Or, to so many, and so Broad-seales had,
               What can one witnesse, and a weake one, add
               For such a worke, as could not need theirs? Yet
               If Praises, when th'are full, heaping admit,
               My suffrage brings thee all increase, to crowne
               Thy Richard, rais'd in song, past pulling downe.
               BEN: IONSON.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE GHOST OF RICHARD THE THIRD.
         
            His Character.
            
               WHat Magick, or what Fiends infernall hand,
               Reares my tormented Ghost from Orcus Flame?
               And lights my Conscience, with her burning Brand,
               Through Death, and Hell, to view the Worlds faire Frame?
               Must I againe regreete my Natiue Land,
               Whose Graues resound the horror of my Name?
               
               Then gaspe those Marble Iawes; and Birds of Night,
               Perplex my passage to the loathed Light.
            
            
               Some Consciences, with soules, may hope for Peace,
               When all their veniall, and their petty Crimes
               Are expiate, but mine will neuer cease;
               T'augment my Torment, past all Worlds and Time;
               
               Damn'd deeds in life, damn'd pennance doth encrease;
               Mens soules may fly their bodies putrid Clymes;
               
               But horrid paines still cleaue to foule offence;
               Nor will the sinne forsake the Conscience.
               
               
                  Giue way Times Pageants; Bubbles, but a Blast;
               Obiects for idle spirits, whose vanitie
               Feede Streames of Humors, in this Sea of Waste;
               
               Where Carpet Courtlings swim in Brauery;
               Such Comick Puppets are not Things to last;
               
                  Subiects vnfit for Fame, or Memory;
               
               But Time, nor Age, can paralell, or stayne
               My Bloudy scoe
                        •
                     es, which Death hath dyde in grayne.
            
            
               
                  Vale Natures 
                     •
                  urselings; Fortunes Fauorites;
               Whose percell-guylt, my Touch will not endure;
               Fostrers of Fooles, and glib-Tongu'd Parasites;
               
               Sick of Times Lethargie; past hope of Cure;
               
                  Cameleons in your Change of gaudy Sights;
               How wanton Salmasis with Lust impure
               Cleaues to your soules? proues ye of two fold Kind,
               
                  Male in the Body; Female in the Mind?
               
            
            
               Wallow in Wast, still iet in sumptuous Weeds;
               Waue feathered Gulls with Wind: & shrinck with Raine,
               
                  Buskin'd ye are but not for lofty deeds;
               No stately Matter e're inspyr'd your Braines;
               Nought but soft Loue, your great Ambition Feeds;
               None sencible of Pleasure; but of Paine
               
               Must looke on me; such whose high Thoughts are fed,
               With spirit, and Fame, from dust of Bodies, dead.
            
            
               
               Thinke Ye that Graues, and hollow Vaultes inherit
               Nought but Obliuion, and Impotence?
               
               Doth not from Death arise an other spirit,
               
               Of high Resolue th'extracted Quintessence?
               
               
                  Fame is the Agent to substantiall merit,
               
               And beares about the Worlds Circumference
               
               All deeds notorious; which Time remembers;
               Thus Phoenix like, Life springs from down-trod E
                        ••
                     bers
               
            
            
               Then as th'Almighty Thunde
                        •
                     er doth shake,
               (With selfe-bred Fumes) th'Immense and Massie Earth;
               
               No lesse amazement may my Fury make
               In my Liues horror, from my Monstrous Byrth:
               And since I'm raised from Hells burning Like,
               
               Ile fright the World▪
                   and chase all Formes of Mirth,
               From this now Mimick and ridiculous stage;
               
               I sing of Murther, Tyrany, and Rage.
               
            
            
               Then let the Canker'd Trumpets of the Deepe;
               
               Proclaime my Entrance, to this stagie Round;
               
               That I may startle Worldlings from their sleepe,
               Their sences in security fast bound:
               My Tongue in firie Dragons Spleene I steepe,
               That Acts, with Accents, Cruelty may 
                     •
                  ound;
               As once the Furies snakes hist in my Breath,
               
               When I kist Horror; and engender'd Death.
               
            
            
               
               And that my Deuilish Braine may not be dull,
               But touch the quick of each ambitious Soule,
               I take the Wittiest Polliticians Skull,
               That euer Hells black Booke did yet enroule;
               His Mazor fill'd with Stygian Iuice brym-full,
               And innocent Blood, fit for an Ebon Bowle,
               I quaffe to all damn'd spirits, and I know well
               They'l pledg me, though they drinke as deepe as Hell.
            
            
               All yee then that are flesh't in Tyranny,
               View me, your ruthlesse President and Mirror;
               
               Now all Earths glew
                     •
                  d together villany,
               Dissolue, and melt, with pale, and gastly Terror:
               Loe I vnclaspe the Booke of Memory,
               
               Rowze bed-rid Age, fowle sinne, and smooth fac'd error,
               And with all these awake Antiquity,
               
               To sing my Actions to Posterity.
               
            
            
               In my Conception, Nature stroue with Kinde;
               
               When in the hea
                     •
                  e of Blood, and Lusts desire,
               
                  Imagination mou'd (a part of Mind)
               And with the Seede commixt an ardent Fire;
               A strange Effect, these Powres should be combyn'd,
               The Mortall, with th' Immortail Part Conspire
               To forme a Prodegy, the World to fright,
               To blemish Humanes, and distayne the Light.
            
            
               
               For Why, my Mother in the strength of Thought,
               
               Propos'd vnto her Apprehensiue Powre,
               Some monstrous Birth, by Natures Error wrought,
               On which all Plannets of good luck did lowre;
               My Syre, Corruption to this Fancy brought;
               My Mother languish't many a tedious houre;
               Trauell brought Sweate, and Grones; Shee long'd to see,
               Her burth'nous Fraught; at last She brought forth Me.
               
            
            
               My Legges came formost; an vnequall Payre;
               Much like the Badgers, that makes swiftest speede
               In waies vneuen: which shew'd that no course faire
               Should crowne my Life, and actions to succeed:
               Hollow my Cheekes; vpon my Brest, black Hayre,
               The Characters of spleene and virulent deeds;
               My Beetle-Brow, and my fire-cyrcled Eye,
               Foreshew'd me Butcher, in my Cruelty.
               
            
            
               Then as a Brow bent Hill, much vndermin'd,
               Casts scowling Shadowes, o're the neighb'ring Plaines,
               Which th'approchers feare, as being enclyn'd
               To bury all, his spatious Reach containes,
               So Mountaine-like was I contract behind;
               That my stretch't Armes (plumpe with ambitious veines)
               Might crush all Obstacles, and throw them downe,
               That stood betwixt my Shadow and a Crowne.
               
            
            
               
               And as a Rauens Beake, pointed to the South
               
               Crokes following Ill, from sharpe and rau'nous maw;
               Such cry Yorkes Bird sent from a fatall mouth;
               Boading confusion to each wight I saw.
               To adde to these (as Token of more Ruth)
               Th'amazed Women started; for each Iaw
               
               Appear'd with teeth; which Mark made these Ils, good;
               That I should woorry Soules; suck humane Blood.
            
            
               My Father rau'd; my Mother curst her Wombe;
               
               Th'impris'ned winds shooke Earth,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   & burst their Caues;
               And Time (swolne big with sad Euents to come)
               Did send forth Throes, eccho'd by gasping Graues;
               The Lights of Heauen, dropt on the worlds darke Tombe;
               Horror inuades the Maine, whose raging Waues
               Doe foame, and swell aboue their bounds (the Earth)
               These fatall Signes raign'd at my fearefull Byrth.
            
            
               In progresse of my Childhood; with delight
               I taught my Nature to see Fowles to bleede;
               Then at the Slaughter-house with hungry sight,
               Vpon slaine Beasts my sensuall part did feede;
               And (that which gentler Natures might affright)
               I search't their Entrayles, as in them to reade
               (Like th'Ancient Ba
                        •
                     ds) what fate should thence be
                     •
                  ide,
               To cherish Sin, and propagate my Pride.
            
            
               
               Then (as I waxed in Maturity)
               I would frequent the Sessions, and those Places
               Where guilty Men receiu'd their doomes to Dye;
               As well to note the Gestures, and the Graces
               Of those were cast; as of the Iudges Eye;
               How these looke pale; the others Front out-faces
               Eene death it selse, and hence I learned how
               To conquer Pitty, with a bended Brow.
            
            
               Now (to confirme these Notions in my Braine
               
               And to chase thence, all Naturall Formes of Good)
               To presse to Executions sooth'd my vaine,
               To see men reeking in their Sweate, and Bloud;
               O how remorslesse was I of their Paine!
               It was my Cordiall, and my nourishing 
                     •
                  ood:
               These ruthles Thoughts, were in my hart so rise,
               That I could laugh at Death, and sport with Life.
               
            
            
               A
                     •
                   Butchers and loath'd Hang-men, in their Life;
               
               (Through Bent of Mind, and instrumentall partes)
               Being often vs'd vnto the bloody Knife,
               Make Blood, and Death, the habits of their Harts:
               And therefore since with them, such Acts are ri
                     •
                  e,
               The Lawes of Kinde (in Liew of their deserts)
               
                  
                     •
                  xempted haue from Life and Deaths sterne Iewries,
               
               Who (for their Natures) might well ranke with Furies.
               
            
            
               
               So this habituall Custome, euer breeds,
               Such fixt impression in th'Affects, and Sence;
               
               That thence the Minde receaues Corruptiue Seedes,
               Nor doth sincerely take the difference
               Twixt Cruell actions, and compassionate deeds;
               So Man, and Beast, with Guylt, and Innocence,
               
               Are all alike to Tyrants, in their swayes;
               Where sensuall Will commands; and not obaies.
            
            
               Thus as Contagious Ayre breeds some disease,
               Which all vnseene creeps on in fowle infection;
               Till at the lat the vitall parts it ceaze,
               And in his Mortall kind, attaines perfection:
               So by Corruption of such Thoughts as these:
               And giuing way to Humor and Affection,
               
               Pernitious Ills encreas'd; and thus I found
               How Pitty lost, and Cruelty won her Ground.
            
            
               Now, for I knew great spirits in Ignorance,
               
               Were farre vnfit to sway, or to Command:
               Since cunning Arts, do Pollitick Ends aduance,
               I sought to ioyne their Strengths into one Band;
               And (t'arme my selfe against the Threats of Chance)
               I gaue my selfe corruptly t'understand
               
                  Letters, and Artes, who
                     •
                  e superficiall Skill,
               Might lay the Ground, to propagate my Ill.
               
            
            
               
               Hence were my Organs apt, and Parts dispos'd
               To giue my Intellect, the Formes of Things:
               Hence was the Chao
                        •
                     
                   of my Braine disclos'd,
               That through each sence, conue
                     •
                  'd their hidden springs;
               Their winding Streames yet, in my Sea were Cloz'd;
               Which made me swell in state, and surge with Kings;
               
               Yet with no Lyne, or Plummet, to be sounded;
               Nor in no Limit, but a Crowne, be bounded.
            
            
               In my Designes, I bore no wexen face,
               To take the Print of any Formes within;
               I had a Forge, that temper'd it like Brasse;
               
               Not by my Tongue, my Hart was knowne, or seene;
               Betweene these two there was so ample space,
               That Words and Thoughts, were neuer of a kin;
               With Threats I could all
                     •
                  e, smile, when I fround;
               Kisse, when I kil'd, and heale, when I did wound.
            
            
               From Schoole-mens Customes, I obseru'd some Skill;
               What's their nice Learning, and their wrangling S
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  fe,
               But Gaine or Glory, to turne Good to Ill;
               
               As if from Reason▪ Passion we deriue?
               Then since these En
                     •
                  s, in Sciences raigne still;
               And few professe them for an after Life,
               
               As they tooke swindge then from their Polliticke schools
               
               So I tooke Licence from their Positiue Rules.
               
            
            
               
               What Midas toucht turnd Gould, such learnings vse,
               For like the Spider, and Industrious Bee,
               
               What one makes Good, the other turnes t'abuse;
               Such was the Nature of my Subtilty:
               With Good, and Ill, so play'd I fast and loose,
               Conuerting Things of most Indifferency,
               To the peculiar Habit of my minde,
               
               And to my forecast thought all others blinde.
            
            
               I did allow of Colledges, and Schooles
               
               And learn'd their Logicall distinction;
               Yet I perceau'd the greatest Clarkes but Fooles,
               In Iudgement, rawe; weake, in Preuention,
               I heard their Lectures, could digest their Rules,
               And make good vse of their Diuision,
               Yet like to Wards, in Nonage still I held them,
               Though they were witty, yet could Wisdom weild thē.
            
            
               
                  Religion I profest (as most men saw)
               But in my Hart deny'd it Reuerence;
               
               For I esteem'd it as a Penall Law,
               
               To curb, and keepe Men in obedience;
               Yet from her Ground, such Notions I would drawe,
               To touch my Wished poynt of Eminence,
               
               That, I, in others, would exact her Breach;
               As Great Ones in their Lyues such Doctrine teach.
            
            
               
               Arts raise their Collumnes vpon Natures Bases;
               And but obserue, and play, what Shee propounds,
               And euery Act of science enterlaces
               
                  Humors, and Mirth, among their scoenes profound,
               But Cunning onely, is the Art that graces;
               And most affects, in this Conspicuous Round;
               
               Which hauing shewne, with Fame we part the stage,
               
               And others enter, mou'd with selfe same Rage.
            
            
               I saw it was a Worke of Natures Kind,
               
               Ambitiously to prick-men on to state:
               By Force, or Cunning to make way, or Wind
               Through any Course, whose End might make them Great
               
                  Huma
                        •
                     ity (by good sence I did finde)
               To be compact of Powre, and 
                     •
                  lye Deceats,
               
               Proposing Rules to our owne wish in Fortune,
               
               Thus each Mans selfe-good, did him most importune.
            
            
               All ayme at Welth, or Pompe, so catch at Fame,
               
               
                  Vertu's inuisible, therefore not knowne:
               Few Loue Her, for herselfe, but for her Name.
               
               Yet what's without vs, we would haue our owne:
               And Honor (being vsurp't by Vertues Clayme)
               Seemes but an Accident, in Vertue growne;
               If Accidents by substance only liue,
               Take vertue from vs, what can Honor giue.
            
            
               
               I was not one of Vertues fond Approuers,
               That Courted her Imaginary Face,
               I saw her Seruants and her doting Louers
               Were poore, and bare, exempt from State, or Place;
               I saw that he, her Collours that discouers,
               And beares th'opinion only of her Grace,
               Did make most shew▪ with Truth to be entyre;
               To be, is vaine, to seeme, men most desire.
            
            
               It was not in my Daies, as once of old,
               When Vertue had the Worlds faire Emperie,
               
               Then was that 
                     •
                  nnocent Time the Age of Gold,
               Whose Coyne, was Truth, whose stampe, Integrity,
               
               Now monies loue, proues vs of baser Mould;
               For as the Ages fell successiuely,
               From Gold to Siluer, thence to Brasse, now worse,
               So men translate their chiefe good to the Purse.
            
            
               He that insinuates with Pollicy,
               
               That Hats and Harts, with admiration drawes:
               That shadowes Tyrannous Thoughts, with Clemency;
               And keepes his height with populare applause,
               Intycles Goodnesse, with Pr
                        •
                     sperity,
               
               And makes his Acts authenticall, as Lawes,
               
               Proues, Actions fortunate, though nere so vile,
               To get the Type of 
                     
                        •
                     ame, and Vertues Style.
            
            
               
               Then each Mans Deeds hath Pra
                     •
                  se, his Actions, Grace,
               
               If squar'd by Forme, and ru'ld by Imitation,
               
               And Honor, got by Blood▪
                   by Wealth, or Place,
               
               Will hold his die i
                     •
                   
                  glost by O
                        •
                     tentation;
               
               But where both Truth, and Colours want, all's base:
               Then if we vse the Vertue most in Fashion,
               
               
                  Honor attends v
                     •
                  , Grace will neuer swerue;
               
                  All striue to haue, but few men to deserue.
               
            
            
               
                  Clours, not Truth then, winne the Worlds reward;
               For like th'obsequious, mercenary Minde,
               Few loue the Merrit all affect Reward;
               
               And so for Currant, Counterfeits are Covn'd:
               Then no Ascent so steepe, no Doore so ba
                     •
                  'd;
               But he that with Deceite the World can blinde,
               May make his way (though stradling in his Gate)
               Through Heads vncouer'd to the Chayre of state.
            
            
               And such was I: for Wit, and Fortune make
               Crooked Things straite, to these Opinion cleaues;
               Which Alchimy, for Currant Golde doth take;
               And like the busie Spynner euer Weaues
               Slight Webs of Praise, and all for Greatnesse sake:
               And thus we see how slye Deceite, deceaues
               The credulous Route, Whose suffrage (though but Breath)▪
               
               Yet from that Ayre, Greatnesse takes Life, or Death.
               
            
            
               
               Proud of this Knowledge I scru'd into the state,
               And of that Nature got intelligence;
               
               There saw I publike Fortunes priuate hate,
               In seuerall tempers of impatience.
               One stirres too soone, and brings on his hard sate,
               
               Others subdue with time and prouidence:
               
               Some mixe their blouds to gaine thē powerfull friends,
               And by that meanes worke safest to their ends.
            
            
               I saw in Friendship Vertue best did suite;
               In Factions, Powre, and the most pollitick Head,
               Since it can only plot, not execute;
               With meaner Fortunes, best was seconded;
               Some Wise, some Valtant, some of base repute;
               And all like seuerall simples tempered;
               Which well prepar'd by a proiecting Braine,
               Giue Greatnesse strength, Ambitious hopes maintaine.
            
            
               I noted Statesmen, in their Agitations,
               
               How they dispatched suters that implor'd them;
               The Followers of their Fortunes, and their Fashions,
               How like to Demy-Gods they did adore them;
               I saw (in offer'd Cause of seuerall Passions)
               With what vnmoued Countenance they bore them;
               
                  Griefe, cast not downe, Ioy, spritned not their Eyes;
               
                  Rage, bent no Brow, their very Feare seem'd wise.
            
            
               
               This taught my spleene should neuer ope too fast,
               That Pollici's not sound, if full of P
                        •
                     ares;
               
               What's violent in Ambition will not last;
               The Foord is shallow'st, where the Channell roares;
               I saw by them, 'twas waine to spend my Blast:
               For first we must take in, then shut the Doores,
               And but by secret Posterns, to conuey
               Our Aymes by close, and vndiscouer'd way.
            
            
               I learn'd like-wise, t'appease an Enemy,
               In Termes, without Hostility and Warre;
               
               To win an Agent, without Iealousie,
               
               And make him tractable, and Regular,
               To hold Affection in Confederacy
               
               Without Expense, and to preuent, or barre
               Seditious Tumults without violence;
               And keepe Men, longing, still in Patience.
               
            
            
               To get close Friends about a Forraine Prince,
               
               To further home designes with Secresie,
               And (to relieue the priuate State Expense)
               Make publique Purses fill the Treasurie:
               In this they vs'd Natures Intelligence;
               
               That as the clouds do render plenteously,
               The Sunne exhaled Steames, to Earths encrease;
               So subiects change base drosse, for welthy peace.
            
            
               
               This is the Wisedome (saith the ancient Sawe)
               That rules the Stars; outworkes the Wheele ef Chance;
               
               And from this Modell did I seeke to draw
               Sound Principles, my Hopes with Haps t'aduance:
               And as ill manners first made soundest Law;
               
               So these Instructions chasing Ignorance;
               
               Mine owne corrupt Ends prompted me t'acquire
               Not Lawes to curb, but Ground
                        •
                      orkes to aspire.
            
            
               Also in counsell, I obseru'd and noted
               How 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , tooke Fire, and Blase
               From others Light, Whose Innocent Margents quoted
               From their Or
                        •
                     ginals, did win them Praise:
               How some by Grace sat; Some againe that doted
               Through feeble Age; (yet trac'd in Politick wayes)
               Could help defects, and see with others eyes;
               Extract their Wits, and make themselues seeme wise.
            
            
               These (like the Others) labor'd not to sound
               The depth of Things; but fraught with Burthen light,
               They sayl
                     •
                  d more shallow, neere vnto the Ground;
               
               And at the Tydes returne, discharg'd their Freight:
               In quest of G
                        •
                     arie, all their Strengths were bound:
               Not Matter, but the circumstance more sleight
               They touch't at still; whose ma
                     ••
                   Entents and Hopes,
               Were 
                     •
                  o inuolue their Aymes, in sounder Scopes.
            
            
               
               Yet did this Mixture of Varietie,
               (Like melting Ha
                        •
                     le, and sollid Pearle, or Stone)
               Seeme like the Elements in Qualitie;
               Assembled by a Disproportion:
               
               For as their Iars worke on Humanitie;
               And make sweet Musick, in Confusion;
               
               So States-men ioin'd in one, vnlike in Parts;
               One Body proue, one life, in seuerall Harts.
               
            
            
               B
                     •
                  t as the Planets haue a proper sway,
               And moue to Heau'n (that turnes them) contrarie;
               So I, from all, drew a peculiar way,
               To right my selfe gainst Natures Iniurie;
               For since She so mishap't my Bodies Clay,
               I labor'd in my Mindes Deformitie
               
               To mock her Worke, She made me like to none,
               Therefore I thought to be my selfe alone.
            
            
               And as your selfe lou'd Politicks, n'ere care
               What Tempests vulgar Vessels doe betide,
               So that their mighty Argoses may share
               Their ruin'd States, made Prize 
                     〈◊〉
                   their Pride:
               So in the Ship of state, my selfe did fare;
               (Driu'n with Ambitions Gale, and swelling Tyde)
               I forst no publique wrack; no priuate Fall,
               So I might rule and raigne sole Lord of All.
            
            
               
               Thus haue I Character'd my spirit and state
               
               In generall Termes; next shall Yee heare apply'd
               The sequell of mine Actions, to that Fate,
               Which Heauen ordain'd, as Iustice to my Pride:
               This my Praeludium; now I must relate
               My Life, in horrid sinnes diuersifi'd:
               There note how saile-hoyst Barks incurre a shel
                        •
                     e,
               
               When Greatnes, would be greater, then it selfe.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            THE LEGEND OF RICHARD THE THIRD.
            
               TO him that Impt my Fame with Clio's Quill;
               
               Whose Magick rais'd me from Obliuions den;
               That writ my Storie on the Muses Hill;
               
               And with my Actions Dignifi'd his Pen:
               
               He that from Heltcon sends many a Rill;
               
               VVhose Nectared Veines, are drunke by thirstie Men:
               
               Crown'd be his Stile, with Fame; his Head, with Bayes;
               
               And none detract, but gratulate his Praise.
               
            
            
               Yet if his Scoenes haue not engrost all Grace,
               
               The much fam'd Action could extend on Stage;
               
               If Time, or Memory, haue left a place
               For Me to fill; t'enforme this Ignorant Age;
               To that intent I shew my horrid Face;
               
               Imprest with Feare, and Characters of Rage:
               
               Nor Wits, nor Chronicles could ere containe,
               The Hell-deepe Reaches, of my soundlesse Braine.
            
            
               
               
                  Then heare Ambitious men, Soules drownd in sences,
               And euer dry in quenchles thirst of Glory:
               
               And yee that haue no eares (yee hearts of Princes)
               Measure your pompe by processe of my story:
               
               There is a Fate your boundles hope conuinces,
               Though nought confine yee in this transitory:
               
               Those that clime high in mischeefe rip'st of all,
               Haue still the feareful'st and most rotten fall.
            
            
               VVhat time my father York began his claime,
               VVhence ciuill, and vnciuill Armes did grow:
               VVhen purple gore deaw'd many a fertile Plaine,
               
               And swords made furrowes, English hearts to sow,
               
               VVhen sonnes by sires, and sires by sonnes were slaine;
               And Englands Common-weale a common woe:
               VVhen Heauen rain'd Vengeance; a Hell sulpher & spew'd,
               And euery Age and sex those sad times rew'd.
            
            
               I, though too young as then to mannage steele,
               
               (Yet in my thoughtes the Theory of Armes)
               My swelling veines and feeble nerues did feele,
               The emulation of those hot Alarm's.
               
               My Glories thirst made Appetite so reele,
               Betweene my peacefull state and boistrous stormes:
               That in the heat and feruor of desire,
               I 
                     〈◊〉
                   on Nature and set Blood on fire.
            
            
               
               My fathers sword or title set on foot,
               VVhose Fate growne ripe he dropt to Earth and perish't:
               But we the Sonnes, (greene branches of his roote)
               Th'aspiring vertue of his Hopes still cherish
                     •
                  ,
               I and my Brother held in swift poursuit
               The royall Game; whose thoughtes were iointly nourish't
               VVith the possession of that chased prize,
               
               As for a Crowne who would not Nimrodize.
               
            
            
               Now (seconded with Right, and warres 
                  
                     •
                  aire merits)
               I mixt my blood with gall, my spleene with ire:
               
               Heere I began to Ioutalize my spirit,
               Midst thundring shock, dar
                     •
                  ing Cyclopian fire,
               
                  Fame prickt vs on to that we were t' inherit,
               And we made way through blood, nor could retire,
               Till on the Rubbish of our Enemy,
               
               VVe reard the Ensigne of our victory.
               
            
            
               Then was the Kingly Lyon
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   held at bay
               Coopt in the Towre; whose Lionesse rag'd in vaine:
               To rescue, or redeeme our purchast prey,
               I pitcht more toyles wherein her whelp was tane,
               
                  Edward her faire Sonne (glory of the day)
               My han
                     •
                   eclipst with foule and bloudy staine:
               A murder, that might make the Sarres to winke,
               The fixed Poles to shake, and Atlas shrinke.
            
            
               
               Next (to secure our parts from Henri
                        •
                     s side)
               The By being bar'd, the chance fell on the Maine,
               
               And damned Policie, instructed Pride.
               
               To stretch my Conscience to a higher Straine:
               The Diuell whisper'd, that my hands not dyde
               In Henries Gore, my hope to rise was vaine:
               My Swords sharpe point brought his Quietus est,
               
               VVhich leuel'd to his Hart, sent Him to Rest.
            
            
               Hence cruell Thoughts tooke Roote, and ouerspred
               My Syn-manur'd Soyle, Nature
                        •
                     
                   shapelesse Frame;
               The Ground grew Ranke, with Blood and Murder fed;
               And fearelesse Impudence, check't blushing Shame;
               I cherish't Tyranny, strooke Pittie dead,
               My Rage, like Salamander, liu'd in Flame,
               And eu'n as Drinke, doth keep the Dropsie, Dry;
               So more I Drunke, the more Desire did Fry.
            
            
               Yet now (secure) Edward enioy'd the Crowne,
               Warres sterne Alarums heere began to cease;
               Bankes, turn'd to Pillowes; Fields to Beds of Downe,
               And Boystrous Armes, to silken Robes of Peace;
               Warres Counsellor resum'd the States-mans 
                  
                     •
                  owne,
               And welcom'd Blisse grew big with all encrease,
               Wealth follow'd Peace, and Ease succeded Plenties,
               And needfull Cates, were turn'd to wanton Dainties.
            
            
               
               Now Mars his Brood, were chain'd to Womens Lockes;
               Surgeons, and Leaches, vs'd for Venus Harmes:
               They that erst liu'd by Wounds now thriue by'th Pox,
               For smoothest Pleasure, still ensues rough Armes;
               Whiles I, gryn'd like a Woolfe, lier'd like a Fox,
               To see soft Men, turn'd swine, by Cyrces Charmes,
               And being not shap't for Loue, employ'd my Wits,
               In subtile Wiles, 
                     •
                   exceede these hum'rous Fits.
            
            
               O how I bit my Tongue when Edward wiu'd!
               That (with the rest) forc'd Shoutes of, God giue Ioy;
               
               When to the Center of my Hart there diu'd
               Curses, and rankorous wishes to destroy;
               My hopes grew Dead; Yet (Hydra-like) suruiu'd
               Fresh Heads of Strength, which Mischiefe did employ,
               And my smooth Gen
                        •
                     us sooth'd me in the Eare,
               That Blood, would Sanguine the pale Cheeke of feare.
            
            
               VVhiles wanton Edward doates on Mistresse Shore,
               
               VVhose Lust, and Tryfling, soyld the face of Things,
               And Coun
                        •
                     eilors (like Pandars) kept the Dore,
               My Thoughts were climing to the State of Kings:
               
               He, painted Beautie; I, did Crownes adore;
               And euer Impt Ambitions Ayrie Wings,
               To reach at Fame, and Fortune, which might crowne
               Hope, with successe; and Wit with Fames Renowne.
            
            
               
               And euen as he (with an Insatiate sight)
               Beheld a beautious Face, a sparkling Eye,
               Admir'd a pleasant wit (as Loues delight)
               And still adored Cupids Deitie:
               So I (enslam'd with Glories Appetite)
               Did Court the shining Beames of Maiestie,
               
               Priz'd Policie, Altars to Fortune rear'd,
               He, study'd to be lou'd; I, to be fear'd.
            
            
               
                  Clarence his Life in Fortunes tickle wheele
               Had now a slipperie Stand; for (dreadlesse) He
               In sound Estate of Health, began to recle,
               (As Natures Powre must yeeld to Tyranny)
               My Adamant had pointed to his Steele,
               And subtly drew him to his Destinie:
               I had a Craft, to vndermine each State,
               My Engines, were the Instruments of Fate.
            
            
               For why, an Ignorant Wisard, taught by Me,
               
               That neuer knew a Letter in the Rowe
               
               From his Spell'd Lesson, tooke the Letter G,
               
               To worke my rising, and his ouerthrow:
               And by a foolish childish Prophesie,
               (As Fooles and children still tell all they know)
               Insinuates with the fearefull King, that G,
               
               Should put to death his Royall Progenie.
               
            
            
               
               So harmelesse Clarence superstitiously
               In sent to close Death to the Fatall Tower;
               
               But I that charm'd, fulfill'd the Augurie,
               
               So Polliticks kill farre off with vnseene Powre,
               VVith sheathed Points I wrought my Tyranny;
               
               Thus could I whet, prepare, feed, and deuoure,
               Concoct, Euacuate, with most nimble hast,
               Blood was my Cheare, and other Feasts, my Fast.
            
            
               So George rid post; and at his Iourneyes end
               (To quench his Thirst, and coole his bloody Sweate)
               His gentle Host (being my secret friend)
               Did broach a Butt, t' allay his dangerous heate,
               But so he sow'st him in't, that he did send
               Poore George to rest, in euerlasting Seate,
               Yet no tart VVine, But Malmsey stopt his Breath;
               So dyde he not the sharp'st, but sweetest Death.
            
            
               Next, Time an other Point begins t' attaine,
               VVhen Edward (past the Solstice of his yeares)
               With necessarie change begins to wayne,
               And I thrust in to vndergoe his cares,
               Life (sencible of Pleasure) now feeles paine,
               Earth must to Earth; as natures course out-weares:
               His Scene is done, Death strikes him to the Hart,
               So parts the Stage; and now begins my part.
            
            
               
               Now Back-steel'd Buckingham I made my Friend,
               Him I sustain'd with hope, and fed with Ayre,
               To further me, in my aspyring End,
               In whom I found will, power, and faithfull care:
               I shot the Shaft, and he the Bow
                        •
                     
                   did bend;
               And both could runne with Hound, and hold with Hare;
               And though to crosse his Ayme I had a Clause,
               Yet strongest Agents, back the weakest Cause.
            
            
               Next, Riuers, Vaughan, Gray, (that stood in light
               And iustly enterpos'd my vniust Ayme)
               Did feele the vengeance of my fell despite,
               VVhose Deaths did more secure my lawlesse Claime:
               Poore simple soules they were to stand for Right
               Not hauing Strength: for Vertues power is lame;
               'Tis desperate folly to oppose, not strong,
               Then sinke with Right, 'tis better winke at wrong.
            
            
               So Regent made, Protector to the Princes;
               
               Bare Heads, bent Knees, sooth Mischiefe, second hope;
               Religious shewes, doe couer close Pre
                     •
                  enses,
               More Towres, more Titles▪
                   are my Fancies scope;
               Now I contract my wits, summon my Sences,
               
               To smooth the rugged VVay, the Dores to ope
               That leade to State; the Law being in my VVill,
               I had a Licence to make good my Ill.
            
            
               
               I plaid with Law as with a waxen nose,
               Now made it crookt, then straight, then saddle wise:
               And its firme brow I bent vnto the toes,
               To make a foot-stoole on't for me to rise.
               VVhat Wisdome stablisht pollicy ore'throwes,
               Corrupts her pure Soule, bleares her fairest eyes,
               
               Law's a mute female Iudge: Guifts, Wit, and Tongue,
               Oft prostitute her parts to lust and wrong.
            
            
               
                  Truth had a tattering stand, I made Commander,
               
                  Tyrants are euer fearefull of the good:
               And Innocence in vaine opposeth slander,
               
               VVhom I accus'd or censur'd, who withstood?
               My Brayne was as an intricate Meander,
               
               VVhence horror issu'd and the streames of blood.
               My Soule, like Stix, and Ioue might sweare by me,
               As nought more aduerse to his Detty.
               
            
            
               Now whiles I trembled in an Agony,
               
               Sole Soueraignty with safest meanes contriuing:
               My working head (my Counsells Consistory)
               Debates how I might raigne, the Princes liuing:
               My powers disioyn'd, and (for security)
               Neither, to other a sure Hostage giuing.
               But in this doubtfull conflict le
                     •
                  t me still
               Betweene my Reason and my sensuall Will.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Reason obiects (to countercheck my pride)
               How Kings are natures Idols, made of clay:
               And though they were by mortalls Deifide,
               
               Yet in the Graue, Beggers as good as they:
               That Sence was slauish, and for man no guide,
               
               That Reason should Command and Will, obey:
               And that with all worlds pompe and Fortunes good,
               
               VVe still were nothing else but flesh and blood.
               
            
            
               
                  Reason infer'd, Men in effect were Kings,
               
               If they could rule themselues, and conquer Passion:
               
               And that Desire soar'd with Icarus Wings,
               
               When it out-stript her Bounds of limitation,
               That Her Powre onely, could distinguish things;
               Shew what was Reall, what but Forme, and Fashion,
               Suggests likewise, 
                     •
                  hat man was ouerthrowne,
               Not more by others Flatterie, then his owne
            
            
               Farther She vrg'd, that Fortune had no Power
               But in Mens Ignorance; although Shee boast
               To blesse, or crosse, as Shee doth smile, or Lowre,
               And to make Fooles of those Shee Flatters most:
               That Vertue onely was the Mindes rich Dowre;
               
               By Wealth, not bought, by Pouertie not lost,
               VVhich who so had not, euer purchast losse,
               His Pompe was Bane, and Titles, but his Crosse.
            
            
               
               This Reason doth suggest; which I conuince;
               And proue those Grounds for idle, false, and vaine,
               I knew her Powre, was in decay of sence,
               
               Which Age, not Youth; did Foster, and maintaine;
               And though your sagest Morrallists from hence
               Gaue Humane Precepts, with much thanklesse paine;
               Such meager Wisedome, writ with Death-like clawes,
               I held as foolish as your old VViues Sawes.
               
            
            
               Low Thoughts, in high-pitcht Hopes, despaire do bring,
               And as one walking when the stars appeare;
               Night fils his Eye, whence Shapes of Darknes spring,
               And all his Thoughts, proue Visions by his Feare:
               But when Aurora sets the Day on VVing,
               And driues the Rauen-black-Night from Heau'ns bright sphere,
               
               Then Flowers, and Trees spangled with dewes he spies,
               And worlds of Glories glitter in his Eyes.
            
            
               So when great Spirits doe shrinke in cloudy Feares,
               Loosing their strength, diminishing their Pleasures,
               Then Wealth, and Glorie, and what else is theirs,
               In darkest Womb doe bury all their Treasures;
               But when a Kingly boldnes them vpreares,
               Treading on cloth of state their solemne Measures;
               
               Then doe they graspe (in vigor of their Powres)
               The Globe, and Scepter, and kisse Heauen with Towres.
               
            
            
               
               Now then (quoth I) let tastlesse liues Define
               
                  Vertue, and her Reward, in after Time;
               
                  Richard, thou hast an Essence more Diuine,
               VVhich Glories Flame, hath purg'd from grossest Slime,
               
                  Crownes be thy Obiects, and those Eares of thine
               
                  Rellish no Musick but a Sphere-like Chime,
               
               Thus coucht I Reason with my Eagles wings,
               
               If Reason rul
                     •
                  d Men, then what need of Kings?
               
            
            
               No; I look't vp, Nature bid me aspire,
               So taught the firie Essence of my soule,
               
               Harts are small Things, but infinite in Desire,
               VVhich neither bounds containd, nor Bars controule,
               The Flesh, is vapor, and the spirit, a Fire;
               And Iouiall Minds (when these begin t' inroule)
               Do part the Drosse, and on the Bodies Head,
               Dissolue in Thunder, what his Basenes bred.
            
            
               So, on I went, in diuelish politick wise;
               The Yong Prince now from safest sanctuarie
               
               A Prela
                        •
                     e forst (some such can tamporize)
               VVho held with Fiends t' enfring Church libertie:
               The Child being brought to me (as t'was my Guize)
               I kist, and Blest, with fein'd sinceritie
               The Innocent Soule, and therein did fulfill,
               The part of Iudas; for I ment to kill.
            
            
               
               Him, with his Brother, lodg'd I in the Towre,
               
               A payre ill met, to vndergoe like Fate;
               Now wrinckled Browes (like Skies, before a Showre)
               Spred gloomy Darknes ouer Englands State:
               All sought to saue; I purpos'd to deuou
                     •
                  e;
               My Mynes are lay'd, and they preuent too late;
               
                  Counsels diuide; and a confused Rumor,
               
               
                  Time sent, as Throes, vnto my swelling Tumor.
            
            
               Now did I vse each working Instrument,
               Some Fyles to take off; some smooth Tooles, to glaze;
               Some serues t'insinuate; all for close entent,
               Wrought one effectuall end, in seuerall wayes;
               I was prime Mouer in this Firmament:
               
               And they, the Sphere-like Mouers to my praise,
               But Buckingham, my Iupiter of Light,
               VVhose Influence, was Mirror of my Might.
            
            
               And as the Catholick Spirit in Man applyes
               Each Sence and Organ, to their proper Ends,
               Vseth the Hart, the Braine, the Eares, and Eyes,
               
               And to th'impulsiue soule, those Powers extends:
               So in this pollitick Bodie, I deuise,
               By Buckingham (my Spi
                        •
                     it) who slackes, or bends
               My vsefull Engins; Him I made my Hand,
               Temploy his powre, with theirs, to my command.
            
            
               
               Now good Lord Hastings (great in all Mens Grace)
               (Of th'aduerse Faction, Fautor and chiefe Head)
               I heau'd at, and remou'd him from his place,
               That so the Rest might faint, vncomforted;
               My Blood-hound Catesby foyl'd him in the Chase;
               Who earst by him being rais'd, cherisht, and Bred,
               Knowing himsel
                     •
                  e too weake, to stand for Right,
               Proues treacherously Wise, and Friend to Might.
            
            
               Thus could I Saint a Diuell with a Fiend,
               And make one Engine other to driue out,
               From a mayne Faction cull, a secret Friend,
               To hold with hope, and to preuent with Doubt,
               I had a Powre to breake, what would not bend,
               In cautions, vs'd my Sentinell and Scoute;
               
               In Iealousie, had Argoes hundred eyes,
               And Nero's cruell Hart, to tyrannize.
            
            
               How cunningly did Buckingham, and I,
               Pretend, and set a coulour in the Treason
               Of Hastings, to our Liues? how suddenly
               We Butcher'd, (without Forme of Law, or Reason)
               That harmelesse Man? then gull'd Simplicitie
               VVith forced feare; as if at that same Season,
               
                  Erinnis, and the Furies had been bent,
               To cast their palenes on our damn'd entent?
            
            
               
               And what a peece of Iustice did I shew
               On Mistresse Shore? when (with a fained hate
               To vnchast Life) I forced her to goe
               Bare-foote, on penance, with deiected State?
               
               But now her Fame by a vild Play doth grow;
               Whose Fate, the Women so commisserate,
               That who (to see my Iustice on that Sinner)
               Drinks not her Teares; & makes her Fast, their dinner?
            
            
               Now, whiles all wish to see yong Edward Crown'd,
               And in each Place a solemne Preparation;
               In my vast Sea, their Streames of Ioy were drown'd,
               Whose Ayme was bent to crosse their Expectation:
               For Buckingham, and I, had laid the Ground
               To raise my Columne, and suppresse their Station;
               
               And much vntemper'd Morter was in hand,
               To Dawbe, and Ciment, what could neuer stand.
            
            
               The gayne and Glorie-thirsting smooth Diuine,
               More learn'd, then true; yet of lesse Arte, then Fame;
               And many others with him doe Combine;
               To sleike, and pollish, my corrupter Clayme;
               And whiles their Wits doe work to make me shine,
               To guild my Guilt, and glorifie my shame;
               Like Racking clouds the people flock, and runne,
               With pitchie Breathes, t' obscure my rising Sonne.
            
            
               
               But I, that held the Conscience but a Sawe,
               
               In my selfe-loue, con
                     •
                  ounding Idle Hate,
               Found Tricks t'impeach the Princes claime, by Lawe,
               
               Prouing mine true; theirs Illigitimate,
               And to this end subborn'd one Doctor Shaw
               
               With seruile Tongue, and Spirit adulterate
               To preach dead Ed
                        •
                     ards slander, with my Mother,
               And Bastardize the Issue of my Brother.
            
            
               It was suggested then, most Impiously,
               
                  Edward, nor 
                     
                        •
                     larence to be lawfull Payres;
               B
                     •
                  t (by th'erronious Rule of Phisnomy)
               To be the Issue of some stranger Syres:
               
               That Edward had with fowlest Brgamy
               
               Blemish't his Stock, and had no rightfull Heyres;
               Thus Father, Mother, Brother, Race, and Name
               I would haue vilify'd, t' aduance my claime.
            
            
               Report went out; and whispring Rumor drew
               From eu'ry quarter, Men of each condition;
               To know the Sequell, whether false, or true,
               To cleare their doubts and to enforme Suspition:
               And to Paules Crosse (where State-foode fresh, and new,
               After a Change, to feed their Inquisition)
               The many Headed Beast, doe flock, and gather,
               To heare strange Tidings, from their Ghostly Father.
            
            
               
               There Doctor Shaw stept vp: this was his Theam
                        •
                     
                  
               
               The Bastard slips doe neuer take deepe roote;
               VVho from his Conduit pipe sent such a Streame,
               As drench't his Audience from the Head to foote:
               Such Milke and Hony, with such clouted Creame
               Flow'd from his Wit; and from his Tongue did shoote
               Such spleenefull Venome; that all Men (perplext)
               Fear
                     •
                  d He'd goe mad, running beside his text.
            
            
               VVhere, hauing slander'd Edwards Progenie,
               
               Taxed his Lyfe; and shew'd his Praecontract,
               
               Defam'd our Mother with Adulterie;
               
                  Edward, nor Clarence, got in lawfull Act;
               Then prouing Me (though most prepost
                     •
                  rously)
               
                  Yorkes true borne sonne; by vs it was Compact
               That I (by Miracle) should come in Place,
               At th'instant of my Praise, to meet with Grace.
               
            
            
               He lo
                     •
                  kes vs oft, I came not on my Cue;
               At last (of course) descending to my Praise
               Home it was sent, which done, I came in view
               And spred amongst them my abhorred Rayes;
               Then Shaw (Verbatim) doth againe renew
               What he had spoke, Things fowle, need double Glaze,
               
               Forgetting quite that twice sod Meate, would dull,
               Witlesse, as shamelesse, prais'd me to the full.
            
            
               
               Which (in Effect) was thus: That I alone
               VVas patterne, of each Princely Qualitie,
               For Armes, and vertuous Disposition,
               Vnparalell'd; That in Forme, Face, and Eye,
               I bore the Figure, and Proportion,
               O
                     •
                   
                  Yorke my Sire: nay, to th' Extremitie
               His hyred Tongue, my hope, and Glorie brings
               I was not borne t
                     •
                   obey; but rule with Kings.
               
            
            
               VVhich twice rub'd ouer, grossest Flatterie,
               (Met with opinions so preiudicate)
               Enforc'd the Hearers vniuersally
               To vent in murmure, their concealed Hate.
               Another too (of the bald-Frierie)
               Instructed on like subiect to Dilate,
               Grew hoarse; and in the mid'st (abrupt) came downe
               Whose Hyre, was Hate; perpetuall Shame, his crowne.
            
            
               Such Doctors were (I doe not say there are)
               Whose Breaths scall'd Heauen; Harts clog'd with worlds desire,
               That without Scruple, touch of Shame, or Feare,
               VVould wrest the Scripture, to make Truth a Lyer:
               And these like Mercenarie Men appeare;
               That loue the Word, for VVealth; the worke, for Hyre;
               whose tutor'd tongues, to take off Great Mens Blames,
               Set stronger Seales on theirs, and their owne Shames.
            
            
               
               To giue more colour to this Enterprise;
               My Agent Buckingham, (with wits high Straines)
               Prepares the Citie States; men chiefly VVise,
               In giuing way to things aboue their Braines:
               Such as were seene in Measures, Weights, and Siz
               
               Of Grocerie; with Bread, B
                        •
                     ere, Ale, and Graines;
               
               And better knew the waight of Bags, and Pence,
               Then matters of this weight, and Consequence.
            
            
               These notable, Wise-wealthy M
                        •
                     gistrates;
               
               (Such they were then, what euer they are now)
               Did onely see with th' Eyes of higher States;
               
               And what these thought (though bad) they would allow:
               The sweet Recorder, and the Cittie Waytes
               
               Did make them sound; and eu'rie Man knew how
               Better to Coppie, from their lookes Austere,
               Then take true Notes of Wit from them, by Eare.
            
            
               These Gray-hayr'd Sages, (Graue, in saying little)
               My Subtle Buckingham like Wax had wrought;
               Who surely seal'd together with the People,
               He brought to tender, what I long had sought;
               And being their Mouth deliu'ring to a tittle,
               Both what they would, and what our selues fore-thought,
               Sollicit me (and they would haue no Nay)
               To take the Crowne, the Scepter, and the Sway.
            
            
               
               He shewes the publique Good that would ensue,
               The Peoples generall liking, and Applause,
               Preuention of seditious Plots that grew,
               Through want of Execution of the Lawes:
               Said, that old sores, would fester, and renew,
               If I tooke not the Sword, to right their Cause:
               Behold vs then (quoth He) with Pitties Eye,
               Of your accustom'd Grace, and Clemencie.
               
            
            
               Then I (with hart-cheek't tongue) made this Reply:
               That, though I saw their heauy states with Ruth;
               
               Yet so much was my loues sinceritie,
               Vnto the promising Hopes of Edwards Youth;
               Withall, so loth to staine Humilitie
               
               (Professing seemelesse Zeale; and naked Truth)
               That I (vnapt for Rule, and Soueraigntie)
               Prefer'd content, to highest Monarchie.
               
            
            
               He farther doth enforce, and I deny:
               He pleads my Right, and I dissemble strong;
               Obiects the Princes confirm'd Bastardie,
               
               And still the Maidens part is all my Song:
               At last he dri
                     •
                  es his subtill Oratorie
               To shew of Spleene, that I their liues did wrong:
               And if (quoth he) you will not Condiscend,
               We must elect some other: there's an End.
            
            
               
               This Sc
                        •
                     ne so well perform'd on either part,
               The play drew on to a Catastrophe,
               
               I added to States double dealing Art
               Deuices that by Ebbing, fill'd my Sea;
               I hung off; to be drawne by the Desert
               Of making Conscience of the charge, my Plea,
               To take as forc'd, what more then Heauen I wish't,
               And to which, would through troubled Hel haue fish't.
            
            
               I still put Baite on Baite, to make my Hooke
               The more Inuisible, and gaue away
               More then men ask't: men vs'd more care to looke
               Where any Suite but worth the begging lay,
               Then how to get my wing'd Hand to the Booke,
               Proud Beggery made the whole weeke Holiday,
               For Saboths, Beggery was a worke of worth,
               While merit grew as bamefull as the North.
            
            
               Then made I ciuill men, make Ryot way,
               Men by Art Ciuill, that are ryotous euer,
               When men play Artes prize once, they fight, and play,
               Such danger in the open Field, is neuer.
               Art drawne from Nature, drawes her Soule away,
               And then from Beasts, you can not men disseuer,
               But in the worst part; These men for round Fees
               Squar'd Arts, and all Termes out by Policies.
            
            
               
               For Fees, I made them lawfull proue my claime;
               Disabling both my Nephewes to Inherit;
               Gold sets vp markes, Hoyles, pricks for any Ayme,
               That still shall hit, how wide soeuer Merit;
               Goulds Chymick Skill, can cure an aged Mayme,
               And in at deaths last gaspe breath Youths first Spirit,
               Nay, so much, Art, and Nature, Gold controules,
               That men it makes liue without manly Soules.
            
            
               Gold got by Begging; Begging not forgot
               Could be at any hand; but (varied now)
               For my good now they beg'd; that theirs might not
               The Font finde dry, since euer all the flow
               Their Sewres renew'd still; and made seeth their Pot.
               Tis sacred Truth: First good t' our selues we owe;
               
               Thus for themselues they Supplication made,
               That I would take on me the Royall Trade.
            
            
               I made it nice for my Good, (as from theirs
               They turn'd their owne ends ouer, all to mine)
               And at the last for their Good heard their Prayers;
               And as by any Floods side sinkes a Pine
               To take more Roote; and curle his leauie Hayres
               The more in Bows, and Armes, that kisse the Skyne;
               So stoopt I; so to rise; and being vp
               Both with their Goods, and Bloods, I crown'd my cup.
            
            
               
               This fearefull doubt then being thus decided,
               As a Praeludium to my Tragick Maine:
               
               The factious Peeres now ioyn'd that were diuided,
               Who with all sollemne Rites confirm'd my Reigne.
               Thus desperately I tooke the Clew that guided
               Through Laberinthian doubts; and now in vaine
               That monstrous Minotaure (the people) rag'd,
               Whose turbulent Breath I calm'd; and fiercenes swag'd.
            
            
               Now though all heads are bare, all bend their knees,
               Yet (in themselues) my Greatnes they compare
               To Senecaes high-stiled Tragedies,
               Embost with gold, most glorious, ritch and faire,
               Which as they ope, Thyestes greets their eyes,
               Who prou'd his Childrens Tombe; and then they fare
               Like men that see with horror, reade with hate,
               And so abhorred was my golden state.
            
            
               For hauing died my hands in humane gore,
               Made black my Soule; my wit a plot doth ca
                     •
                  t
               To feed my rauenous appetite with more,
               My Gorge was empty for a new repast,
               But such a one, not Ages long before
               Offer'd to Time; or Fames all-sounding Blast:
               Now doth my Conscience play the Cowards part,
               And Blood chac'd from my face, flies to my heart.
            
            
               
               Then Ioy, with Feare; and Hope, with deep Despaire,
               Adulterate their Powers, and did engender
               Confusion, Horror, and blood-thirsting Care,
               Which Passion (mixed with distraction) render;
               Now Nature shrunke, and set on end my Hayre,
               My Hart pants thick, my Pulse beates slow, and tender,
               At the Conception of a Thought, whose Hell
               Containes that Torment where the Diuels dwell.
            
            
               In shapelesse Darknes I was then confin'd,
               And eu'rie thing (that erst was my delight)
               Turn'd to a Fiend; bro
                     •
                  d waking, I was blind,
               As if enfolded in the vayle of Night,
               Astonishment, did all my sences binde,
               Shame did appeare; dead Pittie rose to light,
               VVhen I conceau'd the Murder of the Princes,
               Which Heau'n, & Hel, Time, Nature, death, conuinces.
            
            
               Yet thus my Diuellish spirit shooke off this Trance,
               And thus my Genius chid: O Coward faint!
               Did not thy wit aboue thy Birth aduance?
               Cut knotty Doubts, and Bars of all Restraint?
               Doth not thy Frowne controule the Frowne of chance?
               And shall thy Superstitious Fancy paint,
               These hartlesse Feares, Imaginarie Hell,
               And haue a Charme aboue thy Politick Spell?
               
            
            
               
               Hast not made God a Cloake, to get a Crowne?
               VVithout all Shame, parboyl'd thy blushlesse Face?
               With conquering Tyrany, cast Pitie downe?
               Establish't Wickednes; supplanted Grace?
               
               And now like to a man (ready to drowne)
               Catch at a helplesse Thing? Why this is base;
               Not like a Kingly Pollitician;
               
               But a poore Ignorant Plebeian.
               
            
            
               VVhat? wilt thou thus runne from thy selfe to Error?
               And make Indulgent Nature now thy Foe?
               Plunging thy selfe into the Depth of Terror?
               And where once Wisedome thriu'd, let Folly grow?
               Shall ayrie Vertue, now become thy Mirror?
               And things (meerely without) afflict thee so?
               If Conscience fright, and silent Shame be fear'd?
               Thou art no King, but of the popular Heard.
            
            
               Tis Shame (where parts agree) to make a Iarre;
               To bring Disturbance, and Distraction;
               VVhat Nature hath established, to marre,
               Is to deface the Habit, she puts on:
               To bring thy Actions to thy conscience Bar,
               So to be doom'd to swift perdition,
               But hauing sear'd thy conscience, seal'd thy Blame,
               T' vnrip the wombe againe, why this were shame:
            
            
               
               
                  No Richard: in thine owne powers, still be free,
               And what seemes best, thinke absolutely well:
               Confirme thy strength, make good thy pollicy,
               Nor gainst thy name, and dignity, rebell:
               Proue not a Zelist in fond Purity,
               
               Nor paint a Heauen, nor counterfeit a Hell:
               
               But wind into thy selfe; there, set thy rest,
               So plot, and execute what thou think'st best.
            
            
               Maintaine thy power, diminish not thy sway,
               Nor bound thy selfe, being a boundlesse King;
               
               But of thy State still propagate the Sea,
               
               And take the Tribute of each petty Spring:
               Frame thine owne Circle, and then boldly say,
               This is my Center; hether will I bring
               The lynes of all my Actions; faire, or foule,
               And see what power, or will, or can controule.
            
            
               Breake ope thy black Abissus, and take thence,
               Worlds of aduantages against the world:
               Be false, and cruell, still with impudence,
               And calmes, with 
                     •
                  empests, on thy Brow be curl'd;
               From thy owne Heauen deriue thy influence,
               And Fiend-like feare be into darknes hurl'd,
               Thy Sun, to Sun; thy Starres, to Starres aduance,
               And let thy pompe in golden mountaines dance.
            
            
               
               So then (resolued) hauing thus debated
               My tirannous Will, had laid the bloody traine:
               And in my doome the Princes liues were dated,
               Whose ominous being, did impeach my raigne:
               I thought my selfe not absolute instated,
               Nor could make free vse of my purchast gaine;
               Till without Riuall, I might shew my brow,
               One King in state; one Sunne the Heauens allow
            
            
               Now was my Frostie coldnes, fully thaw'd;
               And my resisted fire found open vent,
               Now I digested, what so hard was chaw'd,
               And turn'd it to familiar nourishment:
               Then Buckingham (my artificiall Bawde▪
               
               My Hand, my Factor, and my Instrument)
               I grounded on, to worke this last Designe,
               And giue the Fire, to this my secret Myne.
               
            
            
               Legions of Diuels seconded my Thought
               To ioyne him with me, in this dangerous Mayne,
               Whose powrefull hand, my counsell would haue wrought
               T' effect the complot of this Murth'rous Traine;
               But here he stopt, would by no meanes be brought
               To adde this fowlenes, to his former Staine,
               And like on's Nayles within an vlcerous Sore,
               Touch't to the quick, he shrinkes, and will no more.
            
            
               
               My Motion did repeale his banish't feare,
               And Feare, Sollicites his num'd Conscience,
               His coldnes, mou'd my heate, which heate did beare
               The churlish temper of Impatience:
               And now his Loue from memory I teare,
               Turne his obsequious seruice to offence:
               For Polliticians are no longer Friends,
               When Friends can adde no more to their mayne Ends.
            
            
               So did he vanish, for he now had spent
               The Marrow, of his Trust, and Flatterie;
               And so I vs'd each seruile Instrument,
               VVhen it had lost his steeled facultie:
               I squeaz'd him dry, and his true seruice spent
               I pay'd with emptie handed Vsury,
               For like a Pol
                        •
                     itick, well taught, full growne,
               I felt no want, or fulnes, but mine owne.
            
            
               Besides; he had both power, and Subtiltie,
               And knew where I was weakest fortify'd,
               Then of my selfe so much in him did lie,
               That he had got the Raines to curb my Pride,
               Nor stood it with my kingly Dignitie,
               To proue his Slaue, that erst had been his Guide,
               For his owne neck he made the fatall noose,
               
                  They loue no Traytors, that doe Traytors vse.
               
            
            
               
               Great Buckingham thus pay'd with hatefull Frownes,
               I chose for him the Maleconted Mate,
               One that will kill his dearest Syre for Crownes,
               In hope t' aduance his long deiected State,
               The hope of Heauen, and paines of Hell he drownes
               In smiles of Fortune, and auspitious Fate;
               And of this Ranke▪ one Tyrrell I did frame
               To doe this deed, whose horror wants a Name,
            
            
               This vpstart Gentleman, being styl'd a Knight,
               VVhose Back, and Belly, had consum'd his Good,
               Puts forth his long-hid-head, into the light,
               To crowne his valour in this Act of Blood:
               Ages to come, a Catalogue may cyte
               Of such braue spitits, whose hated Crests doe bud
               VVith homicidiall honor; and doe beare
               A Sable conscience, in a Shield of Feare.
            
            
               And note what State was kept when this was wrought,
               The Close-stoole was my Seate most eminent,
               A filthy Carpet fits an ordur'd Thought,
               The Sences loathing, and Sinnes Excrement:
               So Tyrrell tooke som State, whose pride had sought
               Two loathed Sla
                     •
                  es, which o'ercloy'd Time did vent
               Into this Sinke of Shame, in which damn'd Fact,
               
                  Tyrrell commanded, and the Groomes did act.
            
            
               
               The Euen, before the Night, that this was done,
               The head-strong windes did rage with hydeous Storme,
               As red as Blood discends the fearefull Sunne,
               And Nature, had put on a dismall Forme,
               
                  Chaos was threatned by th'ecclipsed Moone,
               
               And Rauens, and S
                        •
                     rich-owles bode th'ensuing harme,
               Then burst there forth (whiles darknes shooke Hels Chaine)
               An angry Comet with a smoaky Traine.
            
            
               The fatall howre vsher'd by this Ostent,
               Astonish't all; and in the Princes bred
               Oraculous Presages of th' Euent,
               That they like Lambes were to the Slaughter led:
               Their spotlesse Liues must cleare the Element,
               The angry Comet thirsted to be fed
               With their hart bloods; they knew these stormes would cease,
               VVhen they were lodged in their Graues in peace.
            
            
               Thus they Diuin'd; and though by zealous Prayer
               They sought t'auoid the danger, then so neere,
               Yet such vaine hopes doe turne into despayre,
               For Fate respects nor zeale, Truth, Loue, nor Feare,
               Heau
                     •
                  ns causes knit, doe neuer breake their square,
               But runne directly to th'effects they beare;
               And though hard Fates can neuer be withstood,
               Yet Death confounds the Bad, life crownes the Good.
            
            
               
               Thus Heauens iust Law, order'd by vpright Hand,
               They that liue iustly, that true Course do runne;
               Which they that leaue, apparantly withstand,
               And doe pursue their owne Confusion:
               These innocents, being mark't for Angells Band,
               Keeping Heauens Course as constant as the Sunne,
               Although by my most bloody hand they fell,
               Yet in their Fall, they rose; I, Damn'd in Hell.
            
            
               These Deuilish Slaues, whose darke deeds fly the light,
               (When Sleepe, in binding deawes had steep't the Sences)
               With glaring Eyes, cloak't in the vale of Night,
               Rush't in, to act this Murder on the Princes;
               Whose horrid Semblance, Death might well affright,
               And whose attempt, euen Hell it selfe Conuinces,
               
                  Medusa's Adders in their Hayre were 
                     •
                  old,
               Not Gorgons Head more vgly to behold.
            
            
               As they approch the Bed where they repose;
               Their drumming Harts, panted their Feares Alarm's,
               To see the sweetnesse Nature did disclose;
               (that such Beauty should lye ope to harmes!)
               There twyn'd the Lilly and the blushing Rose:
               And as they clasp't like leaues) their Innocent Armes,
               They seemed in the obiect of such Glory,
               T'inuite some Pen to lyneate their Story.
            
            
               
               The Humors, and the Elements, combin'd,
               To forme in them, the Abstract of perfection;
               The Graces, in their sweet proportion shin'd,
               Whose radiant Beames, shot Loue, and fyr'd Affection,
               And if the outward Beauty from the Minde
               Receiue all Grace, all Luster, and Reflection;
               Then might one say, of eithers Spirit▪ and Feature;
               Heauen held the Pensill, and the forme of Nature.
            
            
               The Worlds Abridgement in this Beauty lay,
               Thus subiect to the hand of Tyranny;
               Whose light, from darknes might haue strooke the day,
               And with his Beames, dazled an Eagles Eye;
               Yet these damn'd Hell-Hounds had the hart t'assay
               To roule these Orbs vp in obscuritie,
               And pash to Chaos, their so faire built Frames,
               To sacrifice their Lymbs, in Funerall Flames.
            
            
               Now, in the Bed (which is the Type of Graues)
               And in dead Sleepe (the portraicture of Death)
               Those dregs of Men, this Spawne of Earth, these Slaues,
               Did bury them aliue, and stop't their Breaths,
               Where like a Sexton each himselfe behaues,
               To couer them with that which lay beneath;
               So left them sleeping in eternall Rest,
               Whose Sainted soules, now liue among the Blest.
            
            
               
               These Furies now are tortur'd with Despayre,
               And howle in horror of their murd'rous deede,
               They beate their Brests, and teare their Snaky Hayre,
               In their assured Torment to succeed;
               VVith sinfull Breaths they taint the pi
                     •
                  rest Ayre,
               And in their Faces eu'ry one may reade
               Guilt, mixt with Feares; too late, they finde too well,
               That though they breath on Earth; they liue in Hell.
            
            
               Now when I saw printed in Tyrrels Brow,
               These Characters of Death, and shamefull Gore,
               I bid him study for the best meanes how
               I might requite, or he might well Implore:
               But he, that did with Guilt enough endowe
               His wretched state; would neuer looke for more;
               But summing vp this Murder, with his Pride,
               He got the Diuell and all; so liu'd, so dyde.
            
            
               Thus without Feare, arm'd with Herculean Force,
               I saw this Hell, my Thoughts had shap't, and bred;
               If fearefull Hydra, had oppos'd my course,
               I should haue left the Monster neuer a Head:
               Or like Roomes Tyrant (with as small remorse)
               Thousand contracted Liues, haue Butchered;
               To raise my Glorie to this compleate Frame,
               And set my Foote vpon the Throate of Shame.
            
            
               
               Yet now my Li
                     •
                  e was conuersant with Danger,
               Feare, and suspition, did perturb my Sleepe,
               Th'apparant Hate of Men, stir'd vp my Anger,
               And charged Pistols, for defence I keepe,
               For since I had profest my selfe a Stranger
               To euery Good; in Blood, and sinne, so deepe,
               My Sores were to be rub'd, t' auoide their Harmes,
               Whom 
                     〈◊〉
                   sollicits, Circumspection armes.
            
            
               They that no Ill commit, no Ill need feare,
               And Truth is their best Armor of Defence,
               Ill comes not, when before it was not there,
               And Weapons fit a wounded Conscience,
               Tyrants, the priuie coate had need to weare,
               And euer waking keep their troubled Sence,
               So kept I watch, and stood vpon my Guard,
               
               My Steele still drawne, of mine own Shadow fear'd.
            
            
               Now the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Line, that scarse was seene,
               With Sword (insteed of Pen) begins to raze
               The Line of Yorke; whose Inke, is blackest Spleene,
               To blot my Glorie, and my Name, de
                     •
                  ace,
               The Frost bit Rose, now sprouts, and waxeth greene,
               Wanting but time to spred with wonted Grace,
               The white Rose, must be ioined with the Red,
               To propagate faire Stems, in one chast Bed.
            
            
               
               
                  Richmond, my Brothers Daughter to Espouse
               (The sweet Elizabeth) is ma
                     •
                  k't by Fate,
               VVhich to preuent, my Lyon Spirit I Rouze,
               VVith that faire Lyonesset Incorporate;
               Which though nor Lawes of God, nor Man allowes,
               Yet to establish, and secure my State,
               I sought with wilfull Lust, and powerfull Awe,
               To crosse the Banes, and ouer-rule the Law.
            
            
               First Buckingham (whose hopes were vainely 
                     •
                  ed
               To breake the Ice for Richmond with his powre)
               I march'
                     •
                   against, and (by good Fortune) sped;
               My Starres herein did smile▪ and his, did lowre,
               I prick't him kindly, he as kindly bled
               His ancient Loue; and so in happy howre,
               I pai'd th' arrerages of his lent Good,
               And had m' Acquittance sealed with his Blood.
            
            
               O Buckingham; thou wert too open Brested,
               And spent'st too freely to receiue thy Right;
               For of my State, by thee I was Inuested,
               A debt farre greater, then I could requite,
               Some States-mens Hands are shut; their Bounty Chested,
               And ill doe they abide those men in 
                     •
                  ight,
               That may vpbrayde with vnrequited Good,
               Such Bonds are seldome cancell'd, but with Blood.
            
            
               
               Next Anne my Wife (whose Being did deny
               My match, with my fayre Neece Elizabeth)
               Fell sodaine sicke with griefe, or Iealousie;
               
               And all my Loue would not preserue her Breath:
               I gaue her Medicines for Sterilitie
               And She grew fruitfull in the Bed of Death,
               Her Issue, crawling Wormes; and there she lyes,
               Whose loue, and life, loe thus I memorize.
            
            
               This was that creature that I woo'd, and wonn,
               Ouer her bleeding Husband, stab'd by me;
               Such different persons, neuer saw the Sunne,
               He, for perfection; I, Deformitie;
               She wept, and smil'd, hated, and lou'd, in one,
               Such was her Vertue, my Hypocrisie,
               Thus womens Griefes, nor Loues, are dyde in graine,
               For eithers colour, Time, or Men, can staine.
            
            
               For farther proofe, my Sister Queene I chose,
               Professing Truth, to her; t' her Daughter, Loue;
               Insinuating with such artfull Gloze,
               As if the God of Eloquence should moue;
               And notwithstanding all the banefull woes,
               She had sustain'd by me; I made her proue
               My Loues Attourney, furthering my Sute
               T' astonish Wonder; and strike Rumor Mute.
            
            
               
               By this I Instance, how these Fooles are caught
               With honors Baites; or tickled with their Praise,
               Whose flexible conditions may be wrought
               To any Forme; Subiects for Sports, and Playes;
               Angels they seeme, and are with Angels bought,
               Guilded corruption; Natures falsed Glaze,
               No meane in their Affects; in Passion mouing,
               No moment in their Teares; nor Faith, in Louing.
            
            
               Inconstant Sex; no sooner full, then wayning,
               In weakenes, dying; and imperfect, borne;
               Their scanted wils, like halfe fac't Moones complaining,
               Which to supply they make the Forked Horne:
               Nor hot, nor cold; now louing, then disdaining,
               The Fautors of Deceipt; of Truth, the storme;
               Like Cotton Buds, which none can bruise, or pull,
               But being put forth, like them they turne to wooll.
            
            
               Such were my Wyles, I could deceiue deceite,
               Guild Imperfections, with Imperfect Glorie,
               Building on Ruines my vncertaine State,
               Laugh at Oppression, from Prides Promontorie,
               I sooth'd my Pompe with an eternall Date,
               And in Ambition, perfected my Storie,
               Which VVord, let Fame to after Ages sound,
               As of my Life, the Pyramed, and Ground.
               
            
            
               
               And as a Taper play'd within the night,
               Where men doe firmely sit, or walke, or stand;
               Raiseth their Shadowes, to the places hight,
               Then to the Ground, in turning of a hand:
               Now it empai
                     •
                  es them, by the wa
                     •
                  ing light,
               And then extends their lengths, themselues beyond,
               So Fortune playes with Kings, and worldly States,
               She tosses, turnes, reares, and precipitates.
            
            
               As one that drinkes more then he can containe,
               He sur
                     •
                  ets in excesse, and duls his Tast;
               And then the Fume (spred through his Poares & Braine)
               He speakes his secret's thoughts, and seemes disgrast:
               Nor doth desist, till in his drunken vaine
               His Intellectuall powres are so defac't,
               That (loosing th'office of his Feete) he lyes
               Shamefull, and naked to all 
                     •
                  ober eyes:
            
            
               So I, in thirst of Glorie, Rule, and State,
               
               Drinking excessiuely, and past my fill;
               Swinging in Lust, and Thoughts intemperate,
               Drunke in Ambition, and my 
                     •
                  ensuall will:
               Was so transparent in my latest date,
               And all my Good, so swallow'd in my Ill;
               Th
                     •
                  t in my staggering Pride, and shamefull Fall,
               I grew a Monster, and a scorne to all.
            
            
               
               I, that once thought, that no man could be blest
               In moderate kinde of Humane blessednes;
               And in my Tyrannous licence did suggest
               To comprehend (in Pompe) all Happines:
               Gaue Reignes to Lust, and in my Will supprest
               The rule of Reason (mans sole Souereignesse)
               That to the Worlds Doome, still prefer'd mine owne,
               And pitcht my hopes, no lower then a crowne:
            
            
               I, that did make no conscience to Plot,
               And perpetrate, all Beastiall cruelty;
               That harrow'd Earth, and Hell for what I got,
               As if those Tipes would last Eternally:
               In Goodnes cold, in Mischiefe euer hot,
               And in my damned Tracts of Pollicie
               Had sowne mens Harts, and with vnfeeling Taints
               Did dye my Hands in Innocent blood of Saints:
            
            
               I, that could taint soules with corrupting Breath,
               And from their Brests roote Faith, and Pietie,
               Steeling their Spirits for Acts of closest Death,
               And suck the hart of their abilitie,
               Then raise fresh bloods, and set the dry, beneath,
               Fester'd, in conscience of their villany,
               Then rack them with delayes; reward with ayre▪
               
               And laugh to see them perish in despaire:
            
            
               
               I that at best, held Vertue, and Religion,
               No other Things, but well mixt Elements;
               Nor Vice, nor Ill, but H
                     •
                  mors Disposition,
               Depraued by the Bodies Instruments:
               Esteem'd the Soule subiect to Deaths corruption:
               Nor thought all these, but naturall Euents,
               And their disorder cur'd by Phisicks Skill,
               And nothing subiect to th'Eternall Will.
            
            
               Now did my Conscience, that lay smothered
               Vnd
                     •
                  r this Pile, of Damn'd Impietie,
               And seem'd (as with greene fuell Maistered)
               Conceall'd, and prison'd in Obscuritie;
               Shew'd, that by Sin, 'twas rather comforted,
               Then any way depriu'd of Facultie,
               And in their Flame did rage so much the more,
               By how much it did seeme restrain'd before.
            
            
               Now all my Acts of Murder, Sinne, and Shame
               (Bred by Ambition, and my tyrannous VVill)
               Appear'd vpon my Head like A
                        •
                     tn
                        •
                     's Flame,
               Or like a Beacon fyr'd vpon a Hill;
               Now Rumor, giues the Eccho to my Fame;
               Vprores, and Insurrections gin to fill
               All places vast; and now in feare, I start,
               To fall beneath the mountaine of my Hart.
            
            
               
               O how I curst my Aspick Flatterie,
               That shed such ve
                     •
                  ome in my Rationall Powre,
               I curst the Glasse that so corruptedly,
               Did shew the face of vice to smile, not lowre;
               Now for each priuiledg'd Mischiefe did I lye
               A Butt to Torment; and a fearefull Showre
               (By the Black vapor of my Sin being bred)
               With blood and vengeance swolne, hung o're my head.
            
            
               Thus, in the VVayning Splendor of my Pride,
               Compast with danger, and assaylde with Feares;
               And in my Thoughts, all Torments multiply'd,
               That might augment the burthen of my cares;
               I found my selfe so weakely fortifyde,
               Against the powerfull Battery of despaires;
               That I was plung'd into Hels deepe Abisse,
               
               Secluded from all comfort, Ioy, or Blisse.
            
            
               Nor did the ancient Poets idely faine
               
                  Erinnis, and the damn'd Eumenides;
               
               Since euen those Furies, in their Maske containe
               The Morall, of my tortur'd Tyranies:
               For th' Apparitions of ensuing paine
               So danted me with their Extremities,
               That I was rack't in terror of my doome;
               And made that present; which was but to come.
            
            
               
               Then dreadfull Melancholl
                        •
                     
                   did conuert
               My Nature, to the Temper of my Braine,
               Which soaked with my Spleene, disturb'd my heart,
               And through my body, spred a pois
                     •
                  nous Bane,
               It did confound my Sense, and eu'ry part,
               Each Muscle, Sinnew, Artire, Ioin
                        •
                     , and Vaine,
               
               Had lost their naturall working, and prepare,
               To set me it the high-way, to despaire.
            
            
               Such was the horror of my Malady▪
               
               Distract with feare, of that I was t' inherit,
               That it corrupted euery Facultie,
               Congeal'd my Blood▪ and dull'd my actiue Spirit,
               Thus my whole Nature 
                  
                     •
                  elt like Sympathy,
               
               With my despairefull So
                     •
                  le, for si
                     •
                  full Merit,
               For all the Functions of my Soule, and Sence,
               Were maymed by my wounded Conscience.
            
            
               My Reason dotes; my Soule did idle sit,
               VVanting fit matter of Intelligence:
               Organs, deprau'd, and stupifyde my Wit,
               My Vnderstanding, weake; vnsound my Sence;
               And euery part disabled, and vnfit,
               To comfort or relieue my Conscience,
               Hopelesse, and helplesse, all my powers agree,
               In Desperations Gulph to swallow me.
            
            
               
               And as we see the Eye, the Eare, or Sent,
               Affected long, and oue
                     •
                   vehemently,
               Retaine their Species in the Instrument,
               Though absent 
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                  he mo
                     •
                  ing qualitie:
               So the Internall Sence
                     •
                   strongly bent
               To fearefull Obiects of obs
                     •••
                  itie,
               To iudge of things by their depraued kinde,
               Giue Passion vigor, and make 
                     
                        •
                     eason, blind.
            
            
               The Sunne, the Moone, and Plan
                        •••
                     
                   of 
                     •
                  y Nature,
               So fearefully ecclipsed in their light:
               My inward darknes casting on my Feature
               A
                     •
                  semblance gha
                     ••
                  ly pale, and full of fright:
               My leprous Soule▪ deformed, as my Stature,
               Did in these Tragick Terrors seeme t' excite
               The thoughtfull presage of my Destinie,
               To be accomplish't in my Tragedie.
            
            
               Likewise my Name enter 'd in Hels black Roule;
               So infinite my Actions of Arrest,
               My grim 
                     •
                  ac't conscience ceazing on my Soule;
               And my Tormentor e
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   in my Brest;
               So not the minde alone, but 
                     •
                  ody whole,
               Equally feeling, and alike distrest;
               Such watch they kept; such clamor they did make;
               That waking, I did dreame; and sleeping, wake.
            
            
               
               Such was my Passion; of all faith 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
               VVhich should apply a Salue vnto my wound,
               That in my Minde, Hell onely was conceau'd,
               VVhich did all thought, and hope of Heau
                        •
                     n confound:
               Thus my despairefull 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   wea
                     •
                  'd
               The Web of my affliction; and I found
               My State so desperate, and my Sin so great,
               That no repenta
                     •
                  t meanes could expia
                     •
                  e.
            
            
               Should I haue fill'd the ayre with plain
                     •
                  s 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  ries;
               Haue wr
                     •
                  ng my hands in griefe; straynd blood, in feares;
               Eate into Marble with my still bent knees;
               And all the Center rotted, with my teares;
               Such was the clamo
                     •
                   of my vi
                     •••
                  ies▪
               
               And so importunate were my Despaires,
               That nothing (as I thought) would satisfie,
               Th'offended Iustice of the Dei
                     •
                  ie.
            
            
               The setled Center, eas
                     •
                  er might a
                     ••
                  ume
               The heauenly Motion that turnes euer round;
               Huge Whales might sooner fly with feathered plume,
               And Birds (like wormes) creepe on the ba
                     •
                  er Ground,
               Ere I could hope, or euer might presume,
               By my repentance, mercy to haue found,
               For prest with sin, and of all Grace bereauen,
               I could not lift one Thought so high as heauen.
            
            
               
               Not Saul, that (being possest) dyde Reprobate:
               Not Esau's selfe, that did his Birth-right 
                     •
                  ell;
               Not Iudas, mark't for veng'ance by his Fate;
               Not those which were deuoured quick to Hell;
               Not hardned Pharao, all as Desperate;
               Nor cursed, and forlorne Achitophel;
               
               Could be more surely seall'd, in Heauens iust doome,
               Then I, in conscience, for the wrath to come.
            
            
               Thus blasted with the Whirlewind of Gods Breath,
               And shaken, with the Terror of his wrath,
               Veng'ance aboue me, and Hell-fire beneath;
               So void of Grace, and so exempt from faith:
               What could I looke for but Eternall Death,
               Since all my life was progrest in that Path?
               Now did I fondly wish, in my Despayre,
               To be resolu'd to th' Element, of Ayre
            
            
               When drowsie Morpheus, with his Mace addrest
               My turbulent spirits, to a quiet Truce;
               My Thoughts, scarce gaue me sleepe; that sleepe, no Rest,
               Though bound my Sences, yet my Sinne was loose;
               For th' Images of outward Things (Imprest
               In common Sence) did (as it is their vse)
               Present vnto my waking Phantasie
               
               The horrid visions of my Tyrannie.
            
            
               
               For my 
                     •
                  ome
                     •
                  i
                     ••
                   feares (that wholy tend
               To 
                     •
                  xtacies▪ and 
                     •
                  roken sleepes, vnfound)
               Did to my 
                     〈◊〉
                  , black 
                     •
                  umes of horror send,
               Rais'd from 
                     ••
                  spare, and 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   ground;
               Whereon the 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   did apprehend,
               And forge such terrible obiects, that I found
               My selfe oft strangled through those dreames of Terror,
               Which shew'd my Death, and Hell, as through a Mirror.
            
            
               Such appa
                     •
                  itions frighted me in sleepe;
               My Conscience, vnappea
                     ••
                  d; my Sinne, still crying;
               These terrible Impressions were so deepe,
               That waking, I was Transt; and liuing▪ dying;
               I wish't I had beene made a worme, to creepe;
               Or from a worthlesse Egge, beene hatch't from flying;
               Or like proude N
                        •
                     buchadnez
                        •
                     r, to nourish
               My Beastiall Nature, and like Beasts to perrish.
            
            
               Thus Sinne, a venom'd Tooth from Hell did borrow,
               Which ranckled to the Death, with deadly Byte;
               I sorrow'd desperatly, because my sorrow
               Was all too late, to helpe my helplesse plight;
               I plow'd vppon my barren Heart, whose Furrow
               (Not deaw'd with teares; 
                     •
                  or sowne with Seedes, Contrite)
               Could yeeld no frute, but ranckned with Sinns Ayre,
               For hopeful faith, brought Thornes of sharp despaire.
            
            
               
               Damnations feare did make me penitent
               VVhich Reprobates may haue with Gods Elect,
               But Fayth and Grace, (whose ends are to repent)
               VVere farre remou'd, and absent in Effect,
               I knew my Sinne, with Sorrowes languishment,
               In Conscience sincking, and in horror wrak't,
               But that Repentance, which should saue and raise me,
               Iustice forbids me, and despaire denaies me.
            
            
               Now Engl
                        •
                     nds Genius doth begin to swell,
               VVhose spirit, long supprest, breakes out in Fyre,
               The Peeres doe stirr, the Commons doe rebell,
               Gyrles great with spleene, and VVomen sharpe with Ire,
               Old men take Armes, Children (new crept from Shell)
               Wrong, and Oppression, doe with Rage inspire:
               Factions now rend the State in seuerall parts,
               Swords in their hands, and vengeance in their hearts.
            
            
               
                  Richmond hath set his foote vpon my stand,
               Who out of many letts hath wrought his course,
               And like a Streame, which lower Ban
                     ••
                  es withstand,
               Swells o're his Bounds, and spreeds his flowing Sourse,
               
               The wrong incensed Peeres, augment his Band,
               And giue his weakenes, a resistfull force,
               Of those, that did my Tyrannous Yoake still beare,
               None lent their strengths in Loue, but all in Feare.
            
            
               
               Who in their staggering doubts of Warres euent,
               And to secure their Howses from Attaint,
               Did set a Coulor, on their forst entent,
               And with could Faiths, relieued my Hope as faint,
               Distracted were their Mindes, their Hearts were rent,
               Weake are the Powers that fight vpon Constraint,
               Of some I tooke firme Hostage, to assure them,
               And promisd others Mountaines, to procure them.
            
            
               From the could North, (summond by my Commaund)
               I had a Company of Frozen Hearts,
               Who seem'd the very Scar-Crowes of the Land,
               So poore they were, ill furnish't at all parts:
               These halfe Fac't staruelings, and this Bandles Band,
               These ragged outsides, and these tattered Shirts,
               Came as to warme them, nere the VVestern Light,
               VVith Mawes to feede, rather then Hearts to fight.
            
            
               These were the Souldiers that I kept in Pay,
               Such Fayndings neuer yet were prest with Coyne,
               Whose heauy lookes, their duller Spirits betray;
               To make hope falter, in my Warres designe,
               All sought to loose, rather then win the day,
               And seem'd more Richmonds part, then friends of myne,
               Yet these I term'd true Hearts, with falsed Stile,
               And hartned them with many a hartles Smile.
            
            
               
               And though enuiron'd with a darkesome Feare.
               Yet in my face, I forst a seeming light,
               Whose Substance crude, and could, I did out weare
               The day, in cares, in waking Howers, the Night,
               Vnsetled were my Motions, and did beare
               Vndoubted semblance of distracted plight,
               My Conscience prick't soliciting my mynd
               With Blood, for my most bloody deedes assignd.
            
            
               O how I band the Welch, with bitter spite,
               
                  Ap Thomas, Griffeth, Herbert, and their Traine,
               That with poore Richmonds handfull, ioyn'd their might;
               To take part with the Meane; and leaue the Mayne:
               
               But when they swore to our defensiue Right,
               With Sence reseru'd, they kept their Names from Stayne,
               For I Vsurpt, and had noe Right at all,
               Their Gardian Angells prompt their Rize; my Fall.
            
            
               Yet on I must with these my dangerous Friends,
               To try the Chance of vengeance threatning Warrs,
               Where guilt giues Terror, Terror Mischeefe lends;
               And mixe their Malice with my fatall Starres,
               The Deulish Fury in my Brest entends,
               In spite of danger and all opposite Barrs,
               To Cut this knot the mistick Fates conteyne,
               And set my life and Kingdome on this Mayne.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Richmond comes on, relieu'd with still supplies;
               VVhose firmest Faiths, giue hart to his iust Ayme,
               S
                     •
                  eeling the Back of his great enterprize,
               VVith Cambro-Brittaines, men of taintlesse Name,
               My strength, is trustles; his, in true harts lyes,
               And still encreaseth, going; like to Fame;
               Angels attend Him, with their imminent powre,
               Auspicious are his Starres, and mine doe lowre.
            
            
               The Prayers of old men, and the Nerues of young,
               Giue vigor to his Arme, and prompt his Spirit,
               Cur
                     •
                  es, and Rage, (through Tyrany and wrong)
               Attend my Action, and my hatefull merit:
               I faint in Millions; He, in hundreds strong,
               For not the oddes of multitudes inherit
               The victors Prize, since Warre (in heauens iust lawes)
               Is euer sway'd by Iustice of the cause.
            
            
               Warr's the Tribunall, where all deeds of Armes
               Receiue their equall, and their partlesse Doome,
               Not Fortunes Spels, nor Legions with their Charmes,
               But must giue Fate Preeminence, and Roome▪
               
               Though men, like Gyants, with their proud Alarm's
               Doe braue the Heau'ns; yet if Ioues Thunder come
               In awfull veng'ance downe, such pride he quailes,
               So, not presumption then, but truth preuailes.
            
            
               
               The bloody Field is pitcht; suruey'd the Ground▪
               
               The Centynels are plac't; Perdu's are sent,
               Souldiers entrenched, and encamped round,
               And in the midst aduanc'd my shining Tent,
               Counsels assembled, for directions, found;
               Aduantages propos'd, for Detriment,
               All Things dispos'd, night comes, strong watch wee keep,
               When weighty cares, doe summon me to sleepe.
            
            
               Now doth my conscience agitate my feares
               In visions, of my waking Phantasie,
               
               Now each particular action appeares
               A strong Appealant of my Tyrany:
               Murder sounds horror, in my deafned Eares,
               And all my deeds of damn'd impietie
               Presse to the Barr, where I receiue my doome
               Of death-Stabs heere, and infinite to come.
            
            
               Me thought I saw in those affrighting Dreames,
               My slaughtred Numbers round about my Bed,
               Op'ning their wounded Mouthes, in Crimson Streames,
               And powring Blood vpon my tyrannous Head:
               The Furies Brands (me thought) shed flaming Beames,
               To wast me in my passage through the dead;
               Where at Hels mouth, each howling spirit proclaimes,
               And ring my welcome, with their clamorous chaines.
            
            
               
               Me thought I saw, and heard the loathsome Plight
               Of dying Men; how bound in Frosts they lye,
               Swimming in cold sweates, and berest of Light,
               Their entrailes gnawne; pulse, stay'd, and veines drawne dry,
               Their ratling Throats; fur'd Tongues; their broken sight;
               Their gasping Breaths; their lookes deformitie,
               Their earthy sauor, in expiring Breath,
               O horrid Dreame! but O more fearefull Death!
            
            
               Me thought likewise, the dismall Rau'ns did croke,
               As I approch't my death, to passe the Graues,
               The Earth did shake, and coniur'd Tempests broke
               In hydeous noises from their Bellowing caues,
               Which threw downe Turrets; roots the stoutest Oake:
               Then from the clouds the Arme of vengeance waues,
               And giues the Signall to the bloody fight,
               Where thousand swords diuide me, and the light.
            
            
               These violent distractions broke in sunder
               The heauy Band, tha
                     •
                   bound my Sences fast,
               Whose frightfull visions made me wild with wonder,
               Yet vp I rose, then had I slept my last,
               And whiles with ghastly visage, I did ponder,
               Present, ensuing, and the Times long past;
               I started from my Trance with ragefull Teene,
               Taking a Dragons Spirit, a Tygers Spleene.
            
            
               
               And as the motions of all Naturall Things
               Proue swiftest in their Ends; more strong enclin'd;
               As Torrents roare, deriu'd from smallest Springs
               And gentle Blasts, doe turne to boystrous win
                     •
                  e:
               So I resolu'd to put on fierie wings:
               And in my End, adde Spirit to my minde,
               For yeelding Thoughts, befit the basest Slaues,
               
                  Kings should soare high, although they drop to graues.
            
            
               The Mornings Chanticlere proclaim'd the day,
               Whose lowring countenance vaild the God of light;
               
               Yet glistring Armor (spite of Mornings Gray)
               To valiant mindes, doe yeeld a cheerefull sight;
               The roll'd vp Ensigne, when it doth display,
               Giues Hart, and Coulor, to the Martiall wight;
               From Richmonds Armes, his harts took such bright shine
               But leaden Spirits, could take no life from mine.
            
            
               Now was my Battell rang'd on Bosworth Plaine,
               
               The Vantgard, order'd; and the Wings were set,
               
                  Norfolke (my Chieftaine) with much sweat, and paine,
               Temper'd my Frozen Harts, with his kind heate;
               
                  Surrey, and He, bore mindes that had no staine,
               Both well approu'd in Armes, and martiall Feate,
               Our Standards both aduanc't in open fight,
               Summons are giuen, to prepare the Fight.
            
            
               
               My Men with Souldiors Rethorick, I excite;
               Enforce the vildnes of mine Enemie
               Th'Iniustice of his cause, of ours, the Right;
               Our wealthy States; their desperate Pouertie;
               Their fainting Force; and our assured Might;
               Our liuing Honors; and their Infamy:
               So I concluded with these hartning Words;
               St 
                  George for England; and for me their Swords.
            
            
               Now rotten Sin giues ripenes to my Fate;
               And Ioue doth vaile the Curtaine of the Sky,
               Reflecting Beames of Fauor, and sterne hate,
               On Richmonds Conquest; and my Tragedie:
               
                  Heauens singing Motion (that deuoures liues date,
               The working Organs of the Deitie)
               Hast to my Period; when I must be throwne
               From height of Pride, to depth of Acheron.
               
            
            
               Signall is giuen; and the sound of death,
               Showts, Drums, and Trumpets deafen all our Eares,
               Brests, Buts for Shafts; and swords in flesh doe sheath,
               Horse, meet with Horse; and Speares are lin'd with speares;
               
               Blood, blends with Blood; & Breath doth mix with breath;
               Life, flies with life; and Beeres, are laid by Beeres;
               
                  Mazors to Bils, doe stand for Butchers Blocks,
               Fire, twin'd with Lightning, Thunder, ioin'd with shocks.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Bellona rag'd not so, as I did storme,
               My L
                        •
                     on Spirit hunts Richmond for my pray,
               I out-fac't death in his most vgly Forme;
               And through the thickest Shocks, I hew'd my way;
               My Spirit was like whirle-winde, and mine Arme,
               A pointed Comet▪ in this cruell Fray,
               Streaming forth Blood, and foming Rage, and Gall,
               Deathfull my spleene; my Fury, Funerall.
            
            
               Vnequall'd was my more then mortall Ire,
               Hels euer burning Lymbeck did distill
               The Spirit of Diuels, in my quenchlesse Fire,
               Wishing such power to damne, as hart to kill;
               My winged Horse did Regase my desire;
               Windes, in my Passion; th'Ocean in my Will;
               My cloud-congested Rage, dissolu'd like Thunder,
               My valour, more prodigious then VVonder.
            
            
               But soone my Archers slack their strongest Bent,
               My Souldiers Steele rebated; yet (more keene)
               They brandish Malice with one free consent,
               And against me, conuert their pointed Spleene;
               
                  Stanley, with Richmond, ioines his Regiment,
               Some fled, some stood at gaze, the rest were seene
               VVith idle action to maintaine the Field
               
                  Powre, faintly answer'd, argues Will, to yeeld.
               
            
            
               
               Then as I had attain'd the wished Ken
               Of Richmonds selfe, by noted Markes he wore,
               In bloudy sweate I spur'd through slaughtred Men,
               To quench my fierie Spirit, with his Gore:
               
                  Brandon (his valiant Standard-Bearer then)
               I slew; with stout opposers, many more,
               And with spent Blood being weake in eu'ry part
               I fail'd to set my Seale on Richmonds Heart.
            
            
               My Horse being slaine, with him I fell to Ground,
               And yet euen then was not disanimate,
               For my high Spirit, aboue my Flesh did bound,
               Scorning the limit of my mortall Date,
               Till with their thickest Troopes enclosed round,
               And wrastling manly with r
                     •
                  alignant Fate,
               They Character'd in wounds my Tyrannie,
               And thus perform'd my bloody Tragedie.
            
            
               My Braine they dasht, which flew on eu'ry side
               As they would shew my Tracts of Policie:
               
               My yeares, with stabs; my dayes, they multiplide
               In drops of Blood; t'expresse my Crueltie:
               They pierst my Hart; euaporating Pride,
               And mangled me like an Anatomie,
               And then with Horses drag'd me to my Tombe,
               Thus finish't I my Fate by Heauens iust Doome.
            
            
               
               Yee, that in stately madnesse of desire,
               Doe thinke your selues firme Center'd in your Spheres;
               
               Yee that (subiecting Sence) like Gods aspire,
               In rising Hopes, confounding headlong Feares;
               Behold in me, your suddaine quenched fire,
               To depth of Hell falne, from those lofty Stayres:
               
               Asswage your Thirst betimes; remit your height,
               For if yee fall y'are crush't with your owne weight.
            
            
               But if ye slight my Counsell: still feed lust,
               Pamper proud flesh; drinke sinfull Lethae free;
               Till Tyme and Death resolue your Trunkes to dust,
               Your Soules to Torments, Names to Infamy.
               And so farewell, for back againe I must
               Vnto the horrid shades of Destiny:
               Now doe I sinke, as erst in Pride I fell,
               And to leaue fame on Earth, thus diu'd to Hell.
            
            
               Now Englands Chaos was reduc't to order
               By God-like Richmond; whose successiue Stems,
               
               The hand of Time hath Branch't in curious Border,
               Vnto the mem'rie of thrice Royall Iames:
               
               An Angels Trumpe be his true Fames Recorder,
               
               And may that Brittaine Phoebus from his Beames
               In Glories light his influence extend,
               His Off-spring, countles; Peace, nor Date, nor End.
            
            Hac decies repetita placebit.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            Errata
                  •
               
            
            
               C. pag. 
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
               . 9. 
                  〈◊〉
                fo
                  •
                
               regard, Ibid. p
                  •
               : 7. 
                  •
               in. 5. way
                  •
               e, fo
                  ••
               
               vaine: F. 
               
                  〈…〉
                for feamelesse; Ibid. lin: 22 
                  〈◊〉
               
for loues. pag. 7. lin, 16. b
                  ••
               efull for b
                     •
                  nefull.
            
            
         
      
   