
      
         
            
               
               
               A PETITION TO THE KING.
            
            FOR AVTHORITY AND ALLOWANCE to expound the Apocalyps in Hebrew and Greek, To ſhew Iewes and Gentiles: that Rome in Cęſars and Pope, is therein ſtill damned.
            And for tranſlaters to ſet over all into other large-vſed tongues.
            1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO THE KINGS MAIESTY.
            
               SInce the time that the Ieſuites, my liege L. are buſy with our K. I held it my duety to ſhew readynes to combate with them. And becauſe the Apocalyps revealeth perpetual wrath of God vpon Rome for killing of Chriſt as was told by Balaam, Numb. 24. I made two Engliſh Commentaries vpon that book: one brief, to ſhew the harmony of the viſions: the other large: ſhewing how God in one word lappeth the whole tenour of Romes badnes. Becauſe it is not fit for me to ſteale a victory: I would make two Cōmentaryes moo: in tongues which the Pope is bound to vnderſtand: one in Ebrew vpon an Ebrew tranſlation: an other in Greek vpon Iohns owne ſtyle. The Hebrew would yeeld this commodity. The Apocalyps in two ſorts draweth all the law to it. It ſheweth Chriſt from all the law and prophets: and the curſe of Rome from all the old curſed ſince the ſerpent deceived Eve. This cannot be ſo well done in any tongue as in Ebrew: as Iohn tranſlateth Ebrew moſt ſtrictly: and this would winne millions of Iewes, which grone to be taught. Sr Iohn Forteſcue of honourable memory, receiving the Hebrew books which I printed vpon myne own charges, told the meſſenger cōfidently, that he would obteyn of the K. a very great ſtipend to go forward. But the very aged honourable gentleman was prevented by death: that the K. might ſhew himſelf willing of himſelf: in his enemies cauſe: that the Pope may be known of all Iewes that he is the taile of the old Dragon. So both Iewes and Papiſts ſhalbe together here benefited. Yea and Turks too. Of which argument I may here lay down part of a letter of the Lieger at Conſtantinople, written to M. Richard Stapers merchant. Theſe be his words.

                  
                     There

is a Iew taking himſelf learned, and hearing of the good fame of M. H. Broughton, hath invited him to make proof of his learning, by the due anſwer expected by the Iew from the ſayd Broughton. And therefore I require your worſhip; though as I heare, he be not in London, yet to cauſe the ſame to be ſent vnto him, and to procure anſwer: and if it were poſsible to cauſe him to come hither: being, as I heare, little esteemed there. I aſſure your worſhip it might turne to the benefit of Chriſtendom.
                     
                        Yours Barton.
                     
                  
               
            
            I was at Baſil when the Iewes letter, and the Ambaſſadours came to my hand: and I printed the Iewes letter: and others in Ebrew to Archb. Whitgift, and in Greek to the reſt of the Biſhops. And when they deſpiſed the cauſe: they and the like ſped never the better: and vpon myne own charges I printed, and ſcattered books. I wiſh your Maieſties charges to clear all the Bible ſo. And this much for Hebrew handling of the Apocalyps. Now for Greek. The Caeſars wickednes ſhould be told briefly: whereby they are ſo hatefull to God: from Greeks, beſt in their own tongue: and the Popes continuall trechery to overthrow the Eaſt Empire, ever ſince great Conſtantine left hated Rome: and I would expound in Greek all the Apocalyps for Graecia: and choſe out of their Commentaries all that is good. A Greek Biſhop told me they haue 30. which he will help me too, by the Patriarch. Wee haue but two printed. I requeſt your Maieſties authority and allowance for this paynes: even to hire alſo others to turn all to other tongues. This ſummer might at Baſil, where plenty is of Ebrew Printers, ſerve me for to expound in Ebrew, the Apocalyps: and the next, for the Greek: and the reſt of my life ſhould open the conſent of

all the Bible ſhewing Chriſt, in Adams tongue: which work would force Academiques to better agreement: as that litle which I haue done in Ebrew, is welcome to all ſorts. This I dare promiſe your M. by Gods help, that you ſhall never repent of liberality this way: and I moſt humbly requeſt your royall wiſdome to regard aright this moſt weighty cauſe.
            
               Your Maiesties humble ſubiect,
H. BROVGHTON.
            
            
         
      
   