
      
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST HIGH
AND MIGHTIE PRINCE
ELIZABET, by the grace of God
Queene of Englande, Fraunce,
and Irelande, defender of
the fayth. &c.
            
               I Preſented vnto
your Highnes (moſt
gracious Soueraine) the
Concent of the holy Storie:
endeuoryng there
to ſhewe, that all the
Booke of trueth breathed
from one ſpirite.
That coulde not be declared,
vnles the times
had a moſt exact playnnes: which I recorded to be certaynly
chayned, euen from the fall, to the Redemption.
For that, I layde downe the pure wordes of the text:
whereof an angel tolde: That from the ende of Iudahs
captiuitie 490. yeeres are pared out vnto our Lordes
death. Againſt this last part, a Learned man of Oxford
long diſputed: not denying the wordes to haue Gods authoritie
in them, nor yet differing from mee for their
beginning and ende. but affirming, That the Angell
meant no certaine tyme. And ſetting aſide the Angels

wordes, he affirmeth, That from Olympiades 560. yeeres
preciſely may be gathered by the Greeke affayres: And
going on by the Iewes common weale, maketh a partitiō.
He maketh the Temple (a marke moſt famous) the limit
of both partes: as I had done, but not in lyke tyme.
From Zorobabel and Ioſuahs returne from Babel, he
maketh yeeres an hundreth and ſeauen vnto the buylding
of the Temple. There I ſay that ancient Ebrewes
vniuerſally, ancient Greekes vniuerſally, and Latines
moſt generally olde and late, keepe them within 32. yeres,
and that Scripture and lyues of all famous men agree
with that. After the buylding of the Temple, are by
him to our Lordes death 453. yeres: which I wyll grant
him, and fiue more. In this laboure of his I blame his endeuour
of two generall errours: That he diſanulleth the
propriety of the Angels wordes, and affirmeth, that the
returned from Babel lyued 107. yeeres to buylde the
Temple. He read twelue monethes, as his hearers triumphed.
Some of his Lectures he ſent me, by which I might
iudge what matter could be in the reſt. I could haue wiſhed
that he woulde eyther haue ſpoken where I myght
reply, or haue printed his opinions, that rumors myght
not preuayle aboue iudgement. I haue printed many ſeuerall
workes againſt him. The ſumme of them is this:
That all his gaynſaying is extreamely erroneous: and
that he hath not blamed with any colour of ſounde learning,
one worde of my Booke. Thoſe ſmall workes of my
Defences for our Religion, and common trueth, oppugned
by one pretending peculiar differing from me: who
for theſe two poyntes haue all Nations, Religions, and
Studies, on my ſide: Them I humbly commende to your

Highnes, that they may be cenſured by ſome Learned,
countenanced as trueth requireth, and conſidered according
to the honour of your gracious gouernement.
A priuate cenſure hath paſſed betwixt vs all ready.
For my Lord Archbyſhop of Canterburies grace, was
choſen vmpier, and examined both ſides argumentes.
I hope I may with modeſty pleade his teſtimony, though
for my ſelfe, yet in a publique cauſe: where it is good for
all to knowe the full ſtrength of the trueth. His Grace
did wholly approue the Concent for euery whit: where
his wiſedome ſaw Heathen (that deceaued Diuines)
confuted moſt plentifully, by moſt ancient Heathen of
their owne kinde, and vniuerſally by all Iewes. And touching
former Chriſtians folowyng Gentiles on Daniel,
folowing Iewes in Ezra, his Grace ſaw them holpen from
errours, by their owne graunt: that when the D. and I
ioyne iſſue for the ſpace betwixt the Alter and Temple:
Prophane heathē haue there no worke: but olde Diuines
Ebrew, Greeke, Latine, tell him, that he went very farr,
further then they woulde wiſh him. And touching croſſing
the Angels propriety, I can not thinke that Europe
beareth one learned Chriſtian, or that Iury (which trembleth
at Gabriels oration) hath now one man, that holdeth
the number vncertaine. I thinke his Grace will tell
your Highnes ſo much. And your Maieſties ſignification
of your Princely determination, woulde more breake
young brauing Studentes, whom reaſon in ſuch vnexpected
ſoyles can not bende. I greatly reuerence my learned
aduerſarie, and commende him, that he woulde not
haue all libraries ſet on flame by fire of iudgement in few
wordes, without tryall in one twelue monethes fight.

But I ſhoulde more commende him now, if at the laſt
he woulde tell, how playne the Scripture lay alwayes,
though no heathen before ſetled Iubilees aright with the
Chronicle. His fame of Learning, and my more confident
reſistance, maketh many thinke that the Scripture
is hard, where our long labours differ. The fault is vntolerable
in the one of vs two, eyther in him or in mee:
and the faulty ſhoulde be forced to yeelde, that none
thinke amiſse of Gods worde. I refuſe not to abyde all
diſgrace, yf my trauels be not founde true for the ſtory,
profitable for the quietnes of the ſtate, and fit for a Prince,
reigning in theſe weſt endes of the earth, the poſsesſion
of Chriſt. Our Marchantes that paſſe ouer all Nations,
can not carry into the Eaſt more noble marchandiſe
from the Weſt, then skil of teaching Greekes, vpon what
occaſion, euer hitherto they miſſed 1500. yeeres in 4000.
and marred all the holy ſtory, and loſt religion: and cauſed
the Chriſtian Arabians to follow and fayle alike.
And that poynt hath been hence firſt opened, in
that lytle worke to your Maieſtie, and in a further explication
of it. Likewyſe, where by the tyme and kinred
of Chriſt, they may moue any Iewes: there, I truſt, that I
may affirme, without chalenging more then due, that to
your Highnes firſt, both poyntes were declared in full
and conſtant Concent. What the paynes hath been to
contriue vnto agreement ſo many moſt intricate pointes,
as for this harmony of Scripture haue been ioyned, from
eaſt writers of hard and diuers tongues, and ſubtilties:
not Ebrew onely, but Syriaque and Chaldean, in ſundry
Dialectes from Greekes and Latines of all ſortes, auoyding
the errours of all, bringing nothing but matters of

difficultie, and all iudged faultleſſe: any may iudge, that
conſidereth but the hardnes of the leaſt of theſe ſtudies
ſeuerally. The payne is augmented by the greatnes of the
charges: not mainteined by great allowance of Diuinity,
but gotten through Ebrew skill, and ſpent on Diuinity:
though it be a rule of God and man, that none warre on
their owne charges. Yet duetie bindeth all men to further,
as they can, celeſtiall knowledge. But paynes in this
ſort, loſeth much of the due encoragement. And ſome
encreaſe of grieſe I felt, that when I had a meaning to
looke to my ſelfe by other meanes then Diuinity: I was
requeſted by one of your Maieſties honorable Counſellers,
a Diuine, to take rather your Highnes preferment:
the delay whereof hath hindred myne owne courſe.
But all this may ſoone be cured, when it is knowen to
your gracious care ouer Learning.
            
               Your Maieſties
moſt humble Subiect
Hugh Broughton.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            An Epiſtle ſent vnto the Archb.
of C. and D. Elmer then B. of
London, choſen vmpires touching
the D. that read againſt the Concent
of Scripture, and the Author
of that Concent.
            
               MY duetie remembed to your
Grace and Lordſhyp. It is knowen
to all the Realme, with what
vehemencie and care D.R. labored
to proue, that a Concent
of Scripture for certaintie of
Chronicle coulde not be made.
By reaſon of his former credite, he hath drawen
many to deny that, which they alwayes helde:
& to be againſt them ſelues, to countenance him,
and to diſgrace mee. I thought ſmall skill might
ſerue in an Apologie for all men: and was ſo bolde
as to pronounce him more groſely deceyued,
then euer I knew any man. And content coulde
I haue been, to haue tryed by diſputation, or by
printing: not minding to leaue off, vntil my booke
to her Maieſtie (which he laboreth wholly to diſgrace)
ſtandeth by open iudgement, or falleth to
my continuall diſgrace, and laſt paynes in ſtudie.

When he had long read to proue that Mardochai
was not of Iechonias captiuitie, and had made many
commende his cauſe (we both graunt that to
ende our ſtrife) and they being called to reade the
text, loathed their owne inconſtancie: Yet then
this was tolde me, that ſome Oxforde men required
anſwere of me. Therevpon I wrote to D. Robinſon,
Prouoſt of the Q. Colledge, certaine Theſes,
which might ende the cauſe: requeſting his
alowance, or reiection: with this addition, that I
thought it iniurious that Oxforde men ſhould require
me to defende that, which they euer helde:
vnleſſe they woulde proteſt, that eyther their
mindes were altered, or that they were vnable: and
of D. Reynoldes I wrote, that he was extremely culpable,
in blaming me for differing frō him: where
none euer was, nor wylbe of his iudgement; and
by his owne wordes he is vtterly condemned.
Vpon this, D. Reynoldes commeth to London to
me, ſhewing that he was willing to take any iudge:
and both we agreed vpon your Grace, & you my
L. B. of London, that we might haue the cauſe
fully ended, without partialitie to the credite of
either, clearely to the glory of God, and brightnes
of his trueth: That whether ſoeuer hereafter ſhould
make any ſtir in the cauſe, he ſhoulde be openly
culpable by all cenſures. My matter is opened in
my Booke of Scripture Concent in Gabriels oration
Dan. 9. in the Preface, and at the yeere of the
worlde 3470. My accuſation is, that D. R. vniuſtly
blamed that, as all particulars depending therevpon:

which tende through the olde Teſtament,
yea from Moſes to our Lord his aſcention. To
all which courſes, I blame him as iniurious. Imoued
him to ſende to your Grace and Lordſhip,
the booke of his Lectures. I trow, reaſon wil moue
him to do ſo much, yf he meane to defende him
ſelfe. I haue ſent herewithall a briefe in Theſes
and ſhort declarations, to giue an inſight to the
matter: a copie whereof I coulde wiſh D. R. yf
he would: as I would gladly giue him any thing
for a Booke of his whole Lectures againſt mee. If
theſe be not ſufficient, I am ready by Lecture,
Diſputation, or Printing, to open any poynt hid
in my cauſe. Thus requeſting your Graces and
Lordſhips free report to her Maieſtie, and my L.
Treaſurer, touching my Booke wherefore we
ſtriue: after your conuenient leaſure: I humbly
commende your Grace and Lordſhip to the
ſpirite of trueth.
            
               London. Nou. 4. 1591.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the worſhypfull and learned,
the Vicechauncelour, and
others the gouernours of
learning-houſes in the Vniuerſitie
of Oxeforde.
            
               LFarned Fathers, 
you know that I
put foorth ſundry defences of my
doctrine, touching the harmonie
of Scripture, to cleare my booke
which I wrote to her Maieſtie:
that I might proue my ſelfe not
vnaduiſed, in offering that doctrine
to her Highnes: but carefull
of duetie to the Church and ſtate. And God is my iudge,
that I had deſire and hope therein, to haue aduanced not
a litle the knowledge of Chriſt, the peace of the Church,
and honour of all humane good learning. My defenſes I
hope, proue my cauſe to be ſounde. And not onely that,
but a more playne dealing vſed, then I haue founde from
your Studentes. I wyll touch what I wrote: and your
mens iniuries: and require your cenſure. Firſt the treatiſe
of Mardochai, wrytten without open noting any
perticuler aduerſarie, proouing all Churches and Synagoges,
and the natiue iudgement of all playne folke, to
be of my ſyde, myght haue quietly appeaſed all ſtryfe, or
haue dryuen all you to haue defended your owne cauſe.
Moreouer I, though I ſtoode in poſſesſion of the ancient
opinion, and by that onely myght diſgrace the replyer,
conſented to abyde arbitrement, which commonly
would part ſtakes. Beſides, I chayned holy teſtimonies
for the ſeruice of Shemeſh, vnto that bleſſed ſeruice of
redemption, that the cauſe myght match the Sunnes
brightnes in the ſimpleſt ſight: and the ſpeach of euery

part appeare of one tenour in phraſe: that he which wold
be tropique in one poynt, ſhould be guilty of threatning
the lyke to all. Some learned ſtrangers, thought that
paynes the beſt of mine. But ſome ſayd, that your D. diſdayned
to anſwere that: being whole the expreſſe worde
of God. Such reuerence holy Euthyphrones gaue Gods
worde. Beſides, your D. affyrming, that there was not a
Chronicle in the Bible, diſputed vpon Abrabams tymes,
and the Iudges, to proue them vncertayne. I marueyled
what he ſhould meane to diſturbe the trueth, in that moſt
famous place: where God vpon Terahs death, bagan a
new accumpt from Chriſtes promiſe. The Sunne differeth
not more from the dimmeſt Starre, then that
poynt differeth from obſcuritie. And the ancient Grekes
ſaw it ſo wonderfull a matter, that Moſes ſhould tell of
Terahs death, telling in the eight aboue onely all their
yeeres: that to hide the wonder, they put in eight tymes,
and he dyed, S. Stephen and Philo in Abrahams peregrination
might haue tolde your D. that antiquitie therein
made no doubt. Neyther did euer any Englyſhe differ
from me for S. Stephens wordes. For the Iudges times, my
Booke woulde haue tolde him by perticuler accomptes,
where S. Paul bringeth 18. ſtories to one worde: that no
Virginalles were better in tune, then that harmonie of
time: though your D. would needes be buſie with me
for the ſeauen yeeres of Conqueſt, and the ſeauen Iubilees
to Samuel: feauen Seauenties to Nebucadnezars warre, the
ſeauenty of Captiuitie, and thence the ſeauen Seauenties.
But for Abrahams Promiſe, I moſt labord to reforme
him: that he might not preuayle to marre the two moſt
heauenly Promiſes, and nobleſt ioyntes of all the Bible:
that, and the other to Daniel. In a diſputation vpon Melchizedek.
I conueyed a redreſſe of his opinions: which
becauſe ſome litle marked, afterwardes I graued in braſſe,
by reaſon of ſome Pictures, a view of the whole Bible,

freendly amending his breaches of all the buylding.
This alſo being vnregarded, directly do I reproue your
Studentes, as denying the Redemption by a ſtrong conſequent:
who holde, that it fell not out in the time properly
tolde: whereas men and Angels wyll holde, that
otherwiſe it coulde not be from God: and the Iewes
ſeeke no more colorable defence then to proue, that the
proper time cannot be proued to agree with the prophecie.
Therein alſo I founde your Studentes enemies to
Gods trueth, as before: and bitter, becauſe I liken them
to Nero, harping at their owne cities flames. Hearing of
their rage againſt my cauſe, and mee for that, I wrote a
ſmoth treatiſe of the whole time, with fuller handling of
euery ioynt, as though I had no aduerſary: with a Preface,
telling what ſome others thought of him, whom yours
do ſo much deſpiſe: thinking that among indifferent
Athenians Eſchines muſt giue leaue to Demoſthenes, extreamely
accuſed, to proue how for all his times, others
woulde haue made him a garlande. Thus I haue tolde
what, and why I haue printed. Now for the next poynt,
I thinke it not amiſſe to call your Studentes dealinges to
accompt, and to requeſt, what Chriſtian defence they
can make, that the pleaſure which they tooke in ſpeaking
againſt the trueth, and the defender, may be bitternes to
them in hearing a recompence, I wyll not complayne
what hinderances and griefes they wrought me: but call
them to accompt barely, for bad dealing.
            
                Firſt, your D. taught in his firſt ſpeach, that Papiſtes
might haue helpe by my doctrine, Choroebus harnes, in
his lecture Cxvj. where al our nation in the Geneua bible
are of my minde: and from Choroebus his Olympiades
are counted: and they ſhould be Choroebus harnes.
            
                He confuteth mee for that which he no leſſe then I
writeth: that the 490. yeeres are begunne from Cyrus
firſt, and are complete at our Lordes death, and meaneth

to finde me ſenſeleſſe: not opening to the worlde
how through his. xii. monethes paynes, he confuteth
himſelfe. Quo quid ſol vidit vnquam mir abiſius?
            
            
                He confeſſed to mee, that he had not ſtudied theſe
matters: yet tooke vpon him to diſgrace me in abſence,
making himſelfe accuſer and rudge.
            
                He promiſed me to yeelde, yf he ſaw reaſons. When
they are ſhewed, whoſe fault is it, yf he wyl not ſee?
            
                You know that I charge him of ſtriuing agaynſt all
men, art, and posſibility: that wyll not be diſproued.
            
                A D. of yours tolde him thus when I was in Germany
1590. Inibis paruam gratiam a Chriſtianis qui conatus es
hanc prophetiam Danielis labefactare. Praeterea qui iſtic mos
eſt in vebi in abſentem: ille cui contradicis iam eſt in media
Germania. Adhaec vis aduerſari omnib. Nos omnes ſumus
in eadem ſententia.
            
            
                Any myght maruayle how euer he durſt confute a
particuler man for the vniuerſall opinion: that in his
xij. monethes gayneſaying, he can not bring one ſillable
faultie againſte the graunt, and good of our preſent
Religion, and Diuines. VVhether meaneth he to haue
his aduerſaire and all the Realme ſenſeleſſe, that cannot
marke this? All men know that he hath made many
blaſpheme the trueth vnawares: who woulde rather
die, then do ſo willingly. If in warres a man ſhoulde
fight againſt them who hire him, and giue him autheritie:
it would be looke vnto. It is no more lawful in
learnyng to confute all the learned, and learnyng of
the prſent ſtate: and to do it by ſtealth, it cannot
agree with the corage of a learned Chriſtian. VVhile
the Sunne ſhyneth, herein he can not be defended.
            
                Touching the pretence that antiquitie is of his ſide,
a ſincere minde ſhould ſoone acknowledge, how that
is turned againſt him. Thus it ſtandeta. 1500. yeeres
writers are in the generall on his ſyde (ſauyng that all

Ebrewes al their troupes, millions are againſt him) but
olde Greekes & Latines are once with him, yet turned
againſt him thus: 230. yeeres Iudab was vnder Perſia,
ſaith antiquitie. Part the time, ſay I, by the Iewes common
weale: on part from Iudahs returne, or the Perſians
Monarchie, vnto the building of the Temple by
the 49000. returned. VVhat doth antiquitie make
that time? 18. yeeres: very well, I wyll graunt that all,
and 14. yeeres more. Now from thence to Alexander
the great, the D. cannot complaine that I make it ſhorter
then he doth: and therein antiquitie can helpe him
nothing, where he moſt iuſtly doth damne it as in particuler
other ſtories: antiquitie damneth the errour of
it ſelfe. VVhy may not I do ſo? Now if I proue that
antiquity al euery one man that euer wrote vpon ſome
one ſufficient poynt, is of my ſide: what an iniurie is it
to all the worlde, ſo to ſet a face vpon defences damnyng
of hym, VVhy woulde not he playnely tell at
the firſt thus: 1500. yeeres wryters are with A. C. for
the Temple, that 49000. men at the returne ſhoulde
buylde it, as all the Talmudiſtes holde at 18. after the
returne, and not 107. But yet he wyll confute all ancient
preuayling opinions. An oratour of plaine dealing
ſhould not enter an action againſt Cteſipho, where Demoſthenes
commeth principall.
            
                An other vnhumane par of this kinde he ſhewed,
in ſaying, that in this phraſe Ezra filius Saraiae: the
terme Filius, Sonne, deceaued me: where by him it
ſhoulde be Abnepos: the fiſt from him. I pleade that I
am ſure ſo it is: if it were not ſo, marke how he confuteth
all the worlde: Hebrewes, all the millions that
folow the Talmudiſtes in Aboth, and al their conſentes
in Seder Olam, their common regiſter, and in Rambam,
in their ſucceſions, and in Sepher Mitzuoth gadoloth:
namely after them I archi, Abrabbaneel, Kimchi. None

are to the contrary (but Zakuto forgetting himſelfe, for
one diſcent.) Ierome is of the ſame minde: which thing
your D. ſhoulde haue profeſſed: So be our learned
men, Bullinger Pellican, Lauater, Lyra, and Stella, with the
generall opinion of Rhomiſtes: and no Diuine of
Englande, to my knowledge, euer was of any other
mynde. But contrary all helde the fourth of Ezra a
witty Booke, wherein Ezra (as borne where I ſet him)
is a Prophet 30. after the burnyng of Ieruſalem. This
was not fayre play, to blame all in deede, and pretende
nouelty in one. As he talkyng of Ezra, ſayd, that I
ſhould do wel to confeſſe my ouerſight: ſeeing he, not
I, is ouerſcene, he ſhould remember, Patere legem quam
ipſe tulenis: And to tell plainely, how all be againſt him.
If Mercerus were aliue, who vpon Aggai maketh Ezra
ſonne to Saraias, he woulde maruel why any ſhoulde
thinke otherwyſe. I aſked M. Fra. Iunius, whoſe ſonne
he thought Ezra? He anſwered, who dare deny him to
be ſonne to Saraias. Now the confesſion of M. Iunius
is litle leſſe agaynſt your D. then his owne. And yfall
antiquitie make Ezra lyue 50. yeeres more then the
Perſians raigne: your D. wyl confeſſe, that by antiquitie
my cauſe ſtandeth, and his falleth.
            
                The vniuerſal conſent of the French, in their edition
1588. Is fully on my ſide, and expreſly, where
Ezra is ſonne to Saraias vpon I. Ch. 6. 14. relyed vpon
Filius Ezra 7. I. as I tooke it: whom all, he confuted,
and agaynſt the ſame his hearers triumphed, when
they ſought onely my diſgrace. If none euer were of
his mynde for vncertayntie in Daniels 490. agaynſt
me, nor for Ezra, why am I onely blamed? or what reuerence
of men, do his wordes beare? And this one
poynt (where al the worlde is on my ſide) Ebrewes al,
Greekes al, Latines al, ouerthroweth al his Chronicle
and ſtrife: and as he ouerturned al religion, in framing

an vncertayntie for the Angels number: So when he
feigneth Ezra abnepotem Saraiae: he might as wel giue
a new Bible from his authority. S. Auguſtine ſayd that
Ezra was borne in Captiuitie. And ſo he might: but
begotten before, as poſthumus. And any tyme of the
Captiuitie woulde ſerue my turne. But neuer any was
towarde his minde.
            
                VVhen the french heare that al their iudgement
is diſgraced, their commending of Daniels 490. for a
rare iewel, for the certaine time of our Lord his death:
& likewiſe for Ezra, by one that brocheh a new opinion
from his owne authority, pretending to confute
one man, what wyl they ſay? Not Caluin only, and other
wholly my partners, nor Iunius and Scaliger, onely his
partners once, but al the nation is of him confuted, and
al nations of the earth. And I might turne ouer the
cauſe to others, whoſe hand was in it before mine.
            
                And for my learned friende I muſt needes confeſſe
this much, that when he hath his owne ſide, and al the
worlde ſtyl againſt him, and yet hopeth of a victorie,
he hath a moſt valint courge. But I, as one In Homer,
would wyſhe courage not to exceede ſafety. So for
Mardochai al Churches, and natiue iudgement: for Daniel
and Ezra, euery ſeueral man is agaynſt him. Now
it wylbe an hard demaunde, whether it were better to
haue al Vniuerſities with Helice and Bura, or peſtered
with Studentes, as M. Doctors hearers, who triumph
that manifolde teſtimonies of all the worlde, brought
to prooue the Sunnes ſeruice recorded vnto the Redemption,
haue bin confuted among them by their
owne authoritie and courage? The Sonne neuer ſawe
the lyke dealyng.
            
                But tochyng your D. I woulde gladly ſhew him
all reuerence, not hynderyng fayth.
            
                Iniuries of his hearers muſt be recorded: whereof

one Bacheler of D. meeting (1589) at Toceſter with one
H. T. of London, and a Miniſter of Lancaſhire, who
founde comfort by my paynes: that B. ſayd, Qur D. R.
hath confuted all that Booke: yet he could tell no one
thing, but ſayd, that he had that booke, and coulde vnderſtande
nothing. How diuinely he pleaded ignorance
in his owne language and profesſion, I let other
iudge: yet he would be a Bacheler of diuinitie.
            
                I wyll ioyne a late like part. M. Koph told, that of my
Apologie all you D D. thought the ſame, How well,
others know. If vntruly, you muſt blame him. Two
of you, one in writing, the other in ſpeach ſent me, tell
the contrary, that no one argument can be anſwered.
If he haue a deſire to winn fame for reſiſtyng the hart
of Religion Gabriels lampe of all Scripture, he muſt be
cenſured as a Iulian or Lucian. But I haue ſome better
hope of goodnes in the man, after that your D. publiſheth
his recantation. And I truſt, he wyll regarde the
common trueth, & Gods honour, more then his owne,
Neuer any ſo diſgraced Gabriel, as his lectures do.
            
                A like part, hurtfull not to me, but to your Scholers
fame, I wyl here ioyne. At his readinges 1589. vpon
my going to Germany, by ſome of your young heades
it was blazed ouer all London, Omnibus & lippis notum
& tonſoribus, that your Doctors learned reading droue
me away. A Damaſell put in Bridewell for refuſing
our Churches aſſemblies, vpon mention of my iudgement,
could reply, that your D. droue me away. Yet I
had ſent him worde afore by two of New Colledge,
that if he were not foylde, I would neuer more handle
penne: and a ſharper warning by M. Kennel, by which
he made him make the tyme 490. yeeres, iuſt as I did,
and daſh all his former paynes. VVoulde any of you
take patiently ſch ſauage iniuries, as to abide opprobrious
ſpeches, where the confuter proueth good, the
cauſe of the confuted?
            
               
                An other part no leſſe groſſe, or rather fully the
part of a bad man, I can not omit. A. M. of art of your
breede, being at London on Thames 1590. in a Bote
with one M. A. Cot. and others, ſayd, that I had yeelded
vnto your D. for Mardochaj: that not he, but Kis
was the captiued. Then one knowing the contrary,
ſayd. Are not you aſhamed to behe one ſo, that the
laſt weeke openly read with cleere reaſons to the contrary.
Areye paſt ſhame? I hen ſayd the M. of his art:
You in London ſpeake ill of M. D. R. and why ſhould
not we of Oxford ſpeake ſo of M. B. Yf this muſt be
ſo, I muſt requeſt all the graue of our nation, to admit
neuer any Oxford teſimony againſt mee.
            
                The lyke part of one ſpeaking to certaine Counſellers,
when the Court was at Oxford, I put in print,
how one of yours ſayd, that I was aſhamed of my
cauſe, and yeelded vnto your D. His eyes might haue
tolde him, that I wrote otherwyſe to all Chriſtians,
and ſpecially to ſome Honorable, in an other opinion.
The like part a third man playde.
            
                An other borne in Hereforde towne, of B. N. C.
told one thence in Paules, that his hart reioyced to ſee
how your D. flouted mee, as promiſing to lende my
Rabbines, and after for feare, breaking promiſe. If your
D. did ſo, this much I muſt tell him, That all who
know both our ſtudies, wil ſay, that I haue ſpent more
yeeres, then he hours in the principal Rabbines. It may
be founde that neuer any Rabbine was of his minde
for the cauſe then in ſtrife of Mardochaj, nor againſt
mee. He deemed that he had the Chaldy Paraphraſt: by
which he was moſt notably condemned: and thought
that he had Aben Ezra, but was deceyued. By all argumentes
that can be brought foorth from any Rabbine
vpon Scripture, or either Talmuds, I trow he ſhal
finde his condemnation ſure. Iupiter and Mercurj
               
might ſoner make Amphitryo and Soſia beleeue others
to be them ſelues: then he make any from Rabbine
recordes belecue Kis not Mardochaj to be of the Captiued.
Floutyng from your men I can not ſtay: but I
can ſhew to others, that they haue no more ſtay for
trueth in theſe ſtudies, for the holy ſtory, then Vlyſſes
ſhyp had ſtay in a tempeſt, when he knew not where
ſtoode eaſt or weſt. I cannot abyde to ſloute, and I
am ſory that your D. woulde be counted pleaſaunt
that way. But for ſad trueth, the blinde may ſee all
kindes of ſtudy turned agaynſt him, euen ſuch as in
which he put al his truſt and confidence.
            
                His fayth ſtayed vpon Olympiades: and by them
he woulde gather 560. yeeres preciſely. But they are
turned agaynſt him: and Phlegon taketh part with my
ſyde: in whom yf he reſt not, then I ſhew that Thallus,
Caſtor, Phlegon, Timaeus, Philiſtus, Xenophon, Laertius,
Africanus, Clemens, Triclinius, Soſigenes, Pamphila, Apollodorus,
Plutarch, and ſuch, differ ſo exceedingly one
from an other, and from them ſelues, hundrethes of
yeeres for famous matters, touching Olympiades, that
one myght wonder how your D. coulde miſſe, to ſee
that by them Cyrus myght touch Iudas Machabeus:
Aggai and Zachary goe afore Daniel and Ezekiel: and all
heathen antiquities be brought vnto an infinite Chaos.
Likewyſe he myght haue ſeene how by prophane
Greekes the Perſians myght be ſayd (in Clemens) to haue
reigned 500. yeeres, or bare ten yeeres. He ſpent his
tyme not in theſe ſtudies. And I commende his courage,
that durſt prouoke one readier of youth in this
tongue, then in any. He lytle looked that 50. of 80.
in Erat
                     •
                  ſthenes accompt, cited by M. Ioſeph Scal. ſhould
be cut off. For, twixt Cyrus & X erxes. He leſſe loked
to haue all the worlde with Iude to proue this. Lykewyſe
thence he marked not, that Iſocrates maketh

               Athens principality 25. ſhorter then Lycurgus doth:
(Wherein I coulde wyſhe it to be no more ſhortened.)
Nor marked how Athenianes, Andocides, and Aeſchines,
recken for thoſe tymes 30. where Thucidides and Xenophon
make but 14. Likewyſe Aeſchines ſcholerſhyp vnder
Socrates, and his warfare vnder Alcibiades, and death after
great Alexanders (the doubtful poynt) recorded from
Demetrius Phalereus: this wyll make Lyſander neare Alexander,
then Olympiades accompt about 30. yeeres,
though ſome Olympiades proue the ſame: for K K.
Philip & Mauſolus. The very ſame is holpen by Plutarch
and Vlpian, by Lyſias: for if Lyſias were 63. before Athens
fall, and a pleader for Iphicrates at Philip Macedons tyme,
the diſtance can not be about 50. but rather leſſe then
halfe. The Olympique fayth is fayne to deny the orations
to be from Lyſias: as though Plutarch and Vlpian
knew not the ſtyle of Lyſias. So yf the Angel had ſpoke
nothyng, cunnyng humaniſtes myght haue ſeene the
ſame ſpace from heathen. Aelianus that maketh Demetrius
Phalereus to be ſeruant to Conon and Timotheus (Conons
death being neare Lyſanders) and Phalereus ſeeing the 70.
tranſlaters: this alſo would haue troubled your D. hope
of a longer compt then the Angels from Heathen. Iſocrates
agayne woulde reſiſt him, that telleth how Lacedemonan
ruled Greece not 34. yeeres, but ten: though he
touched not exactly Leuctra fall. But Polybius who telleth
that by the 12. yeere they were at the loſſe of it, galleth
the Olympiques. Athenaeus troubleth them ſomewhat,
in whom Philip reigneth not 24. yeeres, but 20.
And Clemes more, in whom Alexander by ſome is 12.
yere, hygher then by others: that is neare Socrates. And
agayne by Phalereus the ſame is playne, out of Reinecius,
for if he liuing ſo long after great Alexander were ſcholefelow
with Alcibiades brother, the ſpace betwixt Lyſander
and Alexander, can hardly come neare halfe 70. The

whole ſpeaches in the later Attique oratours talke in the
ſame tenour of Conon, and the equals, as knowen well to
ſome then alyue. Thus Grecia is with S. Matthew and S.
Luke, in their ages: and not I, but your D.hath the new
opinion. For ten by him muſt draw 527. yeeres in their
ſuccesſions: the lyke where of ſince Dauids tyme, that is
2500. yeres, the Sunne neuer ſaw. I may not blame him
agayne for callyng thoſe ten men the glory of all the
earth, and rare argumentes for this cauſe, Obſcura ſydera.
But this I may tell, that a diuine, M. I. I. bred at Cambridge,
there in iudgement holden inferiour to none of yours,
ſeeing in the countrey your Doctors booke of Lectures,
was greeued to ſeetherin for thoſe ten men theſe wordes:
Autoris Concentus obſcura ſydera. The man him ſelfe tolde
mee: And gaue your diuines this prayſe, that they were
indifferent iudges: and ſayd, that your D. was now out
of his ſtudies. That, all the worlde may ſee, whom rancour
blyndeth not. But how then wyll he be able to ſatisfie
the Church, pretending trueth and antiquity, and
defence of the ſetled opinion, diſturbyng all Englande,
all Europe, and Aſia. May not I require that he be called
to accompt, for what one ſyllable in my Booke for this
matter, differing from others of our beſt he blameth me,
and putteth me to priuate paynes and charges, for the
deſence of the publique trueth? If the young ſtudent
delyght in floutyng, let him ſee whoſe dealynges deſerueth
that: your Doctors, myne, or his owne?
            A graue Preacher dwelling betwixt Algate and Bow,
gaue this cenſure: that your D. and one other D. wryting
both contrary to them ſelues, and to the thirde that
helde the true, beginnyng vpon affection out-off their
ſtudie, had made many Athieſtes. The man, yf partiality
might ſerue, is knowen otherwiſe bent. Many haue ſayd
ſince: What, ſhall we ſtudy the Bible, when ſo great
Scholers cannot agree? And a Preacher of your breede,

now teaching in London, ſeeing your D. confuted, ſayd,
For two pence halfepeny he woulde be of eyther opinion:
to ſuch a paſſe come your Diuines. They triumph
at the firſt, as hauing caried away Burlyſpoyles, and ample
laude: how one is by yours confuted, for endeuoring
to proue, that God draweth vs by the Sunnes Chronicle,
vnto the Sonnes iuſtice, contriuing all Libraries, all,
playnely to this high poynt. When the matter is detected,
that he confuted the trueth, himſelfe, and all the
worlde: then a new peſtiferous errour is bred, that the
matters are ſmall: though they be the harmony of all
Scripture, and ioy of Chriſtianity. An other B. of D. of
yours neare Lon. thanked God, that he neuer troubled
his head with theſe matters: That is, why God vpon
Terahs death, leaueth to honour man with the Sunnes
ourneys, and tyeth all to the promyſe of Chriſt: and
what wiſedome Gabriel promiſed to teach Daniel. Belike
yong diuines are in deepe myſteries, that can diſpiſe ſuch
high poyntes.
            But here I muſt needes pardon your young Students;
whereas Preachers abroad, ſome not of your breede, fall
to groſſe ſchiſme. A certaine learned man was to be preferred
vnto a charge, one that helde my ſtudies for the
trueth of the frame of the Bible not vnprofitable. An
aged graue Gentleman liked well to collate a place on
him. Certayne that would be counted Preachers, deſirous
of that which they call reformation, aboue al holyer
knowledge, come to the Gentleman with greater heate
then the Terentian Chremes came to Simo, charging the
Gentleman in his conſcience, that the ſhoulde not prefer
him, for the doctrine which he liked off. The gentleman
aſked an olde great-learned man, what he thought of the
doctrine, and of the man. He ſhewed how groſly the
Preachers were deceaued. Becauſe of their calling, I wyll
not lyken them to Alexander the Capper-ſmith: but I

am ſure that Paul would abandon them. Olde M. Iohn
More, preacher of Norwich, lately a neighbour of theirs,
one in their zeale, but ſeaſoned better, no colder then
they, & as great a ſtudent in the text Hebrew & Greke,
as they knew any: he was of an other ſpirit, & diſdayned
not to treade in euery ſtep, where theſe men, like Paris
of Homer ſhrunke, as if they had troden neare a Serpent.
I know it to be farre from your D. minde, to pricke forwarde
rumors in that kind. And I thinke that he is reſolued,
how zeale (as Iewes proued) running afore knowledge,
is the ruine of Religion: and knoweth tradeſinen,
who be cunninger in the depht of the holy booke, then
the common ſort of teachers: whoſe zeale medleth not
beyond their owne boundes. I would not be thought to
thinke, that your D. could fauour ſuch dealings: But becauſe
they wil needes be ſhrowding vnder his winges, I
thought good to warne of that. This euil ſowen by miſtaking
your D. is like a Grangraena further growing. A
Cambridge man that liueth in Eſſex a Scholmaſter and
a Preacher, meeting with a Gentleman that knew from
Geneſis to the Apocalyps, the frame of the Bible better thē
he, was counſelled by that Gentleman to make a declaratio
of chriſtianity, how in al ages it was cleere (before he
trauelled to ſtir the ſimple vncertainly) and to make the
people know the euerlaſting certainty of ſaluation, by
Moſes, the Prophets, the Goſpel, and the Epiſtles. He anſwered,
that ſome bookes of Scripture could neuer yet
be vnderſtood: namely the Reuelation. The Gentleman
vſing an inſtance from ſome for that, he ſayd, that your
D. had confuted that paines: though he medled not with
one worde. You may ſee what harme to himſelfe, and to
the Church is wrought by his reading, being miſtaken,
and miſreported. I could wiſh that he would eyther reuoke
all his gain-ſayinges: as I charge him, that they be
all iniurious & erronious: or print al his lectures, which

I ſaw for the one halfe, an yeeres reading, that all might
ſee what is in controuerſy.
            Marke further infection of an other learned man: I
know not whether he were bred amongſt you, a certaine
Gentleman, whom I neuer ſaw, writeth to a friend
of his from Dunſlei in Staffoideſhyre, to a Londoner
thus: Dec. 20. 1592. I hearde not long ſince, a learned man, yet
ignorant, and ouer ſwift in iudgement, diſprayſe this Booke (of
Scripture Concent) as needeleſſe, and a ſuperfluous worke:
of whom I demaunded, whether he did know it: or euer read it.
His anſwere was, no. How can you giue iudgement then, ſayd I,
of that you know not. He anſwered, that he heard ſo. Thus leauing
the counſell of S. Iohn, which biddeth vs try ſpirites, whether
they be of God or no: ſuch fall into the curſe of the Lord,
that call lyght darknes, and darknes lyght: that iudge good euyl
and euyll good. Although he tooke himſelfe learned, I am ſure
he was not able of his owne pregnant wit, ſo much as to reade
ouer the booke in ſuch order as it requireth, without an inſtructer:
much leſſe then to vnder ſtande the ſame, and the drift therien.
The Gentleman that wrote this, fauoureth much your
ſtudentes, and hearing of my iuſt griefes, wrote a requeſt
to beare with the loſers. But when he perceiued the
ſtrang dealinges of ſome from you, and ſauage barbarouſnes,
he was of that mynde, that pitty may not marre
the citie. VVhat ſome Doctors of Cambridge thought, I
recorded. One being at London vpon your Doctors firſt
Antilogy, being aſked of a Londoner, what he thought
of the Booke which your D. confuted, ſayd thus: The
argument is as profitable, as could be choſen for this age.
Then ſayd the Londoner: yf it be ſo, VVhy did none of
you DD. or of the BB. take it in hande? Then ſayd he:
The man who tooke it in hande knew, by reaſon of his
ſtudies in the tongues, longer then any others, that he
was ableſt to performe it. Truely, I woulde not for any
preferment, haue troubled her Maieſtie with accepting

any worke of mine, aboue all others in the kinde: in
yeeres the youngeſt of dealers in ſo weighty affaires, vnleſſe
I had thought my houres moſt of any in that ſtudy,
and my ſelfe able to keepe our nation from all foyle for
accepting my paynes. And I know that by that helpe,
an other may ſee more into Scripture by a learned guide
in few monethes, then I coulde before I founde the order,
in ten yeeres. And acertaine Nobleman of my age
tolde me, that he learned more in two houres by that
helpe, with open ſpeach vpon it, then by all his former
paines. I hope you wyll beare with me: the cauſe is not
now mine owne. And I may giue as good leaue to diſgrace
the cauſe, as the defender. Pericles or Neſtor would
do this vnprouoked. Iob. Moſes, and Paul, would in defence
ſpeake of them ſelues. And as I made the cauſe
from priuate by arbitrement to be publique, ſo I wyll
enterlace here the teſtimony of a publique perſon. The
Archbyſhop of C
                  ••
               terbury his grace, you know, was by 
both ſides choſen vmpire: you may ſoone know whether
he thus cenſured, That neuer any humane paynes
was of greater trauell and dexteritie, then againſt. 1500.
yeeres errours, ſo to cleare the holy ſtory, as the booke of
Concent hath done. Of what ſpirite then ſhal we holde
Studentes, that cannot abide their owne Religion to go
cleare forwarde, nor the publique teſtimonie, which
ſtandeth as the Princes owne? I moſt humbly woulde
intreate her Maieſtie to commaunde that a publique teſtimonie
which might be knowen ouer the Realme,
may paſſe betwixt ys. But now I deſire your goodnes to
giue your teſtimony, eyther in print, or as you wil: whether
I holde not the trueth, and haue bin more groſly
iniuried▪ then euer any by any of a contrary religion. I
hope all wyll ſo conclude, who reuerence learning, care
for trueth, honour Scripture, and regarde Religion.
            
         
      
   