
      
         
            
               
                  
                  Aduertiſements
FROM BRITANY,
And from the Lovv Countries▪
                     In September and October.
                  
                  
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe. Anno Domini,
1591.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE READER.
                  
                     LEaſt that the better ſorte ſhoulde
be miſ-ledde by the malicious,
who hearing of ſome ſmalgarboyl
betweene the French and Engliſh,
enlarged it ſo on Tenterhookes,
that they proclaimed it a
ruin of both the armies. I thought
it good to publiſh this Iournall of Aduertiſements,
which I receaued out of Brittanie, as well to make it
knowen how well our ſlender and weake Forces daylie
confront the enemie, as alſo with what good agreement
(by the great wiſdome of the Commaunders) the two
Naeions ioyne in a common quarrell againſt a common
enemie.
                  If I may finde this to be acceptable to the Reader,
I ſhall be willing to acquaint him with
thereſt, as it ſhall come vnto
my handes.
                  Farewell.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  ADVERTISEMENTS
OVT OF BRITANIE, IN
SEPTEMBER.
1591.
                  
                     SIR, by my laſt letters of the 20. of Auguſt, I did acquaint
you with thoſe reaſons that
moued the Prince de Dombes
in ſuch earneſtneſſe to vrge,
and my Lord Generall to
yeeld vnto this viage of the
South: which concluſion ſo
mightelie perplexed the Inhabitantes
of S. Brieux, that their greeues forcing
th' ordinarie paſſage of a popular diſcontentment, reſolued
into moſt bitter railinges againſt the Prince,
vpon whom they publickly exclaimed: That hauing
ſixe moneths ſince ſupplied his armie with al things
neceſſarie, (entertained both him and it 14. daies in
their Towne, and laſtly yeelded to a contribution
of a thouſand crownes,) he woulde now abandon
them vnto the implacable furie of their profeſsed enemies,
the Lambalists, and the greedie couetousnes
of the Duke de Mercurie, who alreadie had extorted
1400. crownes from them: Some did ſolemnly vow

to ſeeke new habitations, and the greateſt number
abſolutelie to geue themſelues vnto the League.
How be it in verie trueth theſe reaſons were not ſufficient,
to binde an armie to the conſeruation of ſo
meane a place, which by neither partie can be otherwiſe
preſerued.
                  The Gentlemen of thoſe partes ſeeking to diuert
this reſolution, by drawing the Prince vnto a ſeconde
vndertaking of Lambalta, made proffer of
10000. men, toward the better performance of the
ſeruice, and offered an hundred of the beſt of them,
vnto the firſt breach that ſhould be made by the Canon.
Theſe were of thoſe Gallants, which left vs at
the late ſiege of Lamballa. who cōtented themſeles
to looke on at the cutting of our throats, while they
(good men) did figure vnto themſelues no other
care, but the fetching in of harueſt, and the conſeruation
of their petie menage; as if the warres of their
Countreie, nothing apperteining to themſelues,
were onely to be determined by her Maieſties Forces.
But ſeeing the armie readie to march, and that
reckoning ſome what diſappointed, knowing withal
notwithſtanding, the Duke de Mercuries ſafegard,
which the moſt of them haue, that their owne neere
neighbouring hungry Garriſons, woulde eternallie
praie vpon them: after the fayned inſtance of Ixion,
and the Aegle: they became vntimely ſutors for that,
which not long before (thorow their owne endeuors)
they might eaſilie haue conquered vnto them
ſelues.
                  Vpon this Text you muſt geue me leaue tonote,
that theſe Petitioners were onlie ſuch, whoſe whole

liuings did lie ſubiect to the dailie incurſions of the
Lamballiſts. Thoſe which dwelt but ſix leagues from
Lamballa, were neuer moued at our departure, no
more doe the Britanes otherwiſe apprehende this
general quarrel, then in regard of ſome particular intereſt:
which error, the King (being aſſiſted with her
Maieſties Forces) may eaſilie reforme.
                  The Prince being taught by former experience
that thoſe fewe particularities could bring no great
aduancement to the Kinges ſeruice, continued his
former determination of carrying his armie into the
South, where a great ſupplie of forces was promiſed
by Monſieur de la Verdun, and others: and according
to that, our army diſlodged from S. Brieux, vpon the
one and twentie day of Auguſt. That night we came
to Kerſoe, the 23. to Plemy, the 25. to Collinie, where the
Prince receiued information, that the Duke de Mercurie
was diſlodged from Dinant, and marched that
night toward a ſdmal village called Brun: by the oportunitie
of which place, he might, to his reaſonable
aduantage, charge vs in our next daies march. Brun is
ſomewhat more then two leagues from Collinie, and
not a quarter of a league from the hie-way, by which
we were to paſſe vnto S. Meyn.
                  
                  Vppon which intelligence, the Prince, with
ſome of his principal Counſellers, came to my Lord
Generals lodging, which then was an Engliſh mile
from Collinie, where Monſieur de la Verdun, dilating
all the circumſtances of that late receiued aduertiſement
concluded with theſe two doubtfull conſiderations.
The firſt, that in regard of the enemies purpoſes
to croſſe our paſſage into the South partes of

Brittanie, it was neceſſarie to conſider, whether our
Forces were ſufficient to ſecond our defences. The
other, that in holding a right forward courſe, the
Duke de Mercurie might cut vs from al ſupplie of victuals,
comming from Reines, and Monford, by taking
his lodging at S. Meyn. Vnto theſe two doubtes, being
the onelie matter of moment propounded by
Monſieur de la Verdun, my L. Generall moſt grauelie
and reſolutelie anſwered, that the Prince, Monſieur
de la Verdun himſelfe, and the reſt of the Princes
Counſaile, after a long deliberation, and moſt earneſt
opportunitie, hauing embarked themſelves, and
him into this courſe, it was not now to looke into
their weakeneſſe, which before ſhould haue beene
weighed with better iudgement. Wherby ſince their
reputation were ſo deepelie engaged, hee nowe
thought them all tied in honour, to march directlie
forward, without anie regard to their ſmal numbers;
and that to take any other courſe, would altogether
ſauour of an exceeding feare, vnto the ſecond, that
Duke de Mercurie could no more anoy vs by putting
himſelfe betweene Reynes and our armie, then we, by
poſſeſſing thoſe paſſages which leade to Dinant and
S. Malo, from which place he was likewiſe to attend
his greateſt reliefe.
                  Theſe reaſons being highlie approoued by the
prince, and Monſieur de la Verdun himſelfe, who willinglie
would haue driuen a wider courſe by Malletroit
and Plermer, it was concluded, that by breake of
daie following, the armie ſhould diſlodge, & marche
directlie towards S. Meyn, and that foorth with certaine
light horſes ſhould be ſent foorth, to diſcouer

whether the enemie was that night come to Brun,
or not. The order of march, and the place whereunto
the army ſhould the next day march, was referred
to the morning conſultation, at the place of Kende
                        
                           •
                        ous.
                  
                  At the Councel, I remember, Monſieur de la
Verdun would needes preſcribe a ſolemne platte of
battell, againſt the next daies expected encounter,
but that deuiſe was readelie altered by my Lord General,
who affirmed, that al formes of fighting were
euermore tied to the circumſtances of thoſe places,
wherein men were to fight, and therefore, not to be
determined, til the place were firſt viewed.
                  The 26. our armie diſlodged from Collinie; and
becauſe the Prince was certainly enformed by thoſe
light horſe, ſent foorth the night before, to diſcouer
that Duke Mercurie was not come to Brun, it was reſolued
that the armie ſhould march that day to Saint
Meyn: But through the vnreadines of al things appertaining
to the Cannon, whereby the beſt part of
the morning was waſted, and the diſhabilitie of our
weak men, in ſo ſhort a time to performe a march of
ſuch length, this courſe was cutte off by the waſte,
and at night we came to Medrimack, which ſtandeth
in the mid way betwixt Collinie, and Saint Meyn. At
Medrimack the Prince was truelie enformed, that the
Duke de Mercurie, the day before in al ſecrecie, about
ſeuen of the clocke in the euening, diſlodged from
Dinant with his armie, and was that night come to
Plenaden, where this day he repoſed himſelfe, meaning
thereby (as afterwarde it appeared) the better
to couer his intention, which was, with a ſpeedie

march in the night following, to poſſeſſe Saint Meyn
before we ſhould ſuſpect his departure from Plenaden,
which is foure Leagues from S. Meyn. From Medrimack
thether are counted but three leagues: but
this fraud was eaſilie diſcouered by my Lord Generall,
who aduiſed the Prince, our Groſe being not
able to performe that march, through the comber of
the Cannon, and the great number of weake men,
that Monſieur de la Verdun, hauing foure hundred
of our ableſt Footemen ioyned to his fourſcore Curaces,
and not aboue fiue hundred Harquebuzers, a
cheual ſhould diſlodge about midnight, and aſſaie,
if by a ſpeedie diligence he coulde diſappoint the enemie
of his intended lodging at S. Meyn; which
was accordingly performed.
                  My Lord Generall, moſt exceedinglie carefull
vpon al hazards to ſecond theſe troupes, cauſed our
armie to diſlodge from Medrimack the next morning,
almoſt two howers before day, which was the
ſeuen and twentieth. In our march the Prince receiued
aduertiſement from Monſieur de la Verdun,
that Saint Meyn was inueſted with his Forces, and
that nothing could be diſcouered of the enemies intention
that way: So that all ſeemed to be very ſure
on our ſide. But my Lord Generall ſuſpecting that
which in trueth folowed, perſwaded the Prince to
aduance with his Caualarie in ſo much the greater
ſpeede towards S. Meyn. And to the ende that our
Footemen might follow with the better haſt, his
Lordſhip commanded the Cannon and baggage to
be placed after the Rerewarde, and for the guarde
thereof appointed certaine Launceknightes. The

euent did ſhew ſome ſpirite of diuination of what
ſhould follow. For the Prince had not beene three
quarters of an houre in S. Meyn, when a very warme
report was brought vnto him, that the Duke de Mercurie
with his whole armie, was within halfe a league
of the Towne. The trueth of theſe matters was verie
ſenſible, for the reporter brought with him two Spaniſh
Captaines, whom he and his companions, being
all but common Soldiers, had preſently made
priſoners: the one of theſe two did afterward ſweare
Bota dios, that hee was taken per Caritad in their
march, and going to their ſuccours; they were taken
by thoſe French companions, which came thether
A la picoree, not two hundred pace from the
head of the Duke de Mercurie his armie.
                  Some wil ſay, that Monſieur de la Verdun, did
this day forget himſelfe: for comming by ſixe of the
clock in the morning to Saint Meyn, hee did neither
ſend foorth his light horſes, (pour batre le ſtrado,)
whereby the enemies approaches might haue been
aduertiſed in time conuenient; nor imploy the ſeruice
of his foote in garding the enemies, but in a
plaine ſecuritie of all that might happen, he lodged
himſelf and his in a village, halfe a league from Saint
Meyn, quite oppoſite from the way the enemies
ſhould take, and left our foote embattailed in the
towne, rather for a Parade, then to any other ſeruiceable
purpoſe. By the like careleſneſſe in Monſieur de
la Verdun, the Countie Soyſons was two yeeres ſince
taken at Shateau-giron, his armie abſolutely defeated,
and himſelfe did meete with a very narrowe eſcape:
but our leiſure at that time did not verie well ſerue

vs to diſpute of errors.
                  The Allarum amongſt our French, you may
be ſure, was verie hotte, the Prince confuſed, and
thoſe about him, who in calmes would ouer-rule all
councels; in this little ſtorme did knowe, neuer a
point in the Compaſſe. The enemy was within halfe
a league of S. Meyn, Monſieur de la Verdun had beſtowed
himſelfe and his troupes ſo farre, or farther off
from vs. The French horſe that came with the
Prince, had alreadie lodged themſelues in villages,
and where the Prince was, were onlie left thoſe four
hundred, ſent the night before with Monſieur de la
Verdun, and my Lord Generals Cornets of horſe:
Our Vantgarde was at the leaſt a long league and a
halfe from vs. In which harde plight, neither the
Prince, nor thoſe about him, could apprehende anie
other courſe of proceeding, but what they did ſee
with the eies of a moſt deſperate feare. But my Lord
Generall, with a moſt chearefull countenance, and
excellent perſwaſions, full of all comfortable aſſurance,
did firſt winne the Prince vnto a better opinion
of his fortune, and then, to repoſe himſelfe onlie
vpon his ſeruice. By his Lordſhips commandement,
the Engliſh troupes were preſentlie drawn out
of the towne, and by himſelfe placed in thoſe waies
which did leade directly towards the enemie. Firſt,
the horſe were appointed to aduance the foot ſome
quarter of a mile. The dikes and hedges were lyned
with ſhotte, to the beſt aduauntage that might bee
thought on: and in the high-way which was ſomewhat
large, our pikes were diſpoſed into three ſeuerall
ſtandes. Meane while, the Prince had ſent for

Monſieur de la Verdun, and the reſt; ſo that hauing a
greater encreaſe of horſe, diſcouerers were ſent ſomwhat
further off, to ſee what courſe the Duke de Mercurie
did take, who being certainlie enformed, that
the Prince had alreadie inueſted S. Meyn, became ſodenlie
more perplexed in the field, then his Countreimen
were in the towne: his armie was exceeding
weary, for the ſame had marched all that night.
To make anie faire retreite they could not; to tarrie
and fight with vs they durſt not; much leſſe to force
vs from our lodging at S. Meyn, where they ſuppoſed
all our armie was: So that the confuſion amongſt
the enemie became verie great, and it was verely beleeued,
that at that time, with two thouſand Engliſh
men, the Duke de Mercurie and all his armie, might
eaſilie haue beene defeated. But how ſo euer, certaine
it is, that in a verie gentle feare hee retired to
Luedilliack, which did verie wel appeare, for not finding
that place of ſuch ſtrength as hee ordinarilie vſeth
to encampe in, and nothing liking our neere
neighborhood, Luedilliack being but one league and
a halfe from S. Meyn, hee was contented to diſlodge
from that place. After that the Logas for the Cor-degard
Fiers were laide together, and to encampe at
Saint Iohn. Whereby the Duke de Mercurie did find
the meane, to put a reaſonable good riuer betweene
him and vs, and to lie two long leagues and a halfe
from S Meyn.
                  
                  Thus with a handfull of men, and my Lord Generals
carefull foreſight, the Prince was deliuered
from the greateſt hazard that euer he was in, and we
became quiet poſſeſſors of our lodging at S. Meyn,
                     
which was a ſeruice of great conſequence, principallie,
in regard of the multitude of our ſicke men,
who otherwiſe had beene left vnto many harde diſcomfits:
beſides, the enemies diſgrace hereby receyued,
was not little.
                  As for the reſt of the armie, they came not vnto
vs in two long houres after the enemies retreit, and
it was almoſt night before the arriual of our Canon.
This is the ſumme of that daies worke.
                  And becauſe it was the nexte day founde that
the Duke de Mercurie diſlodged not, the Prince
was aduiſed by ſome, in whoſe heartes (peraduenture)
ſome relicks of the former daies feare yet remained,
to follow his courſe towards Reines, which
he might very wel doe, hauing aboundantlie ſatiſfied
his reputation in his laſte confronting the enemie,
and croſſing his purpoſes. But my Lorde Generall
directlie oppoſed himſelfe againſt this councell;
affirming, that if we diſlodged firſt, the enemie
would be encouraged to purſue vs, and beating ſtill
vpon the taile of our weake armie, trauel the ſame
with continuall paine and trouble, which could not
be tollerated; beſides the performance of his former
vaunt, which was, that he would driue vs before him
into Reines. That it was therefore better for the
Prince, to ſend for ſuch ſuccors as might be drawen
from Reines, and other places not farre off, to make
good the place whereof they were alreadie poſſeſſed,
and to attend, either the enimies firſt diſlodging,
or ſome good opportunitie, whereby hee might be
forced vnto the ſame.
                  This counſel was folowed, and ſuch diligence

vſed in the execution thereof, that by the next morning
two hundred horſe were come vnto vs, and
two Cannons ſent from Reines, were alreadie aduanced
as farre as Monford. Vpon the arriuall of this
ſmall ſupplie, it was preſently reſolued, that our armie
ſhould diſlodge the next day, and encamp within
a quarter of a league of Saint Iohn. But the Duke
de Mercury (who al this while did but ſeek to countenance
himſelfe with his ſtaie at that place) vnderſtanding
the reſolution of our armie, diſlodged the
next morning before tenne of the clock, and marched
foure leagues, vnto a village called Ereat, where
(for him ſelfe and his Spaniardes) hee founde a lodging
of great ſtrength.
                  Certaine knowledge being geuen, that the Duke
de Mercurie had made his retreate to Ereat, the Prince
ſtreitelie commaunded, that all our armie ſhould be
in readineſſe by nine of the clocke in the night, to
march towardes the enemie. For it was preſuppoſed,
that by the aduauntage of that march in the
night, we ſhould fall vppon the Duke de Mercurie his
army, weary, and not looking for vs, and ſo perform
ſome great peece of ſeruice; or at his next mornings
riſing, diſtreſſe the rereward of his armie. Our ſicke
men and baggage were left at S. Meyn, and an hundred
of ours for their gard.
                  My Lord Generall being wel acquainted with
the weakeneſſe of our armie, and obſeruing the thin
repaire of thoſe that were ſent for, did very much
oppoſe himſelfe againſt this courſe, the rather, becauſe
at that time ther was not one in our army, that

coulde iuſtly enforme the ſtate of the Enemies lodging.
                  But the Prince, to ſatisfie my Lord herein, told
him in great ſecreſie, that al was but Pour fair la Meyn;
and that after ſome two leagues march, it was meant
that we ſhould returne. How be it, in our march one
peece ſo pulde on another, that la Mein was quite
forgotten, and ſomething before day light, we were
come within two miles of the enemies lodging:
where, (and that not without good cauſe) a ſtande
was made, and it was ſolemnlie demaunded, what
could be done vpon the enemie. The ſtate of their
lodging was freſhly enquired after, whereunto anſwere
was made by a French Gentleman, dwelling
in thoſe partes, that there were but two Riuers betweene
vs and the enemies Groſe of his armie: wherof
the one was hardlie to be foorded. And that from
thence, the way to Ereat was exceeding ſtreite. By
meanes whereof, wee did now begin to learne how
our Canon might haue beene loſt, and our enemies
notablie engaged. Vpon which conſiderations, euerie
man began to diſauow this councell: firſt la Verdun,
then Momertin, Baſtine, and the reſt: yet God of
his goodnes did ſaue all our honeſties; for while the
Prince, my Lord General, and the reſt were in councell,
ſome of vs had taken a prieſt and a peazaunt: by
whom they were informed, that a compaine of the
enemies hargabuzers a cheuall, did lodge within
halfe a league of vs, and that there were nothing
more eaſie, then the cutting them in peeces. To the
ſeazing of this pray, la Verdun, and Monſieur de Baſtine,
                     
with thirtie Curaſſes, and three hundred Hargabuzers
a cheuall, were preſentlie ſent foorth, (for
in ſodaine enterpriſes it was thought better to vſe
the ſeruice of thoſe French ſhot on horſeback, then
on foote.
                  Theſe following their guides, found not onlie
that compaine, but three French Regiments lodged
al eſtart, euerie man in a ſounde ſleepe, and not ſo
much as one Centronel to geue the allarum, which
being wel perceiued by Baſtine, he willinglie would
haue ſent for foure hundred of our ſhot and pikes,
wherewith queſtionles all the skirtes of the enemies
armie might haue beene handſomelie cutte off. But
la Verdun, either in an emulation towards vs, in too
great impatiencie with himſelfe, with his Curaſſes
farre inough off, he ſent thoſe Herga a Chi to the enterpriſe,
who finding no kinde of reſiſtance, ſlewe
an hundred and twentie of the enemie. In which
number Captaine Meſſandere was one: and at that
time la Mott Cheure was taken priſoner, who commaunded
another compaine of Herga a Chi. The reſt
which were not, but might very well in like ſorte
haue beene aſſayled, receiued the allarum by their
companions laſte cries, and ſo ſaued themſelues.
The armie likewiſe warned by theſe, did preſentlie
put themſelues in armes.
                  This ſeruice thus perfourmed, wee did ſtande
three long houres imbattelled vppon a faire ſpatious
heath, not halfe a league from the Duke de Mercury
his Armie, but when it was perceyued, that neither
honour, nor loſſe, could driue him vnto a tryall of

Armes (although beſides his French forces, it was
certen that he had then with him aboue three thouſand
Spanyards) that it was not poſsible to paſſe any
further without apparant loſſe, the Prince thought
good to commaund our retreite.
                  Wee poor ſoules were not this day able to march
twelue thouſand ſtrong: but had you ſeene theyr
notable reſolutions, and earneſt deſires to fight, you
would peraduenture greeue that ſuch men, and a
commaunder of my Lords woorth, ſhould be expoſed
into ſo great an inequalitie as hitherto wee haue
mette with. For I proteſt vnto you before the liuing
God, that our ſoldiours onely haue borne the entire
burden of this Sommers ſeruice. At Lamballa we
were not aſſiſted with three hundred French, which
may ſeeme very ſtraunge, but what I write is moſt
true: and how farre my Lord Generall will in all
ſeruice aduenture his owne perſon, is ſo well known
vnto you, that I ſhal not neede to mention the ſame.
Vpon euerie opinion of encounter with the Spanyards,
, a faire blew ſcarfe (in likelyhoode preſented
by ſome honourable Lady) is faſtened to the ende
of his Pike: for his Lordſhippe vnderſtanding that
Don Iohn de Laguilla had vſed ſome braue ſpeeches:
did ſende him worde by Monſieur Gibrian, that by
that fauour hee would make himſelf knowne at their
firſt meeting.
                  After our returne to Saint Meyn, the Prince perceiuing
that the Duke de Mercury meant that daye
to diſlodge from Ereat, and that the place of our
abode, did yeelde no kinde of comfort vnto our

weake armie, other then ſuch as came thither from
Reines and Vittrie, which was ſometime cutte off
by the way, thought good likewiſe to diſlodge the
day following, and ſo for this time the Duke de Mercurie
and wee did part compaine. He vppon the thirtith
day leauing Ereat, did take the way towards Iocelin:
we vppon the day following diſlodged from S.
Meyn, and ſo to Hendet: the ſecond of September
to Breall, the third to Noyall, where the Prince did accord
vnto vs twentie daies reſt at Shatteau-grion, for
the refreſhing of our weake men: at this place wee
arriued the fourth of September.
                  The day following, my Lord Generall was
ſolempnly inuited by the principall Magiſtrates of
Reines to viſite their Cittie, and the thirde day after
was receyued into the ſame with all thoſe teſtimonies
that might aſſure a moſt kinde and frendly
welcome.
                  The Prince in the meane time hauing three
hundred men, and three Cannons from Vittrie, did
inueſt the Caſtle of Chattillion, vpon the ſeuenth of
this inſtant. But after three dayes triall, finding
thoſe forces nothing ſufficient (for he had but thoſe
three hundred French, and fiue hundred Launce-knights)
he ſent vnto Reines for ſixe Cannons more,
and to my Lord Generall, in all earneſtnes, to aſſiſte
him with ſixe hundred Engliſh. His Lordſhippe
conſidering, that after ſuch a deduction, the remainder
would be verie weake, and by ſuch a ſeperation
ſubiect vnto hazard, thought good with all his companies
to remoue to Saint Aubin de Cormer: whereby

the ſtrength of our Armie might ſtande ſtill vnited,
and the Prince, according to his deſire, readily enough
aſsiſted. For from Saint Aubin to Chattillion
are but three little leagues. In the meane ſeaſon his
Lordſhippe ſent two hundred ſhotte and pikes, to attend
the Cannon of Reines, whoſe ſeruice afterwards
the Prince vſed to great purpoſe.
                  Thus not hauing ſtaide ſixe dayes at Shatteau-giron,
wee diſlodged vppon the tenth of September,
and incamped that night at Shatteau-burga, the next
day to Saint Aubin.
                  
                  The Prince hauing receyued thoſe Canons ſent
from Reines, and planted the ſame, vppon the twelfth
of September, were diſcharged ſome loſt volleys vppon
the defences of the Caſtle: The morning following
my Lord came to the Prince with three hundred
Engliſh more, and then the battery was purſued
with ſuch furie, that by twelue of the clocke the
breach was made very faire and aſſaultable: which
beeing well perceiued by the defendants, they came
to a parley, and from the Prince receyued theſe laſt
conditions: That all Gentlemen and Captains within
the Caſtle ſhould become priſoners: That the ſoldiours
ſhould haue their liues, only except twentie,
which ſhould reſt at the Prince his diſcretion: for he
ment to make ſome examplary puniſhment of them.
                  While the enemie did entertaine ſomewhat too
long time in the acceptance of theſe conditions, our
launce knights in a hungrie deſire after ſpoyle, drew
themſelues (vncommaunded) towardes the aſſault:
my Lord Generall perceiuing the ſame, and doubting

that ſome touch in honour to the Prince might
thereby ariſe, partly by perſwaſions, and ſometimes
by threatnings, did ſtay them from that purpoſe a
long half houre: but in concluſion they offered violence
to their Coronel, diſobeyed all their commanders,
forced the breach, where they founde no reſiſtance,
and of two hundred and thereeſcore that were
within the Caſtle, left not twentie aliue. But in the
eager purſuite after ſpoyle, they fiered (vnawares)
ſome barrels of powder, with the furie whereof thirtie
of them were preſently ſlaine, and at leaſt fiftie
more came from thence, the moſt miſerable creatures
that euer I did behold. The iudgement of God
was moſt iuſtly executed vppon them both; in theſe
for their diſobedience; in the enemie, for their notorious
ſpoyles and infinite outrages committed vppon
the country: it is conſtantly affirmed, that theſe
companions did yearely ſpoyle La vall, Vittrie, and
Reines, of more then twelue thouſand crownes.
                  They of Fougiers were ſo terrified at the taking
of Shattillion, that in doubt of our next remoue towardes
them, they did beginne the verie ſame day
to burne their Suburbs, which (peraduenture) was
but a needleſſe feare: for in plaine Engliſh, we haue
neither men, nor meanes, to vndertake the ſiege of
ſuch a place.
                  Monſieur de la Verdun did leaue the Prince at
I. Iendit, and promiſed to return within three weekes
with three thouſande footemen, and fiue hundred
horſe. His preparations (for ought that I perceiue)
doe come but ſlowlie forwarde, and yet I know the

King hath of late vrgentlie haſtened the ſame, our
men doe now begin to die, and that verie faſte: ſo
that without a preſent ſupplie, wee are like to haue
but a poore armie.
                  The Spaniardes paie arriued at Blanett, about
the eighteenth of Auguſt laſt. The ſame was brought
thether in foure Galliaſſes. The Duke de Mercurie
is gone to Nantes, where a Spaniſh Countie, of the
houſe of Tolledo, hath theſe daies paſt attended his
comming thether, ſent by the King of Spaine to negotiate
about the affaires of Brittaine. Vpon the promiſe
of ſome honeſt bribe, you may peraduenture
winne me to ſende you a true report, both of what
is paſt in the laſt yeeres trafficke, and in this preſent
negotiation betweene the King of Spaine, and Madame
de Mercurie, for it is ſhe that doeth ſwaie the
ballance.
                  And ſo hoping that you will be as wearie in the
reading, as I am in the writing hereof, I commit you
to the comfort of your beſt deſires: and vs both to
the bleſſed protection of the Almightie.
                  
                     From our
poore armie at Saint Aubin de Cormer, 
                        this ſixteenth
of September, 1591.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  Aduertiſements
FROM THE LOVV
Countries.
                  The 16. day of October.
                  
                  LONDON
Printed by Iohn Wolfe. Anno Domini,
1591.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  BY LETTERS
out of the lovv Countries, of the
ſixteene of October.
1591.
                  
                     VPon the fourteenth daie
of this preſent, there vvas
intercepted beetvveene
Antwerp and Newport, a
Spaniard, named Barnardo
de Helena, late of the
Caſtle of Antwerp, (repairing to his brother,
ſeruing in the companie of Don Carlos
de Luna, Captaine of the Horſe at Newport)
this man being carefullie examined,
ſaith, that the Duke of Parma is ſtill remayning
at Bruxels, vvithout any likelihood
of performing his pretended viage
into Fraunce: And deliuereth farther,
that certaine of the mutined Spaniardes,

to the number of one thouſande and fiue
hundred, being vppon promiſe of paie,
dravven out of Heretalles, and the Sonne
of the Duke of Parma ſent to them, to
induce them thereunto. By vvhoſe perſvvaſion
they vvere brought into the land
of Waes, they novv vpon ſome nevv diſcontentment,
are retired backe againe,
haue ſeized the Tovvne of Tiel-mont, in
Brabant, vvhere they fortifie againſt
the Duke, and haue carried vvith them
perforce, his Sonne, vvhom they deteine
vvith a Collonell, named Don Sancho de
Leua, ſometime Gouernour of Liere, vntill
their demaunds be graunted and performed.
                  
                     Mondragon is in the Land of Waes,
vvith three thouſande Foote and fiue hundred
horſe, to erect certaine Sconces for
the freeing of the paſſage betvveene Antwerpe
and Gaunt, impeached by the taking
of Hulſts, vvhich being performed,
and the mutinie appeaſed, the Duke geueth
out that he vvill into Fraunce.
                  
                     
The late Gouernour of Hulst, and a
Spanyard that vvas commaunder of the
forces in the Tovvne at the time of rendering
thereof, are novve cloſe priſoners at
Bruxels.
                  
                  Monſieur la Mote is in Brabant, ſent
of purpoſe to pacifie the mutinies, vvho as
yet doe obſtinately make refuſall of all his
offers.
                  The Gouernour of Cambray vvith fiue
hundred horſe hath made of late a great
rode into Henault, and there exceedinglie
vvaſted the country, vvhich hath beene vtterlie
contrarie to the Dukes expectation,
and it is thought to bee the chiefeſt cauſe
of his ſtay of his iourney for Fraunce.
                  It is aduertiſed, and from diuerſe places
confirmed, that the kingdome of Arragon
is reuolted, the Vice-roy maſſacred,
and thoſe of the Inquiſition in that kingdome
baniſhed, beeing practiſed by the
King of Spaines Secretarie, fled from the
Court vpon diſcontentment.
                  The inhabitants of Venlo, by the aſsiſtance

of the Italians there in garriſon,
haue put out the Wallons that vvere alſo in
garriſon in that place, and aftervvards by
a notable dexterity haue ridde themſelues
alſo of the Italians, but doe as yet holde
for the King, and onely as it is thought
till they haue made their peace vvith the
States.
                  The Duke of Parma renevveth his demaund
of fiue thouſand poundes by the
moneth, and vvould haue it to bee leuied
for ſixe moneths before hand vppon the
vvalled Tovvnes, and they aftervvardes,
to collect and reimburſe the ſame vppon
the countrie and villages.
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   