
      
         
            
            
            A Defence of the Booke entitled A Cōcent of Scripture, for amendment of former Athean moſt groſſe, and Iudaique errours, which our tranſlations and notes had:
            Againſt the libel, ſcoffing a Scottish miſt: and ſlaundering that the Iewes Epiſtle ſent from Byzantian Rome, was a forged worke, and not in deed ſent thence.
            By HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
            1609.
         
         
            
            
            To the Mightie Prince JAMES, King of Great Britaine, France and Ireland, Defendour of the Faith, &c.
            
               ABout the middes of Q. Elizabeths reigne, gratious Soveraigne, ſome Courtiers tooke occaſion, by our corruptions in tranſlation of the Bible and Notes, to plead that our religion was but mans invention. To restraine their courſe, I wrote A Concent of Scripture, contriving a douzen kindes of hard ſtudies Thalmudique & Attique to one ſcope: couching large matters in ſo many ſeverall wordes. That paines was of esteeme, till I dealt with certen Scottes concerning preventing Neroes, hoping for Priamus happines: and M. Iames Melvin ſent frō 
               Edenburg a letter by post, of your Maiesties favour, which letter came to me opened. Then my Lord Peregrin Willoughby warned me to looke to my ſelfe: and ſoone a Sumner coūterfaiteth an other mā, & the ſame day a Cōſtable & purſuivant offred 40. marks to tel wher I was: And I made over to Middelburg, and print how your Maieſtie would be King of our language. A Drifat of thoſe copies D. B. brent, noyſing that I wrot treaſon: twiſe he brent them, vnder Q. E. and vnder your Maieſtie, and conſpiring to ſcoffe the Scottiſh mist vnder cover of confuting mee, alloweth a libell raving againſt Archb. Wh. and D. Bilſon for the Creede: (teaching that our Lord went hence to Paradiſe.) And highly extolling Maiſter Lively for a moſt vnlearned Iudaique and Ethnique expoſition of Daniel:

daſhing all the frame of Scripture Concent. At the ſame time a Iew wrote from to citie of Conſtantine, your Maieſties anceſtor, a ſupplication to haue our Goſpell opened in Ebrew. The Queenes Agent, Barton, ſent the Letters: two ſeverall copies. B. D. conſpired to Libell that I forged the Epistle printed: And when I compiled lately a treatiſe vpon our Lo. familie, clearing our Nation from Iudaique errours, and touching foure Genevean Schollers of his bent to Albion flames, the thankfull wight receyving a booke, ſhewed as much grace as a Bargulus Illyricus, and threatned to ſtay your Maieſtie from Ebrew manifeſtation of our glorious Goſpell. For theſe partes I accuſe him to your Highnes, vpon this Commaundement, 1. Cor. 16. If any loue not the Lord Ieſus Chriſt, let him be Anathema Maran Atha. I hope your Highnes that hath placed him high, will not ſuffer a Babylonian Lucifer to lifte him ſelfe aboue God and your State. And for his indevour to hinder the Iewes ſalvation, your Highnes will take heed, that you hazard not your Familie by Gods anger, but will tender every worke bent to ſalvation.
         
      
      
         
            
            Articles of errours allowed by Archb. B. to goe with the Bible as good Divinitie.
            
               Article I. The Scripture ſaith, Adam lived 
                     ••
                  0. yeares and begat Seth.
               
                  Bancroftes croft of Bane in the notes fol. 6. Col. 2.
                  Adam at 230. begat Seth: where Moſes omitted 100. yeares, wherein Adam and Eue lamented their ſonne Abell ſo ſlaine.
               
               
                  The manifolde croft of Bane.
                  If Moſes omitted any yeare, he ſpared a trueth: none but giddie headed ſmithes would forge yeres to be moe or leſſe, for ioy or ſorrow: and the holy Angells that were created the firſt day: the Devills that fell preſently after Adam was proclaymed ruler of the worlde, they that kept their ioy, and they that fell into eternall ſorow, were not an houre diſtant in yeares, nor from Adam but five dayes and a night. Now it is Atheiſme to ſay that Moſes lyed.
               
               
                  Therefore Bancroft alloweth an Athean note, and muſt heare the blame.
                  
                     Abell died as in Chriſtes place, & his parentes were both Prophetes, and were not comfortles as the prophane, and would teach their other children, whom they had many before Seth, to looke vnto the redemption of Chriſt, and to reioyce in his dayes.
               
               
                  So D. Bancroft by his note ſhould be much deceaved, and a ſlender D.
                  The errour of 100. yeares difference came from miſtaking the 
                        〈…〉
                      II. Tranſlatours: who dallying with skoffing heathen, altered the Ebrew. Gen. 5. and xi. to 1000. yeares difference and many hundred.
                  That alteration I handled in a Treatiſe of Melchiſedeke: which ſome about your Grace will ſhew your Highnes. Now the allowance of an Atheiſme after diſcoverie, ſhould tell Archb. Bancroft, that there is but a ſteppe betwixt him & eternall deſtruction: where the bare title of Grace will be no defence for him.
               
               
                  Of an Atheiſme allowed by Rich. Bancroft, buring Moſes 40. yeares before he receaved the Law.
                  Theſe wordes vnlearned Bancroft alloweth as well tranſlated from the Ebrew, Exodus 12.40.
                  
                  The dwelling of the children of Iſraell while they dwelt in Egypt, was 430. yeares, Moſes Hebrew hath infinite wiſdome to dally with fooliſh Heathen, by equivocation, that they ſhould not ſcoffe how 215. in Chanaan, bred Abraham for Egypt but 70. ſoules, and 215. in Egypt bred to goe for Chanaan ſix hundred thouſand warriers, that heathen ſhould not mocke Moſes, vſed wordes that one vnlearned as Bancroft, might turne to dwelling of 430. yeares.
               
               
                  
                  Thus ſtandeth the trueth.
                  The peregrination of the children of Iſraell: When they had ended their ſtaying in Egypt, was 430. yeares. ſo the LXXII. ſo Thalmud Ieruſalemy ſhew that ſince Abraham left his countrey, Gen. 1.2. and ſince he receaved the promiſe Gal. 3.17. Saint Paul ſheweth the tymes accompt: yet Bancroft a D. 
                        〈…〉
                     , would croſſe Saint Paule, Ieruſalemy, and the Lxx. to burie Moſes before the Law. Proofe.
                  
                     Cohath came with Iacob into Egypt, Gen. 46.
                     
                        Lived 133. yeares, Exod. 6. all 133.390.
                        
                           Amram. 137. Exod. 6. all 137.390.
                        
                           Moſes 120. Deut. 33. all 120.390.
                     
So by Bancroftes Grammer and Arithmetique two courtiers that would perſwade now twentie yeres agoe, that the Bible was a forged worke, had probabilitie, and wann many to Atheiſme. When my Concent came foorth, them ſelves yeelded: But the vnlearned and vngratefull D. had rather conſpire to the libell, mocking Archb. Wh. and L. Winton, then learne the trueth in whole 20. yeares.
               
            
            
               Article II.
               AN Atheiſme denying that Iehu ever conquered Chanaan, or that David ever was.
               The ſpace ſince Iſraell left Egypt vnto the building of Salomons Temple, is 480. 1 King. 6.1. againſt this by D. Bancroftes allowed divinitie, for his graces graceles skill in tranſlating, Saint Paules moſt wiſe Greek, is, God gaue Iudges

about the ſpace of 450. yeares, Act. 13.
Therefore about 30. of the wildernes, will make with the Iudges times, the 480. And about the laſt tenne of Moſes, and all Ioſuahs, and Davids not borne till tenne after Ellis death, ſhal haue no time in the world.
                  Bancroft his Doctorſhip for learning, his grace, for divinitie, ſho
                     ••
                  d be taken from him, for ſuch Athean divinitie.
            
            
               Article III.
               HEe denyeth the New Teſtament, in feigning that it ſhould diſagree with the Old.
            
            
               Article IV.
               SAint Paule ſpake with infinite admiration, to make all the worlde admire the new Teſtament, as I ſhewed in my advertiſement, and in a Diſputation in the Martialcie againſt the Rhemiſtes, who tranſlated the new Teſtament from the Latin, ſaying that the Greeke was corrupted.
               
                  Bancroftes vnthankefulnes.
                  
                     Bar. Lo. in his Libell againſt the Scottiſh miſt and Brittiſh Nation, forged with a Giddie headed ſlaūder, a moſt ſenſeles lye, that I diſputed in defence of the Lxx. which none ever defended to bee well copied, yet Bancroft conſpired with the vnlearned, vngratefull, ſhameleſſe Libeller, to allow the traitorous Athean worke, of a moſt impudent ſlaunderer, foming out his owne ſhame, as the raging waves of the ſea, preparing him ſelfe a lodging in gloomie darknes.
               
            
            
               
               Article V.
               
                  A fayning that Baaſa King of Iſraell fought againſt Aſa tenne yeares after he was dead.
                  IN the third yeare of Aſa, Baaſa began his reigne of 24. yeares, 1. King. 15.33. Now he muſt die in the 26. of Aſa, by this true ſcripture.
               
               
                  Bancroft his croft of bane by barbarous rudenes, that knew not Malc
                        •
                     th to meane there a kingdome not reigne, 1. Chron. 16.1.
                  Thus goeth Bancrofts allowed learning in the 36. yeare of Aſa, came Baaſa King of Iſraell againſt Iuda, 2. Chron. 10.1. It was the 36. ſince the kingdome of Aſa was devided from Iſraell: twentie yeares before Aſa reigned, as my Concent noted with an evident title, Iuda or Aſaes Kingdome D. Bancroft was rude that knew not the generall name.
               
               
                  Sequell.
                  So Baaſa came ten yeares dead to fight by Bancroftes allowed divinitie, by as good Machmad the foule ſpirit may be hoped to returne to his deceaved Knightes. It is ſtraunge that a D. and bearing G. in title, ſhould after warning, ſuffer ſuch ſtuffe to be ſolde vnder the name of the Bible.
               
            
            
               Article VI.
               
                  Farre greater Atheiſmes are allowed by the learned D. and most Reverend F. about Ochozias ſonne to King Ioram.
                  IOram was thirtie and twoo yeares olde when he began to reigne, and he reigned eight yeres in Ieruſalem: ſo he died

aged 40. yeares. And Ochozias his ſonne reigned in his ſtead: two and twentie yeares old was Ochozias when hee began to reigne, and he reigned one yeare in Ieruſalem, and his mothers name was Athalia, the grand daughter of Omry. ſo when he reigned he fell into the yeare 42. of Omries houſe, rooted out by Iehu, And periſhed. Ben of that 42. yeares, falling into their Lot, as oftentimes meaneth Gods iudgement ſhewed in time to be termed, Time. Apoc. 11.12.
               
               
                  How Bancroftes vnskilfulnes for Ben, vſuall for any Lot: taking it for age: alloweth Ochozias to be elder then his father by two yeares: and twentie yeares elder then him ſelfe.
                  Bancroft alloweth this tranſlation as having Gods authoritie from the Ebrew. fortie and two yeares olde was Achozias, when he began to reigne, 2. Chro. 22.2. Now his Father died at 40. 2. Chro. 20.20. and 2. King. 8.17. and he reigned at 22. 2. Kin. 8.26. and reigned but one yeare, for he was kild: ſo by D. Bancroft his divinitie, he was two yeares elder then his father, and twentie elder then himſelfe: and reigned, when he had been dead twentie yeares. M. Iacks told D. ſtill at Hadley of this aboue 22. yeres agoe.
               
               
                  Another allowance of as Giddiheaded a Smitherie, in the margent note, vpon 2. Chro. 22.2. It is to be noted that he reigned 20. yeares with his father yet living.
                  His Father reigned but eight yeares in all: ſo by Bancrofts Arithmetique, he ſhould reigne twelve yeares before his father. Beſides this nothing helpeth to ſhew how he is not two yeres elder then his Father. All this the booke of Concent

opened of old: but hogges care not for pearles: Grunting in a reuting libell will be their grace.
               
               
                  Of a most wicked note allowed by D. Bancroft, to the overthrow of the Goſpell: the note is prefixed to Saint Mathewes Goſpell. Thus it ſtandeth.
                  The poſteritie of Sollomon left in Ochozias: wherby the kingdome was tranſported to the line of Ioas ſonne to Iuda.
               
               
                  The bane of this banned croft.
                  Iewes ſweare that Bancroft and all that would teach againſt their native iudgement for the ſtorie of the Kings, that Ioas was not the ſonne of Ochozias, and all to Iechonias, were of Salomon, ſuch were ſhameles Atheiſtes, and no Graecian ever denyed that. And all ages have allowed Ioſephus in this, that Salomons houſe held on to Iechonias. The Giddiheadines of this forged ſmithery, is ſo more contemptuous of God in that Ioas is ſix times termed the ſon to Ochozias in as plaine tokens of propertie, as ever any was called ſonne to his father. A D. of grace ſhould not allowe the Kings ſtorie to bee ſo contemned. And twentie yeares agoe I wrote in my Concent enough to haue taught anie man of grace the trueth of this poinct. But D. Bancroftes libeller againſt Archb. Whitg. and Biſhop Wintons Syllogiſme (for the Creede to meane a going vp to Paradiſe in the Godly) thought that booke to be atormēt for his vnlearned ſoule: and Bancroft allowed the Lunatique libell againſt the Brittiſh nation, from the ſlyme of a Fiſhemongers ſpawne, that God reſerved him to a moſt iuſt reproofe, for moſt deteſtable dotage, not ſo much from olde yeares, as from olde

contempt of trueth. God doth nothing but he telleth his ſervantes the Prophetes: as when hee meant to end Salomons houſe in Iechonias, he ſware to Ieremie it ſhould ſo fall out: and bad him proclaime it to all the earth. But he tolde no ending in Ochozia, but cleane contrarie ſix times a continuance. There a D. of any grace beſides his title, ſhould not allow ſuch graceleſſe Divinitie, to the overthrow of Saint Matthew and Ieremie in the Kings ſtorie, and Ezra for the Chronicles and of Saint Luke as giving wicked Ioas a name never given him▪ without any token of being otherwiſe called: But I haue written ſufficiently of this in the treatiſe of our L. Familie, whereof I haue ſent 250. copies to Archbiſh. Bancroft, with 50. commentaries vpon the Lamentations, to beſtowe on what Preachers he will: at his owne price.
               
            
            
               Article VII.
               
                  Of his breeding the Goſpell high contempt, touching Governours.
                  In the table of Davids houſe touched afore, this alſo is allowed.
                  RHeſa governed 66. yeares. Iohanna. fiftie yeares, and others in their portions. No Iew ever heard that any of theſe governed one houre. So ſhould theſe ſet before the Goſpell, make Iewes thinke the Goſpell is not true: Nowe that Iewes deſire to be taught, ſuch trappes ſhould be remooved, and not allowed by a D. of Grace.
               
            
            
               
               Article VIII.
               
                  Of a Iudaiſme invented by wicked Iewes to overthrow the Goſpell, and confuſion of the Kings ſtorie.
                  Thus the Iewes reaſon:
The true Redeemer of the world redeemeth in a Iubilae: that they gather moſt learnedly from Levit. 25. as in Zohar vpon that place: and Rimchi affirmeth it vpon Ezek. 4. where he would haue the 25. yeare of his captivitie, and 14. after the citie was ſtroken to be the Iubilie: and to containe a viſion of Meſsias that ſhould redeeme in a Iubilee. The latter is true:
                  
                  That Meſſias redeemed in a Iubilee: but the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Ezekiels viſion was but the xxv. towards a Iubilee, and 25. yeares afore was the xvii. Iubilee: and the Paſcha of Ioſias the middle of a Iubilee xxv. yeares in it, yet our notes vpon Ezek. 1. make Kimchi true, that Ioſias Paſcha was in a Iubilee: ſo it were vnpoſſible to ſhew from any ſenſible beginning f
                        ••
                      the firſt Iubilee, parted by fifties ſhould fall out with our Lords death. D. Bancroft was herein ſo ſimple allowing this note as when he allowed Maiſter Livelies Iudaiſmes in more high extremitie, then Aben Ezra would wiſhe, or any.
               
               
                  How the Iubilees end with our redemption, openly ſhewed in my Concent.
                  The Lande was parted the VII. yeare of entring into it the next yere they were to reckon ſeaven times ſeaven yeres that is 49. yeares, and the fiftie ſhould be a Iubilee yeare, an
                        •
                      
                     
by the Chronicle the xxviii. Iubilee 1400. yeares falleth out iuſt with our Lords death, in a wonderfull pleaſant diſtinction, as I haue often ſhewed. It coſt me infinit paynes to finde out the Iubilees agreement with the Chronicle to fall by moſt noble ſtories, vpon the redemption 
                        〈◊〉
                      AD. of learning and grace, ſhould not allow bane ſo malitiouſly invented Iudaiſme to diſturbe both Teſtamentes.
                  Maiſter Andrew Melvin expounded my booke in Scotland: D. Bancroft could allow it with the Scottiſh miſt, al villanie of ſcoffing from his & the libellers cariage. your Grace may require him to anſwere quietly to all this: and afterwardes I will charge him with Tobias Athean fable, and Syraſides the breeder of Arius, Maiſter Livelies diſturbance of all the Bible: and heathen trueth for tymes. And your G. may Biſhop D. Bancroft, catechiſing him to allow no more ſuch croftes of bane: but to looke when his ſoule ſhall aſcend to Haides, to Gods throne: to finde Gehemather for raving againſt trueth, & allowing leaſing: whom in time your Grace ſhall be holde from Abrahams boſome in Haides. Amen.
               
            
            
               Article IX.
               
                  Of fifteene ſcore idle wordes in fifteene verſes, and not only idle but perverting the ſenſe.
                  D. Farar a Iew thus diſputed againſt our Goſpell: If the Goſpel ſhew not how Chriſt cometh of David, it is all in vaine. For that is the maine.
                  But Mathew and Luke both handle Ioſephs houſe, and Ioſeph was not Father to Ieſus: and other Evangeliſtes paſſe ouer the matter: Therefore your Goſpell is in vaine. He fled

to our common tranſlation, which D. Bancroft alloweth.
                  I anſwered in this maner: The Greeke is plaine. Ieſus was filius Ioſephi, as men thought, filius Elii, and filius Dei. and all there, from Elii haue relation to Ieſus, as Fathers after the fleſh, to him who in the ſpirit the holynes is God, to be bleſſed for ever: and the relation is not to ther next naturall ſonne. Whereby our vncircumſpect tranſlation helpeth the Athean vilanie of Iudaiſme, obſcuring the honour of theſe 75. iuſt men, as Thalmudiques ſpeake of iuſt, higher then the Angells created to ſerve them. And the wordes bee idle, which was the ſonne: theſe foure wordes ſeaventie-five tymes, are idle, that is three hundred times: and obſcure and make tedious a moſt heavenly matter: where Ieſus is moſt plainly ſhewed to be the ſonne of David, & he not Adam the ſonne of God.
               
            
            
               Article X.
               I Sent to the learned & gratefull Doctor theſe three bookes bound togeather, Our Lordes Familie, honouring the K. Coheleth, and Lamentations, given to P. H. and I thought he had ſo much witt as to give ſage thankes, as they that bee made Lordes without giving money to friends, to come by their title: but I was farre deceaved. He raved and ſaide, the Kings Knight was a lying flatterer. And that the K. gave no promeſſe, that he might give the lie to the K. too, and threatned that he would ſtay the King.
               But if I can prooue he chirpeth one ſyllable to hinder the opening of our glorious Goſpell to the Iewes, and driving off all Chriſtians to their deſired conſent of agreement for

ſtory: as Papiſtes, Lutherans, Genvaees ſage Preachers, and our BB. all but twoo ſilver Speared, wiſhe: Franckfurt Mart ſhall beare me witneſſe I will give in Ebrew and Greeke to D. Bancroft that knoweth neither, the good Doctor, the Anathema. Maran, Atha, that as wicked Ioakim was buried like an Aſſe for burning the infinite pleaſant witty ſixfold Alphabeted Lamentations of Ieremie, which matter I touched aboue. So that Richard Bancroft may be with all Chriſtians wiſhe, an other Vladiſlaus for toying with the glorious Goſpell of our ſalvation. If Heathen could ſee Salmoneus tormented in tartarus of Haides, for counterfaiting Iupiters thunderboltes, and the flames of heauens: all Chriſtians will hartily wiſhe that Wormes and Vermins badd doe die quickly as a Moth, that will be thundering and lightning againſt Chriſt, who by gentlenes allureth the vnrepenting heart vnto amendement. But I hope all will be well.
            
            
               Article XI.
               SAint Luke againe is moſt vnlearnedly iniured, in wreſting his moſt witty ſpeach into moſt groſſe leaſing. This tranſlation the vnlearned D. alloweth to be read for Gods word, Act. 7.8.15. and 16. And Iacob deſcended into Egypt and died: he and our Fathers, and were carried over to Sychem: and were layde in the Sepulchre that Abraham bought for money, of the ſonnes of Emor, the ſonne of Sychem. Heere a Doctor ſhould ſee errour: Iacob was not carried to Sychem. Abraham bought no buriall there: the buriall there was not bought for money, but for ſheepe.
               And our margent expreſly damneth the text: ſaying, Heere appeareth an errour. That is true. But in the Biſhops tranſlaſlation

not in Saint Lukes worke. So where Saint Luke hath Haides for Abrahams Lodge, and katelthein eleven tymes for paſſages, without regard of inferioritie, they who rave againſt the true meaning of the Greeke, vpon their owne barbarous tranſlation, being for the originall as black to white, rave from their owne weake heades againſt God the Author of wittie ſpeaches. S. Stephen had, as the Angells face, ſo a Prophetes tongue. Doctor Bancroft ſhould not allowe corruption for their heavenly ſpeach. Care herein would make an Archb. ſooneſt finde Grace, to make ſound his title. If it pleaſe you that ſome of your Gentlemen Catechize or Biſhop D. Bancrofte in theſe poinctes, he ſhall be farre more worthy the title of a D. and G. then he is cōtinuing in theſe errours.
            
            
               Article XII.
               THis argument Iewes of olde vſed againſt vs and the Turkes ſtill, as Arias Montanus noteth againſt Erostratus, and the Pope againſt Zuitſerland: by D. Piſtorius 1598. and Rabbi Farrar, yet vrgeth the ſame at Amſtelredam. A Teſtament corrupt in parte looſeth authoritie for the whole: That will I graunt: and I taught D. Piſtorius that I ſafely might.
               
                  The Aſſumption.
                  
                     Arias Montanus maketh a great worke of the double Ebrew readings in 848. places, that the margent checketh the text as corrupt in Babylon: and for Geneveans, Rob. Stepha. praefac. ad Nov. Teſt. ſayeth, they were notes of differing copies, and Edward Lively checketh the Biſhoppes for tranſlating the text, Daniell ninth, as checked by the margent: and wiſe D. Banecroft conſpired to commende him, for checking

the Biſhopps deſerving beſt, and he alloweth againſt the Biſhopps, the corrupt Geneva, Ioſias begate Iacim, Iacim begate Iechonias: where the Biſhoppes haue, Ioſias begate Iechonias.
                  
               
               
                  Concluſion.
                  Therfore he betrayeth the Goſpell to Iewe, Turke & Pope.
               
               
                  A
                        •
                     ſw
                        ••
                     e.
                  D. Bancroft ſeeing he would aſpire by wiſdom to be guilty of all errours, committed in his charge, ſhall be left now: as the Biſhoppes with Maiſter Lively for Dan. 9. and with the Geneva for Michals children, 2. Sam. And againe Math. 1. for adding Iacim full badly: whom the Biſhopps ſagely omitted. Now I will defende them for Iakim reiected: and that by the reaſons following.
               
               
                  Reaſons why the copyes muſt be holden corrupt that haue Iacim, Math. 1.
                  1. None who know the Ebrew to bee Iehoiakim, would ſoone beleeue, being learned, that the one halfe, the latter halfe ſhould be the Apoſtles Greeke: that 
                        •
                      ſhould be ſwallowed vp. So Iewes would ſay, that Levy was a Publican not a Grammarian, and the honorer of the Goſpell muſt bee a ſingular Grammarian. Wher though vnebrewed Greekes in Euſebius bring Iacim, the Lxx. ſtill have Iehoiakim. This argueth that Beza and the Geneveans had little Ebrew, as their Ebrew Profeſſour bragged: that he would ſell the great Bomberg for fourteene Frenche crownes (ſolde for 33. at Leidon) becauſe they little eſteemed Ebrew, becauſe Mercerus was deceaved by them.
                  2. Saint Matthew had three ſortes of men to ſpeake off:
                  
                     Fourteene all Fathers to our Lord 
                        〈…〉
                      earthly kingdome.
                  Fourteene of idolatrous houſe: & none without blemiſhe.
                  Fourteene of another houſe of Nathā, poore in this world: but Kings of an eternall kingdome, Dan. 7.
                  Now if Ioakim were in the ſecond company, then it had fifteene: and wicked Iechonias muſt ſit at table with the moſt holy: and the Virgin Marie muſt be caſt out: without conſideration of whom Ieſus could not be knowen Ioſephs ſon, for the right of the kingdome. Therefore the Geneveans litle knewe Saint Mathewes purpoſe: As. Calvin and Beza miſſed as the Iewes concerning the Romanes: falſlie holden the fourth Kingdome.
                  3. Ioiakim King of Iuda, was ſo hateful, as deſtroyer of all, Temple, Cittie, Kingdome, that after the returne the Iewes enacted that in their Thalmudiques they ſhould either name Zedekias to be King in his ſteed: as in the Miſna or Babylonian Thalmud: where the Comment noteth that Zedechias reigned not before his brothers ſonne, and his brothers death: but for hatred to Ioakim his Name was lothed: Solom. Iarchi handleth the ſame.
                  4. In Ieruſalemy and the Babylonian when they diſpute what men of Iſraell may be determined to haue periſhed for euer, many be named, as Ieroboam, Achab, Iecheſai, Manaſſes, Ioakim: But ſome hoped of all ſaving Ioakim: all damned him as ſure of deſtruction. And although Ieſus the high Sacrificer honored the name, calling his ſonne Ioakim, yet that proſpered not: for Eliaſib his ſonne ioyned with Sanballat, Nehem. 13. to make a chamber for him about the Temple, that in Zacharies viſion Ieſus had vncleane apparell, for his ſonnes faultes: and none amongſt all the other returned, are

called Ioakim, Nor any among all the Iewes named in the New Teſt. Whereby it appeareth that the communaltie hated the name: and ſcoffed it in the Fable Suſannas.
                  5. I ſhewed one Rabbi Elias at Baſill, how learnedly Saint Matthew diſcarded wicked Ioakim: not as a Publican but as a Thalmudique: and how Saint Luke brought Cainan ſon to Arphaxad as the Lxx. and 75. ſoules, Act. 7. for 70. And S. Paule brought yeres 450. after a ſort. for 339. as Thalmudique and Ioſephus: and how Iohn placed the xii. ſtones Lawlier like by the Tribes deſert, Apoc. 21. Then he admired Saint Mathew and the reſt, and requeſted mee to handle their Goſpell in ſuch Ebrew as I ſpake, and ſaide I ſhould turne all their nation. And now the Iewes of Hanaw haue choſen that very Rabbi to deale with me: that if I perſwade him, they will all be Chriſtians. I tolde I wiſhed they knew our groundes firſt, and ſawe Chriſt through all the Lawe. It had bene a great glory to the Weſt, that our Archb. and Biſhops, could in Ebrew ſhew Iewes, that we haue Biſhops in their ſenſe, as our Apoſtle requireth. So, I would yeeld as I haue done, twelve yeres, the Place & Pay vnto them for opening the Bible in Ebrew. Their zeale at the leaſt ſhould be ready▪ and will to glory of Chriſt, the morning ſtarr, Pſa. 22. as Kimchi doth expound it: an enimie to Chriſt, yet ſerving Chriſt, for Apoc. 2. & 21. Their zeale ſhould be readie, that we ſhould not be as Babylonian Lucifer: in opiniō a light giver, in trueth darknes of confuſion. I doe not know how they can looke to be ſaved careleſſe to ſhew Iewes the great ſalvation firſt ſpoken by the Lord himſelfe, and left by the Apoſtles for al holy to declare. The like occaſion was never offred vs to celebrate the glory of our Goſpell, to ſhew how faire it paſſeth the Thalmudicq. in their own kinde, & hath no ſpeach heard, but in their veine all is ſpokē: though they

could never beleeue how God was in Chriſt. The faithles Iewes Apocrypha never medle with Chriſt: & Iewes holde vs to be eſtranged from God, by thinking fables to be ſadd matter. For that let Iochim be marked in the fable of Suſanna, to the purpoſe of diſcerning text.
               
               
                  The fable of Suſanna.
                  6. The fable of Suſanna, contayneth in a play the canon againſt Ioakim▪ any skilfull in Iudaiques would ſoone ſee the ieſt: that Daniell ſhould bee but twelve yeares old in Babylon, for 90 at Cyrus reigne: that captives ſhould have courtes for life and death: and ſtately houſes: and great riches without known deſert, and Iudges to looſe their wittes in ſeeing of a Diana: to conſpire her death, with a Lucian ſtorie: theſe might teach all whom to much want of learning with conceit of ſome witt, maketh not madd with Feſtus, that the ſpeach is a Iudaique dalliance to trappe an aſſe, like the Athean fable of Toby: that dareth give Angells names, and fayne a ſtorie which the Thalmudiques never heard, nor the Prophetes of latter tymes.
                  And the Fable is of purpoſe a fable, as much as any part of Ovid or Lucian: So Suſanna in this tenour.
                  The Iewes holy People are called Shuſan of Salomon, Cant 2 when they were a Lillie among thornes in Babylon, and the Perſian citie Suſan, named of Lillies plentifull in their fieldes, bare ſwaye, then they might play vpon their hope, & turne their Tragedie into a Comoedie.
                  Now in the Lamētations, God is to Iuda Helki, my portion: So Iuda was daughter to Helkiah: Ioakim the King was man to the common weale, and Husbande to Suſannas, and aucthour of the carriadge to Babell, the Caldeans were the Iudges that deſired to ſtayne the Religiō of the Church: But Daniell in high place, was a defence: ſo that he tolde Ch. 5. that the K. ſhould be killed: & then Darius reigned, Astyages
                     
in the fable. This fable might haue taught the Geneveans to haue hated Ioakim, as they well hate the Apocripha, wherof not one ſyllable ſpeaketh of Chriſt, though Galatinus would wreſt a worde of fooliſh Barue that way: That God would be ſeene on earth: to bring a ſpiders webbe for the incarnation.
                  7. Robert Stephen, had ſixteene ſeverall old Greeke copies: of them fifteene had not Ioakim, only one had it. Now what iudgement would bring one againſt fifteene, without rare ſtronge argument?
                  8. Tranſlatours take the greateſt care to follow true copies: and they that will tranſlate, vnable to iudge of copies, are vnadviſed.
               
               
                  But the tranſlation Syriaque, Arabiques, Diverſe, the olde Latin, the Ethiopian, whether truly old, or forged at Rome, the Perſian theſe heard not of Iacim:
                  Therefore Beza did not wel to fill Europe now fiftie yeares with Millions of Teſtament copies, which God never allowed.
                  
                     Beza lately called backe his errour, in his notes, and in ſome Greeke & Latin: So he convicteth all of wicked blindnes that followed him to corrupt millions of Bibles over Europe. Now while the world ſtandeth, all will not caſt off the wicked errour. Our Archb. and Printers ſhould begin, and give warning of Genevean deceipt. Franciſcus Lucas, a very learned Papiſt, whippeth Beza for chooſing one corrupt copie againſt fifteene good, he taketh no notice of his revocation. And one man ſhold not truſt his owne wit againſt millions

not his inferiors, to alter Gods worde. And the French printed at Geneva, & againe at Rochel, followeth the corrupt copie, to denie ſtill our maine holde.
                  That the Scripture is this maine holde ſure in text: Theſe harmes would haue ſtirred an Archbiſhopp of learning, to haue looked to his dutie, and not to conſpire to a Libell againſt all Chriſtianitie, and civill honeſtie, and common witt, that the Iewes Epiſtle was forged. When hee can anſwere to theſe blames, he ſhalbe the Archbiſhop, and all Grace ſhall dye with him, And the ſmall booke of Scriptures Concent ſhall abide ſkoffes.
               
               
                  Of our Lords time to ordeyne the Supper: groſſe errours allowed by D. Bancroft, after ſufficient advertiſement.
                  THe Paſcha was to be killed the fourteenth day of Niſan in the Temple, the place that God would chooſe. And it was death not to obſerve the day and place, but by the exceptions conteyned in the Lawe: Both the Paſcha of hocke-beaſt, Lambe, or kidde which ſtood vpon expreſſe cōmandment, Exod. 12. and Paſcha of Oxe & Ram, Deut. 16. which was a permiſſiō. The whole ſtorie is in 2. Chr. in Ioſias, theſe were killed both in one day. The Lambe was eaten al at one meale, or the remnant was burnt: the other might continewe for two dayes as the peace-offring, but not vnto the ſecond morning: and for that, they that kept it, kept the whole day feſtine with their brave apparell, & good cheare, as Thalmud Ieruſalemy in Paſach noteth. That is noted of S. Iohn 18. The ignorance of Rabbines for that Paſcha, made ſome feigne that our Lord prevented the Iewes a day: that

zeale wāted knowledge: For ſo he had not eaten the Lambe kild in the Temple, and ſo he had broken the Law: But hee ſawe his Lambe killed in the Temple, and his owne ſad caſe, the Lambe flead, as him ſelfe crucified naked: the Lambes blood poured on the Altar, as his owne blood on the altar of the Croſſe, the Lambe made a ſacrifice, as him ſelfe a ſacrifice: the Lambe ending ſacrifice, as his death then ending all ſacrifice.
                  Now Bezaes note followed of vs, would make our Goſpell wicked, as teaching that our Lord kept not the Lawe. Saint Marke taught the trueth plainly: That the day on which they ſacrifized the Lambe, the Diſciples asked where he would they prepared.
                  May mony in C
                           •
                        rbaan Paſcha ſheweth that the Lambe was carried from the Temple to the private houſes: when the fatt was brent in the fire, and the blood by ſacrificers brought in golden cuppes, from the firſt by the reſt vnto him that ſtood at the Altars foote. Now the Altars foote had ſpoutes, and the ſacrifices blood was reſerved for vſe of Gardens.
                  The Goſpell needed not to handle this which all the Nation knew: and reaſon would tell that ſo much blood muſt haue an end. The Libeller that skoffed Rabbique ſtudies, & D Bancroft the allower, ſhewe to al Learned, that they come ſhort 40. yeares ſtudies of fitt learning to ſee how the Apoſtles alike ſpeake plainlie to the Iewes knowne affaires: and when they prophanely skoffe openers of Gods trueth, The Anathenian Maran Atha muſt be noted to be neare them.
               
               
                  Of the tyme of our Lordes ending ſacrifice.
                  This ſaving action was tolde by the Angell Gabriell exactly

490. yeares afore the performance, as the holy Athanaſius noted. The notes vpon the Biſhopps vſed Bible end the 490. yeares at the comming of Chriſt. Another Table prefixed to Eſdras, endeth rightly the 490. yeares at our Lords death: But by old Greekes, deceavers and deceaved, beginneth not from the Angells ſpeach as trueth requireth: But long after, to make all of Meſſias a lye.
               
               
                  Of the name CHRIST, Dan. 9 denyed by Maiſter Lively, Bancroft
                        •
                     s allowed, to ſignifie our Redeemer.
                  I ſhewed in my Advertſement, how haynouſlie Maiſter Lively offended in denying the terme Meſſias, Dan. 9. to bee our Lord. Now I may be ſhorter. Firſt of all let Studentes mark this, The learned in Ebrew, that Meſsias never cometh in Ebrew, as Iohn 1. & 4. but only in Dan. chapter the ninth, in all other places it is, anointed. And in Daniel our Biſhops verie fagely and moſt ſoundly tranſlate, both places Meſſias: and the ſaying of his redemptiō in perfection of Ebrew skill: Meſsias ſhall be ſlaine, and not for him ſelfe: Saint Paule maketh that the ſumme of his doctrine: how he taught nothing but that which Moſes and the Propetes taught, that Chriſt was to ſuffer, and being the firſt from the dead ſhould ſhew light vnto the world. So S. Paule tranſlated in Act. Iicareth, to ſuffre, as in other places often, and Saint 1. Peter 3. Maſter Lively trrnſlated partly againſt his purpoſe, partly againſt Ebrew. and atheanly, againſt all wit, Meſsias ſhall have no being. He taketh Meſsias collectivelie for the governour. None ever tooke Meſsias ſo. Now to ſay, that Meſſias ſhould have no being. D. Bancroft will graunt that to be Epicurean deniall

of ſoules immortalitie. Now it is a wonder how Bancroft ſhould ſo diſgrace all our Biſhops chriſtianitie celebrated from the Angells wordes, through the new Teſtament, and allowe Maiſter Lively in moſt vnlearned, fooliſh & ſenſeles Iudaiſme Whereas our Biſhopps ſo ſoundly handled the matter, that the ſharpeſt enemie of Iewes yeeldeth vnto thē. His wordes I haue printed in many thouſand copies: and I wiſhe all Iewes over the world, and all Chriſtians had them, they be the bande of all the holy Chronicle, and confirme our old Athanaſius, and our Biſhops beſt notes. Marke well.
               
               
                  Of Aben Ezra the Iewe, moſt envious, more Chriſtian then our D.D.D.
                  
                     Aben Ezra Commenter vpon Daniell in the Ile Rhodes, above five hundred yeares agoe, a great Aſtronomer, and regarding Greeke Recordes of Eclipſes, as the fables and prating of our Apocrypha: thus he writeth vpon Dan. 9. The 490. yeares reach from Daniells prayer to ſealing of Meſsias the holyneſſe of all holynes. I cited to Maiſter Livelies hand Aben Ezra, Chriſt his enemie, for Chriſt: He and Barrabas & Ananias, ſhould not admit the enemie againſt Chriſt: that may be heavily blamed: that the enimie ſpeaking for Chriſt, the beſt: ſhould be reiectected, and cited in Athean malice.
               
               
                  Of Olympiades.
                  Games in Graecia kept in Olympia every fift yeare, helde full ſower yeeres. Many kinde of games they had: and ſome writers reckoned now from one, now from another, ſo doth Thucidides: as Yorkeſheire from the horſes of Gaterley race:

and before Alexander ſonne to Olympias, they regarded them as we would dates from horſe races. Afterwards Greek
                        •
                      Hiſtories for the Macedonians honour in Aſia conſpired to caſte Alexanders warre, to Olympiade an hundred and eleven. But at Babells no certeinly had they. For men then alive ſaw Olympiad. 6. or 25. or 55. or 80. The old Greekes in Clement ſtrom. 1. differ vnſpeakeablie from allowance of thoſe trifles that Lively citeth as a childe, to checke the Angell of God: and to ſeigne that Ezra ſonne to Saraias lived two hundred and foure ſcore yeares: as I charged Bancroft. He that profeſſed Greeke, from 18. and read and practiſed it to high olde age, will teach Bancroft that Lively might haue ſeene Olympiades caſte Cyrus ſurpriſing of Babell to Olympiad 80. as Beroaldus caſteth them: & Cyrus brought 100. yeres nearer our Lord: as Ezraes lives teach, then Bancroftes barbarous Greekeſhip dreameth: And ſo Bancrofte ſhalbe convicted to haue moe errours in head then titles in Lambeth: as Archb. Wh. was tolde he ſhould if he diſturbed the Angells limites: which ſpeach ſett Livelie on worke hoping for reward. But as he complayned Archb. Wh ſhewed him no countenance. Theſe Olympiades might haue wiſed, by Maiſter Ioſeph Scaliger, the yeares from Cyrus taking of Babell three yeares before his death in 27. of his reigne, vnto the Conſulſhip of Brutus were but 16. for by his count of Olympiades Cābyſes reigned Olympiad 65. and, yere the firſt Brutus 68 yeare, the firſt. Now if I proove, that Brutus was Conſull Olympiad 85. the firſt yeare then Cyrus tooke Babylon in the 80. Seeing 17. afore Brutus Conſulſhip ſo that our Lord ſuffering in the 202. ſhould, as his holy Angells tolde, be ſeaven ſeaventies, after the ſeaventie of Babell: And thus I make my ſyllogiſme.
                  
                     
                     
                        If Brutus Conſulſhip fell to Olympiad 85. and to 16. or 17. yea
                              •
                           es after Cyrus tooke Babell, Cyrus tooke Babell at Olympiad 80. and but ſeaventie ſeavens before our Lords death.
                     
                     But a moſt highly commended olde worke in Greek and Latin titled, Faſtis Siculis, found in a Librarie of Sicilie printed by Comelin at Heydelberge, bringeth Brutus to Olympiad 85. the firſt yere, and ſo Conſuls 70. leſſe then Onuphrius of late gathered from marbles: and that 70. is the difference of Maiſter Scaliger from Beroald.
                     
                  
                  So by Olympiad and by Conſuls, Beroald overcommeth the Grand Scaliger, much more Caiphas, with Barabas. And ſo all Churches, Albion in our Geneua: France in in Genebrard: Portugals in Hector Pintius: Heydelbergh in Tremelius: Zurich in Wolphius: the millions of the companies ſhall bee iudged to follow God & his Angell: as the captivitie prophetes, teach infinitlie, and all the new Teſtament. And Barabbas & Caiphas, allowing Maiſter Ed. Lively, wilbe found as vnlearned and as braſſen faced wightes, as ever were ſtroken with Anathema Maran Atha. I ſhewed more ſearch of Greekes for Daniel, then all that ever were before me, for the common clearing of the Goſpell: and the builders of Iericho, the prophane contemners of trueth, the railers againſt their owne good, ſhall feele they buy eternal flames, denying our Lords death to be in tyme according to the prophecie, as they denyed his coming into the world, to be in due eſtate of time, when the double Macedonians were argued to fall: and denied his paſſage frō the croſſe to the Father, againſt the Goſpell

and the Greeke ſumme of faith: honouring Hell with their Athean Lies, that they, in the courſe they hold, may be ſure to haue it their eternall lodging. But all who love the trueth, will holde all the former poinctes aright, to make a pleaſant Scripture Concent.
               
               
                  Of Generall contempt of all the Bible.
                  WHereas Rabbi Abraham Ruben ſtirred vp by the Agent, M. Edw. Barton, of godly memorie, ſent an Epiſtle to England, requeſting an explication of our Goſpell to his Ebrewes: and againſt this cauſe D. Bancroft conſpired a libell, that the Epiſtle was forged: his blames herein be manie and great. Iewes would thinke him diverſlie enemie to Chriſtendome. Firſt, that he envied their honoring of Chriſtians, as better in Ebrewes then them ſelves. They ſay, they did never ſo before: and thinke they ſhall never do ſo again. Secondly, that he laboured to hinder the glorie of the Goſpell: where they heard that one brought all the Bible into frame, evē by Thalmudiques. Thirdly, that he envied Iewes ſalvation: which doeing argueth that he never knew God: nor hath for him ſelfe any ſure hope of life. As the Iewes would compaſſe ſea & lande to make one proſelyts, ſo they would require equall zeale in vs, if we be of God. Beſides Iewes all men would holde this dealing bad. The Agent endorced the Iewes Epiſtle to me, and it came to London and to Croydon, and Bancroft might haue read it, if hee could: and ſhould be ſure what it conteyned before he would conſpire to libell that whē it was ſent to Baſill, another was printed in ſteed of it. Beſides Archb. Wh. ſente me worde that he would give me allowance to anſwere, if I would requeſt

that. But I ſaide, I could not defende Englande. Which denyed the ſtorie of ſalvation for our Lords paſſage hence to the Father, through the veile of his fleſh into the moſt holy. Bancroft libelling that I forged the Epiſtle, that the people ſhould require no anſwere, little pleaſed God, or any ſage men. Moreover, all learned will ſweare he was vnlearned, that would thinke any of Chriſtian ſtudie in Ebrew & Rhetorique could followe the Rabbin for ſtyle: and perpetuitie of ſpeach: with contempt of periodes. Beſides, none would nor could counterfait the whole matter: over and beſides, a Iew in London tranſlated that into Latin: and D. Bancroft might haue enquired how that differed nothing from that Printed at Baſill. Moreover, ſagenes would not ſoone beleeue that the Vniverſitie of Baſill would allowe a thing to be printed, which might in any ſorte bee thought forged. Iewes from Prage receaved from a Iewe of Baſill fieldes one copye: they write to him, that the Byzantian Iew was their beſt Rabbin, and was drawen to favour Chriſtianitie by one of England: and would cauſe other Iewes much diſturbāce. The Iewe ſpake this to Syr Iohn Payton and his tutor at Baſill: and our Marchants from Thrace reporte that the Iewe doth acknowledge his Epiſtle Printed as he ſent it: & daylie teſtified to Graecians, that he never hoped to ſee ſo much for our Goſpell as he read from one of England. Hence all may ſee what D Bancroft is: voyde of Religion, cōſcience, iudgement and reverence of men: as when he conſpired to execute Barrow and Greenwood for beleeving as Archb. Wh. and D. Bilſon proove moſt ſubſtantially, that the Greek Creede taught. Such dealing hath not lightly bene heard, that men ſhould die for beleeving as their accuſers beleeved. Though they were condemned for diſturbance of the State, that was

pardoned if they would come to Church. And they pleaded the addition vnlawfull: to ioyne with them that beleeved falſlie our Lordes ſoule went to Hell. And well they might: as Archb. Wh. and D. Bilſon agreed with them: yet D. Bancroft ſtill vrgeth honor for Hell: as telling of his bent thither: even as endevouring to hinder clearing of the Goſpell for Iewes. So hee raved at blame of Geneveans, bragging, as he libelled that, Armiferam Thracen qui regat alter erit, and raved againſt opening of our Lordes Familie, and threatned to ſtay the K. from allowance to cleare our Goſpell to Iewes: All theſe dealings warne that hee bee not a Maran Atha. Sharpe warninge may ſave him, if hee haue any G. beſides his title. This twelve yeares iniuries call for vengeance. When Q. E. ſent me word that I ſhould choſe my preferment, and meant a ſpeciall place: he by learning prevented that. And that nothing greeved me. But wher he brent my bookes for theſe wordes, as treaſon: The King of our language: and brent them twice: once vnder Q. Eliz. againe vnder K. I. I haue merveiled how he is in favour after ſuch dealing. Alſo he brent an Epiſtle to Archb, Wh. which hee allowed, for the true meaning of the Creede: as though that pranke ſerved not ſatan in high diligence. Beſides, he conſpireth to a libell, Blaſpheming that our Lord ſhould ſay: The Kings of the nations tyrannically rule over them. This blaſphemy is Athean Barbarous. And when I at Baſill fought againſt the Popes Chalenger for Bancroftes faith, then the thankfull Papas or Father (the name is not bad) was content that a libell ſhould kome againſt God, againſt all learning, againſt the K. and Bretanes all: Pretending to deale but with one. And in that he giveth me the terme Aſſe, He, or Bar Lo

giveth the Name. But I hope all that marke my penne, will bidde them take their owne terme to them ſelves: And I humbly require leaue to pleade with Doctor Bancroft, with as much freedome for my bookes to be read, as hee had for the Libell, moſt Athean againſt God and man. I might doe good teaching Doctor Bancroft how his faith & proceeding agree with the worde of God: though not ſo much as in opening all the Bible in Ebrew to all the world: I might doe good: but not the moſt good. But whereas he threatned he would hinder your Maieſtie from the moſt glorious argument, that can be offered to honour your Kingdome: if hee have prevailed that your Maieſtie will deſpiſe that cauſe, I humblie requeſt leaue to complaine of his proceedinges ſo, as Francfurt Mart, may quietly trie betweene vs. I would gladlie keepe Peace with all men, and if your Archb. could be quiet: I could otherwiſe haue ſpent my time, and not medle with your Eccleſiaſticall men. But whē ſhalow Scholers cannot be quiet, your Maieſtie will not bee angrie at a penne of Pacification.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   