
      
         
            
            The holy Genealogie of Ieſus Chriſt, both his naturall Line of Fathers, which S. Luke followeth, chap. 3. And his Kingly line, which S. Matthew followeth, chap. 1. with fit notation of their Names. By H. Br.
            
            
               To the Chriſtian Reader.
               
                  THE holy Genealogie of Ieſus Chriſt (may not be reckoned in the number of thoſe prophane ones, which S. Paul condemneth in 1. Tim. 1.4. for it) doth not conſiſt in a vaine repetition of Names, (as many doe thinke) neither is the knowledge thereof ſuperfluous, (as ſome doe affirme;) But verily (if it be rightly vnderſtood) it is of exceeding great vſe and conſequence; not onely to prooue Chriſt to be the promiſed Seede, (which is a weightie poynt;) But alſo it ſerueth as a ſpeciall guide, to direct vs in the true vnderſtanding of all the Holy Storie: For the natiue iudgement of all men teacheth, that Hiſtories cannot be learned rightly, without knowledge of the Perſons vpon whom the Narrations goe. That beeing ſo, all that looke for Saluation by Scripture, which calleth vs vnto our Sauiour, ſhould haue a ſpecial care to know our Lords Line: for vpon it, all the Stories go principally; either in open phraſe of words, or elſe with ſome cloſe relation: as hee that will take but a ſerious view of our Lords line of Fathers, ſhall ſoone ſee, how all the Holy ſtorie dependeth vpon it, and from it, as from a Fountaine, doth branch it ſelfe into a moſt pleaſant varietie of all Gods holy proceedinges, in the wonderfull preſeruation of his Church, and in the fearefull ouerthrow of all the enemies thereof.
               The Ebrew hath kept a perfect Regiſter of all their Names vnto Dauid; but

after that Dauid had the promiſe of the Celeſtiall Throne, (2. Sam. 7. Then our Lords kindred was kept in priuate Recordes, all ſauing foure: As Nathan for the firſt, and three others of him, that inherited Salomons right: And yet notwithſtanding the God of Wiſedome, hath not ſuffered thoſe Names (which the Ebrew hath omitted in the old Teſt.) to periſh in obliuion; But the Holy Ghoſt hath been exceeding carefull, to ſet downe (in Greeke) a perfect Regiſter of them all, in the very forefront, (euen like a moſt ſtately Vlam or Porch,) before the Temple of the New Teſtament.
               And yet, it is a moſt lamentable thing to conſider, how many men doe peruert and obſcure this glorious entrance of the bleſſed Goſpel, to the great hurt of all Chriſtianitie, & to the great hardoning of the poore blind Iewes in their obſtinate reſiſting of all our Goſpel: For ſay they, If ſo many groſſe errours (as many Chriſtians haue broched for currant truth) be ſet in the very forefrunt of all the N. Teſtament; then Chriſt is not come in the fleſh, neither is our N.T. from God. Which aſſertion cannot be denied, if it be true, as many doe affirme: Firſt, That Salomons houſe did end in Achazias. Secondly, That King Ioas in Mat. 1. and Simeon in Luk. 3. are all one man. Thirdly, That Ioachaz a younger Brother, was made Father to Ioakim two yeares his elder. Fourthly, That Salathiel was the naturall Sonne of Iechonias, notwithſtanding Gods Oath, that he ſhould die childleſſe. Ier. 22.
               But to cleare the holy Genealogie of Ieſus Chriſt from theſe, and many other groſſe errours, it will not be amiſſe, firſt to lay downe a briefe Table, to reconſile S. Matthew and S. Luke: which ſhall begin no higher then Dauid; becauſe the maine errours, are chiefly found in his poſteritie. And after this, ſhall follow a more large Table of all our Lords Fathers, with briefe obſeruations vpon their Names; which ſhall be layde downe in their true diſtinctions, and with notations agreeable to the Ebrew, and to occaſions, holden fitte to giue them names at their birth times: And herein we may conſider the wonderfull prouidence of God, cloſely diſpoſing their Names, to that which in Storie ſhould be moſt famous: For it is euident, that the Names of our Lords line, were ſagely giuen by the guidance of Gods ſpirit, and in more wiſe ſort, then euer any fieigner could thinke vpon; as the diſcreete Reader may eaſily diſcerne, by the correſpondance of their Names, which abridge the Holy Story. The Syria
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   or Chaldy, Arabi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   and Ethiopian, are as Ebrew.
               
               
                  H. Broughton.
               
            
            
               
               A BRIEFE TABLE, RECONCILING S. Matthew and S. Luke: with Notes to cleere them from the errors of ſome, aforenamed.
               
                  DAVID.
                  
                     
                        Math. 1.
                        SALOMON.
                        Roboam.
                        Abia.
                        Aſa.
                        Ioſaphat.
                        Ioram.
                        
                           
                              They are greatly deceiued, that end Salomons houſe in Achaziah, & bring aboue 600. errours into ye Genealogie: Beſides, they deriue our Lord from moſt wicked folke; though he honoured all his true Fathers with ye gift of fayth, being the roote of goodnes, whom we are to follow in the honouring of our Parents, and can not goe before him.
                           Achaziah, Theſe badde 3. and worſe Iehoiakim, which were kild for euill ruling, S. Matthevv omitteth.
                        Ioaz.It is a great errour of many, that make this Joaz and Simeon in Luk. 3. to be all one perſon: for Simeon there, is the ſon of Iuda, and Ioaz here, is the natural ſon of Achaziah, (for Salomons houſe did not end in Achaziah:) as we are taught by ſixe plaine teſtimonies of ſcripture, 2. king. 11, 2.13, 1.14, 13. 1. Chro. 3.1
                                 •
                              . 2. Chro 22.11.23.3. Theſe badde 3. and worſe Iehoiakim, which were kild for euill ruling, S. Matthevv omitteth.
                        Amaziah. Theſe badde 3. and worſe Iehoiakim, which were kild for euill ruling, S. Matthevv omitteth.
                        Ozias.
                        Ioatham.
                        Achas.
                        Ezechias.
                        Manaſſes.
                        Amon.
                        
                           
                              Whereas Ioſias begetteth Iechonias and his breathren, Math. 1. vnderſtand by breathren, couſins: That Ioſias the Grandfather, begat vnkles to Iechonias, as Tzedechias is called his brother. 2. chro. 36.10. but he was properly his vnkle, and brother to his father. 1. chro. 3.15. 2. king. 24.17. and he is alſo his ſonne for ſucceſſiō. 1. chro. 3.16.Ioſias.
                        
                           
                              It is a wonderfull thing that any man of learning, ſhould be ſo much deceiued as to make Iehoiakim an elder brother (and the naturall ſonne of Ioſiah) to be the naturall ſonne of Ioachaz, who was two yeares his younger: as the text it ſelfe doth planely ſhew. 2. ki
                                 •
                              k. 23.30. 2 chro. 36·Iakim, or Iehoiakim.
                        Iehoiachin, or Ie-chonias. Hee ended Salomons race: for God ſwore, that he ſhould leaue no Child behind him, Ier. 22.24. Wherfore it is flat atheiſme to prate, that he naturally became father to Salathiel. Although S. Luke had neuer left vs Salathiels familie vp to Nathan, yet Gods oath, Jer. 22. ſhould make vs beleeue it. And when Zorobabel of Salathiel is choſē for Gods ſignet (in the place of Jec
                                 •
                              onias) Aggi, 2.24. then Zacharie taught chap. 12.10. that they were of the familie of Nathan. And yet it is true alſo, that Jechonias begat Salathiel (to wit) as a ſucceſſor to the Kingdome; and ſo S. Matthevv doth meane: for any Learned know, that he beginning with the term
                              •
                            of begetting, might not depart frō it, where the cuſtome of ſpeach ſuffereth the catachreſis: But yet the Iewes in Sanedrin foll. 38. ſay, That Jechonias by repentance called backe Gods oath: and ſtill they teach, that Chriſt muſt come of Jechonias. That errour ſendeth millions dayly to Abaddon.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Luk. 3.
                        NATHAN.
                        Mattatha.
                        Mainan.
                        Melea.
                        Eliakim.
                        Ionan.
                        Ioſeph.
                        Iuda.
                        Simeon.
                        Leui.
                        Matthat.
                        Iorim.
                        Eliezer.
                        Ioſe.
                        Er
                        Elmodam.
                        Coſam.
                        Addi.
                        Melchi.
                        Neri.
                        Salathiel.
                        Pedaiah.
                        Zorobabel.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ZOROBABEL.
                  
                     
                        Mat. 1.
                        *Abiud. He was alſo called Moſollam, 1. Chr. 3. That is, Hee ſhall be ſetled in
                            Salem
                              •
                            
                           (and ſo Naaſlon named Salmon, in this ſence.) The Crovvne belonged vnto him, and to the reſt: and although Heathen kept them from it, yet they vvere ſetled in the Salem of a better kingdome, foreuer & euer. Dan. 7.18.
                        Eliakim.
                        Azor.
                        Sadoc.
                        Achim.
                        Eliud.
                        Eliazar.
                        Matthan
                        Iacob.
                        Ioſeph. Hee ſhould haue been King, if Tirants would haue giuen all men their right: and ſo our Lord (his ſonne by Lawes eſteeme) had been King of the Iewes: But would haue it in no other right, that his heauenly Kingdome might be knowne.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Luk. 3.
                        
                           ☽ Rhefa. Hee is alſo called Ananias, 1. Chro. 3. A remēbrance of Annanias the noble martir; the glory of men, that quēched the fire: he was fitly tearmed ſo, a father to Chriſt; that quencheth Hell fire, from burning his ſeruants.
                        
                        Ioanna.
                        Iuda.
                        Ioſeph.
                        Semei.
                        Mattathias.
                        Maath.
                        Nagge.
                        Eſsi.
                        Naum.
                        Amos.
                        Mattathias.
                        Ioſeph.
                        Ianna.
                        Melchi.
                        Leui.
                        Matthat.
                        Eli.
                        Mary.
                        IESVS CHRIST.
                     
                  
               
               
                  In this emptie place (ſeeing we are in reconciling of the beginning of S. Luke and S. Matthew togeather) it will not be amiſſe, to ſpeake a litle in particular of their ſeuerall beginnings.
               
               
                  Of S. Matthewes beginning.
                  S. Matthew begins the ſtorie of our Lords Fathers, no higher then Abraham: Firſt, becauſe the Land of Canaan, where the Kingdome ſhould ariſe, was firſt promiſed to Abraham. Secondly, Chriſt was firſt promiſed to him in open diſtinct plaine words. Thirdly, he is made Father of all the Heathen, which ſhould follow his beliefe: & the Heathen were to offer firſt fruites at Ieruſalē; as Maimony noteth, Bechor. per. 4. and ſo for Iewes & Gentiles, the beginning from him, is very fit.
               
               
                  Of S. Lukes beginning.
                  S. Luke, (before he comes to lay downe the whole Naturall line of Chriſt) hee doth in the firſt place▪ ioyne the end of the Old Teſtament, to the beginning of the New: A moſt heauenly worke. And heere note the very names. Zacharj & Malachj, end the ſpeach of God in the old Teſtament: and Zacharj and Malachj (that is, Iohn Baptiſt) are the firſt ſpeach of the Angell Gabriel in the New. So ſweetly both Teſtaments doe kiſſe one another: that it is not fit for the hid Apocrhipha to come betweene, to hide and obſcure their glorious coniunction.
               
            
            
               
               The holy Genealogie of IESVS CHRIST: Both his naturall line of Fathers which S. Luke followeth, chap. 3. And his Kingly line, which S. Matthew followeth, chap. 1. With fit notation of their names.
               
                  ADAM,
                  
                     Earthy. In my Obſeruations vpon theſe firſt 10. Fathers, their notation is more largly opened.
                  Seth,
                  
                     Sette. Called ſo properly by foreſight, that his houſe onely should continue.
                  Enoſh,
                  
                     Sorrowfull. So called, for Idolatrie then ariſing.
                  Kenan,
                  
                     Lamentable. So called, for Idolatrie then ariſing.
                  Mahalaleel,
                  
                     Prayſing God. As in ſorrowes, that is all our comfort.
                  Iared,
                  
                     Deſcending. Called ſo, becauſe the world went from euill to worſe.
                  Enoch,
                  
                     Dedicated. Meant to God: as he walked with him.
                  Methuſhelah.
                  
                     A weapō againſt death. Becauſe during his life, he kept off the flood▪
                  
                  Lamech,
                  
                     Smitten. For not til his dayes, the Fathers die; & then al ſorrowes come to ripe hart ſmiting.
                  NOAH. 10.
                  
                     Comfort. His notatiō is manifeſt Gen. 5.
                  Shem,
                  
                     A name. His notation is opened in a treatiſe of Melchiſedek.
                  
                  Arpachſad,
                  
                     A healer of very ruines. S. Luke ioyneth Cainan to Arpachſad; vvhich the 70. firſt feigned, to delude Heathen: vvhom S. Luke▪ follovveth as a reporter, but not as a iudge.
                  Shelah,
                  
                     A Branch or Twigge.
                  
                  Eber,
                  
                     Paſſing: In and out, as the branches of a tree doe.
                  Peleg,
                  
                     A deuiſion. In his time Tongues were deuided, and mans age halfed by the building of Babel.
                  Rew,
                  
                     His like. Both liued iuſt equall yeares. 239.
                  Serug,
                  
                     A principall 
                           •
                        ine.
                  
                  Nahor,
                  
                     Heated. As continuing the ſtrength of the Vine.
                  Terah,
                  
                     A ſcent. It ſhould haue bin as that in Cant. 1.2. but it fell out contrary.
                  ABRAM,
                  
                     A father high. A name too ſtately for a mā, & therfore better changed
                  Abraham,
                  
                     A father of a great multitude. A name too ſtately for a mā, & therfore better changed
                  Iſaak,
                  
                     Laughter, or Gladneſſe.
                  
                  Iacob,
                  
                     A ſupplanter. Called alſo, Iſrael, Mightie with God.
                      Heere beginneth the diſtinction of Iewes from Gentiles.
                  Iudah,
                  
                     Prayſe of God.
                  
                  Phares,
                  
                     A breach maker. By occaſion at his birth.
                  Hezron,
                  
                     The middle of ioy. He was borne in the middle, betwixt the Promiſe and the Lambe.
                  Aram,
                  
                     High. Though borne in baſeneſſe, in Egipt.
                  
                  Aminadab,
                  
                     A noble people. Though baſe in Egiptian eyne: all good are Aminadab, in Cant. vvhere the Latine keepeth the terme Aminadab.
                  
                  Nahaſhon,
                  
                     Experimenter. He had experience of the Promiſe from Egipt.
                  
                  Salmon,
                  
                     Set at reſt. (In the land.)
                  Booz,
                  
                     In him ſhal be ſtrength. That appeared, when old Booz begat Obed
                  
                  Obed,
                  
                     A ſeruant. A ſtay to his old kindred.
                  Iſhai,
                  
                     Subſtanciall. Though baſe in Sauls eies; yet he is honorably mentioned a Father of Chriſt: The root of Ieſſai.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The Kingly line by Salomon: which S. Matthew followeth. chap. 1.
               
                  DAVID,
                  
                     Beloued. (Now for the Naturall line, looke to Nathan. ☞—
                  Bathſeba,
                  
                     The daughter of oath. Kimchi thinketh that Dauid ſwore that her Son ſhould reigne, whē her name was but Bath-ſhuange (a noble daughter) and was changed therevpon into Bath-ſhebange.
                     
                  
                  Salomon,
                  
                     Peaceable.
                  
                  Roboam,
                  
                     The inlargement of ye people. Though it fell out othervviſe.
                  Abia,
                  
                     My Father is Iah, God.
                  
                  Aſa,
                  
                     Healing. Syria
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           :
                      It fell out fit, in his ſeeking to Phiſique.
                  Ioſaphat,
                  
                     The Lord is Iudge. His name is vſed appellatiuely in Ioel. for Gods iudgement.
                  Ioram,
                  
                     God is high.
                  
                  Achaziah,
                  
                     God catcheth. As he did him indeed,
                  Ioas,
                  
                     Deſperate. And ſo he had bin, but for Iehoiadah, that ſaued him frō 
                     Athaliah.
                  
                  Amaz-iah,
                  
                     Strong in God. He vvas ſo in his ovvne conceit, as Ioas king of Iſrael telleth him: But Ioas his father in Barachias dayes, gaue him a name, that might haue kept him from Edoms Gods, to cleaue vnto God, that made him conquer Edom.
                  
                  
                     Vziah, or Azariah,
                  
                  
                     Iah-God is my ſtrength.
                     
                  
                  Io-tham,
                  
                     Iehouah is ye perfect.
                     
                  
                  Achas,
                  
                     (God) catcheth.
                  
                  Ezekias,
                  
                     My ſtrength is Iah-God. And ſo he vvas againſt Zaneherib: but vvhen he began to boaſt in his vvealth, as his ſtrength, then he is told, that his poſteritie shall ſerue in Babels court. Eſa. 3.9.
                  
                  Manaſſeh,
                  
                     A cauſer to forget: The former ruines of Iudah; but he cauſed more.
                  Amon,
                  
                     A Nurſe. But he nouriſhed Idolatrie.
                  Ioſias,
                  
                     My fierie (zeale) is Iah-God. So named whē Ieroboā fell to Idolatry.
                  Iehoiakim,
                  
                     God will ſtabliſh: The ſeat of Iudah, though Babel captiue it.
                  Iehoiachin.
                  
                     
                        God will ſettle. The Infidell Iehoiakim gaue him that name in diſgrace of Ieremie, telling of the Captiuitie: But God reuenged it; for in him, Salomons race ended, the Crowne ſubuerted, and the Diadem was caſt away: Then his race fayling, they were to ſeeke an Heire of the next of kin; And that was *Salathiel ☞ the naturall Sonne of Neri, of the line of Nathan, the brother of Salomō, (for from him by right, was to ſpring the ſucceſſors of Iudahs Kingdome:) So that Salathiel the naturall ſonne of Neri, in ſucceſsion of place, is called the Sonne of Ieconiah, 1. Chro. 3.17. who had indeed▪ no ſonne by naturall propagation, but dyed childleſſe, Ier. 
                           •
                        2.30. And yet in right of the Kingdome, Salathiel ſucceeded him as Heire. And in that ſence S. Matthew doth ſay, Iechonias or Iehoiakim begat Salathiel. Math. 1.12.
                     Marke the woonderfull prouidence of God in this Familie, that all this while, nor after for the Kings line, they neuer named two by one name; becauſe it would much haue troubled mens memorie: as the nigh names Iakim & Iachin, haue troubled Greekes and Latines exceedingly, taking one for the other.
                  
               
            
            
               
               The naturall line by Nathan, which S. Luke followeth chap. 3.
               
                  The line of DAVID by Nathan, is called the Holy ſeed. Eſa. 6.13.
                  
                  
                     NATHAN, is Salomons brother of Bathſheba. 1. Chro. 3.
                  
                  
                     
                        In theſe, regard ſtories and ſentences of faith, from the Patriarkes: as Ioſeph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei alſo is of the ſame notation) Leui twiſe, Eleazar twiſe, Iuda twiſe. The often repetition of like names, ſheweth that the line was not He
                              ••
                           e to the c
                              •
                           owne, wilſt they named them otherwiſe then they did in the crowne line.
                     
                     Giuen (God) hath giuen. The Prophet Nathan told Dauid of this ſpeciall Sonne: and after the Prophets name he vvas to name the Child of vvhom Chriſt should come. Againe, Nathans ſonne
                        In theſe, regard ſtories and ſentences of faith, from the Patriarkes: as Ioſeph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei alſo is of the ſame notation) Leui twiſe, Eleazar twiſe, Iuda twiſe. The often repetition of like names, ſheweth that the line was not He
                              ••
                           e to the c
                              •
                           owne, wilſt they named them otherwiſe then they did in the crowne line.
                      
                     Mattatha, hath a name of the ſame force, to cauſe better marking: as tvviſe alſo Matthat, and tvviſe Mattathia. All call to ma
                        •
                     ke Nathans name & caſe. A principall matter.
                  
                     
                        In theſe, regard ſtories and ſentences of faith, from the Patriarkes: as Ioſeph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei alſo is of the ſame notation) Leui twiſe, Eleazar twiſe, Iuda twiſe. The often repetition of like names, ſheweth that the line was not He
                              ••
                           e to the c
                              •
                           owne, wilſt they named them otherwiſe then they did in the crowne line.
                     
                     Mattatha,
                  
                  
                     A Gift: As euery Child is for the Parents.
                  Mai-nan,
                  
                     Waters of breeding. Be like the mother bore many other childrē, or the familie was populous.
                  Melea,
                  
                     Full. That ſeemeth to be giuen by like occaſion.
                  Eliacim,
                  
                     God can ſettle.
                  
                  Ionan,
                  It is all one with Iohn In the Greeke. 1. Chro. 3. or after the tongue of Iſmael, much neere Iſaaks. So it is in the Arabi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tranſlation (in the ſecund Ioanna.)
                  Ioſeph,
                  
                     God will adde. They name not their children by any younger Patriarke then Iudah, except by the vvorthy Ioſeph. The onely named after the Patriarkes. In Geneſis their notation lieth.
                  Iudah, 2.
                  
                     Prayſe of God. They name not their children by any younger Patriarke then Iudah, except by the vvorthy Ioſeph. The onely named after the Patriarkes. In Geneſis their notation lieth.
                  Symeon,
                  
                     Hearing. They name not their children by any younger Patriarke then Iudah, except by the vvorthy Ioſeph. The onely named after the Patriarkes. In Geneſis their notation lieth.
                  Leui,
                  
                     Coupled. They name not their children by any younger Patriarke then Iudah, except by the vvorthy Ioſeph. The onely named after the Patriarkes. In Geneſis their notation lieth.
                  Matthat,
                  
                     A Gift. As Mattatha, and Nathan.
                  
                  Iorim,
                  
                     God will make high. As Ioram.
                  
                  Eliazer,
                  
                     My God hath the ſtrength.
                  
                  Ioſe,
                  
                     Saluation. As the Aethiopiā tranſlation follovveth the Ebrevv terme vvith the letter Ain in the end: vvhich later Greeks omit, & the Ieruſalemie, & the other Talmud
                  Er,
                  
                     God is vigilant.
                  
                  Elmodam,
                  
                     God meaſureth. A memorie of Ioctans familie.
                  Coſam,
                  
                     Foretelleth: Or all one with Chuſan. A memorie of the Aramite Chuſan, for ſome high cauſe; as that Manaſſe or Amon were new Chuſans.
                  
                  Addi,
                  
                     My Ornament: As any good child is to his parentes.
                  Melchi,
                  
                     The King is mine.
                  
                  Neri,
                  
                     
                        The Candle is mine. As Dauid is called Ner (Light of Iſrael. 2. Sam. 21.17.) they knevv by Sop. 1.8 that Salomons race should faile, 

                           In theſe, regard ſtories and ſentences of faith, from the Patriarkes: as Ioſeph 4. times. Simeon once (Semei alſo is of the ſame notation) Leui twiſe, Eleazar twiſe, Iuda twiſe. The often repetition of like names, ſheweth that the line was not He
                                 ••
                              e to the c
                                 •
                              owne, wilſt they named them otherwiſe then they did in the crowne line.
                        ☜— and theirs be heires to Dauids Throne.
                  
                  *Salathiel,
                  
                     Aſked of God. Samuel
                      and hee, are of one notation.
                  Pedaiah,
                  
                     God redeemeth (from Babel.)
                  Zorobabel,
                  
                     
                        A fanner of Babel. This name glaunceth at Babel the Golden head beaten to duſt. Hee vvas in Babel (as Mercerus vvell gathereth vpon Aggi) Shaeſhbazar, chearefull in ſorrow
                         (of Babel.) A name not dangerous, as the other vvas in Babilon. Ezra. 1.
                     
                     
                        Z
                              •
                           robabel had ſonnes, Abiud & Rheſa: S Luke proſecuteth the line of Rheſa vnto Eli the father of Mary. And S. Natthew folloveth the line by the other brother Abiud, vnto Ioſeph th
                           •
                         husband of Mary: So that Ioſeph & Mary came both of the ſeed of Dauid by the line of Nathan. There is no diſagreement therefore found betvveene S. Matthew and S▪ Luke, but either of them haue deſc
                           •
                        ibed aright the true Genealogie of Chriſt. S. Matthew the Kinges line, S. Luke
                        ▪ the Fathers.
                  
                  
                     Abiud ☟*
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ooke to theſe marks on the other ſide.
                  
                  
                     Rheſa. ☟☽
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ooke to theſe marks on the other ſide.
                  
                  
                     
                     Zorobabel.
                  
                  
                     S. Luke followeth this line by Rheſa, being the Fathers line, and Saintes of the high Trini
                           •
                        ie. Dan▪ 7.18.
                  
                  
                     ☽ 
                     Rheſa,
                  
                  
                     The head. Though his brother Abiu
                           •
                        
                      vvas the father glory, as heyre.
                  Ioanna,
                  
                     The grace of God. A memory of the famous Iohn, Iehoi
                           ••
                        ah, or Barachias.
                  
                  Iudah,
                  
                     Prayſe of God.
                  
                  Ioſeph,
                  
                     God will adde.
                  
                  Semei,
                  
                     Hearing. All one with Simeon.
                  
                  Mattathias,
                  
                     A gift of God.
                  
                  Ma-hath,
                  
                     Broken.
                  
                  Nagge,
                  
                     Light.
                  
                  Eſsi,
                  
                     My prayſe or glory. As all good children are to their Parentes, of Chaſhal a Chaldie tearme; as novv Iudah ſpake 
                        •
                     haldy. ch. or ceth▪ is commonly omitted of the Greek
                        •
                     s.
                  Naum,
                  
                     Comort.
                  
                  Amos,
                  
                     Strong. So was Eſayes father called: or as Nahum, ſo Amos may be after the name of Amos the Prophet.
                  Mattathias,
                  
                     A gift of God.
                  
                  Ioſeph,
                  
                     God will adde.
                  
                  Ioanna,
                  
                     The grace of God.
                  
                  Melchi,
                  
                     The King is mine.
                  
                  Leui,
                  
                     Coupled.
                  
                  Matthat,
                  
                     A gift.
                  
                  Eli,
                  
                     Aſcending. As in his daughter & her ſon, the degree was higheſt.
                  Mary,
                  
                     High, or from bitternes of the ſea. A memory of Moſes ſiſter.
                  IESVS,
                  
                     A Sauiour: Being ſonne of Mary, of Eli, of Adam, of GOD: and ſo both God and Man.
               
            
            
               
                  S. Matthew followeth this line by Abiud, being the Kings line. The moſt of theſe names are of notation, arguing comfort againſt the Perſians and Greekes: And they are called in Daniel, The Saints of the high Trinitie, who ſhall poſſeſſe a Kingdome for euer and euer. Dan. 7 18.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        biud ☟ —☝
                     Abiud,
                  
                  
                     My father oweth the glory, (Not the Perſians.)
                  Eliacim,
                  
                     God will ſtabliſh. Theſe names are taken from Pſal. 89. which handleth the ſtate of Chriſt his Kingdome: as theſe men felt it not earthly, but ſpiritually.
                  Azor,
                  
                     Strength. Theſe names are taken from Pſal. 89. which handleth the ſtate of Chriſt his Kingdome: as theſe men felt it not earthly, but ſpiritually.
                  Sadoc,
                  
                     Iuſtice. Theſe names are taken from Pſal. 89. which handleth the ſtate of Chriſt his Kingdome: as theſe men felt it not earthly, but ſpiritually.
                  Achin,
                  
                     I will ſettle. That word is in Pſa. 89. verſ. 5. in the Ebrew text,
                  Eliud,
                  
                     My God hath the glory.
                  
                  Eliazer,
                  
                     My God hath the ſtrength.
                  
                  Matthan,
                  
                     A gift. Novv vvhen Iudah caſt off the Greekes, the names are of other matter.
                  Iacob,
                  
                     A ſupplanter. Remembrances of old comfort in Egipt, and the firſt of the Kings line, that are named after their Fathers. They novv end Iſraels line vvith tvvo the moſt famous names.
                  Ioſeph,
                  
                     
                        God will add. Remembrances of old comfort in Egipt, and the firſt of the Kings line, that are named after their Fathers. They novv end Iſraels line vvith tvvo the moſt famous names.
                     VVho vvas the Husbande of Mary the Mother of our Lord IESVS CHRIST, vvho being to be holden Ioſephs ſonne, by all Lavv vvas borne King of the Iewes. That he acknovvledged, Pilate graunted; and the Iewes could name none but Caeſar, to hinder his right. Alſo, the Starre declared thus much; and Herod ſought one borne a King. And after that he had confirmed the couenant for many, Dan. 9. then he is made Heire of a
                           ••
                        ; ouer all povvers in this vvorld and in that vvhich is to come. Amen.
                     
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            At London printed by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane.
            
         
      
   