
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  IOB. TO THE KING
                  A Colon-Agrippina ſtudie of one moneth, for the metricall tranſlation: But Of many yeres, for Ebrew difficulties.
                  
                  By Hugh Broughton.
                  Anno D. 1610.
               
               
                  
                  
                  TO THE MIGHTY Prince, IAMES, King of Albion France and Ierne, defendour of the faith in power & learning: Supreme governour vnder God, in his Lands.
                  
                     THe Eternal teſtified of Abraham, how he would teach his houſe to keep holy wayes. That hath ſtory in Iobs book: where moſt learned Princes, five of his howſe, ſhew Gods wayes for Chriſt: in ſuch eloquence, that may argue applying of all knowledge and their dayes that way. The ſtile is in his language for verſe, ſhortnes, and ſtrange words, as Pindarus in Greek: and fuller of difficultie, then all the other books of Adams tongue: And hath coſt me time and paines accordingly: more then my tranſlation of the Prophets volume into Greek: which work I think your Maieſtie hath: & more then my ſhewing of Scripture concent: and defending of it, againſt D. Reinolds and Mr Livelie, having 2000 yeres Libraries on their ſide: and more then my clearing of Daniel, and Apocalyps, to admiration of thowſands. God would have this book as a Iewel hid in the ground, not ſeen playn without paines. What I have done for your nations uſe, the King ſhould judge & recompence accordingly.
                  
                     Your M. m. h. 
                           •
                        
H. Br.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Chriſtian Reader.
                  THe names of God in the holy tongue have in them deep notation: and argue the ſpeakers knowledg. Iob onely of all the diſputers, & he but once, vttereth the holy name, Iehovah. The penner of the ſtory doth often: in preface & concluſion. The Poetrie of the work ſeemeth by Arabique terms Iobs owne. Many names of God are in this book, beſide Iehovah, which is of ſo large force and maieſtie that the Lxx never expreſſe the letters: nor the Iewes commonly pronounce it. Our Engliſh Pſal. 83. doth: I still, as the French, put Eternal, for it: for Elohim, God, and ſometime for Eloah, & El: But for better note: in Eloah, ſeldome in others, often here, Puiſſant: for El, cōmonly omnipotent: for Shaddaj, all ſufficient, and, almighty: Adonaj Iob hath ch. 28. and but once: which to ſhew I ſet Adonaj: as the Lxx in Ezekiel. Abraham first Gen. 15. vttereth that name: but Iob bringeth God the autour. Elihu expreſſeth Abraham for the trinitie in plural ſpeachIob. 35. 10. 
                     Ghoſaj, My makers. A tranſlater ſhould not hide ſo golden a matter. This one word had broken Arius and Machomed: that Christ ſhould onely be Machmad, delite it ſelf: & Daniel as Mary chamudoth by grace.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  IOB.
                  
                     
                        THere was a man in the Land of Uz, named Iob, & that man was perfect and vpright: and feared God, and eſchewed evil.
                     2. And there were borne to him ſeven ſonnes, and three daughters.
                     3. His Cattel alſo was ſeven thowſand ſheep, and three thowſand camels, & five hundred yoke of Oxen, and five hundred aſſes: with a very great family: and that man was the greateſt of all the ſonnes of the Eaſt.
                     4. And his ſonnes went and made a banquet, in the howſe of each one his day: and they ſent and called for their three ſiſters to eat and to drink with them.
                     5. And when the dayes of their banqueting were gone about, Iob ſent, and ſanctified them, and gate-vp-early in the morning, and offred for every one of them a burnt offring: For Iob ſayd, it may be my children have ſinned, and little-bleſſed God in their hart. So did Iob all the dayes.
                     6. And vpon a day, when the ſonnes of God came to

ſtand before the Eternal, Satan came alſo among them:
                     7. And the Eternal ſaid to Satan, whence cōmeſt thou:Our adverſary the Di vel goeth about like a roaring lyon ſeeking whō he may devour. 1 Pet. 5. 8. And Satan anſwered the Eternal & ſayd: from ſerching about the earth, and from walking in it.
                     8. And the Eternal ſayd to Satan, haſt thou ſet thine hart upon my ſervant Iob: how there is none like him in the earth: a man perfect and upright, fearing God, and eſchewing evil.
                     9. Then Satan anſwered the Eternal and ſayd: dooth Iob feare God for nought?
                     10 Haſt not thou hedged about him, and about his houſe, and about all that he hath on every ſide? thou haſt bleſſed the work of his hands: and his cattell encreaſe in the Land.
                     11. But ſend forth now thy hand, and touch all that he
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Divel, falſe accuſer, Gen. 3. and here, is taxed. hath, and then he wil litle-bleſſe thee to thy face.
                     12. And the Eternal ſayd vnto Satan: Behold all that he hath is in thyne hand: onely upon him ſend not forth thine hand: So Satan went forth from the preſence of the Eternall.
                     13 And upon a certain day, when his ſonnes and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in the houſe of their eldeſt brother,
                     14 A meſſenger came to Iob, and ſayd: the Oxen were plowing and the Aſſes feeding beſide them:
                     15 And Sheba fell on and took them: and the ſervants they ſmote with the edge of the ſword: & I onely am eſcaped alone to tell thee.
                     16 While he was yet ſpeaking, an other came & ſayd: a fire of God fel from heaven: and brent vp the ſheep and the ſervants, and ate them vp: and I onely am eſcaped alone

to tell thee.
                     17 While he was yet ſpeaking, another came, & ſayd: The Chaldeans made three troupes, and ſet vpon the Camels, and took them away: and the ſervants they ſmote with the edge of the ſword: and I onely am eſcaped alone to tel thee.
                     18 As he was yet ſpeaking, another came, and ſayd: thy ſonnes and thy daughters were eating, and drinking wine; in the houſe of their eldeſt brother:
                     19 And behold, a great wind came form beyond theBildad, chap. 8. 4. wildernes and touched the four corners of the houſe: and it fell vpon the young folk: and I onely am eſcaped alone to tell thee.
                     20 Then Iob aroſe and rent his cloke, and ſhaved his head: and fell downe vpon the earth and worſhipped:
                     21. And ſayd, Naked came I out of my mothers womb;1 Tim. 6. 
                              •
                           
                         and naked ſhall I returne thither: the Eternall gave, and the Eternal hath taken-away. Bleſſed be the name of the Eternal.
                     22 In all this Iob ſinned not: nor layd any blame on God.
                  
                  
                     Chap. II.
                     ANd vpon a day, when the ſonnes of God came to ſtand before the Eternal, Satan came amongeſt them alſo, to ſtand before the Eternal.
                     2 And the Eternal ſayd to Satan: whence commeſt thou? and Satan anſwered the Eternal, and ſayd: from ſerching about the earth, and from walking in it.
                     
                        3. And the Eternal ſayd to Satan: haſt thou ſet thine hart vpō my ſervant Iob, how there is none like him in the earth: a man perfect and vpright: fearing God and eſchewing evil: and yet he holdeth his integrity: yet thou movedſt me againſt him to vndo him without cauſe.
                     4. Then Satan anſwered the Eternal, & ſayd: ſkin for ſkin, and all that a man hath, he will give for his life.
                     5 But ſend forth now thine hand: and touch his bone, and his fleſh: and then he will litle-bleſſe thee before thy face.
                     6 And the Eternal ſayd to Satan: behold he is in thine hand: onely, ſave his life.
                     7 So Satā went forth frō the preſence of the Eternal: & ſmote Iob with ſore boyles, from the ſole of his foot, to the top of his head.
                     8 And he took him a potſhard to ſcrape him withall: and he, ſate downe among the aſhes.
                     9 Then ſayd his wife to him: Doeſt thou ſtil hold thy integrity: bleſſing God and dying?
                     10 And he ſayd to her: as a fooliſh woman would ſpeak, thou ſpeakeſt: Shall wee receive good from God: and evil not receive? In all this Iob ſinned not with his lippes.
                     11 Now three frends of Iob heard of all this evil which came vpon him: and they came ech one from his place: Eliphaz the Themanite, and Bildad the Shuchite, & Zophar the Naamathite: as they had agreed together to come to ſolace him & to comfort him.
                     12 And they lift vp their eyes a farr off, and knew him not; and they lifted vp their voice and wept: and they tent ech one his cloke: & ſprinkled duſt vpon their heads,

into the ayer.
                     13 And they ſate down with him on the earth, ſeven dayes and ſeven nights: and none ſpake a word vnto him; for they ſaw that his grief was very great.
                  
                  
                     Chap. III.
                     AFterwards, Iob opened his mouth and curſed his day.
                     2 And Iob ſpake and ſayd.
                     3. Loſt be the day when I was borne: and that nightHe pleadeth for this as well ſayd, Chap. 7. And Bildad blameth this, Ch. 8. whenas it was ſayd: a male child is conceived.
                     4. That day be turned to darknes: the Puiſſant regarde it not from high: nor light ſhine vpon it.
                     5. Darknes and ſhadow of death ſtayn it: that clowdineſſe dwel vpon it: ſwartnes of day make it terrible.
                     6 Myrknes take-away that ſame night: ioy may it not in dayes of the yere: nor come in the count of moneths.
                     7 Yea that night be turnd to ſorow: I wiſh no joyance come to it:
                     8. Curſe it may they who do curſe day: who wil hunt the Livjathan:
                     9. Dark be the ſtarres of that twylight: look may it for light, and none be: neyther, let it ſee the mornings eyliddes.
                     10. Becauſe it did not ſhut the doores of the belly which did bear me: and hid not ſorow from myne eyes.
                     11. Why did I not dy, from the womb, ſtarve coming out of the belly:
                     12 Why were knees ready to hold me: & what meant breſts to give me ſuck:
                     
                        13. For now I had layne downe quiet: had ſlept, & then had been at reſt:
                     14 With Kings and Counſellers of the earth: which built them deſolate places.
                     15. Or with Princes which had the gold: who fild their houſes with ſilver.
                     16 Or hid, as one borne out of time, ſhould not have bene: as young infants that ſaw not light.
                     17 There the vnquiet leave vexation: and there reſt the wearied in ſtrength.
                     18 The priſoners are all at eaſe: they heare not the oppreſſours voice.
                     19 Little and great are there all one: and ſervant free from his maiſter.
                     20 Why gives he light to the miſerable: & life to the bitter in ſoule.
                     21 Which long for death but find it not? yet would dig for it more then 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Mat. 13. 
                              •
                           4. hid-wealth.
                     22 Which ioy til they do ſkip againe: be glad if they may find the grave.
                     23 The wight whoſe waye is hid, over whom the Puiſſant caſts a covering.
                     24 For before my meat my ſighs come: & my roarings guſh like water.
                     15 For a fear I feared, and it arrived to me: and that which I dreaded is now come vpon me.
                     26. I had no caſe, no quietnes, no reſt: and now cō
                        meth a vexation.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. IV.
                     THen anſwered Eliphaz the Themanite, and ſayd:
                     2. If we make a ſpeach to thee, wilt thou hold it wearyſome: and who can refrain from ſpeaking?
                     3 Behold thou haſt inſtructed many: and ſtrengthened the weary hands.
                     4 Thy words have lift up the falling, & thou haſt confirmed bowing knees.
                     5. But now, it comes to thee, thou fainteſt: it touches thee and thou art troubled.
                     6 Is not thy religion thy hope: and thy right wayes thy confidence.
                     7 Remember now what innocent hath periſhed: or where the vpright have decayed.
                     7 As I have ſeen: plowers of ſorow, and the ſowers of miſery, do reap the ſame.
                     9. By the breath of the Puiſſant they periſh: and by the blaſt of his anger they conſume.
                     10 The roaring of Arjeh, Shachal, Cephir, Laiſh, Laby, be names of Lyons, ſundry in age and condition, playne in Ebrew notation: which I touch. Of Laiſh, in Greek 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            cōmeth, a Lyon; and of Laby, Low, in Dutch. the renting-Lion, and the voyce of the fierce-Shachal, and the teeth of the Lion-ceaux are brought to nothing.
                     11 The hardtwaſting-Laiſh periſheth for want of prey: and the whelpes of the hart-ſtrong-Laby are ſcattered.
                     12 A ſpeach came by ſtealth vpon me: and mine eare caught ſomewhat of it.
                     
                        13. In thoughtes of viſions by night: when ſleep fallsUirgil Aeneid. 2. ſo expreſseth a dreames time: Tempus erat quo prima quies mortalibus aegris incipit: et dono ſerpit gratiſſima divum. vpon ſorrowful-man.
                     14. Fear and trembling layd hold on me: and made all my bones afrayd.
                     15. And a wind paſſed afore me: which briſtled the hayres of my fleſh.
                     16. It ſtood vp, and I could not mark what kind of viſage it might have: An Image was before mine eyes: Silence was: then I heard a voice.
                     17. Can the ſorowful-man be holden juſt before the Puiſſant: can the humane-vvight be cleare before him that vvas his maker.
                     18. Lo he holdeth not As God is only good, and onely hath immortality, ſo light, and truth, & all, in perfectiō. perfection to be in his ovvn ſervants: and in his angels he judgeth not cleare-light to be.
                     19. Leſſe in dvvellers The body made of earth, is 2 Cor. 5. 1. the earthly houſe of our tabernacle: S. Paul calling vs to this oration of mans baſenes. ``Moſes toucheth this, Pſaſ. 90. teaching vs our miſerie: and repeateth Eliphaz terme, Dacca: Thou turneſt man to Dacca, to bruiſing miſerie: and ſayeſt, returne ye ſonnes of Adam. Pſal. 90. 3. in houſes of clay: vvhoſe foundation is in the duſt: ``beaten to povvder as a moth, be they.
                     20. Betvveen a morning and evening, they are vvaſted: vvithout guide they periſh for ever.
                     21. Man in honour continueth not: is made like the beaſtes that periſh: and all gift
                              ••
                            of reaſon above beaſts come to nothing. This oration ſhould teach Iewes & Gentiles to reiect all thought of juſtice by the
                              ••
                            works: ſeing they are dead in ſinne: that they may receive the abundance of grace of the gift of juſtice, to reigne by Christ, Rom. 5. 17. Iourneyeth not their excellency vvith them▪ They do die, but vvithout vviſdome.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. 5.
                     CAll now whether any will will like of thy grudging againſt God. defend thee: and to whom of the holy Ch. 36. 20. In that thou deſireſt night of death, Elihu will not like of it. wilt thou look.
                     2. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            4. 5. Aey doth anguiſh kil the evil: and indignation bring death vpon the ſot.
                     3. I haue ſeen the evil faſtening root: but preſently did I curſe his dwelling.
                     4. His children ſhalbe far from good-caſe: and ſhalbe brought low in the gate: & Deut. 32. 39. there ſhalbe none to ſuccour them.
                     5. The hungry ſhall eat vp his harveſt: which he had gotten through the thornes: and the thirſty ſhall ſwill vp their wealth.
                     6. For ſorow iſſueth not from the duſt: nor doth miſerie ſpring from the ground:
                     7. But 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           ▪
                         earthly-man is borne to miſerie, as ſparkes of fyer flee vpwards.
                     8. Doubtleſſe I would ſeek vnto ``the Omnipotent: & diſpoſe my talk unto God:
                     9. Who doth ch. 9. 10. Rom. 11. 33. great things, paſt ſerching out: wonderful, paſt number:
                     10. He giveth rayn vpon the face of the earth: and ſendeth waters vpon the open fieldes.
                     11. To ſet the humble on high: that the ſad be exalted with ſalvation.
                     12. He defeateth the purpoſes of the ſubtile: that there hands bring nothing ſoundly to paſſe.
                     13. He catcheth the wiſe in their ſubtilty: that the counſel of the froward is made raſh.
                     14. On the day time they ſtumble at darknes: and as in night they grope at noone:
                     15. And he will ſave the poore from the ſword: from

their mouth, and from the hand of the ſtrong.
                     16. And the needy ſhall find confidence: and Pſal. 107. 42. vnrighteouſnes ſhall ſtop her mouth.
                     17. Behold, bleſſed is the ſorowful-man whom the Puiſſant reproveth: Then, deſpiſe not the chaſtiſement of the Almighty.
                     18. For he maketh the ſore, & bindeth it vp: he woundeth, and his hands heale.
                     19. In ſix afflictions he wil ſuccour thee: and in ſeven, wrong ſhall not touch thee.
                     20. In hunger he will ſave thee from death: & in warr▪ from the edge of the ſword.
                     21. When the tongue whippeth, thou ſhalt be hid: & thou ſhalt not be afraid of ſpoiling when it cōmeth.
                     22. At ſpoiling and famine thou wilt laugh: and wilt not be affraid for the ſavage-beaſts of the field.
                     23. For the ſtones of the field ſhalbe at covenant with thee: & the ſavage-beaſts of the field ſhalbe at peace with thee.
                     24. And thou ſhalt perceive that thy tent ſhall have peace: and thou ſhalt look to thy dwelling and not miſproſper.
                     25. And thou ſhalt know that thy ſeed ſhalbe much: & thy ofſpring as the graſſe of the earth.
                     26. Thou ſhalt come 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         in luſty old age to the grave: as corne is reaped in due time.
                     27. Behold this: we have tryed it, ſo it is: heare it, and know thou it for thy ſelf.
                  
                  
                     CHAP VI.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2. Oh that To Chap. 
                              •
                           . 2. mine anguiſh were rightly weighed:

and that my calamities were lift in a ballance together.
                     3. For then it would be heavier then the ſand of the ſeas: therefore my words Ebr. are ſwallowed vp. come ſhort.
                     4. For the arrowes of the almighty are in me: whoſe venom drinketh vp my ſpirit: the terrours of the puiſſant camp againſt me.
                     5. Doth the wild aſſe bray 
                           Rambā. He meaneth that he crieth & complaineth not without cauſe: as the wild or tame beaſts do not: when they have all that they need. But he cryeth for his calamities. Aben Ezra ſaith, he spake this of his felowes which were in quietnes: how the quiet roar not, or cōplayn. at the graſſe: doth the ox low at his fodder.
                     6. Shall 
                           Rambam. Your ſpeach is not ſeaſoned with ſalt: I cannot abide it. the vnſavory be eaten without ſalt: or is there taſt in the white of the yolk.
                     7. Thoſe things which I would have lothed to touch, are now And can I choſe but cry in this caſe? the very ſicknes of my Lechem, is fleſh in Arabique. fleſh.
                     O that I might have my requeſt, and that the Puiſſant would give me my deſire:
                     9. That it would pleaſe God 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Phil. 1. 21. Death would be a gain to me. to bring me to duſt: that he would looſe his hand, and make an end of me.
                     10. So I In all this pang if God would make an end of me, it ſhould be my comfort: and I would take courage in my ſicknes to bear it: by my ioy that I ſhould dye: becauſe I profeſſed the religion of God. Abr. Ben. Peritz. Here is a cloſe touch of Jobs faith: for the immortalitie of the ſoule: by his deſire of death: to go from his pangs: and that he ſhould dye without ſinne to be worthy of the life of the world to come. ſhould yet find comfort: though I parch in payn: when he would not ſpare. For I kept not cloſe the words of the moſt-Holy.
                     11. What is my ſtrength that I ſhould have any hope: or what can be my end, that I ſhould To ſee proſperitie. Ch. 5. 26. prolong my life.
                     
                        12 Is▪ my ſtrength the ſtrength of ſtones? Is To ch 
                              •
                           . 18 my fleſh ſteell?
                     13 Have not I When I ſayd, the beaſts would not complain but in lack: and that your wordes were vnſavoury. Rā
                              bam.
                         my defence: and is judgement driven away from me?
                     14 By him whoſe mercie is molten toward his neighbour: and who leaveth the fear of the Almighty.
                     15. My brethren faile me as a brook: as ſtreames of brooks that paſſe away.
                     16 Which once are In winter when water is plentifull, yce & ſnow make them deep: But in ſommer they ar dry: that waters be ſcant in Thema. Eſa. 21. and Herodot: & all ſtories. black by yce: in which ſnow hideth it ſelf.
                     17 At the time of parching-weather, they are dryed vp: when it is hoat, they are quenched from their place.
                     18. They turne aſide from the paſſage of their way: they come to nothing and periſh.
                     19. The paſſengers of Thema had reſpect to them: the companies of Sheba had deſire to them.
                     20 They bluſhed that any had hope: they came to the place and were aſhamed.
                     21 So now, you are become 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            the double reading abridging the ſimilitude, given of God, may wel be tranſlated: as S. Luke, ch. 4. tranſlateth Eſa. 61. The Chaldy tranſlated the Margent: knowing that both have Gods authority. like that, even nothing: ye 
                           Tireu ve Tyrau: Here first commeth in ſweet ſounds: from hence very often in the Law: specially the Pſalmes. ſee dread & are afrayd.
                     22 Have I ſayd, Ye need not to feare in a cauſe wherein ye have no harme: But ye may quietly reaſon
                              •
                            & find, that I am not to be condemned for wickednes. Might in wordes cannot overcome right. give for me: and reward for me of your wealth.
                     
                        23. And ſave me from the hand of the afflicter: & redeem me from the hand of the violent.
                     24 Teach me Touching my complaint, Chap. 3. and I wilbe ſilent: & wherin I have erred let me vnderſtand.
                     25. How ſtrong are the words of rightfulnes: & what can your blame ſoundly blame.
                     26. Do ye think Becauſe Eliphaz, Ch. 5. 1. replyed vpō his wordes, he requiteth that here. to reprove words: & hold the terms of the forlorne a wind.
                     27 But In that ye count me wicked: ye lay a trap to make me fal. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in the new T. expreſſeth this. ye lay a ſnare for the orphane: as ye dig a pit for your neighbour.
                     28 Now therefore be content, regard me: for it is before your face if I do lie.
                     29 Change your mind now: Let not vnrighteouſnes be objected:  
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            in the text is referred to Iobs ſoul: which by a pathetical gesture of striking his breaſt he expreſsed: and then turneth his speach to his frendes▪ Becauſe this was hard for the ſimple, God gave in the margent a repetitiō: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            change ye your mind, yet. Be thou (my ſoul) of an other mind ſtill: my juſtice is in it.
                     Is there any evil in my tongue? cannot my palate declare all-kind-of-heavie-ſorowes?
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VII.
                     IS there not The labours of our life have an end by courſe of nature: ſo I may wiſh my ſorrowes and life ended. Chap. 3. a ſet time for ſorowful-man vpon the earth, that his dayes be as the dayes of an hireling.
                     2 As a ſervant doth breath vnto the ſhadow, and as an hireling would ſee his works end:
                     3 So I, So I iustly wiſhed to dy. Ch. 3. of force poſſeſſe ioyleſſe moneths: & nights of miſerie are numbred vnto me.
                     4 When I ly down then I ſay: when ſhall I riſe? and

the Evening, that is, night. Gen. 1. duſky-time be meaſured out? and I am full of toſſing too and fro vnto the dawning.
                     5. My fleſh is clothed with worme, & rubbiſh of duſt: my skin is rent and become lothſome.
                     6. My dayes are ſwifter then a weavers-ſhuttle: and are ſpent without hope.
                     7 Remember that my life is but a blaſt: mine ey ſhallWhat is our life? a vapour appearing, & preſently gone. Iam. 4 14. ſee no more pleaſures:
                     8. The quick ey ſhall no more view me: let thine eyes be vpon me: that I be no more.
                     9. A clowd conſumeth and paſſeth away: ſo he that goeth downe vnto the grave ſhall no more come vp:
                     10. Nor returne any more to his houſe: neyther ſhall his place know him any more.
                     11 Therefore I wil not ſpare my mouth: I will ſpeak in the diſtreſſe of my ſpirit: I will ſigh in the bitternes of my ſoule.
                     12 Am I a ſea? am I a whale, that thou haſt ſet me in priſon?
                     13 When I ſay, my couch ſhall comfort me: my bed ſhall leſſen my ſighing:
                     14 Then thou feareſt me with dreames: and frighteſt me with viſions.
                     15 That my ſoule had rather be choked to death, then to remaine with my bones.
                     16 I loth-live: I would no longer live: ceaſſe from me, for my 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Lxx. commōly, & Iam. 4. 14. life is but a vapour.
                     17 What is ſorrowful-man that thou doeſt make accompt of him: & that thou doeſt ſet thine hart vpon him.
                     18. To think vpon him every morning: to try him every moment.
                     
                        19. How long wilt thou not look away from me: not leave me till I ſwallow down my ſpittle?
                     20 I have ſinned: what ſhould I do vnto thee, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Lxx. Thou that lookest to the mind of men. o thou keeper of men: why haſt thou made me thy mark, that I am a burthen unto my ſelf.
                     21 Why doeſt thou not pardon my treſpaſſe, and take away my iniquity: whereas To be pitied of the keeper of men: I ly now in the duſt: why doeſt thou not I would by a quick death be rid from theſe paynes. quickly ſeek me out, that I ſhould no more be.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. VIII.
                     THen Bildad of Shuach anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 How long wilt thou talk in this ſort: that the words of thy mouth be a vehement wind.
                     3 Is 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Rō. 3. 5. God vnjuſt: or is the Almighty vnrighteous?
                     4 As Ch. 1. 19. thy children have ſinned againſt him, ſo he hath ſent them into the hand of their treſpas.
                     5 If thou wouldeſt betimes Act. 17. 27. ſeek vnto God; and call for pitie of the Almighty.
                     6. If thou wouldeſt be blameleſſe and vpright, then would he now rayſe thee vp, and proſper Thy ſoul. Aben Ezr. the dwelling of thee being iust. of thy righteouſnes.
                     7 And thy former ſtate ſhould be little to thy latter: that ſhould increaſe exceedingly.
                     8 Wherefore Ch. 32. 7 inquire now of the former age: & ſerch among their fathers.
                     9 For we are 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         but of yeſterday: and without experience: our dayes are but a ſhadow vpon the earth.
                     10 They will teach thee, tell thee, & vtter words from their hart.
                     
                        11. Can ſegges grow without myre? can great ruſhes encreaſe without water.
                     12 While it is yet in the ſtalk, not cut off, it withereth before any herb.
                     13 So are the pathes of all that forget the omnipotent: and the hope of the hypocrite ſhall periſh.
                     14 His That which he hopeth for ſhall ſtil flee from him. hope ſhall loth him: & his confidence ſhalbe a ſpiders houſe.
                     15 He ſhall lean vpon Eb. his houſe. it: but it ſhall not ſtand: he ſhall faſten on it, but it ſhall have no ſtay.
                     16. He is iuice-full afore Sun-riſing, and his ſuckers ſprowt over his orchyard:
                     17. At the wall his roots wrap: he platteth about the houſe of ſtone:
                     18 Yf the Sun Ramban. root him vp from his place: then one may deny him: I ſee thee no more.
                     19 Lo ſuch is the gladnes of his way: but Others ſhal proſper in the place of the wicked, taken away. from the ground others will grow.
                     20 Lo, the Omnipotent will not loath the perfect: not mainteyn the hand of the miſchievous.
                     21 Until he fil thy mouth with laughter: & thy lippes with ſhowting.
                     22. Thy foes Pſal. 132. 18. ſhalbe clothed with ſhame: & the tents of the wicked ſhal come to nought.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. IX.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:To chap. 8. 3. That God will destroy the wicked.
                     
                     2. Truely I know it is ſo: and how can a man be iuſt before the Omnipotent.
                     3. If he delight to plead with him: he cannot anſwer

him to one thing of a thowſand.
                     4. He is wiſe in hart, & mighty in ſtrength: who hath hardened himſelf againſt him, and found quietnes?
                     5. He Seas are wher moun taines have been: as betwixt Rhegium & Sicilie. Euſt. vpon Divnyſius. removeth mountaines, that men can not mark how he hath removed them out of their place in his anger.
                     6. He maketh the earth quake from her place: that her pillars tremble.
                     7 He ſpeaketh to the ſun, that it riſeth not: & ſealeth vp the ſtarres.
                     8. He onely can ſpread the heavens: Mat. 8. 26. & 14. 26. and walk vpon the high waves of the ſea.
                     9. He made Eb. Ghas Arcturus, Eb. Ceſil. Orion, & Eb. Chima. Pleiades: and the chambers of the ſouth.
                     10 He doth great things, Rom. 11. 33. even vnſerchable: & wonderfull, without number:
                     11 When When he ſheweth his iudgements in the world I cannot mark his counſel. he paſſeth by me, I cannot ſee him: when he flitteth by me, I cannot perceive him:
                     12 When Ch. 1. 14. & 17. he taketh away, who can make him reſtore? who can ſay unto him, what doeſt thou?
                     13. When the Puiſſāt wil not ſtay his anger, the Dan. 2. & 4. Nebuchadnez zar, &c. proud helpers ſtoup under him.
                     14 Much leſſe can I anſwer him: can I wiſh to have pleading againſt him.
                     15 Who if I were iuſt, I would not anſwer him: I would crave pitie of my judge.
                     16 If I crie, wil he anſwer me? I cannot beleeve that he wil give eare vnto my voice.
                     17 He wil 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Gen. 3. 15. bruſe me ſo with tempeſt: and wil multiply my woundes That none can blame him. freely.
                     18. He wil not ſuffer me to take my breth: but filleth

me with bitternes.
                     19. As for force, behold he is valiant: as for judgement, who wilbe my pleader?
                     20 If I will juſtify my ſelf, Luk. 19. 22. Rom. 2 1. myne owne mouth ſhall condemne me: If I will be perfect, it will prove me That is, vnperfect. perverſe.
                     21 If I be Elihu, ch. 33. 9. vpright: I know not myne owne ſoule: I am weary of my life.
                     22 This is vniforme: therevpon I ſpeak: Ch. 35. 3. perfect and wicked he conſumeth.
                     23. For with the ſcourge he killeth ſuddenly: He ſcorneth at the melting away of the innocent.
                     24 The earth Ch. 8. 11 is given into the hand of the wicked: who condemneth ſuch as would defend their country. Eſt. 7. 8. covereth the face of her judges. Now if not he, who doth this?
                     25 So my My proſperous dayes: ``Aba. 1. 8 dayes are ſwifter then a runner: they are fled, and ſaw no good thing.
                     26 They are flit as the Pirates ſhipps: as ``the Egle fleing to meat.
                     27. If I ſay, I will forget my ſighing: I wlll leave my woful-ſadnes, and be of comfort:
                     28 Then I am afrayd of all my ſorowes: I know that thou wilt not For holding my peace: for I tryed that long. cleare me:
                     29 I ſhalbe holden as wicked. Now why do I To have any long hope of goodnes. labour in vaine.
                     30 If I waſh my ſelf in 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            & 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            In waters: In ſnow water: The double reading hath a ſweet alluſion. ſnow: and cleare my hands in ſope:
                     
                        31 Yet thou wilt deep me In the grave: in the mire: and When I go naked to the grave: as though my clothes did loth me. my own clothes ſhall loth me.
                     32. Becauſe he is not a man, like me: that I might give him an anſwer, that we ſhould come together to judgement:
                     33 There is no Umpire. dayes-man betwixt vs: to lay his hand vpon vs both:
                     34 Let him To this Elihu ſpeaketh, ch. 33. take away his rod from me: that his terrour fright me no more.
                     35 I would then ſpeak and not fear him. For I am not As Gods ſcourge ſeemeth to make me: & your ſpeachet would. ſuch with my ſelf.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. X.
                     MY ſoule is weary of my life: when I leave my ſighing for my ſelf: I will ſpeak in the bitternes of my ſoule.
                     2 I wil ſay vnto the Puiſſant: condemne me not: Let me know wherefore thou pleadeſt with me.
                     3 Doth it pleaſe thee to oppreſſe: that thou doſt loth the labour of thyne owne Eb. palmes of the handes. hands? and ſhineſt upon the counſel of the My uniuſt blamer
                              •
                           
                         wicked.
                     4 Are Thou knoweſt the hart: and needeſt no further tryall. thine eyes of fleſh? doſt thou ſee as ſorowfullman?
                     5 Are thy Thou wantest no time, to teach thee knowledge
                              •
                            as men. Chap. 8. 8. 9. 10. to be chaunged in ſundry opinions. dayes as ſorowful-mans? are thy yeares as earthly-wightes yeres.
                     6 That thou ſeekeſt out my iniquity: and inquireſt of my ſinne.
                     7 Thou knoweſt that I am not wicked: yet Deut. 32. 39. none can ſave me from thyne hand.
                     8 Thy hands have faſhioned me: and have made me in every poinct: and wilt thou deſtroy me?
                     
                        9. Remember now, That as the clay thou haſt made me: and vnto duſt wilt returne me:
                     10 Haſt thou not powred me as milk: & crudded me like vnto cheeſe.
                     11 Thou haſt clothed me with ſkinne and fleſh: and thou haſt covered me with Ribbes deſending the belly. bones and ſinewes.
                     12. Life The immortal ſoule haſt thou given me: and mainteynest the powers of body and mind. and loving-kindnes haſt thou dealt with me: and thy 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         providence praeſerveth my ſpirit.
                     13 And theſe things thou haſt layd vp in thine heart: I do know that this is with thee.
                     14. When I do ſyn thou doeſt watch me: and wil
                           •
                         not cleare me from my iniquitie.
                     15 If I be wicked, wo is me: if I be iuſt, I dare not lift vp myne head: Be ſatiſfyed with confuſion, and behold my affliction.
                     16 How it fleeth vp: as the ramping-Schachal thou hunteſt me: and ſtil art wonderful againſt me.
                     17 Thou bringeſt new witneſſes againſt me: and augmenteſt thine ire vpon me: changes & ſtayed-army have I.
                     18 Why broughteſt thou me out of the wombe: Oh that I had dyed and no ey had ſeen me.
                     19 I ſhould be as if I had not been: brought from the belly vnto the grave.
                     20. Wil not he leave off a little in my dayes: ceaſſe from me for ſome refreſhing:
                     21 Before I go whence I cannot returne: to the earth of darknes and ſhadow of death:
                     22. Earth obſcure as myrknes it ſelf: ſhadow of death, voyd of order: (when light ſhineth) myrknes it ſelf.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XI.
                     THen anſwered Zophar the Naamathite and ſayd:
                     
                        2 Should much ſpeach be vnanſwered: & the One of lip labors with out right of iudgement. lipps man be juſtified.
                     3 Should thy lies make mortal-men ſilent: ſhouldſt thou Ch. 10. 3. mock and none confound thee.
                     4. For Ch. 6. 10. & 10. 7. thou ſayſt, my ſpeach is blameleſſe: and I am pure in thine eyes:
                     5 Now truly I wiſh that the Puiſſant would ſpeak, & open his lipps with thee.
                     6. And would ſhew thee, the myſteries of wiſdome: That thou ſhouldeſt have double by `† juſtice: & know,
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         that the Puiſſant will call thee to accompt for thine iniquity.Ch. 6. 13.
                     
                     7 Canſt thou Rom. 11. 33. find the depth of the Puiſſant: canſt thou find the ſcope of the alſufficient.
                     8. In th'high heavens what canſt thou work: it is deeper then the loweſt part of the earth, what canſt thou do?
                     9 Her mett is longer then the earth: and is broader then the ſea.
                     10. If he Ch. 9. 11. paſſe by, to Rō. 1. 24. 26. 28. give over, or to Act. 11. aſſemble, who can ſtay him?
                     11. For he knoweth the vayne mortal-men: and ſeing badnes, muſt he not mark it?
                     12 That vaine man may be made harty: borne a wildaſſe colt.
                     13 If thou prepare thine heart: and lift vp thy palmes vnto him:
                     14 Where thy hands have badnes: Sinne no more. caſt it away, and ſuffer not unjuſtice to dwell in thy tents.
                     15. So then thou wilt lift vp thy face: that it ſhalbe without blemiſh: and be 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         ſettled and feare nothing.
                     16. So thou ſhouldeſt forget miſerie: remembring it

as waters paſſed by.
                     17. And thy time ſhould paſſe the noon day: obſcureneſſe ſhould match the morning.
                     18 Thou ſhouldeſt be bold becauſe of hope: and entrench to ly downe ſafely.
                     19. And couch thee down, without all feare: & many ſhould ſeek vnto thee.
                     20 And the eyes of the wicked ſhall fayle: and their refuge all be forlorne: and their hope nought but pangs of ſoule.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XII.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 Out of doubt ye are the People: and wiſedome muſt die with you.
                     3 I alſo have an heart as ye: I am not inferiour to you: and who hath not ſuch things as theſe.
                     4. I am one mocked of his frend: praying the Puiſſant and heard: the perfect iuſt is a mockage.
                     5 A baſe lamp to thoughts of welthy, is he that is nere to tottering of feet.
                     6. The tents The wicked are not alway puniſhed: Againſt Ch. 11. 20. Paul from this kind taught wicked proſperous Felix, that a iudgement remayneth for the world to come. of robbers do much proſper: and they that anger the Omnipotēt, have ſecuritie-void-of-all-fear: to whom the Puiſſant brings it to their hand.
                     7 Wherefore The Ebrew is a generall ſpeach of earneſtnes, omitted in our Engliſh B B. in ſagenes, aſk Theſe men take rules of nature, to teach as Salomon from other creatures, mens affaires. So Heſiod the Poet ſaith: Fiſh and beaſts and fowles eat the weaker: & tyran
                              ••
                           : But iuſt men ſhould not do ſo. the beaſts, & ech one of them will teach thee: and the fowles of heaven, and they will tell thee.
                     
                        8. Or ſpeak to the earth, and it will teach thee: and the fiſh of the ſeas; and they will ſhew thee:
                     9 Who doth not know even by all theſe: the hand of
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            is only here vſed by the diſputers. † the Eternal doth this:
                     10 In whoſe hand is every living ſoule: and the ſpirit of all mens fleſh.
                     11 Cannot the eare diſcerne ſpeaches: as the palat taſteth it meat.
                     12. Is wiſdome in th'aged? and vnderſtanding in long life?
                     13 He hath wiſedome and mightines: counſel and vnderſtanding are his:
                     14. If he In cities deſtroyed. Gen. 7. the toure. Gen. 11. in mind. Jer. 
                              •
                           
                         pull downe, it will not be builded: in priſon, grave, or mind. ſhut one vp, it will not be opened.
                     15. If he Gen. 9. with hold the waters, they drie vp: If he Gen. 7. &. 8. ſend them forth, they overwhelm the earth.
                     16. He hath the force, and all that is: 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Rom. 11. is expounded to all theſe. from him, & by him, and for him are deceivers and deceived.
                     17 He brings counſellers to badnes: and judges vnto ſtark-madnes.
                     18 The Chaynes. Targ. Ieru. band of kings he maketh looſe: & bindeth 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            aſtewardes girdle: as a purſe: & Kings ſtewards weare in the Eaſt. Aru
                              •
                           . of Kings they ſhalbe Kings ſervants. But the ſimpler ſenſe is, of Kings they ſhalbe captives. a girdle vpon their loynes.
                     19 He bringeth Dukes to badnes: and he perverteth the mighty:
                     20. He bereaveth Orators of lip: and taketh reaſon from Elders.
                     21 He powreth baſenes on Nobles: and weakneth the * ſway of vehement.
                     
                        22 He revealeth As by Ioſeph to Pha raoh, for plenty and dearth: by Daniel to Judah, for the afflicting image: by John to the Church, for Rome in two ſorts; opē profane, & ſubtil wicked. deep things out of darknes: & bringeth to light the ſhadow of death.
                     23. He augments nations, and deſtroyes them: he ſpreads nations, and governes them.
                     24. He takes hart from heads of people of th'earth, & makes them wander in wild-ground wayleſſe.
                     25 They grope in darknes without light, when he makes them Eſa. 19. 14. and 24 20. wander as drunk.
                  
                  
                     CAHP. XIII.
                     LO, myne eye hath ſeen all: myne eare hath heard and vnderſtood:
                     2 So much as ye do know: I know I am not inferiour to you.
                     3. Ch. 12. 7. Aſſuredly, I would ſpeak to the alſufficient, & reaſon with th'omnipotent.
                     4 But aſſuredly yee are Pſa. 119. 69. The prowd have forged lyes againſt me. forgers oflyes: bad phyſicians are yee all.
                     5 Oh that ye could be ſtill ſilent: and that this might be your wiſdome.
                     6 Hear now my reaſoning: and mark the pleading of my lippes:
                     7 Wil ye ſpeak vnright of th'omnipotent: and for him will ye ſpeak deceipt?
                     8 Will ye reſpect his perſon: plead with the Omnipotent?
                     9 Wil it be well, when he tryeth you: will you 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Gal. 6. 7. mock with him, as man mocks with man?
                     10 He will ſurely reprove you: for ſecret reſpect of perſon.
                     
                        11. Will not his highnes make you feare: and will not his dread fall vpon you.
                     12. Your memorie is like to aſhes: and your bodies to bodies of clay:
                     13. Be ſilent for me, and I will ſpeak: and let come on me what may come.
                     14 Wherefore Think not that I ſpeak as one deſperate: whoſewords fleing through the hedge of my teeth, ſhould rent my fleſh, and cauſe me deſtruction. No I am ſure to ſpeed wel, if I might plead with God. Trem. Or, wherefore have I ſaved whole onely the fleſh about my teeth: and am at deathes dore. Or this, I could be content that I bite my fleſh with my teeth: and have my ſoule in danger in my ſicknes: for I do not deny him. ſhould I take my fleſh in my teeth: & 1 Sam. 19. 5. lay my ſoul even in my hands?
                     15. If he kill me, 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            & 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Abraham Ben Peritzol: expoundeth both readings. As S. Luke doth, Eſ. 61. ſhould I not hope? if he kill me, I will I will hope for ſoules life: for he will be my ſalvation for life eternall. hope in him. So I would plead my wayes before him.
                     16. And he would be my ſalvation: But the hypocrite ſhall not come before him.
                     17 Heare diligently my words: and let my talk come to your eares.
                     18 Behold now, I order the cauſe: Chap. 34. 5. I know that I ſhal be found juſt.
                     19 Who is he that will plead with me? If now I ſpeak not, I ſhould And ſo Chap. 3. 11. ſtarve.
                     20 Chap. 33. 6. 7. 8. &c. Onely two things do not to me: then I will not be hid from thy face.
                     21 Draw away thy hand far from me, & let not dread of thee, fright me.
                     22 Then call, and I will anſwer: or, I will ſpeak, & anſwer thou me.
                     
                        23. Ch. 33. 13. How many are my iniquities and ſinnes? Let me know my treſpas and my ſinne.
                     24 Wherefore doeſt thou hide thy face, & Ch. 33. 10 takeſt me for thy enemie?
                     25. Wilt thou break a leafe betoſſed? or wilt thou purſue dry ſtubble?
                     26. To write againſt me bitter things: and make me heyre of my youth ſinnes.
                     27 And putteſt Ch. 33. 11 in the ſtocks my feet, and watcheſt all my pathes; & leaveſt thy print in the roots of my feet.
                     28 And my body, a dry ſtubble. it waſteth as with a rot: as a garment moth eaten.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XIIII.
                     EArthly-man borne of a woman: is ſhort of life &See Ch. 7. full of vexation.
                     2 As Pſal. 90. 5. 6. & 103. 15. 16. a floure doth he ſhoot forth: and is cut off: and he fleeth as a ſhadow: and continueth not.
                     3. And vpon this doeſt thou open thine eyes: and me doeſt thou bring into judgement before thee.
                     4. Who can make cleane of vncleane? not any.
                     5 Seing his dayes are decreed: his monthes are numbred with thee, his limits thou haſt made which he ſhall not paſſe:
                     6. Turne from him that he may reſt: till he pay his dayes work, as an hireling.
                     7 For a tree hath ſome hope: that being cut downe, it may yet ſprout: and his ſuckers ſhall not leave.
                     8 Though his root be old in the earth: and his ſtock do die in the duſt:
                     
                        9 At ſent of waters it buds, and beareth branches as a young plant:
                     10. But the earthly-wight, dyeth without ſtrength: Adams ſonne ſtarves, and where is he?
                     11 As waters paſſe out of the ſea: and rivers are ſpent, and dry vp:
                     12 So man lieth downe, and riſeth not: till the heavens be not: they wake not nor be rayſed vp out of their ſleep.
                     13. Oh that thou wouldeſt, If it were poſsible I would be dead frō this payne: to be rayſed vp, afetr a ſet time. lay me vp in the grave: wouldeſt hide me vntill thine anger reſted, wouldeſt ſet me a time, and remember me:
                     14 Can the earthly-wight dead revive? Ram. I wil wait all my ſet time: vntil my paſſage away come, and that I dy: for as I know that I ſhall afterwards live, I would dye to plead there with thee: Then thou wouldest favour the work of thine hands: But in this world thou wilt not call me to iudgement. all the dayes of my ſet time I would waite: 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            (70) 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Aquil. Sym. 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         vntil my chaunge were come:
                     15 Thou wouldeſt call, and I would anſwer: thou wouldſt tender the work of thyne owne hands.
                     16 But now Ch. 33. 11 thou doeſt count my goings, & keepeſt them not for my ſinne.
                     17. My treſpas is Deut. 32. 34. feald in a bag: that, thou ioyneſt to preſent iniquitie.
                     18 Even Mountaines ſhaken with earthquakes loſe vſually great peeces of their rocks: broken vnto ſmall duſt: and water overfloweth their growth. an huge mountayn waiſteth: as the rocks remove from their place:
                     
                        19 Water weares the ſtones: thou overfloweſt the growth of the duſty earth: So thou deſtroyeſt the hope of ſorowful-man.
                     20 Thou prevayleſt againſt him, and he paſſeth: tho
                           •
                         changeſt his face, and ſendeſt him away.
                     21 If his children be in honour, he knoweth it not: o
                           •
                         if they be the leaſt, he can not vnderſtand of them.
                     22. Onely his fleſh is grieved for it ſelf: and his ſoulCh. 5. 4. will mourne for himſelf.
                  
                  
                     CHVP. XV.
                     THen anſwered Eliphaz the Themanite, & ſayd:
                     2 Wil a wiſe man U. 13. & 14. vtter knowledge of wind, and fill his belly with an eaſterne blaſt:
                     3 Reaſoning in ſpeach vnprofitable, and in words of no gayne.
                     4 Yea In that thou pleadeſt iuſtice: & ſeekeſt not to Gods mercy. thou diiſanulleſt godlynes: & hindereſt prayer before the Omnipotent.
                     5 Thy Luk. 19. 22. own mouth ſhall argue thy iniquity: how thou choſeſt the tongue of the ſubtile.
                     6 Thy owne mouth Ch. 6. 24 ſhall make thee wicked: & not Ch. 4. Eliphaz ſpake of patience, to abide Gods chastiſing for ordinary overſights: but did not hold him flat wicked: Now he goeth further. I: and thy owne lippes ſhall witnes againſt thee.
                     7. Waſt thou borne the firſt earthly-man: or formed before the mountaynes?
                     8 Haſt thou heard the counſel of God: and drawn vnto thee wiſdome.
                     9 What knoweſt thou that wee know not? perceiveſt thou that is not with vs?
                     10 Both Chap. 12. 12. gray-headed & all gray is amōgeſt vs: greater

then thy father in dayes.
                     11. Are the comfortes of God a ſmall matter with thee? and is the That thou complayneſt of injurie & crooked iudgement. matter hid with thee?
                     12 What doctrine can thine hart give thee? or what can thine eyes aime at.
                     13 That thou turneſt thy ſpirit againſt the Omnipotent; and vttereſt words out of thy mouth.
                     14 What is woful-man to be cleared? or the borne of woman to be juſtified?
                     15 Where he holdeth not his holy ones perfect: nor they of heaven be cleare in his eyes.
                     16 Much leſſe the vncleane, & lothſome: drinking vnrighteouſnes as water.
                     17 I will ſhew thee, heare me: and what I have ſeen, that will I declare.
                     18 What wiſe men have told: & hid not what their 
                           •
                        athers left.
                     19 To whom alone the land was given: & no Wiſe ſage men: peaceable: that no other were choſen to check them. as Rome is blamed for oftē change of policy. ſtraunger came amongſt them.
                     20. The wicked killeth himſelf all his dayes: & ſoon numbred yeres, are ſtored for the Tyrant:
                     21 A noiſe of much feare is in his eares: in peace the 
                           •
                        obber will come vpon him.
                     22. He looketh not to eſcape from darknes, having watch he thinketh vpon the ſword.
                     23 He wandreth for bread, where to find it: he knoweth that the day of darknes is ready round about him. at his hand.
                     24 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            
                           ▪ Rom. 2. 9. Diſtreſſe and affliction will fright him: It wil prevaile againſt him, as a King furniſhed with an army about him.
                     
                        25. Becauſe he ſtretched forth his hand See 21. 14 againſt the Omnipotent: and would be valiant againſt the almighty▪
                     
                     26. He will run vpon him: vpon his neck: vpon the thick bones & nerves. bodies of his ſhields.
                     27 Though▪
                        A deſcription of wealth. he cover his face with his fat, & make playtes vpon the panch.
                     28 Though he make dwellings of cities ruinated: of houſes vndwelt: which were coming to heapes of ſtone.
                     29 He ſhall not continue rich, nor his wealth ſtand▪ nor that which they have brought about, ſpread over the earth.
                     30. He ſhall not depart out of darknes: fyre ſhall dry vp his ſuckers: and he ſhall depart by the ſpirit of ver. 25. & 21. 18. H
                           〈…〉
                         mouth.
                     31 Let not the miſledd truſt in vanitie: for vanitie wilbe his recompence.
                     32 Which will come to the full before his day: & his branch ſhall never be greene.
                     33 God. HE will ſnap off his ſoure-grape as the vines: & caſt off his floure as the Olives.
                     34 For the congregation of the hypocrites ſhalbe ſolitaric: and fyre eateth the tents of bribers.
                     35 By Pſal. 7. 14 conceiving ſorow, and breeding miſerie, ſ
                           •
                         their belly getteth guile.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVI.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 I have heard many words as theſe: Miſerable comforters are ye all.
                     3. Is there any end of windy words? and what make
                           ••
                         thee ſo vehement to reply.
                     
                        4. Would I ſpeak as you Eb. Your ſoule in place of my ſoule. if you were in my place? would I compoſe bare wordes againſt you, & nod Mock. a
                              •
                           , 2 King. 19. 21. vpon you with my head?
                     5 I would ſtrengthen you with my mouth: and my lippes comfort. moving ſhould bring eaſe.
                     6 If I ſpeak, my grief will not be eaſed: or if I leave of, What wil it be the leſse. what will go from me?
                     7 As now it wearieth me. THOU haſt made me deſolate of all Ch. 1. Thou haſt marred all part
                              •
                            of my body. haſt bereft me of my children & frendes: ch. 1. & now of health in all my members. my company.
                     8 So thou haſt made me all wrinkled: That is a proof: & my leannes riſeth vp againſt me: it ſpeaketh to my face.
                     9 His Ch. 17. 3. anger renteth: and he Ch. 33. 10 beareth me a grudge: he gnaſheth his teeth vpon me: he is become my foe: Eb. He ſharpeneth his ey at me he looketh ſharply at me.
                     10. Men open their mouthes againſt me: with reproches they ſmite my cheeks: they come by full troups vpon me.
                     11. The Omnipotent hath given me over to the Chaldaeā & Sabean. godles: and hath caſt me into the hand of the wicked.
                     12 I was welthy, but he hath vndone me: and he layeth hold vpon my neck and ſtill buffeteth me: and hath 
                           •
                        et me for a mark vnto himſelf.
                     13 His Sickneſses & ſores. archers compaſſe me: he hath cleaved my 
                           •
                        eines: and Lam. 2. 2. 21. ſpared not. He hath powred vpon the earth my gall.
                     14 He hath breached in me breach overagainſt breach: He runneth vpon me as a gyant.
                     15 Sackloth my ſackcloth▪ Ch. 
                              •
                           . by boyles broken cleaveth vnto my ſi
                              〈…〉
                           e. ſow I vnto my skin: and wallow mine horne in the duſt.
                     16 My face is become fowl by weeping: and vpon my eyliddes is the ſhadow of death.
                     
                        17 For no miſdoing of my hands, but my wiſh is clear: ſaying.
                     18 O earth cover not my blood: and let there be n
                           •
                         place for If there be any iniury in my hāds let the earth reveale it: & let God never heare my prayer. my crie:
                     19 Even now, behold, in heaven is my witnes: & my record on high:
                     20 My frends ſcorne me: but vnto the Puiſſant dooth mine eye drop.
                     21 That he would decide the cauſe for earthly-wight before the Puiſſant: as the ſonn of Adam dooth with his neighbour.
                     22. For the ſoon numbred yeres be arrived: and a path muſt I go, where I have no returne.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVII.
                     MY breath is corrupt: my dayes are quenched: graves are for me.
                     2. Surely mockages are beſtowed vpon me: and in theſe mens vexing Night & day they vex me. lodgeth myne ey.
                     3. Set me now an vmpire with Whom thou alloweſt. thee: who is he? Let my hand be ſtroken.
                     4. For thou haſt hid the hart of theſe men from judgement: therefore thou wilt not give them honour.
                     5. who ſo ſpeaketh 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            . Rom. 16. 18vaine-goodly-ſpeach to neighbours, the eyes of the given that way ſhalbe conſumed.
                     6 That maketh me a by-word to people: & I They play vpon me as a tabber:am openly a taber.
                     7 Wherefore myne eye is dim by anguiſh: and all my members be like a ſhadow.
                     8 Let the vpright wonder at this: and let the innocēt

                        encouraging him ſelfe and others not to faint for afflictions by-Iobs example.beſtir himſelfe againſt the hypocrite.
                     9 And Rev. 22. 11. let the iuſt hold on his way: and let the cleane in handes encreaſe courage.
                     10 Now, all ye, chaunge your mind: and To Jobs opinion. come now. For, I find not a wiſe man amongſt you.
                     11. My dayes are paſt, I hoped for much good▪ but all that hopeis gone.my purpoſes are pluckt vp: the poſſeſſions of my heart.
                     12 The I watch and taken no reſt all night: and delite little in day by dark afflictions.night they change into day: light is ſhort becauſe of darknes.
                     13 As I deſire the grave my houſe: in the darknes I ſtraw my couch.
                     14. To the pit I cry, o father: ô mother, ô ſiſter to the wormes.
                     15 For where now have I my hope: yea my hope who can behold it?
                     16 To the Barres that carry to the grave.middes of the grave all ſhall deſcend: when we go downe together to the duſt.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XVIII.
                     THen Bildad the Shuchite anſwered, and ſayd.
                     2 When will yee make an end of ſpeaking: Mark yee: and after we wil ſpeak.
                     3. Why are we counted as Ch. 12. 7 & 17. 4. & 10. beaſts, are Dul. vncleane in your eyes:
                     4. O he that teareth his ſoule in his Ch. 16. 9 anger, ſhall Shall the whole government of the world, ſo conſtant as any rock, be removed for thy opinion.the earth be caſt off for thee, & rocks be removed from their place.
                     5 Yea the light of the wicked is ſoon quenched: and the ſparkle of his fire ſhall not long ſhine.
                     6 Light is darkened in his tent: and his candle is put

out in him.
                     7 His violent paſſages are diſtreſſed: and his own counſel will make him fall.
                     8 He is ſent into the net by his owne feet: and walketh into the platted grin.
                     9 The ſnare ſhall catch him by the heel: the ſavage ſhal lay hold on him.
                     10 His Eb. gable or cord. ſnare is hid in the ground: & his pitfall at the way ſide.
                     11. Terrours fright him on every ſyde: and preſſe him, Whither ſoever he goeth. at his feet.
                     12 His ſtrength ſhall come to hungar: and wo is ready at his ſyde.
                     13 A ſtraunge death ſhall eat the braunches of his ſkin.body. All his children. braunches, ſhall it eat.
                     14 His confidence ſhalbe plucked vp from his tent: he ſhalbe conveyed to the king of terrours.
                     15 It ſhall dwell in his tent, when it is not his: Gen. 19. brimſton ſhalbe ſcattered vpon his dwelling.
                     16 Beneath, his roots ſhalbe dryed vp: and above, his branch ſhalbe cut downe.
                     17 His remembrance ſhall periſh from the earth: & he ſhall have no name in the ſtreates.
                     18. He ſhalbe drvien from light to darknes: & he ſhalbe chaſed out of the earth.
                     19. He ſhall leave no child, nor nephew among his people: nor remnant in his pilgrimage.
                     20. At his day they that come after ſhall wonder: as the preſent took an horrour.
                     21. Even theſe are the habitatiōs of the vnrighteous, 
                           ••
                         this is the Eb. place. caſe of him See Ch. 
                              •
                           1. that knoweth not the Omnipotēt.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XIX.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 How long will ye greive my ſoule: and fret me with words.
                     3 Now fiue times I ſpake, and fiue times you, croſſing my good ſpeches. or, Ten, that is many times. ten times ye have reproched me: nothing aſhamed: But ye harden your ſelves againſt me.
                     4. Suppoſe in deed that I have erred: let my errour continue with me.
                     5. But truely you deale ſtately over me: `* and bring my wretched caſe an argument againſt me.
                     6. Know then that the Puiſſant hath wronged, or, wringed me. overthrowne me: and compaſſed his net about me:
                     7. If Elihu blameth this, Ch. 34. 5▪ &c. I complayne of wrong, I cannot be heard: if I`†Ch. 32. 13. cry, no ſentence wilbe given.
                     8. He hath Lamentations 3. 7.hedged in my wayes that I cannot paſſe: and hath ſet darknes over my pathes:
                     9. He hath beſtript me of my honour: and taken away the crowne of myne head.
                     10. He hath puld me downe on every ſide: and I goe away: and he hath plucked vp my hope as a tree.
                     11. And his anger is kindled againſt me: & he holdeth ne as Chap. 33. 10. one of his enemies.
                     12. His afflictions. hoſtes come together againſt me: and caſt vp 
                           •
                        heir trench againſt me: and camp about my tent.
                     13. He hath alienated my brethren from me, and they my acquaintance who honoured me are become mere ſtrangers vnto me.
                     14 My kinſfolk ceaſe, & they whom I favoured have forgotten me.
                     
                        15 The hirelinges of my houſe, and my maydens, take me for a ſtranger: I am an alliant in their eyes.
                     16 I call my ſervant; but he wil give no anſwer: though I entreat him with my mouth.
                     17 My breath is ſtrange vnto my wife, though I pray her by the children of my belly.
                     18 Even Princockes do diſpiſe me: when I ariſe they talk againſt me.
                     19 All men of my counſell loath me: and, they whomWhen I was in health. I loved turne agaynſt me.
                     20 My bone cleaveth to my ſkin, as to my fleſh: and I am whol onely in the ſkin of my teeth.
                     21 Pitie me, pitie me, o yee my frendes: for the hand of the Puiſſant hath touched me.
                     22 Why do ye perſecute me as the Omnipotent: and are not ſatiſfied with Be cōtent that my fleſh is waſted: & go not about, as ſavage beaſts, to break my bones. my fleſh.
                     23 O that Becauſe Iob was termed one that knew not God: he proteſteth his faith: in the incarnation and reſurrection of Chriſt, authour of our reſurection. The ſtrict proprietie of Ebrew beareth that: and Gods ſpirit alwayes reached to the best ſenſe. my words were now written: ô that they were drawen in a book.
                     24 Graven with a pen of iron: with lead, were in ſtone for ever.
                     25 How I know My redeemer in the nature of man, is the Ever-living: 
                              〈…〉
                            ſhall ariſe from death: and by him I ſhall riſe: and be made like his glorious body. my redemer liveth: and at the laſt ſhall ariſe vpon the duſt.
                     26 And after this my ſkin is ſpent: yet from my fle
                           〈…〉
                         ſhall I ſee the Puiſſant.
                     27. Whom I ſhall ſee, even I, my ſelf: & myne ey
                           〈…〉
                         view, and No other for me. no ſtraunger: when my reynes and boſo
                           〈…〉
                         be ſpent.
                     
                        28. Thus, yee ſhould ſay, Seing this poinct it the main; not to doubt in the hart, who can go vp to heaven to bring Chriſt downe: or who can go downe into the deep to bring Chriſt from the dead: but to beleve that Jeſus is the Eternall: & that God raiſeth him from death: Job could not be ſayd not to know God. why purſue we him: when the thinges root is found in me.
                     29 Be afraied your ſelves of the ſword: For ire vpon ſin hath the ſword. Therefore know ther is 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            & Shaddin: might ſeme to be Sh
                              •
                           ddin Devils▪ in the vn
                           
                              •
                           oincted Bible. The margent reading helpeth therin. a iudgment.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XX.
                     THen anſwered Sophar the Naamathite, and ſayd.
                     2. For this my thoughts make me reply: and therefore my haſt is in me.
                     3. A Chap. 19. 28. 29. reprofe to my ſhame I heare: and the ſpirit of my conſcience will that I anſwer.
                     4 Thou doſt know this much, how of old, ſince Adam was ſet on the earth:
                     5. The joyance of wicked is ſhort: & hypocrites gladnes for a moment.
                     6. If his height aſcend to heaven: and his head reach vnto the cloudes:
                     7. Turning a little he falls for ever: they who ſaw him. his beholders 
                           •
                        ay, where is he?
                     8. As Eſa. 29. 7. 8. a dreame ſhall he flee, paſt finding: and paſſe like a viſion on night.
                     9. Eyes viewed him: but ſhall no more: nor his place behold him againe.
                     10. His children muſt content the poore: & his hands recompence his wrongs.
                     11. His bones ſhall feel full pay for his youth prankes: which ſhall lye with him in the duſt.
                     
                        12. Though wrong be ſweet within his mouth, and he hide it vnder his tongue:
                     13. Though he cheriſh it, and leave it not: and hold it within his pallate:
                     14. His meat in his bowels turneth into gall of aſpes within him.
                     15 Wealth devoured he ſhall caſt-vp: The Omnipotent will drive it out of his belly.
                     16. He ſhall ſuck the gall of aſpes: the tongue of ſerpents ſhall kill him.
                     17 He ſhall no more ſee rivers, ſtreames, brooks of hony and of butter.
                     18. He ſhall reſtore what mens paines gate: and not have time to devour it: and never reioyce in the wealth for which he muſt make recompence.
                     19 He oppreſſeth and leaveth poor; robbed of houſe: which he ſhall not build vp.
                     20 For he ſhall feel no reſt in his belly: by that whichPſal. 59. 15 & 69. 22. he deſired he ſhall not be ſafe.
                     21 There ſhalbe no remnant of his meat: therefore his goods continue not.
                     22 When he hath filled him with ſufficiency, then he ſhalbe diſtreſt: ech hand of grieved. injuried will come vpon him.
                     23 When he would fil his belly, God will ſend his hoat anger vpon him: he wil rayn vpon him into his fleſh.
                     24. When he fleeth from the iron armour, the bowe of ſteel ſhall ſhoot him through.
                     25. The arrow ſhalbe drawen and come out of Chald. & Ab. the quiver; and the head ſhalbe in his gall: terrours ſhall come vpon him.
                     
                        26. All darknes is hid vp for his For his ſtore of ſinnes. Rom. 2. 5. ſtore: a fyre Eb. Which needeth no blowing. vnquenchable ſhall eat him vp, and the remnant of his tent ſhalbe wringed.
                     27 The heaven ſhall reveale his iniquity: and the earth ſhall riſe vp againſt him.
                     28 The As oyle & wine. Chald. fruites for his houſe ſhall paſſe avvay: & flow away in the day of anger.
                     29 This ſhalbe the portion of the wicked earthly-man from Elohim. God: and the inheritance appointed him from the 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            , in the Lxx. Omnipotent.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXI.
                     THen anſwered Iob and ſayd:
                     2 Heare diligently my words: and let that be your conſolation.
                     3 Suffer ye me and I will ſpeak: and after I have ſpoken, mock thou:
                     4. Is I complayne not to you: but vnto God. I plead with God: and ſorrow that I am not heard. my ſighing vnto man: notwithſtanding I have my ſighing: then why ſhould not my ſpirit be diſcouraged.
                     5 Mark me, and be amazed: lay the hand vpon the mouth:
                     6 When I bethink me, I am troubled: and a quaking taketh my fleſh.
                     7 Why are the wicked lively, continue long, and be mighty in riches.
                     8 Their ſeed is ſetled before them with them: and their iſſue before their eyes.
                     9 Their houſes have peace without feare: and the rod of the puiſſant is not vpon them.
                     10. Their oxe gendreth and looſeth not ſeed: their

cow calveth, and looſeth not the young.
                     11. They ſend forth their children as flocks: & the
                           ••
                        
                        Ch. 15. 30. prinkockes daunce.
                     12. They bear with the tabret & harpe: and reioyce a
                           •
                         the ſound of the pleaſant inſtrument.
                     13. They ſpend their dayes in wealthineſſe: and in aCh. 15. 24. moment they go downe But in Haides they are pā
                           ged in flame, Luk. 16. 19. 23. to the grave.
                     14. And they ſay to the omnipotent, depart from vs: for we deſire not to know thy wayes.
                     15. What See Ch. 15 is the almighty that we ſhould ſerve him: or what profit ſhall we have if we pray to him.
                     16. Loe their welth cōmeth not But frō God. by their own power: here I am far from the iudgement of which never thank God for their welth but think their owne wiſdome found all: as Aſſur, Eſa. 10. 12. 13 the wicked.
                     17. 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            is, how often? or how ſeldome. Ramban. Not ſo often is the candle of the wicked put out: that their wo doth come vpon them: that HE imparteth pangs in his anger.
                     18 That they become Pſal. 1. 4. & 35. 5. as ſtraw before the wind: and duſt which a tempeſt ſtealeth away.
                     19. Doth God lay vp his injuries for his children: doth pay himſelf that he doth feel it?
                     20. Do his own eyen ſee his ruine: that he drink the ire of the omnipotent.
                     21. Otherwiſe what careth he for his houſe after him: when the number of his own moneths ſhalbe ſhortned.
                     22. Can a man teach the Omnipotent knowledg, how he ſhall judge the lofty?
                     23 One dyeth in his very perfection, all in proſperitie and eaſe:
                     24 His He hath all proſperity of health and wealth. payles are full of milk: and the marrow of his bones are moiſt.
                     
                        25 An other dyeth with a bitter ſoule: and never ate good thing.
                     26 They ſhall lye alike in the duſt: & the worme ſhall cover them.
                     27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and your injurious imaginations againſt me.
                     28 When ye ſay: where is the houſe of Or, rich Tyrant. the noble? &Chap. 20. 19. where is the tent and pavilion of the wicked?
                     29. Cannot ye aſk them that go by the way? ſo yee would not make their ſignes ſtraunge.
                     30. How the bad is ſpared vnto the day of heavines, the day when great wrath is brought.
                     31 Who dare tell him of his wayes to his face: & reward him that which he doth?
                     32. But he is brought vnto the grave, and ſtill abideth in the tumbe.
                     33 The vale clodds be ſweet vnto him: & he draweth all earthly after him: as innumerable went before him.
                     34 And what do yee comfort me with vanitie: when great offence remayneth in your diſputations.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXII.
                     THen anſwered Eliphaz the Themanite and ſayd.
                     2. Can the humane-wight teach the Omnipotent? If he would teach, would he regard it?
                     3. Is it a pleaſure to the almighty, that thou pleadeſt juſtice: or gain, that thou wouldſt make thy wayes perfect?
                     4. Would he reprove thee for thy religion; would he come into judgement with thee?
                     5 Nay doubtleſſe thy evill is great, and thy iniquity endleſſe.
                     
                        6. For thou haſt taken a pledge from thy brother vv
                           〈…〉
                        
                        Mat. 25. 35. &c. out cauſe: and beſtript the naked of their clothing.
                     7 No vvater to the vveary haſt thou given to drink and thou haſt kept avvay bread from the hungry.
                     8 But the ſtronger in arme held the land: and 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Ma. 10. 42. hee eſtimation vvould dvvell in it.
                     9 True devotion is this, to viſit the fatherles and widowes in their adverſuy: and to keep himſelf vnſpotted of this world. Iam. 1. 27. Widovves haſt thou ſent avvay empty: and the armes of the fatherles vvere broken.
                     10 Therefore ſnares compaſſe thee: and ſuddayn fear frightes thee:
                     11 Or darknes, that thou canſt not ſee: and much w
                           •
                         ter doth cover thee:
                     12 Is not the Puiſſant in the height o
                           •
                         heaven: & be hold the loftynes, the ſtarres hovv high they be.
                     14 So thou ſayeſt, vvhat knovveth the Omnipotem can he judge through the dark cloud?
                     14 The clovvdes be a covering to him that he cannot ſee: and he vvalketh vpon the compaſſe of the heaven.
                     15 Doeſt thou hold. Haſt thou marked the vvay of 2 Pet. 2. 5. the old vvorld vvherin vngratious men have vvalked?
                     16 Which vvere made avvay before their time: vvho
                           •
                        
                        * The middle of the book by the Maſſorites. foundation became a water of deluge:
                     17 Who 
                           ••
                        id vnto the Omnipotent, depart from 
                           •
                         and vvhat ſhould the Almighty do vnto them?
                     18 For he fild their houſes vvith goods: & I am far from the iudgement of the wicked which holdth: ſtarres their Gods and givers of bleſſing. the opinion of the vvicked is far from me.
                     19 The iuſt did ſee and rejoyced: and the innocent 
                           〈…〉
                         mock them.
                     20 As our ſtate is not yet deſtroyed, that the remna
                           •
                         of the other, The world reſerved to fyre. Eſ. 66. & 2 Pet. 3. fyre ſhould eat vp:
                     21 Reconcile thee novv vnto him, & be at peace: S
                           〈…〉
                         proſperitie ſhall come vnto thee.
                     
                        22 Receive now the Law at his mouth: & lay vp his 
                           ••
                        ordes in thine hart.
                     23 If thou tuine vnto the almighty: thou ſhalt be built 
                           •
                        p: if thou caſt far off vnrighteouſnes from thy tents.
                     24. So thou ſhalt ſet by gold as duſt: and Ophir, as 
                           •
                        he ſtones in rivers.
                     25 And the Almighty wilbe thy plentiful gold: & 
                           •
                        ilver of ſtrength vnto thee.
                     26 For then thou ſhalt delite in the Almighty: and 
                           ••
                        ft vp thy countenance vnto the Puiſſant.
                     27 Thou ſhalt crave good of him: and he ſhall heare 
                           •
                        hee: and thou ſhalt pay thy vowes.
                     28 And thou ſhalt decree a matter: & it ſhall ſtand ſo 
                           •
                        or thee, and in thy wayes ſhall the light ſhine.
                     29 When Pride wil have a fall. others ſhalbe humbled, thou ſhalt ſpeak 
                           •
                        f exaltation: as the humble eyed he will ſave.
                     30 He will ſpare the innocent: who ſhalbe ſpared forCh. 42. 
                        
                           •
                        hy pure hands.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIII.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 Yet this day Ch. 22. 3 my ſighing is holden a rebellion: though my ſtroke be greater then my 
                           •
                        roning.
                     3 O that I knew how to find him: that I might come into his throne.
                     4 I would lay the cauſe before him: and fill my mouth with arguments:
                     5. Would know what words he would anſwer me: & would perceive what he would tell me.
                     6 Would he by great power plead againſt me? No, but he would help me.
                     7 There the vpright doth plead with him: ſo ſhould I 
                           •
                        e quit for ever by my judge.
                     
                        8. Go I cannot mark Gods iudgements in any part of the world I Eaſtward, there he is not: or weſtward, I 
                           〈…〉
                         not mark him:
                     9. On the left hand when he worketh, I cannot vi
                           〈…〉
                         him: when he covereth the right hand, I can not ſee him.
                     10 But he knowes what way is with me: tryed he m
                           •
                         I ſhould come forth as gold.
                     11. My foot hath held his right path: his way have kept, and not turned away.
                     12. And his lippes lawes I caſt not of: More then m
                           〈…〉
                         dayly bread have I layd vp the wordes of his mouth.
                     13 Yet He is vnchangeable. when he is againſt me, who can ſtay him? h
                           〈…〉
                         ſoule willeth, and that doth he.
                     14 Becauſe See Ch. 10 ver. 8. 9. he furniſhed me with my dayly bread
                           •
                         and many ſuch graces are with him.
                     15. Therefore I ſhrink at his preſence: I conſider an
                           •
                         am afrayd of him.
                     16 For the Omnipotent hath loftened mine hart: an
                           •
                         the Almighty hath made me ſhrink:
                     17 Becauſe Becauſe I found neyther death, nor eaſe of ſicknes. I have not dyed by thick-darknes: nor H
                           〈…〉
                         yet That I ſhould not ſeel theſe afflictions. hideth gloomyneſſe from my face.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIV.
                     WHy ſhould not The affaires of mē in their times. times be hid by the almighty, for none that know him ſee his wayes.
                     2. Men remove landmarks: rob away heards, and feed them.
                     3 They drive away the aſſe of the fatherleſſe: and t
                           〈…〉
                         the oxe of the widow for a pledge.
                     4. They make the poore turne out of the way: t
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
meek of the land hide themſelves together.
                     5 Behold the wild in the wildernes go forth to their
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            & 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            . The margent expoū
                           deth meek by helpleſſe. Some tranſlate the margent: & wel may: But none may think the Line-reading corrupt. york: riſing timely to ſpoile: the vaſt-ground giveth him 
                           •
                        read for his young.
                     6. They reap the field that is not their own: ſo the wic
                        
                           •
                        ed ſnap of the vineyards grapes.
                     7. The naked they do cauſe to lodge without garment: 
                           •
                        nd without covering in the cold.
                     8. They are Poor dwel in high rockes, in many ſhowres of rayne: and in holes of rockes, they lodge. moiſtened with the ſtreams of the moun
                        
                           •
                        aines: and for want of covert, they imbrace the rock.
                     9 Of miſchievouſnes they rob the fatherles: and take 
                           •
                        way as a pledge that which the poor hath vpon him.
                     10 The The naked in part they make more naked naked they cauſe to go without garment: & 
                           •
                        hey take away the ſheaf of the hungry.
                     11 Men The laborer hath not 
                              〈…〉
                           is pay. make oyle within their walls, & tread wine
                        
                           •
                        reſſes, and are thirſtie.
                     12. In the citie, folk doe grone: and the ſoule of the 
                           •
                        layne As Rev. 6. 10. cryeth: and the Puiſſant marketh not the vnſa
                        
                           •
                        orie dealings.
                     13. They are of rebellers againſt the light: They know 
                           •
                        ot his wayes: nor keep in his pathes.
                     14. With the light the murtherer riſeth: he killeth the 
                           •
                        eedy and poore: and on the night he wilbe a very 
                           •
                        heife.
                     15. The ey of the adulterer watcheth the twylight, ſaying: No ey ſhall ſee me: and layeth a viſard vpon his face.
                     16. Ramban thus: In dark places he diggeth houſes: which he ſealeth vp on the day time: And that ſeemeth the right ſenſe: ſo this: They can 
                              〈…〉
                           ide no light. In the dark he diggeth houſes: which he mar
                        
                           •
                        ed on the day tyme: they know no light.
                     17. For altogether the morning is vnto them the ſhadow

of death: if any ſpy them, then come terrours of the ſhadow of death.
                     18 He is lighter then the face of waters: their porti
                           ••
                         is curſed on the earth: none will look vnto the way of the vineyards.
                     19 Drought and heat quickly take away ſnow waters: the grave them that ſinne.
                     20 The Raban. His wife: others, his mother; or friends; all of compaſſion. wombe ſhall forget him: he is ſweet to the worme: he ſhalbe no more remembred: and wickedne
                           •
                         is broken downe as a tree.
                     21. HE The wicked mans life ſhall have the huſbands lot. adioyneth the barren which hath not borne child: and to the widow HE ſheweth no good.
                     22 And HE draweth the ſtout after him by his might: while ech ſtood, none was ſure of his life.
                     23 HE would give them ſecurity to ſtay vpon: But his eyes was vpon their wayes.
                     24 They were exalted a ſhort while: but come to nothing, ſo they are brought low: every one are made to ſkip away: they are cutt off as an eare of corne.
                     25. If it be not ſo now, who will prove me a liar: and make my wordes nothing?
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXV.
                     THen anſwered Bildad the Shuchite and ſayd:
                     2 Dominion and feare be with him: he makethThe maieſtie of God is too terrible for baſe man to plead with: ſaith Bildad: and all Gods doings are in iudgment & iuſtice: the iudge is iuſt, and the iudged a ſot: vnable to know the ſecret of thus matter. At this Iob mocketh in the next chap.
                        
peace in his high places.
                     3. Can his armies be numbred? or None of his Angels have light of themſelves: but all from him. over whomeThe Chaldy vpon v. 2. Sultanſhip and feare be with him: he maketh peace in his high heavens. Michael is on his right hand: and he is of fyre: and Gabriel on his left hand: and he is of water: and the body creatures be part of fyre: and part of water. Such fables S. Paul forbiddeth: and 
                              •
                           ewes making Michael a created Angel, holp out Machomed: and ever Zohar graun
                           
                              •
                           eth the truth, that Michael is Iehovah. doth not his light ſhine?
                     4 And what ſhould ſorowful-man plead iuſtice with the Omnipotent: or the borne of woman look to be cleared.
                     5 Look vnto the moon: and it will not be bright: & the ſtarres are not cleare in his eyes.
                     6. Much leſſe ſorowful-man, a worme: & the ſonne of Adam a vermin.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVI.
                     THen Iob anſwered and ſayd:
                     2 What helpeſt thou to no ſtrength? and ſaveſt with an arme having no force?
                     3 What doeſt thou counſel without wiſdome: & makeſt advice knowen aboundantly.
                     4 With whom haſt thou vttered ſpeach: and whoſe 
                           •
                        oule admired thee.
                     5 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Ambre, and pearle, and ſuch. God his providence reacheth to the furtheſt places: even to the bottom of the ſea, and lowest earth: which places ſeem to be as cast off. Things without life are formed vnder the waters:* * * Job ſheweth that he can ſpeak more of Gods ſtraunge works then Bildad. and places neare them.
                     
                        6 The loweſt earth is naked afore him: and the That which ſeemeth to be loſt and cō
                           temned. loſt hath no covering.
                     7. He ſtretcheth out the North vpon the empty: and hangeth the earth vpon nothing.
                     8. He bindeth waters in his thick-metcores: and the clowd is not broken for them.
                     9. He Rambā: He maketh the face of the heavens for an houſe. faſteneth the face of the throne: He ſpreadeth beawtifully his clowd over it.
                     10 A bound He brought the ſea about the Land: to abide while day and night continue. he hath made for the face of the waters: vnto the end of light with darknes.
                     11. The Mountaines, as Atlas, ſayd to hold vp the heavens, by earthquake tremble. pillars of the heavens ſhake: and are amazed at his check.
                     12 By his ſtrength Of a generall water, he made many ſeas. he divides the ſea: and by his wiſdome he parted the Eb. Pride▪ That is the proud ſea: that threateneth to drown the land. maine-water.
                     13 By his ſpirit he garniſhed the heavens: his hand hath formed the long ſerpent.
                     14 Lo, theſe are part of his wayes: and what a ſmall thing can we heare of him. And the thunder of his power who can vnderſtand?
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVII.
                     ANd Iob proceeded to continue his Oration, and ſayd:
                     2. As the Omnipotent liveth which hath removed my cauſe, & the Almighty which hath brought my ſoule to bitternes.
                     
                        3. Surely, all the while that my breath is in me, and the ſpirit of the Puiſſant in my noſtrels:
                     4. My lippes ſhall not ſpeake the vnright: and my tongue ſhall not ſound vntruth.
                     5. Be it farr from me that I ſhould juſtify you vntil I give vp the ghoſt: I will not remove myne integritie frō me.
                     6: I will lay hold vpon my righteouſnes, and I will not leave it: my hart ſhall take no ſhame from my dayes.
                     7. Mine enemie ſhalbe as the wicked: and my adverſary as the vnrighteous.
                     8. For what can be the hope of the hypocrite, that heIf I were wicked I durst not plead with God. ſhould bring it about: when the Puiſſant would ſhake off his ſoule.
                     9. Would the Omnipotent heare his crye: when diſtreſſe cōmeth vpon him.
                     10. Can he delight in the Almighty? will he call vponPhil. 4. 6. the Puiſſant at all times?
                     11 I will teach you of God his hand: that which is with the Almighty I will not hide.
                     12 Lo, ye all have ſeèn it: and why do ye then vaniſh in vanitie.
                     13 This ſhalbe the lot of the wicked earthly-man, with the Omnipotent: and the portion of tyrants, which they ſhall receive from the Almighty.
                     14. If his children be many, it ſhalbe to the ſword: & his ofſpring ſhall not be filled with bread.
                     15. His remnant ſhalbe buried as contē
                           ned ſlaves. (And ſo Beth is taken, Dan. 2. 44. preſently after the dayes of theſe kings, the God of heaven ſhall ſet vp a kingdome.) as ſoon as they are

dead: and his widowes ſhall as glad to be rid of them. not weep.
                     16 If he heap vp ſilver as duſt: and prepare him ga
                           •
                        
                        ments as clay:
                     17 Wel he may prepare it: but the iuſt ſhall weare i
                           •
                         and the innocent ſhall part the ſilver.
                     18 He buildeth his houſe as a moth: and as a booth which a watchman maketh.
                     19 The rich in death. lieth and is not To be honeſtly buried: for his children ſhalbe kild. 
                              ••
                            v. 14. Amongſt the wild Arabians this continueth vnto this day: and in our wild countreyes. It is an Ebrew phraſe, for one dead taken frendly to buriall: or of a straunger into lodging, as Mat. 25. 35. 43. taken vp one openeth his eyes, but he is gone.
                     20 Terrours ſhall faſten on him as waters: and in the night a tempeſt ſhal ſteal him away.
                     21 An 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Act. 27. 14. Eaſt wind ſhall take him: and he muſt go: and and it ſhall whirle him from his place.
                     22. It falleth on him, and ſpares him not: when he would fayne flee from that ſway.
                     23. Every one ſhall clap hands at him, and hiſſe him away from his place.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXVIII.
                     NOw there is an iſſue for ſilver: and a place ofGod is merveilous in workes made knowne: but vnſearcheable for mans l
                              •
                           t. Golds refining.
                     2. Iron is taken out of duſt: & braſſe is molten out of ſtone.
                     3. HE hath Pſal. 119. 96. ſet an end to darknes: and ſearcheth the vſe of all things: ſtone of myrknes and ſhadow of death.
                     
                        4. A ſtreame breaketh from his ſpring: vnkenned of a
                        
                           •
                        y foot: deep for ſad-man, it floweth away.
                     5 A ground out of which groweth food: is vnderneath chaunged as Erimſto
                              •
                           
                         fyre.
                     6. Her ſtones have the place of Saphir: and the duſt of gold is in it.
                     7. A path which the kite hath not knowne: nor the eye of glead lookt on it.
                     8. The ſavage beaſts have not trode it: nor fierce-Lyon paſſed over it.
                     9. HE ſendeth his hand into the flint: and changeth In mountaines he breaketh a way for ſtreames. mountaines at the roote:
                     10 Breaking rivers out of the rocks: And all that is rare his ey ſeeth.
                     11. HE God drieth the ſprings whence rivers ran: that they fail: and have not ſo much as a tear of water. bindeth the floods from weeping: And the hid he bringeth to light.
                     12 But from whence can wiſdome be found: & where is vnderſtandings place?
                     13. Sorowfull-man knoweth not her eſteeme: neither can it be found in the Land of the living.
                     14 The deep ſaith, it is not in me: and the ſea ſaith, it is not with me.
                     15 No Ebr. Sagor: ſtored that is gold. ore can be given for her: nor ſilver be weighed for her price.
                     16 It will not be valewed with The name of gold in Ophir. Cethem from Ophir: with precious Beryll and Saphir.
                     17▪ No gold nor diamond will match her: nor cup of Phez-gold of Peſſ in Barbaria. Phez-gold make her exchaunge.
                     18 East mountaine ſtones, Sardonyx and Cha
                              •
                           ar in Greek as I gueſſe. Ramoth and Gabiſh may not be mentioned:

wiſdomes price doth paſſe carbuncles.
                     19 The Topaz of Cuſh will not match her: ſhe wil not be weighed with pure Cethem.
                     20 Then from whence doth wiſdome proceed: andCh. 8. 10. where is the place of vnderſtanding.
                     21 For it is hid from the eyes of all living: and kept cloſe from the fowles of the heaven.
                     22 Deſtruction and death ſay: with our eares we have heard her fame.
                     23. God perceiveth her way: and he knoweth herElohim, the name of the holy trinity. place.
                     24 For he beholdeth the ends of the earth: and hee ſeeth all that is vnder heaven.
                     25 When he made for the wind a peiſe, and held the waters in a meaſure.
                     26. When he made a bound for the rayne: and a way for lightening of thunders.
                     27 Then he ſaw her: and ſhewed her: and ſetled her: and ſearched her.
                     28. And he ſayd to Adam, Mark: the fear of The Lord. Adonaj is vſed first Gen. 15. of Abraham, and is plurall, for note of Trinity: My ſtayes. Adonaj, is the wiſdome: and to eſchew ill, is vnderſtanding.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXIX.
                     ANd Iob continued his Oration and ſayd.
                     2 O that I were as in former moneths: as in the dayes when the Puiſſant preſerved me.
                     3. When he cauſed his brightnes to ſhine over my head:

when I walked at his light in darknes.
                     4. As I was in my luſty yeres: with Gods favour over my tent.
                     5. When yet the almighty was with me: and my children about me:
                     6. When I waſht my ſteps with butter: and the rock powred me ſtreames of oyle.
                     7. When I went out a door to the city: and ſettled my ſeat in the ſtreet.
                     8. The young men ſaw me, & would not be ſeen: the aged ariſing ſtood vp.
                     9. Princes refrayned from ſpeaking: & layd their hand vpon their mouth.
                     10. The beſt in voyce would not be ſeen: theyr toung cleaved to their palat.
                     11 When the ear heard, then it held me happy: and the ey ſaw, and gave me good report:
                     12. That I delivered the poore when he cryed: and the fatherleſſe and the ſuccourleſſe.
                     13 The bleſſing of the periſhing came vpon me: and I made glad the heart of the widow.
                     14. I put on righteouſnes, and it clothed me: my iuſtice was like a cloke, and a crowne.
                     15. Eyes was I vnto the blind: and I became feet to the lame.
                     16 A father was I to the poore: and the cauſe I knew not I ſearcht out.
                     17. And I brake the tuſkes of the vnright: and caſt the pray out of his teeth.
                     18. And I ſayd: I ſhall give out the ghoſt in preſence of my neſt, and multiply dayes as the ſand.
                     
                        19 My root was ſpred to the water: and dew lay vpon my braunches.
                     20 My honour was aey-new with me, and my bow
                           •
                         was freſh in mine hand.
                     21 To me men gave eare and regard: and kept ſilenc
                           •
                         at my counſel.
                     22 After my words they diffred not: & my talk dropped vpon them.
                     23. They regarded me as the rain: & gaped as to the later ſhowres.
                     24. When I laughed vpon them, they would not be bold: nor caſt downe the light of my face.
                     25 I choſe their way, and ſate a chief: and dwelt as a King with a garriſon: as one that comforteth mourners.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXX.
                     BUt now they make a ſcorne of mee, who are leſſer in dayes then I, whoſe fathers I would have diſdayned to ſet with the dogges of my ſheep.
                     2 For what could their hands ſtrength do me: whoſe aged time came to nothing.
                     3. In want and in famine heavie, they fled into the vnwatery land, obſcure, waſt and wildernes.
                     4 Which pluckt vp ſalt herbs among trees, and Iuniper rootes were their meat.
                     5 They were driven from company: men ſhouted at them as at a theif.
                     6 That they dwelt in Ground holow: broken by ſtreames. cliffs at rivers, in holes of duſt,

and in rocks.
                     7. Among trees they groned: among the nettles they 
                           •
                        marted.
                     8 A vile kind, yea a kind without fame: baniſhed from the earth.
                     9 But now. I am become their talk, and made to them a common ſpeach.
                     10 They abhor me: keep far from me: and from my face ſpare not ſpittle.
                     11 For HE hath looſed 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Iithro, The string or raine of his government: that holdeth baſe from ſtriving with mighty. Let them that think that hard, read the margent: 
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Iithri, my string: the ſtring of my bow, Chap. 29. 
                              •
                           0. his ſtrings and afflicted me: and they caſt away the bridle from me.
                     12 At my right hand ſpringals ariſe: they thruſt my feet: and they caſt vpon me the cauſies of their woe.
                     13. They have marred my way: they hold my heavines a profit: though they be never the better.
                     14 They come as into a broad breach: in the broken place they tumble.
                     15 All terrours are turned vpon me: ech, courſe my Chap. 29. nobilitie as a wind: and my ſalvation is paſt as a clowd.
                     16. So my ſoule in me is powred out: and affliction dayes have caught me.
                     17 The night perceth my bones from me: that my ſinewes do take no reſt.
                     18 Through great force my garment changeth: as the edge of my coat it girdes me.
                     19. He hath Or, compared me to mire. made me a pattron of mire: that I am like duſt and aſhes.
                     
                        20 I cry vnto thee, but thou doeſt not heare me: I ſtand vp, but thou doeſt To bring vpon me all kindes of puniſhmēts. mark me.
                     21. Thou art turned one cruel to me: by thy hand hand thou art my foe.
                     22. Thou takeſt me vp vnto a wind: and Layeſt me me therevpon. cauſeſt me to ride: thou melteſt me from all ſoundnes.
                     23. For I know, to death thou wilt turne me: and to the houſe appoynted for all living.
                     24. And prayed I not when plague was ſent? when hurt came to any, therevpon cryed I not?
                     25. Did I not weep for the hard of day: did not my ſoule  
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            2 Cor. 11. 29. Mercerus citeth S. Paulan expounder of this rare word: very learnedly. burne for the poore?
                     26. But I looked for good, & evil came: and I wayted for light, and myrknes came.
                     27. My bowels ſeethed & reſted not: dayes of affliction came vpon me.
                     28. I walked black out of the ſun: I ſtood vp in the Church: I cryed▪
                     
                     29. I am a brother to Dragons: and a felow to Eſtrich kind:
                     30 My ſkin vpon me is black, and my bones are brent without hoat-drought.
                     31 And my harp is made a mourning: and pleaſant ſoundes be weepers voice.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXI.
                     I Made a covenant with myne eyen, not to look vpon a virgin.
                     2. For what were the portion of God from above: and lot of the almighty from on high?
                     
                        3. Have not the vnrighteous woe: and be not ildoers rid away?
                     4. Will not he ſee vnto my wayes: and number all my paſſages?
                     5. If I walked in vanity: and▪ my feet haſtened to guyl:
                     6. Let God weigh me in even ballance: and let him mark my integrity.
                     7. If my ſtep have turnd from the way: and my hart followed myne eyes: and any blame ſticked to myne hands:
                     8 Then let me ſow, and another eat: and my ofſpring be rooted out.
                     9 If mine hart were drawen by woman: that I waited at my neighbours doore:
                     10. Let my wife grind to an other: & let others bow vpon her.
                     11 For this ſhould be an haynous thing: and a ſin To take knowledge of, ſearch out, and puniſh. Pro. 6. 29. Lev. 20. 10. for the Iudges.
                     12. For it is a fyre eating to deſtruction, which would root out all my revenues.
                     13. If I deſpiſed my ſervants cauſe: & my handmaids pleading with me:
                     14 Then what ſhould I do: when th'Omnipotent ſtood vp: and when he did viſite, what ſhould I anſwer him?
                     15 Hath not he that made me made him in the belly? and the ſame framed vs both in the wombe?
                     16 If I ſtayd the poore from the wiſhed: and conſumed the eyes of the widow:
                     17 If I have eaten my morſel alone: that the fatherles

ate not of the ſame▪
                     
                     18. For from my youth this grew with me as a father: and from my mothers wombe I did tender it.
                     19 If I ſaw any periſhing for want of clothes: and lack of covering for the poore:
                     20. If his loynes have not bleſſed me: when he felt warmth by my ſheeps fleece:
                     21 If I liſted myne hand againſt the orphane: when I ſaw my ſtrength in the gate:
                     22 Let my ſhoulder fall from the back: and let myne arme break from the cane.
                     23. For th'Omnipotents feared woe held me: and I could not ſtand be
                           ••••
                         his highnes.
                     24▪ If I made gold my confidence, and ſaid to Cethem, ô my hope.
                     25. If I ioyed that my welth grew: and that my hand found much riches.
                     26. If I admired the ſun how it ſhined: and The new moone: of which yet fooles ſay, God ſave her. the moon walking precious:
                     27 That mine hart was cloſly deceived: No, my hand Stopped all idolatrous ſpeach: of s
                              •••
                           -worſhip: for which Babel bred confuſion▪ So Re
                              •
                            Peritzol taketh it: Others take that for a gesture of idolatry: The words and matter may abidethat. kiſſed my mouth.
                     28 So this had been a ſinne to be judged: for I had denyed the omnipotent from above.
                     29 If See Ch. 30. 24. I rejoyced at the hurt of myne enemy, & beſtird

me when he found loſſe:
                     30 No, I let not my palate ſinne: to wiſh his ſoule vnder a curſe.
                     31 Haue not the folk of my houſe ſayd: A ſpeach of hatred to the enemy, as Pſal. 124. 3. or for hoſpitalitie: that ſervants dynner was given ſtraungers: that they tarried to roſt more: as the next verſe ſheweth. ô that wee had his fleſh: wee would not be ſatiſfied.
                     32 The ſtranger lodged not in the ſtreet: I opened my doores to Wayfaring. travellers.
                     33. Have I covered my treſpas as Adam: hiding my 
                           •
                        in of a ſelf-love.
                     34. For I could oppreſſe a great troup: & thoſe of families to baſenes, that made me ſhrink: that I was dumme, and went not out of doores.
                     35. O that I had one to heare me: behold my ſcope is this: that th'Almighty would anſwer me: & the book which my adverſary would write.
                     36 I ſweare, I would beare it on my ſhoulder: I would tye it for crownes to me:
                     37. I would tell him the number of my ſteppes: I would come to him as a bold Prince.
                     38 If my land cry out againſt me: and her furrowes weep together:
                     39 If I ate her ſtrength without ſilver, and have grieved her owners ſoule:
                     40 Then let thornes grow in ſtead of wheat: & darnell in ſteed of barley.
                     Here end the words of Iob.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXII.
                     SO theſe three men reſted from anſwering Iob: becauſe he was iuſt in his owne eyes.
                     2. And the anger of Elihu, the ſonne of Baracheel the Buzite of the familie of Ram, was in a choler againſt Iob: becauſe he iuſtifyed himſelfe above God.
                     3. And againſt his three felowes his anger was in a choler: becauſe they found no anſwer, yet condemned Iob.
                     4. Yet Elihu wayted to ſpeak to Iob: becauſe they were elder then he, in dayes.
                     5. So Elihu ſaw there was no anſwer in the mouth of the three men, and his anger was in a choler.
                     6. Then ſpake Elihu the ſonne of Baraceel the Buzite: and ſayd: I am young, and ye are old: Therefore I reverenced, and feared to ſhew my mind among you.
                     7. For I ſayd, dayes will ſpeak: and many yeres will teach wiſdome.
                     8. Certes a ſpirit is in ſad-man: & th'almighties breath to wiſe them.
                     9 Men of not great time may be wiſe: as the old vnderſtand the right.
                     10. Therefore I ſay, Hear thou me now: I alſo will ſhew my mind.
                     11. Behold I wayted through your ſpeach: I gave ear to your arguments: while ye ſearched out what to ſpeak.
                     12 And vnto you I gave attendance: and lo, Iob found no confuter: of you that anſwered his words.
                     13 Leaſt ye ſay, we have found wiſdome: th'omnipotentChap. 19. 5. 6. doth toſſe him, not man.
                     
                        14. He hath framed no ſpeach againſt me: I will not anſwer him by your words.
                     15. They ſhrink away, do ſpeak no more: ſpeaches be departed from them.
                     16. And I expected, til that they wold no longer ſpeaks but they ſtand ſtill, they anſwer no more.
                     17. Now I will anſwer in my turne: alſo I will ſhew myne owne mind.
                     18. For I am full of words: and my bellies ſpirit doth preſſe me.
                     19 Behold my belly is as wine that hath no vent: as new barels like to burſt.
                     20. I will ſpeak that I may take breath: I will open my lippes and anſwer.
                     21. Look not that I regard mans perſon: that I reſpect an earthly-man.
                     22. For I know not how to reſpect: So my maker wold be my taker away.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIII.
                     ANd in ſooth heare now Iob my talke: and give eare to all my ſpeaches.
                     2. Behold now I will open my mouth: my tongue ſpeaketh in my palat.
                     3. My words are th'vpright of my hart: and my lippes ſhall vtter knowledg purely.
                     4. Th'Omnipotents ſpirit hath made me: and the almighties breath hath given me life:
                     5. If thou canſt anſwer, ſettle thy ſelfe before me, ſtand to it.
                     
                        6 Lo I am, as thou ſpakeſt, for th'Omnipotent: I am alſo formed out of clay.
                     7. Lo Ch. 13. 21. my terrour ſhall not fright thee: nor my 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            acaph, hand: Caph is vſuall. hand be heavie vpon thee.
                     8 Now thou haſt ſpoken in myne eares, and I heard the voice of the woords:
                     9 I Chap. 9. 30. am cleare, without treſpas: I am neat, without iniquitie.
                     10. Lo Thou ioyneſt vnto mine iniquitie more matter: Rā
                           ban ſo doth fitly apply the reply. *Chap. 14 17. & 16. 9 he piketh quarels againſt me: Chap. 13. 24. & 16. 9. and taketh me for his enemy:
                     11 He Chap. 13. 27. & 14. 16. putteth my feet in the ſtocks: and watcheth all my pathes.
                     12 Lo here thou art not in the right. I muſt tell thee: For the puiſſant is greater then ſorowful-man.
                     13 Wherfore doeſt thou ſtrive againſt him: that he will not ſpeak for all his dealings?
                     14 When th'Omnipotent ſpeaketh once, or twiſe: ▪ man will not mark it.
                     15 In a dreame of a viſion by night: when heavie ſleep falls on weak-man: in deep-ſlumbring vpon the bed:
                     16 Then he openeth the eares of weak-men: and When he hath chaſtiſed them, he ſealeth vp the decree of their iudgement. imprinteth why they are chaſtiſed.
                     17 That the earthly-man Leave mans work, and do the work of God. leave of to work: and He cover pride from the humane-wight.
                     18 To keep back his ſoule from the pit: and his life from going on the dart.
                     
                        19. So he chaſtiſeth with malady on his bed: yea all his bones with a ſore one.
                     20 So that his life abhorreth meat: and his ſoule the delicate food.
                     21 His fleſh waſteth away from ſight: and his bones ſtand out, which were not ſeen.
                     22. And his ſoule draweth neare to the pit: & his life to killing maladies.
                     23 If there be for him a meſſenger, a teacher one of a thowſand: to tell the earthly God his mercy. HIS rightfulnes:
                     24 Then he will have mercy vpon him: and ſay: ſpare him (ô killing malady,) from deſcending into the pit, I haue found a ranſome.
                     25 His fleſh ſhalbe moiſter then in youth: he ſhall returne to his freſh dayes.
                     26 He will pray to the puiſsant, & he will accept him: and he ſhall ſee his face with great ioyance: and HE will reſtore to man his Iuſtice in Chriſt. juſtice:
                     27 He will accompany with men and ſay: I ſinned & wreſtred the right: but Rom. 6. 21. it profited me nothing.
                     28 He ſaved my ſoule from going into the pit: that my life doth ſee the light.
                     29 Lo, th'Omnipotent works all this: twiſe, thriſe with a man.
                     30 To ſtay his ſoule from the pit: to be lightened with the light of the living.
                     31 Attend ô Iob, liſten to me: be ſilent, and then will I ſpeak:
                     32. If thou have ſpeach to anſwer me, ſay on, for I desire to make thee iuſt.
                     
                        33 If thou haſt nothing, liſten thou to me: be ſilent, and I will teach thee wiſedome.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXIV.
                     FUrthermore Elihu ſpake and ſayd:
                     2 Heare ô ye wiſe my words: and give eare ye men of knowledge.
                     3 For the Ch. 12. 11. eare diſcerneth ſpeaches, as the palate taſteth to eat.
                     4. Let vs deſire judgment for vs, know amongſt vs what is the good.
                     5. For Iob hath ſayd: Ch. 13. 18. 23.—27 and 27. 2. 6 I am iuſt: but, th'Omnipotent keeps back my right.
                     6. For my right I muſt be a lyer: my ſtroke is ſore without treſpas.
                     7 What ſage-wight is like to Iob: that drinketh ſcornfulnesI Looked for good: but evill is come. like water.
                     8. Who goeth in company with them that work iniquity: and walketh with the ſorrowful wicked men.
                     9. For he hath ſayd, it profiteth not the humanewight, when he would walk with God.
                     10 Therefore ſad-men of hart heare me: farre be wickednes from th'omnipotent: & vnrighteouſnes from theRom. 3. 4. 5 almighty.
                     11 For he will repay the earthly his work: and as theRom. 2. 6. way of ech one is, ſo will make him find it.
                     12 Moſt ſure is this. th'Omnipotent will not doe wickedly: neither will th'almighty pervert judgement.
                     13 Who before him looked to the earth: or who ſetled

all the dwelt-land.
                     14. If he ſet his hart vpon one, gather his ſpirit and his breath vnto him:
                     15 All fleſh would yeeld vp the ghoſt together: and the earthly ſhould returne to duſt.Gen. 3. 19.
                     
                     16 Now, if thou have vnderſtanding, heare this: give eare vnto the voice of my ſpeches.
                     17. Can a foe to judgement rule well: or wilt thou cō
                        demnethe moſt iuſt?
                     18 May one ſay to the King, Belial? thou wicked, toRom. 3. 5. 6 the King of nobles?
                     19 Who reſpects no perſon of Princes: nor regards wealthy more then poore: for all be the work of his hands.
                     20 People Gen. 19. dy ſuddenly: & be ſhaken of Exod. 12. at midnight: and they paſſe away: & the mighty are taken away without hand.
                     21 For his eyes are vpon mans wayes: and he dothRev. 2. 18. 19. ſee all his goings.
                     22 No darknes, nor ſhadow of death, can hide in it workers of ſinne.
                     23 Therefore Ch. 4. 17. 18. 19. it is not for man ever to purpoſe, to enter into judgement before the Omnipotent.
                     24 He bruſeth mighty without end: & placeth others in their rowme.
                     25 So he looketh vnto their works: & bringeth night, and they are brought low.
                     26 For wicked, he maketh plentifull riddance of them: in In open ſight: for example of others. open place of beholders.
                     27 Becauſe they turned back from him: & conſidered not all his wayes.
                     
                        28 Bringing on ſuch the cry of poore: as he heares the cry of the needy.
                     29. When he makes reſt, who can diſturb? when he hidethWhen for the poore he kills the mighty, none can stay him: and when he hideth his favour, none can find it. favour, who can behold him? eyther for a nation, or one earthly man alone.
                     30 That the hypocrite do not reigne: that HE take away ſnares from people.
                     31. Now vnto the Omnipotent, which ſayth, I pardon, I wil not deſtroy: This ſhould be ſayd:
                     32 Where I ſee not: do thou teach me: if I wrought il, I will no more.
                     33 Shall that come from thee, which he will puniſh: as thou doeſt loth, as thou likeſt, where I would not? NowLotheſt life, likeſt of death, Ch. 7 16. and 17. ſpeak what thou thinkeſt.
                     34 Sad-men of hart will ſpeak as I: and the wiſe perſon that heares me.
                     35. Iob doth ſpeak without knowledge: and his ſpeaches are without ſkill.
                     36. O my father Elihu in geſture looking to heaven, by ô father, meāt the reſt: as Abraham S. of Peritzol expoundeth the words at large. which art in heaven, let Iob be tryed throughly. vnto victorie: for anſwers of ſorrowful wicked.
                     37 For he addes treſpas to his ſin: he maketh a noyſe amongſt vs: and againſt the omnipotent, he doth multiply his talking.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XXXV.
                     ELihu ſpake moreover and ſayd:
                     2. Haſt thou counted this for judgement? Thou ſaydſt, I am more iuſt then the Omnipotent.
                     3 So thou ſaydſt, what good will it do thee: what gain

I clenſed from my ſinne?
                     4 I will anſwer thee in ſpeeches: and alſo thy fellowes with thee.
                     5. Conſider and ſee the heavens, and mark the ſkies height above thee:
                     6 If thou haſt ſinned, what canſt thou work for him: &Chap. 7. 20 Thy ſins puniſhment profiteth God, or thee. But it is nothing to God: therefore it is for thy vſe, and mens: as alſo thy iustice. thy treſpas be much, what canſt thou do to him?
                     7 If thou be juſt, what giveſt thou him: or what will he take from thy hand?
                     8 Thy ill may touch one like thy ſelf, and thy iuſtice a ſonne of Adam.
                     9 For violence th'oppreſſed complaine: Afflicted godles cry, and God heareth not: leſſe him who ſaith God is his enemy. Ch. 19. cry out for the violents arme.
                     10 But none ſay, where is the Puiſſant: The myſtery of the Trinity. my MAKERS (the Eternal Trinitie,) who ſtirreth to praiſe on the night.
                     11 Who doth 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                         teach vs more then the beaſts of the earth: and wiſeth vs above the foules of the heaven.
                     12 There they cry, but he anſwers not: concerning the wrong-doers pride.
                     13 So, As God heareth not the faithles: he will not heare the deſpiſeus. bad, th'Omnipotent will not heare: and th'almighty regards it not.
                     14 So when thou ſayſt, thou wilt not mark it: Iudge thee afore him, and wayt for him.
                     15 And now for miſſing, his anger doth viſit: becauſe Iob knoweth not this great plenty.
                     16 But doth open his mouth in vayn: without knowledge doth vſe much ſpeach.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXXVI.
                     AGaine Elihu held on and ſayd:
                     2. Wait. Forbeare me a little, and I will ſhew the
                           •
                         that I have yet ſpeaches of God:
                     3 I will vtter my knowledg from the eternall nature of God: &c. from far: and to him that wrought me give iuſtice.
                     4 Truly my words ſhall not be lies: for him that Ramban. tendreth thee ſoundly.
                     5 Mark, the Omnipotent is mighty, no deſpiſer, mighty, the ſtrength of hart:
                     6 He ſaveth not Pſ. 55. 23 & 104. 35. the wickeds life: but yeeldeth Right is defence & mercy; in ſpeach from God to the humble. as Act. 17. right vnto the The poor in ſpirit. Mat. 5. 3. poore.
                     7 He witholdeth not his eyes from the juſt, and placeth them with Kings in throne: They ſhalbe made fit for light with the living with the angels of God his ſervants: in their degree and be placed for ever in honour: and be high in honour and dignitie. So, ye ſhall ſit vpon 12. thrones, iudging the twelve tribes of Iſrael. Mat. 19. 28. that they are exalted for ever.
                     8. And if they be bound in chaines: and be caught i
                           •
                         cords of anguiſh:
                     9 Then he will tell them of their work: and that their treſpaſſes reigned.
                     10. He will open their eares to correction: and bid that they returne from naughtŷnes:
                     11 And if they heare & do ſerve him: they ſhall ſpend their dayes in good, and their yeres in pleaſures:
                     12 But if they will not heare: they ſhall paſſe on the ſpear: and yeeld the ghoſt without knowledge.
                     13 But So in the Lxx & in the N. T. And is often vſed, for prophane. hypocrites in hart ſtore wrath: they cry not 
                           •
                        
                        
when he corrects them.
                     14. Their ſoule ſhall dye in their youth: and their life with fornicatours.
                     15. He Chalatz, & lachatz, two contraries: ſave, vndo, are ſweetly vſed of Elihu. ſaveth poore in their anguiſh: and openeth their eare † in oppreſſion.
                     16. Which God once made thee wealthy & wold again. hath turnd thee from diſtreſſe mouth: to largenes where is no ſtraitnes: and that which was laid vpon thy table was full of fatnes.
                     17 As thou haſt fulfilled the ſentence of wicked, ſentence and iudgement have layd hold.
                     18 Since ire is come, look he turne thee not off by ſtripes: and great ranſome from being cast of. help not away.
                     19. Will he eſteme thy Whereof thou ſpakeſt ch. 29. noblenes: no gold nor any other thing If now thou deſpiſe repentance: be ſure thou ſhalt be vtterly caſt off. ſhould be able to giue ſound ſtrength.
                     20. Breath not Deſire not death, the common paſſage of all men: as thou haſt done, ch. 6. and 7. vnto that night: for peoples paſſage to their place.
                     21 Beware Ch. 7. thou look not to ſorow, to choſe that: for thy affliction.
                     22. Mark, God can exalt thee: and knoweth how by thy anguiſh to teach thee meanes to all goodnes. the Omnipotent ſets vp: by his ſtrength: who can teach as he?
                     23. Who gave him chargeover his wayes: who can ſay, thou workeſt evil.
                     24 Remember to magnifie his work: which the ſonnes of Enoſh 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Behold: Ramban: praiſe in Pſalmes and ſonges. Beholding fully a good thing, and prayſing it goe together. behold.
                     
                        25. All Of Adam and Enoſh all men are cald ſo: Adam in the tongue of them that knew Moſes: and Enoſh, the faithles eaſt Dan. 2, 10. calleth mē: Jiran ſlate Adam earthly in reſpect of God: and Enoſh ſorowfull: but now to diſtinguiſh from beaſts mans knowledg, neither terme would ſerve: but the Ebrew beſt cometh in. of Adam ſee it: they † of Enoſh behold a far off.
                     26. Lo, the Omnipotentis great: but we cannot fully know that: nor find the number of his yeares.
                     27. He withdrawes dropping of waters: which makes rain pure through his 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            Cloud, and vapour, But Ghab and Ghanan be alſo cloudes, therfore I am forced to vſe a new ſchole terme. meteores:
                     28 Which 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            the welkin, ſky, ayer, 1 Theſ. 4. 17. the ayre powreth, cauſeth to flow on Mat. 5. 45. many Adams ſonnes.
                     29. So if one marke his cloudes Diver ſities. ſpreadinges, the much roaring of his The roaring of windes and cloudes in the ayer: purging it. Pſal. 18. 12. cabane.
                     30 Lo, he ſpreads Hoat ſun makes great rain vpon the earth: vpon which the ſea standeth his light vpon it: and covereth The earth. the rootes of the ſea.
                     31. When by them he will Helpe &c. judge people: and give meat in abundant plenty.
                     32. By Cloudes. He cauſeth cloudy weather. hands he covereth the light: and chargeth it as man doth pray.
                     33 Declaring his favour towards him, the cattel, & alſo plantes.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXVII.
                     ALſo at this mine heart quaketh: and ſkippeth out of his place.
                     2. Hearken well to the noyſe of his voyce: and to the ſound that cōmeth from his mouth.
                     3 He directeth it under the whole heaven: and his light vnto the wings of the earth.
                     4 After the light roareth a voice: He thundreth withThe lightning commeth firſt to our ſenſe. the voyce of his Maieſty: He will not have it to be behind, when his voice is to be heard.
                     5 The Omnipotent thundreth wonderfully by his voice: he doeth great things which we cannot know.
                     6 For, to the ſnow he ſayth, be vpon the earth; or to ſhowres of rayn: then ſhowres of much great raine come.
                     7 That ſealeth vp the hand of Adams ſonne, to peruſe what all his workmen may According as rain cometh in dry countreyes: the firſt rayne, they apply their tillage. As in Aegypt, as Nilus floweth. do.
                     8 Then the beaſts go into their dennes: and keep in their lodgings.
                     9 A tempeſt cōmeth from his chamber, and cold from The ſcatterers of clowdes. the fair-weather windes
                     10 By the breath of the Omnipotent he giveth ice: & the breadth of the waters are made hard.
                     So by clearnes he wearieth thick-vapours: he ſcattereth the clowdes by his light.
                     12 And for varieties, he turneth himſelf in his wiſe counſels, for their operatiō, for whatſoever he commaundeth them, in the face of the world, on the earth.
                     
                        13. Whether for a ſcourge, or for the earth, or for mercy, he doth cauſe it to come.
                     14. Give eare vnto this ô Iob, ſtand ſtill, and conſider the wondrous works of the Omnipotent.
                     15 Doeſt thou know when the Puiſſant diſpoſeth of them, how the light of his cloud doth ſhine.
                     16. Doeſt thou know the peiſing of his thick-vapours: the miracles of the perfect in all knowledge.
                     17. How thy clothes are warme, (when the land is ſtill)Thick clouds with ſunnes heat in ſouth to Arabia & all more North, without wind, in ſtill ayre, give a parching heat. from the ſouth.
                     18. Couldeſt thou make a firmament with him of the ayer, ſettled as glaſſe molten.
                     19. Teach vs what we ſhould ſay vnto him, we cannot reaſon for darknes.
                     20 Shall it be recorded vnto him when I ſpeak: would any plead when he ſhould be vndone?
                     21. And now men cannot look vpon the light, when it is bright in the ayre: when a wind paſſeth and cleareth it.
                     22. Through the North a golden cōmeth: but a terrible glorie is in the Puiſſant.
                     23. The almighty, whom we cannot find out, he is huge of ſtrength: but Judgemēt in God, for the lowly, is defence againſt Satā (as in the book of Iudges, and Act. 17. from Pſal. 76. 8, 9. and 89. 14. and 97. 2. and 103. 6.) and iuſtice is mercy. And ſuch is God to ſad Enoſh: till he wil be a rebell Nemrod. of judgement and greatnes of iuſtice he would not afflict.
                     24 Therefore ſad-men do feare him. He reſpecteth no wiſe in heart.
                  
                  
                     
                     CHAP. XXXVIII.
                     THen anſwered the Eternal vnto Iob, out of the whirlewind, and ſayd.
                     2 What 
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                            . a man is this, that darkneth Gods providence. counſel by words voyd of knowledg.
                     3. Gird now thy loynes like a man, and I will queſtion with thee: & let me ſee thy ſkill.
                     4. Where waſt thou, when I layd the foundation of theOf the Earth. earth, tell if thou This phraſe holy Daniel hath ch. 2. 21. in opening the Image: callnig the hearer to this ſpeach of the Eternal. know vnderſtanding.
                     5. Who ſet her meaſures? for thou wilt be ſkilfull: or who hath ſtretched the line vpon it?
                     6. Wherevpon are her foundations ſunk-faſt? or who hath caſt her corner ſtone?
                     7. When the the angels. So Chriſt is Pſa. 22. the morning ſtar: & Rev. 2. & 22. & ſo Kimchi expounds Pſ. 22. The Angels were made at the firſt: Ramban: and Baſil: The leſser, Caeſarienſis, &c. morning ſtarres reioyced together: and all the ſonnes of God ſhowted.
                     8 When he ſhut vp Of the Sea. the ſea with doores, when it guſhed out comming from the wombe.
                     9. When I ſet a cloud his garment: and obſcuritie his ſwadling-band.
                     10. And brake the earth for it by my decree: and ſet barre and doores.
                     11 And ſaid, Hitherto thou ſhalt come, but ſhalt go no further: and here ſhalbe an end for the pride of thy waves.
                     12 Haſt thou ſince thy dayes given the morning his charge? and haſt taught the dawning his place?
                     13. To hold the winges of thé earth, that the wicked might be ſhaken out of it.
                     14 That it ſhould be made diverſe as clay to the pictured: and Herbes and all plants. things ſtand vpon it as a garment:
                     
                        15. That the wicked ſhould be reſtrained of their light: and the arme lift vp ſhould be broken.
                     16. Cameſt thou ever to the ſpringes of the ſea, or haſt thou walked in the border of the deepe?
                     17. Have the gates of The bottom of the ſea which ſemeth left of God, as a dead place: as Ch. 28. death bene opened vnto thee? or haſt thou ſeen the gates of the ſhadow of death?
                     18 Haſt thou perceived the breadth of the earth? tell if thou knoweſt it all.
                     19. Where is the way that light dwelleth? & whereOf light & darknes. is the place of darkenes?
                     20. That thou mayſt take it into his border, & know the pathes of his houſe.
                     21. Didſt If thou know not thy owne cauſe, others of the beginning overreach thee. thou know, that then thou waſt to be born: & the number of thy dayes to be many.
                     22 Haſt thou come Of Snow. Haile. to the ſtorehouſe of ſnow? or haſt thou ſeen the ſtorehouſe of haile?
                     23. Which I ſpare vnto the time of diſtreſſe: againſt the day of battell and war?
                     24. By what way is Lightning Ch. 37. 2. light parted: and the eaſtwind ſcatterreth it ſelf over the earth?
                     25 Who divided a chanel for the ſtreames, and a way for the lightning of thunder?
                     26. To raine vpon the earth where no man is: vpon the deſert, where none of Adam dwelleth.
                     27 To ſatiſfie the waſt and vaſt-ground: and to cauſe the bud of herb to ſpring fourth.
                     28 Hath the raine a father, or vvho begat the miſlingRaine. Dewe. Ice. Frost. of devv?
                     29. From vvhoſe vvomb came the Ice: and vvho begat the froſt of heaven?
                     
                        30 That the waters hide themſelves like a ſtone: and the face of the deep is faſtened.
                     31 Canſt thou bind the delicacies of Pleiades, or looſeStarres. the bands of Orion?
                     32 Canſt thou bring forth The farr ſtarres in the South. Mazaroth in due ſeaſon: canſt thou lead Arcturus and her children?
                     33 Doeſt thou know the rules of heaven, or canſt thou ſet his force vpon earth?
                     34 Canſt thou lift vp thy voice unto the clowdes: that abundance of water cover thee?
                     35. Canſt thou ſend forth the lightnings, that they go, and ſay to thee, here we are.
                     36. Who hath ſet wiſdome in the reines, or who hathOf man. given the hart vnderſtanding?
                     37 Who could make the ayre Aben Ezra, & Ramban. Saphir-like by wiſedome:Cloudes. or diſtill the barrels of the heavens?
                     38. Sprinkling the duſt with this ſprinkling, that the clods cleave together?
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXXIX.
                     CAnſt thou hunt pray for the hardy-Lion: or ſatiſfyThe Lyon. the heird of Lions whelpes?
                     2 When they couch in their lodge, and tarry in their covert to lye in wait.
                     3 Who could prepare for the raven his food: when hisRaven. Pſ. 147. 9. young ones cry vnto the Omnipotent: The dammes. they wandring without meat.
                     4. Canſt thou know the time when the wild goates bring forth young: canſt thou mark when hindes calve?Wild goat. Hart.
                     
                     
                        5. Canſt thou number the monethes that they muſt fulfill? Canſt thou know the time when they bring forth young?
                     6. They lie down, they calve their young ones, & paſſe their travel.
                     7. Their young ones wax ſtrong: they grow in the fieldes: they go forth, and returne not vnto them.
                     8. Who ſet the wild-aſſe at liberty: or who looſed theWild asse. bandes of that An other name of the ſtrong wild asse. Arad?
                     9. Even I, who made the plaine wildernes his houſe: & the barren land his dwelling.
                     10. He ſcorneth the multitude of the city: and will not heare the cry of the driver.
                     11 Choſen places in the mountaynes are his paſture: & he will ſeek after every green herbe.
                     12. Will the vnicorne do thee ſervice: or will he abideUnicorn. by thy crib?
                     13. Canſt thou bind the vnicorne for the furrow, by his cords: will he plough the valley after thee?
                     14. Mayſt thou truſt him, becauſe his ſtrength is great: or leave thy labour vnto him?
                     15 Mayſt thou beleev him, that he will bring home thy corne: or gather it vnto thy barne?
                     16 Couldeſt thou give the proud wing to the peacock:Peacock. Stork. Eſtrich. or fether to the ſtork, and eſtrich?
                     17. Which leaveth her egges in the ground, and warmeth them in the duſt:
                     18. And forgetteth how a foot may daſh them: & the beaſts of the feild may tread vpon them.
                     19. So hard ſhe is to her owne young ones: as though they were not hers: & had laboured in vayn without fear.
                     
                        20. Becauſe the Puiſſant hath denyed her wiſdome: & not geven her vnderſtanding.
                     21. At what time it mounteth on high: ſhe ſcornes the horſe and his rider.
                     22. Canſt thou give to the horſe courage? canſt thouHorſe. cloth his neck with thundering?
                     23. Canſt thou make him quake as a locuſt: or his proud ſnurting with terrour?
                     24. His feet will digge in the plaine ground: he reioiceth in his ſtrongnes: he will go fourth to meet the harneſſe.
                     25. He mocks terrour, and ſhrinketh not: neither ſtarteth back from the ſword:
                     26. Though the quiver rattle vpon him: with bright blade, with ſpeare, with javeling.
                     27 With ſhaking & ſtirring he beateth vpon the earth: & will not ſtand ſtill at the voyce of the trumpet.
                     28. Of the trumpet he will ſay, Heah, and from far will ſmell the battell, the thunder and ſhout of princes.
                     29. Doth the Hauk flee from thy wiſdome, ſpreadingHauke. Eagle. the winges toward the ſouth?
                     30. Mounts the Eagle on high by thy mouth: or doth it make the neſt on high?
                     31. He dwelleth and lodgeth on a rock: in the edge of a rock, and a fortreſſe.
                     32. Thence he ſearcheth meat, his eyes will ſee far off.
                     33. His younge Eb. Ieghaleghu: a word made here to ſhew choking by greedy ſucking. nere choke ſwallowing blood: and Math. 24. 28. where carcaſſes be, reſort they.
                  
                  
                     CHAP. XL.
                     MOreover the Eternall ſpake to Iob, and ſayd:
                     2. Who is the pleader that will check the Omnipotent?Rom. 9. 20.
                        
let the reprover of the puiſſant ſpeak to any on
                           •
                         of theſe thinges.
                     3. Then Iob anſwered the Eternall, and ſayd:
                     4. Lo, I am vile, what ſhall I anſwer thee: I will lay my hand on my mouth.
                     5. Once I ſpake, but I will not anſwer: or twiſe, but 
                           〈…〉
                         will no more.
                     6. Then the Eternall anſwered Iob out of the whir
                           ••
                         wind, and ſayd:
                     7. Gird now thy loynes like a man, and I will queſtio
                           •
                         with thee, and let me ſee thy ſkill.
                     8. Wilt thou diſanull my judgement, condemne m
                           •
                         that thou maieſt be iuſt?
                     Or haſt thou an arme as the Omnipotent? canſt tho
                           •
                         thunder with voice as he?
                     10. Deck thee now with gayneſſe and height: & put o
                           •
                         glory and honour.
                     11. Caſt abroad wrath of thine anger: & behold ec
                           〈…〉
                         proud, and humble him.
                     12. Behold ech proud, make him bow downe: be
                           〈…〉
                         wicked to duſt as they ſtand.
                     13 Hide them in the duſt together: bind their faces i
                           •
                         the hid place.
                     14 And then I will confeſſe to thee, that thy right hand can ſave thee.
                     15 If thou canſt not deale with stout men: mark the beast Elephant how he is ſtronger then thou 
                              〈◊〉
                            being without mans reaſon: and without traynes can not be taken. Behold now Behemoth, which I have made wit
                           •
                        
                        Of the Elephant. thee: he eateth graſſe as an oxe:
                     
                        16. Behold now his ſtrength is in his loynes: and his power in the navel of his belly.
                     17. He will make his rayle ſtand like a Ceder: the ſinewes of his ſtones are platted in and out as branches.
                     18. His bones be as barres of ſteel: his hard-partes as ſtaues of iron.
                     19 He is the chief of the Omnipotents wayes: HE that 
                           •
                        ade him, dare joyne his ſword.
                     20. The mountaynes do bring him fodder: where all 
                           •
                        he field beaſtes play boldly.
                     21 He reſteth him in the ſhadow: in the covert of reed and fennes:
                     22. Shade-places cover him with their ſhade: the riuers willowes cover him.
                     23 Lo, he robs a river, that it haſt not: he durſt think 
                           •
                        hat Iorden would guſh into his mouth.
                     24. Can men take him before his eyes: to peirce his noſe with many ſnares?
                  
                  
                     CHAP XLI.
                     CAnſt thou draw Livjathan with an hook: or deepOf the Whale. a cord into his tongue?
                     2 Canſt thou put a ruſh into his noſe: or bore his 
                           •
                        aw through with a thorne?
                     3. Will he make much praying to thee: or ſpeak vnto thee tenderly?
                     4. Will he make a covenant with thee: that thou take him a ſervant for ever?
                     5. Wilt thou play with him as with a bird: wilt thou 
                           •
                        ye him for thy yonge-girles?
                     
                        6. Will companies make cheare of him? ſhall he be parted to marchants?
                     7. Wilt thou fill his ſkin with ſharp-hookes: and his head with fiſhers angles?
                     8 Lay thyne hand vpō him: look for war: do it no more.
                     9. When hope of him proveth falſe: yea at his very ſight one would be caſt downe.
                     10. None is ſo hardy that dare ſtir him: and then who can ſtand before me?
                     11. Who gave me any thing firſt, that I may pay it toRom. 11. 3
                              •
                           . him againe? whatſoever is vnder the heaven is mine.
                     12. I will not keepe ſilence, concerning his members: and ſpeach of ſtrength, and grace of his frame.
                     13 Who can vncover the face of his garment? who canThe ſea is his garmēt: who can take that from him, and bring him to lād? come with his To draw him to land. double bridle?
                     14. Who dare open the His iawes doores of his face? Terrour is about his teeth.
                     15 The ſtrong Scales. They are as a ſheild, all ſealed together: as one ſkin. ſhieldes have pride: he is cloſed with a ſtrait ſeale.
                     16 One toucheth an other ſo nere, that no wind can come betwixt them.
                     17 Ec
                           •
                         doth cleaue vnto his felow, hold one the other▪ and cannot be ſundred.
                     18. His neiſing maketh a light ſhine: and his eyes are like the huge great▪
                         eylids of the morning.
                     19. Out of his mouth do lampes proceed: and ſparks of fyer leap of themſelves.
                     20. From his noſetrilles iſſueth a ſmoke: as a pannes or caldrons ſeething.
                     
                        21 His breath would ſet coles on fyer: & a flame iſſueth from his mouth.
                     22. In his neck doth ſtrength alwayes lodge: and before him He hath no care; meeting a
                              •
                           y with fiſh to feed vpō: that his taking of thought is a gladnes. Abr. Ben. Peritzol. daunſeth carefullnes.
                     23 The peeces of his fleſh cleave faſt, hard in him, that none can be moved.
                     24. His hart is ſo hard as a ſtone: ſo hard as the nether milſtone.
                     25 At his ſtatelynes the mightie feare: Ab. ben Peritzol. & of ſhivering purge themſelves.
                     26. The ſword of one that doth ſtrike him, ſpeare, dart, and javeling, will not faſten.
                     27. He holds iron as ſtraw: and ſteell as rotten wood.
                     28. The arrow. bowes child driues him not away: the ſling ſtones turne as chaff to him.
                     29. The axes are counted as chaff: and he will laugh at ſhaking pikes.
                     30. His vnderneath-places be as ſharpe ſheardes: He ſpreades the pricking in the mire.
                     31 He makes the deep boyle as a pot: ſets the ſea as a ſpicers kettle.
                     32 After him he makes the way lighten: and thinks the ſea to be hoary.
                     33 His like are not vpon the land, which do deal withoutThough the land by nature ſhould breed ſtrō
                           ger things then the ſea: yet God ſheweth that his power▪ not nature, ruleth all, & bred al. feare.
                     34 He deſpiſeth all lofty things: He is King over all the wild kind.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XLII.
                     THen Iob anſwered the Eternall, and ſayd:
                     2. I know thou canſt do all things, and no wiſdome was kept from thee.Thou hast made all things in perfect wiſdome: to ſhew thy Eternal power and godhead.
                     
                     3. What a man hath this ben, who hides counſel without knowledg? Therfore I tell, that I had not vnderſtanding: wonders are aboue me: ſuch I know not.
                     4 Oh heare me, when I do ſpeak: I will make petition vnto thee, & teach thou me.
                     5 By eare hearing I heard of thee: but now mine ey hath ſeen thee.
                     6. Therefore I loth my ſelf: and I will repent in duſt & aſhes.
                     7. Now after the Eternall had ſpoken theſe words vnto Iob, the Eternall ſayd to Eliphaz the Themanite, I am diſpleaſed with thee, and thy two frendes: for yee haue no
                           •
                         ſpoken of me the right, as my ſervant Iob.
                     8 But now take to you ſeaven oxen & ſeaven rammes: and go to my ſervant Iob: and offer a burnt offering for your ſelves: and my ſervant Iob ſhall pray for you. For certenly I will accept his perſō, that I puniſh not your fooliſhnes: where ye have not ſpoken the right of me, as my ſervant Iob.
                     9. So went they, Eliphaz the Themanite, and Bildad the Shuchite, Sophar the Naamathite, and did as the Eternal ſpake vnto them: and the Eternal accepted the perſon of Iob.
                     10 And the Eternal reſtored that which had bene taken from Iob, when he had prayed for his frendes: and the

Eternal encreaſed all that Iob had to double.
                     11 Than came to him all his brethren and all his ſiſters, and all that had bene of his acquaintance afore: & did eat bread with him in his houſe: and ſolaced him, and comforted him, for all the harme which the Eternal had brought vpon him. And they gave him ech, one lambe and one earing of gold.
                     12. So the Eternal bleſſed the end of Iob, more then his beginning: and he had fourtene thouſand ſheep, and ſix thouſand camels, and a thouſand yoke of oxen, and a thouſand aſſes.
                     13. And he had ſeaven ſonnes, and three daughters.
                     14 And he called the name of the firſt Iemimah, and the name of the ſecond Caſſia, & the name of the third, Keren-Happue.
                     15. And no woman-kind was found ſo faire as the daughters of Iob in all the land: And their father gave thē inheritance among their brethren.
                     16. And Iob lived after this, an hundred & forty yeares: and ſaw his children, & his childrens children, four generations.
                     17. And Iob died aged, and full of dayes.
                  
                  
                     
                     The Argument of the book of Iob.
                     
                        IOb tried of God with many and heavy ſorowe
                           〈…〉
                         loſse of all his cattel, children, health, is further tried of his wife & frends. She greveth him with mocking and ſcolding, as though all his religion was but hypocriſy; They from God his majesti
                           〈…〉
                         and mans corruption, and Iobs disturbed ſpeac
                           〈…〉
                         would prove that eyther Iob was an evil doer; or an hypocrytes otherwiſe the just God would never afflict him ſo grevouſly. Iob defendeth his ſpeaches, Gods iustice & his own: & ſheweth th
                           〈…〉
                         commonly the godly are in this life more afflicted then the wicked: and blameth his frends of impietie in handling Gods cause vniustly, & in falſe accuſing of him. At last, Elihu maketh a 
                           〈…〉
                         dest agremēt: & blameth both: & teacheth Iob of Gods highness by his workes, ſhewing his eternall power and godhead: that bas
                           〈…〉
                         & blind man ſhould not wiſh to plead with him. At the last, God confirmeth the ſame doctrine, by examples frō al his works▪ & driveth Iob firſt to ſilence: then to confeſsion and repentance▪ and teacheth his frends reconciliation: and reſtoreth Iob to health: and new children, & double wealth.
                     
                        
                        THE ARGVMENTS of each Chapter.
                        
                           Chap. 1.
                           Iob in the land of Uz, Aus in old pronouncing, whence Auſitae, in Ptol. table 4. where Thema, Saba, Buz, & Madian, and Chaldaea, and Minnaej be neare; where Arabie the ſtony held Tharahs houſe, Iſmaels, Keturaes, 
                                 •
                              eare Eſawes; Iob being Godly is tried by Satan going about like a roaring Lion and accuſing the godly, by loſſe of catell and children: and ſtill continueth in ſynceritie.
                        
                        
                           Chap. II.
                           Iobs body is afflicted by Satan with all greifs: he is mocked of his wife: viſited of his frends, of Eſaw, Ketura, Buz.
                        
                        
                           Chap. III.
                           Iob wiſheth he never had bene borne, in merveilous vehemency of ſpeeches: and laſtly that ſtill he feared, but now found, extreme vexation.
                        
                        
                           Chap. IV.
                           Eliphaz vpon Iobs chiding with God, Ch. 3. 19. exhorteth him to patience: and to conſider Gods holynes: before whom the angels be not perfect: & men in this earthly tabernacle of ſorow, 
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                               of one dayes life: and periſh almoſt all by ignorance of the Lord, whom to know they regard not.
                        
                        
                           Chap. V.
                           No holy would defend Iob: whoſe puniſhment ariſeth from his ſin: and to God he ſhould ſeek: and ſo find an happyer ſtate then his firſt.
                        
                        
                           
                           Chap. VI.
                           Iob defendeth his ſpeaches, Ch. 3. that they were nothing to his pangs: and as the wild aſſe would not bray nor oxe low at fodder: ſo would not he have done: & ſheweth that he wiſheth death: and cannot hope to live: and look for proſperity, by repentance: and hath integritie to defend himſelf, againſt his frends; in proſperity, needles; in diſtreſſe, amazed: and requireth diſputation, againſt his ſpeach, Chap. 3.
                        
                        
                           Chap. VII.
                           All mens time is ſhort, and they naturally grone for a paſſage hence: and flit like a Chap. 9. Poſt, Pineſſe, or Egle to prey. One in pangs endleſſe ſhould deſire death: as Iob did, Ch. 3. and now deſireth pardon of treſpas, & paſſage away.
                        
                        
                           Chap. VIII.
                           Bildad holdeth Iobs words of pleading innocencie but as a ſtrong blaſt: that ſeemed to make God vnrighteous: who, as he ſaid, kild not his children, but for their ſinne: and wiſheth Iob repentance, ſo he ſhould be happier then ever he was. Ancient ſtories tell, that as ſegges can not grow without moiſture, ſo man cannot without moiſture of iuſt life: But his houſe is made a ſpiders webbe: or a tree over luxurious in braunches, to provoke the Lord of the ſoile to root him out: as Iobs children in their feaſting by courſe. But ſeeking to God would bring proſperity.
                        
                        
                           Chap. IX.
                           Iob acknowledgeth Gods juſtice, and himſelf a ſinner: 
                                 〈…〉
                               God is onely wiſe and mighty. He maketh ſeas where 
                                 •
                              ountaines were: he maketh earthquakes: cloudy, faire,

and calme weather: the ſtarres order ſhew his wiſdome: calling vs to conſider how his works are vnſearcheable: in election and reiection: in puniſhing or ſparing: when he robbed Iob by Sheba & Chaldy, none could ſtay him: or plead with him. Iob, if he were iuſt, would not plead: but crave mercy: though for civil cariage, he knoweth no groſſe treſpas. But this is the ſum: Gods wrath in this world is vpon iuſt and vniuſt. But commonly the wicked rule countreys: who kill them that would do iuſtice: And Iobs lyfe fled away: full of heavie cares: and now can hope for no quietnes: nor dare plead: for God would find him loth ſome. But wiſheth leave out of greif to plead with God: becauſe he knoweth not him ſelf worthy of ſo heavie puniſhmentes.
                        
                        
                           Chap. X.
                           Iob humbly pleadeth with God of his afflictions; and of wicked mens proſperity: and acknowledgeth Gods old mercy: with petition to haue an end of this praeſent ſorow.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XI.
                           Zophar blameth Iob for long vehement ſpeach, for lying and for checking Eliphaz and Bildad: and for juſtifying of himſelf: deſerving double puniſhment by Gods juſtice. The height the depth the length the breadth, of whoſe counſel, none can ſee. (From this ſpeach, S. Paul wiſheth Gods mercy in Chriſt knowen to vs. Ephe. 3. 18. 19.) But here puniſhment from juſtice doth Zophar plead: by which God would wiſe Adams ſonns being naturally dull as beaſts. But Iob by repentance may come to joy, otherwiſe while he continueth in wickednes, his hope can be but panges of ſoule.
                        
                        
                           
                           Chap. XII.
                           Iob taketh vp all his three frends at once, for arrogancy in geving counſel: and chalengeth equall ſkil: and pleadeth vpon their ſpeach, that the juſt is a mock, in affliction, to the welthy: And that the God of this world hath from the true God power, to proſper the wicked. Beaſts & fowles, plants and fiſh, ſhew God rules all: and ſo from him wicked rule: & no repentance of godly can find this worlds proſperitie.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XIII.
                           Iob repeateth the checking of his frends: as not ſuperiours to him in wiſdome: and calleth them liers: and fooliſh phyſicians, and fooliſh pleaders for God: and truſteth that if God would give him leave to plead without his pangs, he would frame a ſufficient narration.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XIV.
                           Iob pleadeth of mans cōmon frailty: as a floure: (from him Moyſes Pſal. 90.) and confeſſeth all vnclean: and craveth eaſe of his pangs, til neare death come. A tree dying from by-rootes yeeldeth new: but man not ſo. As waters paſſe & not returne: ſo he, dead ariſeth not: till the heauens and worlds end. Rockes of mountaynes break: and tumble into rivers: which being ſoft, yet conſume them: So would mans hope ſoft ſtrokes, and conſume.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XV.
                           Eliphaz in this ſecond reply is vehementer then in the firſt: wherein he blamed Iob not ſo, as openly wicked: nor juſtifying of himſelf. His long ſpeaches he counteth a wind: and that he ſayth, perfect & wicked God deſtroyeth, ſo all prayer to God he holdeth alſo deſtroyed: if God regard all alike. And checketh him as ch. 4. that miſerable

man would compare with God: before whom the Angels be not perfect. And by old teſtemonies he would prove, that the wicked be aey full of ſorow.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XVI.
                           Iob blameth them for often windy and vehement words: and if they had bene in his caſe he had otherwiſe ſolaced them. And he ſheweth that his ſores exceedingly paſſe puniſhment of wicked: from deep counſell of God.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XVII.
                           Iob continueth blame of his frends mockages: how God hath hid their hart from vnderſtanding: and wiſheth wiſer pleaders: where God will not give ſuch honour: and ſheweth himſelf being juſt and in miſerie, an example for martyrs not to ſhrink, Apoc. 22. And blameth their ſmooth words how repentance can help him that is already as death.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XVIII.
                           Bildad the ſecond tyme blameth Iobs much ſpeach in defence of himſelf: and in ſending the diſputers to learne of beaſts, Ch. 12. And againſt Iobs ſpeach there, he giveth this rule generall, that the wicked man is ful of ſorow, and nippeth Iob, as one that knew not God.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XIX.
                           After five ſpeaches of Iobs, and ſo many of his felowes, tedious and teaching nothing, as he wiſhed, Chap. 6. he wiſheth better argument then his afflictions to prove him one that knew not God: and now, ſeing they have harped ſtill vpon the ſame ſtring, he deſires them to leave him reſt in his errour: and ſheweth his puniſhments extraordinary, and that he is not godleſſe, but knoweth Chriſt his incarnation and reſurrection, the cauſe of ours to ſee God

in Chriſt: and he blameth his frends of badnes.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XX.
                           Zophar in his ſecond reply chafeth that he was counted bad, v. 3. and could not choſe but reply that the wicked ever ſince Adam ſtood vpon the earth wicked were to themſelves and children, highly plagued.
                        
                        
                           Chap XXI.
                           Iob replyeth how he deſireth not to complain to mans perſwaſion: but hath occaſion of ſighing: and therfore muſt have leave to ſigh: and biddes them merveil at his caſe: & not ſpeak as of an ordinarie, that ſpeach of repentance might help him. And to confute Zophar, he replyeth, that wicked and their iſſue commonly proſper. Or if yſſue doth not: the wicked litle careth but for himſelf. And in this ſort theyr counſel is in vain.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXII.
                           Eliphaz now the third tyme cōmeth nere Iob: that he ſhould not look for familiaritie with God: to think that he would regard his teaching: or ioy that he pleaded iuſtice: or puniſh him for being religious. And chargeth him of open treſpaſſe: that therevpon puniſhment cometh: as generally vpon all wicked in Noes flood: to all the old world: and biddeth him in the world now, where yet fyre conſumeth not the wicked remnant, ſeek vnto God: and he ſhall have a golden life: and as iuſt Noe ſave the vnjuſt.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXIII.
                           Iob greived that his frends complaine of his deſire to plead with God; and blame his cariage: ſtill ſtandeth to his defence: and lamenteth that he cannot: and merveileth that he neither dyed quickly, nor hath eaſe of calamity.
                        
                        
                           
                           Chap. XXIIII.
                           God hideth his iudgmēts: that even Prophets cannot ſee them. Wicked often proſper: often never haue good day.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXV.
                           Bildad the third time replyeth that the terrour of God is high to his very Angels: and thereby peace is on high. And Gods light is too bright for man to abide: whereto ſtarres to him be not cleare: leſſe ſorowfull man.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXVI.
                           Iob mocketh him for telling playn knowen things: & telleth from the ſea bottom and deep earth, the furtheſt from heaven, Gods works: and from the earths ſet in the middes, and mountaynes quakes, & clouds not broken, & ſea ſhore not overflowen, & ſtarres beauty, & Livjathans greatnes, that all theſe paſſe mans reach: that Bildads arguments ſhould not hinder Iob.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXVII.
                           Iob ſtill proteſteth his innocency: and that he could not hope of good pleading before God if he were wicked. For the wicked when God entreth into judgement come to horrible ruine. But that is hid from vs: how he meaſureth judgement times.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXVIII.
                           God teacheth men to find mines of ſilver and gold, & to refine it: and to make iron and braſſe of ſtone: and to find the limit of all hid things: and precious ſtones deeply hid: and how of ſmall ſprings deep rivers flow: and how the earth above beareth meat, Brimſton and Saphir vnderneath: where foules and wild beaſts could ſee nothing: ſo he changeth rocks at the root: and maketh rivers: and bringeth every precious thing to light.
                           
                              But Gods wiſdom for dealing with men cannot be foun
                                 〈…〉
                               out among the living here: the deep ſea expreſſeth it n
                                 〈…〉
                               no mettalls nor precious ſtones match it: the living on t
                                 〈…〉
                               earth and fowles expreſſe it not: though they ſhew mu
                                 〈…〉
                               of Gods providence. The earth in the ſea bottom, when live things be not, and which ſeemeth as caſt off, the
                                 〈…〉
                               have not ſimilitudes of this: but God onely: who in h
                                 〈…〉
                               meteores plainly ſheweth his wiſdome vnſerchable: and ſayd to Adam, Mark, the feare of Adonaj is wiſdome, and to flee from evill is vnderſtanding.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXIX.
                           Iob wiſheth his former happines reſtored: and ſheweth all his duties to God and men.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXX.
                           But now the vileſt violate Iob, flowing on him as rive
                                 〈…〉
                               breaking the ſtank: and Gods hand hath made him miſerable.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXI.
                           To all ſortes he ſhewed goodnes: maydes, wife, man
                                 〈…〉
                               ſervants, vvidowes, naked, orphanes: worſhipped no ſtarrs▪ nor gold, Ephe. 5. 5. loved his enemy, was hoſpital, confeſſed his imperfections, payd for the land he tilled: and wiſheth curſe if this were not ſo.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXII.
                           Elihu ſeing Iob ſilent and his three frendes: was offended at Iobs comparing in juſtice to plead with God; and with his frends for concluding that Iob was wicked, becauſe God afflicted him: ſheweth hovv Gods ſpirit biddeth him ſpeak vvithout reſpect of perſon.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXIII.
                           He replyeth to particular vvords of Iobs, wiſhing to

diſpute with God as man doth with man. He will ſpeak right: 
                                 •
                               creature that Iob may abide. This he reproveth: verſ. 9. I am pure without ſinne: Ch. 9. 21. & 16. 17. & 29. 14. And 
                                 •
                              . 10. He picketh quarrels with me: and boldeth me as his enemy. Ch. 14. 13. & 13. 24. & 19. 11. And v. 11. He layeth my feet 
                                 •
                              n the ſtocks: and watcheth all my wayes, Ch. 13. 27. To this 
                                 •
                              e ſayth: God is too great for man to call to accompt for all his wayes. God doth by viſions and ſicknes warne men: which warning if they take, they are reſtored. And he aſ
                              
                                 •
                              eth Iob what he can ſay to this, and Iob is ſilent.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXIV.
                           Elihu, vpon Iobs ſilence repeateth his ſpeaches: and sheweth their abſurdities. Iob ſayd, I am iuſt, and God hath kept away iuſtice from me: ſhould I lye against myne own cauſe: 
                                 •
                              y plague is deadly without my ſin: Ch. 13. 18, & 23. 10. & 27. 2. & 6. 4. Gods juſt nature which rewardeth every man according to his doing, will not abide this: who might as in Noes flood call all to judgement at once. And 
                                 •
                              f God were not juſt, how could he governe the world? (Gen. 18. Rom. 3.) Now he ſtill deſtroyeth the froward, and the humble penitent he reſtoreth: and he prayeth God to teſtify that, by his owne judgement.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXV.
                           Iobs juſtice or ſin cannot reach to help or hurt to God: the height of the heavens might teach that. Oppreſſed cry: but faithles in vain: more, proude contemners, who ſayd, God will not regard: now becauſe neyther Gods juſtice vpon all, nor his pacience is regarded, God is angry with Iob.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXVI.
                           Elihu ſheweth Iob of Gods power & tendering of his

creature, of his judgements, and mercies: and biddeth Iob apply himſelf accordingly, conſidering Gods judgement, Politicall and Phyſicall, in the meteores.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXVII.
                           Thunder, lightening, ſnow, rain, ice, ſayre weather ſhew power and mercy towards man: that he afflicteth not, but provoked: that the world may be governed i
                                 •
                               order.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXVIII.
                           God ſheweth Iobs ſhortnes in vviſdome, to plead i
                                 •
                               Gods cauſes: by the earth, how it ſtands, vvhich thing
                                 •
                               the Angels the firſt with the heavens admired: by the ſea how the ſhores keep it in: by night and day, hovv they have limits: by the bottom of the ſea, and parts that ſee
                                 •
                               caſt off: by ſnow and haile, for Gods judgements: by lightening and great rain; by leſſer, and dew; by ice, and frost
                                 •
                               by the ſtarres for all ſeaſons, by their operation vpon the earth: by planting wiſedome in mans ſoule: by making the clovvdes ſaphirlike: by calling the raine to fall out of them, to clod the earth. That which may be knowen of God, his eternall power and Godhead, wiſdome may hence ſee to be vnſearchable.
                        
                        
                           Chap. XXXIX.
                           The Beaſts and fowles on the earth and ayer, cal Iob to ſee weaknes of judgement. As how the Lions in the
                                 〈…〉
                               dennes have beaſts to come neare to be caught: and how the ravens forgetfull and foule kindes breed. The wil
                                 〈…〉
                               goat among beaſts in the high rocks keep their young fr
                                 ••
                               being taken: and hindes hide cunningly their faons. Th
                                 〈…〉
                               wild beaſt, the wild aſſe, hath alſo a ſtrange courſe: And the Vnicorne or Indians aſſe, a ſtraungier. Again in foules

the Peacock hath a proud feather: the Curlew, a flighty: the Eſtrich a brave: a braue hath the Eſtrich, the dull of vnderſtanding: which leaveth her egges in the ſand: not thinking whether beaſtes tread them: Yet by Gods providence they breed, to paſſe the horſe with legges and wing: Alſo the horſe ſheweth Gods power by his boldnes in ſnurting: & digging the ground and deſire to fight. Alſo Gods wiſdome paſſeth mans reach, in the hauks change to South and North: and in the Egles wit to neſt on the tooth of a rock, and in ſharpe ſight to find prey: (a pattern for the godly to ſearch where Chriſt may be found. And none but of ſharpe ſight wilbe cheif guides herein.)
                        
                        
                           Chap. XL.
                           Iob not knowing Gods counſel in theſe viſible things, ſhould not plead with God for juſtice. Now for Gods power, as Elihu ſhewed it in taming the proude, Ch. 34. 24. &c. ſo God doth after long pacience: to ſhew his power and juſtice vpon veſſels of wrath bent to deſtruction: And who is he that will plead with God: who cannot ſpeak to this.
                           
                              Of the Elephant.
                              The Elephant ſheweth Gods power: not a devouring beaſt: but fed with graſſe like the oxe: what ſtrength is in his loynes? what force in the navel of his belly? his yard is like the Ceder: the nerves of his ſtones, like the branches of a tree: his bones and ioynts as iron & ſteel: God can tame him, who made him a ſtrong one: and quiet to ly among willowes:: and heavie great wight: yet not by force will pierce his ſnorte. And thus the power of God paſſeth mans reach in a quiet dryland beaſt.
                           
                        
                        
                           
                           Chap. XLI.
                           The Whale in the ſea ſheweth that they curſe their da
                                 •
                               that courſe him: and Dionyſius the Greek Geographer, borne neare Iobs countrey, at Teredon on the Perſia
                                 •
                               gulph, remembranceth vvhales hunting there: and poetically, how they ſvvallovvſhip and all. If none dare medle vvith a fiſh in vvatery not hard earth breed: vvho dare compare vvith God: for Iobs afflictions: (or as S. Paul citeth this place: for election, or rejection, Rom. 9. & 11.) vvho firſt could give to God: that he ſhould be bound to repay them. Iob the godlyeſt could not plead: but muſt ſtand to Gods mercy. All that is vnder heaven is Gods, & Satans fall and all are from him, and by him, and for him▪ he praedeſtined them not: that is, he furthered not their meanes: but gaue infinite arguments of better adviſement: but ſet them to anger: leaving them vnſearchably to rebellion.
                           
                              Of the Whale.
                              A deſcription of the Whales nature, for a waterie creature, to teach all of Gods power: (yea and of the God of this world, Satan, by Gods iuſt judgment: as the LXX here allude:) 1. An huck will not dravv him: 2. a cord cannot be put in his tongue, 3. no ruſh in his noſe, 4. no thorne ſhall perſe his chekes. He vvill not be taken vvith ſharpe pickes in ſkin or head: They are deceived vvho think to take him: and vvill not tvviſe fight: but curſe their day. Who can bring him out of the ſea: and take avvay the vvaters, the garment that covereth him. Who dare medle vvith the iavves of his face vvith a ſnaffuld: his teeth be terrible: his ſkales one continued matter: His ſnurting maketh a light: his eyes be great, as the mornings:

his eyes ſends forth, torches, vvith ſparkles of leaping fyre: and all terribles of a creature is in him. Mans weapons hurt him not: and he deſpiſeth all, all of the earth: which ſhould be ſtronger by mans eſteeme then the ſea: as all other fiſh be weake
                                    •
                                  then beaſts. But God would have his will to rule and over-rule his meanes: that his will might be knowen the ground of all: who will ſuffer no pleading for his dealings full of power, and juſtice, & mercy in Chriſt: as Iob told, Chap. 19.
                           
                        
                        
                           Chap. XLII.
                           Iob repenteth, and his fellowes: and ſacrifice in Chriſt pleaſeth God: and Iob is double happy.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  IOB. BROVGHT ON TO FAMILIAR DIALOGUE AND PARAPHRASE FOR EASIER ENTENDEMENT.
                  TO WHICH IF ANY REQVIRE FVRTHER RESOLUTION, QVAESTIONS VPON THEIR DOVBTS SHALBE ADDED.
                  By HVGH BROVGHTON.
               
               
                  
                  Of Iob brought into dialogue: for our familiar ſpeach.
                  
                     THe caſe of Iob, that he the godliest in the world ſhould be moſt afflicted, would not be vnderstood of the children of this world: But that was to teach that the world of ſoules was the world of reward: as Abrahā Iſaac & Iacob lived here in a peregrinatiō: looking for the heavēly citie, which God praepared for them in that part of Haides, Luc. 16. which was the kingdome of heaven, as Chryſostome ſpeaketh vpon 2 Cor. Hom. 6. Although the outward doctrine of the law had not perfection, God providing ſomewhat better for vs, that they ſhould not have perfection in this world without vs: yet for perfect comprehending of Christ, by ſpirit of prophecy and plenty of grace, they far paſſed vs. In Iob God would revive Abrahams caſe: before the law was geven: which taught dull Iſrael, by outward bleſſings cloſly after ſpech of all ſuch, how he would have his tabernacle amongſt them, Levit. 26. 10. That when the earthly houſe of tabernacle ſhould be diſſolued, they ſhould have a building from God, not made with hands, everlasting in the heavens. But worldlings, who all as the ſerpent go vpon the belly, would not vnderſtand this. Therefore Iob is a rare example: who in moſt high calamityes, wiſhed to be with God. Prophane would ſcoph this pleading. Therefore God penned the book in ſuch a ſtyle as Sadducees & Epicures ſhould not care to vnderſtand it. And of my ſelfe I wil ſay, that the tongue, in proprietie

and trop
                        ••
                      and ſequeles of arguments, hath ben hard
                        •
                      to me, then all the reſt of the Bible. That he may be ſofter to others, I have made a tranſlation with great paynes and the be
                        •
                      circumſpection that I could. Moreover I have brought the diſputers ſpech, in termes hard and ſhort, vnto a ſofter & larger veine: bringing the best examples at large to enlarge ſentences. As Targum Ieruſalemy cited to generall ſentences particular exāples, & ſometime later then Iobs time, as a Paraphra
                        ••
                      might do: So when I make them Prophets, to ſpeak of latt
                        •
                      times then their owne: I ſpeak it as my owne Paraphraſe. The ſettling of arguments: to what verſe of the formers ſpeach, replyers do ſpeake: that I studied to expreſse clearly: and all har
                        •
                      Phraſes. My deſire was to have had the Ebrew text joyned to the Engliſh, with Rabbine commentary for their tongue: ſaving Iob. 10. where the incarnation and reſurrection paſſeth Iew
                        •
                      moderne faith: for the bare tongue, my deſire was to force our enemies the Thalmudiques to ſpeak for vs: But I could fin
                        •
                      no cunning and ready hebrew printers vnleſſe I had gone to Baſil. To print the whole Bible in the originall and my Engliſh, I would have done it: vpon allowance & expected recompence. But I might not be at ſo great charges for one little book. Beſides this dialogue: I have before added ſundry helpes: Short not
                        ••
                      in the Chapters, large Abridgementes and arguments of every chapter, & here a deſcription of the diſputers ſtory, how they belong to Abrahams kindred. To a plain book I would not have done ſo: But for this of vnſpeakable difficulty it will not be tedious: as the diſputers themſelves infinitely rowle one ſtone: The rest, all ſave Elihu: That Iob is wicked: yet by repentance may be ſure of Gods grace: and, that ſtill the wicked be puniſhed: and the ſtrangely puniſhed, be ſo far in wikednes. Iob as often defendeth his integrity: and that he cannot
                     
                     be ever better then he was: and therefore would gladly know the reaſon of his afflictiō. As they often repeat their diſcourſe, ſo the cōmenter might. When this is abroad, if my readers think it not plain enough: questions vpon difficulties remayning ſhall come forth, if God will. So I have made two cōmentaries vpō 
                     
                        •
                     poc. one curt, that the hearer may ſoon ſee the tenour of the 
                        •
                     ork: the other larger, ſhewing by what miſpolicy and miſtudy, the City of Quirinus came to be ſo great. When thoſe books be printed: I would bring in Dialogue ſome demaunding of matters which breed hardnes. Dialogues haue brevity: and therefore Plato the learned contrived his matters into Dialogues. But now let the reader turne his mynd from me, vnto Iob.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  THE SPEACHES IN IOB BROVGHT TO a ſhort ſumme, ſhewing at which the replyers aime.
                  
                     Chap. 3.
                     
                        
                           IOb. Loſt be the day wherein I was borne:Iob. I had forty tounges, I could not ſufficienth curſe it. For before my meat my ſighing
                           •
                         come: and my roaring guſh like waters. 
                           •
                         had ſmall eaſe in heart, when Sheba took m
                           •
                         Oxen and aſſes: no quietnes, when Cald
                           ••
                         ans toke my Camels: and both kild my men. So whe
                           •
                         fyer from heaven brent my ſheepe: and wind feld th
                           •
                         houſe vpon my children. In this I had grief enough. Y
                           ••
                         all this while I bleſſed God: that gave and took away: But now that I am ſtroken with boyles frō the ſole of my foo
                           •
                         to the top of my head, I cannot ſufficiētly curſe my dayes▪ Now I have in my ſiknes an vntolerable vexation.
                  
                  
                     Chap: 4. and 5.
                     
                        Eliphaz. May I ſpeak my mind? Thou haſt comforted many others in ſorow: Thy religion knoweth the rightEliphaz. way of hope in Gods mercy: and thou knoweſt how to make thy ways right, by ſeeking vnto God. v. 6. But no
                           •
                         thou art thy ſelf touched, thou art moſt vnpatient. Rem
                           •
                        
                        ber that no innocent periſheth: But they that reap m
                           •
                        
                        ſery, have plowed ſorrow: and by the blaſt of Gods anger they conſume: Mighty tyrants like lyons, as Emi
                           ••
                         and Zamzūmim are come to nothing: and Iſmael hat
                           •
                         had tvvelve dukedomes in Cuſh or Abyſſinj, (as Th
                           •
                         ma is one, our neighbour:) and droven out mighty L
                           •
                        
                        ons. And Eſaw my anceſter hath broken lyo
                           •
                         teeth in Seyr: And yee of Ketura the children of the eaſt

have drouen Cuſh further South: & have dukedomes: as Madian thy anceſter: & Medan: & Shuach, or Sychaeus, of whom Bildad cometh: and Sheba that took Iobs oxen & aſſes: forgetting the kinred of Abraham: and when we plow ſorow, we reap miſerie: yea the richeſt of Abrahams ſonnes: when we play the tyrants: As at this time Iſrael in Egypt, ſee Pharoh kill their children, becauſe none forſake Pharaohs Idols. I will ſpare to blame Iob of Tyrāny as a lyon: though he be Lord chief Iuſtice in Aus Land: yet I would deſire him to conſider mans common corruption, and how the very Angels haue not perfection before God: Much leſſe our ſoules that dwell in this earthly tabernacle: of one dayes life: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         of Greeks: beaten to powder as mothes: and all their excellency of learning and eloquence cometh to nothing, and their thoughts periſh, when they die: and they periſh for ever, vnleſſe God be their guid: as the moſt part of Edom my father leave God: though he pittied ſome of my fathers houſe. Madiā thy anceſter gave goodly names to his ſonns to teach them godlines, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         darknes: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         duſt: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         Enoch dedicateGen. 25. 4. thy ſelf to God: be a new Enoch: and walk vvith God: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         know the father which is in heaven: 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         know God: (I think he is thy father, ô Iob.) The firſt of theſe tell we are in darknes, and be but duſt: and I had a dreame from God, v. 12. &c. which taught me the ſame that Madians childrens names warne them: though many now worſhip Baal Peor. Theſe matters ſhould humble thee from ſuch invectives againſt God.Chap. V.
                     
                     No holy will like of thy dealing: ſuch chaſing killeth

the evill fool. I have ſeen the evill fool proſper: and 
                           ••
                         children come to nothing: and wild Arabians rob him 
                           ••
                         all. Miſery doth not ſpring from the earth: but from man wickednes, which as ſparkles, breaketh out. Therefore 
                           ••
                         would wiſh thee not to invey againſt God: who is vnſpeakable in mercy: as his workes, ſpecially the raine, in o
                           •
                         dry Arabia ſheweth. Subtile contemners, as hypocrites and inventers of falſe religion, he will defeat: that in the
                           •
                         high day proſperity they ſhall come to nothing, to darknes of night. But the poore he will ſave from the ſword of the ſtrong wild Arabian: from their conſpiracie: ſuch as the Caldaeans and Sabeans made to ſpoile in one day Yea the poor in ſpirit ſhall find confidence And it is great token of Gods favour to be chaſtiſed: for him tha
                           •
                         can ſeek to God. For as he ſtriketh, he can heale. After ſix afflictions he can ſuccour thee; after loſſe of Children of Sheep, of Camels, of Oxen, of aſſes, of familie: after all this he can ſo deale that harme ſhall not faſten vpon thee. Though thou haſt loſt thy oxen for tillage, in hunger he can ſave thee from death: as thy mony is not take away: and in war from Sabeanes and Chaldeans: that they make amendes for thy Oxen, Camels, and aſſe. From all conſpiring to ſpoile thou ſhalt be ſafe. For ſtony harted ſhalbe at peace with thee: and the vvild ſavage Arabians. Thou ſhalt be wealthy, and have many children: and live long, notwithſtanding this great ſickne
                           •
                         I haue ſeen the like: and from things paſt can judge vvh
                           •
                         vvilbe to come.
                  
                  
                     Chap. 6. and 7.
                     
                        Iob. Am I evill that ſo complayn (through Ch. 3.) w
                           •••
                        
                        Iob. ſuch ſtreams of greivous ſpeaches? Oh that my calamiti
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        vere vveighed: & my complaint: ſo my vvordes ſhould

be ſeen to come ſhort. For vvhen the arrovves of the almighty are in me, and there venome drinketh vp my ſpirit, & the terrours of the puiſſant camp againſt me; ſhould I not vviſh the day of my birth never to haue bene: or that darknes and ſhadovv of death ſhould ſtayn it: and clowdineſſe dwell vpon it: and ſvvartnes of day make it terrible? Do you think that I vvould thus complain without iuſt occaſion. A beaſt wild or tame would not doe ſo. Doth the wild aſſe bray at the graſſe: or the ox lovv at his fodder: when they vvant nothing? Your ſpeach is vnſavory, vvithout ſalt of reaſon: and hath no more taſt then the vvhite of the yolk: and complayning in greif, is as ſalt to the vnſavory vvhite of an egge.
                     Strangulat incluſus dolor, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cor aeſtuat intus: Cogitur & vires multiplicare ſuas.
                     I vvould haue lothed to touch in an other, ſuch ſores as novv are in my fleſh. Therefore I curſed the day and night of my birth and conception. And novv again, I ſay: ô that God vvould make an end of me: Though I parch in payn, I ſhould find comfort: if I knevv I ſhould ſoon dy. I am ſure I ſhall goe to Eternall joy: for I kept not cloſe the vvordes of the moſt holy: but as my father Abraham, I ſhewed my hope of the world to come. Now where Eliphaz ſaith, I ſhall come in luſty old age to the grave: what hope can I have that way: or of what ſort can my end be: that I ſhould prolong my life? Am I of ſtone or of ſteel, to abide long in this parching: But where ye would perſwade me, that for Lyonlike tyranny I am puniſhed, or for ſowing ſorovves to reap miſerie, and to haue ſorovves for coales of ſin, vvhoſe ſparkles flee out vp: I haue my defence againſt ſuch: vvhoſe mercy is molten tovvards the neighbour: and he leaveth the feare of the ALMIGHTY.

My brethren are like the rivers of our Arabia, which i
                           •
                         winter are black by Ice, and deep, when men want not water: but when heat cōmeth, be dryed vp and come to nothing. The paſsingers of Thema, the Iſmaelites our neighbours, and of Sheba, that robbed me of my oxen, (wh
                           •••
                         I name to teach poſteritie of what Uz land I am, not o
                           •
                         Edoms, but of Nachors, as the Chaldeans are on the ea
                           ••
                         neate:) theſe men come for water, and find none: and art aſhamed of their hope: So ye are become like that, come to nothing: yee ſee parching affliction and ye are at your wittes end. You need not to feare: I requeſt no money help, to ranſome me from ſome wild Arabians, or any ſtrong hand: but touching my complaint, Ch. 3. let me vnderſtand wherein I haue erred: Nay right vvill never be reproved: and what can ye ſoundly blame? You think to reprove words, that I curſe my night of conception & day of birth. And whereas I am paſt hope for this world, and would joy for the grave, ye think my words to be but a
                           •
                         wind: ye lay a ſnare to overthrow me: while ye would perſwade me not to ſtick to my former integritie. Be of an other mind: obiect no vvickednes: Be thou my ſoule of an other mynd ſtill. Is there any wickednes in my tongue: for my vehement complaint, Ch. 3. Cannot my palate declare all kind of ſorrowes: more then the boiles which you ſee?
                     All men by natures courſe haue an end of lifes toyle: asChap. VII. a ſervāt of his dayes work: But I haue moſt joyles moneths and nights, of ſorow: that when I lay me downe, I would fayne ſee the morning. My fleſh is lothſome: that I am paſt hope of long life: my dayes are ſpent: my life is but a blaſt: I can hope for no more pleaſures: I ſlit away as in

the twinkling of an ey: I go to the grave as a fading cloud: Therfore as Ch. 3. I will not ſpare my mouth: but I will ſigh vnto God in the bitternes of my ſoule: That I am kept in priſon with boyles: and I would not live: Pitie me frō this viſitation, euery moment: leave me for a breathing while: I have ſinned, as the hart of man is onely wicked all the day: and what can I do vnto thee, ô thou watcher of men, that every ſinne receiveth recompence: that thou haſt made me thy mark: that I am a burden vnto my ſelf. O that thou wouldeſt ſo pardon my ſin, as I ly now in the duſt to be pitied of the keeper of men: that thou wouldeſt make a ſhort end of my ſorrowes: and lay me in my grave.
                  
                  
                     Chap. VIII.
                     
                        Bildad. How long wilt thou talk in this ſort: that weeBildad. may as thou ſpeakeſt, Ch. 6. 26. hold the termes of the forlorne a wind? Is God vnjuſt who ſheweth anger? Far be that: So how could God rule the world? Rom. 3. Gen. 18. Take an example by thine owne children: As thy children have ſinned againſt him, in their continuall feaſting: ſo he hath ſent them into the hand of their treſpas. By their example look to thy ſelf. If thou would craue for pittie at the almighty, and become vpright: thou ſhouldeſt be happier & ritcher then ever thou waſt. Enquire of the former age: and the age of their fathers: For we are but of yeſterday, and have no experience: as our dayes are but a ſhadow: Ancient examples ſince God ſcattered Noes ſonns, and how for wickednes one is over-run of an other, ſuch remembrance of ancient dayes, ſuch marking the yeares of all ages, will teach ſound judgement. As ſegges can not grow without water, but ſoon withereth and is cut

off: ſo they vvho have not the dew of grace to remembe
                           〈…〉
                         God: ſoon periſh. Nērod was a luſty hunter: & ſet vp kingdoms: but ſoon Sems houſe in Elā vvas Emperour: & 
                           〈…〉
                         med the Chananeans brother, vvho vvhen their ſinnes 
                           〈…〉
                         ripe, ſhalbe vvholly given to our Iſraels houſe. Of Nacho
                           〈…〉
                         Elihu his father, for Abrahās ſake tvvelve nations ſettle 
                           〈…〉
                         the hart of Cuſh: of Iſmael, as many: of Eſavv, more Duke doms: vvho drive Cuſh further off. And becauſe Abrahā
                        
                           〈…〉
                         after mariage with Ketura our grandmother, left religiō i
                           〈…〉
                         our families, we haue proſpered: That Tyrus King take
                           〈…〉
                         the name Sychaeus from our father: as glad to honour o
                           〈…〉
                         houſes. Now they whom our fathers drove avvay: wāting moiſture of grace, dryed vp as ruſhes vvithout mire: The favour of God in Chriſt, is as devv vpon graſſe: and the wicked, as ruſhes vvithout vvater. Chanaan novv buildeth cities full ſtrong, to defeat the promiſe to Abraham: B
                           〈…〉
                         his building ſhalbe a ſpiders houſe: he ſhall leane vpo
                           〈…〉
                         it, but it ſhall not ſtand. Pharaohs daughter took vp lately an infant of Iſrael caſt into the vvaters, and meanet
                           〈…〉
                         to make him King: and calleth him, taken out of the water: vvhen he ſhalbe 80. yeares old: then ſhalbe 400 yeares to our brother Iſaaks affliction. Then God vvill revenge Chams land: and Chanaan: juicefull novv afore ſunn
                           〈…〉
                         parching: and his ſuckers ſprout over his orchyard. B
                           〈…〉
                         vvhen the ſun ſhall root him out of his place: then he vvi
                           〈…〉
                         flee to Lybia: and thence to the Iland Ierne: and in Chanaan he ſhalbe ſeen no more. But from the ground others vvill grovv: our brethren of Iſrael. Lo, the Omnipotent vvill not loth the perfect, nor mainteyne the hand of the miſcheivous Chaldeans & Sabeans that robbed thee: For the tent of the vvicked ſhall come to nought.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. 9. & 10.
                     
                        Iob. I knovv that I muſt ſeek to God for mercy: as IIob. confeſſed, Chap. 7. verſ. 20. and 21. every mouth muſt be ſtopped: and no fleſh can be juſtifyed before God. If he will plead with a man: he cannot anſwer him to one thing of a thouſand: as he is wiſe in hart, & mighty in ſtrength: 
                           •
                        o defeat the ſubtile in their purpoſes, that their hands bring nothing ſoundly to paſſe. And all that which may be known of him, appeareth in his creation. His might appeareth in removing mountaines to be ſeas, & making Ilands of a continent: as in Cittim land: the Iland flaming with brimſtone, called three mountained Trinacria, was joyned to the near continent. And Rhegium beareth 
                           •
                        ameThe next land of Italy to Sicania or Sicily. of breaking the ground. He makes the earth to quake: that the mountaynes, the pillars of it tremble: he cloudeth the ſun, to be no more ſeen then if it were not riſen, & ſealeth vp the ſtarres: that they cannot be ſeen of certen dayes, when he will make a tempeſt (as Act. 27.) Againe he ſpreadeth the heavens, which in tempeſt, were rowled vp as a book, not to be looked vpon: and he walketh vpon the high waves of the ſea: and when God ſhalbeMath. 27. & Ch. 14. manifeſted in the fleſh, and prove himſelfe to be God by the miracles of the ſpirit, he will darken the ſun at noon day, and walk vpon the waves of the ſea. His eternal power and goodlynes appeareth in the cluſtered ſtarres: for all ſeaſons: in the bandes of Orion, for wintery weather, and for delicacies in Pleiades: He doth great things (as Eliphaz ſpake) vnſearchable: and wonderful without number: ſpecially in election, & rejection. Now Keturaes ſonns, & ſome of Eſaw, and Elihu, & others of Arā, as Boſor his houſe, hold truth in part: & none of Iſrael

forſake the idols of Egypt. We ſhall ſoon fall: and Iſrael ſhall in Chanaan tye Satan for a thowſand yeares. And then ſhall Iſrael be caſt off: & lapheth dwell in the ten
                           〈…〉
                         of Sem. So vnſearchable are his wayes. Now when h
                           〈…〉
                         paſſed in his judgement over me, I cannot perceive hi
                           〈…〉
                         counſell: when he taketh all away, who can make him 
                           〈…〉
                         ſtore: or enter an action againſt him: and ſay vnto hi
                           〈…〉
                         what doeſt thou? Dan. 4. when the Puiſſant will not ſta
                           〈…〉
                         his hand, proud helpers can do the afflicted no good. A
                           〈…〉
                         all my confederates could not helpe me againſt the Sab
                           〈…〉
                        ans, and Chaldaeans: but all loſt hart, and durſt not ſti
                           〈…〉
                         If I were juſt, I would crave pittie: If I cry, I can hardly b
                           〈…〉
                         lee
                           ••
                         that he will anſwer me. He will bruſe me with tempeſt, ſo that none can blame him. As for iudgement who can be my pleader? If I wilbe perfect, myne own mouth ſhall cōdemne me: if I be vpright, I know not mi
                           〈…〉
                         owne ſoule: but that great impiety lurketh hid: But this know, I am weary of my life: This is vniform: The perfe
                           〈…〉
                         in mans judgement, and the wicked doth he conſume: 
                           〈…〉
                         mocketh at the ſcourge of the innocent. The earth is give
                           〈…〉
                         to the hand of the wicked: which over-rule them that d
                           〈…〉
                         right. And yet none can haue any authoritie, vnles 
                           〈…〉
                         be given him from God. So my dayes are fled: and I a
                           〈…〉
                         full of ſorow: and if I would forget my ſighing, Ch. 3. 
                           〈…〉
                         know God will not cleare me: I ſhalbe holden as wicked Now then, why ſhould I labour in vayne, by repentan
                           〈…〉
                         to hope for any goodnes. Bildad exhorteth me to b
                           〈…〉
                         blameleſſe and vpright. Ch. 8. verſ. 6. If I waſh my ſelf i
                           〈…〉
                         ſnow, in ſnow water, dye muſt I quickly: & thou wilt dee
                           〈…〉
                         me in the grave naked: as though my clothes loathed m
                           〈…〉
                        
                        
If the high God would take from my baſenes his rod: that his terrour fright me no more: I would then ſpeak and not feare him: for I am not ſuch with my ſelf as my calamities make you think.
                     Ye find great fault with my complaint, Ch. 3. ſtill I tellCh. 10. you, my ſoule is weary of my life: when I leave my ſighing for my ſelf: Therefore I will ſay vnto the Puiſſant: condemne me not: let me know wherefore thou pleadeſt with me. I am the vvork of thyne hands, vvhy ſhouldeſt thou loath me: and ſhine vpon the counſell of theſe troubleſome pleaders. Thou art not as a man that needeſt yeares, as Ch. 8. 8. 9. 10. or tryall: vvhere thou knovveſt the hart. Thou knovveſt that I am not vvicked: and yet I am plagued, paſt all mans help. Conſider thy goodnes in my frame of body: and joyning of ſoule: and looking to me: to plague me, vpon ſin. Which novv is come to the higheſt, that I vviſh I never had bene: Eaſe my payne, ſeing I ſhall ſhortly die.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XI.
                     
                        Zophar. Thou haſt vſed much ſpeach, Chap. 3. EliphazZophar. blamed that: Ch. 5. thou doeſt anſwer, Ch. 6. that thy complaint is leſſe then the ſorrowes vndeſerved. And thou doeſt mock, Ch. 6. that thy frends are like the rivers in our dry Arabia: full, when men need not rivers, in vvinter: in ſummer. dryed vp. &c. all Ch. 6. And thou wilt ſay to the Puiſſant, condemne me not: doth it pleaſe thee to oppreſſe? Ch. 10. 3. And, thou knovveſt that I am not vvicked: v. 7. and thou art not ſuch vvith thy ſelf; as Gods ſcourges argue, and the adviſe from Eliphaz and Bildad.
                     
                        Thou vvouldeſt fayne plead vvith God: as a man doth with man. Ch. 9. 3 3. and would take his rod from the
                           〈…〉
                         that thou ſhouldeſt not be frighted: So now truely I vv
                           〈…〉
                         that the Puiſſant vvould ſpeak, and open his lipps vvith thee: that thou ſhouldeſt haue double by juſtice: & know that the Puiſſant vvil call thee to account, for thine iniquity. Canſt thou find out the depth of the Puiſſant? 
                           〈…〉
                         depth of ritches of the knowledge and vviſdome of Go
                           〈…〉
                         How vnſerchable are his judgements and his vvayes p
                           〈…〉
                         finding out!
                     
                        The Tranſlaters commentary. Before the flood, wh
                           〈…〉
                         they diſpiſed the fathers, he did let them run to the deſtruction of the deluge: He gave over the builders of Babel for worſhip to ſtarres, that even Sems houſe in Ioc
                           〈…〉
                        tan hath periſhed more by millions of parts then Cha
                           〈…〉
                         deſpiſing deſpiſing Noe, Sē, Arphaxad, Sala, Eber, all ali
                           〈…〉
                         ſtil warning them. The eaſt Indians come of them: as Io
                           〈…〉
                        tans ſonnes names ſhew: famous in Greeks, by names remayning in cities, rivers, mountaynes. And the weſt co
                           〈…〉
                         of them: as the paſſage betwixt is very narrow. And me
                           〈…〉
                         from the Weſt could not ſo paſſe over the broad Ocean▪ Abraham is called to revive the world: the ſonnes of Abraham will fall away: and yet be zealous in the law: to give warrant to the Apoſtles for all that they ſpeak, plain warrant: but for the myſterie hid of long time: that God i
                           •
                         Chriſt will reconcile the world vnto himſelf. And here cōmeth a new myſterie: That the city which crucified Chriſt, ſhalbe extolled by Satans ſleight, to overthrow the Goſpell: becauſe men love not the truth: and when reformation cōmeth, yet wicked archbiſhops over-ruling cōmon lawes: and other creatures of the King of Locuſts,

will ſtill plague in the ends of the earth: where Chriſt hath his chief poſſeſsion. Novv Gods vvayes be vnſearchable in theſe dealings. When the Goſpel vvas confirmed: if Princes and all ſorts had dayly read it: all had held the truth: but as they diſdayned that paynes, God gave them over to imbrace deceit: That many are called: and fevv be ſaved. The height, the depth, the length, the breadth, of Gods counſel is vnſearchable. This ſhould be our work, to bow our knees vnto the father of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt: that▪ we may comprehend the breadth and length, the depth and height: and know the love of Chriſt vvhich paſſeth knowledge. Iob will flee to this. Ch. 19. Returne to Zophar.
                     
                     If God paſſe through the vvorld, to give over men to Satan in blindnes, or conquerour to be ſervant; or keepe them in aſſemblies, to continue religion, or policy: vvho can ſtay him? In puniſhment moſt vve feele him. Becauſe he knoweth men aey dying to be nothing vvorth: and ſeing ſin, ſhould not he mark it: That vayn man ſhould have an vnderſtanding hart. For as God told Abraham of our Iſmael, that he ſhould be a wild aſſe: ſo we are all: & thou, I geſſe, by many mothers art of Iſmael, as Iſrael of Chanaan: we wild aſſes muſt be tamed, by Gods hand: ſeing men cannot tame vs. Now I will tell thee, as Eliphaz did, Chap. 4. that the juſt periſh not: neither come the vpright to ruine: (Chaldy Paraphraſt, Ch. 4. 7.) The juſt, as Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, periſh not: But the wicked nation of the deluge periſhed. So Iſmael and his children, as Lions and Lionceaux, given to ſpoiling, haue their teeth puld out. As each was borne the foale of a wild aſſe: I as Eliphaz, Ch. 5. 8. would vviſh that thou ſeek vnto God:

ſo ſinning no more, thou ſhouldeſt have great proſper
                           •••
                         This rule is generall: that the eyes of the wicked ſha
                           ••
                         fayle: and their refuge all be forlorne: and their hope nought but pangs of ſoule.
                  
                  
                     Chap. 12.
                     
                        Iob. Out of doubt wiſdome muſt dye with you. B
                           ••
                        
                        Iob. I am not inferiour to you. And who cannot ſpeak ſuc
                           •
                         things as theſe: That God is high, and inviſible, & God onely wiſe: 
                           •
                         Tim▪ 
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ & men cannot ſearch out, his wayes▪ Take this Propoſition: A mockage to his neighbour ſh
                           •••
                         the perfect juſt be: vvho prayeth vnto God, and he 
                           〈◊〉
                         heare him: a baſe lamp to the thoughts of the vvealthyAben Ezra & Kimchi vpon the braue Ebrew. and for calamitie a contempt to the ſhining ſtate of the proſperous is he that is neare▪ to tottering of feet. The juſt periſheth in his juſtice: and the wicked proſpereth 
                           〈◊〉
                         his vvickednes: To ſhevv that this vvorld is the vvorld 
                           〈◊〉
                         tryall: and the vvorld of ſoules is the vvorld of revvard Eliphaz ſayd: The roaring of the renting Lion, and th
                           •
                        
                        Ch. 4. 10. voice of the feirce Shachal ſhall come to nothing. And Bildad ſayd: As ſegges cannot grovv vvithout mire: ſuchCh. 8. 11. is the gladnes of the vvicked, that hath not moiſture of grace. And Zophar ſaid this as a generall rule: tha
                           •
                        
                        Ch. 11. 20. the ey of the vvicked shall fayle: and their refuge all be forlorne. I anſvvered Bildad, that the earth is given commonly all to the hands of the vvicked: The vvicked be the Pakidim: vvho condemne all that vvould do good to their ſtate: and cover their faces: as vnvvorthy to ſee light: So vvill they do to the ſonne of God: vvhen in the fleſh he cōmeth to give light to the vvorld. Among beaſts, fowls, trees, fiſh, the ſtrongeſt oppreſſeth the inferiour. And vvho can deny, but God ruleth in all varieties. Ye ſpeak at randone. But cannot mine eare diſcerne ſpeaches, as the palat

taſteth it meat. Elihu vvill confeſſe thus much: Chap. 34. Ye bid me look to former ages: vvhen they lived long: Ch. 8. 9. Is the vviſdome in the aged? The fooliſh builders of Babylon vvere of long life: but ſhort in vviſdome. God hath vviſedome and mightynes, counſell and vnderſtanding are his. If he pull dovvne the tovver, Gen. 11. it vvill not be built: If he ſhut one vp in priſon, as Pharaohs baker: he cannot be ſet free: if he vvith hould the vvaters, for mercy to Noe. Gen. 8. they dry vp. When he ſent them forth, Gen. 7. they overvvhelmed the earth. For him and by him and from him are deceivers & deceived. Becauſe they knovving God by his vvorks, do not honour him as God: he ſhuttes them vp to a bad mind: and although he putteth not vvickednes in their hart: yet that vvhich they have, he ruleth to his counſel: Pharaoh vvould deſtroy Iſrael: God turned him from the right vvay to that: vvhich had ben to kill the fathers: that he ſet to kill ſome children: Eſavv vvould kill Iacob: God ſuffred him not to think of preſēt murder: but vvhen his father ſhould be dead: And vvhen vvith 400 men he came againſt him, he bridled him. All ſtates he ruleth vp and dovvn: and the rulers vvhich proſper are vvicked: and one vvicked plagueth an other. He bringeth counſellers to badnes: and judges vnto ſtark madnes. Such they vvere in Enos age: vvhen corruption ſprang, in ſtead of calling vpon the name of God. The rulers or judges of families being prophane, hating God that looked vnto all things, and required to be regarded in all things: they hated him, as curious and full of buſines: and vvorſhipped ſtarres: & the creature, not the creator. For the vvickednes of their hart: he ſhut vp the rulers of many families, called counſellers and judges into madnes.
                     
                        The band of Kings he maketh looſe: when the Kings 
                           〈…〉
                         Chanaan Gen. 14. did caſt of the yoke of Cedarlaomer: 
                           〈…〉
                         bringeth Dukes to be a ſpoile: and overturneth the mighty. As to Kedarlaomer the Raphaim, and Zuzim, & A
                           ••
                        
                        mim, and the Aemorites. So he powreth baſenes vpo
                           •
                         nobles, Pſal. 107. and weakeneth the ſway of veheme
                           ••
                        
                        ▪ He bereaveth eloquent ſpeakers of lip: and taketh reaſo
                           •
                         from Biſhops: as from Pharaoh & his counſellers, to ma
                           ••
                         Iſrael a buſh burning but not conſumed: and pricks 
                           〈…〉
                         Egypt in the end. Exod. 1. Act. 7. He revealeth d
                           〈…〉
                         things out of darknes: and bringeth to light the ſhado
                           •
                         of death: as to Ioſeph in expounding Pharaohs dream: 
                           〈…〉
                         to Iaacob in the Lot of his Children. He augments nations: as before the flood: he ſpreads nations, after the flood and ſetteth their limits. He taketh hart from the head of the people of the earth: as when Cuſh fled to the furtheſt ſouth & weſt: and ſo Ioctanes 13. ſonns: They grope in darknes without light, and wander as one drunk. Eſ. 19▪ 14. & 24. 20.
                     By this ye may ſee that I am not inferiour to you i
                           •
                        
                        Ch. XIII. knowledge how God doth governe the world. Therefore I would ſpeak with God: you are all bad Phyſicians▪ Will you plead for Gods juſtice more then due? God will not be mocked. Gods highnes, & your glory duſt & aſhes ſhould keep you in order. Gen. 19. be ſilent and I will ſpeak. Wherefore ſhould I take my fleſh in my teeth as one deſperate: whoſe words fleing through the hedge of my teeth: ſhould rent my fleſh, and cauſe me deſtruction. Behold Lord I haue ordered my pleading: and i
                           •
                         is death to me not to defend my good conſcience of walking vprightly. I know I ſhould be found juſt. God
                           •
                        
                        
hand and terrour I wiſh withdrawen: then would I plead. How many are my ſinnes, that I am thus ſtrangely afflicted?
                     Earthly man is of himſelfe but as a flour, and ſhouldChap. 14. ſuch be thus afflicted? I confeſſe, all are vncleane: Seing his dayes be ſhort, let him end them with ſome reſt. A tree cut downe may yet ſprout: But Adams ſonns ſtarves, and where is he? As rivers are ſpent and dry vp: ſo man 
                           •
                        yeth downe, ariſeth not till the end of the world. I could wiſh to be dead: to plead in the world of ſoules: where my ſoule ſhould ioy till the reſurrectiō. Now thou doſt count my goings: but kepeſt them not from ſinning. But my treſpaſſe is ſealed in a bag: That thou joyneſt to preſent iniquitie: to puniſh the ould and new together. Rockes of moūtaines falling vnto the water do waſt: the hard grouth of the earth: So thou ſendeſt man away. He knoweth not what ſhall become of his children: vnleſſe he be a prophet, as Abraham: for ſpeciall revelations: to know Moyſes and the Prophets: and as Iacob, know principal heads of his ſonnes affayres. Onely a man will mourne for him ſelfe: and for his ſick body. For this cauſe we never pray to Enoch, Sem, or any but vnto God: becauſe he only knoweth our harts: And alſo becauſe the ſoules and the Angels are in a feare before the infinite maieſty: and leave man to learne how to pray for himſelf. And God is the onely that heareth prayer.
                  
                  
                     Chap. 15.
                     
                        Eliphaz. Wind and blaſt: Thou diſannulleſt prayer:Eliphaz: The ſecond tyme. Thy own mouth ſhall argue thee to be wicked. I Chap. 4. ſpake not ſo expreſly: but of ordinary infirmities. But now I tell thee plainely, thou ſpeakeſt wickedly. Thou ſayeſt,

art not inferiour to us: and that we are forgers of li
                           〈…〉
                         and bad Phyſicians: and ſhould be wiſeſt in ſilence. The haſt no extraordinarie, as Adam had, or the Angel 
                           ••
                        
                        ated the firſt day. Therefore by yeares wiſdome comme
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪ And there be here elder then thy father. Thy chaſti
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ment wiſely expounded, and our ſpech vpon it, be co
                           •
                        
                        forts: But thou chafeſt againſt God, and with ſubtile hypocriſie deceiveſt thy ſelf. I told Chap. 4. that all me
                           •
                         are miſerable before God: and I repeat that: for the wo
                           •
                        
                        thynes of the matter. And for open wicked, open puniſ
                           •
                        
                        ment commeth: as ſage wiſe men taught: ſuch as the people obeyed quietly: and never ſought others to che
                           〈…〉
                         them. Thus they teach: that the wicked 
                           •
                        exeth him ſe
                           〈…〉
                         and hath no hope, as thou haſt none: from v. 20. to 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪ Be not deceived: puniſhments argue a man wicked.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XVI. and XVII.
                     
                        Iob. I haue already heard many words as theſe: wi
                           •
                        
                        dyIob. words, as you reckon myne to be▪ Chap. 15. 2. I woul
                           •
                         if you were in my caſe, ſtrengthen and not weaken yo
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Ye blame my vehement complaynt: when I complayn
                           •
                         not, I find no eaſe: And my puniſhment is more grieuous then they haue which are openly ſinfull.
                     And there is no hope for a body as myne to be reſtoredCh. XVII to long life: as you would perſwade me, Ch. 5. T
                           •
                         the pit I cry, ô father: ô mother and ſiſter, to the worms▪ Ye mock and vex me: ô that God would judge: for Go
                           •
                         hath hid your hart from judgement: and will not give you that honour: God will conſume your eyes, for your vai
                           •
                         goodly ſpeach: which maketh me to be a by-word to the people: that I am openly a taber. Wherefore marke wha
                           •
                         I tell you: Myne ey is dymme with anguiſh: and all my

members be like a ſhadow. This counſel God hath: that the juſt ſhould have me for an example: not to ſhrink for 
                           •
                        fflictions: Iam. 5. But that the juſt ſhould be juſt ſtill: Apo. 
                           •
                        2. Therefore change your mind, and cauſe not me to be 
                           •
                        l-ſpoken-off. My dayes are paſt: for any comfort in this world: and the night they change into day: that I fleepe not: but wake, as men do on the day. And light of day, ſhort by my darknes of afflictions: litle light, that is litle reſt, do I find on the day tyme.
                  
                  
                     Chah. XVIII.
                     
                        Bildad. Why are we counted as beaſtes, when thou doeſtBildad: the ſecond tym
                              •
                           
                         bid vs aſk the beaſtes of the field, Ch. 12. 7. & vncleane, as fooles, Ch. 17. 10. Apo. 22. Oh thou that renteſt thy ſoule in thy anger: Ch. 3. & 6. & 10. and 14. and 16. thou thinkeſt to remoue rockes: and alter the moſt conſtant courſe of Gods iudgement. Yea the light of the wickeds proſperitie is ſoone quenched: His tyranny will come to diſtreſſe: and his owne counſell, as Pharohs, will make him fall. Pharaoh now killeth Iſraels children, But Pharaohs daughter hath taken one vp, that ſhall pay his ſucceſſour, and God will iudge him as he told Abraham, Gen. 15. Pharaoh ſhalbe ſent into the net by his owne feet: And the preſent Pharaoh, if he do envy Moyſes, when he ſhalbe forty yeares old, and will viſit his brethren: he ſhall not long live, but his candle ſhall ſoone be put out. Iob, thou mayſt hope to ſee the day, ſome forty yeares hence, that Moyſes will come to thy nation of Madian, nere Aus to Raguels houſe: who hath a little Boy called Iethro: Who can tell but vve may have affinitie vvith him. And Pharaoh that ſhalbe in tyme, vvhen God vvill judge: 400. yeares ſince vvild Iſmael aged 18. vexed Iſaak, entring

into ſix: doubt not Iob but that thou ſhalt ſee the day about 80. y. hence to ſee judgments. Pharaoh wilbe ſent 
                           ••
                         his own feet into the net: when he purſueth Iſrael, w
                           •••
                         God in the fourth age brings them out. And ſo othe
                           •
                         wicked of families amongſt vs: ſhall ſoone have their na
                           ••
                         put out. Conſider Iob: theſe are the habitations of th
                           •
                         vnrighteous, as thou art: I muſt tell the plainely: a
                           ••
                         this plainely is thy caſe, that knoweſt not the Omnipotent
                  
                  
                     Chap. XIX.
                     
                        Iob. How long will yee fret me with words? Now t
                           ••
                        
                        Iob. times yee haue reproched me. Fiue times I ſpake: and fiue times you, croſſing my ſpeaches; Eliphaz twiſe: and Bildad twiſe: and Zophar once. Suppoſe I have erred: 
                           〈…〉
                         my errour continue with me. Eliphaz hath made me 
                           〈…〉
                         be counted wicked over Theman: becauſe I am ſo greatly plagued: and ſaith that my children were puniſhed f
                           ••
                         their ſinnes. And becauſe God hath geven me over in
                           ••
                         the hand of the wicked, Chaldeans in my Camels, and wicked Sabeans, who have forgoten our kindred in Abraham, Eliphaz will have me counted wicked, bringing my wretched caſe an argument againſt me. Bild
                           ••
                         will make all the Land Sacchaea, make me a parable: and Zophar over all Minnaea. The Agarey of Hagar, and Ch
                           •
                        
                        tramis Land of Cheturam, Abrahams wife: (In Arab
                           〈…〉
                         we terme gladly names in the letter M) theſe will have as ill a conceit of me. Thema of wild Iſmael is moſt quiet my next neighbour to our Aus or Uz land: where mountaines of Chaldaea ly Eaſt: Saba that took my Oxen & Aſſes, Weſt: and Dry Thema, South. When my ſtory ſhalbe written, men will think then I am of Vz in Edom. It is much that Eliphaz commeth to grace: of prophane Eſavv, that ſold his Birthright, for a meſſe of Pottage. I
                           •
                        
                        
him God in wrath remembreth mercy: But one ſvvalovv maketh not a ſummer. Of prophane Nachor, Elihu is one, beſt of all vs. But of Chetura, our beſt and moſt good be. Amongſt all theſe families, yee vvould have me counted one that forgetteth God. Yee deale too proudly againſt me. Knovv then that God hath dealt more ſtrangely vvith me, then ever vvith vvicked men for vvickednes. Knovv then that the Puiſſant hath overthrovvne me: and compaſſed his net about me: As never to any man for vvickednes. If I complaine, I cannot be heard: The common rule is: call vpon me in the day of trouble, and I vvill heare thee. But I call, as one that God ſhould heare: but no ſentence is geven. Therefore my caſe is ſtrange: & not as of one puniſhed for vvickednes. He hath hedged me in on every ſide, that I cannot paſſe: He hath not done ſo vvith vvicked Nemrod: nor vvith any vvicked. He hath beſtript me of all my honour: vvhereas I vvas Lord chief Iuſtice in all our confoederated provinces: and the richeſt of all Abrahams ſonns by Ketura. He hath puld me dovvne on every ſide: as never any for ſin. For Gods patience leadeth them in many degrees ſtill to repentance: and I goe avvay, vncapable of any benefit in this vvorld. His anger is kindled againſt me: and he houldeth me as one of his enimies. Elihu vvill reply vpon this, Chap. 33. 10. as that I complaine vpon vvrong, and cannot be heard, Ch. 34. 3. &c. As he holdeth me as one of his enimyes, ſo he commeth vvith an hoſt againſt me: His hoſt of affliction in vvealth body and frinds come together againſt me: & caſt vp their trench againſt me: and camp about my tent: my brethren, all honorers, my kinefolke, my promoted, my hirelinges, my maydens, my vvife: prinkockes, ſage counſelers, my tendered: And my body, is ſo leane, that it cleaveth to my bones: ſo full of ſores, that onely the fleſh of my teeth vvithin my lippes hath eſcaped.

Therefore do ye perſecute me, as the Omnipotent holdeth me as one of his enemies: and why are ye not ſatiſfied with my fleſh ſo eaten vp: but ye will as ſavage beaſts, eat my bones. And where ye ſay, that I am one that forget God: I have a ready anſwer for my hope: as Abraham taught vs in our fathers: how Adam loſt life, and brought death vpon all. But the S. of God will dwell in our tabernacle: and performe juſtice for vs: That as all being in Adam loſt life: ſo they who will receive the abundance of the grace of the gift of juſtice ſhall reigne by one. The abundance of grace is in this: That one diſobedience brought death: but the grace waſheth all ſoule ſore, from the ſole of the foot to the top of the head. Now of Abraham the God of Bethel will take fleſh: in Iſaac, his death and reſurrection were taught: with Iacob he wreſtled, and ſhewed how his delite is to play with the ſonnes of Adam: Of Iuda he commeth, & that tribe ſhall not be ſcattered till his Sonne commeth. Iacob in Meſtra land, where the great river Aegypt is, told all this in his laſt ſpeach: and thence we learned all. But as now we of Ketura in Iſmaels land, ſtick to God: and none of Iſraell forſake the Idols of Aegypt, ſo in tyme we ſhall have equall glory: though when they have the land of Canaan, and all muſt come thither, to worſhip, our children will not: but be enemies. Troupes of Camels ſhall cover the land: Dromedaries of Madian and Ghepha our houſe, and all of Saba: the Saba that robbed me, now godleſſe: they ſhall bring gold and incenſe: and preach the praiſe of the Eternall. Yea and wild Iſmael wilbe aſhamed of Hagar, and name them of Sara: and Cedar & Nabaioth called commonly Nabathaea, ſhall ſerve the God of Bethel:

the Angel that wreſtled with Iacob: in memorie of which ſtory, Iacob vvas called Iſrael: and the place, Phanuel. This I know, that ſeing in Abraham all families ſhalbe bleſſed, Abrahams naturall ſpecially. Now then I will bring the ſum of my faith: and ô that my words vvere written, and drawne in a book; graven with a pen of iron, with lead were in ſtone for ever: How I know that my redeemer is the everliving: and at the laſt ſhall ariſe vpon the duſt: dying for our ſinnes, and ariſing for our juſtification. And after wormes ſpend this my ſkin & fleſh, I meane, after my reſurrection, (and I vſe a doubtfull terme, to conteyne both, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ) from my fleſh ſhall I ſee the Puiſſant. When God hath been manifeſt in the fleſh, and ſeen of Angels, and taken vp in glorie. The very ſame body ſhall come to this ſoule, not a new body: God hath all the duſt of the earth in meaſure: and all duſt of bodyes eaten with fiſh, water or fyre, dogges or worms, ſhall return to their old bodyes. So I shall ſee the Puiſſant, in his moſt glorious body: & my eyes ſhall view him, & not an other Iob: when my reines and boſome, all is once ſpēt. God will do this by the power wherewith he is able to ſubdue all things to himſelf. Thus ye ſhould ſay, vvhy doye call him vvicked, vvhen the things root is in me: that my mind goeth vp to heaven, and bringeth the God of Bethel, the angel of the covenant dovvne: to be made a man of a vvoman: and to be made vnder the lavv: and my mind deſcendeth to the grave to bring him frō death. And this matter is the mayn point: vvhereby God is pleaſed. Conſider hovv vvickedly you deal in your bitternes againſt mee: and be afraid your ſelves of the ſvvord. For

ire vpon ſin hath the ſvvord. Therefore knovv there 
                           ••
                         judgment.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XX.
                     
                        Zophar. Where thou doeſt charge vs vvith ſinne: forZophar: the ſecōd time. this my thoughtes make me reply: and I haſt to do that. A reproof to my ſhame I heare: and the ſpirit of my conſcience vvill, that I anſvver: novv my ſecond time: as Eliphaz and Bildad have done. I vvill ſpeak in a vvord: Since Adam vvas ſet on the earth, the joyance of the vvicked is ſhort. &c. from 6. to 28.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXI.
                     
                        Iob. I vvill ſpeak, and after I have ſpoken, mock. IsIob. my ſighing vnto man: as though I thought you could help me. But I have much cauſe of ſighing and ſobbing ſpeches: and then vvhy should you complaine of my diſcouraged ſpeches? Mark my caſe: & marvell. When I my ſelfe bethink me, a quaking taketh my flesh: ſeing the contrary proſperitie of So Moſes deſired to know this: Ex. 33. Aſaph Pſ. 73. Ier. 12. the vvicked. You ſee the vvicked are liuely: continue long, and be mightie in riches. Why ſaid you then: their joyance is short: their height hath a quick fall: and they paſſe like a drcame. Their ſeed is ſetled before them: and their houſes haue peace: & hovv ſay you then, He oppreſſeth and leaueth poore: robbed of houſes, vvhich he shall not build vp: and the frutes for his houſe shall paſſe avvay: and flovv avvay in the day of anger. They beare vvith the tabret and harp: & rejoyce at the ſound of the pleaſant inſtrument. And vvhy ſay yee then: he ſhall feel no reſt in his belly. They ſpend their dayes in vvealthines: and in a moment goe dovvne to the grave. The houſe of Lamech vvas like them: & thence vve haue a pattron: for vvicked Iabal had

ſheep: Iubal Muſique: and Tubal-cain ſmithrye, that man made him a God of ſmythes, Vulcain. And men ſaid as before the flood: what is the almightie, that we ſhould ſerve him. They thought that the ſtarres had ſpirites in them, and gave them wealth: and therevpon ſprang corruption in ſteed of calling vpon the name of God, in the age of ſorowfull Enoſh. But far be from me the judgment of the wicked. God giveth all that all have: But they never thank God. Eliphaz ſayd, Ch. 18. the wicked his candle is put out with him. How often is his candle put out? not ſo often: that God doth lay vp his iniuries for his children, Ch. 5. 4. & 20. 10. Can a man teach the Omnipotent knowledge, how he ſhall judge the loftie? One dieth in perfection: an other with a bitter ſoule: and never ate of good. As for the wealthy wicked, Ch. 5. 10. & 20. 19. God doth not alwayes, lay vp his iniuries for his children: pay him that he doth feele it. Behold, I know your iniurious imaginations againſt me: when yee ſay, where is the pavilion of the wicked, Ch. 5. 3. I ſaw the wicked faſten root, but preſently did I curſe his dwelling: the hungry ſhall eat vp his harveſt, as the Caldeans: and the thirſty Sabeans ſhall ſwill vp, their wealth. And Ch. 20. 19. He oppreſſeth and leaueth poor: robbed of houſe, which he ſhall not build vp. I know your imaginations when ye ſay, where is the houſe of the noble tyrant? Can ye not mark them vvhich go by the vvay? hovv came Iſmael by 12. princehoods: & Eſavv by ſo many dukedoms? They vvould tell you: What ſtately houſes ſee you not built of tyrants? The bad is ſpared vnto a day of heavines, a day vvhen all vvrath is brought: that men may knovv that this vvorld is the vvorld of vvork, and an other vvorld is the vvorld of revvard: And God in this vvorld often plagueth all ſortes, that men may knovv him judge.

But the juſt are not ſtill in beſt caſe. And what do yee comfort me with vanitie: when great offence remayneth in your diſputations.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXII.
                     
                        Eliphaz. Thou wouldeſt be pleading with God. IfEliphaz: the third tyme. thou would teach, would he regard it? is it a pleaſure to the almightie that thou pleadeſt juſtice? What ſhall we ſay of our father Abraham: that he attayned of his natural power? If Abraham were juſtified by workes, he hath wherein to rejoyce: but he hath no ſuch matter before God. Before men he was a Prince of God: And rare in readines he was to haue ſacrificed Iſaak: But Iſaak was no leſſe rare, that would be ſacrificed. Now mark Abraham, how far he was from iuſtification by works: The Iew Bechaia reaſoneth, as Eliphas might, vpon Gen. 15. Fol. 22. Col. 3. 
                        Behould this was a great ſin, that Abraham ſinned, ſaying to Sara, I pray thee ſay, thou art my ſister. This ſinn which Abraham ſinned, was the cauſe of the ſlavery in Egypt. And doubtles it was a great ſinn, that he brought his iuſt woman, into a trap to ſinn: for his own feare, least men ſhould kill him. It was his part to have trusted in God, that he would ſave both him and his wife. Moreover he ſinned in going out of the land concerning which he had the charge: It was his part to have truſtThus much Bechaia bringeth from Ramban, which Eliphaz might have told. in the bleſſed God, that he would ſaue him in hunger, from death. And for this was decreed against his ſeed, the captivitie of Egipt: for in the place where he ſinned, there was the puniſhment. Iob, all that Eliphaz telleth, thou mighteſt haue knowne not to plead iuſtice before God. Would God reprove thee for thy religion: and call thee into judgment for being holy? Nay, thy evil is great: Vnjuſt pledge; beſtripping the naked; denying water

to vveary, bread to hungry; violent holding of Land; oppreſſion of vvidovv and fatherles: Theſe be thy ſin: that ſnares come, and darknes, in Gods providence: that he cannot ſee through the cloudes. Haſt thou marked the old vvorld: vvhen mockers folovving their ovvne deſires ſayd, ſayd vnto Noe, as doting in the vvork of the Ark: where is the appearance of Gods cōming: as Enoch ſayd, that God vvould come vvith thouſands of his Angels, to be revenged vpon all vvicked men. They vvere vvillingly ignorant of this, that the heavens were of old: & the earth, ſet out of water and by water, by the word of God, and by them, by the windowes of heavē opened, by the ſprings ariſing and ſea ſwelling, the vvorld then deluged by vvater periſhed: But the heavens now & the earth, ſtored by his word are kept for fyre to the deſtruction of godleſſe men. In memory of this ſtorie Greek fables grew that Noe, 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         is Deucalion: and his wife in vvarning of deſtruction by fyre is called Pyrrha. So the Poet Metamorph. 
                           •
                        . tells with the flood, of fyre, in this ſort.
                     
                        Eſſe quoque in fatis reminiſcitur, affore tempus,
                        quo mare quo tellus immenſa
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            regia Caeli
                        ardeat, & mundi moles operoſa laboret.
                     
                     That is,
                     
                        Iuppiter bethought him, how tyme ſhould come,
                        when ſea and land and great heavens pallace
                        ſhould burne, and the worldes workmanſhip decay.
                     
                     The Greeks of old had learned the ſame: And their verſes be vvorthy marking: and novv vve are in the middes of Iob: and at a mayn matter, for the old world, and end of the preſent. Sophocles ſayth in this ſort, in Iuſtine Martyr, fol. 167. and in Clem. ſtrom. 5. fol. 258. Commel.

and Euſeb. Pr
                           •
                        par. 13. fol. 400. from Ariſtobu
                           •••
                        
                        ▪ learned Iew
                           •
                         ſo rare the matter is:
                     
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                           
                        
                     
                     That is,
                     
                        Such a time of ages is for to come:
                        when the welkin of golden hew ſendeth
                        a ſtore of fyre, & then the hungry flame
                        ſhall burne all that is below or on high:
                        And when all is wasted and conſumed,
                        all the depth of waters ſhall come vnto nothing:
                        And the Land ſhall haue no dwelling, nor foules
                        that can flee when fyre hath eaten all vp.
                        For in haides we ſettle two dwellings,
                        one of the iust, and th'other of godleſſe.
                     
                     Thus the old families taught of the world to be consumed with fyre: that not onely Abraham in Iſrael ſhould hold it, and in Edom, and Keturah: but heathen eſtranged from Iſrael. Now the two laſt verſes are in Diphilus, And Philemō & Diphilus haue moo verſes the ſame, then lightly any braſe of writers, for Haides. So when S. Luke wrote to Theophilus in the goſpel, Ch. 16. he placeth Abrahā of the citie which God prepared for him, to be no leſſe in Haides, being in joy: then was the cōtemner of God, the tormented inflames. This digreſsion the Authour maketh: Now

Eliphaz ſhall ſpeak to Iob. Haſt thou marked the way of the old world: which ſay, depart from vs: as thou ſpakeſt, Chap. 21. 14. wee deſire not the knowledge of thy wayes: when the ſpirit of our Saviour went and preached in the dayes of Noe: when the patience of God waited while the ark was in making: their bodies wrinkled by waters, but the ſpirits which diſobeyed are in priſon, for not giving eare to Noe. And what ſhould God do to them. They had ſheep, and muſique, and ſmithry for all tillage and huſbandry, and to lock their houſe filled with all ſtore: and feaſted and maryed: till Noe went into the ark: and the flood came and took them all away: Becauſe they bred prophaneſſe & called not vpon God with a clear vnderſtanding: but ſayd, what can the Omnipotent do vnto vs: our Bel is he that ſtoreth: as Cham taught Nemrod. I will ſay with thee, Iob: that I am far from thoſe wicked mindes: I know God is the giver of all wealth. The juſt Noe & Sem & Iapheth did ſee Gods judgement, and rejoyced: Noe the eight, the preacher of righteouſnes, with his two ſonnes and their wives, did mock them: And they vvere ſaved by waters: & wee ſhould be ſaved vvith waters of knowledge to call vpon God aright. So Iob reconcile thee vnto God, & thy afflictions ſhalbe vnto thee as the waters of Noe: that as God ſware, he would drownd the earth no more, ſo if thou turn to the Almighty, thou ſhalt be built: So thou ſhalt ſet by gold as duſt: and Ophir, as the ſtones of rivers. And th'almighty wilbe thy gold, and ſilver of ſtrength to thee. He will ſpare the vninnocent, as Cham vvas to Noe, and he ſhalbe ſpared for thy pure hands.
                  
                  
                     Ch. XXIII.
                     
                        Iob. Yet this day my ſighing, is holden a rebellion:Job. as though I vvould teach the Omnipotent: to hold it

a gaine, that I make my ways perfect. Oh that I knew how to find him, that I might come vnto his throne: would he by great power plead againſt me? No, but he would help me. There the vpright do plead againſt him. So ſhould I be quit for ever by my judge: if I might plead, why the ill have good, and the good ill. Of this I can learne nothing by your ſpeach. But neither in Eaſt, Weſt, South, or North, can I find him. He knoweth what way is with me: tryed he me, I ſhould come forth as gold: More then my dayly bread haue I laid vp all the words of his mouth. Yet when he is againſt me, who can ſtay him? But becauſe he furniſhed me with my dayly bread, and many graces: vvhereby I do know, that he tendreth me, as I told, Ch. 10. 8. & 9. I conſider and am afrayd of him▪ Becauſe thick darknes & affliction hath not made an end of me: nor I ſee an end of my burning ſicknes.
                     Who can deny but that God hath hid his counſelCh. 24. for mens affaires: ſeing the coyle our wild Arabians keep. They dayly fight for their borders: rob one an other: as the Chaldaeans and Sabaeans haue done to me: yea the fatherles and widow: and the poore of their garment: that they cannot paſſe the wayes for freebutters: the grapes & corne of others they eat. They drive the poore to dwell naked in high rocks: in many great ſhowres: & live Tr
                           •
                        
                        glodytae in dennes. And if they have a garden of hempe to have a ſhirt, or of corne to have a ſheaf: they rob them of that. So the wild live abroad. In the citie they are as bad. Poor make oile, and tread winepreſſes, and without pay: by hard Landlords: they grone by oppreſſion, and by vnjuſt death: and yet God ſuffreth all this. He ſuffreth rebellers againſt the light of conſcience: which keep not in his pathes: Murtherers on day: theeves on night:

adulterers, houſe-breakers. This ſort is of leſſe weight in trade of life, then the face of waters which windes beat: their portion in the earth is curſed: tillage they regard not: nor planting of vines. Miſerably they live: & miſerably they die: taken to the grave as heat taketh ſnow: his mother and wife will ſoon forget him: onely his ſweetnes ſhalbe for wormes: and he is no more pittied then a tree cut downe: which hath no feeling. God ſendeth after him, a barren wife: that he ſhould haue no help by children: and ſheweth no pitie to his widow. God draweth the ſtout after him by his might: & while they ſtood, they were not ſure longer then God would. God gave them a while ſecuritie to ſtay vpon: but his eyes were vpon their wayes. A while they were exalted: but ſoon come to nothing: they are cut off as an eare of corne. Thus the courſe of the world is: God long ſuffreth: and leaveth ſome to vngraciouſnes: and payeth the mighty, mightily. And who can deny this?
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXV.
                     
                        Bildad. Although the ſtate of men be on earth confuſed,Bildad: the third time. God on high is terrible to all about him: who ſee his angry face vpō them that deſpiſed his covenant of grace: but rebelled againſt him: whoſe worme ſhall not die: and vvhoſe fyre ſhall not be quenched. On high is terrour: & ſo peace: his armies of light be innumerable: & his light overſhineth all: where ſorowfull-man could not abide an angels light. And what ſhould he plead juſtice with the Omnipotent? In the moone he teacheth vs: that it hath not clearnes of it ſelf: neither be ſtarres bright, when he will ſhine in the redemption, And what ſhould one of Adam plead vvith God? We are but vvormes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Chap. XXVI.
                     
                        Iob. Thou helpeſt nothing, nor ſheweſt wiſdome. WhoJob. vvould admire ſo vveak a ſpeach: to tell a litle of Gods terrour on high? Who knovveth not that? or vvho vvould plead juſtice vvith God? I tould you, Ch. 9. none can be juſt before God: but as in mercy he held me his ſervant: and I haue run for the goale of the heavenly calling, I vvould plead vvhy I am thus puniſhed: and touching honour to God for his vvorkes, yee ſhall ſee vvhat I can ſay. Thou ſpeakeſt of his povver on high▪ it reacheth to the furtheſt off. The ſea bottom hath thinges without life formed, as ambre and pearle and topaz and ſuch. The lovv earth ſeeming loſt and caſt off, is ſhevved to have ſtones precious, and for building, and coales. He turneth the heavens about vpon no ſtay: and hangeth the earth in the middes. The heavie meteores he bindeth: & beautifieth the ayer, as a palace for him ſelf. The vnconſtant ſea he kepeth in boundes: and maketh mountaynes as Atlas the Pillars of heaven to ſhake. The diviſions of all ſeas, and great rivers through mountaynes ſhevv his povver. By his ſpirit he trimmed the heavens by a moſt pleaſant ſituation of ſtarres: to be remembred by formes of creatures. This on high: and belovv his hand hath made the great terrible Whales. And theſe are but part of his vvayes: and vvhat a ſmall thing can vve heare of him: as vvhen you teach me ſlenderly hovv to ſeek to him by repentance. Novv the thunder of his povver vvho can vnderſtand: as hovv the vvicked armies in millions fall to Eternall death: and the old vvorld: & the builders of Babel are caſt off: and hovv God hath ſet vnto vvrath all them vvhom he hath not choſen of Eternitie to ſeek him in this life: and here to honour him. Theſe be his hid vvorkes.
                  
                  
                     
                     Ch. XXVII. and XXVIII.
                     Now as the Almighty, vvhich hath brought my ſoule to bitternes, doth live, my lippes ſhall not ſpeak the vnright: I will not juſtifie you: nor remove my integrity from me. My enemy ſhalbe as the wicked: and my adverſary as the vnrighteous. This I ſpeak vnto you: Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad. If I had bene an hypocrite, what hope could I have: when God ſhould ſhake off my ſoule? Would the Omnipotent heare my cry? I will teach you of Gods hand: and ye have ſeen it. Wicked tyrants ſhall come to nothing: eyther in their life, or ſoon after: This is the ordinarie courſe of Gods judgement. But God in pacience often ſuffreth much: knowing his heavie puniſhment.
                     God openeth exceeding ſecrets of his works in the earth:Ch. 28. but none of them have any reſemblance of his dealing in his counſel for men, caſt off, or ſpared. But each one ſhould feare him: and labour to eſchew evill.
                  
                  
                     Chap. XXIX. and XXX. and XXXI.
                     I Iob was in high proſperitie: a Prince in our confederate ſtates: for ſage counſel all gaue place: & I aey defē
                        ded the poore in right: I brake the tuſkes of the vnright: and I was loved accordingly: And this was long: according to Gods ordinarie favour to the rulers in juſtice. I waſhed my ſteppes in butter, of ſheepes milk & Camels milk: and I had woodes in ſtony ground of olives: which I bought, Ch. 31. 39. Young and aged, princes and oratours, gaue me place: when I went to judgement court: They regarded me as the raine: and gaped as to the latter ſhowres.
                     But now, for grave aged and nobles, young vile-mensCh. 30. ſonnes, the baſeſt that can be, a vile kind, baniſhed from the earth, ariſe againſt me: thruſt my feet: and hold my

heavines a profit. They rejoyce as though they had been the better by my ſad caſe. As waters in part of a weare broken all tumble: ſo they vpon my miſerie. And they vex my former noble caſe: become now as a wind. And by Gods hand my ſicknes is vnſpeakeable: and he is turned to me as one cruell: and I know to death will he turne me. When others were in hard caſe: I parched in ſorow: and ſhould but for ſome hid judgement of God feel the like. Not forChap. 31. my ſin: as come puniſhment. For my eyes durſt not look vpon a mayd: I held that adultery, and ſure of heavie puniſhment. I vſed my ſervant, as knowing that I had a Lord in heaven. I let the poore haue what they could wiſh: ſpecially the ſad widow, & the fatherles ate with me: The naked I cloathed: the orphane I protected: covetousnes I hated: and ſtarr worſhip I deteſted: I rejoyced not in my foes hurt: paſſengers by, had my ſervants portion: that they tarried for a new dynner to be dreſſed: that they ſayd, ô that we had the fleſh prepared for vs: vve vvould ſoone eat it vp: we come ſo hungry from work. The ſtranger lodged not in the ſtreets: I opened my doores to travellers. Abraham and Lot taught me ſuch hoſpitalitie. If my folk did any wrong, and they complayned: I covered not my treſpas like Adam: hiding my ſin of ſelf-love: Though I could oppreſſe a great troup. But ſuch families come to baſenes. That made me ſhrink: and that made me dum, that I never went out of doores to plead in injurie: but at home made content. That all this is true: I wiſh the almighty would plead. And laſtly this: if ever I ran into my neighbours ground to plow or graſe without pay: then let thornes grow in ſteed of wheat: and darnell in ſtead of barley.
                  
                  
                     Ch. XXXII. and XXXIII.
                     Elihu the Buzite, of Buz Abrahams brothers ſonne, of

the familie of Ram, famous then for knowledge: Auz was the eldeſt brother: and to the eldeſt, to avoid envie, would Abraham ſend the ſonnes of Ketura. Auz & Buz, Ier. 25. are together in Arabia. Rebecca & Iacob ſeem to haue left religiō in Nachors houſe: That Elihu ſhould be rare of knowledge. He endeth the diſputation. Nowlet ſpeak Elihu.Elihu.
                     
                     
                        Elihu. I am young, and yee old: therefore I reverenced and feared to ſhew my mind among you. For I thought, many yeares will teach wiſdome. Certes a ſpirit is in ſadman: and the almighties breath to wiſe them. Men of not great time may be wiſe: as the old vnderſtand the right. Therefore I ſay, ô Iob heare thou me novv: I alſo will ſhew my mind. Behold I vvayted vvhile ye searched vvhat to ſpeak. And vnto you I gave attendance: & lo, I found no confuter of you, that anſvvered his vvords. Ye thought this enough: His puniſhment ſheweth he is wicked. He hath not framed ſpeaches againſt me: and I vvil not reply vpon him, as ye doe. Novv I vvill ſpeak: and I vvill not regard Perſon: vvhich doing Iob blamed in you: and ſpake of puniſhment for mocking vvith God: as thou ſpakeſt, Ch. 13. He vvill ſurely reprove you, for ſecret regard of Perſon. Will not his highnes make you feare: & vvill not his dread fall vpon you? I vvill not plead for God, that he never puniſheth but of hatred? So my maker vvould be my taker avvay.
                     And in ſooth heare novv ô Iob my talk: if thou canſtCh. 33. anſwer, ſettle thy ſelf before me, ſtand to it. Lo I am, as thou ſpakeſt, for th'Omnipotent: I am alſo formed out of clay. Thou diddeſt ſay of God: Draw away thy hand far from me: and let not dread of thee fright me. Ch. 13. 21. Lo my terrour ſhall not fright thee: nor my hand be heavie vpon thee. Now thou haſt ſpoken in myne eares, and I have heard the voice of the words: I am cleare without treſpaſſe:

I know I ſhalbe found iuſt. Ch. 9. 21. Lo he piketh quarels againſt mee: when my treſpas is ſealed in a bag, that thou ioy neſt to preſent iniquity. Ch. 14. 17. Alſo thou haſt ſayd to Bildad: He taketh me as one of his enemies. Ch. 19. 11. And to Zophar: He putteth my fect in the ſlocks: & watcheth all my pathes. Ch. 13. 27. Lo, here thou art not in the right: I muſt tell thee. For the Puiſſant is greater then ſorowful-man. Wherefore doeſt thou ſtrive againſt him, that he will not ſpeak for all his dealings. Firſt I will tell thee of Gods general dealings: manifeſt, and felt: then I will touch thine more particularly: and his vnſearchable in the frame of naturall philoſophie in the meteores. Mark Iob, when the omnipotent ſpeaketh once or twiſe in viſions, or ſicknes to the grave, to ſtay man from his owne work, man will not mark it Iob now thinketh himſelf paſt hope of recovery, Ch. 7. through out. But when a mans ſoule draweth neare to the pit, and his life to killing maladies: if there be for him a meſſenger, a teacher one of a thowſand, to teach the earthly, Gods rightfulnes: then God will haue mercy vpon him: and ſay: ſpare him, ô killing malady, from deſcending into the pit: I haue found a ranſome. His ſoule ſhalbe moiſter then in youth: He ſhall returne to his freſh dayes. Attend ô Iob: and then I will ſpeak. If thou haue ſpeach to anſwer me, ſay on: for I deſire to make thee juſt.
                  
                  
                     Ch. XXXIV.
                     Heare mee ô yee wiſe, and give eare ye men of knowledge: for Iob ſayd truely, Ch. 12. 11. The eare diſcerneth ſpeaches, as the pallate tasteth to eat. And when words be ſpoken as before God: a mans ſoule is an angel betwixt God and him to judge of them. Let vs deſire judgement: know amongſt vs what is good. Iob ſayd, I am iuſt, Ch. 9. 21. & 10. 7. & 13. 18. 23. 27. and 27. 2. 
                           •
                        . But Iob drinketh ſcornfulnes like water. Alſo he hath ſayd, it profiteth

not a man when he would walk with God. For he ſayd, perfect & wicked he conſumeth, Ch. 9. 22. Far be vnrighteouſnes frō God. For he will repay every man according to his work. His juſtice is ſo great: that if he minded feveritie, all fleſh would yeeld vp the ghoſt together: & all of Adam ſhould returne to duſt: as Gen. 7. Can a foe to juſtice rule well? But God ruleth well. Wilt thou then condemne the juſt. He reſpecteth no perſon, as all are the work of his hands. Wee ſee great judgements: and wee ſee his juſtice. Whole troupes dy ſuddenly: as the conſumed with fyre from heaven: Gen. 19. and the mighty are taken away without hand, as in the deluge. He bruſeth mighty, without end in open place of beholders: Becauſe they 
                           〈…〉
                        ed back from him: and oppreſſed the weaker. So he bringeth on ſuch the cry of the poor: when he rooteth out all their families: as in tyme he will root out the Chanaanites, when their ſinnes be ripe. When he makes reſt, who can diſturbe? When the Sychemites were killed: who durſt meddle with Iacobs family to whom God had promiſed favour? When he hideth favour, who can behold his mercy? whole nations & ſeverall men find this: Where Abrahams poſteritie, though faithles, drove out other nations: Nemrod vvas mighty: But Sinear ſerved Elam of Sem in Abrahams dayes, Gen. 14. though Elamites left God: and made Gods of the fyre that brent the ſacrifice, yet for Sem they had ſuperioritie: that the wicked houſe of Nemrod ſhould ſmart: As they ſmarted by Abraham. Now touching thy caſe, ô Iob: Unto the Omnipotent, vvhich ſayth to thee repenting, I pardō, I will not deſtroy: this ſhouldeſt thou ſay: Where I ſee not the cauſes of my affliction, teach thou me: I know, I am wicked: If I haue wrought evill, I vvill do it no more. Shall that proceed frō thee, which he will puniſh: as thou doeſt loath life: and

likeſt of death? where I durſt not do ſo. Speak what th
                           ••
                         thinkeſt. Wiſe men will ſay as I: but Iobs ſpeaches are without ſkill. O my father which art in heaven, let Iob be tryed vnto victorie. For againſt the omnipotent doth he multiply his talking.
                  
                  
                     Ch. XXXV.
                     Now Iob I will come neare thee: Thou ſayeſt in effecti
                           〈…〉
                         thy great complaint: I am iuster then God. Ch. 6. And wh
                           ••
                         gaine I clenſed frō my ſin, ſeing perfect and wicked he deſtroyeth. Ch. 9. Conſider as thou canſt not reach vnto the heavens: ſo thy dealing, in juſtice or ſin, cannot help or hurt God: But for thy, ſelf thy puniſhment commeth to amend thee. Thou complayneſt, that God doth not heare thee▪ Ch. 30. 
                           •
                        0. For violence the oppreſſed complayn: as thou of the Chaldeans and Sabeans, the godles. When thou w
                           〈…〉
                         wealthy: but art vndone: Ch: 16. 11. Thou didſt cry out, for violent armes. So the oppreſſed do. But none ſay: where is the Puiſſant my makers: the Eternall trinitie: vvho ſtirreth to praiſe on the night. There they cry, but he anſvvers not, concerning the vvrong-doers pride. So God heareth not ſinners. (Ioh. 9.) So when thou ſayſt: Thou wilt not mark it: Ch. 30. 20. Iudge thee afore him, and vvayt for him. Novv for miſſing, his anger doth pay thee: becauſe Iob regardeth not the great plenty of Gods vvayes, vvhich ſhould teach him vviſedome? But doth open his mouth in vaine: vvithout knovvledge doth vſe much ſpeach.
                  
                  
                     Ch. XXXVI. and XXXVII.
                     Forbeare me a little: I will vtter my knowledge from far, from the nature of God. Mark, the Omnipotent is mighty: no deſpiſer: mighty; and that the wicked feel: the ſtrength of heart; and that the poore in ſpirit feel. He ſaveth not the wickeds life: but makes him feel his might:

but he yeeldeth right vnto the poore: as he is no deſpiſer. He placeth the juſt with Kings in throne, as he did thee when thou didſt well: and if they be bound in chaines of ſorrow, he will open their eares to correction. If they will not heare, they ſhall die without knowledge. But hypocrites in heart ſtore vp wrath & their ſoul dyeth in youth. He ſaveth the poore in their anguiſh: and openeth their ea
                           •
                        e in oppreſſion. As he made thee great of a ſmall man: one of the richeſt of Keturaes ſonnes. But as thou haſt fulfilled the ſentence of wicked (ſome cloſe errour) ſentence and judgement have layd hold. Since ire is come: look he caſt thee not off: will he eſteeme thy noblenes & great hoſpitalitie? ſuch ranſome which thou ſpakeſt off, Ch. 29. will not help away. This may be thy very great ſin: that thou doeſt breath vnto death: in thy cōtinuall ſpeaches: as miſtruſting Gods will or power to reſtore thee: And this alſo: that thou wouldeſt be reaſoning with God. Beware thou look not to ſorow: to chooſe death for thy affliction. Miſtruſt not Gods power, for thy reſtoring: Mark, the Omnipotent ſets vp, by his ſtrength: and vvho art thou that diſputeſt vvith God? vvho can teach as he: vvho can ſay, Thou vvorkeſt evill. Remember to magnifie his vvorkes: vvhich all men ſee: even the meteores in the ayre: vvhich all men behould: but none can tell hovv they be ruled: for mercy, and plage: In raine, for men, cattell, and plantes: In thundring and lightening:Ch. 37. in ſnovv and vvintery vveather: ſealing mens hands from vvork: to caſt their accompts vvith better leaſure, for huſbandry: Ice, cloudy vveather, clearnes, heat, and ſuch. Through the North a golden light commeth: but a terrible glorie is in the Puiſſant. The almighty, he is huge of ſtrength: able to pay all that vvilbe contending: and him vve cannot find out, to be pleading vvith him: But

of judgement in tendring his creatures and juſtice of 
                           •••
                        
                        cy he deliteth not to afflict. Therefore ſad-men feare him. He reſpecteth no vviſe in conceit: ſuch as vvilbe pleading vvith him.
                  
                  
                     Of Ch. 38. 39. 40. 41. & 42.
                     The ſpeaches of God, plead not of Iobs faults, butThe Lord: And Iob. of vviſhing to plead vvith God. Whom he teacheth frō his viſible vvorks, yet vnſearchable, that Gods counſel for men is deeper. And vvho ſhould plead vvith God: vvho puniſheth not but the proud: and the deſerving: and vvhy God rejecteth men: none ſhould plead: ſeing to the viſible creatures our vvit reacheth not to ſee the reaſon of them. I leave the vvhole text to be ſought for them. Novv Chap. 42. hath no hardnes.
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
                  Faults eſcaped.
                  Chap. 30. verſ. 11. for, ſtrings, read, ſtring, and &c. Chap. 31. v. 34. for, and thoſe of families to baſenes, that made me ſhrink &c. read, but ſuch families come to baſenes: That made me ſhrink: &c. Chap. 36. v. 13. put out, 
                        •
                     , in the end of the line.
                  
               
            
         
      
   