
      
         
            
            
            The firſt part of the Marchants Daughter of Briſtow.
            To the tune of, The Maydens ioy.
            
            
               BEhold the touchſtone of true loue,
               
                  Maudlin the Marchants daughter of Briſtow towne
               Whoſe firme affection nothing could moue:
               Such fauour beares the louely browne.
               ¶ A gallant Youth was dwelling by,
               Which many yeeres had borne this Mayden great goodwill:
               She loued him as faythfully,
               But all her friendes withſtood it ſtill.
               ¶ The Young man now perceiuing well,
               He could not get nor win the fauour of her friendes:
               The force of ſorrowes to expell,
               To view ſtrange Countries be intendes.
               ¶ And now to take his laſt farewell,
               Of his true loue, his faire and conſtant Maudlin:
               
               With Muſicke ſweete that did excell,
               He playes vnder her window fine.
               ¶ Farewell quoth he, my owne true loue,
               Farewell my deare & cheefeſt treaſure of my hart:
               Through fortunes ſpight that falſe did proue,
               I am inforc't from thee to part.
               ¶ Into the land of Italy,
               
               There will I waſte and wearie out my dayes in woe:
               Seeing my true loue to kept from me,
               I hold my life a mortall foe.
               ¶ Faire Briſtow towne therefore adue,
               For Padua muſt be my habitation now:
               Although my Loue doth lodge in thee,
               To whom alone my hart I vow.
               ¶ With trickling teares thus did he ſing,
               With ſighes and ſobs deſcending from his hart ful ſore
               He ſayth, when he his hands did wring,
               Farewell ſweete loue for euermore.
               ¶ Faire Maudlin from a window hie,
               Beholdes her true loue with his muſicke where he ſtood
               But not a word ſhe durſt reply,
               Fearing her parents angry mood.
               ¶ In teares he ſpendes the dolefull night.
               wiſhing her ſelfe (though naked) with her faithful friend
               She blames her friendes and fortunes ſpight,
               That wrought their loues ſuch luckles end.
               ¶ And in her hart ſhe makes a how,
               Cleane to forſake her countrey and her kinſfolke all,
               And for to follow her true loue now,
               To bide all chauntes that might fall.
               ¶ The night is gone, and the day is come,
               And in the morning very early doth ſhe ariſe,
               She gets her downe to the lower roome,
               where ſundry Seamen ſhe eſpies,
               ¶ A gallant Maiſter among them all,
               The Maiſter of a faire and goodly Ship was he▪
               
               Which there ſtood waighting in the hall,
               To ſpeake with her father if it might be.
               ¶ She kindly takes him by the hand,
               Good ſir ſhe ſayd, and would you ſpeake with any heere?
               Quoth he faire Mayde therefore I ſtand.
               Then gentle ſir, I pray you come neere,
               ¶ Into a pleaſant Parlour by,
               With hand in hand ſhe bringes this Seaman all alone:
               Sighing to him moſt pitteouſly.
               She thus to him did make her mone.
               ¶ She falles vpon her tender knee,
               Good ſir ſhe ſayd, now pitty you a Maydens woe:
               And proue a faythfull friend to me▪
               
               That I to you my griefe may ſhew.
               ¶ Sith you repoſe ſuch truſt, he ſayd,
               To me that am vnknowne, and ekia ſtranger heere:
               Be you aſſured proper Mayde,
               Moſt faythfull ſtill I will appeare.
               ¶ I haue a brother ſir quoth ſhe,
               Whom as my lyfe I loue and fauour tenderly:
               In Padua alas is he,
               Full ſicke God wot, and like to die.
               ¶ And faine I would my brother ſee,
               But that my father will not yeeld to let me got.
               Wherefore good ſir be good to me,
               And vnto me this fauour ſhow.
               ¶ Some Ship-boyes garments bring to me,
               That I diſguiſd may get away from hence vnknowne:
               And vnto Sea Ile goe with thee,
               If thus much friendſhyp may be ſhowne.
               ¶ Faire Mayde quoth he take here my hand,
               I will fulfill each thing that now you deſire:
               And ſet you ſafe in that ſame Land,
               and in the place where you require.
               ¶ Then giues ſhe him a tender kiſſe,
               And ſayth, your ſeruant (gallant Maiſter) I will be,
               And proue your faythfull friend for this:
               Sweete Maiſter then forget not me.
               ¶ This done, as they had doth decreed,
               Soone after, early, euen before the breake of days
               He bringes her garments then with ſpeed,
               Wherein ſhe doth her ſelfe array.
               ¶ And ere her father did ariſe,
               She meetes her Maiſter as he walked in the hall▪
               
               She did attend on him likewiſe,
               Euen till her father did him call.
               ¶ But ere the Marchant made an end,
               Of all thoſe matters to the Maiſter he could ſay:
               His wife came weeping in with ſpeed,
               Saying, our Daughter is gone away.
               ¶ The Marchant much amazed in minde,
               Yonder vilde wretch entic't away my child quoth he:
               But well I wot I ſhall him find
               at Padua in Italie.
               
               ¶ With that beſpake the Maiſter braue,
               Worſhipfull Marchant thither goes this pretty youth▪
               
               And any thing that you would haue,
               He will performe it and write the trueth.
               ¶ Sweete youth quoth he, if it be ſo,
               Beare me a letter to the Engliſh Marchants there,
               and gold on thee I will beſtow:
               My Daughters welfare I do feare.
               ¶ Her Mother takes her by the hand,
               Faire youth quoth ſhe, if there thou doſt my daughter ſee
               Let me thereof ſoone vnderſtand,
               and there is twenty Crownes for thee.
               ¶ Thus through the Daughters ſtrange diſguiſe,
               The Mother knew not when ſhe ſpake vnto her child:
               And after her Maiſter ſtraight ſhe dies,
               Taking her leaue with countenance milde.
               ¶ Thus to the Sea faire Maudlin is gone,
               With her gentle Maiſter, God ſend them a merry wind
               Where we a while muſt leaue them alone,
               Till you the ſecond part do finde.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   