
      
         
            
            
            Obſeruations
Vpon
The firſt ten
FATHERS. By H. BROVGHTON.
            
            Imprinted at London by W. White
dwelling in Cow-lane.
1612.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            OBSERVATIONS
Vpon Adam, Seth, Enoſh, Kenan,
Mahalaleel, Iared, Enoch, Methuſelah, Lamech, Noah:
the firſt ten Fathers. 1. Chro. 1.
            
            1 IN that all men which
haue beene ſince the
Hood, come of thoſe
tenne Patriarches, all
may be counted faultie,
that regarde not the
Hiſtorie of ſuch their
owne and moſt noble
Anceſtors: all faythfull Chriſtians; all recorded
thriſe in the Writ of trueth for their
age. Gen. 5. and 6. And all recorded in three
Bookes for their line. Gen. 3. 1. Chr. 1. Luk. 3.
            2 Seeing Iewes and Gentiles both agree, that
CHRIST is the glory of all men; all ſhould
thinke that the Holy ſpirit would not begin
his Line, to leaue it afterwarde vnperfect (as
the wicked Iewes now know it not) but would
continue it through vnto himſelfe; as in S.
Luke it is chayned from Ely Maries father,
vp to Zorobabel, Nathan, Dauid, Adam.
            
            
               
3 While theſe men liued in the world, there
was but one Tongue, that in which Adam
ſpake,What Tongue Adam & Eue palce. and was fit to argue his Angel-like
witte; which the ſame, the holy Spirit vſed in
all the Bookes of the old Teſtament, and hath
not left it in any other Writer extant; but hath
ended it with the old Teſtament. Their Language
ſo wittie and ſo ſanctified, ſhould be
knowen of all their (not baſtardly) race, what
worthineſſe it hath, In ſome generalitie.
            4 That Adams Tongue was the ſame which
Moſes vſed, the Notations doe ſhew in Adams
wordes: Hee calleth her which was taken
out of his ſide, Iſha;(in the morning preſently
vpon her creation) becauſe ſhe was taken from
Iſh. That Language helde vntoIn Malachies age the old Teſtament ended, and authenticall Ebrew. The h
                     •
                  d Apocrypha is not in that tongue, nor penned by the holy ſpirit. 
               Malachy:
Iſh for Man, Iſha for Owman, or Of man.
            
            5 The ſame appeareth in the name which he
giueth to the woman in the euening of the
ſame day, vpon the promiſe of Life; Eua or
Ch-Eua, Life: from a tearme of lyuing,
Chaya, flowing out of the ſame ſpring.
            6 Eua declareth the ſame Tongue to be her
Tongue: For ſhe nameth her firſt ſonne Kain,
Poſſeſſion; from the verbe Kanah to poſſeſſe:
ſhewing that to be the reaſon of his
name, becauſe ſhe poſſeſt a Sonne by the Eternall.
            7 The other names,A digreſſion to Habel and Kayn. Adam, Earthie, of
Adama Earth. Habel, Vanitie, are plaine of
them ſelues, and often touched in glaunces; as

               Col Habel, Col Adam; the whole that commeth
of Adam, is wholly Vanitie. Pſa. 39. 6. And all
Adam, Man is Habel. Pſal. 39. 11. And, truely
the ſonnes of Adam are Vanitie. Pſal. 6. 2. 11.
Adam is like to Habel, Man to Vanitie. Wee
may not thinke it a ſmall matter, when the
matter is ſo often handled by the ſpirit of all
Wiſedome perfect, that hath nothing ſuperfluous.
Thus we may finde the 
                  •••
               guage of
our firſt Parents, what it was 
                  •
                and moreouer
how it was moſt fit for perfect Wiſedome;
and how the firſt perſons conteine all mans
eſtate. Adam the earthy man, what poſſeſsion
(Kynian) ſoeuer he gate; all is (Habel) vanitie.
The Man (Chaya) liueth by the promiſe in
CHRIST.
            
               The words of Rabbi Bochai touching Kain
and Habel, are in mine opinion worthy citing:
and the enemies owne teſtimonie for a trueth,
ſhould be not the worſt. Thus Bochai ſayth. In a
wittie ſenſe Kain & Habel conteyne in their names
aduertiſementes, & cloſe glaunſes for matter of true
continuance, and corruption▪ 
               Kain, betokeneth Poſſesſion
in this world: & Habel betokeneth one humbled
in minde, and holding ſuch poſſesſion vayne.
Such was his offering, Sheepe kinde; the gentleſt of
all lyuing beaſtes: and therefore the fauour of God
folowed him. And the offering of Kain was of the
fruict of the Earth, as he loued the poſſesſion of this
worlde, and the ſeruice of the body (which yet can
haue no continuance) and followed after body luſtes:

               Therfore the bleſsed God fauoured him not. This the
Rabbin ſpeaketh, glauncing at their names. Diuiner
matter from their perſones & doing, we are
taught: That Kain was of the Serpent, and hated
his brother, becauſe of good workes. Alſo iuſt
Habels ſlaughter, the firſt that dyed, was an effectuall
proofe, that for beng iuſt, the beſt ſhould
die: as our Lord telleth the Iewes how Habels
blood ſhou
                  ••
                be required at them, murhterers of
him. And the faythles Hebrew Docters are at
their wits ende, as touching what Gods counſell
was, in that good Habel ſhould ſo be kilde. The
Apoſtles compare them with Cain; Habel with
Chriſt, ſuffering for goodnes. But my degresſion,
drawing vnto the ten Fathers to collateral men,
may not be long; I will go to the right lyne.
            1 Seth commeteh Adams heyre. His name
in Adam tongue and ours, falleth a like; Set, or
ſetled ſure. Eue named him Seth, becauſe God
hath Set mee an other-gates Seede in ſtead of
Habel, for Kain ſlue him, and prooued his dayes
to be Habel, Vanuie. Gen. 3. 25. Adam approoued
the ſame name, as knowing that hee ſhould
be the ſure-ſetled, when all other Familyes
ſhould ende by the Flood.
            2 Therefore Balaam ſpeaketh, that all the
Sonnes of Seth, that is, all Nations (all come of
him) ſh
                  •
               lbe vnwalled by Chriſt; and taught by
doctrine or experience, that all their ſtrength is
nothing Num. 24.
            3 It is a good meditation to thinke of Adam,

Habel, and Seth; how the Scripture conferreth
all three with our Lordes caſes: Adam the earthy,
with the heauenly: Habels blood, with our
Sauiours: and Seths families, with his conqueſtes.
            4 Adam and Eue both agreeing for the name
Seth, gaue a doble witneſſed warning to the
world, that as Kain was curſed, ſo other families
ioyning with his, ſhould feele in the Flood, the
curſe of all the earth, that they ſhould better regard
Seths right line.
            5 The Scripture telleth in Seth onely in plaine
ſort, that after Adams image and likeneſſe he was
borne, becauſe hee was the fitteſt to ſhew what
all Adams 
               
                  •
               ace was, beeing the firſt in the line
continued ſtill: and as hee was, ſo muſt all be.
            6 The Iewes commonly
               Some Iewe
                     •
                   of malice ſtudie to perue
                     ••
                   all Chriſtians doctrine: as this man, Abrabbaneel, or, Barbinel, a Rabbine of great paines and witte, bu
                     •
                   not of grace: and only to b
                     •
                   folowed whe
                     •
                   he clearely is on our ſide. Without then our age can not fear
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   thinges: and much they 
                     〈…〉
                   the vnacquainted with them. 
               peruert the meaning
of the tearmes: The Image and likenes of
Adam. Thus Abrabbaneel expoundeth it. pag. 39.
Becauſe Adam was excellent in his likeneſſe and
Image intellectiue, God like; Seth came foorth like
vnto him in that image and likeneſſe which God
made in him: For he was a wiſe ſonne, & in his wiſedome
and vnderſtanding, hee was like his Father;
which was wiſer then all men, being the frame of the
handes of God. And hereupon it is ſayd; And hee
beg
                  •
               t according to his owne likeneſse, according to
his owne image: That is, hee begot a Sonne which
ſhould iſſue in the likeneſſe and wi
                  •
               te of Adam: the
wit
                  •
               e, and of knowledge; and therefore his name
was called Seth, by a tearme of ſtabliſhment and ſetling:

becauſe he ſaw by his Wiſedome, that his ſeede
ſhould be ſetled in the world. And therefore it was
not ſpoken ſo of Kain or Habel, becauſe they were
not after the likeneſſe of Adam, and ſhould not haue
continuance in the World, but their end ſhould faile.
This doctrine is badde. Euery man is borne the
Foale of a wild Aſſe, and conceaued in ſinne, and
dead in ſinne, and a child of wrath naturally.
Kain, Habel, and Seth, were all three borne after
the image of the earthly: Kain continued therein;
Habel and Seth were borne againe. The mention
of naturall corruption, or Adams image and
likeneſſe in Kain or Habel, had not touched vs
ſo much as in our owne Father: So the name of
Seth is frowardly applyed by him to Adam likeneſſe;
for all Adams, is all Habel: His continuance
and ſetled ſtate was by Gods fauour, not by
his witte or wiſedome. His other Families prooued
that.
            7 Againſt the IewesYet in all other of Seth, they held the nature of all men, corrupt. But that point was very needfull to be cleared to the full. common errour, our
Lord teacheth Nicode
                     ••
                  s, that the Sonnes of
Seth, and all of Adam, muſt be borne from abone,
or they enter not into the kingdome of
Heauen: and ſo much
                  •
                
               
                  
                     •
                  oſes meant, to tell of
Adams corrupt image in Seths birth; not of that
which he firſt had, and loſt.
            8 Enoſh is next Seth, his Sonne, much to be
conſidered. The letters of his name in the appellatiue,
ſignifie Sorrowfull, Grieuous, and the
like; and that very often in Scripture. Moſes
giueth cloſely a reaſon of Seths counſell at the

naming of him ſo,
                  Tremellius, Tum caeptum eſt profana
                     •
                  i in inuocando nomine Jehouae. ſaying: Azhuchal, Then
ſprang Corruption, touching the calling vpon
the name of God.
            9 Men not acquainted very much with
Scripture, would maruell why any would cite
the Text ſo, ſeeing it is commonly tranſlated
thus;Gen. 4. 26. 
               Then men began to call vpon the name of the
Lord. So Moſes may be tranſlated; AZ huchal, Then was a Beginning. The Greeke draweth
neare vnto that. The Latine tranſlation
called S. Ieromes, followeth that, and many others.
            10 This poynt cannot be well weighed,A digreſsion for a matter of ſome difficultie. without
iudgement of a rule generall through Moſes
and the Prophets, and the later Iewes their tranſlaters
from Adams tongue into Greeke, how
all theſe hide their minde, when matters come to
be ſpoken of, which to prophane men would
ſeeme ſtrange.Life eternall plainly meant, but neuer named in Moſes: and why? 
               Moſes neuer nameth life eternall
in the plaine and vſuall phraſe, but by ſtrong
conſequentes; as how the Lord is the God of
Abraham, Iſaak, & Iacob; and not of the dead, but
of the liuing: whereby they muſt be holden to
liue. So Life in his Law, ſignifieth often Life eternall:
and Death, Death eternall. So by this
place, Deut. 32. 39. I kill, and I make aliue; Aben
Ezra noteth, that Death, and life after it, is cloſely
taught. And this reaſon is rendred of many
Rabbines, why Moſes neuer nameth Life eternall,
though all his doctrine tendeth thyther;
euen becauſe the world then all prophane, which

skant heard of one God, and hardly beleeued the
Creation, was to be allured by open and plaine
thinges, firſt vnto the worſhip of the one God:
and that being done for Earthly bleſsinges, they
might afterwardes be drawen eaſily vnto the
Eternall: Vnto which, if directly they were called,
the ſtrangeneſſe would make them reiect all.
So, Moſes hideth his minde in the Paradox of
Adams preſent fall, with manifold turnings of the
Narration: and likewiſe of the ages of Iapheth
and Sem,
               Gen. 11. 
               Haran and Abraham: and with doubtfull
tearmes for the Peregrination of the Children
of Iſrael, as though they had been 430.
yeares in Egypt: But he had relation to Abrahams
Peregrination and Promiſe of Chriſt:
               Galat. 3. 17. which the
eſtranged could not conceiue. From diſputing
whereof, he minded to bridle men vnskilfull, by
doubtfull ſpeaches; yet giueth rules thyther, to
vnderſtand himAs in Exod. 6. 18. ſhewing that his grandfather, who was of their number who came into Egypt, ivued 133. yeares, his ſonne Amram 137. Moſes 80 there: all 350. rightly. So heere, the tearme
Huchal may be taken for a Beginnig, or for Corruption:
But the matter telleth, that God was
called vpon long before that, in the firſt Sabbath;
and therefore, Beginning could not be
then: wherefore, Corruption muſt be meant
there, by Huchal. So Dauid Kymchi the King of
Grammarians, doth take it in his Rootes, for
Corruption. So in Breſhith Rabba, the fallinges
away from God, are reckoned in the dayes of
Enoſh, of the Deluge, and of Babel. The Zoar, and
others, the moſt of Iudahs name, hold the ſame:
Arias Montanus hath both. The Greek-Hebrewes

knowing why Moſes hid his minde, they
turned it fit for Heathen, Then men hoped to call
vpon Gods name. All who incline that way, haue
great defence by Grammer, and much authority;
ſome of Hebrewes, more of others. But the matter
will require Corruption; not a Beginning of
Religion, to be meant there: As in the ſpeach
continuing the Narration (after the Catalogue
of the Fathers) it is manifeſt; how the Sonnes of
God, ſaw the Daughters of Adams Sonnes, and
ſo choſe Wiues of a ſtrange God: Otherwiſe,
Moſes telleth not when apoſtacie from Religion
ſhould fall.
            11 If at Enoſh birth, men began to call vpon
God; Seth vpon that occaſion, would not euer
haue named his ſonne Sorrowfull Enoſh; nor
Moſes haue ioyned preſently thereupon (after naming
the Fathers) the falling away. The Prophets
likewiſe name Life. My digreſsion would
be too long, if I tooke examples of the like concealing
the minde, from the Prophets, and from
the Greeke tranſlaters. I will now proceed vnto
the next.
            12 Kenan is hee: Konen, To Lament, might
be the roote, for his name. Twiſe ſpeaking of one
thing is vſuall, for vehemencie; as in Dan. 5.
Mene, Mene: So theſe two names, Sorrow, and
Lamentation, teach, that they lamented the ſorrowes
of their Workes, and of the Earth, which
God hath curſed.
            13 Ma-hahal-El, a prayſer of God; teacheth

what comfort ought to be in ſorrow; the
ſeeking of Gods prayſe, and glory for the world
to come. An other Notation, Mahal-Le-El,
God bringeth a Confuſion (by water,) is well
agreeable to the Argument. So, thy Wine, is
Mahul, Confuſed (with water.) That is fitteſt
for the continuall threatning of the Flood; to
ſhew the curſe vpon the Flood. So that this
name comprehendeth the drift of all the Scripture.
            14 Iared, is in the playnneſſe (caſting away
no letter) Deſcending: as betokening a downefall
in the behauiour of men, without hope of
goodneſſe to any bettering. Such as deriue this
name from Radah, to Rule, go twiſe further then
they neede: The Argument calleth for no ſuch
matter; and, that Etymologie ſhould firſt be admitted,
which hath beſt agreement in the Letters,
when nothing for the matter diſagreeth; and not
any farre off ſought out, when one at home is fit
onely.
            15 Enoch ſignifieth, Dedicated, Appoynted
vnto. If Kain had called him ſo, the name had
been of no praiſe; but as in one appoynted for the
wicked world; now it is the beſt as in one Conſecrated
vnto God. Hee is in number, the ſeuenth
(as any may reckon) from Adam: and alſo,
as the Holy ghoſt noteth, for an higher purpoſe.
The prouidence of God may be ſweetly conſidered,
in continuall calling of vs to conſider the
Sabbath, by his diſpoſing of great matter gracious

moſt often by ſeauens. So Moſes was from
Abraham, the ſeuenth. The time of his life is
wonderfull, matching in yeares the dayes of the
Sunnes yere. 365. A matter moſt pleaſaut to teach,
what recompence commeth by walking with
God. If his aſſumption had not been recorded; yet
the number of his yeares would haue cauſed celeſtiall
admiration, what kind of man he ſhould be.
Hee walking with God, was doubleſſe a moſt
zealous Preacher of righteouſneſſe, and told of
the Flood to come. S. Iude eloquently frameth
an Oration for him, by the matter, as Oratours
may lawfully doe: thus it ſtandeth, Iude 14. Behold,
the Lord commeth with his holy thouſandes,
to execute iudgement againſt all men, and to reproue
all the wicked of them, for all their workes which they
haue committed; and for all their hard words which
wicked ſinners ſpake againſt him. This is a moſt
ſweete Oration, framed from Moſes, for this our
holy Father. In the Flood God ſhewed iudgement:
and as on Sinai hee came with thouſandes
of his Holy-ones; ſo doubtleſſe at the Deluge,
againſt men that caſt oft, and ſcorned trueth of
Religion, and holy Patriarchs admonitions, and
liued wallowing in all badneſſe. Alſo, the tearme
Behold, may haue a cloſe glaunce at the notation
of Methuſelah: Then firſt, Enoch walked
with God, as a Prophet and holy Teacher.
            16 Meth, He dying, V, then; Shelah, He
(God) ſendeth:
                what? the matter ſpoken of,
iudgement vpon the wicked. The Scripture is

full of cloſe glaunſes: And well might Enoch
name his Sonne ſo, as Iared gaue him a name fitted
to his euent. While Methuselah liued, the
Flood came not; few dayes after his death it
came, when he had skant begun his laſt yeare of
969. For memory of the phraſe, the Iewes ſay,
that he lay vpon the Arke: For, being iuſt, he periſhed
not; onely eight were in the Arke; and he
could not haue his full yeares 187. to Lameches
birth, & 182. thence to Noahs, & his 600. compleat,
but as vpon the Arke. This is the meaning
of their fable, the ſhewing how his age reached
into the Flood. And I thinke that the mockers
which S. Peter ſpeaketh of, skoffed the prophecie
conteined vnder his name, when they ſaid, Where
is the appearance of his comming? For ſince the Fathers
dyed, the world continueth in the ſame ſtate.
Now the Fathers all, and his Sonne, dyed before
the Flood: and for the ſadneſſe of that, hee gaue
to his Sonne the name Lamech.
            
            17 La-Mech, of Mach, Striking. Tubalcayns
               
father, that would kill a man in his wounde, had
the ſame name, as a Striker: but this man was
ſtroken with all calamities: Hee ſaw Adam turned
to duſt, Seth ſet in his reſt, Enoſh taken with
ſorrowes of death, Kenan lamented by mourners
in the ſtreete, Mahalaleel depart thyther where
Angels prayſe God, Iared deſcend to the low
partes of the earth, Enoch taken vp; and knew
that he ſhould die before his Father, when he named
Noah, the Comforter. Whereas ſeeing his

Father liued vnto the Flood, without propheticall
knowledge, that he ſhould die before his Father,
hee, not Noah, ſhould haue been thought
the Comforter. And the ſaddeſt Oration that
could proceed from a broken heart, is that which
hee maketh at Noahs birth, ſaying: This is hee
that ſhall comfort vs, concerning our workes, and
concerning the ſorrowes of our handes, and concerning
the earth which GOD hath curſed. So
Lamech giueth ſadneſſe; as his Sonne, a remedie
to ſorrow.
            18 Noah, the tenth, hath his name arguing
that Lamech ſpake Hebrew; as Moſes in the
Notation, Noah and Naham. Great matters are
to be conſidered in him: Hee was long a ſingle
man. When hee was 480. the ſpirit of Chriſt,
not recorded euer ſince the firſt day of man, to
haue ſpoken to any (ſauing to the curſed Kain,)
neuer to any for effectuall Saluation, ſpeaketh
to Noah. Therefore S. Peter talking of Chriſt
his Diuinitie, had not an auncienter open record
ſince the ſpeach to Adam, to talke of, for Chriſt
his open full ſpeach ſpeaking vnto men, though
the other nine were illuminated with propheticall
knowledge. Noah is 500. before he was a
Father, or maried; as we may gather: That argueth
his great feare of Gods iudgementes;
farre vnlike his ſonnes now adayes, giuen as
Horſes, to all voluptuouſneſſe, and not caring
for their owne moſt certaine deſtruction.
Twentie yeares before hee was maried, hee

had a warrant, that his houſe ſhould not periſh.
His breathren and ſiſters yet would not take that
warning, for all that Lamech and Methuſelah both
could doe, beholders of the Arke, and witneſſes
doubtleſſe of the wtath no come. Lamech lyued
not out the whole to 120. yeares, as Methuſelah;
but dying before his Father, gaue a further warning,
that he ſpake as a Prophet, touching the
Flood. The three witneſſes, were a full condemnation
of the wicked world. The further Stories
of Noah, may better be fetched from the fountaine
of Geneſis, then abridged by any mans wit.
This much I thought good to ſpeake ſeuerally
of theſe ten Fathers: ſome thinges common to
them all, may well heere be ioyned; as their Religion,
& long life: and neare the ſame, commeth
the compariſion of their ages togeather.
            Their Religion was perfect and ſinceere.
They knew the Creator to beGen. ver. 1, 3. one GOD; and
that the Sonne ſhould bruſe Satans power; and
that the Spirit was a perſon coequall and coeternall.
All that Moſes recordeth for vs, touching
thoſe times, wee may know that they knew, by
the ſpeaches vttered in Iob before the Law:
Eliphaz, Zohar, Bildad, and Elthu, ſpake no otherwiſe
then the Fathers:For they had not the Law to reach them, but were taught from the fathers, as they had bin. For they ſpake ſoundly
of all Religion; whereby wee may be ſure,
that the firſt, came not ſhort of them, in knowledge.
Adam knew the natures of all thinges,
the creation of the viſible thinges, and the vnuiſible;
the fall of Angels, and their eternall condemnation:

the corruption of mankind, being
the ſeed of the Serpent, and a generation of Vipers.
And as Moſes telleth, that Elohim ſayd;
Let Vs make man: So hee knew that, and why
Elohim was a forme plurall, for GOD. It were
groſſe to thinke that the Cabaliſtes (which expound
Elo him, El-hem, They be one God, in
Bachai vpon Gen. 1.) ſhould know more then
Adam, for names. And the Hebrews vpon Middras
Tillim, bring in God talking with Adam
as he gaue names, & asking; What is my name?
To whom Adam ſayd: Thou art Elohim, and
Iehouah. Whether God by expreſſed word named
himſelfe Iehouah and Elohim, or gaue Adam
wiſedome ſo to doe; we ſee that the names were
knowen from the beginning: For the Serpent
nameth Elohim to Euah, and turneth preſently
the forme plurall vnto Gods prophanely, ſaying:
Yee ſhalbe like vnto Gods, that know good and euill.
Which pluralitie, Adam and Euah referred to
the holy Trinitie. There the Greekes in the
Serpents word Elohim, the ſecond time tranſlate
very learnedly, Gods. And ſo doe the Talmudiſtes
hold it meant, in Maſſeceth Sopherim, Perk. 4.
And we may be ſure, that Adam and Euah were
not ignorant of Satans thoughts, when by experience
they found him out. Now when Euah
bare a Sonne, ſhe ſpake voyde of all doubt, to the
Vnitie, I haue poſſeſſed a Sonne by Iehouah, by the
one Eternall: yet we may be ſure that ſhe remembred
the ſpeach of the Trinitie, Adam wilbe like

to one of VS now. The late Iews haue Satans
darkneſſe, which will haue that tearme VS, to
be ſpoken of Angels. The Angels were not yet
ſpoken of in all Moſes ſtyle, and therefore they
could not be meant by any of his tearmes; but as
Elohim was vſed for the Creator onely, ſo common
natiue logique would ſtretch it no further
there: and VS the plurall, to be as Boreica, Thy
Creators in Eccle. 12. 1. a miſticall ſpeach, marked
and cited euen of Rabbi Bochai the Iew: a
witneſſe ſtrong againſt his owne ſide.
            
               Moreouer, as Moſes knew a difference in ſignification
betwixt Elohim the tearme of Might,
and Iehouah named of Beeing ſimply by him
ſelfe, and giuing a Beeing to all his workes and
wordes; and therefore neuer vſeth the tearme Iehouah,
before the Creation had his full beeing,
Gen. 2. 4: So wet may be ſure, that Adam and
Euah knew the difference betwixt Iehouah and
Elohim. The Serpent nameth not Iehouah, but
onely Elohim, as a name of bare Might, and the
forme whereof her might peruert to Gods:
Hee trembled to conſider the eternall trueth, conſtant
to giue performance of Mercie and Wrath,
noted by the tearme Iehouah Now, whereas in
Sems time, EL was Gods name; it is all one as
Elohim, Mightie: onely a forme ſingular.
            And this ſeemeth to be the reaſon, that Satan
had corrupted the world to vnderſtand Gods
by the tearme Elohim; as in Nachors religion,
Elohim is Gods in Labans wordes: Therefore

               Sem might vſe EL, Almightie, in the frame ſingular.
            
               Abraham firſt nameth God Adonai; that is,
My Pillers; with a miſticall note of the trinitie.
Adam, who knew not vpon what Pillers the
Earth could be faſtened in the middeſt of the liquid
Ayre and Water, but by Gods power, knew
him to be Adonai, though occaſion was not offered
to vſe the word, vntill God and his prouidence
became vnknowen, and denied almoſt of
all the world.
            
               IAH, an abridgement of Iehouah, vſed firſt in
tearme by Moſes, Exod. 15. ſubſtaunce could
not be vnknowen to Adam, though in later
times more names to expreſſe Gods nature were
ſeene needfull by the eternall Spirit. The Vnitie
and Trinitie being thus knowen to Adam, hee
would deliuer it ouer equally to his Sonnes, to
Methuſela and Lamech.
            
            Now for the Redemption: Hee confeſſed that
hee was naked, and was afraide; hid himſelfe, as
needing one to bring him into fauour: and knew
that hee who ſhould ouercome Satan, being in
mans nature, was to die, as all of Adam: and muſt
recouer himſelfe from death, and muſt reuiue
Adam, and muſt reſtore all, fallen once to corruption:
and know that none but God, could doe
this much: And this hee beleeued, and therevpon
named the Woman Life. And for the moſt
vnlikely part, of death, hee had Sacrifice to ſeale

aſſurance of that; and requiring an open profeſſion
of that euery Sabbath, that day being ordeyned
for that vſe: Whereby wee muſt needes
know, that when that was performed, which in
that day was repreſented, the day muſt be altered.
And as the Skinnes of the Beaſtes couered his
body; ſo the Carkaſes burnt, repreſented whoſe
Death ſhould couer his Soule with Iuſtice, taking
away the giltineſſe of ſinne. Moſes was to
ſpeake ſhort or theſe matters, that the prophane
ſhould not trouble them ſelues with that, which
they would neuer beleeue. Doubtleſſe Adam
knew that the moſt Holy ſhould annoynt the
Humanitie, with the dwelling of the Godhead
in it, and ſanctifie himſelfe for Adam and his
faythfull Sonnes; and muſt be called by the name
fitteſt Meſsiah: And hee that knew the whoſe
courſe of Nature, could not but know, that the
liquor of Spices was the fitteſt to repreſent Deuine
thinges by an Oyntment made of it. And
ſeeing it was moſt needfull that hee ſhould be a
great Prophet, wee may ſay well with the Iewes;
that hee ſaw the lot of his Sonnes through all
ages: And God would hide nothing good for
the Vineyard; nor would doe any thing, but hee
would reueale it to his Prophets. And although
hee liued not to ſee Henoch taken vp, hee might
well know it; and Iared might vſe his counſell
in giuing Heno
                     •
                  h the name Conſecrated, or,
Dedicated to God. And as Noah in his three
Sonnes names conteined their Storie for Religion,

in Deuine Sem: in Iapheth, that the new Teſtament
ſhould be written in Greeke, as the Iewes
well gather in Thal. Ieruſalemi, in Megilah, by the
aluſion Iapheth, and Iapheth will perſwade: So,
Hotte Countries dwelling, by Chams houſe, by
his name Hotte. And as Noah ſaw their whole
ſtate; ſo no doubt Adam did as well as hee: and
they all beheld the dayes of Chriſt, and knew that
hee ſhould redeeme them on Mount Sion. And
Rambam recordeth that, which no reaſon can
denie, how the Iewes euer held by tradition, that
Adam, Habel, and Kain, offered where Abraham
offered Iſaac, where both Temples were built:
on which Mountaine our Lord taught, and on
that alſo he died.
            All that, Moſes figured at large: and that the
new Teſtament openeth in ſubſtaunee they
knew. And ſeeing they be our Fathers, and Mirrours
of Wiſedome in their names, fayth, feare
of God, and yeares; wee ſhould in our meditation
bring backe the Ghoſpell vnto them, as they
foreſaw it, and forbade to ſay, Who can goe vp
to Heauen to bring Chriſt downe? or who can
goe into the deepe of the Earth, to bring Chriſt
from the dead? But they knew (as I touched
both, in the Incarnation) that the Sauiour in Hebrew
Ioſhuang, in Greeke Ieſus, was God dwelling
in Chriſt: and iuſt Habel ſhewed his death, and
Henoch his aſcenſion. And in theſe few poyntes,
Deuinitie ſtandeth; in the Trinitie, and Redemption:
that all iuſt went hence vp to ioy at Gods

Throne. All this the Heathen heard of, and the
Scribes held it ſure: But, that God was to dwell
in Chriſt; and that hee ſhould by death ouer-him
that had the power of death, they deſpiſed to
hold that in knowledge, bending their mindes
to earthly benefites.
            Theſe meditations I hold profitable for all,
who by ſtudie will of them ſelues multiply them:
and a Child knowing theſe Stories, ſhall paſſe
Ariſtotle in ſound Wiſedome, to feare God, till
the Body returne to the earth, and the Soule to
God that gaue it: To whom with the Sonne,
and Holy ſpirit, be all prayſe, honour, & glory,
both now and henceforth for euermore. Amen.
            For conference of ages,Concluſion. I thought good to
place heere, the Table printed in the Concent:
where euery Patriarches yeares be ſet vnderneath
him, at what age he is a father, or dieth;
and with how many others he liued, and how
long.
            Meditations herein, will bring great knowledge,
comfort, and delight.
            
               
               
                  ADAM falleth before the woman is called EVE.
And CHRIST is promiſed a deſtroyer of the Deuils
workes. Sacrifice is a ſeale of iuſtice, giuen by Fayth.
                  
                     ADAM. his yeares.
                     
                  
                  
                     130
                     Seth borne. Gen. 5. 3.
                  
                  
                     235
                     105
                     Enos borne. Gen. 5. 6. By Enos birth, religion is ſorrowfully corrupted, through mariages with Gains houſe. The faythfull are called the children of God. Ioh. 1 12.
                  
                  
                     325
                     195
                     90
                     Kenan borne. Gen. 5. 9.
                  
                  
                     395
                     265
                     160
                     70
                     Mahalaleel borne. Gen. 5.
                  
                  
                     460
                     330
                     225
                     135
                     65
                     Iared borne. Gen. 5.
                  
                  
                     622
                     492
                     387
                     297
                     227
                     162
                     Henoch borne. Gen. 5. the ſeueuth frō
                         Adam. Iude.
                  
                  
                     687
                     557
                     452
                     362
                     292
                     227
                     65
                     Mathuſelah borne. Gen. 5. 21.
                  
                  
                     874
                     744
                     639
                     549.
                     479
                     414
                     252
                     187
                     Lamech borne Gen. 5. 25.
                  
                  
                     930
                     800
                     695
                     605
                     535
                     470
                     308
                     243
                     56
                     Adam dieth. Gen. 5. 5.
                  
                  
                     987
                     857
                     752
                     662
                     592
                     527
                     365
                     300
                     113
                     Henoch is taken avvay. Gen 5.
                  
                  
                     1042
                     912
                     807
                     717
                     647
                     582
                      
                     355
                     168
                     Seth dieth. Gen. 5. 8.
                  
                  
                     1056
                      
                     821
                     731
                     661
                     596
                      
                     369
                     182
                     Noah B. Gë. 5. 29 the 10. frō
                         Adam.
                  
                  
                     1140
                      
                     905
                     815
                     745
                     680
                      
                     453
                     266
                     84
                     Enos dieth. Gen. 5. 14.
                  
                  
                     1235
                      
                      
                     910
                     840
                     775
                      
                     548
                     361
                     179
                     Kenan dieth. Gen. 5. 14.
                  
                  
                     1290
                      
                      
                      
                     895
                     830
                      
                     603
                     416
                     234
                     Mahalaleel dieth. Gen. 5. 17.
                  
                  
                     1422
                      
                      
                      
                      
                     962
                      
                     735
                     548
                     366
                     Iared dieth. Gen. 5 20.
                  
                  
                     1536
                     The patience of God Abode 120. yeres, in which the ſpirit of Chriſt preached while the Arke was in making, to the ſpirites now in priſon. 1. Pet. 3. 19.
                     849
                     662
                     480
                     CXX. yeeres begin. Gen. 6.
                  
                  
                     1556
                     869
                     682
                     500
                     20
                     Iapheth borne. Gen. 5. 32.
                  
                  
                     1558
                     871
                     684
                     502
                     22
                     2
                     Sem borne.
                  
                  
                     1651
                     964
                     777
                     595
                     115
                     95
                     93
                     Lamech dith.
                     
                  
                  
                     1656
                     Mathuſelah dyeth. Gen. 5. 27.
                     969
                      
                     600
                     120
                     100
                     98
                     The Flood.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   