
      
         
            
            
            TEXTES of Scripture, Chayning the holy Chronicle vntyll the Sunne loſt his lyght, and the Sonne brake the Serpentes head: dying, riſing, and aſcending.
            Search the Scriptures: for in them ye thinke to haue eternall life, and they are they which teſtifie of me.
            Iohn. 5. 39.
            
               Imprinted at London, for Gabriell Simſon and W. White: and are to be ſolde at their houſe in Fleetelane. 1591.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
            
               IN humane affayres (gentle Reader) of Princes reigne, the yeres wherin thinges fall out, are noted of common necesſitie for diſtinction and certaynety ariſing by recorde of tyme. But this recorde hath not of ancientie continued to poſteritie. For the Lord, who altereth times and ſeaſons, changeth ſtates in ſuch varietie, that the true report of theyr memory periſhed with them. For Diuine ſtories, tymes haue more vſe then for humane affayres: no leſſe then heauenly thinges ouermatch earthly. And as the worke of God is perfect: ſo he beginneth and continueth times regiſter, from the Creation to the Redemption. The golden Chayne which Salomon drew before the dore of the moſt holy Debyr, hath not ſo much admiration as this Chayne: continued from ſince Paradiſe was ſhut to Adam, vntyll the Lord opened the heauens vnto the Thiefe, that craued remembrance in his kingdome. The Fathers in the nobleſt lyne, draw in their age theſe yeeres, ſlyding by the Sunnes courſe, from the promiſe made to Eue, vntyll one of thoſe

Fathers fell once away from hope of that promiſe. Terah was he that fell away: after whoſe death the Promiſe is reuiued to Abraham. Thence the Lynkes of this holy Chayne are faſtened on other poyntes: ſtately in ſtory, to be ſoner marked: few in number, to be eaſely remembred: deepe in ſignification, to be carefully ſtudied. Theſe are, the Lambe and the Temple: fit ſtarres to draw out the tymes, vntyll the true Lambe buyldeth the Temple, rayſing vp the temple of his body. For the diſtance from the Promiſe vnto the Lambe, euen the very day is by Moſes ſet downe. Likewyſe the diſtance thence, vntyll the buyldyng of the Temple by Salomon. Thence the whole yeres of Salomons reigne: and from the departure of ten Tribes vnto the burnyng of the Temble. Ezek 4. How long the Temple lay without any decree of buyldyng it agayne, we may certainely gather by the whole Captiuity which Iudah ſuffered in Babylon. For Nebuchad-nezars houſe was to reigne Seuentie yeeres: and Iudah ſo long to be in captiuitie. VVherefore the beginnyng of that Captiuity muſt needes be, when Nebuchad-nezar tooke Ieruſalem, in the firſt of his reigne, and brought the nobleſt to Babylon. In the ninteenth yeere of Nebuchad-nezar the Temple was brent: and thereupon the thirde Captiuitie folowed. VVherfore fiftie ful yeres are to finyſh the Seuenty, when Cyrus came vp, and made a decree to buylde the Temple againe. Cyrus was not mooued ſo to do, vntyll Daniel was taught by an Angel, when Chriſt the true Temple woulde conſecrate him ſelfe. That he was taught: for the very houre, when he prayed, at the tyme of the euenyng offeryng, how long it ſhoulde be vntyll the Lord did make hymſelfe the euenyng Offeryng, when the vayle of the Temple rented. For this laſt part, the Lord hath taken ſpeciall care, ſo long before

tellyng the matter playnely: and ceasſing further particulers beyonde that age, that men ſhoulde reſt in the playnnes of his worde, as his holy Prophetes then taught of Redemption.
            Holy writynges touching theſe poyntes, I haue ioyned togeather. The playnnes whereof, yf any ſtryue to ouerthrow, I wyll no more yeelde to him, then Iob woulde to Eliphaz, Zophar, and Bildad. Although many differ in their Chronicles, yet theſe places onely being noted, all ſtrife ceaſſeth. One, that after Terahs death, Abraham at ſeuentie and fiue yeeres olde, receyued the Promiſe: whereof I haue diſputed at large in the treatiſe of Melchiſedek. An other, that three hundreth and ninetie yeeres. Ezek. 4. are from Ieroboams drawyng Iſrael away to the burnyng of the Temple, with the third captiuitie: which time, both in particulers, many haue caſt aright: and for the general ſumme theſe agree: Iohn Caluin vpon Ezek 4. Gerard Mercator, Clement Schubert, Math. Beroald, Ioſeph Scaliger, Henry Bunting. An other is, that Nebuchad-nezars houſe reigned but ſeuentie yeres: which the Talmud, wherin lieth all Countrey-Iewes conſent, expreſſely holdeth: alſo olde Tatianus in Euſebius, and old Grecians commonly, no leſſe of antiquity then the Apoſtles age: in hym, and in Clemens, with late writers very many, from Dan. 1. and Ier. 25. and the common rate of ages, in ſuch as were caried captiue: and ſaw both the fyrſt Temple, and the ſeconde buylded. The fourth knot is, the Seauens of Daniel: wherein the proprietie, as Daniel vnderſtoode it, and penned it, ſhoulde ſuffiſe.
            Theſe foure places ryghtly holden, ende the endles controuerſies. Reade the textes, and vnderſtand them. The Lord teach vs ſo to number our dayes, that we may bring the hart to wyſedome.
            
               H. B.
            
         
         
            
            The chiefe poyntes of the holy Chronicle.
            
            
               
                  FRom the firſt Promiſe of Chriſt, to reſtore life vpon death, brought in by the Serpent: vnto the ſeconde Promiſe made to Abraham vpon the death of Terah: whom firſt of the Fathers the Serpent drew to Idolatrie, are yeeres.
               2083. That ſpace is recorded by the particuler Fathers.
               From the Promiſe vnto the Lambe, appoynted to expreſſe the Lambe of God, are yeeres.
               430.
               From the Lambe, to the beginnyng of the Temple: a ſhadow of the truer Temple, are yeeres.
               480.
               From the buyldyng of it, vnto the burnyng: or rather the captiuitie vpon that, are yeeres.
               427.
               Thence to the end of the Captiuitie, where Cyrus mad a decree of building it againe, are yeeres full.
               50.
               Thence, vntyll the Temple of our Lord his body aroſe the thyrde day, are yeeres.
               490.
               The whole ſumme is.
               3960.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Textes of Scripture, chayning the Chronicle vntill the Sunne loſt his lyght, and the Sonne brake the Serpentes head: dying, ryſing, and aſcending.
            
               
                  
                     ADAM lyued an hundrethGen. 5. 3. and thirtie yeeres, and begate Seth.
               
               
                  Seth lyued an hundreth and fiue yeeres, and begate Enoſh.
               
               
                  Enoſh lyued nintie yeeres, and begate Kenan.
               
               
                  Kenan lyued ſeuenty yeres, and begate Mahalaleel.
               
               
                  Mahalaleel lyued ſixtie and fiue yeres, and begate Iered.
               
               
                  Iered lyued an hundreth ſixtie and two yeres, and begate Henoch.
               
               
                  Henoch liued ſixtie & fiue yeres, and begate Methuſelah.
               
               
                  Methuſelah lyued and hundreth eightie and ſeuen yeeres, and begate Lamech.
               
               
                  Lamech lyued an hundreth eightie and two yeeres, and begate Noah.
               
               And Noah was fiue hundreth yeeres olde: and Noah begate Sem, Cham, and Iapheth. And Noah was ſixe hundreth yeeres olde when the flood of waters was vpon the earth.
               
                  SEM was an hundreth yeeres olde, & begate Arphaxad
                  Gen. 11. 10. two yeeres after the Flood.
               
                  
                  Arphaxad lyued fiue and thirtie yeres, and begate Selah.
               
               
                  Selah lyued thirtie yeeres, and begate Eber.
               
               
                  Eber lyued foure and thirtie yeeres and begate Peleg.
               
               
                  Peleg lyued thirtie yeeres, and begate Regu.
               
               
                  Regu lyuen two and thirtie yeeres, and begate Serug.
               
               
                  Serug lyued thirtie yeeres and begate Nahor.
               
               
                  Nahor lyued nine and twentie yeres, and begate Terah.
               
               
                  Terah lyued ſeuentie yeeres, and begate Abram, Nahor, and Haran. So the dayes of Terah were two hundreth and fiue yeeres, and Terah died in Haran.
               
            
            
               The Promiſe made to Abram, when his Father was dead.
                     Actes. 7.
               
               ANd God ſayd to Abram, Get thee out of thy land,Gen. 12. 1. and from thy kinred, and from thy fathers houſe, vnto the lande that I wyll ſhewe thee. And I wyl bleſſe them that bleſſe thee, & curſe them that curſe thee, and in thee al the families of the earth ſhalbe bleſſed. And Abram went as the Lord commanded him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was ſeuentie and fiue yeres olde, when he departed out of Haran. Then Abram toke Sarai his wyfe, and Lot his brothers ſonne, and all their ſubſtaunce that they poſſeſſed, and the ſoules that they had gotten in Haran, and they departed to go to the land of Chanaan: and to the land of Chanaan they came.
            
            
               The departure from Egypt, or Paſſeouer, and Law.
               SO the peregrination of the chyldren of Iſrael, whichExod. 12. 40. 41. 42. were ſoiourners in Egypt, was foure hundreth & thirtie yeeres. And when the foure hundreth and thirtie yeere were expired, euen the ſelfe ſame day departed all the hoſtes of the Lorde out of the land of Egypt. It is a

nyght to be kept holy to the Lorde, becauſe he brought them out of the land of Egypt: this is that nyght of the Lord, which al the children of Iſrael muſt keepe throughout their generations. This is ye law of the Paſſeouer. &c. The Law which was foure hundreth and thirtie yeresGal. 3, 17. after, can not diſanull the Couenant that was confirmed afore of God in reſpect of Chriſt, that it ſhould make the Promiſe of none effect.
               
            
            
               The Temple of Salomon.
               ANd in the foure hundreth and foureſcore yeere (after1. Kin. 6. 1. the childred of Iſrael were come out of the lande of Egypt) and in the fourth yeere of the reigne of Salomon ouer Iſrael, in the moneth Zif (which is the ſecond moneth) he buylt the houſe of the Lorde.
            
            
               The whole time of Salomon, and the diuiſion of the kingdome.
               THe time that Salomon reigned in Ieruſalem ouer1. King. 11. 42. all Iſrael, was fourtie yeeres.
               And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Iſrael were1 King. 12. 1. 2 20. 19. come to Shechem, to make him king. And when Ieroboam the ſonne of Nebat heard of it (who was yet in Egypt, whyther Ieroboam had fled from king Salomon, and dwelt in Egypt.) And when all Iſrael had heard that Ieroboam was come agayne, they ſent and called him vnto the aſſemblie, and made him king ouer all Iſrael: none folowed the houſe of Dauid, but the tribe of Iudah onely. And Iſrael rebelled agaynſt the houſe of Dauid vnto this day: and ſayd. What portion haue we in Dauid? we1. King. 12. 16. 17. haue none inheritaunce in the ſonne of Iſhai. To your tentes, O Iſrael: now ſee to thine owne houſe, Dauid. So Iſrael departed vnto their tentes. Howbeit ouer the chyldren of Iſrael, which dwelt in the cities of Iudah, did Rehoboam reigne ſtyll.
            
            
               
               
                  The Captiuitie of ſeuentie yeeres, nineteene yeres before the burnyng of the Temple. This captiuitie muſt needes begin with the firſt yeere of Nebuchad-nezar, ſeeing his houſe reigned but 70. yeeres, and ſo the Hebrewes continually, and moſt ancient Grekes haue helde it: Grekes, both the prophane and Chriſtians.
               IN the thirde yeere of the reigne of Iehoiakim king ofDan. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 21. 
                  Iudah, came Nebuchad-nezar king of Babel vnto Ieruſalem, & beſieged it. And the Lord gaue Iehoiakim king of Iudah into his hand, with part of the veſſelles of the houſe of God, which he caryed into the houſe of Shinar, to the houſe of his God, & he brought the veſſelles into his gods treaſurie. And the king ſpake vnto Aſhpenaz the maiſter of his Eunuches, that he ſhoulde bring certayne of the chyldren of Iſrael, of the kinges ſeede, and of the princes: chyldren in whom was no blemyſhe, but well fauoured, and inſtruct in all wiſedome, and well ſeene in knowledge, and able to vtter knowledge, and ſuch as were able to ſtande in the kinges Palace, and whom they myght teach the learnyng and the tongue of the Caldeans. And the king appoynted them prouiſion euery day of a portion of the kinges meate, and of the wine which he dranke, ſo nouriſhed them three yeeres, that at the ende thereof they myght ſtand before the king. Now among theſe were certayne of the chyldren of Iudab. Daniel, Hananiah, Miſhael,
                   and Azariah. And Daniel was vnto the firſt yeere of king Cyrus.
               
            
            
               
               
                  The burning of the Temple ſhewed in a viſion, and performedin ſtory: and the laſt captiuitie of. 50. yeeres.
               
                  1 THou ſonne of man, take thee a Bricke, and lay itEzek. 4▪ 1. 2. 3▪ 4. 5. 6 7. 8. 9▪ 10. 11, &. 12. verſes. before thee, and pourtrey vpon it the citie, euen Ieruſalem, and lay ſiege againſt it, & buylde a fort againſt it, and caſt a mount againſt it: ſet the campe alſo agaynſt it, & lay engines of warre againſt it round about. Moreouer, take an yron pan, & ſet it for a wall of yron betweene thee and the citie, and direct thy face toward it, and it ſhal be beſieged, and thou ſhalt lay ſiege agaynſt it: this ſhalbe a ſigne vnto the houſe of Iſrael. Sleepe thou alſo vpon thy left ſide, and lay the iniquitie of the houſe of Iſrael vpon it: according to the number of the dayes, that thou ſhalt ſleepe vpon it, thou ſhalt beare their iniquitie. For I haue layde vpon thee the yeeres of their iniquitie, according to the number of the dayes, euen three hundreth390. yeeres frō Ieroboam. 427. from the foundation of the temple. 40. yeres ſince Ieremy began in. 13. of Ioſias..
                      and ninetie dayes: ſo ſhalt thou beare the iniquitie of the houſe of Iſrael. And when thou haſt accomplyſhed them, ſleepe againe vpon thy right ſide, and thou ſhalt beare the iniquitie of the houſe of Iudah fourtie dayes: I haue appoynted thee a day for a yeere, even a day for a yeere. Therefore thou ſhalt direct thy face towarde the ſiege of Ieruſalem, and thine arme ſhalbe vncouered, and thou ſhalt prophecie againſt it. And beholde, I wyl lay bandes vpon thee, and thou ſhalt not turne thee from one ſide to another, tyll thou haſt ended the dayes of thy ſiege. Thou ſhalt take alſo vnto thee Wheate, and Barley, & Beanes, and Lentiles, and Miller, and Fitches, and put them in one veſſell, and make thee bread thereof according to the number of the dayes, that thou ſhalt ſleepe vpon thy ſide: euen three hundreth and ninetic dayes ſhalt thou eate

thereof. And the meate whereof thou ſhalt eate, ſhalbe by weight, euen twentie fhekelles a day: and from time to time ſhalt thou eate thereof. Thou ſhalt drinke alſo water by meaſure, euen the ſixt part of an Hin: from time to time ſhalt thou drinke. And thou ſhalt eate it as Barly cakes, and thou ſhalt bake it in the doung that commeth out of man, in their ſight.
               
               
                  The ſtory of the Viſion.
                  2 ANd in the ninth yeere of Zedekiahs reigne, the2. King, 25. 1, 2. 3, 4. 5, 6 7. 8 9. 10. & 11 ver.
                      tenth moneth and tenth day of the moneth, Nebuchad-nezer king of Babel came, he & all his hoſt againſt Ieruſalem and pitched agaynſt it, and they buylt fortes againſt it round about it. So the citie was beſieged vnto the eleuenth yeere of king Zedekiah. And the ninth day of the month the famine was ſore in the citie, ſo that there was no bread for the people of the land. Then the citie was broken vp, and al the men of warre fled by nyght, by the way of the gate, which is betweene ye two walles that was by the kinges garden: now the Caldees were by the citie rounde about: and the king went by the way of the wilderneſſe. But the armie of the Caldees purſued after the king, and tooke him in the deſartes of Iericho, and all his hoſte was ſcattered from him. Then they tooke the king, and caried him vp to the king of Babel to Riblah, where they gaue iudgement vpon him. And they ſlew the ſonnes of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chaynes, & caried him to Babel. And in the fift moneth, and ſeuenth day of the moneth, which was the ninteinth yere of king Nebuchadnezer king of Babel, came Nebuzar-adan chiefe ſtewarde and ſeruant of the king of Babel to Ieruſalem, and burnt the hauſe of the Lord, and the kinges houſe, and all

the houſes of Ieruſalem, and all the great houſes burnt he with fire. And all the armie of the Caldees that were with the chiefe ſtewarde, brake downe the walles of Ieruſalem rounde about. And the reſt of the people that were left in the citie, and thoſe that were fled & fallen to the king of Babel, with the remnant of the multitude, did Nebuzaradan chiefe ſtewarde cary away captiue.
               
               
                  The laſt captiuitie of. 50. yeeres, complete.
                  3 THey that were left by the ſword, caried he away to2. Chro 36. 20. to the end. 
                     Babel, and they were ſeruantes to him and to his ſonnes, vntyll the kingdome of the Perſians had rule, to fulfill the worde of the Lord by the mouth of Ieremiah, vntyll the land had her fill of her Sabbathes: for all the dayes that ſhe lay deſolate, ſhe kept Sabbath, to fulfill ſeuentie yeeres.
               
            
            
               
                  The Babylonians fall by Cyrus, who ſendeth the Iewes home, after Daniel was taught, the yeere of our Lord, his death, and the decree for buylding the Temple.
               
                  1 IN the firſt yeere of Cyrus king of Perſia (when theIer. 25. woroe of the Lord, ſpoken by the mouth of Ieremiah, was finiſhed) the Lorde ſtyrred vp the ſpirite of Cyrus king of Perſia, and he made a Proclamation through all his kingdome, and alſo by wryting, ſaying, Thus ſayth Cyrus king of Perſia, All the kingdomes of the earth hath the Lord God of heauen geuen me, and he hath commaunded me to buylde him an houſe in Ieruſalem, that is in Iudah. Who is among you of all his people,

with whom the Lord his God is? let him go vp.
                  
                     For when King Belſhazzar made a great feaſt to aDan. 5. 1. 5. 9. 27. 25. thouſande of his Princes, and dranke Wine before the thouſande: At the ſame houre appeared fingers of a mans hande, which wrote ouer agaynſt the candleſticke vpon the playſter of the wall of the kinges palace, and the king ſawe the palme of the hand that wrote. Then was king Belſhazzar greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his Princes were aſtonied. Then Daniel ſayd before king Belſhazzar,
                      This is the writing that God hath written, MENE, MENE, TEKEL VPHARSIN. This is the interpretation of the thing, MENE, God hath numbred thy kingdome, and hath finiſhed it. TEKEL, thou art weighed in the balance, and art founde too light. PERES, thy kingdome is deuided, and geuen to the Medes and Perſians. Then at the commaundement of Belſhazzar, they clothed Daniel with purple, and put a chayne of golde about his necke, and made a proclamation concerning him, that he ſhould be the thirde ruler in the kingdome. The ſame nyght was Belſhazzar the king of the Caldees ſlayne: and Darius of the Medes cooke the kingdome, being threeſcore and two yere olde. But not alone: for the Perſians and they had a felowſhyp in the diuiſion: as expreſſed. wordes ſhewe.
                  
               
               
                  Daniels Seuens.
                  2 IN the firſt yeere of Darius the ſonne of Ahaſhueroſh, of the ſeede of the Medes, which was madeDan. 9. 1. 2. 3. 20. to the end. king ouer the realme of the Caldeans, euen in the firſt yeere of his reigne, I Daniel vnderſtoode by bookes the number of the yeeres, whereof the Lord had ſpoken vnto Ieremiah the Prophet, that he woulde accomplysh

Seuentie yeres in the deſolation of Ieruſalem. And I turned my face vnto the Lord God, and ſought by prayer and ſupplications with faſting and ſackcloth and aſhes. And while I was ſpeaking and praying, and confeſſing my ſinne, and the ſinne of my people Iſrael, and did preſent my ſupplication before the Lord my God, for the holy Mountaine of my God: yea, whyle I was ſpeaking in prayer, euen the man Gabriel, whom I had ſeene before in a viſion, came flying, and touched me about the time of the euenyng oblation: and he informed me, and talked with me, and ſayde, O Daniel, I am now come foorth to geue thee knowledge and vnderſtandyng. At the beginuyng of thy ſupplications the commaundement came foorth, and I am come to ſhew thee, for thou art greatly beloued: therefore vnderſtand the matter and conſider the viſion. Seuentie ſeuens (of yeeres) are cut out for thy people, and for thy holy Citie, to conſume wickednes, and to abolyſh ſinnes, and to make reconſiliation for iniquitie, and to bring in righteouſneſſe euerlaſtyng, and to ſeale viſion and prophet, and to ſhewe Chriſt the Holy of Holy. Know then and marke: From the outgoing of the Worde, to returne and to buylde Ieruſalem, vnto Chriſt the gouernour, ſhalbe ſeuen ſeuens (of yeeres) and ſixtie and two ſeuens: in the other, it ſhalbe reſtored and buylded, ſtreete and wall: and troublous ſhall theſe times be. In that after the ſixtie and two ſeuens Chriſt ſhalbe killed: and not for him ſelfe: therevpon the Citie and holy place ſhall he deſtroy, the Gouernours owne people to come, and their ende ſhalbe with a Flood: and at the ende of warre, it ſhall haue a finall iudgement to deſolation. But he ſhall confirme the Teſtament for many the laſt ſeuen, when in Halfe that Seuen he ſhall ende the Sacrifice and Oblation. Afterwardes by an armie abominable he ſhall make a deſoliation,

euen tyll vtter deſtruction and finall iudgement flow vpon the deſolate.
               
               
                  The decree of buylding the Temple.
                  3 ANd there was founde in a coffer (in the palace thatEzra 6. 2. 3. 4. 5. was in the prouince of the Medes) a volume, and therein was it thus written, as a memoriall: In the fyrſt yeere of king Cyrus, king Cyrus made a decree for the houſe of God in Ieruſalem, Let the houſe be buylt, euen the place where they offered ſacrifices, and let the walles thereof be ioyned together: let ye height thereof be threeſcore cubites, and the breadth thereof three ſcore cubites, three orders of great ſtones, and one order of timber: and let the expenſes be geuen of the kings houſe. And alſo let them render the veſſelles of the houſe of God (of golde and ſiluer, which Nebuchadnezar tooke out of the Temple which was in Ieruſalem, and brought vnto Babel) and let him goe vnto the Temple that is in Ieruſalem to his place, and put them in the houſe of God.
               
            
            
               
                  The Iewes Temples fall, an others aryſing.
               IEſus went out, and departed from the Temple, andMath. 24. 1. 2. 3. 15. his Diſciples came to him, to ſhew him the buyldyng of the Temple. And Jeſus ſayd vnto them, See ye not all theſe thynges? Uerily I ſay vnto you, there ſhall not be here left a ſtone vpon a ſtone, that ſhall not be caſt downe. And as he ſate vpon the mount of Oliues, his Diſciples came to him a part, ſaying, Tell vs when theſe thynges ſhalbe, & what ſigne ſhalbe of thy comming, and of the ende of the worlde. When ye ſhall ſee the abomination

of deſolation ſpoken of by Daniel the Prophet, ſtandyng in the Holy place: (let him that readeth, conſider it. Therefore, when ye ſee Ieruſalem beſieged with Souldiers,Luk. 21. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. then vnderſtande that the deſolation thereof is neare. Then let them which are in Iudea, flee to the Mountaynes: and let them which are in the mids thereof, depart out: and let not them that are in the countrey, enter therein. For theſe be the dayes of vengeance, to fulfill all thinges that are written. But wo be to them that be with chyld, and to them that geue ſucke in thoſe dayes: for there ſhalbe great diſtreſſe in this lande, and wrath euer this people. And they ſhall fall on the edge of the ſworde, and ſhall be ledde captiue into all nations, and Ieruſalem ſhall be troden vnder foote of the Gentiles, vntyll the tyme of the Gentiles be fulfilled.
               Jeſus ſayd vnto them, Deſtroy this Temple, and inIohn. 2. 19. three dayes, I wyll rayſe it vp agayne. Then ſayd the Iewes, Fourtie and ſixe yeeres was this Temple a buyldyng (from the thirde of Cyrus, Dan. 3. Ezra. 4. vntyll Nehemias obteyned the kinges letters to Aſaph for timber, to buylde the gates of the Cloyſter Palace, hard by the houſe of God) and wylt thou reare it vp in three dayes? But he ſpake of the Temple of his body.
               Then there aroſe certayne, and bare falſe witnes againſtMark. 14. 57. 58. 59. him, ſaying, We heard him ſay, I wyll deſtroy this Temple made with handes, and within three dayes I wyll buylde another, made without handes: But their witnes yet agreed not togeather.
               
                  At the diſpenſation of the fulneſſe of time, when the time of the promiſe was come, then ſpake Ieſus, & ſaid.
               
               Father, the houre is come: glorifie thy Sonne. &c.Iohn. 17. 1. Iohn. 19. 14. 15. 16. 17. Then Pilate on the preparation of the Paſſeouer, about the ſixt houre, ſayd vnto the Iewes, Beholde your king. But they cryed, Away with him, away with him, crucifie

him. Pilate ſayde vnto them, Shall I crucifie your king? The high Prieſtes anſwered, We haue no king, but Ceſar. Then deliuered he him vnto them, to be crucified. And they tooke Jeſus, and led him away. And he bare his croſſe, and came into a place named of dead mens ſkulles, which is called in Hebrewe Golgotha: where they crucified him, and two other with him, on eyther ſide one, and Jeſus in the middes. It was (I ſay) about the ſixt houre, and there was darknes ouer all the land vntyll the ninth houre: and the Sunne was darkened.
               
               
                  The time of the euening offering.
                        Dan. 9.
                  
                  ABout the ninth houre Jeſus cried with a loude voyce,Math 27. 46. 47. 48 49. 50 51. 52 53. ſaying, Eli, Eli, lamaſabachtani? that is, My God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? And ſome of them that ſtoode there, when they heard it, ſayd, This man calleth Elias. And ſtraight way one of them ran, and tooke a Spondge, and filled it with Uineger, and put it on a reede, and gaue him to drinke. Other ſayd, Let be: let vs ſee yf Elias wyll come and ſaue him. Then Jeſus cryed agayne with a loude voyce, & yeelded vp the ghoſt. And behold, the vaile of the Temple was rent in twayne, from the toppe to the bottome, and the earth did quake, and the ſtones were clouen, and the graues did open themſelues, and many bodies of the Saintes which ſlept, aroſe, and came out of the graues after his reſurrection, and went into the holy citie, and appeared vnto many.
               
               
                  Chriſt is king 
                        Dan. 9
                  
                  ANd Pilate wrote alſo a title, and put it on the Croſſe,Ioh. 19 19. 20. 21 22 38. and it was written, Ieſus of Nazaret the king of the Iewes. This title then read many of the Iewes, for the place where Jeſus was crucified, was neare to the citie:

and it was written in Hebrewe, Greeke, and Latine. Then ſayde the high Prieſtes of the Iewes to Pilate, Write not, The king of the Iewes, but that he ſayd, I am king of the Iewes. Pilate anſwered, What I haue written, I haue written. And after theſe thinges, Ioſeph of Arimathea (who was a Diſciple of Jeſus, but ſecretly for feare of the Iewes) beſought Pilate that he myght take downe the body of Jeſus. And Pilate gaue hym lycence. He came then and tooke Jeſus body. And there came alſo Nicodemus (which firſt came to Jeſus by nyght) and brought of Mirrhe and Aloes mingled togeather, about an hundreth pounde. Then tooke they the body of Jeſus, and wrapped it in linnen clothes with the odours, as the maner of the Iewes is to burie. And in that place where Jeſus was crucified, was a Garden, and in the Garden a new Sepulchre, wherein was neuer man yet layde: there then layde they Jeſus, becauſe of the Iewes preparation day, for the Sepulchre was neare. Now the firſt day of the weeke came Marie Magdalene
                     Iohn. 20. 1. 16. 17. earely whyle it was yet darke, vnto the Sepulchre, and ſaw the ſtone taken away from the Tombe. Jeſus ſayth vnto her, Marie. She turned her ſelfe, and ſayd vnto him, Maiſter. Jeſus ſayd vnto her, Faſten not ſo vpon me: for I goe not yet vp to my Father, &c.
                  Alſo he preſented him ſelfe a liue after that he had ſuffered,Acte. 1. 3. 4. 5. to the. 13. verſe by many infallible tokens, being ſeene of them by the ſpace of fourtie dayes, and ſpeaking of thoſe thynges which apperteine to the kingdome of God. And when he had gathered them togeather, he commaunded them, that they ſhoulde not depart from Ieruſalem, but to wayte for the promiſe of the Father, which, ſayd he, ye haue heard of me. For Iohn in deede baptized with water, but ye ſhal be baptized with the holy Ghoſt within theſe fewe dayes. When they therefore were come together, they aſked of

him, ſaying, Wilt thou at this time reſtore the kingdome to Iſrael? And he ſaid, It is not for you to know the times, or the ſeaſons, which the Father hath put in his owne power: but ye ſhal receiue power of the holy Ghoſt, when he ſhall come on you: and ye ſhall be witneſſes vnto me both in Ieruſalem, and in all Iudea, and in Samaria, and vnto the vttermoſt part of the earth. And when he had ſpoken theſe things, while they behelde, he was taken vp: for a cloude tooke him out of their ſight. And whyle they looked ſtedfaſtly towarde heauen, as he went, beholde, two men ſtoode by them in whyte apparell, which alſo ſayde, Ye men of Galile, Why ſtande ye gaſing into heauen? This Jeſus which is taken vp from you into heauen, ſhall ſo come as ye haue ſeene him goe into heauen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   