
      
         
            
            
            A
TREATISE
OF THE
Perpetuall Visibilitie,
AND
Succession of the True CHVRCH.
in all AGES.
            AT LONDON,
Printed by HVM
                  •
               REY LOVVNES; for
ROBERT MILBOVRNE.
1624.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               KIng Salomon, the Mirror
of wisdome, who digged
deepest into the richest
Mines of diuine and
humane knowledge, exhorts
others to search after
that which himself had found in such
abundance: and he sets an edge vpon our
desires, by promising, If thou seekest after
her as for siluer, and searchest for
her as for hid treasure, then shalt thou
finde the knowledge of God, &c. Of
so pretious a Talent when wee haue found



any parcell, wee ought not to hide it in a
napkin, much lesse to bury it in the bowels
of the earth, by concealment or suppression:
for, Veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire;
               L. 12. confess. c. 25.
To conceale the Truth, is to burie
gold, and therby to depriue not only others,
but our selues also, of the benefit and vse
thereof. Wherefore Saint Austen sharply
censureth such as would challenge a peculiar
interest and propriety in this, which is
the true common treasure of Gods Church,
saying, Veritas nec mea, nec tua, nec
illius est, sed omnium nostrum, quos
ad eius communionem publicè vocas;
admonens nos, vt nolimus eam habere
priuatam, ne priuemur ea: The truth
is neither mine, nor thine, nor his, but all
ours in common, whom thou (O Lord) callest
publikely to the communion thereof;
dreadfully admonishing vs, not to desire
to haue it priuate, lest we be depriued of it.
Now, of all truth this day in controuersie,
there is none more sought after by some,
than the visibility of the true Church,
which retained the purity of the Apostles



doctrine, vnmixed with dregs of errour
and superstition, especially in the gloomy
and dark Ages before Luther. As for
higher times, and neerer the Apostles, such
was the clarity and splendour of the pure
Church, that in a manner it obscured the
Sun. But, in succeeding and degenerating
times, after the number of the name of the
Beast, 666, it began much to be obscured
and clouded with ignorance and superstition:
and in the thousandth yeer, in which,
Satan was let loose, and much more after,
euen till the happy reformation in these later
Ages, it was so eclipsed, especially in
the Western Parts of the world, that some
confidently affirm, it was quite extinct.
The Woman, clothed with the Sun, hauing
the Moon vnder her feet, was now fled into
the Wildernesse, and had but a fewe
Stars to discouer her. By the conduct and
lustre wherof, yet many Wise-men follow'd
her obscure track, and found her. Among
whom, the most reuerend, religious, learned,
and painfull Authour of this enfuing
Treatise, concerning The Visibility and



Succession of the true Church, deserueth
to bee named in the first rank; who
hath more particularly and perspicuously
trauelled in this Argument, than any in
our English Tongue. It was the manner of
the Heathen Race-runners,Erasm. Ad. after they had
finished their course,Pers. Sat. Nunc in decursu lampada trado, &c. to deliuer a Lamp
or Taper to the next Runner. Semblably
whereto, this Christian Antiquary shewes
vnto thee,Lucret. Et quasi currentes vitalem lampada tradunt. how the noble Worthies of the
Christian world, and Fore-runners of our
faith, after they had finished their course,
deliuered the Lamp of their doctrine from
one to another:
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . as (to omit other former-bearers
of this Light) Bertram, to Berengarius;
Berengarious, to Petrus
Bruis; Petrus Bruis, to Waldo; Waldo,
to Dulcinus; Dulcinus, to Gandune
and Marsilius; they, to Wicklef;
Wicklef, to Hus and Ierome of Prague;
and their scholars, the Taborites, to Luther.
This Treasure of Antiquitie falling
into my hands, and finding it hard to
come-by, I thought fit to publish it, and
make it more common; that so, all that loue



the truth, might cleerly see in it the perfect
Image of their Mother, the true Protestant
Church, partly blubbered with tears,
partly smeared with bloud, by the cruelty
of the Man of sinne, and his Complices, in
former Ages. About which dolefull Image,
we may fitly write these words of the Prophet
Micah,
               Micah 7. 8. for a Motto: Reioyce not
against me, O my enemy: when I fall,
I shall rise: when I sit in darknes, the
Lord shall be a Light vnto mee. Such
a Light hee hath been Before, and In our
daies, and Henceforth will bee, according
to his promise; til he shall dispell all darknes,
and consume the Man of sin with the
Spirit of his mouth,2 Thes. 2. and destroy him with
the brightnes of his Comming. Euen so
come, Lord Iesu; come quickly.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A TREATISE OF
the perpetuall Visibilitie
and Succession of the true
CHVRCH.
            
               WEE teach,Sect. 1. that as
from the beginning
long before the Incarnation
of Christ,
God euer had his
Church, yet sometimes
more visible
and glorious, and sometimes more
contracted, and obscured: so since the
appearance of our Sauiour, at all
times infallibly and without exception,
there haue been chosen children
of God, who haue retained his faith,



and calling vpon his name haue studied
to expresse their knowledge in
their life, by retyring themselues both
from the loose conuersation of Libertines,
and the profanation of Idolatrous
persons. Neither euer was
there any of our profession, which
did teach or write the contrary. But
wheras the Synagogue of Rome layes
it downe for a fundamentall Rule,
that this Church hath been and must
bee in all ages, a visible and conspicuous
Congregation at the least, consisting
of an apparant Hierarchy, so
that at all times a man may poynt it
out, and may repaire thither, as to a
matter eminent; yea, and in a sort
pompous too; or to say as Stapleton
speaketh when he doth most extenuate
it,In Antid. Matt. 24. 
               It is euermore visible in respect
of her Gouernours and Sheepheards, but
most of all for the Pope, or cheife Pastor
thereof. To which Pope,De Rom. Pontif. 4. 4. 
               Bellarmine
assigneth that he cannot erre in iudgment,



and to the people and Cleargie
of Rome (where this sensible Church
must principally be) that they cannot
erre with a personall errour; so that all
altogether erre; we therein doe dissent
from them, and maintaine, that although
when the godly are most driuen
to extremities by Heresies or persecutions,
they bee visible each to other,
and acquainted with some other
brethren, who are in like case with
themselues, yet they are not so apparant
to other men, as that at all times
they know where to find Assemblies,
and Congregations of them. But that
the Bishop of Rome, and his Pontificall
Clergie, should haue the face of
the Church tyed, and inseperably ioyned
vnto them, wee can in no sort
yeeld, but doe disclaime it as a flattering
tale, suggested to that Bishop by
such parasites as are about him, and
from time to time doe depend vpon
him.
            
               And that it may bee seene what
reason we haue of this our assertion,Sect. 2.
wee first shew, that the estate of the
faithfull was frequently so, before the
comming of Christ. For when it lay
as hid in some fewe persons, within
the single Families of the old Patriarks,
before and after the Floud, what
great boast could there bee made of
it? Nay, when the Commonwealth
of the lewes was much setled, into
what straight was it brought, when
Dauid complained,Psalm 12. 1. 
               Helpe Lord, for
there is not one godly man left: for the faithfull
are fayled from among the children of
men? This being spoken, as it is most
probable, in the dayes of Saul, aster
the dayes of Samuel, and the1 Sam. 22. 18 slaughter
of the Priests, how was it euen in
Iudah and Ierusalem, when Esay cried
out, thatEsay 1. 5, 6. 
               the whole head is sicke, and
the whole heart is heauy, from the sole of
the foot vnto the head, there is nothing
whole therin? The estate of the Church



being then most miserable, and all depraued,
not onely in manners, but in
Religion, Idolatry being plentifull, as
is manifest by the wordes in the same
vision,Esay 1. 29. 
               For they shall be
                     •
                   confounded for
the Okes which you haue desired, and
yee shall bee ashamed for the G
                     •
                  rdens
you haue chosen: which intendeth the
trees and pleasant places where they
vsed their superstitions. Call to mind
the dayes of Ieremie, when hee sayd,
Ierem. 5. 1. 
               Runne to and fro by the streetes of Ierusalem,
and behold now, and know, and inquire
in the open places thereof, if yee can
finde a man, or if there bee any that executeth
Iudgement, and seeketh the Truth, and
I will spare it. And those of Ezech
                     •
                  l,
testifying in this sort:Ezek. 22. 30. 
               I sought for a
man among them that should make vp the
hedge, and stand in the gap before mee for
the land, that I should not destroy it, but
I found none. These things were spoken
of Iudah and Ierusalem, where alone
at that time was that Church



which was; the Israelites for their
grieuous sins, being long before caried
away into captiuitie. You may adde
to this, if you will, the complaint of
Micah,Mich. 7. 1. 
               Woe is mee for I am as the Summer
gatherings, and as the Grapes of the
vintage: there is no cluster to eate: my
soule desireth the first ripe fruites. The
good man is perished out of the earth, and
there is none righteous among men: they all
lie in wait for blood: euery man hunteth his
brother with a net. If the Priests & people
had not almost generally gone astray,
and the whole face of the visible
Church had not seemed to bee defaced,
would these Prophets thus haue
particularized, that one godly man
was not left, and that one was not
to bee found, who had not declined
from truth?
            Wee doubt not but in those times
the Lord had many faithfull ones in
secret,Sect. 3. as hee had seuen thousand in Israel
when1 King 19. 18 Rom. 11. 4. 
               Elias liued, of whom neither



the enemies of the trueth, nor
scant that Prophet, did take any notice.
Ezek. 9. 4. Apoc 7. 3. The marke in the forehead is
sometime knowne to few, but onely
to him that imprinted it there; yet this
is a good holde for the Elect,2 Tim. 2. 19 
               The
Lord knoweth who are his. But vpon
what might those, who were Gods
secret chosen outwardly build, when
diuers times the Princes and people
had corrupted their wayes, and the
Temple it selfe was polluted, and
made a sinke of Idolatrie? For wee
finde that things stood vpon those
termes in the dayes of Manasse, when
in the House of the Lord, euen that
house, whereof the Lord had said,2 Kin. 21. 4, 5 
               In
Ierusalem will I put my Name, hee built
prophane altars: and in the two Courts
of the House of the Lord hee built Altars
for all the hoste of Heauen. Iudge where
in those dayes was the glorie of the
visible Church, or where it was a
prettie while before that, when the



Priest2 Kings 16. 11. 
               Vriah was as ready to set vp in
the Temple an Altar after the fashion
of that which was in Damascus, as
the King Ahaz was ready to commaund
it. And then the Prince and
Priests conspiring, there was scant any
kinde of grosse Idolatry, which was
not plentifully committed, Ahaz himselfe
making his sonne toVerse 
                     •
                  . 
               goe through
the fire after the abominations of the Heathen.
And least it should bee thought,
that the people at least, did amend
somewhat which was amisse, in the
very next chapter it is witnessed in
generall,2 Kings 17. 29. 
               Yet Iudah kept not the Commaundements
of the Lord their God, but
walked according to the fashion of Israel,
which they vsed. And by most probabilitie,
this outrage vnderEsay 1. 1. 
               Ahaz was
the time, against which Esay so inueighed
in the Vision before remembred.
These things are so plaine, that
the greatest pillars of the Papacie cannot
deny them; and therefore they are



forced to another shift, as the Rhemists
when they say,Rom. 11. 4. 
               That there is a great
difference betweene the Christian Church,
and the Iewes, ours resting vpon better
promises then theirs; which is a very
poore euasion, in as much as euery Diuine
may know, that there be as large
and many promises, that the Church
of the Iewes should last vntill Christes
appearance in the flesh, as there bee
that the Congregation of Gods Saints
shall continue among the Gentiles
vntill the day of Iudgement. And 
                  •
               auing
onely for the time of the Babylonish
captiuitie, there was one set externall
place of Gods eminent seruice,
that is, the Temple at Ierusalem, supported
with such words,Psal. 13
                     •
                  . 14 
               This is my
rest for euer, heere will I dwell, 
               
                  〈◊〉
                and
2 Chro. 33. 4. 
               In Ierusalem shall my name 
                     〈◊〉
                   euer:
the like whereof through
                  ••
                all the
continuance of the New Testament,
is not warrantable o
                  ••
                of the Word
for any one place wh
                  •••
               euer. Now it



cannot bee so much as superficially
maintained out of the Scripture, that
Rome it selfe hath any such promise,
but rather out of the Reuelation of St.
Iohn, there are many substantiall matters
which make to the contrary.
            But because by the strong shot of
Trueth they bee beaten from the Bulwarke
of the Iewish Synagogue,Sect. 4. and
flye to the next hold of the later Testament;
let vs follow them thither.
VVhen our Sauiour Christ was borne,
and for the most part afterward, till
he was baptized, where shall we conceiue
was the visible Church? The
Scribes and Pharisees possessed all the
shew, and they were no better then
Math. 23. 24. 2 Mach. 4. 8. 24. c. 11. 3. blinde leaders of the blinde. The
Priesthood was long before and after
bought and sold;Ioseph de Bell. lud. 4. 5. & lib. 5. 9. and in Christs owne
time it is euident out of the Scripture,
that the highest spirituall dignitie goingIohn 11. 51.
by yeares, Annas and Caiphas, and
other vnworthy men of that rabble



did enioy it. Vpon the birth of Iesus,
they were not glad, who should haue
most reioyced in it: but allMath. 2. 
                     •
                  . Ierufalem
was troubled at it. And how they
persisted afterward till Christ did manifest
himselfe fully, may bee guessed
by diuers circumstances, which the Euangelists
do mention after his birth.
But when hee came first into the
world, of whom doe we find speech
made, but of some Shepheards in the
field, of Simeon an old man, of Anna a
most aged woman, both ready to goe
into their graues, of Ioseph and Marie,
Zacharias and Elizabeth, and very few
others? and of these some might bee
soone dead, others might liue out of
the way at Bethlehem, or Nazareth, or
in Aegypt, and the Shepheards were in
the fieldes about their Trades: but
where there was the appearance of a
visible Congregation can hardly bee
imagined. When our Sauiour had selected
out his Apostles, they then were



termed by the name of a Flocke; but
yet by their Master they were called
but a
                  Luke 12. 22 Rhem 
                     •
                  Annot, ibidem. 
               little flocke, where the Rhemists
do confesse, that in the beginning it was
little indeed. At the death of Christ,
when his body hanged on the crosse
for our sakes, and his Disciples were
allMath 26. 56. fled, no man daring to shew himselfe.

                  Iohn 19. 25. Nich. de Clem. de Mater. Concil. 
               Mary and Iohn, and a fewe women
were all the faithfull that now
appeared vpon earth: and afterward
while the Apostles & their followers
walked very priuately, or were assembledActs 1. 13.
in a chamber, the Priestes, and
Scribes, and Pharisees were they who
ruffled it in the streetes, and bore the
sway in the Temple; so that if a weak
body had enquired for the Church, he
might rather haue been directed to
them, who had the Law, and the Altars,
and all sacred things in their custody,Actes 8. 2.
then to any other. When Steuen
had been stoned, and for feare of the
persecution which was at Ierusalem,



the Disciples were all scattered; besides
the Apostles, it may well be presumed,
that for a time they which remained
in the citie where Steuen had
lost his life, did not walke very openly.
Truth it is, that after these things
the Church was better setled, and the
truth was more spread; but yet neuer
was there any such priuiledge bestowed
vpon it, but that in the dayes
of persecution, or some grieuous apostacy,
the faithfull might bee brought
to a small visibilitie.
            Our Sauiours wordes intend so
much,Sect. 5. when alluding to the time of
his second appearance, to iudge the
quicke and the dead, he asketh,Luke 18. 8 
               Neuerthelesse,
when the Sonne of man commeth,
shall he find faith on earth? as meaning,
that very little should then bee
found, in comparison of the Floodes
and Ocean of iniquitie which euery
where should abound. But God, to
the end that he might not haue vs ignorant



but warned before hand into
what straights the Church should bee
brought, informeth vs by Saint2 Thes. 2. 3. 
               Paul,
that the Lord shall not come, except
there first bee an apostacie, or reuolt,
or falling away, wherein Antichrist
with great pride and disdaine should
shew himselfe. This is solemnly spoken
of by the Apostle, and by all both
old and new, intreating of it, is obserued
to some matter of great note, that
is to say, some maine declining from
somwhat. Many of our Papists fearing
to touch this sore, which can in no case
turne them to good, would haue that
interpreted, to note nothing else but
the slipping of diuers regions & countries
from their subiection to the Romane
Empire. But Gregory Martin, and
the other Rhemistes being ouercome
with the euidence of truth, are heere
a little more honest then ordinary, and
speake to other purpose. Indeed they
cannot tell how it will be taken at other



Papists hands, that contrary to
the custome of their fellowes, in a
matter of such moment, they should
giue way vnto vs; and therefore they
doe vse these words in vvay of excuse,

                  •
               
               Rhemes. in 2. Thess. 2. 
                     •
                  . 
               Be it spoken vnder the correction of Gods
Church, and all learned Catholiques. But
to the poynt concerning the Apostacie,
they deliuer this: It is very like,
that this great defection and reuolt shall
not bee onely from the Romane Empire, but
especially from the Romane Church, and
withall from most poynts of Christian Religion,
(in the Margent it is, and from
most Articles of the Catholique Faith.)
Heere they would haue vs take the
Romish beleefe for the Christian Religion,
and Catholique faith: but that
deserueth a long pause: we rather obserue
out of them, that this reuolt is in
matter of faith, and not onely from
the Empire; then which Glosse, nothing
can be truer. Well then, if there
must bee so egregious an Apostacie, it



will follow, that Antichrist so domineering,
as by the Apostle he is described,
will not bee negligent so to represse
the publike seruice of God, that
it shall not carry any liuely head, or
countenance, where hee hath to doe.
So that certainely our Rhemistes yeelding
to this Exposition, doe in substance
confesse so much, as that the apparancy
of Gods Congregation, in the
time of the great defection, must bee
mightily ecclipsed. Now the Lord, to
the end hee might establish his faithfull,
and arme them to expect this paucitie
of beleeuers, and inconspicuousnes
of his Church, and yet not be discouraged
for that which should bee
past, present, or to come. And againe,
that there might bee no doubt in a
matter of this moment, letteth vs further
know, that theAp
                     •
                  c. 12▪ 6. 
               woman fled into
the wildernesse, where shee hath a place
prepared of God. It is not doubted of
betweene the Romanists and vs, but



this Woman doeth represent the
Church, concerning whom, being in
the wildernesse, it doth manifestly
follow, that for the time of her abode
there, which the Almightie had decreed,
she should not be discerned; that
is, by her enemies, who did & would
chase her: notwithstanding, it is not
to be doubted, but shee knew where
her selfe was. If the Romanist therefore,
and persecuting aduersary, did
not euer see the Professors of the Gospell,
it was no wonder: the woman
was to remaine in the Wildernesse a
part, and hidde from them. The euidence
of which matter is such, that as
In Prefat. super Apocal. Master Fox obserueth, for feare of
diuers things in the Reuelation of Saint
Iohn, (whereof this may worthily be
one scant any Popish Writer for many
yeares together, durst aduenture to
comment any thing vpon the Apocalyps,
vntill our Rhemistes being desirous
to shame the Pope, and themselues,



with all who are wise, and adventured
to set pen to paper. Hauing
then a purpose to set forth and corrupt
the New Testament, partly by their
Translation, but most of all by their
Annotations, they could not choose
but say somewhat of the Reuelation,
although they professe, that it is as
In Argument. Apocal & in Apoc. I. 1. sparingly as may be, and as briefly;
which is not for that the Volume of
the Rhemish Testament groweth
great, as they would colour it, but for
feare least they should too much lay
open their owne weakenesse, which
while that Booke is in the Bible, will
neuer bee concealed. Howsoeuer
therefore, through their Volume, in
many maine matters, they bee very silent
where they should most speake,
as of the Question of imputed righteousnesse,
where theRom. 4. 6. Apostle doeth
most handle it, (a sore argument of
their owne conscience distrusting
their cause, and euen sinking vnder the



waight of that chapter) yet here God
ouer-ruling them, to say the truth, as
hee didIoh
                     •
                   11. 15. 
               Caiaphas, they interpret the
woman to be theApoc. 12. 6. 
               Church, flying from
the great persecution, which shall be in the
time of Antichrist. Indeed, to keepe
peace with their Lord and Mastes the
Pope, they will not haue this flight
to bee but in the very ending of the
world; and so they would fetch it
with a backe Racket, that the woman
should continue so in secret, but three
yeares and a halfe, which (to keepe all
vpright) they assigne to be the time
of Antichrists raigne, and then the
Iudgement must come; which is a
most fond evasion, seeing by that
meanes men liuing at the appearance
of Antichrist, should be able precisely
to tell when the day should be, to
wit, three yeares and a halfe after Antichrists
entring.Mark. 13. 22. 
               But of that day and
houre knoweth no man, no not the Angells
which are in Heauen, neither the Sonne



himselfe, saue the Father onely. It can
neuer be made good, that theApoc. 11. 2, 3. & 12▪ 6. & 13. 5. & Dan. 7. 25 time,
times, and halfe a time, the two and
fortie moneths, and the thousand,
two hundred and sixtie dayes, are so
literally to bee taken, as that they
should containe exactly three ordinary
yeares and a halfe. Your Romane
Bishop in his declination, hath already
been in the world much longer,
and he is the greatest Antichrist that
euer yet was manifested among men,
and on whom many things in the
Scripture signified, touching Antichrist,
doe directly and vnauoydably
light.
            Well,Sect. 6. this reuolt taking place, and
the woman, the Church being in the
wildernesse, it is not to be doubted,
but here and there be diuers, which
serue God aright, the very gatesMath. 16. 18. of
Hell not being able to preuaile against
them. And as these in generall
wheresoeuer dispersed, doe make vp



the vniuersall militant Church: so
where any few of them, euen in the
smallest number, are assembled together,
they may be said to be a particular
Congregation, or Church. Where
three are, saithTertull, exhort, ad chastit. 
               Tertullian, there is a
Church, although they bee Lay persons. It
is likely, that he alludeth to that saying
of our Sauiour,Math. 18. 20 
               Where two or
three are gathered together in my Name,
there am I in the middest of them. He is
with them as with members of his
Church, to guide them and heare
them, to blesse them, and preserue
them. And that such little assemblies
are not vnworthy the name of the
Church, is plaine by S. Pauls words
to Philemon, where he sendeth greeting,
not only to Philemon, and Appias,
and Archippus, butPhil. 2. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                
               to the Church in
Philemons house: for so the Rhemistes
themselues translate it. In dangerous
and Apostatating times, such petty assemblies
doe make vp the generall,



and they belong vnto the same mysticall
body, although they not onely be
not knowne to their persecutors, but
many of them haue no acquaintance
with other. They haue the same
Head, the same Faith, the same Charitie,
the same Spirit, the same Holy Ghost
is giuen to all Saints, ioyned one to the
other in loue, whether they know each other
corporally, or doe not knowe them,
saithDe Baptism. contra Donatist. 6. 4. idem spiritus 
                     〈◊〉
                   ea dimit tit (i. peccata) quod datus est 
                     〈◊〉
                   sanctis, &c. Saint Austen. The want then
of Acquaintance each with other,
may keepe the godly asunder, as well
as the rage of their persecutors; both
which are to be found in the case of
Elias. But directly to follow further
this Argument of the Ecclipse of the
Churches glorie, may it not bee
thought to be brought to a low ebbe,
when it is said of the second Beast,
ThatApoc. 13. 16. 
               he causeth all both small and great,
rich and poore, free and bond, that he should
giue them a marke in the right hand, or in
their foreheads, and that no man might



buy or sell, saue hee that had the marke, or
the name of the Beast, or the number of
his name. And what else is signified,
when soCap. 17. 2. & 21. many are mentioned to
haue commerce with the Whore of
Babylon; yea,Cap. 8. 3. all Nations are reported
to haue drunken of the wine of the
wrath of her fornication. The ancient
Fathers were not ignorant, that such
times these might bee, when they so
oft compared the Church to the
Moone, as SaintS. Ambr. Epist. lib. 5. 31. 
               Ambrose. The Moone
it selfe, whereby in the Oracles of the Prophets,
the countenance of the Church is figured;
when at the first rising againe, shee
is renewed into the ages of the Moneth, she
is hidden by the darknesse of the night, and
by little and little filling her hornes, or
right ouer against the Sunne ending them,
doth shine with the light of cleare brightnes.
               S. August. in Psal. 101. S. Austen in one place doth for diuers
respects liken the church vnto the
moone, and expoundeth the moone to
signifie it.Serm. 134. de Temp
                     •
                  re. In another place he hath



the Sun is Christ, the Moon the Church;
which as one the one side it doth intimate
vnto vs, that the Moone hath no
light but from the Sun; and the Church
no light nor beauty, but from God: so
on the other side it doth most liuely
put vs in mind, that as the Moon continueth
at the same stay, but increaseth
and decreaseth, waxeth and waneth,
is ecclipsed by the interposition of the
earth between her selfe and the Sunne,
and somtimes in the change cannot be
seene, although it is neuer to be doubted
but there is a Moon: so the church
of Christ, whilest this troublesome
world doth last, is now glorious, then
shadowed; in one age in beauty, in an
other age kept vnder; vnder some
Princes in peace, vnder others in persecution;
yea, sometimes so pressed with
the extremity of the malicious, as that
she is glad to remaine retyred into secret
places, & not to appeare openly to
the malignant, albeit shee neuer is nor



can be extinguished, but hath a continuall
being. Vnto which it may bee
added, that since faith doth much consist
ofHebr. 11. 1. 
               things which are not seene; and
we beleeue the holy Catholike church
as an Article of our faith, it may follow,
that it need not euer be eminently
visible, and apparantly sensible vnto
vs.
            For the better exemplification of
this verity,Sect. 7. it may be remembred what
hauock was made by the Heathen Romane
Emperors, and their deputies, against
the flock of Christ, in the ten first
persecutions: that in the Roman dominion,
there was scant any to be heard
of, who professed Christianity, but he
was soone cut off by the sword, or otherwise.
Did they in those times suffer
any potent visibilitie of true Professors,
or whē they once knew where
they were, did they not forthwith labour
to extirpate them? But in the
dayes of Constantius, when the Arrian


               
Heresie had once gotten the head,
where in the world did there appeare
any sencible Congregation, maintaining
the Orthodox beliefe? Hieroms
testimony of those dayes was,Hiero aduersus Luciferi
                     •
                  nos. 
               The
whole world did sigh, and wondred that it
selfe was Arrian. The words are but
few, but they are to the purpose. So
said Saint Gregorius Presbyter, writing
the life of Gregory Nazianzen, The Sect
of the Arrians had almost possessed all the
coasts of the world, the power and impietie
of the Emperour ministring vnto it. The
words of Constantius himselfe inTheod. Histor. Eccles. l. 2. 16. 
               Theodoret,
do giue testimony vnto this. Neither
doth Liberius the Roman Bishop
say ought to the contrary. The speeches
of the Arrian Emperour against
him and Athanasius are these; The whole
world doth thinke that this is well. The
whole world hath giuen sentence of his impietie.
Thou alone doest embrace the friendship
of that wicked man. And a little
before that: Doeth so great a part of the



world reside in thee Liberius, that thou alone
doest dare to come in ayd to that wicked
man, and disturbe the peace of the
vniuersall world? Whereunto Liberius
did not take exception, saying, that the
visible Church stood for him, and Athanasius,
but rather giueth another
reason, to make good his being alone;
Be it that I am alone; notwithstanding for
that the cause of the faith is not the worse:
for a great while ago
                     •
                  e, there were three
onely found, who would resist the Kings
commandement. Heere the Church for
any external shew, was low brought:
for if any body held it vp, it was Athanasius,
who then played least in
sight, and durst not appeare. For this
Liberius, who did for a time second
him, did afterward shrinke. He went
at first into banishment in defence of
the truth: but after that, he was solicited,
and laid at by Fontunatianus, that
he relented and condiscended to subscribe
to the Arrian heresie, asIn Catalog. Scripter. Eccles. 
               Hierom


               
witnesseth, who liued in that age, and
was long conuersant in Rome, and
therefore could better report what was
the issue of Liberius his constancie,
then some others who doe relate it otherwise.
What can be said for him,
Bellarmine hath: but yet inforced by
Bellar. de Pont. Rom. 4. 9. the euident testimony of Athanasius,
Hillary, and Hierome, he confesseth so
much as I haue here set down; but couer
it he would, that he only consented
to the externall act of subscribing, but
remained in heart Othodox. Why should
it then bee a maruell, if in processe of
time, Antichrist growing to greater
strength, the Church should bee in couert?
It is no more then often fell out
vnder the Iewish Synagogue, & hath
bin exemplified to haue been since among
the Christians, and was so euidently
foretold before. In so much that
by the example of theApoc. 12. 6. woman, it can
not bee the true Church, vnlesse it
should be hidden in the wildernesse.



Which while our Popish teachers deny
to agree to their Romish Church,
but professe that it hath euer been in
sight, they themselues doe by a consequent
proclaime, that they are not the
pure and vndefiled flying woman, but
another painted harlot and strumpet.
The true Church is for a time out of
sight in the wildernes; but so say they,
was their Church neuer: and therefore
will they, nill they, their Church
is not the true Church.
            And here,Sect. 8. to the end that the slaunderous
calumniation of our aduersaries
may the more be manifested to all
those, who wil not wilfully close their
eyes against truth, I will a little shew
the vanity, & yet maliciousnes of their
obiection, when they say there was
neuer any of our faith before the daies
ofCamp. Ref. 10. quint. Euangely Pr
                     •
                  sessores. 
               Luther, who in the yeare 1517,
began for his part to display the kingdome
of Antichrist. Where, I pray the
Reader to consider, that the most part



of those whom I shall cite, are Popish
Writers, and no way partially affected
towards vs. We say then, that Martine
Luther was not the first brocher of
those points which he taught again't
papistry; but as he did originally deduce
them from the Scriptures, & out of the
works of the ancient Fathers; so he did
derine them also hereditarily from other,
who immediatly before him had
taught the same doctrine, & left it both
in books, & the hearts of men recommended
vnto him; as principal parties
herein I name Iohn Hus, & Hierome of
Prage, and all such as were their schollers,
in or about Bohemia; who before
Luthers time oppugned the beliefe of
the church of Rome, & their profession
was not extinguished vntill his dayes,
howsoeuer it before had bin mainly
assaulted. If we could learne this no
where els, yetHistor. l. 13. 
               Fr. Guicciardine, an Italian,
& Florentin Historiographer, would
informe vs of it, who writing of the



yeare 1520, saith plainly, that Luther
did set abroad the Heresies (as he tearmeth
them) of the Bohemians; and hee
nameth there Hus and Hierome as former
diuulgers of the same: andIn vita VVenceslai. 
               Petrus
Messias a Spaniard therein agreeth
with him, who mentioning the opinions
of Hus and the Bohemians, saith,
they were the seed of those errours,
which were afterward in Germany, alluding
to the doctrine of Luther. There
is no man whose testimony in this behalfe
may be of more worth then Ioh.
               Histor. Cochlei de Hussitis.
               Cochleus; First, because he wrote a large
story of purpose concerning the Hussites,
& therfore by his long search, reading,
and writing, in that argument
may be persumed to know as much as
any. Secondly, because it may be well
imagined, that he would fain nothing
to do Luther good, in as much as he also
wrote a volume purposely against
that worthy seruant of God,
               Histor. de actis & scriptis Mar. Luther. intending
to rip vp his whole life from yeare to



yeare, and to censure all his works; yet
this enemy of his, in the Story of the
Hussites, doth plentifully satisfie vs about
the matter now in question.
One where he telleth vs,L. 2. that Hus did
slay soules for an hundred yeares together;
neither yet doth he cease to slay them by the
second death. Within an hundred yeares
after him came in Luther, according as
the said Iohn Hus didIobannes Fox. in Hist. Eccles. prophecie not
long before his death. And when it
is added, that yet he doth not cease to slay;
it is manifest, that his Doctrine remained
till the dayes of Cochleus.
               Cochleus. l. 2. In another
place he relateth, that Luther did
stirre vp seditions in Germanie, by the
Books of the Hussites. Afterward he
calleth those, who were in Germany in
his time, New
               Ibidem. 
               Hussites. And againe,
Hus did so rent the vnitie of the Church,
that vnto this day there remaineth a pitifull
diuision in Bohemia. He proceedeth
in the same matter elsewhere,L. 3. saying,
That the people of Germanie are now by



Luther partakers of the Heresies of Hus,
and Hierome. One sort of the followers
of this Iohn Hus, did call themselues
Thaborites; and these were they,
who most dissented of all from the
Doctrine of Rome: Of these he speaketh
thus:Cochl. lib. 8. 
               Vnto this day remaineth the
Sect of the Thaborites, in many places of
Bohemia, and Morauia, vnder the name
of Picards and Waldenses. Lastly, the
sameL. 12. 
               Cochleus, in the yeare 1534.
doth wish that hee may see the remainders
or leauings of the Hussites to returne
to the Church, and the Germanes to
cast out all new Sectes. VVhat can bee
more euident, then that the Doctrine
of Iohn Hus was sensibly and apparantly
continued somewhere, euen till
the dayes of Martin Luther? Vnto
which may bee added, that whereas
Luther began to shew himselfe but in
the yeare 1517, that very yeere, was
Centur. 16. l. 1. 20. ended the Councell of Laterane held
at Rome, and finished by Pope Leo


               
the tenth. And there consultation
was had of reforming the manners of the
Church, and of recalling the Bohemians to
the vnity of the Church of Rome.
            
            And as these Testimonies doe conuince,Sect. 9.
that the Christian Confession
of Hus was not extinguished at the
comming of Martin Luther: so may
there be good reason assigned, why it
did so long continue, in as much as it
was imbraced by many, and earnestly
maintained euen vnto the death.
When Hus began first to preach the
people which vsedCochleus l. 1. handy craftes did
with great desire heare his sermons, &
did read the scriptures, being turned by
him into their mother tongue, so that
they could dispute with the Priestes;
which the very women were able to
doe;lbide
                     •
                  . yea, and one woman did make
a Booke. Not long after three of the
schollers of this Preacher did affirme,
that the Pope thē liuing was Antichrist;
who had proclaimed a Croisado against



a Christian King; that was Ladislaus,
King of Naples, then infesting the
lands of the Church of Rome. These
three persons were martyred for this
speech, and tooke their death patiently.
In small processe of time, this Doctrine
so multiplied, that asIn Tabulo Concilii ante Platine Hist. 
               Onuphrius
hath, the Councell of Constance was
called principally for two things; the
one was against the Hussites, the other
to take away the Schisme between the
Popes. These of liklihood grew great,
that now a generall Councell was called
against them. Neither did the people
only agree in faith with Iohn Hus,
but the Nobles of Bohemia stood apparantly
for him; in so much that they
sent twoIoh. Fox. in Concil Constant. Histor. seuerall and solemne supplications
to the Councell of Constance in
his behalfe. And when these their request
were neglected, and Iohn Hus,
and Hierom of Prage (contrary to the
Cochl. l. 4. Emperors safe conduct giuen to the
former of them) were burnt, the Nobles



of Bohemia did mightily murmure
against the Fathers of the Councell;
in so much that Sigismund the
Emperour, to giue them satisfaction
on his behalfe, did write vnto them,
excusing himselfe touching the death
of these men, and laying the fault vpon
the Councell. But this gaue not
contentment vnto the Bohemians, now
robbed of their principall Pastor, but
being mooued at the perfidiousnesse
of those at Constance, they assembled
themselues together,Ibidem. to the number
of thirtie thousand; and in the fields
vpon three hundred Tables erected
for that purpose, they receiued the Eucharist
in both kindes. Afterward,
they rushing into the Churches and
Monasteries,Zisca ad locum quem cruci
                     •
                   appellant profectus est, ibi supra quadragint a millia vnorum ex
                     •
                  ere
                     •
                   icis conuenere. did breake downe the
Images there. It was not long after,
but that vnderCochleus l. 5. & Pe
                     •
                  us Messias in Sigismundo. 
               Iohannes Zisca, a
Noble and victorious Warriour, these
Hussites grew to bee of Souldiers fortie
thousand in one armie, who got



into their hands the Castle of Prage,
the chiefe Citie of Bohemia. Then
not long after did Pope Martin the fift
publish a Croysado against these,
whom hee called Heretiques, promising
remission of their sinnes to
such as could destroy them. Notwithstanding,
these hated persons did still
prosper, getting many Victories vnder
Procopius, and other Captaines,
but especially vnder Zisca, who was
of that dexteritie, and felicitie in his
Warres, as thatL. 5. vix vlla Graeco
                     •
                   um, Hebreo
                     ••
                  
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  . aut Latin
                     •
                  ou
                     ••
                   Historia talem ref ducem qua
                     ••
                  s Zisca fui
                     •
                  . 
               Cochleus almost amazed
at his strange successe, sayeth, That
scant any Historie of the Greekes, or Hebrewes,
or Latines doeth mention such a
Generall as Zisca was. Hee built a
new Citie, as a refuge for his men,
and called it Thabor, whereof diuers
embracing the Doctrine of Hus,
were afterward called Thaborites. A
L. 6. second time did Pope Martine proclaime
a Croysado against them, graunting
remission of sinnes to all who



did either fight, or contribute money
against them. Vpon which, there
were at one timeIbid. quis putasset quadraginta millia aequitum Germanicae nationis tam leuiter compelli posse &c. nolo hic temere iudicare sciens iudicia Dei esse oc. culta, &c. fortie thousand
Germane Horse men gathered to destroy
them: but such was the terror
of their name, that vpon the approaching
to them, the Horsemen of their
owne accord turned their backes and
fled. The Popish Authour saith, that
there was in this some secret Iudgement
of God, but hee thinketh the
cause of their ill successe, was, that
they had Bishops and Priests to their
Leaders and Captaines. By this time
came on the Councell of Basil, which
asIn Tahul. ante Platin. 
               Onuphrius saith, was held against
the Hussites. This sheweth that there
were many, which may also appeare,
in that the Fathers at Basil, did by an
Indulgence graunt to the Bohemians
this dispensation, That contrary to the
Act of the Councell ofSess. 13. 
               Constance, they
might receiue the Eucharist both in
Bread and Wine.Lib. 4. Chronog. 
               Genebrard, who



was euer a true seruant to the Pope,
confesseth so much: but addeth withall,
that the Cup was permitted vnto
them, because that alwaies before had
beene their custome so to communicate:
yet saith he, all was on that condition,
That they should not finde fault
with the contrary vse, nor seuer themselues
from the Catholique Church in other Rites
and Doctrines.
               L. 7. 
               Cochleus nameth no
such condition. Nay, to shew that simply
and directly it was yeelded vnto
them, hee reporteth, that the Legates
of the Councell of Basil, did thus expound
that which was concluded in
the Bohemians behalfe. The
               L. 8. 
               Councell
doeth permit the Eucharist vnder both
kindes; not tollerating it onely as a thing
euill, as to the Iewes was permitted a Bill
of Diuorce; but so, that by the authoritie
of Christ and his Church, it is lawfull and
profitable to the worthy Receiuers. Where
is it likely, that vnlesse the Bohemians
now after Husses death had beene a



strong partie, the Antichristian rabble
would haue yeelded to their importunitie,
so directly against the Canon
of the next precedent Councell? Indeed
theIbidem. Emperour Sigismund did afterward
take a course to lessen their
number, when he sent many of them
into Hungaria against the Turkes, that
there they might either conquering
winne to him victories, or being conquered
themselues, so be destroied and
perish. He who list to see more concerning
the multitude of these Professors,
Histor. Bohem. c. 35. & 50. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 130. let him but looke on diuers places
in the workes of Aeneas Syluius,
who was afterward Pope, by the
name of Pius the second, and hee shall
finde him reporting of his owne
knowledge, as trauailing himselfe into
Bohemia, that they were many, and
very earnest also in their Religion.
            If heere it should bee replyed, that
these perhaps were base people, and of
the vulgar, who thus followed Iohn



Hus; but men of learning and knowledge,
or persons of authoritie, they
had none to ioyne with them; the
course of the Story will easily cleare
the same, and shew that they had both
learned Pastors, and great Magistrates,
who beleeued as they beleeued, and
stood wholly with them. Of what
literature Hus himselfe was, is euident
by his workes yet remaining, and by
his personall withstanding the whole
Councell of Constance. And what learning,
what eloquence, what memory,
all admirable were in Hierom of Prage,
as also with what singular patience
he tooke his death, is most significantly
deliuered in an Epistle ofAd Leonard
                     ••
                   Aretinum. 
               Poggius,
who as an eye witnes beheld him, and
seemed to be much affected with the
singular parts of the man. Which noble
testimony of that worthy Poggius,
is acknowledged byMortē ala
                     •
                  ri vultu vt ait Poggius, non so 
                     〈◊〉
                   perpeti, sed etiam appetiuisse visus est. C
                     •
                  cb. lib. 3. 
               Cochleus. Whilst
these two liued, there were diuers
L. 2. Priests, andL. 1. Preachers, which agreed



in their doctrine; and in their Sermons
reproued the Popish Clergy for their
Simony, keeping of Concubines, auarice, ryot,
and Secular-like pride. But after the
death of those two famous seruants of
God, theirL. 4. Nacti Episcopum Archi
                     •
                  episcopi Pragensis Suff aganeū ordinouerum per eum clericos, &c followers got to them a
Bishop, who was a Suffragane to the
Archbishop of Prage, and by him they
put into holy Orders, as many Clerkes
as they would. Which the Archbishop
tooke so ill, that he suspended his Suffragan.
But it was not long after, that
Coch. lib. 5. Concil, Pragens. Hussitarum ita incipit, In nomine Dom. Amen. Incipit sancta Syn
                     •
                  dus hibita & rite celebrata anno 1421. sub Conrad. &c. Conradus Archiep. Pragensis cum Zisca & Hussitis scribit 
                     •
                  d principē, &c. 
               Conradus the Archbishop himselfe
became a Hussite also, as the Authour
calleth him. Vnder this Conradus, as
President of the assembly, these Hussites
held a Councell at Prage, in the
yeare 1421, and there they compiled
a Confession of their faith. This cause
did the said Archbishop, and many Barons
of Bohemia, afterward stiffely
maintaine, & complained against the
Emperor Sigismund, for offring wrong
to those of their Religion.Ibidem. 
               Alexander


               
also the Duke of Lituania, did giue
these Hussites ayd, which moued Pope
Martin the fifth to write vnto him in
this sort: Know, that thou couldest not
giue thy faith to Heretikes, which are the
violaters of the holy faith, and that thou
doest sinne deadly if thou shalt keepe it,
because there cannot be any fellowship of a
Beleeuer with an Infidell. Thus did the
vertuous Pope write.L 8. Scholare die caesis Pragens. vtri▪ tam sub vna quam sub 
                     •
                   tra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   communi
                     •
                  ca
                     •
                   es specie habilitate &c. pr
                     •
                  
                  supposita ad s
                     •
                   cros crdine
                     •
                   psomoueantar & ordine
                     •
                  tur. In processe of
time there grew a parley betweene
Sigismund the Emperour, and the Bohemians.
There among the Compacts,
this was one, That the Bishop should
promote to holy Orders the Bohemians, euen
the Hussites, which were of the Vniuersitie
of Prage. And they might well
deserue to be reputed Vniuersity men:
for Cochleus himselfe witnesseth, that
the Priests of the Thaborites were skilled
in arguing, and exercised in the holy Scripture.
               L. 10.
               Kakizana, one of them did vndertake
to dispute with Capistranus,
a great and learned Papist. By that



time that the yeare 1453. was come,
Aeneas: Syluius doth complaine, that
L. 11. the kingdom of Bohemia was wholly
gouerned by Heretikes. Now all the
Nobilitie, all the Comminaltie is subiect
to an Heretike. That was one George
of Gyrziko, Gouernour of the kingdome
of Bohemia, vnder King Ladislaus.
But when Ladislaus was dead,
thisL. 2. Georgius Girziko de Cunstat, & Podiebrat quem Acneas Poggi siratium v
                     •••
                  re solebat, vnctus est in Regem Bohemis, &c. post, 
                     〈◊〉
                   vna defi
                     •
                  sset labes Hussititae sect
                     •
                  , in
                     •
                  er optimo
                     •
                   reges haud immeritò commemorari possit. 
               George himselfe was by the Nobles,
and people chosen King of that
Countrey: And continuing the ancient
profession of his Religion, about
the yeare 1458. those of Vratislauia
and Silesia doe refuse to obey
him, as being an Heretike. Notwithstanding
Pope Pius the second then
intending warres against the Turke,
did by all meanes perswade them,
that they should yeeld obedience vnto
him. This George, saith the Authour,
was borne and brought vp in the
heresie of the Hussites. Now when
Pope Pius did interpose himselfe as a



Mediator betweene the King and his
subiects, George did require of the
Pope, that hee might keepe the Compacts
agreed vpon at Basil, in behalfe
of the Bohemians. And whenIbidem. 
               Pius
would not yeeld thereunto, the King
calleth together the Estates of his
kingdome, and protesteth that hee
would liue & die in those Compacts,
and so did also the nobles which were
Hussites. This was done at Prage in the
yeare 1462. This resolutenesse of his
caused that Pope to tolerate many
things in him. But Paul 2, who succeeded
in that See of Rome, did excommunicate
that King, & set vp a Croisado
against him. Also he gaue to Matthias
the King of Hungary, the title of King
of Bohemia.
               Apud Plat. 
               Onuphrius in the life of
Paul the 2. saith, that the Pope did excommunicate him, and depriue him
of his kingdome. Indeed for seuen
yeares this George & Matthias did war
for it, and Matthias got from him Morauia,


               
and Silesia, & a good part of the
kingdom of Bohemia: Vratislauia also,
and some other Prouinces and Cities
did put themselues in subiection to
Mathias. Yet did not George deale hardly
with the Papistes which were in
Prage; but in his greatest extremity did
vse both the aduise and aid of many
Nobles of the popish belief. At length,
after the continuance of warre for seuen
yeares, Mathias concludeth a peace
with king George, both against the wil
ofCochl. l. 12. the Pope, and the Emperour. And
then this King was content to aske of
the Pope an absolution from the Excommunication,
some Princes being
mediators for him in that respect. But
before the Agents could returne from
Rome, the King died, in the yeare of
our Lord, 1471. By this Story it is
manifest, that both noble and learned
of high account, were of that Christian
Beliefe which Iohn Hus taught, and
were contented to aduenture al things



which they had in the world for the
maintenance of the same.
            Perhaps here it may bee asked;Sect. II. but
how shal we know that Iohn Hus and
his followers did imbrace that Religion
which is now professed in England?
We find in Aeneas Syluius, some
opinions of theirs, which peraduenture
will scant be reputed currant among
all English Protestants. Hee rehearseth
these foure of theirs:Hist. Bohem. c. 50. 
               That
they would receiue the Sacraments in both
kinds; that ciuill dominion is inhibited to
Clergie men; that Preaching of the Word
was permitted to al men; that publik crimes
are in no sort to be tolerated. I answer, that
truth it is, that hee there mentioneth
onely those; and whether he relateth
them truly or no, it may be doubted, as
anon I shall shew, by laying open the
custom of the enemies of the Gospell,
in misreporting their doctrine. But
Ep. 130. elsewhere he deliuereth other opinions
of theirs, as against the Supremacy of



the Pope against Purgatory, against Inuocation
of Saints, and such like matters. If
we returne to Cochleus, who was best
acquainted with their matters, we shal
find much more. As thus,Coch. Hist. lib. 1. 
               Hus translated
all the Books of Canonicall Scripture
into the Bohemian tongue, and the
people did most diligently read them.
They would haue the holy Scriptures to
be the onely Iudge in Controuersies. They
held, that all Bishops and Priestes are the
Successors of the Apostles; that, not the
Pope, but Christ is the head of the Church,
neither are the Cardinals the body, but all
that beleeue in Christ; that, that the Pope
is not a member of the Church, but of the
Deuill, and his Synagogue; that one Pope
was a woman: yea, Hus did preach, that
the Pope is an abomination, and Antichrist.
Also he calleth theL. 2. generall Councell
at Constance, The Synagogue of Sathan.
Another of his articles was,L. 3. 
               The Pope
is the Beast in the Apocalyps. His Schollers
after his death,L. 4. brake downe the



Images in Churches and Monasteries:
yea,L. 5. Zisca vno impetu
                     •
                   insignes 
                     •
                  asilicas, & am pla monastéria quae in bonorem beat
                     •
                   Maria, &c dedicata erant, disiecit tanquom non sit fas alteri, quam soli Deo basilicas, a
                     •
                  t templa consecrare. 
               Zisca did cast down all the churches,
which were dedicated to the virgin
Mary, or to any Saint; as if it were
lawfull onely to build a Church to Almighty
God. In his time the professors
began to be distinguished in two companies;
the one of thē did not so much
dissent from the Pope as the other:
Those which in fewer matters diffred
from the Bishop of Rome, retained still
the name of Hussites; they which disagreed
in more, were called Thaborites,
of Thabor, the citie which Zisca built
for them. And these were the greater
number, and the stronger. There is in
Cochleus a confession of faith made by
one Iohann. Pezibram, a Bohemian, who
was but a Hussite, and not wel affected
to the Thaborites, because he accounted
them as a kinde of Precisians, or Puritans
in comparison of himselfe; yet this
more mild man doth wish and beg of
God, to see a reformation of the Church,


               
thatArtic. 57. there might be redressed Symonies
throughout all the world, most detestable,
most wicked, setting to sale of al Sacramēts,
most insatiable auarice, most impudent fornications,
most putrified vncleannesses, rottennesses
most abominable, Concubines keeping
most polluted, manners most dissolute,
most corrupt gestures and behauiors, harlotry
euery where too too much multiplied in
the Clergy, wherwith alas the whole world
lieth corruptly filthy. Also the Lucifer-like
pride of the Clergie is exalted aboue God,
their dainty & daily banquets, their abundant
riches, and rich abundance, their disquietnes
most litigious being the chiefe root
of the quarels of the world, their curiositie
most vaine, their most vnseemely pompe of
apparell, their conuersation most Secularlike,
their most open transgression of all the
Commandements of God, their most remisse
care of soules, their most negligent regard of
the word of God. This he saith for himselfe:
but concerning the Thaborites,
who indeed came neerer to the purity



of the Gospel, he witnesseth of them,
that they held,Artic. 55. 
               that materiall bread doth
remaine in the Sacrament; that the Saints
now triumphant are not to be called vpon;
that there is no purgatory; that no suffrages
or prayers are to be made for the dead. Also
they allow not of the holy dayes almost of all
the Saints, nor of Eue or Vigils that goe before
them; nor the consecrations of visible
things, as salt, oyle, holy water, Bels, and
such like. They haue a schismaticall celebration
of their Masses, that is, a seuerall
sort of Church-seruice, and refuse the
most celebrious seruice of the Church, and
the rites and administrations of almost all
the Sacraments. Let our Papists now
speak, whether they & we do not agree
in the same doctrine altogether. For I
doubt not but they who had receiued
so much grace frō 
               God, as to see al these
things, were also partakers of farther
knowledg in the misteries of saluatiō.
            While I haue spokē thus largely concerningSect. 12.
these good Christians in Bohemia,


               
let not any man imagin that Christs
faithfull flocke was restrained within
the compasse of that countrey, so that
godly men were else no where to be
found. For certaine it is, that betweene
the times of Io. Hus, who was burnt in
the yeare 1415, and the first standing
vp of M. Luther,
               Anno 1517. were very many other
who in that darknes did see what belonged
vnto the light of the Gospel. Among
these may be reckoned as very
memorable the Waldenses; who about
the yeare 1508, do make anRespons. ad Doctor
                     •
                  m August. answer
in defence of themselues; and therin as
they testifie that then they had Priests
of their owne: so they speake against
Purgatory, and most openly against
Transubstantiation. The same touching
Transubstantiation they doe in a Confession
ofVValdensium confessio in fasciculo rerum expetend. & fugiend. theirs, where
also they impugne
Adoration of the Eucharist. There
also they name the Prelates Vnsauor
                     •
                  
Salt, and auouch that the execrabl
                     •
                  
naughtinesse, which was in them by the



instinct of the Deuill, did driue them away
from the Sea of Rome. For the
Papists in their Sermons did call one
another Schismaticks, Hereticks, Sacrilegious
false Prophets, rauening VVolues,
the Beast and Whore in the Reuelation,
               Seiden. li. 16. of
these there were many in one part of
France, who time out of mind had refused
to beare the yoake of the Pope,
and therefore in the dayes of Frauncis
1. King of France, by a bloudy decree
of that King, but by the execution of
one Minerius a most cruell person; Merindol
& Cabriers, with some other villages
about them, were sacked and destroyed,
men, women, & children, being
slaine; yea, diuers of them being
stripped starke naked first, and then
murthered, and fortie poore women
being burned in a Ba
                  •
               ne. I may adde
vnto these many worthy men here &
there dispersed, whereof all cryed out
against the Church of Rome, and desired
a reformation, and many of them



apprehended, and deliuered to other
the true meanes of Iustification, which
is the nearest point of saluation. The
Luea
                     •
                   Os
                     •
                  ander. lib. 1. c. 8. Author of the 16 Century nameth about
the yeare 1500, and somewhat
after (but yet before Luther) Baptista
Mantuanus, & Franciseus Picus, Earle of
Mirandula, both which much inueighed
agaiust the Clergy and their whole
practise. Also one Doctor Keiserspergius;
another called Iohn: Hilton; a third named
Doctor Andreas Proles, and Sauanorola,
all groning vnder the burthen of
those times. TheOratio ad Leo
                     •••
                   decimum. Oration of Picus in
the Coūcel of Later an is extant; where
besides his most bitter taxing of the
filthy behauiour of the Clergie, he vseth
these words: Pietie is almost sunke
into superstition. How Mantuan doth euery
where pay the Romanists, may appeare
to those who read his workes.
Calamitatum. 3 But one place of him I will name;

                  —Petrique domus polluta fluente
                  Marcessit Luxu, (nulla hic arcana reuelo
                  
                     Nonignota loquor, liceat vulgata referre:
                  Sic Vrbes populique ferunt, ea fama per omnem
                  I am vetus Europam) mores extirpat honestos:
                  Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara cynaedis
                  Seruit, honorandae Divum Ganymedibus aedes.
                  Quid miramur opes, recidiua
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      surgere tecta?
                  Thuris odorati globulos & cinnama vendit
                  Mollis Arabs, Tyr
                        •
                      vestes, venalia nobis
                  Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae
                  Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale Deus
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
               
            
            Some of them I English thus.

                  Priests land now Iesters vile doth serue,
                  the Altars Bawds maintaine;
                  Of holy Churches of the Gods,
                  lewd Ganymeds make their gaine.
                  Why doe we wonder that their wealth,
                  and houses falne doe rise,
                  Sweet Frankincense and Cinnamon
                  are the onely Marchandise
                  Of the Arabians; and but Clothes
                  the Tyrians vse to sell:
                  But with vs Churches, Altars,
                  Priests, yeeld money well.
                  Things hallowed, crowns, fire, frankincense,
                  the Prayers which we make;
                  Yea Heauen, yea God, are saleable,
                  if money wee may take.
               
            
            The opinions of Sauanorola against
Popery are many;Guicciar 
                     •
                  . lib. 3. and for them (howsoeuer



it be otherwise coloured) he was
burnt. In the matter of freeIn Ps. 52. Iustification
he is cleare. And the same is written
also ofCatalog. testi
                     ••
                   veritatu, lib. 19. 
               Trithemius, another learned
man, who liued at that time. How in
England Christ had in all these times
Professors of the truth, I shall haue occasion
to shew anon, when I come to
speake of Iohn Wiclefe.
            
            In the meane while I shal not do amisse
to mētion some other whowere
between the daies of Io. Hus, & M. Luther.
               Sect. 13.
A special oppugner of the Papacy
was the learned Laurentius Valla, a Romane
Patritian, and Canon of S. Iohn of
Later an there. He wrote aCo
                     •••
                   em
                     ••
                  
                  titam donationē Const. Treatise of
purpose against the forged donation of
Cōstantine. He prouounceth of his own
experience, That the Pope himselfe doth
make war against peaceable people, & soweth
discord between Cities & Princes. The
Pope doth both thirst after mens riches, and
swalloweth vp his owne. He maketh gain of
not only the Common wealth, but the Estate



Ecclesiasticall, and the holy Ghost. The latter
Popes do seeme to labour this, that looke
how much the ancient Popes were wise, and
holy, so much they will be wicked and foolish.
He liued about the yeare 1420,
and for the freenesse of his speech and
pen, was by the Pope driuen into exile.
About the same time liued Archdeacon
De ann
                     •
                  tis non soluendis. 
               Nicholaus Clemang
                     •
                  is, who rebuked
many things in the Ecclesiasticall
state, and spake excellently in the
matter of generall Councels, and their
circumstances, as hereafter may be declared.De Reform. Eccles.
               Petrus de Aliaco, Cardinall of
Cambray, gaue a Tract to the Councell
of Constance, touching the reformation
of the Church. There doth he reproue
many notable abuses of the Romanists,
& giueth aduise how to represse them;
cap. 3. 
               There should not be multiplied, saith he,
such varietie of Images and pictures in the
Churches; there should not be so many holy
dayes; there should not be so many new Sts
canonized; Apocryphal writings should not



be read in the churches on holy dayes;c. 4. such
numerosity & variety of religious persons
not expedient; there are so many Orders of
begging Friers, that their state is burtheusome
to men, hurtfull to hospitals, and to the
poore; few doe now study diuinity, for the
abuse of the Church of Rome, who hath despised
Diuines; all now turne to the law, &
artes of gaine. He saith, that it was then
a prouerbe, The Church is come to that estate,
that it is not worthy to be ruled, but by
reprobates. He hath very much more,
and in thec. 6. end concludeth, That as
there were 7000, who had not bowed to
Baal: so it is to bee hoped there bee some,
which desire the reformation of the Church.
Imagine whether this Cardinall, if he
had found company to haue ioyned
with him, would not haue sayd much
more.In Hypocritas libellus. About that time liued Leonardus
Aretinus, whose little book against Hypocrites
is worth the reading.Oratio od clerū Coloniensem. So is the
oration of Antonius Cornelius Eynni
                     •
                  hanus,
laying open the lewd lubric
                  ••
               e of



Priests in his dayes. So doth he detect
many abuses and errours, who wrote
The ten grieuances of Germany;
               Decem grauami. na Germaniae. but those
who compiled the hundred grieuances
of the German nation, doe discouer
many more. Finally, he who list to see
further, that God euen in those dead
dayes, had diuers seruants, who by
more then a glimpse did see the truth,
and desired yet to be more plentifully
instructed in religion, let him read the
Catologus testium veritatis,
               L. 19. lately set out,
and there he shall find diuers, whom
I haue not named.
            By this time I trust it is manifest howSect. 14.
fals a slander that of the Papists is, that
before the daies of M. Luther, there was
neuer any man of our religion. Til the
time of the Councell of Constance, this
case is cleared. And beyond that, it is as
easie to shew, that I. Hus, & Hierom of
Prage had their imediat antecessors in
witnessing the faith of Christ For they
were instructed & much helped by the



Books of Io. Wiclif an English man; and
therefore saith Platina, as spectators of
Wiclife,
               In Iohn 24. they were condemned in the
Councell of Constance. AEneas Syluius
sheweth the meanes how those Bohemians
came to know the doctrine of
Wiclife,
               Histor. Bohem. c. 35. he saith thus, He who first raised
vp the opinion of the Hussites, had them frō
Oxford, carying thence into Bohemia Wiclefs
books de Realibus Vniuersalib', Coehleus,
who by his good will would bee
taken for a great defender of Popery,
giueth yet a larger testimony; for he
saith,Hist. de Huss
                     •
                  tis, lib. 1. 
               That as a Bohemian brought first into
Bohemia Wiclefs books de Realibus Vniuer
salibus; so there was afterward one
Peter Paine, a Scholler of Wiclefs, who after
the death of his Master came also into
               Scripsit mihi quidā ex Anglia Epis
                     •
                   opus esse sibi ad
                     •
                  uc bodie duo maxima volum
                     •
                  a VVitlefi quae mol
                     •
                   sua videantur 
                     •
                  quari opera beati, August.
               Bohemia, and brought with him Wiclef
bookes, which were in quantity as great as
S. Austins works: many of these books
did Hus afterward translate into their
mother tongue. In plaine termes, after
this the Author deliuereth it, That the
Hussites & Thaborites were branches of



Wiclefe.
               L. 1. Hus forni ca
                     •
                  us est spiritu aliter cum ali enigenis plurimis cum VViclefistis cum Dulcinistis, &c. L 2. And in the same book Hus did
commit spiritual fornication with many
strangers, with Wiclefist the Dulcimist,
&c. And in the next he auoucheth, that
L. 3. 
               Hus & Hierom tooke their heresies frō
               Wiclef. And once againe he termeth the
Protestant Germās
               L. 6. 
               new Wiclefists. What
an opinion of this man I. Hus had, may
be fully seen by that wish of his, wherin
he praied,L. 2. 
               that he might there be where
the soul of Wiclef was.
               Miser Hus optauit animam suā fore ihi est anima VViclefi. Now what Wiclef
did teach, may be easily gathered, if by
nothing else, yet by the deadly hatred
which the Romanistes did carrie towards
him.S
                     •
                  ss. 8. The Councell of Constance
did define him to be an Heretike long
after his death, & commanded that his
bones should be taken vp & burnt. Also
Pope Iohn 23.L. 2. in a general Councell at
Rome, did before that time condemne
him for an heretike; which the Hussites
did but laugh at: but no man had a harder
conceit of him then Cochl. who sticketh
not to affirme, that he thinketh that


               
               Multa g
                     •
                  autora 
                     ••
                  diderim esse VViclefi tbrmeta, quā 
                  
                     •
                  uit apud infero
                     •
                   vel scele ratissim
                     •
                  rum hominum, Iudae prod
                     •
                   o
                     •
                  s Christi & Neronus 
                     ••
                  irstianorum persecu. 
                     ••
                  is, &c. L. 2. 
               the torments of Wiclefe are greater in hell,
then those of Iudas, or Nero. If God almightie
had no better opinion of him, the
man were in an ill case. But the best is,
this cholerick Criticke is not the Iudge
of all the world. He was angry belike,
in behalfe of Transubstantiation, concerning
which he citeth this article of Wiclefe:
There was neuer a greater heresie, then
that which putteth the Accident without a
Subiect in the Eucharist. But hee might
haue named more points, wherein that
holy man did differ from the Church of
Rome.
               Sess. 8. The Councel of Constāce picketh
out 45. articles of his Positions, which
the learned Reader may find there. Yet
doubtles many of them are falsly reported,
which is a matter common with
enemies of the truth, to peruert & misconster,
that so they may more freely
defame. There was one Wilh. Wideford,
               Respons ad 18. Artic. VViclefi in f
                     ••
                  cic rerum expe
                     •
                  end.
who tooke on him to answer 18. articles
said to bee Wiclefs, whence a man
may gathersome of his doctrine. But
that all things there said against him



were not true, may wel be obserud out
of the same answere, declaring that he
had many things concerning Wiclef; but
only by aIn fine Artic. 10. V
                     •
                  rg. Aen
                     •
                  ad. fame and report, and that
is not the most certaine relater. What
positions indeed he held, may be seen in
M. Fox, reporting his life and actions, as
also in Catalogo testium veritatis.
               L. 18. And
those who be not learned, may esteem
of thē by the doctrine of Io Hu
                     •
                  
                before
rehearsed, who by the testimony of the
Papists themselues, as I haue shewed,
maintained the opinions of Wiclef.
            
            Now that this worthy ChampionSect. 15.
& Preacher of the Gospel of Iesus Christ
went not alone, but had many English
men and women, who in his life time,
& after his death beleeued as he beleeued,
and professed as he professed, is in
the next place to be shewed. Among
the chiefe of his fautours, were Iohn of
Gant,
               Apolog▪ Hicra
                     •
                  c. c. 1. (as Parsons the Iesuite confesseth)
and Lord Henry Percy; the one of them
Duke of Lancaster, the other Marshall



of England. M. Fox citeth out a Register
of the Archb. of Canterbury,
               Ex Regist. G. Courtney. a Mandate
that the Conclusions of Wiclefe were
preached in diuers and sundry places of the
Archbishops Prouince, generally, commonly,
and publikely. The same also is manifested
by a letter of the Archbishop to
the Bishop of Lōdon; and in a Monition
directed to Oxford,
               Ad Cancell. Ox. where it is said, that
certain Conclusions hereticall and erronious
were generally and commonly preached and
published in diuers places of the Prouince of
Canterbury. There be extant also Letters
of king Richard 2.Ad Arthiepi
                     •
                  c Cant. & Cancell. Ox. directly signifying so
much. But there is nothing which may
more amply testifie the spreading of his
doctrine, then an Act of Parliament in
the beginning almost of that young
Kings dayes,Anno. 5. Rich. 2. c. 5. where it is related, that
there were diuers Preaching dayly, not
onely in Churches and Church-yardes, but
also in markets, faires, & other open places,
where as great congregation of people is, diuers
Sermons containing heresies, and notorious
errours.
            
            
               This putteth me in minde of a written
book which once I saw,In manu magistri Wirley. being a
Chronicle compiled by a Monk of
Leicester Abby; who, writing of the
time of the said King, reporteth at
large, that the people in faires and
markets, and riding by the way, and
almost euery where, would talke of
the Scripture, and reprooue the customes
of that time, as also the Priests;
to the exceeding great trouble and offence
of the Clergie. This they might
the rather do out of the Word of God,
because the Scriptures were then translated
into English, as may bee seene
by diuerse Copies written and remaining
vnto this day, supposed to
be so turned by Wicklef. And it is very
probable, that in Leicester shire there
were many of those of whom the
Monk Leicestrensis spake, since, at
Lutterworth a Towne in that County,
Iohn Wicklef was beneficed. But the
greatest part of this learned mans
abode was at the first in the Vniuersitie



of Oxford, where hee was both a
Doctor and Reader in Diuinity; and
therefore is to bee conceiued to haue
many learned men partaking with
him in his opinions. Master Fox saith
(out of the Chronicle of S. Albanes),In fine R. Richard
                     •
                   3.
that hee had a Benefice in Oxford; of
which he was depriued by Simon Sudbury,
Arch-Bishop of Canterbury. It
may bee, this was nothing else but the
Mastership or chiefe Gouernors place
in Bailioll Colledge; which I am perswaded
that hee had, since there are
yet two antient Writings in the treasury
of that Colledge (which I haue
seene),In Arch uis Coll
                     •
                  dg. Bali
                     •
                  l. which were made in the name
of Iohn Wicklef, Master of that house,
and that in the daies of King Richard
the Second. But while he liued, he had
so many fauourers in that Vniuersity,
as that Master Robert Rigges ViceChancelor,Vid. 10. Fox. in vit
                     •
                   Wicklef.
and the two Proctors,
took part with him; as also Nicholas
Herford, Philip Repington and Iohn
Ashton, Preachers and Batchelors of



Diuinity, and grew into great question
for his cause: where Repington in
the end beeing Doctor, did slippe
from him. Yea, so farre was his doctrine
there spred,A 
                     〈◊〉
                  . Richara
                     ••
                   2. that Pope Gregorie
the Eleuenth, in the yeere 1378, did
direct his B
                  •
               ll to the Vniuersity of
Oxford against the Doctrine and Articles
of that learned man, euen Rome it
selfe ringing of his opinions in that
Vniuersity. Neither did his Followers
dye when he himselfe died. But long
after that,Sub rege Hen. 4. Pope Gregory the twelfth
did direct downe another Bull to Oxford
against Wicklef; in which he vsed
the same words which his Predecessors
had, that is to say, that Wicklef did
follow the doctrine of Marsilius of Padua,
and of Iohn of Gandune of vnworthy
memory: Which speech is worth
the marking; to shew, that this man
also had his Predecessors. The Copie
of this latter Bull is to bee seene in theL. 2. in literis Reg. Henrici 4.
Booke which that worthy louer of
Antiquities, Master Hare, gaue to our



Vniuersity: where also is to bee seene
in the Constitution of a Prouinciall
Councell, celebrated at Oxford, a sharp
Inquisition decreed by Thomas Arundel
Archbishop of Canterbury, against
all, euen the heads of Colledges and
Halles, and others suspected of Lollardy
and Wicleuisme. They might well
suppose, that the Students of that place
were entertainers of such doctrine,
since about that very time a testimoniall
was giuen in their Congregation
house vnder seale, in fauour of Iohn
Wicklef: where these words are among
other;Anno 1406. Octobr. 5. In operib. I. Hus. 
               God forbid, that our Prelates
should haue condemned a man of such
honesty for an Heretick. And yet in the
Councell of Constance hee was condemned
for such a one, forty yeeres after
that he was dead and buried. But
all would not serue to extirpate his
Bookes or memory out of our Vniuersity:
but euen in the daies of King
Edward the Fourth,Anno 1476. there were new
letters directed to the Gouernors of



that place, by the King himselfe, to
make search for his Bookes, and to
burne them. I haue in my custody a
faire antient Record of that Vniuersity:
which, by meanes of a good
friend, I haue gained back to this
place. And therein is a solemne Letter
directed from the Conuocation of
Doctors and Masters, to the King; te
                  •
               
               tifying,
that according to their Soueraigns
Commandement, they had
with accurate diligence searched out
the Bookes and Tracts of Wicklef
himselfe, and of Reginald Pecock, and
had burnt them. So much adoe was
it, and that in so long a space, to suppresse
the head whereunto Wicklefs
doctrine was growne in the famous
Vniuersity of Oxford.
            
            How elsewhere in this Kingdome,Sect. 16.
his positions were spred, may be easily
collected out of Geffry Chaucer:
who, dying about the yeere 1400,
may rightly be supposed to haue liued
while Ioh. Wicklef liued. This Chaucer,


               
who wanted neither wit nor learning,
did atin a Ploughmans tale. large paint-out the pride,
lasciuious, vicious, and intolerable behauior
of the Pope, Cardinals and
Clergy, euen applying the name of
Antichrist diuers times vnto the Romane
Bishop, and saying, that There
were many in those daies of the speakers
minde; yea, finding fault with
their faith, aswell as with their manners.
The whole tale is wel worth the
reading: but I will cite onely a few
verses.

                  
                     Peter was neuer so great a foole,The Apostle.
                  
                  To leaue hiswhich Papists say, he hath of heauen gate. Key with such aas the Pope. lorell,
                  Or take such cursed such a toole,
                  He was aduised nothing well:
                  I trow they haue the key of hell:
                  Their master is of that place Marshall:
                  For there they dressen hem to dwell,
                  And with false Lucifer there to fall:
                  They beene as proud as Lucifer,
                  
                  As angry, and as enuious:
                  From good faith they beene full farre,
                  In couetize they beene curious.
                  
                     To catch cattaile, as couetous
                  As hound, that for hunger will yall:
                  Vngodly and vngracious
                  And needily such falshod shall fool fall.
               
            
            This and a hundred times as much,
he expresseth in a simple plough mans
person; as euidently inferring, that
the husbandman & meanest country
body of that time, by the reading and
hearing of the Word of God, could
tell what was right and religious, and
what otherwise; yea, and complaine
of the blindnesse, and impiety of the
Romanists in that age. But if wee
would be aduertised, what euen Laymen
in those times could doe, let vs
looke into the Declarations of Walter
Bruite, who was in question for his
opinion, before the Bishop of Hereford,
in the yeere 1393, and gaue vp a
a little booke, containing those t
                  ••
               ngs
which he maintained. The true copy
of that treatise is yet extant,Ex registro Episcops Herefor
                     •
                  
                and deserueth
to bee read. There wee may
finde these and the like positions:



that Bread remaineth in the Sacraments
after Consecration; that The
Pope is Antichrist; that Nothing is to be
beleeued, but what may bee confirmed out
of the Scriptures; that The Pope is the
Idoll of desolation, sitting in the Temple of
God; that Antichrist is not to come of
the Tribe of Dan, neither onely to raigne
three yeeres and a halfe: that The Citie
Apoc. 17, is Rome; that Our Iustification
is freely by faith alone; that The doctrine
of the Pope differeth from that of
Christ; that Miracles are no assurance of
truth; that Men are not rashly to bee reputed
Saints; that The Pope hath not
power beyond other Bishops, neither is the
Head of the Church; that Papists mistake
the keys of binding & loosing; that Infants
dying before Baptisme, are not therefore
damned; that Auricular Confession is not
prescribed in the Scripture; that The
Canon Lawe is ill grounded; that The
Pope deceiueth men in his pardons; that
Absolution is to be sought at the hands of
God onely; that The Priests vse vaine



prayers in the Masses; that Exorcismes
and holy water are vnlawfull; that
Priests doe sinne, who bargaine to sing for
the soules of men departed; that Religious
men and women are deuourers of widowes
houses; that Selling of orders and dirges
is naught; that The Pope is the beast
with the two hornes like the Lamb, while
he challengeth the double sword; that He
seeketh to bee worshipped as God; that
Dux Cleri doth make vp the number
666; that Worshipping of Images is idolatry;
that Temporall goods may be taken
from the Clergie offending. There was
a great Papist, one William Wideford,
whom before I mentioned, who giueth
testimony to this Treatise of
Bruite, whom hee calleth Waltherus
Britta in Latine;
               Contra 18. articul. Wicklef. In articul. 11. & 12. 
               and writing against
Wicklef, maketh twise mention of a
booke of his owne, sent to the Bishop
of Hereford (Dominum Erfordensem he
calleth him) in confutation of the
book of Walter Bruite.
            While I write these things,Sect. 17. I cannot



but think vpon the audacious absurdnes
of an ignorāt popish Doctor; who
blusheth not to vtter, that it is most
manifest, that All in England were Papists,
without exception, from the first
christening thereof, vntill this age of
King Henry the Eight. He is doubtless
an honest man, and worthie to bee
trusted on his word. It is not onely
manifest, but most manifest, not that
the greatest part, but all; yea, and because
it shall not be scanted, all without
exception, were Papists, &c. Were Iohn
Wicklefs bones burnt, because he was a
Papist? And were the Bulls of the pope
denounced against him for that cause?
And were the Arch-bishop Arundels
constitutions against his Followers
so seuere, because they were Papists?
The man is to be pitied for his simplicity.
A man may know by the Lawes,
Proclamations, Letters and Proceedings
by the State, against some as against
Hereticks, as also by the records
of Bishops yet extant; and by the manifold



executions and burnings afterward,
that euen in that deepe time of
ignorance, England did giue most noble
testimony of Christs truth against
Popery; euen so farre, as to the fiery
triall. If the Christian Reader peruse
the Ecclesiasticall History of Master
Fox, hee shall finde,A
                     •
                  . 1400. sub Reg. He
                     •
                  . 4. how before the
Councel, William Sawtree a Priest was
burnt, & after him Iohn Badby; & that
because they were Wickleuists or Lollards
(as they then called them), and
not because they were Papists. There
are the reasons also and asseuerations
of Puruey and Thorpe against Poperie,
with diuers other matters. And is it
not to be thought,Sub reg. Henrie. 5. that the Hereticks
increased, when a Synod was assembled
in S. Paul's Church at London,
into the which came twelue Inquisitors,
who in a former Synod were appointed
to sift and scan the writings
of Wicklef, wherein they found 246.
Conclusions; all which they supposed
to be heresie? But it is plaine, that in



the first yeere of King Henry the Fift,
diuers were put to death as Lollards.
Afterward the Lord Cobham was hanged,
for a shew, as if hee had beene a
kinde of Traytor: but hee was then
also burnt as a reputed Heretick. So
was one Iohn Claydon, for his Conscience,
consumed to ashes. Not long
after the comming of Henry the Sixt
to the Kingdome,Sub. Hen. 6. besides diuers
which were questioned and much
troubled about religion, Taylor and
White, two Priests, and Houeden a Citizen
of London, were burnt: and
some other followed afterward. Neither
did the daies of King Edward the
Fourth, and of King Henry the Seuenth,
escape without the Martyrdome
of sundry English, yeelding vp
their liues for Iesus Christ his sake, and
for the profession of the truth: The
particular Stories of whom may bee
found in the Author aboue-named.
The Clergy of those times did beare
much sway with their Princes, and



left no meanes vnsought, no stone vnturned,
to keepe vp the dignity and
preeminence of their romish Hierarchy,
and the superstitious Idolatry
which then was in vse. Now, if in the
Raigne of all these Princes, so many
were slaughtered for the testimony of
a good conscience, how many weake
brethren were there, who made not
open profession of their faith? & how
many did there lie hid, diuers of them
in probability hauing confederates,
and some of them beeing Priests, and
therfore not vnlikely to haue learning
both to confirme themselues in the
truth, and such others as heard them?
Thus haue I both in England and
else-where brought vp the doctrine
of the Gospell, vntill the time of Iohn
Wicklef, who flourished in the yeere
1371.
            Heer it may please the Reader toSect. 18.
remember, that the iudgement (before
cited) of two Popes, was, that Wicklef
taught the doctrine of Marsilius of Padua,



& of Iohn of G
                     ••
                  dune.
               Greg. 11. Of the later
Greg. 12. of these there yet appeareth no monument
written;Catal. testium 
                     •
                  esitatis.. l. 18. but he ioined in opinion
with the former. But as for
Marsilius Patauinus, our Aduersaries
cannot but acknowledge him to be a
very learned man, after the measure of
the age wherein he liued, which was
in the yeere 1324. He wrote a Book
against the vsurped power of the Bishop
of Rome;
               Defensor pacis. which argument he entred
into, in behalfe of the Emperour
Lewes of Bauiere, who was mightily
layd-at by three Popes successiuely.
There the Authour auoweth, as right
and iust, the supreme authoritie of
the Emperour, displaying the iniquity
of the Popes vsurpation ouer Christian
Princes, and generall Councels:
The book is worth the reading, to see
Whether all in times past did allow of
the Popes doctrine and proceedings;
or not: his opinions are these; I that
The Pope is not superiour to other Bishops,
and much lesse to the Emperour and ciuill



Magistrates; 2 that Things are to be decided
by the Scripture; 3 that Learned men
of the Laity haue voices in Councels;
4 that The Clergie and Pope himself are to
be subiect to Magistrates; 5 that The
Church is the whole company of the faithfull;
6 that Christ is the foundation and
Head of the Church; and appointed no one
to be his Vicar; 7 that priests may be maried;
8 that Saint Peter was neuer at Rome;
9 that The Popish Synagogue is a denne of
theeues; 10 that The Doctrine of the Pope
is not to be followed, because it leads to euerlasting
destruction. In the time of this
Marsilius, liued the noble Poet 
                  
                     ••
                  ente,
who wrote also a booke against the
pope, concerning the Monarchy of the
Emperour:Petrus Messias in Ludo
                     ••
                  co. but, for taking part with
Lewes Bauiere, he was condemned for
an Heretike, and his book as hereticall.
Then also wrote Occam directly to the
same purpose:Catalogus 
                     •
                  estium verit
                     •••
                  . l. 18. but for his labour
therein, and his large reproofe of the
Papacie in other points, hee was excommunicated
by the Romane Bishop:



which he so much contemned,
that hee not vnwillingly dyed vnder
that Sentence. About that time were
heer and there dispersed sundry godly
men, who saw more than the common
sort touching religion;Ibid. ex. Hen. de Erford. as Hayabalus
a Minorite, who frequently said
in his Sermons, that The Church of
Rome was the whore of Babylon, and
that the Pope and his Cardinals were
meere Antichrists: which propositions
were held somewhat before also
by Gerhardus and Dulcinus, two learned
men. This Dulcinus may bee
thought to haue many followers, since
Cochleus could say,Histor. Hussit. l. 2. that Iohn Hus committed
spirituall fornication with the
Wickleuists and with the Dulcinists.
The same opinions concerning the
Pope and Rome, did that rare man,
Franciscus Petrarcha,
               Epis. 20. et in poe
                     •
                  i italic
                     •
                  . seeme fully to
embrace, as may appeare to any who
will reade his workes, howsoeuer
Cardinall Bellarmine labour to make
the world beleeue otherwise,In appendice ad libros de Rom. pontifice. c. 20. beeing



desirous to haue vs thinke, that Petrarch
spake not against the Pope, but
some abuses in the Court of Rome.
And to make it plaine, that it was not
a slight conceipt, or onely in a few, that
The Pope was Antichrist, and Rome was
Babylon, Apo. 17. God stird vp yet more
in that age, who proclaimed the same
matter;Genebrard, Chron. l. 4. Anno 1327. as, Petrus Iohannes Biraensis,
or Piranensis, who was a Minorite;
and for teaching so, was digged vp after
that he was dead; and his body, after
the Sentence of Clement the Sixt,
was burnt. A few yeeres after him,Catal. 
                     •
                  estium veritatis. l. 18.
did Iohannes de Rupe-sciss
                     •
                  , a Monk,
teach the same doctrine; which, as
euery man may ghesse, doth ruinate
the Papacy in euery respect.Academ. les. Christ. Clas. 15 
               Iohannes
Gerson came not so farre, but saw in
his age many horrible abuses of the
Church of Rome, and in his writing
spake liberally of it. And it did bite
deepe, when hee disputed, that the
Pope might bee taken away safely
from the Church,De auseribilitate Pap
                     •
                   ab ecclesia. and yet no danger



follow of it. But let vs now goe a little
higher.
            I mentioned before,Sect. 19. how Cochleus
saith, that Iohn. H
                     •
                  s took his doctrine
from the Wickleuists and the Dulcinists.
Heare, I pray you, what he saith:
Hus did commit spirituall fornication
with many aliens; with the Wickleuists,
the Dulcinists, with the Leonists, the Waldenses,
the Albingenses, and other of that
sort, enemies of the Church of Rome.
These Leonists or poor-men of Lyons,
and Waldenses, and Albingenses, were
the same men, but diuersly, on diuers
occasiōs, tearmed by the Roman Synagogue
which hated them. Their opinion
then did Hus maintain.Hist. Bohem. c. 35. 
               AEneas Syluius
doth also witnesse the same; affirming,
that the Hussites did embrace the
opinions of the Waldenses. There you
may see, that their doctrine was against
the Primacy of the Pope, Purgatory,
and such like matters. Genebrard,
               Chron. l. 4. who saith, that these Waldenses
began, Anno 1170. or, as some other



will, 1218. rehearseth out of Syluius
these opinions of theirs; that Prayers
for the dead, and Purgatory fire, are an inuention
of the Priests couetousnesse; that
Holy Images are to be defaced; that Confirmation
and Extreme Vnction are no
Sacraments; that Auricular Confession is
a trifling thing. Hee who list, may see
a great many more of their positions
agreeing with the doctrine which we
teach: which may well also be gathered
from the Iesuites themselues.Catal. testium veritatis. l. 15. In Pr
                     •
                  sat. general. Controuers. For,
that is the cause that Bellarmine ioyneth
these together as Hereticks; the
Berengarians, the Petrobrusians, the
Waldenses, the Albingenses, the Wickleuists,
the Hussites, the Lutherans, &c.
And Lewes Richcome, another of that
Society,L. 1. c. 19. in his defence of the Masse against
the Lord Plessis, saith, that The
Ministers, for the confirming of their
figuratiue sense in This is my body, haue
none for their Doctors, for their Antients,
for their Fathers, but Berengarius,
Zuinglius, Caluin, Carolastadius, Wicklef,


               
the Albingenses, the Waldenses.
These Waldenses then and Albingenses
are ours, by the confession of our
Aduersaries; and of these long agone
there were no small company. For, as
Du Haillan,
               Hist. l. 12. in the life of Philip the
Third, King of France, speaketh; being
driuen from Lyons in France, they
withdrew themselues into Lombardy:
where they so multiplied, that their
doctrine began to spread through Italy,
and came as farre as Sicily. As the
same Author writeth,L. 9. 
               Philippus Augustus
came to his Kingdome, Anno
1180. which is now more then foure
hundred yeeres since: and in his time
it was, that the Albingenses did so increase
in France, that the Pope and
Princes adioyning were afraid of
their number. Hee who readeth the
Story of them, shall see that they are
reported to haue held many grosse,
wicked, and absurd opinions mingled
with their true Doctrine. But Du
Haillan the best and iudicious Chronicler



of France, and no partiall witnesse
in our behalfe (since his profession
touching Religion, was such, that hee
was imployed to write that Story by
King Henry the third), had not so little
wit, but that he perceiued those imputations
to bee laid on them in odium,
and of purpose to procure their defamation.
See how wisely hee speaketh
truth and his conscience; and yet so
coucheth it, that his fellowes might
not bee iustly offended at his words.
Although, saith hee,L. 10. 
               these Albingenses
had euill opinions, yet so it is, that these
did not stir vp the hate of the Pope and of
great Princes against them so much, as
their liberty of speech did, wherewith they
vsed to blame the vices and dissolutenesse
of the said Princes and of the Clergie, yea,
to tax the vices and actions of the Popes.
This was the principall point which
brought them into vniuersall hatred, and
which charged them with more euil opinions
then they had. Now first, that they
were not men infamous, either for



their vile opinions or filthy conuersation;
and secondly, that they were not
onely base and poore people, it is euident
by this, that so many noble and
worthy men took part with them,
yea, to the aduenturing of their liues
in their company, and for their behalfe;
as the Counts or Earles of
Tholouse,
               Ibid. of Coninges, of Bigorr, of Carmain,
yea, the King of Arragon. And
when Raymund, the Earle of Tholouse,
was for his beliefe excommunicated
by the Pope, and a Croisado was proclaimed
against him and the Albingenses,
as if they had beene Saracens
or Infidels, not onely the Counties of
Foix and Coninges came with all their
strength to assist Raymund, but Alphonsus,
the King of Arragon, came in his
owne person to his succour, as beeing
his kinsman and his friend. And when
all these were met together; the report
is, saith Du Haillan, that the Armie of
these Hereticks did consist of about the
number of one hundred thousand fighting



men. These things beeing thus discouered
by men of your owne part; bee
ashamed, you Papists, and blush to
spread among your simple and credulous
Followers, that neuer men did as
we doo, nor beleeued as wee beleeue,
before Luther's time; but that all
Christendome formerly liked of the
papisticall doctrine and proceedings.
But because you shall heare one testimony
further touching these Albingenses
and Waldenses, how honest
and truely religious they were, I will
cite what one Reinerius, a man who
did hate them, and was (as it is supposed)
an Inquisitor against them, reported
concerning them, now 300 yeers
ago, or thereabout. Thus then, among
much other matter, he saith of them:
There were many Sects of Hereticks long
ago: among all which Sects that are or
were, there is not one more pernicious to
the Church of God, than that of the poore
men of Lyons, for three causes. First, because
it is of longer continuance: some say,



that it hath endured from the time of Syluester:
others say, that from the time of
the Apostles. The second is, because it is
more generall: for, there is almost no Land
into which this Sect doth not creep. The
third, that whereas all other, by the immanity
of their blasphemies against God, doo
make men abhorre them; this of the Lyonists,
hauing a great shew of godlinesse,
because they doo liue iustly before men, and
doo beleeue all things well of God, and all
the Articles which are contained in the
Creed, onely the Church of Rome they
doo blaspheme and hate: which the multitude
is easie to beleeue. And as Sampson's
Foxes had their faces seueral waies,
but their tails tied one to another: so Hereticks
are diuerse in Sects among themselues,
but in the impugning of the Church
they are vnited. There can hardly be
found a more honourable testimony
out of the mouth or penne of a bitter
and bloudy Aduersary as he was, who
wrote this & much more concerning
those good seruants of God. We shall



not need to ascend any higher, since
hee giueth witnes of the antiquity of
their profession long before his time:
which otherwise to make plain, is as
easie, as to deliuer that which hitherto
I haue spoken. And it is not to bee
conceiued,Mat. Paris i
                     •
                   Guliel. cōquaest. that Petrus Waldo (of
whom the Waldenses tooke their
name at Lyons) had his doctrine from
no body, but that of himselfe he attained
to his owne knowledge, since he
was not deeply learned. Berengarius
indeed was onely called in question
for denying Transubstantiation in the
Sacrament; but it may well bee
thought, that in something else he dissented
from the Church of Rome: and
albeit by his owne weaknes, and the
importunity of the Clergie,Contin. hist. de gestis Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 7. he yeelded
once or twice to recant and abiure the
true doctrine which hee held, yet hee
had many scholars, who by his example
would not bee driuen from the
right beleef which they had apprehended.
These scholars were in France


               
in great numbers,Malmis. l. 3. and in diuerse other
lands: and Genebrard cannot conceal
it, but that about the yeer of our Lord
1088,Chron. l. 4. 
               Basilius the Monk did set on
foot again the errour of Berengarius.
And might not the doctrine of both
these bee sucked from Bertram, who
wrote so learnedly and so directly out
of the Scriptures and Fathers against
the reall presence and Transubstantiation,
Index in Bertram resp. ad Dan. Til
                     •
                  s. fol. 158. that the Index expurgatorius cannot
tel what to make of him? But the
Bishop of Eureux, vnder the name of
Henry Constable, tearmeth him The
great fore-runner of all the Sacramentaries:
La. sainct. Mess
                     •
                   de clar. l. 2. and Richcome the Iesuit disclaimeth
him plainly as a Sacramentarie
Heretick. Then Caluin and Zuinglius
were not the first who gain-said transubstantiation.
Before our ascending
thus high, we might tell you of Saint
Bernard: whom although it is likely,
at the first dash, you will challenge as
your owne; yet, when you haue well
aduised on him, you may let him goe



again: for, albeit hee had his errours,
which he suckt from the age wherein
he liued, and we may not in all things
subscribe to his iudgement, but say of
him, as commonly it is spoken, Bernardus
non vidit omnia; yet wee finde
in him saniorem partem, a liberall profession
of many good & sound points
agreeable to the Gospell. Hee, for a
fashion,De consider. ad Eug
                     •
                  n. l. 2. 8. acknowledgeth many matters
to be in the Pope, and giueth him
greater titles than any Papist can iustifie;
but it is, by such insinuation, to
win him more attention frō 
               Eugenius:
and then, hauing procured liberty, or
rather taken it to himself, he schooleth
and lessoneth the Pope plainly; shewing,
that he liked not of their ordinary
courses, neither did hee repute him to
haue that preeminence or prerogatiue
which his Parasites did allow him.
But, touching the matter of merit by
good works,Ser. 61. in Cant. ep. 190. de grat. & lib. arbitrio. Ser. 1. de septem misericordi
                     •
                  s. for iustification alone
by Christ, of free-will, for certain assurance
of saluation in the death and



by the strength of our Sauiour, and for
disliking then the vile life of the Clergie,
how cleer, how learned, how copious
is hee! These things wee teach
together with him; and, notwithstanding
his other slips, we doubt not
but his soule doth rest with the Lord,
God pardoning vnto him his errours
and his ignorances; which hee, being
carried with the stream of that Time;
did neuer discusse, but took them as
they were deliuered to him, without
scanning or examining. And to this
good hope we are firmly induced by
that Saying of Saint Paul;
               1 Cor. 3. 11 
               Other Foundation
can no man lay, but that which is
laid, which is Iesus Christ: and if any
man build on this Foundation, gold, siluer,
precious stones, timber, hay or stubble, euery
mans work shall bee made manifest:
for, the day shall declare it, because it shall
be reuealed by fire; and the fire shall try
euery mans work of what sort it is. If any
mans work that he hath built-vpon, abide,
he shall receiue wages: if any mans workburn,



he shall lose, but he shall be safe himself.
He held the Foundation of iustification
onely by faith in Christ;Degrat. & libero arbit
                     •
                  io. and
that our best deeds are but via Regni,
non causa regnandi; the way to the Kingdome,
not the cause of raigning: and for
that cause, we doubt not but his soule
is safe, though his hay and stubble of
praying to Saints, and such other stuffe
as cannot endure the fire of the holy
Ghost's triall, doo burn and consume.
And this is our iudgement touching
many other both before and after the
time of Saint Bernard; that, holding
Christ the Foundation aright, and
groning vnder the heauy burden of
humane traditions, satisfaction, and
other popish trash, they, by a generall
repentance from their errors and lapses
knowne and vnknowne, and by
an assured faith in their Sauiour, did
finde fauour with the Lord. Such as
these were we hold to be God's good
seruants, to bee of the number of the
Elect; and, propter sanioren et meliorem



partem, for their sounder and better
part, to bee of that Church, whereof
we are to be members; of that body,
whereof (by the grace of Christ) we
are a portion.
            And in this respect our settled andSect. 21.
resolued iudgement is, that when it is
asked, Where our Church in former
Ages was; we may, besides that which
we haue formerly answered, truly say,
that it was in England, in France, in
Spaine,
               Iohn 
                     •
                  . 8. in Italy, yea, in Rome it selfe:
Spiritus vbi vult spirat, the holy
Ghost breatheth where it pleaseth: for
who cannot conceiue by the writings
of many in former Ages, or by such
touches as others doe giue concerning
them, that diuers, who liued neerest
the Whore of Babylon, did most detest
her abomination; and, finding that
the weaknes and impurity of her doctrine
could not truely satisfie the hungry
and thirsty soule, did, according
to that knowledge which Christ out
of his Word reuealed vnto them, seek



some means which was not ordinarily
professed in that Time? And if it be
asked, Who they were, and how they
could lie hid from the world? It may
truly be answered, that their case was
like the case of them in the daies of
Elias, who were not knowne to that
State which would haue persecuted1 Kings 19. 18
them. Now, why should not wee
think, but as God had his secret and
inuisible company at that time, in
that most idolatrous Countrey: so, in
the time of the deepest darknesse, hee
had those which saw light; his Christian
Children, among Antichrists
Brood; such as embraced true Religion;
among the superstitious? So that
Italy, and Rome, and these Westerne
parts, had some of Gods Saints in all
Ages, who, like Sea-fish, most fresh in
the salt water, and beeing remoued in
their affections, though not in their
persons,2. Pet. 2. 8. did with Lot vex their righteous
soules in the middest of a spiritual
Sodom,
               Iam. 1. 27. and kept themselues vnspotted



of the world. And yet it is not to bee
taken, that wee coarctate the Church
within those Prouinces onely which
looked towards the See of Rome; but
know, that God had thousands of his
Elect elsewhere. Christians haue bin
in India,
               Os
                     •
                  rius l. 3. degestis Eman
                     •
                  el. Li. 9. Dam▪ à Goes. de mori
                     •
                  . Ae
                     ••
                  i
                     ••
                  um. euen by perpetuall descent,
from the daies of the Apostles; and so
in Africa among the Abissines, in infinite
and huge companies; besides
such as haue continued in Armenia,
Asia the lesser, Aegypt, but especially
in the Greeke Church, which was
neuer so much as in shew extinguished;
and from whom the Russians
and Muscouites had their Faith. Our
Popish Lads would gladly shut
all these out of Christs Fold, because
they acknowledge not the Bishop of
Rome for their Vniuersall Pastor: but
wee should doe wrong to Almighty
God, to pinne his iudgement vpon
the Popes sleeue, and to offer to pull
from him so many ample Churches;
whereas charity and common sense



might put vs in minde, that he might
there haue thousands throughout all
Ages. Looke to these places, ye Papists,
and imagine, that if there had
beene none but these; yet the words
of the Scripture, which in generality
speake of a Spouse, had beene true:
and Christ had there had his body on
earth, and the Church had not beene
vtterly extinguished, if neither we nor
the Synagogue of Rome had beene extant.
            But in as much as it cannot be denied,Sect. 22.
but that the prophesies concerning
Antichrist, doe most touch the
Westerne world, Rome beeing by the
holy Ghost euidently designed to bee
the seat of the Whore of Babylon,
               Apoc. 17. 18. as also
because our Romish Standard-bearers
are more willing to talke of those
parts then of any other, I will once returne
againe to the Countreys neere
adioyning. Then, in some parts of
Christendome, how many men were
there in all ages, who loathed both



the See of Rome, and the whole courses
of it, as the Israelites did loath the
Aegyptians bondage?In Hen. 3. 
               Mathew Paris
alone giueth as many notable experiments
that way, as relating the Acts
of the Emperour Frederick, who put
out diuers declarations in detestation
of the Pope; and adding elsewhere,
further of his owne,Ibidem. that Pope Gregory
did absolue from the oath of fealty, all who
were bound vnto the Emperor; perswading
them, that they should be faithfull in vnfaithfulnesse,
obedient in disobedience.
But so much deserued the Romane Churches
lewdnesse, which is to be execrated of
all men, that the Popes authority did merit
to bee harkened vnto by few or none.
He reporteth also of a certain Carthusian
Monk at Cambridge,Ibidem. who cryed
out against the Pope, and said, that
Hee was an Heretick, and that the
Churches were profaned; and of
Robert Grosthead, Bishop of Lincolne,
who was a man both holy and learned
in his time. This Lincolniensis,


               
while he liued, had many combates
with the Bishop of Rome, and openly
resisted his barbarous tyranny in domineering
so farre in England, as to
enioyne prouision of the best Benefices
to be taken vp for Italian Boyes;
which for a Prebend in his Church of
Lincolne, hee would not yeeld vnto;
and for that cause was by the Pope excommunicated.Lincoln. Epist.
But when hee was
dying,Math
                     ••
                   Paris in H. 
                     •
                  . 3. hee most bitterly inueighed against
the Romane Bishop and the Ecclesiasticall
persons, as the most wicked
men that did liue. In the same
Author you may also finde the conceit
which the most reuerend Arch-bishop
of York, Sewaldus,
               Ibidem. had of them
and their proceedings. What should
I mention Ioachim,
               Houede
                     •
                   in parte 2. who said, that in
his time Antichrist was already born,
and was in the City of Rome? or that
Bishop of Florence, who liued about
the yeer 1100,Pla
                     •
                  in. in Paschael. 1. and did vse to say, that
Antichrist was then in the world?
Which moued Pope Paschalis so



much, as that hee thought fit to enquire
of him in a Councell, and did
there castigate him for it. Notable in
this kinde are the Contentions of
Philippus Pulcher▪ the King of France,
               Pap. Mas. on in Bo
                     •
                  . 2.
and his whole Clergy, against Boniface
the Eightth. I might adde to these, Petrus
de Brus, and many other learned
men, who laid the Axe to the very
Root of Popery, and some in set
Treatises oppugned one of their documents,
and some assaulted other;
but that the Writer of the Catalogus testium
veritatis, as it is lately enlarged,
and Master Fox, and Master Bale, and
diuers other, haue largely handled
this▪ to the reading of whose Bookes,In Histo
                     •
                  . Eccle. sias. in catal. script. Brit. L
                     •
                  ur. Humsr. I
                     •
                  suit
                     •
                  sm. part.
I doe referre them who in particular
desire to bee more aduertised in this
behalfe. Now, if these things doe
appeare much by their own witnesse,
and by the confession of Papists
themselues, as also by such few Records,
as (by Gods prouidence so disposing)
doe yet remaine; how many



illustrious arguments might there
haue beene of the Confession of our
faith, if the Clergy and Magistracy of
those darke times had not burned
and suppressed all things which made
against them, as I shewed before,
touching the Bookes of Iohn Wickles
& Reinald Pecock in Oxford? The Clergy
in those dayes did almost rule all:
and they had the custody of all Libraries,
to ransack at their pleasure, or to
put in and pull out: and they had
power to search poore mens houses,
and to destroy what was thought fit
by them to bee destroyed. But God,
who would not haue his truth vtterly
burned or buried in ashes, suffred a
remnant to remaine, yea, and that in
England; albeit Potydor Virgil, with
an Italian trick of his owne, did heer
consume and destroy many worthy
and antient Monuments.
            By this time,Sect. 23. I may wel suppose, that
some vehement Papist is euen ready
to swell, with his belly full of exceptions



against these things heer said. And
first he will begin & say, that we rake
together, as the Ancestors and forerunners
of our faith, such as were notorious
Hereticks; as Wicklef, or Hus,
or the Waldenses, men condemned
by Popes or generall Councels: and
Hereticks,R
                     ••
                  ion. 10. as Campian telleth vs, are the
dregges, and the bellows, and the fewell of
hell. These, as our Papists commonly
say, are already fire-brands of hell,
and frying there in flames. It is no
rare matter with the Synagogue of
Rome, to pronounce such Sentences as
these are. Our Rhemists, by their Consistoriall
or Imperiall Decree, haue defined,
that Caluin and Verone are not
onely Hereticks, but Reprobates, for
writing so as they haue done, touching
the Article of Predestination:In Rom. 11. 33. Yea,
they call Master Beza, a Reprobare also,
although hee were then aliue, and
long after too; how 
                  •
               oeuer the Iesuites
some few yeeres since,Ann
                     •
                   159
                     •
                  . did, by a most
ridiculous pamphlet or other newes,



spread it in France and Italy,
               Vid. Epist. Beza ad Stuckium. that hee
was then dead, and that dying had recanted
his Religion, and was returned
to the Romish faith; which also Geneua
did by his example. It is no newes
with Iesuites to lie, and therefore Master
Beza must beare with them; and
so had he neede to doe with the Rhemists
also, who got hastily into Gods
Chaire, and there concluded him to
bee a Reprobate. But indeed these
good Christians before-named, of
whom many lost their liues for the
maintenance of Gods truth, were Hereticks
in such a manner, as Christ was
said to bee a blasphemer; who indeed
was both called so,Mat. 26. 65. and condemned
to bee such a one, by the counsell of
the high Priests, Scribes and Rulers of
the Synagogue. We doe not beleeue,
that a
                  •
               l those are Hereticks, whom
your Papists will so call or account:
for, you giue vs that name, which,
maugre your malice, you shall neuer
bee able to proue against vs. They are



truely orthodox and right Catholiques,
who teach nothing but that
whereof they haue euident warrant
out of the Word of God. And this
wee haue, as hath beene oft shewed
by men of our side, and in that question
wee are ready at all times to
iump with you, for any part or all the
Doctrine wee professe. With Saint
Paul therefore wee say,Acts 24. 14▪
                that, After the
way that you call heresie, so worship wee
the God of our Fathers. The same
which you maliciously and pres
                  •
               mptuously
tearm schisme and heresie, is
that, whereupon, vnder our blessed
Sauiour, wee rest our soules; and by
the Confession thereof, wee hope to
bee saued in the day of the generall
Iudgement. Do not you therfore take
that for granted, which is so highly
questioned betwixt vs and you; but
rather, if you can prooue our Prof
                  •
               ssion
to bee hereticall, by Gods grace
we shall not shrink at any of your biggest
obiections.
            
               Yea, but say you further,Sect. 24. The Writers
which make mention of these
your Predecessors, doo brand them
with the holding of some most grosse
and damnable doctrine, which you
your selues will not auouch. My answer
is, that wee our selues doo easily
beleeue so much: for, did malice, I
pray you,
                  Acts 16. 20. and 17. 7. 2 Cor. 12. 16 Eus. 
                        •
                     ccl
                        •
                     . hist. l. 4. 7. euer say well? The Apostles
were at more times, and in more places
than one, charged with many accusations;
which yet, in truth, were
but calumniations: The old Christians
in the Primitiue Church were
slandered, to vse incestuous company
each with other, like Oedipus, and to
eat vp mans flesh at the banquet of
Thyestes; yea, their owneL. 5. 1. seruants for
fear were induced to lay such matters
to their charge.Socrat. 1. 20. Theod. eccl. hist. l. 1. 30. 
               Athanasius was accused
to haue cut off ones hand: and a
harlot to his face would haue calumniated
him to haue committed fornication
with her. This practice was
neuer more liberally frequented, than



by the enemies of the Gospell in the
late daies of Popery. You may remember
what I cited before out of
Du Haillan, concerning matters falsely
obiected to the Albingenses. There is
extant an excursitory Oration of the
Waldenses;Infasciculo rer
                     •
                   expetend. wherein they say, that, for
that their faith which they were ready
to iustifie, they were condemned, iudged,
captiuated, and afflicted; and afterward
that they were called Hereticks:
but in their Confession they
haue it directly;Conses. Walden. 
               Of these criminations
whereof we are blamed of tentimes, we are
nothing at all guilty. The Pope and his
Chaplains were fell & furious against
them, because they did bite so neer:
and therefore, to disgrace them both
in present and to posterity, they held it
fit, that by speech, preaching and writing,
it should be divulgated, that they
taught monstrous blasphemies; that
by that meanes the credulous people
might be preiudicate; and so not onely
frighted from hearkning to them,



but bee much the readier to ioyne in
the prosecution of them to prison and
to death. But what they indeed held,
is declared before. When Iohn Hus
was at the Councell of Constance, hee
did openly call God to witnes, that
Hee did neither preach nor teach those
               Cocleus histor. Hussit. l. 2. Cum articulos istos nunquam tenuerim quos falsi te
                     ••
                  es c
                     ••
                  ra me 
                     〈◊〉
                  , se
                     •••
                  ont aria tenuer
                     •
                  m, 
                     •
                  oc
                     •
                  
                  erim, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  rimque, 
                     〈◊〉
                   praedicau
                     •
                  rim, &c.
               things which his Aduersaries did obiect
against him, neither that they euer came
into his minde. Neither is it to be maruelled,
that they did load his scholars
with the like false accusations, when
their malice was such towards them,
as that they burnt many thousands of
them in Barnes: which was done by
the treachery of one Mainardus.
               L. 8. In other
places the Romanists haue still
held the same course of slandering:
which caused the Protestants to professe
in the Diet at Augusta,
               Sl
                     •
                  idencomment. l. 8. that Diuers
opinions were falsely reported vp and
down, which wrongfully were fathered on
them; and that those were not only estranged
from the holy Scriptures, but that they
were abhorrent euen from common sense.


               
And is it not probable, that long since,
when much darknesse did couer the
face of the earth, that few had grace to
perceiue their dooings, and fewer had
authority to question their doctrine,
the Pope-holy Clergie, which hated
the true gospellers with all their harts,
would pay them with vile & odious
reports; when in this Age, wherein
God hath affoorded more plentifull
meanes to discouer their false-hoods,
they doo dare, not onely in their Sermons,
or in their secreter whisperings,
but in their printed books, to proclaim
abroad concerning vs, most false
and vngodly calumniations and imputations;
as, that wee doo teach all
loosenesse of life and libertinisme by
this our new Gospell; that we maintain,
that All sinnes are equall; that we
hold it as a Maxime, that God is the
Author of sinne; and whatsoeuer it
pleaseth Master Campian and his Fellowes
to inuent and deuise touching
vs: whereas we vtterly disclaim these



and the like positions, as execrable and
vngodly; yea, that Mounti-bank, which
once before I mentioned, hath not
blushed to asseuere, that we so teach,
as that by our doctrine the Protestants
               Certain Articles or forcible rea
                     •
                  ons at Antwerp, 1600
               are bound in conscience, neuer to ask God
forgiuenesse of their sinnes; and that They
are bound in conscience to auoid all good
works; as also, that We make God the only
cause of sinnes; and hold, that God is
worse than the diuell. So shamelesse
was this fellow growne, that hee neither
knoweth nor careth what hee
saith: and yet many a poor Papist, abused
and gulled by the diuels deceiuing
instruments, doth swallow such
Gudgeons, and runneth away with
these things; beeing as verily perswaded
of them, as that the gospel is true.
Such a hand the seminary Priests haue
ouer their disciples, that they may not
read our Books, to see whether these
obiections be true or no; neither may
they hear ought to the contrary. Now,
if they thus vse vs, who can speak for



our selues; will any man maruell, that
those who professed the Verity two
or three hundred yeers since, doo taste
of the malignant aspersions of those
Times?
            The Romanists,Sect. 25. notwithstanding
all this which hath been said, doo not
yet so leaue vs; but once more further
adde, that none of all those which hitherto
haue been named, or can be named,
but in some knowne, consessed,
and vndoubted opinions, did vary
from you: and therefore they and you
may not bee said to bee all of one
Church. Our Masters of Rhemes doo
think, that this lieth hardly vpon vs:
and therefore thus vauntingly they
vrge;
                  In Rom 11. 4. that They will not put the Protestants
to prooue, that there were 7000 of
their Sect, when their new Elias Luther
began: but let them proue, that there were
seuen, or any one, either then, or in all ages
before him, that was in all points of his belief.
What the old Fathers taught, we
may haue time heerafter to shew: but



for other of later time, it is most easie
to manifest, that all those whom before
I haue named, did generally, for
all main matters, teach the same that
we now doo teach. There is no Papist,
who can truely, and without calumniating
them, or faining things
vpon them, demonstrate, that in causes
which touch the substance of faith,
or the foundation of Christian Religion,
they did dissent from vs. Hee that
will try this, let him look on the Declaration
of Walther Bruite,
               In Fox eccles. Story. which I
before mentioned; and let him read it
set down by himself, and not reported
by other. And what did that learned
Lay-man deliuer there, which was
not the belief of Wicklef, and the rest
of the English, professing the Gospell
in those Times? But if there bee, in
some petty matters, yea, questions of
some reasonable moment, difference
of opinion between them and vs, shal
wee not therefore bee of the same
Church with them, or they with vs?



Yes verily: for, otherwise many of the
antient Fathers should not bee of the
Communion of Saints, or Catholick
Congregation, with those who came
after them, and amended their errors:
for,Diuin. 
                     •
                  istitut. l. 7. c. 14. Aug. Ep
                     •
                  st. 48. was not Lactantius spotted with
the Millenary infection? and Cyprian
with the matter of re-baptizing? Had
not Austen an opinion of the necessity
of the Eucharist to bee administred to
children;Ep. 106. & 28 and that infants, being dead
without Baptism, were not onely depriued
of the fruition of heauenly
ioies, but were damned to the pit of
hell, and to euerlasting torments? And
what man, religiously affected, will
suspect,Con
                     •
                  . Carth. in Cyp. oper. but that although S. Cyprian
and the other African Bishops, assembled
in a Councell, did, concerning
the new baptizing of those who were
already baptized by Hereticks, determine
clean contrary to Cornelius and
the rest of the Italian Bishops, yet they
should not bee of the same faith in generall,
and of the same holy Church





               


               
whereof Cornelius was? Saint Austen
can thus write concerning Cyprian:
Whereas that holy man Cyprian (thinking
               De bapt. cont. Donatis.
               otherwise of Baptisme then the matter
was which was afterward handled,
               L. 1. 
               &



with most diligent consideration established)
did remain in the Catholique Vnity;
both by the plentifulnesse of his charity, a
recompence was made; and by the sickle of
his suffering,
               L. 2. 
               there was a purging. In another
place hee saith, The authority of
Cyprian doth not terrifie me, but the humility
of Cyprian doth refresh mee. He
meaneth, that if that worthy man had
liued to haue seene more light in that
argument, or to behold what the succeeding
time had reuealed and concluded
in that behalfe, hee would, in
great humility and meeknes of heart,
haue conformed himself, and yeelded
vnto it: which may iustly seeme for a
true defense of the Waldenses, Io. Wicklef,
Iohn Hus, or any other seruant of
God, who might seeme, in matters of
small moment, to vary from vs.
            
               And thus I trust,Sect. 26. that by this time
it appeareth to euery one who will
not wilfully cloze his eies, and stop his
eares against an apparant truth, that
God hath at all times had his Children
holding the verity of Christian Religion,
and not approouing of the filthy
Superstitions and sacrilegious Idolatries
of the abominable Antichrist of
Rome: So that it is a most fond collection,
that either the Popish Conuocation
or Confusion are the right and
vndoubted Spouse of Iesus Christ; or
else, that for one thousand yeeres together
there was no Church in the
world. They doat much vpon themselues,
and on the opinion of their
beauty, who, in such intolerable deformities,
doe predicate and magnifie
their Synagogue, as the vnspotted wife
& mysticall body of our most blessed
Sauiour. Truth it is, that, intending
to blinde the ignorant, and to abuse
the simple, they labored, by all externall
pomp and shew, to giue to their



hypocrisie & outward formality a settled
opinion of pietie & sanctitie: and
for that cause, there was no corner of
the braine of man, or rather of men, in
many Ages succeeding together, vnsought,
to procure glory to that which
in it selfe was very vnglorious. Their
care therefore was, to conuert the eies
of all persons on their externall hue,
which was maruellously adorned
and garnished to the sense with their
Crosses set vp or carried before somePrefat. catal. testium veritat.
Prelates, with the triple Crowne of
their Popes, in the red Hats of their
Cardinals, the precious attire of some
in their Churches, their prodigious apparel
abroad, the diuers color'd Couls
of their Monks, such singing & chanting
with Organes, such ringing of
Bells, such trimming of Images, and
many more such sensible matters, as
that neither the Iewes nor the Gentiles
had the like. And among al this, if
true Religion in diuers were present, it
is not to be maruelled at, if shee were



scant seene, or if no notice were taken
of her for her poore, and vntrimmed,
or vngarnished hue, for her naked simplicity,
and vnpainted integrity. It was
the commendation giuen to Salomons
Beloued, by whom the Church is represented,Psal. 45. 13.
that the Kings daughter is all
glorious within; her beauty consisting of
purity in faith, verity in doctrine, seuereness
in behauiour, innocency, patience,
and such like spirituall complements.
And these are as much contemned
in others, by the Antichristian
Rabble, as they are neglected in themselues:
whereas their externall pomp,
on the contrary side, is as much despised
by the Lord, as it is magnified in
their fleshly and carnall imaginations.
The Lord direct vs in his own waies,
and call home such as wilfully, or by
ignorance, haue gone astray; that at
length they may bee reduced to the
sheepfold of Christ Iesus: to whom,
with his Father and the blessed Spirit,
be praise for euermore. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   