
      
         
            
            
            A NARRATION,
BRIEFELY CONTAYNING
the Hiſtory of the French Maſſacre,
eſpecially that horrible one at Paris,
which happened in the yeare 1572.
            In the paſſage of which, are handled certaine
Queſtions both Politike and Ethike,
properly fit for Courtiers and States-men.
            The condition alſo of this preſent time is diſcouered,
by comparing it with the ſtate of
thoſe lamentable times.
            Which in true loue and ſincerity are by Gods grace
ſet downe, to be publikely read, and examined, by
the Nobility and Gentry of England, France,
Germany, and the Low-Countries.
            
            
               PROV. SALOM. 24.
They that ſay to the wicked man thou art iuſt, the people ſhall curſe them, and
the companies ſhall hate them: They which rebuke him ſhall be praiſed, and
vpon them ſhall come a bleſſing.
            
               Ibid. Cap. 
                     •
                  9.
A righteous King raiſeth the earth, and righteous men abhorr
                  •
                the vngodly
man.
            LONDON:
Printed by Thomas Snodham.
1618.
         
         
            
            To the
RIGHT REVEREND
Father in God, and moſt worthy Prelate,
Doctor N. F. the
famous Patron of Learning, and learned men,
I doe humbly
giue and dedicate (as a Monument and ſmall Pledge
of my great loue and dutie) this little Hiſtorie,
touching the lamentable ſlaughter of godly
men, throughout the Kingdom of
FRANCE, which happened in
the yeare 1572. on the Feaſt
day of S. Bartholmew,
and the next dayes
following.
*⁎*
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
NARRATION,
CONTAYNING THE
Hiſtorie of the French Maſſacre,
eſpecially that horrible one at
PARIS, which happened in the
yeare 1572.
            Right Reuerend;
            
               I Thinke that no man is ignorant,
vnleſſe he be altogether
a ſtranger to worldly affaires,
that many haue written many
things touching the famous
perſons in Learning, or
Warre, whom this our Age
hath brought forth, as alſo
touching the ſundry occurrences befallen in this
bleſſed Kingdome of England, as alſo in France, Italy,
and the higher and lower Germany: But in ſo
great a number of ancient and Moderne Writers,
I doe wonder there hath beene none, that as yet

hath particularly ſet ſorth that cruell butchery of
good men, made in the Kingdome of France, in the
yeare 1572. on Bartholmew day. Truely, if I knew
it had beene done by any (though it were but by
ſnatches, or in parts, and peeces) I had rather be
ſilent, after the paſſage of ſo many yeares, then
bring forth any thing vnſeaſonably, that might either
breed offence to your Lordſhip, or the Reader.
But (as I haue formerly ſaid) ſeeing I am fully perſwaded,
there is none that already hath purpoſely
dealt in this Argument, I deemed it as free, and as
lawfull for me as for others, to runne in this race,
and in this Field to make tryall of my ſlender
ability.
            Let it pleaſe you therefore (my good Lord) at this
time, when others out of a plentifull & rich harueſt
haue brought to this Bartholmew Faire abundance
and ſtore enough of fruit; That I, out of my little,
barren, and poore Garden, may with a pure heart
and hand offer a few leaues to your liking. And I
beſeech you vouch ſafe to aſſiſt and further me with
your honourable good will, and fauour, in the diſcourſe
and diſcouery of this buſineſſe, according to
your accuſtomed piety, and your remarkeable vertue
and Learning ſo famouſed both in your owne
Countrey, as alſo in forraigne.
            Since then the whole matter is ſo plaine and euident
to all good men, and of vpright iudgement,
it ſhall not be amiſſe, if in the beginning wee ſeeke
out the cauſe from whence ſo hainous and barbarous
an Act proceeded. It is certaine (if wee may
beleeue Caeſar in his Commentaries) that the French
               
Nation was of old ſo fierce and cruell, that they did
be-ſmeare euen their Altars with humane blood,
they would hale and teare innocent and harmeleſſe
men to be ſacrificed: Nay more, that robberies and
out-rages, done out of the Walles and borders of
their Cittie, they did not account diſhoneſt, or to
be blamed. But from the time that it was once reformed
by lawes, and worthy diſcipline, and that it
learned to obey one King, it preſently fell from that
rude and barbarous kinde of life to humanity, and
Ciuility; So as at this inſtant we may truly, and
not vnfitly terme Fraunce, the Mother of Ciutill courteſie,
and that from our ſelues, by our owne experience.
But before I wade further into other things,
me thinks this one cauſe ſhould be firſt chiefly examined,
namely, from whence that Nation (once
ſo cruell and ſauage, and now ſtyled with the praiſe
of Courteſie and Ciuility)
ſhould draw the matter and
ground-worke of this wicked and perfidious deed
we now ſpeake of? And more; what ſhould moue
Charles their King, then of greene and tender yeres,
(from whom nothing but Acts of glory and Nobility
were expected, both in regard of his excellent
forwardneſſe, as of his moſt Royall diſpoſition
both in body and minde,) that he ſhould ſo fauour
theſe men, which vnder the pretext and counterfait
zeale of ancient Religion, bring about and compaſſe
any thing with the ſimple people? From hence it is
that theſe griefes ariſe; by this onely bait was King
Charles caught; by theſe circumſtances and by-wayes
was that Prince led and miſſe-led, being in
his firſt yeares Noble, milde, and gentle; That hee

(with griefe I ſpeake it) in whom (as Buchanan the
Prince of Poets in our age, ſaith godly and truely)
the Image of the moſt high God ought to be, and
ſhine, ſhould abandon himſelfe to wickedneſſe and
villany, and all manner of impudency and periury.
But that Chriſt (the mouth of Truth) hath fore-told
it ſhould be ſo, that Religion, which ſhould be the
bond of Peace and Society, yet often through the
ſubtilty of Sathan, and malice of men, proueth the
occaſion and matter of vproares, debate, and tumults.
And verily, he that writ this, writ not vainely,
neither did hee write toyes or fables when hee
ſaid,—
            
               Quod ſaepius lim
               Relligio peperit ſceleroſa atque impia facta.
            
            
               That Religion of yore hath brought.
               Forth, deeds vile, wicked and nought.
            
            And in another place;
            
               Tantum Relligio potuit ſuadere malorum.
            
            
               Religion hath the skill
               To perſwade to much ill.
            
            But that we may come to the purpoſe, and our
ſpeech may returne from whence it hath digreſſed,
he is farre out of the way that perſwades himſelfe,
or imagineth, that this deed ſo deteſtable was bred
or forged in any other place, then in the ſhop of the
Biſhop of Rome, the Anuile of all wickedneſſe. Neuertheleſſe,
it is not to be thought that this Pylote
ſate alone at the Helme in this Shippe, (ſo fully
fraught with all impiety) but that he had Mariners,
and Sea-faring fellowes enow of that ſort, carefully

trained vp in any villany. For firſt, what parts in
this Act and deed may not the Conſpiracie of the
Councell of Trent challenge to it ſelfe? What Company
in this Army doth not the encouragement of
the Cardinals and Spaniards lead? What hath not
the furie and rage of the cut-throat Ieſuits attempted
in theſe Tents and fields of vngodlineſſe? who
make their daily vowes and prayers to ſpill the life
and bloud of godly Kings and Princes, eſpecially of
thoſe, which either in words or deeds deny to yeeld
any duty or homage to this rauenous Wolfe of
Rome. And that nothing (forſooth) might be wanting,
there was added to this Councell, (and ſo holy
Congregation) the Councell deuiſed and aduiſed by
that Family which long ſince hath ſo greedily thirſted
after the bloud of good and godly men, which
when I name to be the family of Guyſe, I doe euen
in one breath ſhut vp the many, yea the infinite miſeries
and calamities of France: This is that family
that inſtructed the King in all the wicked principles
of Craft & Deceipt, and egg'd him on to that foule &
moſt abhominable deed. This is that, which had rather
haue all France vtterly to ſinke and periſh, then
ſee (much leſſe indure) any great man to reſide in
the Kings Court, who hath been either noted to be
of Religion reformed, or accounted famous for learning
and vertue. Of this family (ſo praiſe-worthy)
not any vnprofitable or baſe and vnworthy Member
but the very Head was that notable and Memorable
Cardinall, whom whoſoeuer it was that matched
with a certaine Councellour of the Emperour
Decius, did him right, of whom the Eccleſiaſticall

Hiſtorie writeth, that hee was called The Miniſter of
the Deuill, becauſe (farre worſe, and more miſchienous
then the Emperour himſelfe) he ſtirred vp and
incenſed as many as he could againſt the Chriſtians.
This is that ſcarlet Cardinall, whom one termed
(not vnfitly) The Cateline of our time, that by fraude
or treacheries, by right or wrong, omitted not to
inuent a thouſand meanes of doing miſchiefe.
            
               He would reioyce and take a great delight,
               If he could once draw Brethren euen to fight.
            
            All his felicity was to fill houſholds full of batred
and enmity, that purpled hindge and proppe of the
Romaine Biſhop, left nothing vndone that might cut
aſunder the conditions of Peace, and might nouriſh
the ſeeds of warre, and diſcords, or giue fuell to
the fire of factions, vproares, and murthers. To
conclude, in that very deed, that vaſſaile of Antichriſt
might ſhew there is no miſchiefe or attempt
ſo fowle or hatefull, which hath not iſſued from out
the Popes roofe. There is nothing in this Clergy
ſound or vnſpotted; Nothing ſo holy or ſanctified,
which perfidious people vſe not to breake and blemiſh
with their periuries. Witneſſes hereof are innumerable
Popes, many Cardinals, and he Principall,
of whom (euen now) we made mention, not to
his praiſe or good report, but as he deſerued, for his
cruelty and inhumane dealings, committed againſt
good and learned men; yea, againſt his own Countrey,
to his perpetuall ſhame and infamy. This
marke hath that man (in life and conuerſation ſo

impure and impudent) branded himſelfe withall,
and it will neuer be wiped away, or blotted out of
remembrance, ſo long as there remaines in France
any relique of Vertue or Learning; Nay, the 
                  〈◊〉
               
impoſtures, and wicked practiſes of this Scarlet-Prelate,
ſhall liue to the memory of Poſteritie, ſo long
as the Chriſtian world endures. This Man forſooth,
and Men of the ſame coate (whoſe hearts harbour
nothing but wicked thoughts and purpoſes) will be
the light of the world, and not the ſpight; the band,
and not the fire-brand; the beſt, and not the beaſts;
Theſe (I ſay) will be the Salt of the earth, who not
onely haue that little they haue vnſauory, and vnfit
for vſe, but as Saluſt ſayes of Cateline, which is
worſe, are of an euill and peruerſe diſpoſition, impudent,
vndermyning, and changeable: Theſe (to
be ſhort) are thoſe good Shepheards which endeauor
not to teach & feed their flock, but are no ſooner
entred into holy Orders, but are giuen to ciuill
warres, murthers and rapines, learne to deuoure
their ſheepe, and (as I may ſpeake with Homer) to
weaue deceipts; or as Plautus ſayes, neatly to frame
tales and entrappings for them. And this (I warrant
you) gets them great praiſe. Let men of vpright
iudgement cenſure theſe things, and if they be ſilent
and will not, the very ſtones will ſpeake in many
Prouninces of France eſpecially, as alſo in the greateſt
part of Italy, and throughout all Spaine, where the
Popes crafts are not yet diſcouered, but by the iuſt
iudgement of God, lye ſtill lurking, and vnreuealed:
Which notwithſtanding, that in their due time
they may be brought to light, in ſpight of Sathan

and the wicked-minded, Time, nay, God himſelfe
will bring about. Howſoeuer let this be throughly
imprinted in all mens minds, that there is neuer any
thing more cruell, or more working, then is Idolatry,
or the falſe worſhip of God, which as often as it is
voyde of Reaſon and Truth, ſeekes to maintaine it
ſelfe by force, fire, and ſword, and by all meanes to
bereaue the true worſhippers of God, of the goods
and wealth they poſſeſſe; of the life and breath they
draw; of the light they enioy. Neither let any wonder
here, or be diſmayd, that this both is and was
from time to time, and is like to be ſtill, the lot of the
Church, which, as the kingly Prophet witneſſeth, hath
from her Youth vpwards beene afflicted with many
diſtreſſes, vexed with iniuries and revilements, and
toſſed with many ſtormes and tempeſts: Yet let not
any man be in this hereſie, that hee iudge the true
Religion, which we learne out of the Olde and New
Teſtament, to be the cauſe of warres, vproares,
and ſeditions, nor that theſe things are to be aſcribed
to true -Religion, which by accident proceed againſt
the Truth, through the malice of men, and of
the Deuill, God forbid. Neither, when I write this,
doe I write contrarieties; for here I meane the true
and right Religion, peaceable and quiet, not that
which out of Lucretius we haue noted to be wicked,
turbulent, and quarelſome, nor that Religion ſo ſtained
and disfigured with Popiſh infections, and with
the Ieſuiticall itch of lying & ſcandalizing. Let them
(whoſoeuer they be) that liue in the Popiſh blindnes
deny if they can, with a ſafe and ſure conſcience,
whither, ſince through the goodneſſe of God, the

light of the Goſpell, and true Religion hath cleerely
ſhined, the rage and outrage of the Popiſh kingdome
hath not encreaſed? whether out of the ſame ſtorehouſe
haue not come innumerable lyes, menaces, &
hatreds againſt the Churches of the Goſpel? yet it was
ſo. For (to confirme this our obſeruation) as ſoone
as (King Henry being dead) the Churches in France,
which were neglected afflicted, and oppreſſed, and
lay in obſcurity, began to peere out, and riſe; behold
that Arch-worke-maſter of all deceipt and wickedneſſe,
that Factor for the Romane Biſhop, the Cardinall
of Lorraine, (whom a while ſince wee haue
ſomewhat deciphered) that he might make all poſſible
way to his impious deeds and Tyranny, and
might purchaſe Power ouer the life and goods of
ſuch as were good men, began to driue all thoſe
from the Kings Court, whom he thought able to
croſſe his faction, or withſtand his godleſſe and wicked
attempts, and behaued himſelfe with ſuch malice
and inſolence againſt the Peeres, and other Nobles
of Fraunce, that they conſulted together how
they might ſuppreſſe the immeaſurable ambition
of this Man, and of his whole family; wherupon did
ariſe many grieuous and deadly ryots and inſurrections,
as well at Amboyſe, as elſewhere in Fraunce.
Then did hee hereupon ſcandalize the Churches,
and the chiefe Men and Rulers of the true Religion,
with inſpeakeable calumniations. Then did hee
burthen them with lyes, ſlanders and deceipts; nay,
that this deſperate miſcreant and out-caſt-wretch,
might not ouerſlip any nefarious enterpriſe, he did
then charge them with many faigned and deuiſed

offences. It is ſurely a thing worth the telling, to
ſhew with what wiles and tricks this Cardinall could
leade and miſſe-leade a number of people: For euen
as once the Iewes were, in ſcorne, called of the
Gentiles, the Sabbotheans; and the Chriſtians, of Iulian
the Apoſtata, the Galileans: Euen ſo then, they
which imbraced the true Doctrine, that they might
be accuſed as of ſtrange errours before the Solemnity
of the Cardinals holy-dayes, were begun to be
called Hugenets; which in-auſpitious name, firſt
found and inuented by an vnfortunate and accurſed
Man, ſticke in the memory of the people of
France; Fye vpon both the manner and matter of
a wicked deed, and wicked ſeed: Neuertheleſſe, let
vs ſee vpon what ground-worke this ridiculous deuiſe
is founded, and that the Cardinall, and his Aſſociates,
are buſied rather in any other thing, than
in reading and meditating the holy Scriptures.
Thus therefore it is that this honeſt man would
haue them named Hugonets, of a certaine viſion,
which about that time in the night neere vnto the
Towne of Tiſrwin, the common people (that beaſt
of many heads) beleeued to wander vp and downe:
And now my friends can you forbeare laughing?
It was thought to be the Ghoſt of a certaine Monke
called Hugh, lately deceaſed, and becauſe in thoſe
times the Chriſtians, through perſecutions, were
compelled to keepe their meetings in the night, hee
cauſed them to be named Hugonets. Whileſt theſe
things were in doing, and that not one in the whole
kingdome was found that durſt take in hand the
cauſe godly men, & of the afflicted Church, our

Lord God euen beyond all hope & expectation endewed
that moſt honourable and valiant Nobleman
Caſpar Caligni, high Admirall of France, with the
ſpirit of fortitude and incredible zeale, ſo as with an
vndaunted courage, in the very middeſt of the tumults
and vproares, he preſented a Confeſſion of
their faith to the King himſelfe, Francis the ſecond,
in the name of the reformed Churches in Fraunce,
and pleaded their cauſe with wonderfull wiſedome
and ſtoutneſſe, at the Kings Priuie Councell Table, in
the Tower called Callirrhoe. This deed of his, how
much hatred and enuie it purchaſed vnto him,
(though otherwiſe a man in high fauour with the
King) cannot eaſily be expreſſed. After this, all the
rowte and crue of the Popelings made him their
onely marke to ſhoote at: He was the man whom
they aſſalted with all their weapons: He the Prince
on whom thoſe wicked and loathed ſociety caſt all
their reproaches and contumelies: Aboue the reſt
the family of the Guyſes were neuer wearied with
rolling this ſtone, and aduancing this abhominable
and prodigious deſigne, that it might glut it ſelfe
with the French blood, for which it thirſted, and
might alone gouerne all the affaires of the Kingdome.
They haue in very deed approoued that
Verſe of Lucan to be no toye or idle tale,

                  Nulla fides regni ſociis omniſque poteſtas,
                  Impatiens conſortis erit.
               
               
                  There is no truſt in fellow-Kings,
                  Rule, with a Riuall, enuy brings.
               
            
            A great power being leuied and gathered at

               Orleance, where they ruled K. Francis as they liſted,
this vngodly family held a Counſel concerning the
Prince of Condee, whom they had impriſoned, and
concerning many other honourable Perſonages, either
to behead them, or to puniſh them with the
amercement of ſome great fine to be impoſed vpon
them: Or if they dealt more mildly with any, to
baniſh and out-lawe them. Who may not here
cry out?
            
               Quid non impietas deſignat?
            
            
               Oh what will not ſinne and vice attempt?
            
            
               Item.
            
            
               O furor, ô nimium dominandi innata cupido!
            
            
               Oh rage, oh too much inbred thirſt of rule!
            
            Meane while, he that by his prouidence, as out of
a watch-Tower, beholdeth all things did breake aſunder
theſe cruell complots, and commaunded
King Francis, breathing out fearefull ſlaughters, to
yeeld and ſurrender his laſt breath▪ But what of that?
Doe you thinke that this wicked generation was
any thing mooued at the iudgements of God, or at
this example, ſo freſh and euident? No, nothing at
all: But as the Prophet ſayes, The brutiſh generation
of the wicked, is ſtarke blinde in the iudgements of God,
and hath their breſt ouercaſt and clowded with a thicke
miſt of ignorance: And a factious company, deuoted
and giuen ouer to ſinne, reioyce with triumph in
their ſinne, and ſay in their hearts, God doth not looke
vpon theſe things.
            
            Therefore theſe blinde men, and leaders of the
blinde, theſe enemies of Truth, were not beaten
backe from their wicked hopes and ſinnefull practiſes

againſt Chriſt, no, not then, when (young King
Francis being dead) whom they had abuſed to the
deſtruction of good and godly men, the Churches
began euery where to take breath, and ſprowt out;
but euen preſently they renewed their conſultations,
and went about to entangle ſome with pleaſure
and cunning deuiſes, as Anthony King of Nanarre;
ſome to affright with murthers, and all ſorts
of cruelty, the foundation of which they lay in the
Towne of Vaſsien, and thruſt the miſerable Realme
into three moſt bitter ciuill warres, for the ſpace of
tenne whole yeares. It were a hard thing (or rather
impoſſible for me to reckon vp all their kindes of
cruelty by which the Popelings in France haue outſtripped
the very Tigers and Lyons themſelues; Yet
can I not winke at, or ouer-skip the horrible deedes
of the men of Orleance: Theſe men in the yeare 69.
in one day putting fire vnderneath, burnt in diuers
priſons aboue two hundred men of all degrees.
Who ſo vnderſtandeth not, that from them, that ſauage
and barbarous hatred againſt the Admirall, and
the French Churches, tooke beginning, and encreaſe,
him I iudge to ſee nothing in a moſt cleare
light.
            Let vs in the meane while conſider what we may
learne from that ſelfe-ſame hatefull peace, which
once was reſtored and ſet on foote in France. And
firſt this that the Lord doth graunt certaine truces
for a time, leſt with the continuance of miſchiefes,
the godly ſhould altogether faint and grow feeble,
next, in the vncertainty of that Peace, and the great
alteration of things which for full ten yeares was in

               France, wee may obſerue that no true Peace can be
between the World and the true Church: which let the
Low-Countries and Chriſtian Princes marke, that we
may wholly relye on that peace which God affordeth
vs, and alwaies take heed to our ſelues of the
world, which hateth the light, and the Sons of light,
and hath this reſolution, if it can, to blot and raze
out the very name of Truth, and the Goſpell.
            
            But now to the purpoſe: When as the enemies in
two ſull yeares could not by skirmiſhes ouerthrow
the forces of the reformed, who wearied, did often
refreſh themſelues; nor were able either with poyſon,
which they often attempted, to make away, or
in battaile to ouercome and get the victory, the Admirall
being Generall of the hoſte, a man for paines
vntyred, for dangers valerous, for practiſe skilfull,
for aduice diſcreet and wiſe, they determined to
try it another way; ſeeing by open fight they could
profit nothing, that by ſubtilties and deceipt, in
which the vngodly are moſt experienced, and by
putting on the falſe name of Peace, they might get
the vpper hand: So, when they knew the reuerence
of the reformed Princes, of the Admirall, and of the
whole Nobility, to be great towards the King, and
that little credit would be giuen to them if they
ſhould treate of Peace, which they had ſo many
times broken and infringed, they make the King
himſelfe to perſonate and be actor of their Tragedy,
who to that purpoſe auowed hee would haue nothing
more holily and more religiouſly obſerued
then the Peace, and thereupon in countenance and
ſpeech yeelded the greateſt intimation hee could of

rendering and wiſhing well to the Nobility of the
Goſpell, and entertained Teligni, the Sonne in law of
the Admirall, to many his ſecret counſels. He did
moreouer by all meanes ſet forward that marriage
of the King of Nauarre with his Siſter, as the moſt
holy bond and pledge of Peace, and made often
motion that it might be haſtened. What did hee
more? He fained he was farre at oddes with the
Pope himſelfe, and tooke it exceeding ill at his
hands, that he ſhould warne him by his Legate not
to marry his Siſter to an Heretique Prince. But oh
accurſed and vnlucky Nupitails. Oh diſmall and
vnhallowed Bridall. A Bridall they call it: That
name they do paint on their Sinne, for that was the
diſmall day, the firſt of annoy, not of ioy, and the
firſt ſowrce and ſpring of all miſchiefe.
            And although that marriage might then ſeeme
to the French Nobility full of honour and concord,
there were notwithſtanding ſome politike perſons,
& of greater iudgement then others, who thoght otherwiſe,
& were not beſide the matter; for by this it
came to paſſe that the King very earneſtly ſent for
the Peeres and Nobles of the Reformed Religion, out
of all his kingdome, not ſo much to a Bridall, as to
a Buriall: At which time, had not their minds been
very careleſſe, or rather had it not beene the Chriſtians
deſtiny (if I may ſo ſpeake) that their houre
of death and extreame calamity was come, many
fore-tokens and vnhappy ſignes might haue forewarned
that miſchance, as the ſodaine and vnthought-of
deceaſe of the Queene of Nauarr: the
bitter menaces of the Popelings throughout all the

Realme, who vaunted that Peace would be ſlight
and ſhort; the ſecret conference of the Cardinall
Lorraine with the Duke of Alba; his going to Rome
about a Sinode; great troopes of Souldiers placed
in Roane field, vnder this pretence, that a Nauie
muſt be rigged out againſt the Duke of Alba, and
many like matters.
            But yet when the Princes of the reformed Religion
had wholly prepared themſelues, at their great
charges, to this wedding, (as the Sonnes of God are
more ſimple and leſſe apprehenſiue then the ſonnes
of this world, and light beleofe is rather an ouerſight,
then a fault) as to mirth, and the delight of
the King, and that the King did daily either enrich
them with gifts, or bewitch them with flatteries,
who would not haue thought here had beene ſure
truſt? But, good God, how eaſily doth the countenance
deceiue vs; when as the ſelfe-ſame King
did ſo entertaine the Admirall himſelfe, as if hee
had beene the moſt inward partaker of his deepeſt
ſecrets?
            But alas, alas, on the fourth day after this Wedding,
came that laſt day and ineuitable fate: For as
that moſt valiant Prince, the Admirall, at dinnertime
returned homewards from the Court, hee was
ſhot through both his hands with a bullet out of a
Piſtoll: And (oh griefe) what hands? Let him heare,
and all France remember, euen thoſe hands which
had beene borne, made, and vowed for recouering
the liberty and Peace of France. But when as, after
this wound receaued, he preſently fell not dead, and
that the bullet had pierced his hands onely, and not

his heart, as that impious faction and crew had
well hoped, the Conſpiratours and bloud-ſuckers
thought fit, with their wondrous diſſimulation, to
draw our men on ſtill, and to conceale their treaſon:
The King vpon that report, bends his eyes and
countenance to ſorrow, and commaunds that the
party guilty of that act ſhould be enquired out,
promiſing and proclayming rewards to him or
them which ſhould apprehend him; ſends Letters
by Poſt-horſes into all the Prouinces of France; in
which he proteſts that this heauy miſchance of the
Admirall grieues him to the heart, and that he will
reuenge this deed by ſome notable exemplary puniſhment.
            To conclude, that the Nobility of the true Religion,
which was grieuouſly troubled with ſo haynous
an act, might be ſecure, and all ſuſpition taken
away, that they might at vnawares and vnpronided
be ſurprized; the King himſelfe, accompanied
with his Mother, and Brethren, repaires to viſite
the Admirall, layd on his bed, ſpeakes to him very
kindly, and encourageth him to be of good cheere,
aſſuring him certainely that he will throughly reuenge
ſo vilde an offence. That vertuous Nobleman
then turning himſelfe to the King, I am not
(ſaith he, my Soueraigne Liege) carefull about this
my wound, nor about the puniſhment of the Authour
of this deed, for that I referre, as this my life,
ſo all my reuenge vnto God, to whom I wholly
make my complaint, and whoſe ſight in Heauen
will be the end of my labours, which I had beene to
vndergoe in this life, and the full fruition of my

true happineſſe: But if it ſhall pleaſe my gracious
and great God to call me from this my worldly ſtation,
theſe three things (my dread Soueraigne) do I
moſt humbly craue and entreat of your Highneſſe;
            
               Firſt, That you neuer will ſuffer the Peace now ſetled
in your Realme to be broken.
            
               Next, That you fully perſwade your ſelfe, that it concernes
the renowne, glory, and ſafety of your ſtate, to
giue ayde and aſsiſtance to the people of the Low-Countries,
moſt vpright men, and moſt vnworthily oppreſsed,
againſt that cruell and barbarous Tyrant the Duke of
Alba.
            
            
               Laſtly, Let this be ſtedfaſtly beleeued of you, that in
all my actions I accounted nothing more worthy, or more
to be regarded, then to defend the authority of your Maieſties
commands againſt men turbulent, enemies of their
Countries liberty, and endeauouring nothing but the ouerthrowe
of their King, and the lawes of God: And
this aſſure your ſelfe, that I alwayes haue, and will be
ready for the good and ſafegard of your Realme, to expoſe
my life and bloud to all kindes of danger.
            Theſe, and ſuch like ſpeeches did that worthy
Nobleman, full of courage and magnanimity,
though at that time faint and feeble of body, pronounce
conſtantly and ſincerely. The King gone
from thence, to free the Admirall and the other
Peeres of all feare and ſuſpition, commandeth ſome
ſelect Souldiers of his Guard, ſuch as the Admirall
himſelfe would appoint, to be placed in that ſtreet,
who ſhould take care leſt either the people of Paris,
or any others ſhould aſſault the Admirals houſe:
The King likewiſe commandeth, that for many of

the Peeres and Religions Nobles, addicted to the Admirall,
which were here and there diuerſly diſperſed
through the Citie, there ſhould be lodgings prouided
in the ſelfe ſame ſtreete, that ſo ioyned together
they might be the ſafer, or rather, that coupled together
in one heape, as ſheepe appointed for the
ſlaughter, they might at one blowe be butchered.
Who then will doubt, that there are many regions
between the tongue and the thoughts, many cranies
and blinde corners in the mindes of men? who
waighing theſe things, may doubt the ſpeech of
Truth to be ſimple, but faynings, craft, & lyes to be
full of intricate inuolutions, and to ſtand in need of
many ſhadowes, and pretences? There cannot aſſuredly
any more plaine or foule example be giuen
of a diſſembling and deceiptfull minde.
            Oh good God, that ſuch things ſhould enter into
the heart of a Chriſtian, yea, into the minde of any
man, were he neuer ſo vile, much leſſe into the heart
of a moſt Chriſtian king, the Maieſty and dignitie
of whoſe name onely, vnleſſe it withhold vs, what
ſhall we here finde either kingly or commendable?
But I pray you: To be changeable, ſubtile, thirſting
after the blood of the Nobles, to be a fainer and
diſſembler, may you ſay theſe are vertues beſeeming
a Prince, and Chriſtian king? God forbid. Let vs therefore
learne by this that we are oftentimes, moſt ſimple
in thoſe things wherein we ſhould be moſt wiſe,
That the fauour of Court is as brittle as Glaſſe. And let
all Courtiers learne here that be honeſt men, and
ſuch as beſt deſetue at their Princes hands. That it
can hardly be they ſhould eſcape ENUY, HATRED, DESTRUCTIŌ,

               impriſonments and other calamities. Let them beſides
marke aduiſedly. how changeable the courſe of
things is in Court. I will, though I digreſſe a little,
briefly and cloſely expreſſe what I meane. I omit
ancient matters. But is there any that knows not the
example of a lamentable caſe which wee haue in
Papinian, in Peter de Vineis, Moore Aluar de Luna,
Iames Corde, & Columbus, who was moſt ſhamefully
and vnworthily ouerthrowne by Bombadilla; in Cominaus
alſo, Buſſonus, Conſaluns, and infinite others?
Nor are there examples old, and new wanting of
this, in the Courts of the Germane Princes. What if
we think of that ſo late, and freſh in memory, which
fell out in this your bleſſed Realme of England, and in
the Realme of France? Doth not this Italian, ſo quickly
raiſed out of the duſt, without any deſert of his, to
ſuch great wealth and honours, giue vs an apparant
example hereof? vnleſſe they be ſtarke blind, all men
ſee it plainely. Therefore if we haue any wit, let vs
be taught by the example of others, and not ſlightly
paſſe ouer the remembrance of what happened to
the Admirall, a moſt valerous Peere of happy memory.
For (Oh good God) how ſoone, how eaſily,
was King Charles carried from his accuſtomed courteſie,
and mildeneſſe towards the Admirall and his
followers, vnto an incredible diſtaſte, and bitternes;
ſo as himſelfe procured the cheife Nobles of the reformed
Religion, & amongſt thereſt that moſt valiant
worthy, and the very Atlas of all France, to be murthered
in the Court and entrance of his Pallace, and
out of his windowes (with ſhame enough) called
vpon his guard, and animated them on to doe thoſe

villanies? yet could they ſcarce ſatisfie his deſire
therein, it was ſo great, and greedy. On the ſame
day therefore which was the foure and twentieth
of Auguſt, about foure of the clocke in the morning,
when thoſe Noblemen were all of them ſound aſleepe,
and the Admirall himſelfe had prepared
himſelfe ready for reſt: Behold, at vnawares, there
was a great hurly-burly in the ſame ſtreete, a huge
noyſe, and at the very ſame inſtant Ryots and Aſſaults
on euery houſe. What doe they then thinke
you? The ſauage and vnruly Souldiers breake
downe the dores, hurry and ouerturne all things.
Then, I beſeech you, of what minde ſhall we thinke
that godly and ſore-wounded Peere was? Surely,
not forgetting his woonted conſtancy when hee
ſaw his death, yea moſt cruell death, inſtantly to
approach, hee willed a Miniſter of Gods Word,
whom hee had about him in his Chamber to ſay
prayers, and wholly gaue himſelfe to godly and deuout
meditations: Afterwards ſending away his
Seruants, that euery one as well as he could might
ſhift for himſelfe, weakely raiſing himſelfe out of his
bed, he ſat downe on a ſtoole, that hee might, as it
were, goe meete death, which hee knew, and did
foreſee would be happy for him in the Lord: And
what he had formerly preſaged in his mind, fell out
afterwards ſo indeed; for without any ſtop or ſtay,
a damned villaine, choſen out of the whole rabble,
a ſhameleſſe cutter and cut-throat of the traine of
the Duke of Guyſe, after he had made himſelfe way
with his ſword to the Admirals Chamber (oh deed
moſt wicked and accurſed) driuing his Launce

with all his maine force, he pearc't through his ſides
and intrailes. Then came another ympe of Sathan,
who with gaſhes bemangled his Heroicall and Peereleſſe
face. Oh deſperate villaines, oh Deuils incarnate,
oh monſters and prodigious men! Could not
the reuenging hand of the moſt powerfull God (oh
wicked and deteſtable Souldier) reſtraine and aſtoniſh
thee? Could not the Chambers threaſhold, the
very walls, nor the countenance of ſo great a Peere
(whoſe name had always beene dreadfull to all
wicked and hatefull perſons) affright or amaze thee?
Could not the words of this great & godly Captain
moue thee to pitty; who with a loud voice admoniſhed
that firſt cut-throat ruſhing into his Chamber,
that he ſhould ſpare him, a man now of great yeres,
and ſore wounded? Nay, which is more, this Peere
more then halfe dead, was then throwne headlong
out of his Chamber window, that the eyes of the
Dukes of Annale, of Guyſe, and his other enemies,
who in the backeſide of the houſe ſtood longing for
that ſight, might be glutted and ſatisfied; and that
(as the Grecians did in times paſt to dead Hector)
they might inſult and triumph ouer him.
            O ſauage and barbarous men, who breaking all
the barres of ſhame and of Nature her ſelfe, that one
vnpardonable ſin might be heaped vpon the necke
of another, doe furiouſly aſſault all the other Peeres
and Nobles; Men of all degrees are maſſacred; all
the houſhold of the King of Nauarre, and Prince of
Condee are ſlaine; they of moſt name amongſt the
other Nobles, the Earle of Rupefueldanus, and Tel
                     •
                  gni,
the Admirals Sonne in Law, whom the King

before ſeemed to hold ſo deere, that hee could not
be without them, were all put to the ſword.
            Oh damnable and inexorable Man-killers, for
whom it was not enough to ſlaughter and mangle
their bodies, but that they runne alſo vpon their
goods, which were then layd open to the will and
prey of theſe cut-throats, who in their owne eſtates
before, hauing been moſt needy, baſe, & ragged, are
now with other mens goods profuſe and riotous:
Neither had any good man any thing in his houſe
of any ancient Monument from his Anceſtors; any
thing (I ſay) neuer ſo deare, or well-eſteemed, that
could ſcape the clutches of theſe rapinous theeues
and burglarers. The carkaſſe of the Admirall was
haled into the ſtreetes, and abuſed with infinite reproaches
by the raſh, baſe, and ignoble vulgar, and
a long time tumbled vp and downe in the kennels
and durt: At laſt, the head being cut off (which
ſome ſay was ſent to Rome was moſt deſpightfully
hanged vp on a publique gallowes without the Citie.
Oh vnworthy deed! oh madneſſe! oh barbarous
furie, and moſt eſtranged from all ſence or feeling
of humanity! Did it become your enuy and
treachery to dragge a man to an ignominious execution
of Natures frame, almoſt diuine, and of a
minde altogether good and great; a man fit to haue
beene kept for the doubtfulleſt and hardeſt times
of the Common-wealth, whom his moſt famous deſeruings
towards his Countrey, his many noble acts,
and the glory of his vertue had raiſed vp to Heauen?
And yet for all this he had nothing left him, which
the rage and fury of the Souldiers could deprine

him of. But what could not be taken from a valiant
and godly man, a ſtedfaſt faith in God, an immortall
memory of his name and reputation; thoſe,
neither wounds, nor words, nor bloudy cut-throates
could bereaue from him.
            Whilſt theſe things are thus done at Paris, and
that the King had willed the Captaine of theſe men
to ſtay the ſight, whilſt the body of the Admirall
was abuſed in the ſtreets with all manner of iniuries;
then after this began the ſeditious Cittizens to run
in heaps into the ſtreets to aſſaile people of euery
Sex, and degree, and to ruſh euery where in the
darke, making confuſion of all things, as if an eternal
night had ouerſpred the kingdome: What ſay you
to this? That very many, euen well affected to the
Popſh Religion were ſlaine, and extremitie ſhowne
euen to the very Counſellors of the Parliament, if
any amongſt them were of a milder temper then
they. Be this knowne to all good men, that no light
or fluency of Eloquence can be ſuch; no man can be
ſtored with ſuch abundance, and facility of ſpeech,
that he may be able to deliuer the deadly ſpoiles and
deaths of that day: For what degree of miſchiefe can
be added to the vnbridled, and vntamed lycentiouſneſſe
of theſe conſpirators, ſeeing there is nothing
ſo common as breath to the liuing, earth to the dead?
Theſe men after they had taken away life, did either
caſt the very carkaſes to be torne and rent of dogs,
or threw them into the riuers: ſo was a Woman,
for vertue and lynage moſt noble, and excellently
learned aboue her Sexe, the Lady of Iuern, with her
daughters: ſo were two ſiſters, women of Orleance,
               
throwne into the Riuer of Soame, becauſe they refuſed
to heare their ſacrilegious Maſſe; and had rather
ſhed their life and bloud, then that they would
forſake the true, and ſincere Religion. After theſe
ſinnes ſo horrible, and abhominable; What thinke
you was done next? Any breſt, in which there is
the leaſt drop of remorſe, may heare it, and lament.
The Pariſians reioyce, with all merriments; they
triumph openly with ioy; they goe on Proceſſion,
to giue thankes to their Saints and Idols, as for a thing
done brauely. Oh blinde, and impious thoughts of
men, oh trunkes, oh ſtockes and ſtones! Good God,
can theſe things enter into the hearts of Chriſtians?
But let vs proceede, and with griefe wee ſhall ſee,
that no ſort of wickedneſſe was omitted in this enterpriſe.
They fained, that God by a new miracle,
did approue and allow of theſe murthers, and that
in the great Church-yard of Saint Innocents, as they
tearme it, a certaine Hawthorne-buſh, that neuer
before had budded, did on the ſodaine, in that accurſed
day, bud and flouriſh; which buſh, the Duke
of Aniow the Kings brother, with a great traine of
them of Paris and Orleance, would needes ſee, kiſſe,
and adore. What impiety, (I pray you) what barbarouſneſſe
can be greater then this? or what more
franticke part is there, then that theſe men ſhould
inuent ſuch a m
                  •
               racle, to witneſſe their phrenſie, and
make their madneſſe more manifeſt to the world?
            Then forſooth did buſhes flouriſh; it was not
the buſh, but deceit that flouriſhed, wickedneſſe
flouriſhed; & for a time the vngodly flouriſhed, but
they ſhall wither at the laſt, & be adiudged to euerlaſting

fire; as ſtraw, or ſtubble, they ſhall be conſumed.
Neither yet, after that diſmall day, did the
cruelty of theſe robbers and Aſſaſsines ceaſe or giue
ouer; for there were then ſent, euen when there was
weeping and wailing through the whole citie, and
that in all the ſtreetes thereof many were cruelly
ſlaine; either of the Nobilitie, or of the Counſellors
and Aduocates, or of the moſt notable Profeſſours of
the Vniuerſitie, or of the Merchants: Some (I ſay)
were ſent, euen of the King (oh deede nothing kingly!)
which in euery houſe, and inward roome of the
houſe ſhould make diligent ſearch, if any hidden by
chance, had eſcaped the hands of theſe murtherers.
Hereupon a moſt huge ſlaughter is made againe;
neigther (as I may ſpeake with the Poet) was then,
the Hoſte from Gueſt, or Gueſt from Hoſte was ſafe. Many
perſons, of great and high name and eſtimation,
were committed to the Goales; if any of them refuſed
to heare their execrable Maſſe, they had ſtraight
their throates cut, and tumbled headlong into the
Riuer. For the vpſhot, that all in generall might
taſte of their rage and cruelty, and that all things in
the whole kingdome might be turned topſi-turuie,
with Letters ſent by Poſtes, and with what meanes
they can, they perſwade the Gouernours of Prouinces,
and the Cities of the Kingdome, by their example,
vtterly, and without exception, to make away
and roote out all thoſe that were of the reformed
Religion. Neuertheleſſe there wanted not ſome, euen
the moſt heauy enemies of Religion, that refuſed to
obey theſe Edicts; and amongſt the reſt, the Gouernour
of Burgundy, who plainely diſallowed of the

Kings proceedings; yet to them of Orleance, and the
ſeditious people of Lions, this meſſage was moſt
welcome aboue all things, where beyond meaſure
they exerciſed cruelty; and where Butchers were hyred,
as in the time of Licinius the Emperour, to bowell
vp the Chriſtians; nay more (which is an horrible
thing to ſpeak) to buy the far & greaſe of them, which
were fatteſt. This likewiſe is a dolefull and lamentable
caſe, that very few Cities at all in the Kingdome,
very few Townes, very few Villages, and Riuers
there are, which haue not beene filled with the
goare of the godly Martyrs. This is more, that
their inhumane cruelty was ſo great, as in ſo grieuous
an affliction it was not lawfull for Widowes
to bewaile their Husbands, nor Orphanes their Parents;
but that, at Paris, little ones and infants were
found, who when they did ſee themſelues hal'd from
their Mothers breſts, their Mothers hurried to execution,
did not forbeare to cry out, till themſelues
likewiſe had their tender bloudſhed: Oh more then
Scythian barbarouſneſſe! for what Tyrant did euer
doe this in any part of Scythia? not to ſuffer them to
mourne, to whom he gaue cauſe of mourning. Rightly
didſt thou, moſt graue Orator and Philoſopher, that
didſt not well endure, nor couldeſt abide to beholde
men ſo barbarous and miſchieuous.
            There remaineth nothing, that theſe combined
enemies of the Truth haue, wherewith to maintaine
themſelues, either before God, or nature it
ſelfe, or any Chriſtian; but that they may be confounded
of the very Ethnicks themſelues, which neither
endued with the knowledge of the true God,

nor inſtructed with holy-writ, nor puft vp with that
great and gliſtering name of Romane Catholike, doe
gather theſe things euen by the very law, and light
of Nature it ſelfe, by which they are a ſhame to you
Scribes and Phariſees. Doe therefore the Law, and
Prophets, (in GODS name) depend vpon you?
vpon your counſels and traditions? vpon the Cupborde
of the Pope (father of miſchiefe)? and vpon
his Meſſengers and Aſſaſſines? Bluſh you Theeues
and Pyrats, woe to you Hipocrites, which attribute
to your ſelues the Supremacie of the Church, vnder
a falſe and forged title; You (I ſay) conſcript and
ſworne Fathers, who haue forſworne Piety, and
the knowledge of good things, and a ſound Conſcience.
            But leſt any man ſhould thinke wee grow teaſtie
without cauſe, and ſpeake preiudicially, which vſeth
to take away right iudgement; Let vs heare, and go
forward with the reſt, and that by the tops and
chiefe points of the matters, leſt our diſcourſe grow
to be infinite. The things already ſpoken of, though
they were cruell and abhominable, yet did they not
fully ſatisfie the deſires of theſe bloudy butchers.
They goe on therefore, and at Paris in the middeſt
of the Market-place, they cauſe to be hanged vp
Brickmald, a moſt renowned man, and moſt skilfull
in warlike affaires, being almoſt of the age of three-ſcore
and ten yeares, who by chance had hid himſelfe
in the houſe of the Engliſh Embaſſador; as alſo
one Cauagne, a man of great wiſedome, and Chancellour
to the Princes both of Naturre & of Condee;
then made they a laughing-ſtocke of the Picture

and coat of Armes of the Admirall, which through
the ſtreets they ignominiouſly abuſed: and euery
day they were altogether buſie in this, either how
they might kill, or by fearefull threatnings enforce
to their impious and forbidden ſuperſtition, the
profeſſors of the true and reformed Religion, By
this it appeareth more cleare, euen then noone-day,
that the cruelty of theſe men was in the higheſt degree,
their Nature fierce, and ſauage, themſelues neſarious
bloud-ſuckers, and that neuer any Pyrate
was more barbarous.
            
               Antiochus was cruell, but an open enemy of the
Church, and an Heathen. Nero was cruell, but for
full fiue yeares moſt mercifull, and afterwards openly
euill. Domitian was cruell, but when hee vnderſtood
that the Kingdome of Chriſt was Heauenly,
not earthly, he left off to perſecute the Chriſtians. In
the Raigne of Charles the ſixt, King of France, hee
being young, fooliſh, and witleſſe, (as the Chronicles
report) France was grieuouſly diſtreſſed: But there
can nothing be repeated out of all the records of
Antiquity, which comes neere vnto the cruelties we
haue rehearſed, if we well waigh the circumſtances.
And although theſe things be thus true, apparant,
and approoued; yet dare they charge theſe godly
Noblemen with an idle accuſation, and an imputation
of forged conſpiracie; when amongſt them all,
not one (though prouoked) did vnſheath his ſword;
when thoſe pittileſſe cut-throats did likewiſe put to
death Women and Children; when their very coſin
Germans, and amongſt them, ſome Earles, Barons,
and Nobles, did not eſcape from them without

great danger; when they baniſhed from the Court,
and kept priſoner Michaell Hoſpitalis, the high Chancellour
of France, and a moſt honourable perſon, for
this cauſe onely, That he withſtood their wicked Counſailes;
when they enforced no ſmall number by violence
and threatnings, to their idolatrous Maſſes;
laſtly, when Chriſtopher Thouanus the firſt Preſident
in the Parliament, gratulating to the King that (forſooth)
his famous victory, did openly amongſt other
things, repeat that ſaying of Lewis the eleauenth,
Who knowes not how to diſſemble, knowes not
how to rule.
            
            But I detaine your Lordſhip with an Oration ouer-long;
leſt therefore I ſhould abuſe your Lordſhips
patience, I will make ſhort of what remaines.
Let vs then but looke into this one thing, whether
theſe matters which wee haue already vttered, doe
not ſo palpably ſhew forth the impious combination
of the Popelings, that it may be viewed euen with
our eyes. From hence let all Chriſtian Kings and
Princes that are wiſe, ſee, and vnderſtand this betimes,
that this French calamitie cannot be diſioyned
from theirs, when the Religion common to either
is aſſailed, and the Tyrants invred to ſo many
miſchiefes, and greedy of good mens bloud, cannot
ſo reſt and content themſelues.
            Oh moſt renowned Princes, do you ſtill remaine
in doubt? Doe not ſo: but marke and note what
(after theſe times which we haue recounted) at another
time, and not fiue yeares ſince, befelt that
great and moſt Chriſtian King Henrie the fourth?
Conſider with how many ambuſhes, fraudes, and

deceipts they belayed the moſt famous Queene of
England, ELIZABETH of happy and bleſſed memory.
Call to minde with how many engines they
battered the poore wretches of the Low-Countreyes,
both publiquely and priuately, for the ſpace of theſe
fortie yeares and vpwards. Remember all you of
the Engliſh Nobility, that horrible Gunne-powder
Treaſon, which enterprized at one ſtroke to deſtroy
and blow vp your moſt mighty KING, your noble
QVEENE, together with their Royall Progeny,
and the flower of all the Nobility of England.
            
            This is worth the labour to know, with how
plauſible and goodly a name theſe glozing Parazites,
and Pillers of the Romiſh Religion, doe entitle
ſuch like abhominable miſdeeds; marry, A ſtroke
giuen from Heauen.
            
            Oh vowes, oh words, and men of Hell! Doe
you, you hell-hounds, bring downe from Heauen
the forge and fountaine of your ſinnefull actions?
I ſpeake truth (oh Chriſtians) and your ſelues know
it to be ſo, that had not the Lord of Heauen and
Earth hindred this ſtroke, England had not for one
yeare onely beene miſerable, and tormented, but
ſtab'd and mangled with infinite wounds, iniuries,
violences, murthers, and rapines ſhould hardly
haue drawne their begged breath amidſt her deadly
enemies. Wherefore I pray and beſeech you, you
Princes and Noblemen, that the painted ſhew of
Chriſtian Religion, and the name (Catholike) deceiue
you not; let this rather be your reſolutions, That
force by force, is to be beaten backe from your bodies
and liues. For this defence, Reaſon to the Learned,

               Neceſsity to the barbarous, Cuſtome to all Nations,
and Nature it ſelfe, hath preſcribed to the bruite
beaſts. What need I ſpeake more; let vs haue no
league with this brood of Antichriſt, but warre rather.
Let vs bethinke our ſelues, all and euery one of
vs, who haue any care and liking of Religion, or of
the ſafety, renowne, and liberty of their Countrey,
that we ought to beware of the Popiſh traines and
entrappings: For ſooner or later, whatſoeuer they
now intend and couer, will they at their time effect,
and bring to paſſe; Whoſoeuer thinkes they
haue giuen ouer, thinkes farre amiſſe, ſeeing that
rule ſo old, true, and religious, doth neuer faile, There
is no peace with the vngodly. Therefore let it be ſo
farre from vs, to hold conſederacies with theſe Ieſuited
Traytors, that we rather account them conſpiracies,
which although they lye hid perhaps for
a time, yet at laſt they appeare, and are as eaſily diſcerned
by their actions, as the Lyon by his clawes.
What? Is there for vs greater ſecurity now, then
was in thoſe French vproares, when theſe Ieſuites,
theſe plagues of men, haue lowly inſinuated themſelues
into very many Prouinces, Cities, Townes,
Caſtles; yea, and into the Courts of Princes, and
their familiarity; for ſo exceedingly well do theſe
runnagate common Barretors know at firſt how
to humilitate themſelues, as alſo to faigne Pouerty,
and aboue all things, to ſeeme godly; that theſe
coyne-mongers haue not onely by their forged
name gotten incredible wealth, and opinion of true
Religion, but like Bloud-bounds, of better ſcenting
then euer Verres had any, they haue alſo cunningly

ſmelt out the purpoſes of Princes, and their ſecreſies
and myſteries of State.
            
            All which, as ſoone as afterwards they haue in
particular beene related to their fellowes, and by
common aduiſe handled and diſcuſſed; then preſently
are ſent into ſundry Prouinces, ſuch men, as
ſome call the Kings, ſome the Popes Legats, others
the Apoſtolicall Nuntioes, and others call them with
other Titles; but as for me, by what name I may
call them, I know not, vnleſſe peraduenture in that
they tempt and ſollicite ſome by rewards and briberies,
ſome by hope and promiſes, ſome by feare
and threatnings; they may rightly be called Traitors,
and betrayers of their Countrey: who if in the
beginning, the conſines and entrance of Kingdomes
and Regions had beene forbidden them, and commandement
to abſtaine hereafter, they had beene
deliuered by the conſent of all the States, either theſe
Mountebanckes had not at all brought their poyſon
into diuers Prouinces, or elſe they had receiued condign
paiment for their paines: But after it was lawful
for them to betray Kings and Princes, to effect their
buſines either by gold or ſiluer, to ſend intelligencers
abroad, to retaine Pentioners, and to turne and returne
at their pleaſure, to what place ſoeuer, infinite
miſchiefes did preſently enſue thereupon, and
doe daily; Let euen Spaine her ſelfe, the chiefe nurſe
of theſe Waſpes and Locuſts, beare witneſſe; be Italy
alſo witneſſe; let France ſpeake, and the (not
meane) Cities of Germany, and Low-Countries: from
my very ſoule I reioyce that the Iland of England is
bleſt, and free from theſe Flyes and Locuſts, (vnleſſe

ſome that perchance lurke, and lye cloſe in corners)
and I pray God it may ſo remaine euerlaſtingly.
Meane while, moſt noble (King Iames,) moſt
mighty, valiant, and conſtant defendour, and reuenger
of the faith, goe on to chaſe out thy kingdome
this Vipers-brood, men, mockers and contemners of
God (from whoſe onely power, all mans power is
deriued) which goe about vnder the pretext of Religion,
vtterly to roote out all iuſt and lawfull dominion.
Your Maieſtie, according to your ſingular
wiſedome, doth ſee what that wicked deſire of
the Pope went about to doe with your ſelfe, your
children, your poſteritie, and your ſubiects: Hath
not that Romane gulfe long ſince deuoured all the
wealth, bloud, and life of England? Are not theſe
holy men, the fathers of the Societie? ſuch as ſtriue
to enter not onely vpon our goods, cheſts, and money;
but vpon the liberty alſo, and ſafety, and as it
were, the very bones and marrow of vs all? Are not
theſe the men, that were accuſtomed, not onely to
ſet vpon, but to ſell our liues and ſoules, and heauen
it ſelfe at a price? To theſe men then muſt we
liſten, of theſe and none other are Kings, and Princes
to be iudged; if they refuſe, and doe not of their
owne accord, accept of any moſt vnequall condition,
they ſtrait cry out, that they are to be purſued
and perſecuted to death. Are not theſe thoſe
companions, that euery-where labour with tooth
and naile to bring in that Spaniſh Inquiſition? which
at firſt was practiſed onely againſt the Sarazens, and
Infidels? and I pray you, what good comes of it?
of what vſe is it? Truely none, vnleſſe, as miſerable

wretches, wee ſhall be conſtrained to looke for
murther vpon murther, and moſt cruell ſlaughters.
But God forbid, moſt gracious King, and you all,
vertuous and great Princes, that we, who by ſo long
and large diſtance of ground ſeuered from Spaine,
haue no communitie at all with the Religion, manners,
and cuſtome of that Nation, liue in a well gouerned
Kingdome & Commonwealth, ſhould beare
the ſame yoake, as this people doth; or that the
ſame euill ſhould be put vpon vs, or any good people,
which hath in it all euils, The Spaniſh Inquiſition.
For this is that (if any man knowes it not already)
which not onely by poyſoning takes away the liues
of famous men, the Countries beſt commoners,
teares in peeces the ciuill lawes of Commonwealths,
but alſo breakes in ſunder the very lawes of nature
and Nations. Liſten further, and vnderſtand ye Princes;
could euer yet, euen Spaine her ſelfe, and Arragon;
could they of Granato, the Caſtellans, the Neapolitans,
the Italians, the French-men, and amongſt all,
the moſt miſerable men of the Low-Countries, nouriſh
that direfull and vgly monſter with ſo many
ſheddings of their bloud: ſo cruell a wilde beaſt, ſo
vntamed, and ſo vnſatiable is that Spaniſh-Romane
beaſt; which cannot (I ſay) be fattened, nor ſo much
as haue her paunch filled vp with Chriſtians bloud.
And to this Beaſt, ſo wilde and ſauage, will the curteous
French-men, the wiſe men of the Low-Countries,
and the Gentles, and Nobles of England, refuſe
to yeelde obedience? with good reaſon. Set before
your eyes examples, which for the moſt part doe
chiefely moue; conſider them, call to remembrance

the late and freſh memory of the French, Germanes,
and Low-Country-men, and you ſhall haue cauſe
great enough (oh Princes) to defend your right,
your priuiledges, and eſpecially Chriſtian Religion,
purged from the Popiſh dregs and filth: All which
truely, according to your faith and dutie, wiſh to
be protected by your prouidence, and cannot be
forſaken of you, without the manifeſt deſtruction
of all that's Gods, or mans: Neither is it likely that,
that Stoicall numbneſſe, is ſo ingrafted & imprinted in
your mindes, that the many wiſhes, prayers, yea,
and iuſt complaints of good men, may finde in you
no ſenſe of humanitie, no protection for their innocency:
I beſeech you (moſt noble Princes and
Peeres) that you thus fully perſwade your ſelues;
if there be any of all men liuing, who ought to haue
care of ſuch, and ſo great a cauſe; that you eſpecially
are they, and that to you aboue the reſt, this
cauſe belongs, whom the moſt mighty good God,
hath in this rotten and feſtered age, placed here, the
Champions of his reſtored Religion and ſaluation;
that each of you, to the vttermoſt of his power, ſo
farre with your wiſedome, temperance, faith, labour,
vigilance, and (in one word) with that ancient
and inborne Engliſh valour, whoſe glory with
all Nations is immortall, doe ſo much ſtudy to prouide
and aduiſe for your Countrey-men, as that
our God, according to his mercy will, no doubt,
aide your endeauours; and as good men, not onely
deſire, but will alſo celebrate, to the memory of
Poſteritie. But that in this one onely thing, of all the
moſt honourable, there needes agreement, both of

mindes and counſels, I thinke no man is ignorant,
vnleſſe of what belongs vnto man he be ignorant;
for this alone is it which affordes vs good counſell
in dangers, Conſtancy and valour in miſchances,
moderation in Proſperity, and in euery fortune
that gift of Diſcretion, without which nothing can
be well thought, nothing well done: This one, and
alone Concord is it (I ſay) which ſafe-guards that
ſtraight knot of Charity, that yeelding neither priuately
to Enuie, nor publikely to Ambition, vpholds
the Tower of your happineſſe, which if it remaine
ſtrengthned, and confirmed amongſt vs. There
ſhall not be (as I hope, nay confidently truſt) any
cauſe why wee ſhould any longer doubt either of
the ſafety of the Common-wealth, or of our reformed,
and reſtored truely-Catholike and Apoſtolike
Religion.
            
            ALmighty and moſt high God, which gouerneſt
the Heauens, Seas, Earth, Warres and Peace,
which putteſt Lawes, and Statutes on Kings, Princes,
and the vniuerſall people of the World, which
ordereſt and decreeſt victories, Triumphs and Trophies,
which with-holdeſt and putteſt backe afflictions,
dangers, iniuries, make firme to vs, and confirme
this Concord, this Religion, in this bleſſed
Realme of England, that is at this time the largeſt
Theater, and very eye of the whole earths compaſſe.
Ariſe (great God) and raiſe thy ſelfe againſt the
enemy of all Iuſtice and Peace, the enemy of thy
praiſes, & glorie: With thy diuine prouidence guide
the ways, and prolong the dayes of our Soueraigne

King IAMES, renowned for godlineſſe, learning,
iuſtice, wiſedome and clemency, deliuer him and
vs thy people from the out-roades and in-roades
of our moſt cruell foes, from thoſe ſacrilegious conſpiratours,
and wicked Idolaters, which will not
endure that wee worſhip thy moſt holy name with
godlineſſe, and true religion; and who, as in that
lamentable and miſerable Maſſacre of France, took
life from good thouſands of thy deare ſeruants, and
ſtill endeauour to take from vs both life and libertie,
to write and ſpeake freely: Laſtly, who hold it
not lawfull for any man liuing to diſcourſe out of
the Councell, either touching the Articles of Faith, or
any controuerſie of Religion. Reſtraine (oh Lord)
the vpbraidings and attempts of ſuch kinde of men,
who leaue to vs (being Men that onely argue for
our right and the Truth) neither free tongue, nor
free minde. Bleſſe the Reuerend, godly, and learned
Biſhops of the Church of England, and the
profeſſors of Diuinity in the Vniuerſities: Let thoſe
moſt bitter times warne them, and euery Chriſtian
man, that ſetting apart the vnſeaſonable contentions,
invectiues, and preiudices of many Diuines in
the Low-Countries, Germanie, and elſewhere, they
would rather apply their mindes to the eſtabliſhing
and confirming of true Peace and Concord, (as
once when Valens the Emperour perſecuted the
true Chriſtians, Baſill, and Euſebius of Caeſarea did)
then in wrath and ſpleene to ſeeke out new matters
of ſtrife. If wee haue a purpoſe to ſtriue and contend,
let it be with mutuall duties and godly emulation
in the race of piety. If wee haue a deſire to

fight, goe to it in Gods name, let vs skirmiſh againſt
Pride, Couetouſneſſe, Ambition, and againſt our
naughty and froward affections. Let vs with our
teares, and deuout prayers, quench the fire of Gods
anger, which is kindled for our ſinnes. Let vs poſſeſſe
our Soules with Patience, Silence, and Hope.
And meane while, howſoeuer it be, let vs take courage,
and ſuſtaine our ſelues on this hope, that the
end of Homicides, and Ieſuited Traytors hath alwaies
beene moſt miſerable, being ſuch whom daily
and domeſticke furies doe torment, an ill conſcience
doth affright, and ſodaine deſtruction doth
follow: And as Iuuenall ſaith in his 13. Satyre.
            
               —Diri conſcia facti
               Mens habet attonites, & ſurdo verbere caedit,
               Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum
               Paena autem vehemens, & multo ſaeuior illis,
               Nocte dieque ſuum geſtare in pectore teſtem.
               Hi ſunt qui trepidant, & ad omnia fulgura pallent.
            
            
               A guilty minde, whom cruell bloud be-ſmeares,
               Still beats it ſelfe with deafe and vnſeene feares,
               The hidden ſcourge with dread ſtill ſhakes their ſoules,
               And with a ſharper paine the minde controules,
               To beare a ſelfe-accuſing Conſcience day and night;
               Theſe thunder-feares, and lightnings doe affright.
            
            Verily it is ſo indeed, and (Iuuenall) thou haſt
(as they ſay) hit the nayle on the head. And euen
Caligula, Domitian, Nero, and in our memorie the
Duke of Alba, and ſuch like Monſters, would approue
what thou haſt affirmed, if they might return

from hell againe. Of theſe things, and ſuch like,
let good men meditate and comfort themſelues,
chiefly thoſe French-men, which once ſnatcht out
of thoſe French flames, and forſaking that vnhappy
Kingdome, forſaking thoſe fierce and rauenous
Wolues, haue arriued into this Realme of England,
(that is) into the lappe of Peace; not as into a baniſhment,
or any vulgar or common Inne, but as
into certaine bleſſed and fortunate Ilands. And
for vs Low-Countrymen, if we be not vnthankefull,
there is one moſt iuſt and waighty cauſe why wee
ſhould acknowledge the great bleſſing of God beſtowed
vpon vs, namely, the courteſie and hoſpitality
of the Engliſh Nation, for (with griefe I ſpeake
it) when with wringed hands, and wronged hearts
we were conſtrained to behold the funeralls, and
wofull burialls of out Countrey; when the cruell
did rend and teare, and like a greedy beaſt did deuoure
the body of our Common-wealth, and wee
(our laws, priuiledges, and all liberty bereft vs) did as
ſlaues, hold our liues and all our goods by entreaty:
this kingdom, this Realme of England, which we may
freely write, & diſpute againſt the Popiſh Tyranny,
crafts and ſuperſtitions, with the good leaue of the
moſt gracious Queene Elizabeth, (whoſe name and
memory be alwayes bleſſed euen in that reſpect)
was to a great many of vs a ſafe refuge, a ſure hauen
and a ſecure Sanctuarie. This leaue and ſingular
fauour from thence hath continued, and yet hitherto
doth moſt graciouſly continue towards vs, by
the moſt mighty King of Great Britaine: To whom
likewiſe, and his Royall Progeny, for that cauſe be

God propitious and fauourable. As for vs, we confeſſe
our ſelues moſt highly bound and beholding
to his Maieſty.
            With a cheerefull heart (moſt worthy Lord)
pardon my paſſion, which now I ſtay, and ceaſe
to ſay any more of theſe Theeues and Murtherers,
whom neuertheles I haue but rather ſhadowed out,
then expreſſed, for, how farre ſhould I then paſſe?
what end would there be of my ſpeech, if I had a
purpoſe to rehearſe all the miſdeeds, of Popes, Ieſuites,
Prieſts, and Shauelings, clad in the religious
habite? If I ſhould vtter their peſtilent and deadly
commands, which not being able to maintaine by
humane Iuſtice, they vſe to defend by the painted
ſhew of Chriſtian Religion, and Catholike name; if I
ſhould prooue and ſet forth which is the greateſt argument
of all their wickedneſſe, that they canonize
theeues & cut-throats into their Beadroll of Saints,
and aduance to titles and Cardinall-honours their
Allyes and kinſmen, taken from the duſt and dung-hill?
Oh ſinnes, oh plague, oh peſtilence! O God!
if this be not madneſſe and frenzie, what is?
            I cannot for anger, any more; onely one thing I
adde, cry out, and ſo make an end of my ſpeech; O
excellent Interpreters of Diuinitie, increaſers of iniquity,
Correcters and reformers of Religion, and
Gods word, O excellent Biſhop, a keeper of Sheepe,
as (they ſay) is the Wolfe.
            I beſeech the moſt great, moſt good God, (worthy
Biſhop) that he will long proſper you, ſitting at
the ſterne of the Church of England, together with
the reſt of the Lords Biſhops, and Reuerend Fathers

in Chriſt, and guard you ſafe from all euill; no
otherwiſe then the white of his eye; and at the laſt,
that he will receiue you (moſt worthy Lord, after
that godly, good, and learned combate, which you
ſight, and haue ſought) out of this vncleane world,
out of this miſt, or miſery, and griefe, into his heauenly
and euerlaſting Kingdome, flowing with
brightneſſe and bleſſedneſſe, and eternall ioy without
any ſorrow.
         
      
      
         
            Of the Feast day of Saint
BARTHOLOMEVV.
            
               BArtholmew, why doth France each yeare to thee
            Make Holy that bad day? which ſhould not bee
            The cauſe of miſchiefe much, was that one day,
            That onely day did many good men ſlay:
            The good to good, the bad to bad incline,
            Then this day none more good, or bad did ſhine:
            Truſt Popelings all, and truſt you Shaued rout,
            God will at laſt your wicked deeds bring out.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   