
      
         
            
            
            
            
            A MANVAL OF PRAIERS VSED BY THE FATHERS OF THE PRIMAtiue Church, for the moſt part within the foure firſt hundred yeares of Chriſt, & al before the end of the ſixt hundred yeare: diuided into ſeueral Chapters.
            
               Wherin by the very praiers of the Apoſtles, and their ſucceſſors, (here related without anie word or ſillable, added or altered) al the cheifeſt queſtiōs now in controuerſie, are inuincibly proued for the holy doctrine of the preſent Roman Church; by which we are inſtructed how to beleeue, and what to practiſe in deuotion.
            
            By R. B. P.
            Simb. Apoſtol. I beleeue the holy Catholicke Church.
            
            With Licence. 1618.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO OVR MOST REnowmed Queene Anne: And al her Right honorable, and other Ladies.
            
               MOST GRATIOVS QVEENE.
            
            RIght noble, and other worthy Ladies; as by place of dignitie you are honorable in this world, and honour is that which many of you enough, if not to much, affect to haue: and being had, continue as careful to encreaſe, and feareful not to loaſe it: So ſeeing you conſiſt (as al men and women doe) of two portions: the cheif and beſt by nature immortal, and the other, after a ſhort life and death, to be cloathed with immortalitie; and al honors, and pleaſures here, be fading & mortal, and no obiects of delight for creatures immortal: It is wiſdome in time, for al that loue and deſire honor, to prouide how to ioyne honor & immortality together: for moſt ſure it is,

that both you, and al humane kinde ſhal be immortal, and if we ſeeke not here for a better honour then this which is mortal, we ſhal remaine without honour, and be in diſhonour for euer. And al who haue or claime title vnto honour, muſt alſo render true and due honour to euerie one more honourable in degree. For, to render honour is the vrgent and bynding law of God, Nature, and Nations.
            But they which be often honourable in this world, are not alwaies ſo ſtrictly bound for accepting or ſeeking honour. And becauſe I do not doubt, but manie, or moſt of you, are expert enough in the ſecond caſe of admitting honour vnto your ſ
                  ••
               ues, and as negligent, or ignorant in the former, ſo generally commanding precept of performing honour, office, and dutie: I haue (to condemne ignorance, wilfulnes, and al vaine euaſions) peruſed the bookes of armorie, of the beſt and moſt anutient Heraldes, in the Religion of Chriſt: next vnder him his holie Apoſtles, their happie ſucceſſors, the practiſes of Apoſtolick

and al Churches, with the learned vertuous Fathers of this ſacred Primatiue vnſpotted Church, of the firſt, ſecond, third, fourth, fift, and none after the ſixt hundred yeare after Chriſt: and out of them gathered together, and ſet downe in this breife Summarie of true honour: To whom, when, where, how, and what honour, theſe moſt diuine and honourable perſons, yelded vnto others: nor by anie priuate inference or expoſition of mine owne, but in the very wordes & praiers them ſelues, without anie ſillable added, or altered; by which thoſe holie Churches & Fathers, publikly profeſſed and propoſed to al poſterities, that inward faith which they beleued; and alſo, that office, dutie, and honor, which they and al good Chriſtiās owe, and ought to render. That except anie men or women, naming them ſelues Chriſtians, wil be ſo impious Antichriſtians, to condemne theſe moſt holie guides, and Paſtors in the kingdome of Chriſt, and now by theſe profeſſions of their faith, & performinges of dutie and honour, glorious and happie

Sainctes in heauen, and our moſt B. Sauiour & Redemer him ſelf, Chriſt Ieſus, to be a ſeducer: the cheifeſt controuerſies of this time in Religion, being in this ſhort Treatiſe, by theſe inuincible Argumentes and authorities demonſtratiuely proued, made euident, and adiudged, for the moſt ſacred doctrine of the preſent Romane Church, wil haue an end: the wilful and obſtinate inuincibly refuted, the ignorant truly inſtructed, the vniuſtly perſecuted truly rewarded and pitied, moſt ſacred preiſthood and Sacrifice, by many ſo prophanly vſed, wil here thus proued appeare moſt reuerent, holy, and glorious. To be breife, what homage, honour, dutie, loue, pitie, compaſſion, or releife we owe, and muſt render, to the Church Triumphant, Militant, or patient, that we may truly, with the other Articles of our holie Creede, beleue and confeſſe the holie Catholicke Church, the Communion of Sainctes: they are here thus manifeſtly and vndeniably determined: and al cheifeſt matters now called into queſtion, ſo decided. Diuers praiers of this ſubiect, I haue

wholly here omitted, being alreadie lately publiſhed in my Manual of Meditations and Prayers. And in ſome few Cōtrouerſies (though of leaſt momēt) becauſe their praiers do not belong to al eſtates for which this booke is publiſhed, I haue bene ſilent. The cauſe why I principally dedicate it to you, is not to make you patrons of the praiers of Sainctes, and their holie faith, but to make them Patrones vnto you: not to conſtitute you Iudges of the honour which is due to the High Queene and Ladie in Heauen, but to make you ladies there: nor to make your vnlearned ſexe vmpeare ouer the whole Church of God, but to procure you to be true members of that holie companie, forth of which there is no ſaluation; not becauſe I woud exclude your Lordes, whom I duly honour, but to haue it preſented to them by you, and you in knowing, and performing the true honours and duties here remembred, to be more honourable both to them and others; and them, by this and your example, to learne and do the honours and duties they owe to others.

Neither do I omitte the inferiour of your kind, to be grateful vnto you, (though the vertuous among you, I honour with double honour) that liue in ſtate. But becauſe vertue or vice, is often learned from the higher, I wiſh you the firſt, and you therin to be imitated, and made a Rule. And ſo in al dutie I ſhal euer reſt
            
               Your Maieſties dutiful ſubiect and Ladiſhips. true ſeruāt and frend.
R. B. P.
            
         
         
            
            The Table of the contentes.
            
               The firſt Chapter containeth praiers concerning Iuſtification, which is not by faith alone.
               The 2. Chapter; Iuſtification and merite of Almes, Sacrifice, ſuffering perſecution, Praiers of Sainctes, & other good deedes in grace.
               The 3. Chapter, of the Communion of the Militant Church, with the Triumphant, in honour, praier, & protection; and firſt of our B. Ladie S. Marie, the Mother of God.
               The 4. Chapter, of the ſame. The 5. Chapter, of Praier and honour to the holie Angels, and their Protection.
               The 6. Chapter, of praier and honour to al the Sainctes in heauen in general, & their protection.
               The 7. Chapter, to Sainctes in particular, deceaſed before the Paſſion of Chriſt.
               The 8. Chapter, of praier & honour vnto, and the patronage of Sainctes in particular, after the Paſſion of Chriſt.
               The 9. Chapter, the old Lytanies

of the Church.
               The 10. Chapter, Reuerence of holie Reliques.
               The 11. Chapter, praiers for one departed out of this life.
               The 12. Chapter, praiers for al faithful deceaſed.
               The 13. Chapter, praiers before receiuing the B. Sacrament, prouing it to be the true Body, and Bloud of Chriſt.
               The 14. Chapter, praiers after receiuing, this B. S. prouing the ſame.
               The 15. Chapter, of Sacramental Confeſſion, a due preparation for that B. Sacrament.
               The 16. Chapter, the external holy preiſthood, and Sacrifice of Chriſtians, Chriſtes true Bodie and Bloud offered both for the liuing & dead.
               The 17. Chapter, the preeminence of S. Peter, and his Succeſſors, in the Apoſtolick Romane Sea, in this holy preiſthood.
               The 18. Chapter, what diuerſitie of orders belong vnto holie Preiſthood; their Vowes, Virginitie, Chaſtitie, & al degrees of the Church.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
            PRACTISE AND PRAIERS OF THE PRIMATIVE CHVRCH.
            
               How Man is or may be iuſtified: but not by Faith onely.
               Chapter 1.
               WHoſoeuer wil be ſaued; S. Athanaſius Creede. before al thinges it is needeful that he hold the Catholick Faith. Which except euerie one ſhal keepe whole and inuiolate; without doubt, he ſhal periſh for euer. And the Catholicke Faith is this, that we worſhip one God in Trinitie, and Trinitie in vnitie &c. But it is neceſſarie to eternal ſaluation, that he alſo beleue faithfully, the Incarnation of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt &c. At whoſe coming, al men muſt riſe with their bodies; and render accompt of their owne deedes. And they which haue done good things ſhal go into life eternal: & they which haue done euil thinges, into euerlaſting fire. This is the Catholick faith, which except euerie man faithfully and firmly beleue, he can not be ſaued.
               
                  
                  Auguſt. meditat. cap. 33.O Lord, I beſech, intreate, and deſire thee, increaſe my faith, increaſe my hope, increaſe my Charitie. Cauſe vs by thy grace, to be alwaies ſtedfaſt in fatih, and effectual in worke, that by right faith, and worthy workes of faith by thy mercie, we may come to eternal life.
               
                  Auguſt. Serm. 39. de verbis Domini.Decline from euil and do good, & when thou haſt done this, ſecure expect life; and then boldly thou ſhalt ſay; O Lord, I haue done what thou haſt commanded, pay vnto me what thou haſt promiſed.
               
                  S. Ephrem Ser. de laude omnium Martyrum.O moſt holie Martyrs, we beſech you, that you would intreate our Lord for vs wretched ſinners, that he would powre his diuine grace vpon vs, which may continually lighten and illuminate our heartes with the beame of holie Charitie, by which we may be able to loue him with al our heart, and with al our minde.
               
                  Gregor. natal. SS. Innocent. Theſe Innocents none aboue two yeares old, could haue actual faith: much leſſe the new found faith.O Lord help vs we beſech thee, by the praier of thoſe Sainctes, which not yet able to profeſſe thy Sonne with humane voice, were crowned with celeſtial glorie, for his Natiuitie. O Lord

we beſech thee, let them obtaine for vs, puritie of mindes, whoſe innocencie, we ſolemnly celebrate.
               O God looke vpon vs, and make,S. Iacobus in Miſ. that our Oblation ſanctified by the holie Ghoſt, be acceptable for propitiation of our ſinnes, & thoſe ſinnes which the people by ignorance haith committed: and for the reſt of the ſoules of them which are departed before vs.
               O Lord God,Seuerus Patriarch. Alexand. de tit. Bap. graunt vnto vs that with ioy we may keepe and fulfil thy commandementes al the daies of our life.
               There remaine (ſaith the holie Apoſtle Paule) Hope, Faith, and Charitie,
                  S. Gaudentius Bririen. Epiſ. Ser. 10. ad Neophitos, An. 386. 1. Cor. 13.13. 
                  theſe three: but the greateſt of theſe is Charitie. Faith is that, by which we conf
                     •
                  ſſe the Trinitie to be of one ſubſtance. Hope is that, by which we hope the Reſurrection of the fleſh; and rewardes to be hereafter for merites. Charitie is that, by which we ſo loue Chriſt, that we would ſuffer our ſelues with a willing minde, to be put to death for his name. But becauſe al which are baptized in the Apoſtolick faith, beleue ſurely in the Trinitie, and hope for thinges

to come: yet al can not ſay forth of affection with the holie Apoſtle, Who ſhal ſeperate vs from the loue of Chriſt? tribulation? or diſtreſſe? or perſecution? or famine? or nakedneſſe? or daunger? or the ſword? Therfore ſome of our water pottes hold two meaſures,Hee there expoundeth Chriſts firſt miracle of water turned into wine, ſome pots holding two meaſures others three. Io. 2. but ſome three meaſures. Therfore our Lord Ieſus rich towards al, and oueral who cal vpon him, vouchſaife to geue, that we may receiue three meaſures perfect in his loue. Alſo that without warre of perſecution, conſtāt in the loue of God, with prepared mindes, for al ſuffering of preſent paines, we may wel Merite the Renowmed crowne of a vanquiſhing conſcience, by the triumph of ſecret conflict.
               
                  Gotticum Miſ. ſale antiquiſ. To. 6. Bibl. SS. Part.Let vs with praier, beſech our holie and bleſſed God of reward, entreating for our brethren and ſiſters, by whoſe miniſterie & coſt, they which are needy in the Church, do not ſuffer want, that our Lord wil communicate ſpiritual riches vnto them, which geue releefe of worldly ſubſtance, to the pouertie of faithful ſoules by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               Merciful God, graunt vnto the praiers of thy ſeruantes, that whoſoeuer;

                  
                     •
                  indful of thy heauenly precept
                     •
                  s, do miniſter neceſſaries to the poore, may be crowned with incorruptible & heauenly glorie, of thy miſeration & mercie, by our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Amen.
               O God from whom Iudas the traitor receiued the puniſhment of his offence,Supr. Ord. Rom. antiq. in ſer. S. i
                        •
                      caena Domini. and the theife the reward of his confeſſion: graunt vnto vs the effecte of our holie petition, that as our Lord Ieſus Chriſt in his Paſſion, gaue to them both the ſtipendes of their merites; ſo he wil beſtow vpon vs the grace of his Reſurrection.
               Chriſt our God and our Lord,Miſſa Indor antiq. who by his grace hath made vs worthie to receieu his precious Bodie and Bloud: graunt that we may pleaſe him in our wordes, deedes, and thoughtes, that this Sacrament which we haue receiued, and ſhal receiue, be vnto vs a pledge of remiſſion of our debtes, and great hope of Reſurrection from the dead.
               O Lord our God,Can. vniuerſ. ſeu Miſ. Ethiop. make vs pure & cleane from al il odoures of feines, & worth i
                     •
                   of thy 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  nd 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  O louer of men, make us iuſt without ſpotte, with gladnes al the daies of our life. O Lord our God, protect, nouriſh, and gouerne vs, by the powers of the Princes of thy Angels. Seperate vs from al euil workes, conioine vs with al good workes by Chriſt thine only Sonne.
               
                  Aug. l. medit. cap. 20.O houſe of God, bright and bewtiful, I haue loued the dwelling place of the glorie of our Lord my poſſeſſor and maker. Speake thou, aske thou him, that he may make me worthie of the participation of thy glorie. I do not diſpaire to obtaine it; olny let thy merits help me.
               
                  Miſ. Indor. antiq.O my Lord, I beſech thee, that this oblation, may be to vs, o my Lord, a looſing of our debtes, & remiſſion of ſinnes, and new life in the heauenly kingdome.
               
                  Muzarab. in feſt. S. Iacobi.O Lord my God, graunt to me ſo to receiue the bodie and bloud of thy Sōn, our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, that by it I may merite to receiue remiſſion of al my ſinnes, and to be filled with thy holie Spirit, 
                     〈◊〉
                   our God, who liueſt & reigneſt world without end. Amen.
               
                  O God by whom we reproue the errour of them which think,Auguſt. lib. 5. ſoliloq. c. 1. there be no merites of ſoules with thee.
               O Lord let bleſſed Agatha the Martyr,Gregor. in natal. S. Agathae. who hath bene acceptable to thee both by merite of Chaſtitie, and profeſſion of thy vertue: obtaine Pardō for vs.
               O holie and bleſſed Paula:Hieronim. epiſt. 27. ad Euſtochium, thy faith & workes, aſſociate thee to Chriſt.
            
            
               That Praiers, Sacrifice, ſuffering perſecution for Chriſt, Almes-deedes and other good workes, done in grace are meritorious.
               Chapter 2.
               O Lord we reuerence the memory firſt of the glorious alwaies Virgin Marie, Mother of God,Gregor. l. Sacrament. in Ordnar. Miſſae. et Miſ. Rom. antiq. and our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Alſo of the bleſſed Apoſtles and Martyrs Peter and Paul,

Andrew, Iames, Iohn, Thomas, Iames, Philip, Bartholomew, Mathew, Simon and Thadee: Linus, Cletus, Clemens, Xiſtus, Cornelius, Ciprian, Laurence, Chriſogonus, Iohn & Paul, Coſmas & Damianus, and of al thy Sainctes; by whoſe merites and praiers, vouchſaife to graunt, that in al thinges, we may be defended by the helpe of thy protection.
               
                  Gregor. l. Sacram. in natal. S. Io. Baptiſt.O God almightie, we beſech thee that by the interceſſion of B. S. Iohn Baptiſt, we may be defended. That he may obtaine indulgence and fauour for vs, that we may be helped by his merits; that by his patronage meriting it, we may haue increaſe of ſecuritie.
               Graunt we beſech thee, that thy familie, by the interceſſion of thy forerunner, bleſſed Iohn Baptiſt, may be freeed from al ſinnes, and merite to come to him whom he foretold.
               
                  S. Ephrem.O moſt gentle God, by the praiers of the Mother of God, euer a Virgin, and the heauenlie armie, and company of Angels, Cherubins, Seraphines Prophets, Martyrs, godlie Rulers: by the interceſſions of holie Religious people,

& ſupplications of al the bleſſed, haue mercie on me thy creature.
               O God mercifully heare vs,Gregor. ſh
                        •
                     . in Octau. Apoſt. & graūt that by the merites of bleſſed Peter, & his coapoſtle Paule, we may obtaine, the glorie of eternitie.
               O God almightie we beſech thee,In vigil. S. Andr. Apoſt. that bleſſed Andrew thy Apoſtle, may obtaine help for vs. Let vs be protected by his merites.
               
                  Pelag. 2. epiſt. 4. ad Epiſco. Germ. et Gal. Greg. in vigil Apoſt. Pet. & Paul. in praef. S. Gregory teacheth the like prayers of the Church before his time of the other Apoſtles, in particular, S. Iames, S. Mathew, S. Iohn, S. Thomas, Matthias, Philip, Iames.O Lord it is worthie and iuſt, right and helping to ſaluation, humblie to pray thee, that thou, o eternal Shepheard, wilt not forſake thy flocke, but wilt keepe thy people with continual protection, by thy bleſſed Apoſtles, that it may be gouerned by the ſame Rulers, who being the vicars of thy work, thou haſt appointed Paſtours to rule it.
               
                  
                     Gregor. ſup. in natal. SS. Abdon et Sennen.
                     Natal. S. Hermet.
                  O God graūt to thy ſeruantes, that by the merites of thy Sainctes, Abdon and Sennen making interceſſion for vs, we may deſerue to be deliuered from al aduerſities.
               O Lord let the interceſſion of bleſſed Hermes thy Martyr, not ceaſe to pacifie thy iuſtice, and make our ſeruice deuout vnto thee.
               
                  
                  Natal. S. Cornel. et Ciprian.O Lord by the interceſſion of thy Sainctes Cornelius and Ciprian, turn
                     •
                   from vs al euils, which we iuſtly deſerue.
               
                  Nntal. S. Georgii.We humbly beſech thee o God omnipotent, that by the interceſſion of B. George, thy Martyr, thou wilt graunt vs worthilie to ſerue thee. O Lord cleanſe vs from al guilt of our ſinnes, by the interceſſion of bleſſed George thy Martyr.
               
                  Natal. S. Anaſtaſ.Graunt o Lord, that the guiftes, which we offer, may be to the helpe of our ſaluation, the merite of bleſſed Anaſtaſia making interceſſion for vs.
               
                  Natal. S. Cecil.O God we beſech thee, that by the interceſſion of bleſſed Cecilie, we may deſerue to receiue the benefites of thy guift.
               
                  
                     Natal. S. Saturn.
                     S. Greg. ſup. hath aboue 50. other the like, vſed by the Church before his time.
                     Prudentius to S. Vincentius in Him. S. Vincentii.
                  O God graunt vs to be helped by the merites of bleſſed Saturninus thy Martyr.
               O twice renowmed, be preſent now & receiue the humble wordes of them that pray vnto thee, and be an effectual oratour for our offence at the throne of the Father. We beſech thee by thy ſelf, by that priſon, the increaſe of thy

                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ; by thy bondes, flames, hookes, the block of thy priſon; by thoſe potſheardes, 
                     The pauement of his priſon ſtrowed with ſharp peeces of potſherdes, wheron his naked body after other torments, did lye.
                     Sophron. Hieroſol. Encom. Angel.
                   by which thou obtained victory, by which, we that come after thee, with reuerence kiſſe thy bedde: haue mercy on our praiers, that Chriſt being pacified wil not impute our ſinnes vnto vs.
               O moſt laudable and excellent ſpirits, openly propoſe the infinite mercy of God, praying the bountiful & gentle God, that by your interceſſion, he wil vouchſaife to admitte, al the afflictions, and ſicknes, & calamities, which in al my life I haue ſuffered, for a recompence of my ſinnes, and releaſe & pardon of the condemnation and greauous tormentes which I haue iuſtly deſerued, & accompt them in their ſteade and place.
            
            
               
               
                  Of the Communion of the Church 
                        〈◊〉
                      with the Triumphant by Praier & honour to the Saincts there, by vs on earth: & their patronage vnto vs and firſt of the moſt B. Virgin Marie.
               
               Chapter. 3.
               
                  S. Ephrem orat. de laudibus Sanctiſ. Dei matris.O Virgin vouchſaife, that I thy ſeruant may praiſe thee. Haile moſt bright, & moſt bewtiful veſſel of God, Haile Ladie Marie fuf of grace: Haile among women moſt bleſſed Virgin. Haile moſt ſhyning ſtarre, from which Chriſt went forth. Haile moſt glorious light, Mother and Virgin. Haile Ladie higher then al. Haile ſong of the Cherubins, and Himne of Angels. Haile peace, ioy, and ſaluation of the world. Haile gladnes of mankind. Haile praiſe of the Fathers, and honour of the Prophets. Haile bewtie of Martyrs, and crowne of Sainctes, Haile glorie of the godlie. Haile moſt excellent ornament of the heauenlie holies. Haile moſt worthie miracle of the world. Hail tree of life, ioy, and pleaſure. Haile quiet Hauen, and deliuereſſe of thoſe that be troubled. Haile the helper of

them that be in daunger. Haile 
                     ••
                  ou
                     ••
                   of grace and conſolation. Haile refuge of ſinners. Haile hope of al that be vertuous, and afflicted with aduerſities. Haile Queene and defence both of men and women. Haile moſt glorious Mediatrix of the world. Haile doare of heauen. Haile opening of the gates of Paradiſe. Haile key of heauens, & the kingdome of Chriſt.
               O immaculate, vnſpotted,S. Ephrem orat. de ſanctiſ. Dei genetrice. vncorrupted, chaſt Virgin, Spouſe of God, our Ladie, only hope of the diſpaired, help of the oppreſſed, and moſt ſpeedie aide of thoſe that runne vnto thee, and refuge of al Chriſtians: admitte my praier, moſt vile, & vttered with vncleane lippes; and alſo intreate thy Sonne my Lord and God, with thy motherly gentlenes, that he may alſo open vnto me, thoſe moſt merciful bowels, of his pietie: and ſetting aſide mine innumerable ſinnes, conuert me to penance, and graunt me truly to fulfil his commandementes.
               O merciful, gentle, and bountiful Ladie, be alwaies preſent vnto me; in this life an earneſt protecti
                     ••
                   and helper,

driuing backe mine enemies inuaſions, and bringing me to ſaluation, and in the laſt moment of my life, kepe my wretched ſoule, driuing farre from it the vgſome ſight of wicked diuels, & in the terrible day of Iudgment, deliuering me from euerlaſting damnation; laſtly making me heire of that inacceſſible glorie, of thy Soone and God. Which by thine interceſſion and fauour I beſech thee againe and againe, moſt holie Ladie, Mother of God, that I may obtaine by thy grace, mercie and gentlenes of thine only begotten Sonn our Lord, and God, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
               As thou art the Mother of the moſt merciful God; ſo mercifully receiue me a ſinner: be preſent with me, o merciful, gentle, & bountiful Virgin.
               
                  S. Ephrem in lamen. Sanctiſ. Dei genetricis &c.O immaculate and bleſſed Mother, (without ſinne) of thy Sonne, & God of al, pure, ſound, moſt ſacred; we praiſe thee, we bleſſe thee, as ful of grace, who broughteſt forth Chriſt. We al proſtrate ourſelues to thee, we al beſech thee. Deliuer vs o vnſpotted, from al neceſſitie, from al temptations

of the diuel. Be our Reconciliatrix and Aduocate in the hour of Iudgment. Deliuer vs from the fire to comand darknes: and vouchſaif vs the glorie of thy Sonne; for thou art the moſt holie hope of Chriſtians with God.
               To whom be honour world without end. Amen.
               O holie and immaculate Virgin Marie Mother of God,Auguſt. meditat. c. 40. and Mother of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, vouchſaife to make interceſſion for me, to him whoſe Temple thou deſeruedſt to be.
               I beſech the Interceſſion of bleſſed Marie the Virgin;Ambroſ. orat. praeparat. that my praier may be effectual.
               O holie Mother of God Virgin Marie, pray for vs.Greg. in Antiphonar.
               
               O Queene of heauen and Ladie of earth, euer moſt holie Virgin,Io. Caſſian. Coufeſ. Theolog. part. 3. Mother of God & our Lord Ieſus Chriſt; pray for vs and daily, yea continually make interceſſion for me thy ſeruant, and for al the holy Church of God, for remiſſion of ſinnes, purging of vices, for increaſe and perfection of vertues, for the peace and health of the faithful people, for the fruictes of the earth, for the ſtabilitie

of the Church, the order of Sainctes, and for al ſeruantes of God, men and women, both liuing and departed, that by thy praiers and holie merites, God almightie may take mercie on a people ful of ſinnes, here, and for euer.
               
                  S. Leander Liturg. Muzarab. infeſt. S. Iacobi.Haile o Queene, Mother of mercie, life, ſweetenes, and our hope al haille. We that are the baniſhed children of Eue do crie vnto thee. To thee we ſigh groaning and weping, in this vale of teares. Therfore o thou our aduocate, turne thoſe thy merciful eyes vnto vs, and ſhew vnto vs after this exile, bleſſed Ieſus the fruite of thy wombe. O merciful, o ful of pitie, o ſweete Virgin Marie. Pray for vs o holie Mother of God. That we may be made worthie of the promiſes of Chriſt.
               
                  Athanaſ. ſer. de ſanctiſ. Deipara To. 3.Harken o daughter of Dauid & Abraham, and incline thine eare to our praiers, and forgeat not thy people. We crie vnto thee, o moſt holie Virgin, remember vs, and render vnto vs for this litle ſpeech, great guiftes out of the riches of thy graces, thou who art ful of grace. We vſe theſe wordes for

thy praiſe, If at anie time Himne, if at anie time praiſe, be offered vnto thee, either by vs, or anie creature, to thee I ſay our gracious Ladie, Queene, Miſtris, Mother of God, Arke of the Sanctuarie. Al orders of Angels and earthly thinges pronounce thee bleſſed. We exalt thee with a great and lowde voice ſaying: Haile gratious, our Lord is with thee, o Miſtris, and Ladie and Queene, and Mother of God, make interceſſion for vs.
               O venerable Virgin, chaſt,S. Gregor. Nazian. in traged. Chri
                        ••
                      patiens. moſt happy, adorned with the garment of immortalitie, accompted as a Goddeſſe: be mercifuly preſent to my praiers, receiue my petitions.
               O Ladie graunt that I may ſo depart forth of this life, that hauing thee ſo great a gouerneſſe of it, I may alwaies find thee for me a moſt acceptable Patroneſſe to thy Sonne. Suffer me not to be deliuered ouer as it were to be crucified and expoſed to the ſcorne of him that is the ſworne enemie & plague of al mortal men.
               O maiden equalled by none in grace, Mother and Virgin, comly aboue al

virgins, and the greateſt, who excedeſt al orders of heauenly inhabitantes, Queene, Ladie, the good of mankind: be alwaies a frend to mortal men, and to me euerie where the greateſt ſaifguard.
               O thrice bleſſed Mother, o light of virgins, which inhabiteſt the moſt glorious Temple of heauen, free from the ſtianes of mortalitie: now thou art adorned with the ſtoale of immortalitie, harkē gently from aboue to my wordes, and I beſech thee o Virgin, receiue my praiers.
               
                  S. Chriſoſtom. in miſ. tranſlated by Eraſmus of Roterad.It is worthy and iuſt, to glorify thee Goddes Mother, & alwaies moſt bleſſed, & wholly vndefiled Mother of god more honourable then the Cherubins, and, incomparably, more Glorious, then the Seraphins, which without corcorruption, haſt brought forth God: verily we magnify thee Goddes Mother.
               O glorious Mother of God, who brought forth true God: pray vnto him to ſaue our ſoules.
               O Mother of God, becauſe thou art more excellent then al creatures, we

which are not able to praiſe thee worthily, do freely beſech thee, haue mercie vpon vs.
               
                  Haile ful of grace, our Lord is with thee.
                  S. Andreas Archiepiſ. Hieroſolym. ſer. in ſalutat. S. Mar. Deiparae to. 2. Bibl. SS. Patr. An. 550. Haile organe of ioy, by which the condemnation of our offence is purged, and ful cōpenſation of true ioy is made. Haile truly bleſſed. Haile illuminated. Haile magnificent Temple of Diuine glory. Haile conſecrated Palace of the King. Haile bride chamber, in which humanitie was eſpouſed to Chriſt. Haile elected to God before thou wert borne. Haile Goddes Reconciliation with men. Haile treaſure of life which neuer fadeth. Haile heauen celeſtial, Tabernacle of the ſunne of glory. Haile moſt ample feild of God, whom none other place but thou alone, could comprehend. Haile holie virginal earth, of which the new Adam by an vnſpeakable framing, was formed; which ſhould reſtoare the old Adam to ſaluation.
               
                  Haile Marie ful of grace,
                  S. Iacob. in miſ. receiued in concil. 6. genral. Can. 32. 
                  our Lord is with thee; bleſſed art thou among women, and bleſſed is the fruite of thy wombe; for thou haſt brought forth the Sauiour of our ſoules. It is worthie, it is worthie

that we cal thee who art trulie bleſſed the Mother of God alwaies bleſſed & euerie way irreprehenſible, & the Mother of our God, more honourable thē the Cherubins, and more glorious then the Seraphins: who without corruption, haſt brought forth God the word. We truly magnify thee the Mother of God, o ful of grace, to thee euerie creature maketh ioy, the companie of Angels, and mankind: thou who art the ſanctified Temple, the ſpiritual paradiſe, the glorie of virgins, of whom God receiued fleſh, and became a child, our God who is before the world: for he made thy belie his Throne, and thy wombe more ſpacious and large, then the heauens them ſelues. To thee o ful of grace, euerie creature doth gratulate; glorie to thee.
               
                  Precat. Syriac. apud Seuer. Patriarch. Alex. in prec. Syr. to. 6. Bibl. SS. Patr.O holie Marie Mother of God, pray for vs, I ſay ſinners. Amen.
               O Mother of God, Queene of heauen, doare of paradiſe, Ladie of the worlde, begin praiers for my ſinne.
               Amen.
               
                  Eutichian. in vit. S. Theophili.O my bleſſed Ladie, and defence of mankind, the harbour and protection

of them that flee vnto thee. I know o my Ladie Mother of God, that I haue greatly offended thee. For who o my Ladie hath hoped in thee and was aſhamed? or what man hath faithfully aſked thy help, able to al thinges, & hath at anie time bene forſaken? verly no man at anie time. Wherfore I a ſinner alſo and wicked perſon, aske thy euer-during fountaine, from which cures do flowe to our ſoules, be merciful vnto me.
            
            
               Of the ſame praying vnto, and honouring this moſt bleſſed Virgin Marie.
               Chapter. 4.
               
                  HAile ful of grace,
                  S. Andreas Hieroſol. in ſalutat. Angel. Serm. 
                  our Lord is with thee. He that ſaid Let light be made, let the firmament, and the reſt of the workes of wonderful creation, be made. Haile Mother of immeaſurable

ioy. Haile new Arke of glory, in which the ſpirit of God deſcending, reſted; Arke in which reſted the ſanctification of new glorie. Haile ornament of al Prophets and Patriarks, and moſt true praiſe of the vnſearchable oracles of God. Bleſſed art thou among women, and bleſſed is the fruite of thy wombe, and verily thou art trulie bleſſed, for God hath bleſſed thee a Tabernacle to him ſelf. Bleſſed art thou among women, who alone haſt gott the bleſſing which God had promiſed to the Gentiles by Abrahā.Gen. 12. Verily thou art bleſſed, who art called the Mother of the bleſſed child Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour; for whom the Gentiles crie,Math. 22. 
                  Bleſſed is he that cometh in the name of our Lord, & bleſſed the eternal name of his glorie. Bleſſed art thou among women, whom al generations proclame bleſſed, kinges do glorifie, whom Potentates adore, whom virgins both following and going before thee, do attend into the Temple of the King.
               
                  Auguſt. ſer. 2. de anuntiat. et aſſumpt. B. Mar.O haphie Marie, and worthie of al praiſe. O Virgin, o glorious Mother of God, o high child-bearer, to whoſe bowels, the maker of heauen and earth

is committed. O B. Marie, admitte our praiers within the ſacrarie of thy Auditorie, and bring againe vnto vs grace of reconciliation. Obtaine what we aske and excuſe that we feare; for we finde none more excellent in merits, to pacify the Iudges anger, then thou art, who haſt deſerued to be the Mother of our Redemer & Iudge.
               Succour thoſe that be in miſerie, aſſiſt the weake harted, comfort thoſe that weepe, pray for the people, intreat for the Cleargie, make interceſſion for the company of Monkes, beſech for the deuout woman ſexe. Let al perſons perceaue thy helpe, that celebrate thy name. Haue compaſſion vpon the afflicted, beare a merciful affection to vs that be pilgrims from heauen. preſent our wepinges vnto God, and for vs intreate him as thine owne ſonne. We on earth are yet afflicted, intertained with iniuries, affected with reproches: do hunger, thirſt, are detained in priſon. But thou in heauen art preferred before al companies of virgins, thou foloweſt the Lambe whether ſoeuer he goeth. Thou in that moſt happy Region of the

bleſſed, haſt gotte the cheifeſt dignitie. To thee a kingly Queare of Angels is placed in the palace of the eternal King. And the King of kinges himſelf louing thee aboue al, with an embracing of loue, doth ſociate thee to him ſeif, as his true Mother and comlie Spouſe. Therfore, poſſeſſing theſe felicities, turne thy ſelf to the ſaluation of our ſoules: aſſiſt the praiers of them that aske thee; be careful daily to pray for the people of God, thou being bleſſed, dideſt deſerue, to beare the Redemer of the world: who liueth, and reigneth, for euer. Amen.
               
                  Auguſt. ſupr.O bleſſed Marie, who is able worthily, to render dutie of thankes, & ſolemnitie of praiſes vnto thee, who, by thy ſingular aſſent, haſt ſucoured the world which was loſt? What praiſes ſhal the frailtie of man yeld vnto thee, who by thy negotiation alone, haſt? found the meanes to recouer it againe Wherfore receiue ſuch as they be, very ſmale, ſuch as they be, thankes vnequal to thy merites; and when thou haſt receiued our praiers, by praying, excuſe our faultes.
               
                  Bleſſed among women,Andreas Cretenſ. in ſalut. Angel. in Encom. 2. dormit. Deipar. c. 8. pacify our Lord for his common creature. For ſo long as thou dideſt conuerſe on earth, a litle portion of the earth had thee: but ſince thou art tranſlated from earth, the whole world conteineth thee a common propitiatorie.
               O Mother of God,cap. 12. ſupr. to vs that honor thee geue againe this reward of a litle guift, that we may haue more precious and reſplendant then riches, humble praiers to thy Sonne and our Lord, and King, and God.
               O vnſpotted,S. Ephrem orat. de laudib. ſanctiſ. Dei matris. and whollie pure Virgin, Goddes Mother, Queene of al, hope of the deſolate, my moſt glorious Ladie, higher then the inhabitantes of heauen, more pure then the beames & brightnes of the Sunne, more to be honoured then the Cherubim, more holie thē the Seraphim, hope of the Fathers, glorie of the Prophets, praiſe of the Apoſtles, and honour of Martyrs, ioy of Sainctes, and light of the godlie Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, ornament of Aaron, ſhynnig of Moyſes, fleece of Gedeon, the Crowne of the companie of ſarced Prelates, and al Sainctes and Virgins;

inacceſſible for brightnes. By thee we are reconciled to Chriſt, my God, thy Sonne. Thou art the helper of thoſe that ſinne, and are deſtitute of aide, comfort of the world, renowmed deliuerer of the impriſoned. Thou the receiuer of orphanes. Thou the redemption of captiues. Thou the exultation of the ſicke and ſaiftie of al. Thou the ornament, crowne, & ioy of virgins, haue mercie on me that am defiled, who with vetie manie ſinnes, haue offended my Creator, my God, and Iudge, that moſt hateful Sathan do not glorie againſt me. O ſyncere Virgin, I haue none other truſt. for thou, o inuiolate Virgin, art my harbour and readie helper. Laſtly I am whollie vnder thy winge and protection. moſt renowmed Mother I beſech thee with frequent teares, I lye proſtrate to thee, o my Ladie, humbly crauing, that thy ſweete Sonne, & geuer of the life of al, do not take me away, for manie ſinnes which I haue committed.
               
                  Baſilius Seleucus orat. 1. de verb. Incarnat.O thrice holie Virgin Marie, looke vpon us frō heauen with a merciful eye, and now lead vs from hence in peace,

place vs free from confuſion before the Throne of the Iudge, and at laſt make vs partakers of the ſtation at the right hand; that from thence being taken to heauen together with the Angels, we may praiſe the increated, and Homouſion Trinitie.
               O Virgin Mother of God and Chriſt,Canon vniuer.+ſal. or miſ. Ethiop. to. 6. Bibl. po
                        ••
                     . at al times carrie vp our praier with the elect of thy Sonne, that our ſinnes may be forgeuen. Be ioyful o Lady becauſe thou haſt brought forth to vs the true light: pray for vs with him, that he wil haue mercie on our ſoule; pray for vs in the ſight of the Throne of thy ſonne Ieſus Chriſt: be ioyful, o immaculate, verily our Queene: be glad, o glorie of our parents, becauſe thou haſt brought forth vnto vs Emanuel: o verily Mediatrix before our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. We humblie beſech thee, that thou wilt be mindful of vs, that our iniquities may be blotted out.
               Verily the bleſſed Virgin Marie was a great miracle: for what was,S. Chriſoſtom. apud Metaphraſt. et Breu. Rom. 12. Septemb. or euer ſhal be found at anie time greater, or more renowmed then ſhe? She alone 
                     〈◊〉
                   aſſed heauen & earth in renowme.

What more holie then ſhe? Not the Prophets, not Apoſtles, not Maryrs, not Patriarches, not Angels, not Thrones not Dominations, not Seraphim, not Cherubim; Laſtly no other thing among thinges viſible, or inuiſible, can be founde greater or more excellent, The ſame is the handmaid and Mother of God. The ſame a Virgin & Mother. This is the Mother of him, who before al beginning, was begotten of his Father; whom Angels and men acknowledge Lord of al thinges. Wil you know how much this Virgin is more excellent then the celeſtial powers? They with feare & tembling do aſſiſt: ſhe offereth Mankind to him whom ſhe brought forth. By her alſo we obtaine Pardon of ſinnes. Haile therfore o Mother, Heauen, Maiden, Virgin, Throne, of our Church the renowme, glorie, and firmament: pray for vs daily to Ieſus, thy Sonne, and our Lord, that by thee we may finde mercie in the day of Iudgment, and obtaine thoſe good thinges, which are laid vp for thoſe that loue God, by the grace, and bountie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt wit
                     •
                  
                  
whom to the Father and Holie Ghoſt, be glorie, honour, and Rule, now and euer world without end. Amen.
               O holie Mother of God,S. Ciril. Alet. homil. conit. Neſtor. praiſe be to thee, for thou art the precious pearle of the world. Thou the vnquenchable lampe, crowne of virginitie, Scepter of true faith, indiſſoluble Temple containing him, who can no where be contained: A Mother and Virgin. Thou art bleſſed among women, Mother of him that cometh bleſſed in the name of our Lord. By thee the Trinitie is ſanctifyed: By 
                     ••
                  ee the precious Croſſe is celebrated and worſhipped in al the world. By thee heauen doth ioy, the Angels and Archangels reioice, the diuels are driuē away, and man him ſelf is called backe to heauen. By thee euerie creature, detained in the errour of Idols , is conuerted to the knowledge of the truth, & faithful men haue come to holy baptiſm, & churches are builded in al the world. Thou being helper, the Nations haue come to penance. What more? By thee the only begotten Sonne of God, that true light, hath ſhyned to them that ſat in darknes and ſhadow of death. By thee

the Prohets foretold. By thee the Apoſtles preached ſaluation to the Gentiles. Who ſhal be able to expreſſe the greatnes of thy praiſes, o Marie, Mother and Virgin. Let vs extol her, adoring her Sonne, the immaculate Spouſe of the Church. To whom be honour and glorie world without end.
               Amen.
            
            
               Of Praier and honour vnto the bleſſed Angels in heauen.
               Chapter. 5.
               
                  Auguſt. meditat. c. 20.O Ieruſalem, the eternal houſe of God, next to the loue of Chriſt, be thou my gladnes and conſolation. Let the ſweete memory of thy bleſſed name, be the releife of my ſorow & weriſomnes.
               
                  Io. Caſſian. 
                        ••••
                     eſ. Theo.O holie Angels, holie Archangels,

holie Powers, holie Potentates,log. part. 3. et Auguſt. meditat. c. 23. holie Principalityes, holie Dominations, holie Thrones, holie Seraphines, holy Cherubins, holie Michael, holie Gabriel, holie Raphael, and thou my holie Angel, to whom our common maker, hath committed me to be kept, and al you adminiſtring ſpirits, and heauenlie Citizens, & al orders of bleſſed Spirits make interceſſion and pray for me, a wretch, and your vnworthie ſeruant, & for al the Church of God, that we may be worthie of the promiſes of Chriſt, that by your praiers we may be ioyned to your B. felowſhip for euer.
               Let vs aske that we may haue God,
                     Nemetian. Datiu. Felix et Vict. epiſt. ad Ciprian. inter. epiſt. eius 7
                           •
                        . Mallabar. Indi in miſ.
                     S. Sophron. Hieroſol. Encom. Angel.
                   and Chriſt, and the Angels, fauourers vnto vs in al our actions.
               We beſech the Angel of peace & loue with praier and obſecration.
               O you diuine armies of God, & immaterial, O Angels intellectual, & reaſonable: But it is better by degree, & in order, to Praiſe, magnify, and cal vpon you. O Seraphines,Seraphines praied vnto. I beſech you to cleanſe the inward corners of my ſoule, from the filthes of ſinne; and vtterly expelling and putting away the

darknes of my heart, lighten the internal ſenſes of my minde.
               
                  Cherubins.O you Cherubins adorne me with the knowlege of the heauenlie word. Kindle anger in me againſt the old ſerpent and powerablie carrie me on high from the earth.
               
                  Thrones.O you Thrones, who are the ſeate-bearers and reſt of God almightie, deliuer me from al deceipt and curſed work, and make me worthie of the glorie and Maieſtie of God.
               
                  Dominations.O venerable Dominations, graunt vnto me that I may gouerne the paſſions of my minde, which corrupt the vnderſtanding: and to the laſt breath of my life ſubdue the deceiptes of the diuel which greuoſly hurt my ſoule.
               
                  Potentates.O Potentates, named agreable to your office, geue power vnto me againſt the viſible and inuiſible enemies, which riſe againſt my ſoule, & labour to bring my mind into captiuitie, & endeuour to ouerthrow my waies.
               
                  Powers.O you immoueable and mightie powers, compaſſe me about with heauenly ſtrength and power, that am weake and infirme, and make me apt, that I

may manfully driue away, and tread vnder foote, thoſe ſpritual ſnakes & ſcorpions.
               O Principalities,Principalities. cheife in the third order of Angels, be faithfully preſent, and vſe your careful diligence that I may triumphe ouer my moſt noyſome enemies, and reſiſt them without feare & wound euen to the end.
               O you the reſt of the Angels & Archangels,Archangels. Angels. I aske and beſech your bounty, o you good & without blemiſh Angels and Archangels, o vndefiled ſpirits, I intreate your magnificence preſerue my life without offence, my hope vnmoued, manners blameleſſe, my loue towardes God and my neighboure perfect, and free from al tranſgreſſion, I beſech you leade and guide me with your hand, and direct me to euery way of ſaluation, and acceptable to God.
               Al places are ful of Angels,Origen homil. 2. in Ezechiel▪
                   o Angel come receiue one cenuerted frō old error, from doctrine of diuels, from iniquity ſpeaking againſt God: and receiuing him as a good Phiſitian, cheriſh, and inſtruct him: and cal vnto thee other fellowes of thy miniſtery, that al

you together may inſtruct them to faith, which ſometime were deceiued.Luc. 25. 
                  For there is greater Ioy in heauen for one ſinner doing penance then nyntie nine iuſt.
               
               
                  Auguſt. in Iob. conc. 2 ad cap. 19.
                  Haue mercy vpon me, haue mercy vpon me o my freindes. he ſeemeth to requeſt the Angels to pray for him: or ſurely the Saincts to pray for a penitent.
               
                  Auguſt. l. meditat. c. 4.O holy Michael, holy Gabriel, holy Raphael, o you holy Quiets of Angels, and Archangels, I preſume to aske you by him that hath choſen you, and of whoſe ſight you reioyce, that you vouch ſaife to pray for me to God a ſinner.
               
                  S. Chriſoſt. in Liturg.O Michael Prince of the heauenly armie, we vnworthie do beſech thee, that thou wilt defend vs by thy interceſſions; keepe vs with the ſhadow of thy winges of an immaterial nature. We fal downe, and without ceaſing crie vnto thee: deliuer vs from daungers, as prince of the heauenly powers.
               
                  Victor Vticenc. l. 3. perſec. Vandal. Hebr. 1.14.Be preſent vnto me o you Angels of my God which are neuer abſent conſtituted in your miniſterie, for them that ſhal receiue the inheritance of ſaluation. Conſider and behold, how Syon, the Citie of our God, is made vyle, become as it

were polluted among her enemies. Al comlines and delightes, are gone from her countenance. Her Virgins & yong people brought vp in Monaſteries, haue learned to treade ſharp wayes,
               O you Angels, ſuccour vs.Gregor. in agend. mortuor.
                  Gregor. in Sacramentar. O God omnipotent, we humbly aske & intreate, that the interceſſion of Archangels, be vnto our Lord for vs, the Interceſſions of Michael, and Gabriel, & Raphael, that we may appeare worthy before our Sauiour, by the interceſſion of the neene orders of Angels. The Thrones, & Dominations, and Principalities, and Powers: alſo Cherubins, and Seraphimes, vouchſaife to pray for vs.
               O thrice moſt holie and much beloued, and reuerenced Prince,Sophron. Hieroſol. Encom. Angel.
                  S. Machael. and cheife of the Angels Michael, when at the laſt al thoſe admirable thinges which are expected, ſhal be ended, by the ſounde which thou ſhalt geue: then, o holy Arch-prince, teacher of thoſe that erre, raiſer of them that fal, defender of ſoules, preſeruer of bodies, abandoner of diuels, and lightner of euerie creature: then I beſech thee, vouchſaife to

be preſent, a faithful Patrone of my ſoule.
               O moſt holie Michael, illuſtrate my inward ſenſes, and illuminate the internal eye of my ſoule, and ſtrengthen my heart, toſſed with the waues of this life and my mind bended downe to earthly things, lift it vp ward to heauēly wiſdō, and ſtrengthen my weak handes againſt mine enemies expert in warr; & fortify my feeble feete, that they forſake not the path that leadeth to heauen; and cure the reſt of the greifes of my miſeries and laboures.
               
                  Michael ſignifieth, who as God.O Michael both in deede and name, I pray thee, and ſo much as I am able beſech thee, that when I ſhal depart forth of this life, thou wilt appeare ioyful, & pacified, and ſhrowde me vnder the honoured couering of thy winges: & being deliuered from the narrow & darke places of hel, lead me into the roomes of the wonderful Tabernacle, leading me euen to the houſe of God.
               
                  S. Gabriel.O moſt heauenlie and excellent Angel Gabriel; o Gabriel obtainer, and geuer of true gladnes: I often requeſt and beſech thee, that thou wilt l
                     •
                  uing

viſit me oppreſſed with great ſicknes, and fil me with celeſtial vertue, and ioy of minde; and being freed from the tormentes of Belial, and dangers both of viſible and not viſible enemies, by thine authoritie, and interceſſion to God, ioyne me to the companie of the iuſt & Sainctes; and at laſt ſettle me in thoſe places which flow with al delghtes.
               O heauenly ſpirits, I deſire to aske, and earneſtly beſech you, that when as the laſt gaſpe of my life, I ſhal be compelled to goe forth of this earthen veſſel, and you are to weigh in a balance, al mine actions, and take accompt of al things, which openly or ſecretly I haue deſigned, that then either al of you, or at leaſt they whom God ſhal ſend forth of your order, to receiue mine vnhappy & wretched ſoule, wil ſhew your ſelues pleaſed & gētle vnto me; & thoſe weightes which I with my wicked deeds, haue deſperatly burdened, you wil happily vnloade, and by al meanes and skil, as the miniſters of our only mercicul God, disburden.
               When the day of confundation cotheth, and the end of the world ſhal be,

when the heauens ſhal tremble and the firmament ſhake, and the dreedful Iudge approach, and you going before his coming, ſhal runne ouer the boundes & endes of the earth, to gather together, al mortal men that are dead from the beginning of the world, and ſet them before the vncorrupt Iudge, for euery one to yeld accompt of euerie deede, euerie thought, and conceipt of minde: Then I beſech you, and wil neuer ceaſe to the end of my life to beſech you, who behold al thinges, and performe the publicke miniſteries of God, with authoritie, then I ſay, then I beſech you, be mercifully preſent with me, and as the Princes of the moſt excellent King, ſpare me a wretch, and vnhappie, & by your interceſſion to God, deliuer me from that doleful and angrie ſentence, that ſendeth into euerlaſting fyre. And contrariwiſe, make me, with al my partakers, & kinsfolkes, whoſe names and calling he knoweth, who knoweth al thinges, partaker of that ioyful & pleaſāt ſtate & life that is voide of al ſorow, and wanteth nothing; and laſtly pronounce me heire of that ioy which neuer

endeth.
            
            
               Of praier and honour to al the bleſſed Sanctes in heaven in general.
               Chapter. 6.
               O Houſe of God ſhyning and bewtiful,Auguſt. l. meditat. c. 20. I haue loued thy comlines, and the dwelling place of the glorie of our Lord, my poſſeſſor and maker.
               Let my pilgrimage ſigh vnto thee day and night: Let my heart be open vnto thee, my minde intende thee, my ſoule deſire to come vnto the felowſhip of thy bleſſednes. I ſpeake to him who made thee to poſſeſſe me in thee, becauſe he hath made me and thee. And ſpeake thou, aske thou him, to make me worthie of the participation of thy glorie.
               I wil begin to throw downe my ſelf vpon my knees, and pray vnto al Saincts,Origen in lament. to ſuccour me, who dare not aske God for the exceding greatnes of my ſinne, O ye Sainctes of God, with exceding ſorow, teares, and weping, I beſech you, that you wil fal downe before his mercies for me a wretch. Amen.
               
                  
                  Caſſian. Confeſ. Theolog. part. 3. See S. Auguſt. med. c. 23.O al you heauenly Citizens make interceſſion and pray for me a wretch, and your vnworthie ſeruant; And alſo for al the holie Church of God, that we may be made worthie of the promiſes of Chriſt: that by your praiers we may be ioyned to your bleſſed felowſhip for euer.
               O happie Sainctes of God, who haue now paſſed ouer the troubleſome ſea of this mortalitie, & are come to the Hauen of euerlaſting quietnes, ſecuritie, and peace, and deſerued to be fellowes of the heauenly powers; you are ſecure of your ſelues, be careful for vs. I beſech you by him that hath choſen you, who hath made you ſuch, of whoſe contemplatiō you now reioice, with whoſe bewtie you are now filled, by whoſe immortalitie and vnchangeablenes, you are become immortal and vnchangeable: be mindful of vs wretches, yet in the ſea of this life, toſſed with waters fownd about vs. Make interceſſion & pray for vs wretches, and verie negligent ſinners, conſtantly, and without ceaſing, that by the armes of your praiers, we may be carried to God. We ſail

as you know, by this great & vaſt ſea, where the great wahle is readie to deuoure thoſe that paſſe by. where there be daungerous places, Scilla, and Charibdis, with many others, in which men vnwares, and doubtful in faith, do ſuffer ſhip wrackes, wherfore in al thinges we want your help, we are carried on the tree, and by the Croſſe of our Lord hope to paſſe ouer to harbour. Let the aduerſe partes flee away, by the ſight of the ſigne of Chriſt. Al you armie of the heauēly coūtry, pray, that by your merits & by your praiers, we may with our ſhippe ſaife, & marchandiſe preſerued, happily enter into the hauen of eternal glorie; where you are, where you reioyce, where you reigne with God with out end.
               We beſech the Sainctes,S. Hieron
                        ••
                     . ad Pſal. 15. that we be not ſeperated from thee: if we do not deſerue to be cloathed with glorie, yet that we be not excluded from pardon.
               I beſech the interceſſion of the Apoſtles.Ambroſ. 
                        〈◊〉
                      2. praep
                        •
                     r.
               
               O holy Quiers of Patriarches,Auguſt. l. medit. c. 
                        •
                     0. Prophets, Apoſtles, Euangeliſtes, Martyrs, Confeſſors, Preiſtes, Leuſtes, Monkes,

Virgins, and al the iuſt; I preſume to ask you by him who hath choſen you, and of whoſe ſight you ioy, that you wil vouchſaife to pray to God for me a ſinner, that I may be deliuered from the iawes of the deuil, and from euerlaſting death.
               
                  S. Chriſoſt. in miſ. verſ. a leone Tuſco.O Apoſtles, Martyrs, and Prophets, Preiſtes, Confeſſors, and iuſt men, and holie women, who haue wel ended your combat, & kept your faith, being faithful to our Sauiour, pray for vs, that our ſoules may be ſaued. Amen.
               
                  Victor vticenc. l. 3. perſecut. Vandal.O you Patriarches, of whom the Church which now laboureth on earth, is deſcended, make interceſſion for it. O you holie Prophets, behold how ſhe is afflicted, whom you haue tuned forth with Prophetical praiſe. O you Apoſtles, be you interceſſors for her, whom to gather together, you haue runne about al the world.
               
                  Paulin. Nolan. natal. 9. S. Felicis.O you holie prophets, who foretold the coming of God in our fleſh: & you Martyrs, who with the ſlaughter of your bodies, & ſhedding of your bloud, haue geuen teſtimonie to the Lambe that was killed, and is aliue: I humbly

beſech you to be preſent with me.
               The Infantes protomartyrs in the order of Sainctes,S. Ciprian. de ſtel. et mag. 
                        ••
                      Innocent. acquainted with the diuine ſecrets by their familier nearenes: vouchſaife to intreate the mercie of God for our laboures.
               O moſt bleſſed Martyrs, who for our Sauiour, and the loue of him, haue frely and perfectly ſuſtained tormentes,S. Ephrem ſet. de ſanctis Martitib. & therfore are more familiarly ioyned to God: We intreate you, that you wil vouchſaife to make interceſſion to our Lord for vs wretches and ſinners, and polluted with the filthines of negligence, that the grace of Chriſt may com vpon vs, to illuſtrate our heartes with the beame of his holy loue.
               O moſt bleſſed men, o moſt glorious Martyrs of God, help me a wretch with your praiers, that I may obtaine mercie in that hour, when the ſecrets of men ſhal be manifeſt. Stande before the Throne of the Maieſtie of God for me, that by your praiers, I may deſerue to be ſaued, and with you to enioy eternal bleſſednes.
               I aske the Sainctes by their interceſſion, to obtaine vnto me the goodwil

of God. I aske and beſech, that by the Interceſſion of al Sainctes, I may obtaine the help of God.
               
                  Theodoret. up. vit. vlt. he meaneth thoſe Sainctes woſe life he had written in 
                        •
                     hat hiſtory.I beſech thoſe Sainctes, whoſe life I have written, that they wil not deſpiſe me, liuinge farre from their ſpiritual companie, but draw me lying beneath, and lift me vp to the toppe of vertue, & ioyne me with them, that I may not only praiſe the riches of others, but my ſelfe may haue ſome occaſion of praiſe, glorifying the Sauiour of al, both in deede and word, and thought.
               
                  Gregor. antiphonar. ad Proceſ.O Sainctes ariſe, and kepe vs humble ſinners in peace.
            
            
               Of praier and honour vnto ſome Sainctes on particular deceaſed before the Paſſion of Chriſt.
               Chapter. 7.
               
                  Origen in lament.O Father Abraham, pray for me, that I be not driven from the boundes, which I have greatly deſired.
               
                  O bleſſed Iob,Origen. l. 2. in Iob. who liueſt for euer with God, and remaineſt a conquerour in the ſight of the King our Lord: pray for vs wretches, that the dreadful mercie of God, defend vs in al tribulations and deliuer vs from al oppreſſions of the diuel, and number vs among the iuſt, & inrol vs with thoſe that are ſaued, and cauſe vs to reſt with them in his kingdome, where we may continually magnify him with his Sainctes, Amen.
               O bleſſed Iob, be a guide vnto vs,Olimpiodorus. in c. 15. Iob. & forſake vs not vntil thou haue directed vs vnto the plaine way in which we may trauaile ſaifly, & not erre from truth.
               The Protomartyrs,Ciprianus de Stel. et magis. he meaneth the holy Innocentes put to death by Herode. which haue the firſt place in the order of Sainctes, and acquainted with diuine ſecrets by their moſt familiar nearnes: vouchſaife to entreate the clemency of God for our laboures, whom to this day deadly Herode perſecuteth: with whoſe bloud, and death, the diuel delighteth. Therfore theſe tranſlated from their cradles to heauē, are made Senators of the heauenly Capitol, and Iudges there, obtaining pardon for ſome without deſ
                     •
                  ruing.
               
                  
                  Antipater Boſtrenſ. Epiſcop. orat. in S. Io. Baptiſt. c. 3 See more ſupr. cap. 2.O Baptiſt, I beſech thee graunt vnto me the hope of my Praier, and as thou art a voice, preſerue vnto me ſure & ſtable, the ſenſes of the inſtrumentes of voice.
               
                  S. Ephrem Syr. l. de laudib. Ioſeph. Patriarch. his prayer at the Tombe of Rachel his mother.O Rachel, Rachel, my Mother, behold Ioſeph thy Sonne whom thou haſt loued, what hath chanced vnto him. Behold he is ledde captiue as a malefactor. O Rachel, receiue thy ſonne; O mother, receiue me; o my mother heare the mourning and bitter ſcriking of my heart; mine eyes can no longer ſuſtaine teares, neither my life ſufficeth, to ſuch lamentations and groaninges.
            
            
               Of praier and honour vnto Sainctes in particular, deceaſed after the Paſſion of Chriſt.
               Chapter. 8.
               
                  S. Leo ſer. 1. de I
                        ••
                     un. 10 menſ.THe moſt bleſſed Apoſtle Peter, vouchſaife by his praiers, to helpe

our praiers, faſtings, and almes.
               Bleſſd Peter and al Sainctes,S. Leo in ſer. octau. Pet. et Pauli. that haue bene preſent with vs in manie tribulations, vouchſaife to help our praiers with the merciful God, through Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               O Peter,Ambroſ. in c. 22. Luc. prope finem. from whence may I cal thee to teach me what thou didſt think when thou didſt weepe? from whence I ſay may I cal thee? from heauē where thou art among the Queares of Angels, or frō thy graue alſo? becauſe thou thinkeſt it no iniurie to be there frō whence our lord aroſe; teach vs what thy teares did profitt thee.
               O Peter & Paul,Chriſoſt. ho
                        ••
                     . in natal. Apoſtol. Petri et Pnuli. To. 3. ſur. Gal. 6. 2. Pet. 1. pray for vs continually, we beſech you. performe your promiſes, for theſe are your couenantes, of one of you this; come with me, & let vs not faint in good thinges. and of the other, that: I wil ſtudie after my death, to make mention of you. Therfore do not forgeat your agreed couenantes, but you which are immediatly preſent to the B. Trinitie without beginning, aſke for vs al thinges belonging to ſaluation.
               O holy Paul Doctor of the Gentiles, and al you holie Apoſtles,Victor v
                        •
                     . l. 3. perſec. V
                        •••
                     . lament together

with vs. We proſtrate, aske by him who promoted you lowly fiſhers, to the higheſt Apoſtolical dignitie; that you do not deſpiſe your wretched ſinners.
               
                  Elpis hym. de Petro et Paulo.O Paul excellent Doctor, inſtruct our maners, and endeuour to tranſlate vs in minde into heauen.
               
                  Miſ. or cant. vniuer. Ethiop.O S. Paul, who haſt receiued the Crowne, pray and make interceſſion for vs, that our ſoules may be deliuered by the multitude of the mercies of Ieſus Chriſt, and his holy name.
               
                  Damaſus de S. Andrea.O S. Andrew, cheriſh vs which be fainting, haue care of vs, that by the victorie of the Croſſe, we may go to the countrie of heauen.
               
                  Mazarab. in offic. veſper. S. Iacob.O verily worthily, more holy Apoſtle, the ſhyning head of Spaine; be a defendour, patrone, and ſaifguard to vs from heauen: driue away from vs, ſiknes, ſore, and ſinne. Be fauourable, that by heauenly help, we may poſſeſſe Ioy, obtaining the kingdome, may be adorned with eternal glorie; that by thee we may eſcape hel.
               
                  Ciril. Alexand. hom. die Ioh. Euangeliſt. in Concil. Epheſ.O Euangeliſt, o bleſſed Iohn, ſpeak vnto vs ſome great and notable thing.

O Apoſte, open vnto vs the wel of life, graunt now that we may draw from thy fountaines.To S. Clemēt. Ephrem Epiſc. Chenſonis de S. Clemente. An. 500.
               
               O ornament of Martyrs, and glory of Sainctes, defend and kepe this company without harme by thy praiers. O moſt holie, driue-backe the cruel diuels with the dart of thine interceſſions.
               O holie Lawrence thou haſt a double manſion, one of thy bodie on earth,Prudent. hym. 2. de S. Laurent. and an other of thy ſoule in heauen. There thou art a choſen Citizen of the vnſpeakable citie, & weareſt a celeſtial Croune aboue, in the euerlaſting Court. I ſeeme to ſee a man glittering with illuſtrious pretious ſtones, whom the heauenly Rome hath choſen vnto her for an eternal Conſul. What power is beſtowed vpon thee, and what great office is giuē vnto thee, is expreſſed by the ioies of the Romanes, whoſe petitions thou yeldeſt vnto, what anie man doth humbly aske, he proſperouſly obtaineth. They aske, they offer, they honour, & no man departeth in ſadnes, as though thou wert alwaies preſent, embracing in thy nurcing boſome; thy countrie Citizens noriſh them with a fatherly

loue. Among theſe, o honour of Chriſt, heart me alſo confeſſing the ſinnes of my heart, and bewraying my deedes. I acknowledge and know my ſelfe vnworthy to be heard of Chriſt him ſelfe, yet I may receiue cure by his Martyrs my Patrones. O bountiful, heare thy Suppliant: & vnbind him from the bandes of the world.
               
                  Auguſt. l. 7. de Baptiſmo contia Donatiſt. c. 1.Bleſſed Ciprian, vouchſaife to helpe vs with his praiers, in the mortalitie of this fleſh, as labouring in a dark cloude that by the guift of God, we may, ſo much as we can, imitate his good thinges.
               
                  To the ſame S. Gregor. Naz. orat. in S. Ciprian. in fine.O noble Maryr, looke downe mercifully on vs from aboue, and direct our ſpeach and life, and feede this holy fold, or gouerne it, and ſo much as is poſſible diſpoſe other thinges to the beſt.
               
                  To the 40. martyrs. S. Baſil. ſer. in 40. martyrs.
                  Where two or three be gathered together in the name of our Lord, there is God. But where fourtie ſhal be, who wil doubt but God is preſent there? He that is oppreſſed with anie diſtreſſe; let him flee to theſe: he that doth ioy, let him pray to theſe. The one to be deliuered from thinges that be euil; the other to

continew in his ioyes. O holy Queare, o ſacred order, o common kepers of mā
                  kind, moſt excellent fellowes of cares, offerers vp of praiers and Vowes, moſt potent Ambaſſadoures with God, the Starres of the world, Floures of the Churches.
               O holie S. Albane,S. Amphibalus apud Capgratr. et alios in vit. S. Albani et Amphibali. I beſech thee to pray to our Lord for me, that it wil pleaſe him to ſend his Angel to leade me ſecurely that I be not hindered in my way, by the curſed enemie the diuel.
               O holy Father Albane, who leauing thinges terreſtrial, haſt aſcended the high ſeate of heauen with glorie: now we beſech thee with earneſt praier, thee who art our true glorie, vnbind by thy deuout praiers, the ſinnes of thy ſeruantes. Pray for the Engliſh Nation, and for the euerlaſting peace thereof, & obtaine for vs thy ſuppliants, the eternal ioyes of life, where Alleluya doth ſoūd continually.
               
                  Gradual. antiq. et miſ. Saliſb. in feſt. S. Albani.O Sainct Albane pray for vs. O S. Albane, make interceſſion for the ſoules of the deceaſed.
               
                  Litan. Angl. antiq. ante Baptiſt. et cōmned. animae. allowed by S. Amal. c. 18. litan. l. 1. de offic.O twice renuomed, deſcend hither a while, bringing Chriſtes fauour with

thee,
                     To S. Vincentius.
                     Prudent. hym. 5. de. S. Vincent.
                   that our greeued ſenſes, may feele the eaſe of pardon. Let no death now remaine, but the noble Soule receiue fleſh againe; that as it hath bene partaker of laboures and common daunger, ſo it may be coheire of glorie for euer.
               
                  Ptudent. in hym. 10. S. Romanni. martyr.O Romanus conſtant Confeſſor of Chriſt our God, be frendly vnto me, & moue the organe of my ſpeachles mouth graunt me to declare the meruelous thinges of thy praiſes, for thou knoweſt that the dūme, may be made to ſpeake.
               
                  Gregor. Nyſ. orat. de S. Theodoro mart.O bleſſed Theodorus, be Preſent vnto vs; we want manie benefites Make interceſſion and pray for thy coū
                  trie to our common King and Lord. We feare afflictions, we expect daungers. As a ſouldier defend vs, that the madde and wicked Barbarian, rage not againſt Churches or Altares; that the prophane and impious, do not ſpurne the holy thinges, And if there be need of greater aduocation and praier, then aſſemble the companie of thy brethren Martyrs, and pray together for vs with them al. Let the praiers of manie iuſt blotte out the ſinnes of the multitude & people, Moue Peters, ſtirre vp Paule, &

alſo Iohn the Diuine and beloued Diſciple, that they wil be careful for the Churches which they haue founded, for which they haue borne Chains, for which they haue ſuffered daungers and death: that hereſſes do not as thornes ouergrow the vineyard; let not cocle choake vp the wheate, but by vertue of thine owne, and thy felowes praiers, o admirable man, let the Chriſtian common wealth, become a feild of corne, which feild may remaine to the end in a fertile and fruitful foile, of faith in Chriſt, alwaies bringing forth fruit of eternal life.
               O Felix, o Sainct of God,
                     Paulin. Nolan. natal. 8.
                     Natal. 3. S. Faelicis.
                   o beloued of God, be a right hand, and moſt ſaife Towre of defence vnto me. Receiue the praiers of thy ſuppliants, and commend thē to God. Intreate the dreadfull Maieſtie of our Lord, that by thy abundā
                  
                     •
                   praiers, and merites, he wil pardon our offences
               O great Baſile,Gregor. Naz. mon. in magnum Baſilium, in fine. looke downe vpon vs from heauen, and either command my greife to go away, or help me, and perſwade me ſo patiently to endure it, that when I ſhal at laſt depart from hence,

thou maiſt receiue me into the eternal Tabernacles, and that with thee, I may behold the Bleſſed Trinitie in ſuch maner as it is.
               
                  Gregor. Naz. orat. funebri in Athanaſ. Alex. Epiſ. in fine.O Athanaſius, looke downe gently vpon vs from aboue, and direct this holy people, worſhipper of the holy Trinitie, and nouriſh vs in peace, & defend vs. Direct vs in our combate, & receiue vs: and place vs with thy ſelf, and thoſe that be as thou art.
               
                  Gregor. Niſ. ſer. de vita S. Ephrem.O holy Ephrem, excellent Father & Doctor of the Church, ſtanding by the heauenly Altare, and Prince of life, & together with the Angels, ſacrificing to the ſacred Trinitie: remember al vs, & obtaine pardon of ſinnes for vs, that we may enioy the euerlaſting bleſſednes of the celeſtial Kingdome, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord. To whom be glorie for euer. Amen.
               
                  To S. Martine. Fortunatus l. 1. vit. S. Martini.O merciful, haue mercie vpon me a wretch: that when the high Iudge of the world ſhal come, thou wilt procure that my ſinnes be blotted out. Be a mediator betwene our Lord and me. Let thine interceſſiō vnbind him, whom his offence doth binde. Let thy gentle

pietie harken vnto me; for with praier, thou art powerable with him whoſe thou art. what I aſke, thou art able to doe, becauſe he geueth al to his frendes.
               I beſech thee craue pardon,Fortunat. l. ſupr. thou who haſt gotte the crowne, o ſheephard, deliuer thy ſheepe, that it be not lame nor ſhutte forth. Be vnto me a Medidiator betwene God and the guiltie. Be mindful of thy ſeruants by him whoſe light thou ſhalt ſee for euer.
               O beloued of God, remember,
                     To S. Honoratus.
                     S. Hilatius Arelaten. inv
                           •
                        
                        ta S. Honra
                           •
                        . An. 450.
                   remember vs continually: Thou ſtandeſt without blemiſh before God ſinging that new ſong, and following the Lambe whether ſoeuer he goeth. Thou that art a follower of him, be a Patrone vnto vs, an interpreter of our Praiers, an acceptable & ſtrong Aduocate.
               Make interceſſion for vs to our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,
                     To S Germanus.
                     Conſtantiu
                           •
                        . Presbiter in vita S Germ. l. 2. c. 7. An. 480.
                     To S. Simeo
                           •
                         Priſcus. Theodoret. in Philotheo. in vita.
                   that we may deſerue to obtaine the ſong of the heauenly Trmupet, the voice of that deſired ſound, and the ioyes of the holy Reſurrection.
               I deſire Interceſſion which holy Simeon can geue, and I know I ſhal obtaine it. For he wil graunt my petition, Imitating the Bountifulneſſe of our

Lord.
               
                  Theodoret. invit. 8. Sanct. in vit. 10.I pray alſo, that I may haue the Interceſſion of holy Aphrates. I aske that I may alſo haue the Benediction of holy Theodoſius.
               
                  
                     To one S. Iames.
                     Theodoret. ſup. vit. 22.
                  Holie Iames, vouchſaife with his praiers, to ſuſtaine & vphold our weaknes, that being ſtrengthned, we may receiue manie victories from others that haue gotten them againſt vs, and ſo depart out of this life with them as Conquerours.
               
                  Maximus Taur. bomil. de S. Agnete An. 430.O moſt bleſſed Agnes, glorious vnto Chriſt, bewtiful to the Sonne of God, and acceptable to al Angels, and Archangels: vouchſaife to remember vs we intreate thee, with what praiers we are able: that he who hath geuen victorie, of thy laboures vnto thee, wil beſtow pardon of ſinnes vpon vs.
               
                  S. Damaſus de S. Agnete.O Agnes a true ornament, the bright image of ſhamfaſtnes, o noble Virgin I beſech thee, fauour my praiers.
               
                  Prudent. hym. 14. de S. Agnete.Agnes o happie Virgin, o new glory, noble inhabitant of the heauenly towre: bow downe thy face, adorned with a double Diademe, vpon our vncleanes.
               
                  To S. Agatha. S. Damaſus de S. Agatha.Thou ſhyneſt as a bride heauen,

aſke for me, fauour thoſe which honour thee.
               O holie & bleſſed Paula,S. Hieron. epiſt. 27. ad Euſtochium. help with thy praiers the decaying old age of thy worſhipper: thy faith and workes aſſociate thee to Chriſt; being preſent thou ſhalt more eaſily obtaine what thou aſkeſt.
            
            
               
                  THE OLD LITANIES vſed within the firſt 600 yeares. cited by Wallafridus Strab. l. de rebus Eccleſiaſt. 28. de lit. agend. S. Amalar. l 2. de eccl. offic. c. 28. Cermonial. antiq. tit. Lytan. and others.
               
               Chapter. 9.
               LOrd haue mercie vpon vs.
               Chriſt haue mercy vpon vs.
               Lord haue mercie vpon vs.
               O Chriſt heare vs.
               
               O God the Father of heauen, haue mercie vpon vs.
               O God the Sonne Redemer of the world haue mercie vpon vs.
               O God the holy Ghoſt, haue mercie vpon vs.
               O holie Trinitie one God, haue mercie vpon vs.
               O holie Marie, pray for vs.
               O holie Mother of God,
                  pray
               
               O holie Virgin of virgins,
                  pray
               
               O holie Michael,
                  pray
               
               O holie Gabriel,
                  pray
               
               O holie Raphael,
                  pray
               
               O al holie Angels & Archangels of God,
                  pray
               
               O al holie orders of bleſſed ſpirits,
                  pray
               
               O holie Iohn Baptiſt,
                  pray
               
               O al holie Patriarches & Prophets
                  pray
               
               S. Peter,
                  pray
               
               S. Paul,
                  pray
               
               S. Andrew,
                  pray
               
               S. Iohn,
                  pray
               
               S. Iames,
                  pray
               
               S. Mathew,
                  pray
               
               S. Bartholomew,
                  pray
               
               S. Symon,
                  pray
               
               
                  S. Thadeus,
                  pray
               
               S. Mathias,
                  pray
               
               S. Barnabas,
                  pray
               
               S. Marcke,
                  pray
               
               S. Luke,
                  pray
               
               O al holie Apoſtles and Euangeliſtes,
                  pray for vs.
               
               O al holie Diſciples & Innocētes,
                  pray for vs.
               
               S. Stephen,
                  pray
               
               S. Linns,
                  pray
               
               S. Cletus,
                  pray
               
               S. Clement,
                  pray
               
               S. Fabian,
                  pray
               
               S. Albane,
                  pray
               
               S. Coſmas,
                  pray
               
               S. Damian,
                  pray
               
               S. Primus,
                  pray
               
               S. Faelician,
                  pray
               
               S. Dioniſe with his felowes,
                  pray
               
               S. Victor with his felowes,
                  pray
               
               O al holy Martyrs,
                  pray
               
               S. Silueſter,
                  pray
               
               S. Leo,
                  pray
               
               S. Ierome,
                  pray
               
               S. Auguſtine,
                  pray
               
               O al holy Confeſſors,
                  pray
               
               O al holy Monkes & Er
                     •
                  mi
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  ,
                  pray
               
               
                  S. Marie Magdaleine
                  pray
               
               S. Marie of Egipt,
                  pray
               
               
                  This S. Margaret was in the primatiue Church, not ſhe of Scotlād.S. Margaret,
                  pray
               
               S. Scholaſtica,
                  pray
               
               S. Pernel,
                  pray
               
               S. Genouefs,
                  pray
               
               S. Praxedes,
                  pray
               
               S. Sotheris,
                  pray
               
               S. Priſca,
                  pray
               
               S. Thecla,
                  pray
               
               S. Afra,
                  pray
               
               O holy Virgins,
                  pray
               
               O al holy Sainctes of God men & women,
                  pray for vs.
               
            
            
               Of honour & reuerence to the holie bodies, and other Reliques of Sainctes.
               Chapter. 10
               
                  S. Ciril. Alex. apud Damaſ. l. 2. paral. cap. 7.WE honour the veſſels of the bodies of Sainctes, and repay vnto them memory, as it were reward

and wages of their vertue & magnanimitie of mind.
               The noble reliques are pulled forth of their vnnoble ſepulchre.S. Ambroſ. l. 9. epiſtol. 85. Reliques worſhipped, lying vnder the Altar: Chriſt offered vpon the Altar. The Trophes of victorie are ſhewed vnto heauē. Let the triūphant victims ſuccede vnto the place where Chriſt is the Sacrifice: But he who ſuffered for al, vpon the Altare: Theſe redemed by his paſſion, vnder the Altare. This place I had appointed for my ſelfe, for it is worthie a prieſt ſhould reſt there, where a Preiſt accuſtomed to offer Sacrifice. But I yeald the right hand portion to the holy victims. This place belōged to Martyrs: therfore let vs burie the ſacred reliques, & carrie them into worthie houſes, and celebrate the whole day with faithful deuotion.
               O thrice and four times,Prudent. hym of S. Laurence. o 7. times happie, that Citizen who celebrateth thee, & nearhād the ſeate of thy bones, who may lay himſelf downe neare them who ſprincleth the place with teares, who preſſeth his breſt vpon the earth, who offereth vowes in ſecret.
               O bleſſed Apoſtles, what thankes ſhal we render vnto you,Chriſoſtom. ſer. de Apoſtol. apud Metaphraſt. who haue laboured ſo much for vs. O Peter, I remember

thee, and I am amaſed. O Paule, I cal thee to mind, & rauiſhed in mind, I am oppreſſed with teares. For what I may ſay, or what I may ſpeake, beholding your afflictions, I know not. O peter, thou maiſt ioy, to whom it was geuen, to enioy the Croſſe of Chriſt. Ioy thou alſo o Paule, whoſe head was cutte of with a ſword. Let that ſword be to me for a crowne; and the nailes of Peter, for pretious Stones, infixed in my Diademe.
               O who wil graunt vnto me to be rolled about the bodie of Paule, to be faſtened to his ſepulchre, to ſee the duſt of that bodie, fulfilling the thinges, which as yet were wanting in Chriſt, bearing the ſignes of his woundes.
               
                  Prudent. to S. Vincentius in hym. S. Vincent.O double renoumed, we beſech thee by thy handes, blocke of thy priſon, by thoſe potſheardes by which thou gainedſt conqueſt; by which we that come after, with reuerence kiſſe thy bedde,: haue mercy vpon our praiers.
               
                  S. Ciril. Hieroſol. Catecheſ. 4.Here Chriſt verily was crucified for our ſinnes, and if thou wouldeſt deny it, this place apparant diſproueth thee. Bleſſed is this mount Golgatha, in which

now, for him that was crucified, wel make ioy in him, and the whole globe of the earth is filled with wood of the Croſſe by parcels.
               When wil that day be,Hierom. epiſt. 17. in the perſons of Paula & Euſtoch. c. 8. that it may be lawful for vs to enter into the Sepulchre of our Sauiour? to wepe in the Sepulchre of our Lord, and then to licke the wood of the Croſſe; and in mount Oliuet with our Lord aſcending, to be lifted in deſire and mind.
            
            
               Praier for one in particular deceaſed.
               Chapter. 11.
               GOd of his mercie forgeue to the departed out of this life,Dioniſ. Areopag. l. Eccle. hierarch. c. 12. contempl. al ſinnes by humane frailtie and weaknes committed, and bring him into light, and the Countrie of the liuing, into the boſome of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob; into the Place voide of al greife, ſadnes, and groaning.
               
                  
                  Clem. Rom. Conſtitut. SS. Apoſtol. l. 8. c. 47.Let vs pray for al that reſt in Chriſt, that our gentle God, who hath receiued his ſoule, wil forgeue him al offence, & being merciful vnto him, wil place him in the Region of the godly and bleſſed, in the boſome of Abraham, Iſaac, & Iacob, with al that haue pleaſed him from the beginning of the world, and performed his wil, where there is no ſorow, ſadnes, or sighing.
               God of Abraham, God of Iſaac, and God of Iacob, God, not of the dead, but of the liuing becauſe the ſoules of al do liue with thee, and the ſpirits of the Iuſt are in thy handes, and torment ſhal not touch them, for al that are ſanctified, are vnder thy hand: Looke thou alſo now vpon this thy ſeruant whom thou haſt receiued into the other life, and pardō him whatſoeuer he hath offended in. Aſſigne gē
                  tle Angels vnto him, and place him in the boſome of Patriarches, Prophets, and Apoſtles, and al that from the beginning of the world haue pleaſed thee, where there is no ſorow nor horror, but the felowſhip of the godlie, and ſuch as reioyce, and the bleſſed Countrie of the iuſt, beholding the glorie of thy Chriſt,

by whom to thee be glorie, honour, worſhip, thankes, and adoration in the holie Ghoſt for euer. Amen.
               O Lord of life, and death.
                     S. Gregor. Naz. orat. in funere Caeſatis. By C. is meant Caeſati
                           •
                        s the
                           •
                         newly deade, but may be vſed for any faithful departed.
                     Ambroſ. orat. de obitu Theodoſii Imp.
                   o keeper and benefactor of our ſoules, receiue the ſoule of C. whom we commend to thy wiſdome, by which al thinges are done, and hereafter in time conuenient alſo, receiue vs and gouerne vs in our fleſh, ſo long as is profitable for vſ.
               O Lord who kepeſt litle ones, and ſaueſt thoſe that truſt in thee, geue vnto thy perfect ſeruant, that reſt which thou haſt prepared for thy Sainctes. Let his ſoule returne thither frō whence it came, where it can feele no ſting of death: where it may know, that this death is not the end of mā, but of ſinne. For in that he is dead, he is dead to ſinne, that there may now be no place for ſinne. Amen.
               O Lord we commend vnto thee,S. Leander 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſpal. in Liturg. Mu
                        •
                     arab. in miſ. de S. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     cobo. the ſoule of thy ſeruant, that being dead to the world, he may liue to thee. And the ſinnes which by frailtie of worldly conuerſation, he hath committed, blotte thou out with the pardon of thy moſt merciful pietie, by our Lord. Amen.
               
                  In the name of our Lord Ieſus, his ſoule, and al ſoules of the faithful deceaſed, by the mercie of God, reſt in peace without end. Amen.
               
                  Antiquis vſus apud S. Albin. l. de diuin. offic. c. Quomodo moriturus olim prouidebatur.Our Lord raiſe him vp againe to euerlaſting life, and be merciful vnto vs. Our Lord place him in the boſome of Abraham, and be merciful vnto vs.
            
            
               Of praier, Sacrifice, Almes, and other good deedes, for al true faithful deceaſed.
               Chapter. 12.
               
                  Precat. Syrorum antiq. apud ſeuerum patriarch. Alex. in precat. Abecedar. To. 6. Bibl. 55. patr.Opardoner, and clenſer; o forgeuer, blotter out, and forgeating our manie, and great ſinners withou nū
                  ber, and the ſinnes of al thy faithful people: pardon o God, and haue mercy vpon vs. Remember vs o Lord God in the mercies that are from thee, and remember our ſoules, and the ſoules of our fathers, and brethren, and inſtructours,

and of our deceaſed. Finally of al faithful deceaſed, children of thy holy and glorious Church. O Lord God, geue reſt to their ſoules and bodies, and ſprincle the dew of thy miſerations vpō their bones. O Chriſt our King, take compaſſion, and be merciful vnto vs & them.
               O thou my God,Armerians diuided almoſt a 1000 yeares frō the Roman Church in their liturg. who geueſt reſt to the dead and raiſeſt againe thoſe that be buried: receiue the ſoules of thy ſeruants, which we haue remembred, and place them, o my Lord, in the bleſſed manſions of the houſe of thy Father, with Abraham, and Iſaac, and Iacob, thy frendes, and with al Sainctes, that haue performed thy wil in the true faith and of thy Father, and thy holy Spirit for euer. Amen.
               O Lord geue euerlaſting reſt vnto al which haue gone before vs in the faith of Chriſt. O Lord remember, haue mercy vpō, & ſhew fauour to the ſoules which reſt; pacify, illuminate them, & aſſociate them vnto thy Sainctes in the kingdom of heauen, & make them worthie of thy loue.
               Let vs bring forth our praiers,Liturg. Eccle. gotticae. asking

of the pietie of our Lord, that he wil vouchſaife to place the ſoules of them that reſt, in the boſome of Abraham, & admitte them vnto the part of the firſt Reſurrection.
               
                  S. Iacob. liturg. Hieroſol.O Lord graūt our oblation be grateful and acceptable, for the reſt of the ſoules of them which are deceaſed before vs.
               
                  Epiphanius 75. haer. contra Aerium.Becauſe, while we are in this world, oftentimes we be deceived, & err, both vnwillingly, and voluntary: we make memorie both of the luſt, and ſinners that are deceaſed; for ſinners, beſeching the mercie of God.
               
                  Chriſtom. to. 5. in miſ. tranſlated by Eraſmus.O God have reſpect vnto vs, and remember al that are deceaſed in hope of the Reſurrection, and life euerlaſting, and cauſe them to reſt where the light of thy countenence is ſeene.
               
                  Miſ. Conſtantinopolt. aſcribed to S. Andrew Apoſt. & S. Chriſtom.O Lord as merciful, remember thy ſeruantes, & pardon whatſoeuer thinges they in their life haue offended in.
               We Offer vnto thee this reaſonable dutie for the faithful deceaſed, for our Brethren and Siſters, by the interceſſion of Patriarches, Prophets Apoſtles, Martyrs, Confeſſors, & al Sanctes.
               
                  O Lord remember our deceaſed Princes,Ethiop. in miſ. aſcribed to S. Matth. Apoſtle. Biſhops, Kinges, and al that are dead in the true faith. O Lord remē
                  ber al men and women thy ſeruantes, brethren and ſiſters, and al the faithful deceaſed, and reſting in the ſigne of the true faith.
               O Lord remember al thoſe that ſleepe in hope of Reſurrection of euerlaſting life,Liturg. Capadoc. auth. S. Baſil. and refreſh them where the light of thy countenance doth viſit.
               O Lord remember al thy ſeruantes,Gregor. in miſ. Gelaſius apud S. Albin. l. offic. c. de celebrat. miſſae. which haue gone before vs with the ſigne of faith, and reſt in the ſleepe of peace. O Lord we beſech thee to graūt vnto them, and to al that reſt in Chriſt, a place of refreſhing and peace.
               Euerlaſting God, we humbly beſech thee, that thy ſeruant,S. Barnab. or S. Ambroſ. in miſ. meduil. for a Biſhop. to whom thou haſt geuen the gouernmēt of thy Church being now deliuered from the priſon of fleſh, and ioyned to the Prelates of Apoſtolick dignitie, may deſerue to obtaine, the reward of eternal life.
               My praiſe and my life,Auguſtin. l. 9. confeſ. c. 13. for father and mother. God of my heart, I beſech thee for the ſinnes of my mother; heare me by the medicine of our woundes which hanged vpon the

Croſſe, & ſitting at thy right hand, maketh interceſſion to thee for vs. I know that ſhe delt mercifully, and with al her heart forgaue offences to them that had offended her. Therfore forgeue thou alſo her debts, if ſhe hath incurred any, by ſo manie yeares after the water of ſaluation. O Lord forgeue her, forgeue her I beſech thee; enter not into iudgment with her. Let her reſt in peace together with her husband.
               
                  Miſ. S. Iacobi Apoſt. allowed Concil. general. 6. can. 32.O Lord our God, remember the ſoules of the orthodoxal, and true beleuers, frō Abel the iuſt, vnto this day: Cauſe them to reſt in the land of the liuing, in thy Kingdome, and delightes of paradiſe, in the boſome of Abraham, Iſaac, and Iacob, our holy fathers, from whence is baniſhed, ſorow, ſadnes, and groning; where the light of thy countenance, doth rule and ſhine continually.
               
                  S. Baſil. in miſ. receiued concil. 6. ſupr. c. 32.O Lord Creatour of bodies & ſoules, remember at thy heauenly Altare, al thoſe that are departed forth of this wretched world, and refreſh them in thy Tabernacle ful of bewtie. Paſſe them ouer beyond the horrible manſiōs

of torment, and place them in thy light-ſome Tabernacles. Deliuer them from want of light, & from darknes, & take them forth of tribulation and greife, & let thy countenance appeare peaceable unto them, neither ſeuerly examine their former life. But whether in word or work, as men in fleſh, they haue ſinned, forgeue, and aboliſh their errours.
               O holy Father, we beſech thee for the ſoules of the faithful departed,Ambroſ. pre
                        •
                     . 1. praepar. to. 4.that they may haue eternal ſaluatiō, perpetual health, ioy and comfort euerlaſting.
               O Lord make an end of our ſinnes,S. Leander hiſpal. et S. Iſodor. in liturg. Muzarab. graunt ioy, to the afflicted, deliuery to captiues; health, to the ſicke, and reſt to the dead.
               O Lord our God,Liturg. Alexandr. aſcribed to S. Marke Euangeliſt. geue reſt to the ſoules of the faithful departed in thy holy Tabernacles in thy Kingdome, graū
                  ting vnto them the good thinges of thy promiſes, which the eye hath not ſeene, and the eare hath not heard, and haue not aſcended into the heart of man, which thou o God, haſt prepared for them who loue thy name.
               
               O God geue reſt and good memorieSeuer. Patriarch. Alex. l. de ritib. Baptiſmi.
                  
to all hauing ſocietie with vs; & to my father, and to my mother, & to my maiſter who brought me vp.
               
                  Io. Caſſian. 3. part. confeſſ. Theolog.O moſt holy Virgin, Mother of God, pray for al ſeruantes of God, men and women, both liuing and departed out of this life.
            
            
               Praiers preparatorie, before receiuing the moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Altare Chriſts true bodie & bloud.
               Chapter. 13.
               
                  S. Ignatius Epiſt. ad Romanos.I Doe not ioy in corruptible nouriſhment, nor in the pleaſures of this life; I deſire the bread of God, the bread celeſtial, which is the fleſh of Chriſt, the Soune of God; and drink I deſire his bloud, which is life euerlaſting.
               
                  S. Dioniſius Areopag. l. eccle. Hier. c. 5. in contempl.O diuine and ſacred Miſterie, vouchſaif to open tne couerings of ſignifying ſignes which are about thee, and apparantly appeared and repleniſh the eyes of

our vnderſtanding, with a ſingular and manifeſt brightnes of thy light.
               When thou receiueſt the holy meate,Origen. in hom. 5. in diuerſos Euang. locos. and that incorrupted banquet, when thou doſt enioy the bread and cuppe of life; thou doſt eate and drinke the bodie and bloud of our Lord: Then our Lord entreth Vnder thy roofe, and thou therfore humbling thy ſelf, imitate the Centurion and ſay, O lord I am not worthie that thou ſhouldeſt enter vnder my roofe.
               
               O Lord our God, the heauenly bread,S. Iacob. Apoſt. in Liturg. See S. Ciril. Hieroſol. catech. S. Miſtag. life of al, I haue ſinned againſt heauen, and before thee, and I am not worthie to be made partaker of thine immacuate miſteries; but as a merciful God, make me worthie of thy grace, that without condemnation, I may be partaker of thy holy bodie & pretious bloud, to forgeuenes of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting.
               O Lord who dwelleſt aboue the Cherubim,Canon vniuerſal. ſeu miſ. Ethiop. aſcribed to S. Mateew Apoſtle. and lookeſt downe vpon thy people, and inheritance: bleſſe thy ſeruants and their children; graunt a portion to them that come to receiue of thy miraculous Table for purging of their mind,

and remiſſion of ſinnes, & vnion of the holie Ghoſt, and health of ſoule and bo,die, & inheritance of the Kingdome of heauen. Amen.
               
                  Iacob. Apoſt. in miſ. ſupr.Taſt and ſee that our Lord is bountiful, who diſtributed into partes, & not diuided, and beſtowed vpon the faithful, is not conſumed, for remiſſion of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting, now & euer & world without end.
               
                  Liturg. S. Marci Euangeliſt.O Lord God almightie, we beſech thee, to driue away from our thought the darke aſſaultes of ſinne, & make our mindes ioyfui with the brightnes of thy holie Spirit, that being increaſed with the knowlege of thee, we may worthily participate of thoſe good thinges, which are propoſed vnto thee, of the immaculate body, and pretious bloud, of thine onely begotten Sonne, our Lord, and God, & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. Forgeue vnto vs al ſhew of ſinnes, by thy manifold & vnſearchable goodnes, by the grace, and mercies, and gentlenes of thine only begotten Sonne, with whom to thee, be honour, & Rule, with the moſt holie, and good, and quitning Spirit.
               
                  O Lord our God,S. Baſil. Anaphor. who out of the aboundance of thy grace, haſt beſtowed vpon vs al thinges: Thou geueſt vnto vs more then we demand, & more boū
                  tifully then we vnderſtand, thou dealeſt with vs: ſtretch forth o Lord, thy inuiſible hand, and bleſſe thy ſeruantes, and handmaides, and clenſe them from al ſpotte of fleſh and ſpirit, and vouchſaife vs to be made partakers of the body of thine only begotten Sonne, that with puritie and holines humble, we may offer our praiers to thee, and vnto thine only Sonne our Lord Ieſus Criſt, & to thy moſt holy Spirit, to be adored world without end. Amen.
               O our God,Baſil. ſup let vs not be guilty of the Body & Bloud of Chriſt thy Sonne, nor ſicke in mind, or bodie, becauſe vnworthie we participate the ſacred Myſteries: but rather graunt vnto vs, that vntil our laſt breath, we may pleaſe thee and be accompted worthie to receiue the ſauing Sacraments of our Lord and Redemer Ieſus Chriſt, nor to be vnworthie of his bodie and purging bloud; but meete to receiue thē, that by them being ſtrenghned, clenſed, and perfected,

we may worthily beſech thee, by that praier which thy only begotten Sonne hath taught vs, that we may crie with a pure heart and ſay. Our Father which are in heauen, halowed be thy name.
               
               
                  S. Ambroſ. l. 4. de Sacram. Tom. 4. Eraſ. praefat. in com. 4. Ambroſ.O high Preiſt and true Biſhop Ieſus Chriſt, who haſt geuen for vs wretched ſinners, thy fleſh to eate, and thy bloud to drinke, cauſe me by thy grace alway to beleue and vnderſtand, to thinke and firmly hold, to ſay and eſteme of ſo great a miſterie, that which is pleaſing vnto thee, and profitable for my ſoule. O holy bread, o liuely bread, bread bewtiful, pure bread which did deſcend frō heauen, and geueſt life to the world, come into my heart, and cleanſe me frō al vncleannes of bodie and ſoule: enter into my ſoule, heale it within, and without. Be thou a perpetual ſaluation of my bodie and ſoule. Driue back from me the enemies which lye in waite for me. Let them depart from thy preſence, that I being both without and within defended by thee, may come by 
                     •
                   ready path, to thy kingdome, where thinges are not handled with miſteries, as in this time, but we ſhal ſee thee face to

face, when thou ſhalt deliver thy kingdomes to God the Father & God ſhal be al in al. Then thou ſhalt fil me with thy ſelf with a meruelous fulnes, that I ſhal neither hunger nor thirſt for euer. Who with the Father and holy Ghoſt, liueſt & reigneſt world without end. Amen.
               O Lord make me worthie,Chriſoſt. in liturg. to. 5. by the Interceſſion of the vnſpotted, our Lady, Mother of God, and euer Virgin Marie, that without condemnation I may receiue thy immaculate guiſt to remiſſion of ſinnes, to life euerlaſting, purgation of euil cogitations, for illuſtration of thy commandements.
               O Lord Ieſus Chriſt,Gregor. in Sacramentar. Iſodor. l. 1. offic. c. 1
                        •
                     . Sonne of the liuing God, who by the wil of thy Father, the holy Ghoſt cooperating, haſt reuiued the world: deliuer me by this thy ſacred body and bloud, from al mine iniquities, and al euils, & cauſe me alwaies to cleaue to thy commandemens, and ſuffer me neuer to be ſeperated frō thee: who with the ſame God the Father and holie Ghoſt, liueſt and reigneſt world without end. Amen.
               O Lord my God,S. Leander in liturg. Muzarab. in feſt. S. Iacobi. graunt vnto me ſo to receiue the Bodie and Bloud of thy

Sonne our Lord Ieſus, that by it I may deſerue to haue forgeuenes of al my ſinnes, and be repleniſhed with thy holy Spirit, o our God, who liueſt & reigneſt world without end. Amen.
               Haile for euer, o moſt ſacred fleſh of Chriſt, for euer the greateſt ſweetnes. O Lord I am not worthy thou ſhouldeſt enter under my roofe, but only ſay the word, & my ſoule ſhall be cured. O Lord I am not worthie thou ſhoudeſt enter under my roofe, but only ſay the word, & my ſoule ſhal be cured. O Lord I am not worthie thou ſhoudeſt enter under my roofe, but only ſay the word, & my ſoule ſhal be cured. The Bodie & Bloud of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, preſerue my bodie and ſoule vnto euerlaſting life.
               Amen.
               
                  S. Citil. Hieroſol. myſtag. catech 5.After receiuing of the bodie of Chriſt, I come to the Chalice of his bloud proſtrate in maner of Adoration and worſhip ſaying. Amen.
            
            
               
               Of Praiers & Thankes after receiuing of this moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Altar, which is Chriſts true Body & Bloud.
               Chapter. 14.
               HAuing receiued the pretious Body and pretious Bloud of Chriſt,S. Clem. Ro. conſtitut. Apoſtol. l. 8. c. 21. let vs geue thankes to him, who hath made vs worthie to receive his holy Miſteries; And we aske that they be not to vs for iudgment, but ſaluation, for the profit of our ſoule and body, for preſeruation of godlines, for remiſſion of ſinnes, to life of the world to come.
               O Lord God omnipotent,S. Clem. ſupr. l. 8. c. 22. Father of Chriſt, thy bleſſed Sonne: the hearer of them which rightly cal vpon thee, who knoweſt the interceſſions of the ſilent. Let vs geue thankes vnto thee, for that thou haſt made vs worthie of the participation of thy holie Miſteries, which thou haſt geuen vnto vs for confirmation of thinges wel knowne; for keping of pietie, for remiſſion of ſinnes, becauſe the name of thy Chriſt is called vpon

ouer vs, and we are reconciled vnto thee: Thou who haſt ſeperated vs frō Communumcatinge with the vngodly, ioyne vs with thoſe that be conſecrated vnto thee, confirme vs in truth, by the coming of the holy Ghoſt, reueale thinges which we know not, fulfil thinges which are wanting, ſtrengthen thinges knowne, defend Preiſtes vnſpotted in thy ſeruice, preſerue kinges in peace, Magiſtrates in iuſtice, the ayre in holſō
                  nes, the fruites in fertilitie, the world in perfect prouidence. Repreſſe warring Nations, conuert them that erre, ſanctifie thy people, conſerue Virgins kepe the married in faithfulnes, ſtrengthen the ignorant, bring infantes vnto ripe age, confirme nouices, inſtruct Cathecumens, and make them worthy to be admitted to thy Miſteries, and gather vs al together into the Kingdome of heauē, in Chriſt Ieſus our Lord, with whom to thee and the holie Ghoſt, be Glorie, Honour, and Worſhip, for euer.S. Thomas Apoſt. apud Abdiam l. 9. hiſt. Apoſt. in S. Thomas Apoſtol. there the Euchariſt was receiued in one kinde. Amen.
               O Lord Ieſus, I beſech, that this thy Sacrament, be vnto vs to life; that it be to vs for remiſſion of ſinnes, for thy

Paſſion was celebrated for vs. Thou dideſt drinke gaule for vs, that al bitternes of the aduerſary might dye in vs. Alſo for vs thou dideſt drinke vineger, that our wearines might be comforted. Thou wert ſpitted vpō for vs, that thou mighteſt ſprincle vs with immortal dew. Thou waſt ſtricken with a brittle reede, to make firme our brittlenes to euerlaſting life & eternitie. Thou waſt crounned with thornes, to croune thoſe which beleue in thee with the euerfloriſhing Laurel of thy loue. Further thou waſt wrapped in a Syndon, to inueſt vs with a certaine enwrapping of thy vertue. Thon wouldeſt be put in a new Sepulchre, to reforme new grace, a new world vnto vs. I deſire this Euchariſt be vnto vs to life, & the bowels of mercie, and grace of ſaluation, & health of our ſoules. Amen.
               O Lord fil our mouth with thy praiſe,S. Iocobus Apoſt. in liturg. & repleniſh our lippes with ioy, that we may praiſe thy glory, and al the day thy magnificence. We geue thankes vnto thee o Chriſt our God, becauſe thou haſt vouchſaifed vs to be made partakers of thy body and bloud, to remiſſion of

ſinnes, and life euerlaſting.
               O God who for thy manifold and vnſpeakable bounty, haſt condeſcended to the infirmitie of thy ſeruantes, & vouch ſaifed to make vs partakers of this heauenly Table: condemne not vs ſinners, for receiuing thine immaculate myſteries, but bountifully preſerue vs in ſanctification of thy holy Spirit, that we being made holy, may obtaine part & inheritance with al Sainctes, which from eternitie haue bene accepted of thee in the light of thy countenance, by the mercy of thine only begotten Sonne our Lord and God, and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt. Amen.
               O Lord thou haſt geuen vnto vs ſanctification, and receiuing of the moſt holy bodie and pretious bloud of thine only begotten Sōne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. Beſtow vpon vs alſo, the grace of thy good holy Spirit, and preſerue vs without offence in faith: lead vs into perfect adoption, and Redemption, & into thoſe future eternal fruitions. Amen.
               Bleſſed be God, that bleſſeth & ſanctifieth the receiuing of his holy, liuely, and immaculate Miſteries, now & euer,

& world without end. Amen.
               We geue thankes to thee o our God,S. Baſilius Anaphora. we exalt thee the Father omnipotent, & merciful, & praiſe thee Creatour of the world, and adore thee abounding with mercie and grace, becauſe thou haſt taken mercy vpon vs, and cleanſed vs, and blotted forth our ſinnes, and vouchſaifed vs the receiuing of thy holy & liuely Sacraments, which euen the Angels deſires to behold: Therfore let their ſwetnes vnto vs a cleanſing, & their participation, for remiſſion of ſinnes before committed by vs, and for a medicine of thoſe in which we are yet conuerſant: Finally for an auoiding and defence againſt thoſe which hereafter may be cō
                  mitted by vs, and for ioy and exultation with Sainctes, who from the beginning haue pleaſed thee.
               We geue thankes vnto thee,Chriſoſt. Liturg. o moſt gentle Lord Redemer of our ſoules, becauſe at this preſent thou haſt made vs worthy of thy heauenly and immortal Myſteries. Direct thou our way, kepe vs in feare, defend our life, ſtrengthen our goinges, by the praiers and interceſſions of the holy & glorious Mother

of God, and alwaies Virgin Marie. O God he thou exalted aboue the heauens, and thy glory ouer al the earth, now and euer, world without end. Amen.
               
                  S. Leander et Iſodor. in miſ. Muzarab. in feſt. S. Iacob.O Lord my God, Father & Son & holy Ghoſt, cauſe me alwaies to ſeeke & loue thee, and by this holie Communion which I haue receaued, neuer to depart from thee, becauſe thou art God, and beſides thee, there ſhal be none other for euer. Amen.
               Being refreſhed with the body and Bloud of Chriſt, we praiſe thee o Lord, Alleluya, Alleluya, Alleluya.
               The Body of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt which we haue receiued, and his holy bloud which we haue drunke, adhere faſt vnto our bowels, o euerlaſting almighty God, that it come not vnto vs to iudgment nor condemnation, but profit to ſaluation, and remedie of our ſoules vnto life eternal. Amen.
               
                  Liturg. gottic.O Chriſt Ieſus, who haſt effected an euening Sacrifice by the Croſſe, in the euening of the world: vouchſaif to make vs new Sepulchres for thy Bodie.
               Amen.
            
            
               
               Of Sacramental Confeſſion, a due preparatiō before receiuing the moſt bleſſed Sacrament of the Altare.
               Chapter. 15.
               THere is yet an other hard and laborious remiſſion of ſinnes by penance,Origen. hom. 2. in leui
                        •
                     . when the ſinner doth waſh his couch with teares, & is not aſhamed to tel his ſinne to the Preiſt of our Lord,Pſal. 32. & ſeeke remedie, according to that, I will pronounce againſt me, mine iniuſtice to our Lord: and thou haſt forgeuen the wickedneſ of my heart.
               
               Graunt o Lord,Miſ. Ethiop. aſcribe to S. Matth. Apoſt. as thou haſt geuē vnto to thy Preiſtes, the preiſty office in thy holy Church: ſo we beſech thy goodnes and clemencie, o louer of men, that they may abſolue vs thy ſeruantes, & al bowing downe their heades before thy ſight in this thy holy Sacrifice.
               I confeſſe to God almightie,S. Damaſ. S. Leander liturg. Muzarab. S. Anaſt. finair. l. de S. Sina
                        •
                      micralog. l. eccle. offic. c. 
                        •
                     3. gem. animae antiq. rit. miſs. c. ibi. 64. to the Bleſſed Marie euer Virgin, to the bleſſed Michael Archangel, to the bleſſed Iohn Baptiſt, to the holie Apoſtles Peter and Paul, and al Sainctes, & to you my ghoſtly

Father, that I haue greuouſly offended in thought, word, and deede, by my default, by my default, by my greuous default; Therfore I beſech the B. Mary euer Virgin, bleſſed Michael Archangel, the holy Apoſtles Peter & Paul and al Sainctes, and you my ghoſtly Father, to pray vnto God for me.
               
                  Praxis eccl. antiqui ord. Rom tit. confeſ. penitentialis. S. Albin. l. offic. eccle. c. in capite Iemnii.I confeſſe to thee o Lord, Father of heauen and earth, and to thee o good & moſt bountiful Ieſus Chriſt, together with the holy Ghoſt, before thy holy Angels, and thy Preiſt, that I was conceiued in ſinne, and borne in ſinne, and noriſhed in ſinnes, and conuerſing in ſinnes after Baptiſme, vnto this hour: I confeſſe alſo, that I haue ſinned too-much, in pride, vaine-glorie, in proud lookes, and apparel, and al mine actions, in enuie, in hatred, in couetouſnes aſwel of honour, as money: in anger, frowardnes, in ſlouth, in glottonye &c.
Here the penitent maketh particular confeſſion of al his ſinnes he can remember: which done before the Prieſt abſolueth him,Antiq. eccle. Praxis apud S. Albin. Flac. Alcuin. ſupr. he addeth as foloweth.
Manie ſurely, and innumerable others are my ſinnes which I can not remember,

in deedes, in wordes, in thoughtes; for al which my wretched ſoule is ſorowful and ſomtime afflicted with ſharpe penance: therfore I humbly beſech the counſail and iudgment alſo of thee who art ordained arbitratour and meanes, betwene God and man a ſinner. And I humbly beſech thee, that thou wilt be an Interceſſor for the ſame my ſinnes.
               Becauſe in theſe and al other vices,Praxis antiq. in ord. Rom. ſupr. in which humane frailtie can ſinne againſt his Lord and maker, either in thought, word, or deede, or delight, or deſire, I know and confeſſe my ſelfe to haue ſinned, and to be guiltie in the ſight of God, aboue al men. Therfore I humbly beſech al you, o holy Angels of God, and al Sainctes, and thee o reuerend Preiſt, in whoſe ſight I haue cō
                  feſſed al theſe thinges, that you may be witneſſes vnto me in the day of Iudgement, againſt the diuel, aduerſarie and enemie of mankind, that I haue confeſſed al theſe thinges. I alſo earneſtly intreate thee, o Preiſt of God, to make interceſſion for me, and my ſinnes, to our Lord God, that I may deſerue to obtaine pardon and Indulgence for theſe,

and al other my ſinnes, by the merites & Interceſſions of al Sainctes.
               
                  The Abſolution by the Preiſt, is not for this place, but diuers formes therof are in the Ord. Rom. in S. Albin. ſup. Canon uniuerſ. & others.
               
            
            
               Of the external preiſthood of Chriſts Church primarily cōſiſting, in offering the moſt holy Sacrifice of Chriſtiās Chriſt his moſt pretious Body, & bloud for the liuing & dead.
               Chapter. 16.
               
                  S. Marcus Euangeliſt. in Liturg.O Lord, we offer this reaſonable & vnbloudie Oblation, which al Nations offer vnto thee, from the riſing of the Sunne, to the ſetting therof, frō the north to the ſouth; becauſe thy name is great among the Gentiles, & in euerie place, Incence, and Sacricfice, & Oblation, is offred to thy name.
               
                  S. Clem. Ro. Cōſtit. Apoſt. l. 8. c. 5. Biſhops power & office from the Apoſtles time.O Lord almightie, geue vnto him participation of the holy Ghoſt, that he

may haue power to remitte ſinnes according to thy commandement; alſo to geue orders as thou haſt charged, & of vnbinding al band, according to the power which thou gaueſt to thine Apoſtles, and to pleaſe thee in meeknes, & a cleane heart, offering vnto thee without offence alwaies, and without ſinne, that pure and vnbloudie Sacrifice which by Chriſt thou haſt appointed, the Myſterie of the new Teſtament.
               O Lord, o Lord,S. Iacobus Apoſtol. in liturg. ſee miſ. rom. antiq. who haſt graunted vnto vs abiect ſinners, and thy vnworthie ſeruantes, that with confidence we might come to thy holy Altare, & offer vnto thee this dreadful & vnbloudy Sacrifice for our ſinnes & ignorances. O Lord let it pleaſe thee, that we may be miniſters of the Sacrifice of thine immaculate Myſteries, & admitte vs coming to thy holy Altare, that we may be worthie to offer Sacrifice for our ſelues, and for thoſe thinges which the people by ignorance hath committed. O God haue reſpect vnto vs, and behold this our reaſonable dutie, and receiue it, as thou receauedſt the guiftes of Abel, Sacrifices of Noe, Preiſtly duties of Moyſes

and Aaron, pacifyinges of Samuel, penance of Dauid, Incence of Zachary: as thou receiuedſt this true worſhip of the hand of thine Apoſtles, ſo alſo from the handes of vs ſinners, receiue by thy gentlenes, theſe guiftes propoſed: and make that our Oblation, ſanctifyed by the holy Ghoſt, be grateful and acceptable for propitiation of our ſinnes, and thoſe which the people by ignorāce hath committed.
               
                  Liturg. Ethiop. aſcribed to S. Matth. Apoſt.O Lord, our god, who receiuedſt the Sacrifice of Abel, & Noe, & Abraham, and Elias, and Dauid, and the oblation of the poore widow in the holy Temple: So receiue the oblatiō of me, and al thy ſeruantes, offering in thy holy name; & let it be a redemption for mine & their ſinnes; & as we offer, ſo render reward vnto vs in the world preſent, & to com world without end. Amen.
               
                  
                     Enſchius Cae. ſarienſ. l. 1. Demonſt. Euangelic. c. 10.
                     Malach. 1.11.
                  
                  From the riſing of the Sunne, to the ſetting therof, my name is glorified among the Gentyles: and in euery place, incenſe & a pure oblation is offered vnto me. Therfore we Sacrifice to our Lord, moſt high Sacrifice of praiſe, we ſacrifice to God the holy ſacred Sacrifice, ful, and bringing

ſweetnes; we ſacrifice after a new maner according to the new Teſtamēt, a pure Oblation.
               O Lord God receiue our Supplication, make vs worthie,Chriſoſt. in liturg. Conſtant. in offering praiers and the vnbloudy Sacrifice, for al thy people. Thou dideſt become Man, and wert our high Preiſt, and as the God of al, deliueredſt vnto vs the Sacrament of this Myſterie and vnbloudy Oblation. Make me worthie indued with grace of Preiſthoode, to aſſiſt to this thy holie Table, and conſecrate thy holy Body & pretious Bloud. Graunt that I may offer theſe Sacraments vnto thee; for thou art he which offereth, and he that is offered, he that receiueth, and he that is diſtributed Chriſt our God.
               O Chriſt our God,S. Baſil. liturg. eccl. Cappad. thou art he which offereſt and art offered. O Lord thou haſt ſhewed vnto vs that great Myſtery of ſaluation, thou haſt made vs, wretches and thy vnworthy ſeruantes, to be worthie miniſters of thy holy Altar.
               O Lord graunt, that our Sacrifice be acceptable, and receueable in thy ſighr, for al our ſinnes and ignorance of thy people.
               
                  
                  Baſil. liturg. Syror.Make vs worthie to offer this reuerend and vnbloudy Sacrifice, to put away our ſinnes, and for an expiation of thy people, & thoſe ſinnes which by ignorāce it hath cōmitted, & for the quiet reſt of them that are deceaſed. O Lord, holy of holies, God of powers, we offer vnto thee, this reuerend & incruental ſacrifice for thy holy Churches which are from one end of the earth, to the other.
               
                  S. Barnab. Apoſt. and S. Ambroſ. in liturg. mediolan.Almightie euerlaſting God, let this Oblation which I vnworthie do offer to thy pietie, for me a wretch, and for mine innumerable offences, be placable and acceptable vnto thee. We humbly aske and beſech, that thou wilt accept and bleſſe theſe guiftes, theſe offerings theſe holy vnſpotted Sacrifices which we offer vnto thee for thy Catholicke church. We aske and pray, that thou wilt receiue this Oblation in thy high Altare by the handes of thine Angels, as thou dideſt vouchſaife to receiue the guiftes of thy ſeruant Abel the iuſt, and which thy high Preiſt Melchizedech hath offered vnto thee.
               
                  Ambroſ. l. 4. de Sacramen.Being mindful of Chriſtes moſt glorious

paſſion, and Reſurection from thoſe below, and aſcenſion into heauen: O Lord we offer vnto thee this immaculate Oblation, vnbloudy Sacrifice, this holy bread, and Chalice of eternal life: And we aske and pray, that thou wilt receiue this Oblation in thy high Altar by the handes of thine Angels, as thou dideſt vouchſaife to receiue the guifts of thy ſeruant iuſt Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, & which the high Preiſt Melchizedech, offered vnto thee.
               O Lord,Ambroſ. l. 4 de Sacram. I being mindful of thy venerable paſſion, do come to thine Altare (although a ſinner) that I may offer vnto thee the ſacrifice which thou haſt inſtituted and commanded to be offered in commemoration of thee, for our ſaluation. O high God, receiue it I beſech thee, for thy holy Church, and for the people which thou haſt gotten with thy bloud.
               O high Preiſt and true Biſhop Ieſus Chriſt, who haſt geuen vnto vs thy fleſh to eate, and thy bloud to drinke, & haſt put this Myſterie in vertue of the holy Ghoſt ſaying, So often as you do theſe, you

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
ſhal do them in memory of me. I aske by the ſame thy bloud, the price of our ſaluation, I ask by this meruelous & vnſpeakable Charitie, with which thou haſt vouchſaifed to loue vs wretches, & vnworthy, that thou wouldeſt waſh vs frō our ſinnes in thy bloud. Teach me thy vnworthy ſeruāt whom thou haſt vouchſaifed to cal vnto preiſtly functiō: teach me I beſech thee, by thy holy Spirit, to handle ſo great a Myſterie, with that reuerence and honour, with that deuotion and feare, with which it behoueth, and becometh. For thy great clemency graunt me to celebrate the ſolemnities of Maſſe, with a cleane heart, and pure minde. For with how great contrition of heart, and fountaine of teares, with how great reuerence and trembling, with how great chaſtity of body and purity of ſoule, is that diuine and heauenly Sacrifice to be celebrated, where thy fleſh in truth is receiued, where thy Bloud in truth is drunke, where loweſt thinges are ioyned to the higheſt, earthly thinges to diuine, where the preſence of holy Angels is, where thou meruelouſly and vnſpeakably, art conſtituted Sacrifice

and Preiſt.
               We aske thee alſo o Lord, for the ſoules of the faithful departed, that this great Sacrament of pietie, be vnto them ſaluation, health, ioy, and refreſhing.
               O Lord let that inuiſible and incomprehenſible Maieſtie of thy holy Spirit, deſcend, as long agone it did, vpon the Oblations of the Fathers, and make our Oblations thy Body and Bloud, and teach me an vnworthy Preiſt, to handle ſo great a Myſterie, with puritie of heart and deuotion of teares, with reuerence and dread, that thou maiſt receiue pleaſedly and gently of my handes, for the ſaluation of al both liuing and dead.
               We aske that the holy Ghoſt coming,Liturg. eccle. Hieroſol. auct. S. Iacobo Apoſt. may with his holy, good, and glorious preſence, ſanctify and make this bread, the holy Body of thy Chriſt, & this Chalice, the pretious Bloud of thy Chriſt, that it may be vnto al receiuing of them, to remiſſion of ſinnes.
               O louer of men,Liturg. Ethiop. we humbly beſech thee, that thou wilt ſhew thy face vpon this bread, and Chalice, vpon this portable Altare: Bleſſe, ſanctify, cleanſe, and change this bread into thine immaculate

fleſh, and this wine into thy pretious bloud.
               
                  S. Baſil. liturg. Cappadoc.O Lord Ieſus Chriſt, our God, attend from thy holy Tabernacle, & from the Throne of the Glorie of thy Kingdome, & come to ſanctify vs, & vouchſaife with thy powerable hand, to impart vnto vs thine impolluted bodie and pretious Bloud, and by vs, to al the people.
               
                  Baſil. Anaphor. ſyr.O Lord, make this bread, the glorious Body of our Lord, Ieſus Chriſt, for expiation of offences, remiſſion of ſinnes, and life euerlaſting, to them that receiue it. Amen. And this Chalice the pretious bloud of our Lord God & Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, for expiation of offences, and forgeuenes of ſinnes, & life euerlaſting to them that receiue it.
               Amen.
               
                  S. Chriſoſt. in liturg. Conſtant.O Lord ſend forth thy ſpirit vpon vs, and vpon theſe guiftes propoſed, and make this bread the pretious body of thy Chriſt, and that which is in this Chalice, the pretious bloud of Chriſt thy Soone, tranſchanging them with thy holy Spirit.
               
                  Gel
                        •
                     ſi
                        •
                     s apud S. Albin. l. de diuin. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . c. de cel
                        •••••
                     . miſſae. 
                        •
                     t S. Iſodor. hiſp
                        •
                     l. l. 1. de offic. c. 15. de miſ. et or
                        •
                     ti
                        •••
                     .O Lord we beſech thee, that pacified.

thou wilt accept this Oblation of our ſeruice, and of al thy family. Which Oblation, o God, vouchſaif we beſech thee, in al thinges to make bleſſed, ratified, & acceptable, that it may be made for vs the body and bloud of thy moſt beloued Sonne our Lord Ieſus Chriſt.
               O lord we thy ſeruantes, and thy holy people mindful of ſo bleſſed paſſion, ryſing from hel, and aſcention into heauen of the ſame Chriſt, thy Sonne our Lord, do offer to thine excellent Maieſtie, out of thy guiftes, a pure oblation, holy oblation, immaculate oblation, the holy bread of eternal life, and Chalice of euerlaſting ſaluation. Vouchſaife to accept them, as thou dideſt the guiftes of thy ſeruant iuſt Abel, and the Sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, & that which Melchizedech, thy high Preiſt offered vnto thee, holy Sacrifice, immaculate Oblation.
               Humbly we beſech thee, o god almightie, that as many of vs as ſhal receiue of this participatiō of the Altare, the holy Body and Bloud of thy Sonne, may be filled with celeſtial Benediction and grace, by the ſame Chriſt our Lord.
               
                  Amen.
               
                  S. Ciril. Hieroſolymitan. catech. myſtag. 5.O Lord, we offer this Sacrifice vnto thee, that we may remember al thoſe, which before vs are departed from this world: Firſt the Patriarkes, Prophets, Apoſtles, Martyrs; that God by their praiers, wil receiue our praiers. We pray for our holy Fathers and Biſhops: after we pray for al which are dead among vs, beleuing it to be the greateſt help of ſoules, for whom is offered praier of that holy and dreadful Sacrifice, which is placed vpon the Altar. When we pray for the dead, although they be ſinners, we offer vp Chriſt, who was ſlaine for our ſinnes, that we may procure him who is moſt bountiful, to be merciful both to our ſelues and them.
               
                  Litur. gottic.O Lambe of God, that takeſt away the ſinnes of the world, looke vpon vs, and haue mercie vpon vs. Thou art made vnto vs a Sacrifice, who art our Preiſt: Thou art our reward, who art our Redemer; kepe vs whom thou haſt redemed, from al euils.
            
            
               
               What preeminence aboue al others, S. Peter & his Succeſſors in his Sea Apoſtolick haue, in this ſacred Preiſthood.
               Chapter. 17.
               O Peter,S. Chriſoſt. ſer. in adorat. c. 26. to. 4. ſur. the Rocke and firmament of the Church, higheſt topp of the Apoſtles; I beſech thee to be preſent this day, taking pitie vpon vs; and in ſpirit, conuerſe in this place.
               O B. Peter,Victor. vticen. l. 3. perſecut. vandal. why art thou ſilent for the ſheepe and Lambes commited vnto thee by our commō Lord, with great charge and carefulnes.
               O good Shepheard, gentle Peter,Elpis hi
                        •
                     n. de SS. Petro et Paulo. receiue the praiers of them that pray vnto thee, and by authoritie committed vnto thee: Vntye the bandes of our ſinne.
               The confeſſion of Peter,S. Hilarius com. in Matth. c. 16. vpon S. Peters confeſ. obtained plainly a worthie rewarde; becauſe he had ſeene the Sonne of God in man. Bleſſed is this man, who was praiſed to haue fixed his eyes, and ſeene more thē
                  
a thing humane,Tu ei Chriſtus f
                        •
                     lius Dei vi
                        •
                     i. not beholding that which was of fleſh and bloud, but perceiuing by the reuelation of out heauenly Father the Sonne of God, and iudged worthy who ſhould firſt acknowledge that which was in the Chriſt of God. O happy foundation of the Church in naming of thy new name, and a rock worthie of the building by that Rock which ſhould diſſolue the infernal lawes, and gates of hel, & al the cloiſters of death.
               O bleſſed porter of heauen gates, to whoſe wil the Keyes of the euerlaſting entrie are committed, whoſe terreſtrial Iudgment preuenteth the authoritie in heauen; that what thinges on earth are bound or looſed, obtaine the condition of the ſame decree in heauen.
               
                  Gregor. in ſe
                        •
                     t. Cathedrae. S. Peeri. Apoſt. 
                        •
                     t in natal.O God, who dideſt beſtow vpon S. Peter thine Apoſtle, the Keyes of the Kingdome of heauen, & geue vnto him the high Preiſtly power of binding and looſing: graunt, that by the help of his interceſſion, we may be deliuered from the bandes of our ſinnes.
               
                  Gregor. l. 11. epiſt. 43. c. 44. 
                        ••
                      Leon
                     
                        〈…〉
                     ſſe.By how much you more feare the maker of al thinges, ſo much more you may loue his Church, to whom it was ſaid.

                  Thou art Peter,
                  Matth. 16. 
                  and vpon this rocke wil build my Church, & the gaites of hel ſhal not preuaile againſt it: & I wil geue vnto thee the keyes of the Kingdome of heauen: & what ſoeuer thou ſhalt binde vpon earth, ſhal be bound alſo in heauen, and whatſoeuer thou ſhalt vnbind on earth, ſhal be vnbound in heauen. From whence it is not doubtful vnto vs, with how ſtronge a loue you bind your ſelues to him, by whom you deſire to be vnbound from al the bandes of ſinnes. Therfore I beſech he may be the keeper of the Empyre, a Protector to you on earth, an Interceſſor for you in heauen.
               Let it be lawful for no man without daunger of his ſtate,Concil. Rom. circ. An. 460. to violate either the diuine conſtitutions, or the Decrees of the Apoſtolike Sea. We pray, that by S. Peter theſe thinges be obſerued for euer.
               We, with al our Nobles,Conſtantinus magnus Imp. ad Sylueſt. Pap. Iſodor. hiſpal. hiſt. Iſodor. Iun. collect. can. Adrian. primus epiſt. ad Conſtant. et Iren. & the whol Senate, and my Lordes; and al people, ſubiect to the Romane glory of the Empyre, haue Iudged profitable, that as S. Peter, ſemeth to haue bene conſtituted the Vicar of the Sonne of God on earth: ſo alſo the Popes, which are Succeſſors

of the ſame prince of the Apoſtles,Ado. vien. Chron. aetat. 6. &c. obtaine power of principalitie, more then the terrene meeknes of our Emperial ſerenitie, graunted from vs and our Empyre, chooſing vnto vs the ſame Prince of the Apoſtles, and his ſucceſſors, to be firme Patrons with God.
               
                  Pelag. 2. epiſt. ad illegit. Synod. Conſtantinop. An. 579.Pray, that the Eccleſiaſtical honour, be not euacuated in our daies; nor at any time the Romane Sea, which by our Lordes insſitution, is the head of al Churches, may want, or be ſpoyled of her priuileges in any place.
               
                  Canon. vniuerſalis or Ethiop. liturg. the. Preiſts praier.O Lord God almightie, who by the mouth of thine only begotten Sonne, our Lord God and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, haſt ſaid to our Father Peter, Thou art a Rocke, and vpon this Rock wil I build my Church; and the gates of hel ſhal not preuail againſt it (to be ſhaked) and I wil geue vnto thee the Keyes of the Kingdome of heauen: whomſoeuer thou ſhalt binde vpō earth, ſhal be bound in heauen; & whomſoeuer thou ſhalt vnbind on earth, ſhal be vnbound in heauen. Let thy ſeruantes and handmaides be vnbound from the mouth of the holy Trinitie, the Father, the Sonne, and holie Ghoſt, and alſo from my mouth, thy

ſeruant a ſinner, & ful of offences.
            
            
               What diuerſitie of orders and degrees belongeth to true Preiſthood, Vowes, Virginitie, Chaſtitie, & al degrees of the Church.
               Chapter. 18.
               O Lord remember thy holy and only Catholicke,Liturg. S. Marci. and Apoſtolicke Church, from the endes of the earth, vnto the laſt endes therof, is diffuſed, and al thy people, and al thy foldes.
               O Lord God omnipotent, we pray & beſech thee, to preſerue the moſt holy, and moſt bleſſed high Preiſt, Pope N. and moſt reuerend Biſhop N: Preſerue them vnto vs many yeares peaceably executing holy preiſthood, for thy holy, and bleſſed wil, rightly adminiſtring the word of truth, with al orthodoxal Biſhops Preiſtes, Deacons, Subdeacons,

Lectors, ſingers, & Lay people.
               
                  S. Baſil. Anaphor. concil. 6. general.O Lord remember the orthodoral Biſhops, Preiſtes, Deacons Subdeacons, Lectors, ſingers, Monkes, perpetual Virgins, Widowes, Lay people liuing in al places.
               
                  S. Gregor. Sacramentar. Miſ. antiq. et ord. Rom. ſer. 6. Paraſc.O Lord who dideſt breath vpon the faces of thine Apoſtles, & ſay vnto them, Receiue the holy Ghoſt,: ſo breath vpon vs thy ſeruantes, ſtanding round about in the entrance of the holy miniſterie, Biſhops Preiſtes, Deacons, Lectors, Singers, and Lay people, with al fulnes of the Catholicke and Apoſtolicke Church.
               O Lord remember our fathers, and brethren, which are dead in the true Faith, Preiſtes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Lectors, Monkes, liuing in perpetual chaſtitie.
               Let vs pray for al Biſhops, Preiſtes, Deacons, Subdeacons, Acolythites, Enorciſtes, Lectors, Oſtiaries, Confeſſors, Virgins, Widowes, and for al the holy people of God.
               
                  Liturg. S. Iacobi concil. 6. general.Let vs pray vnto our Lord for thoſe which liue in Virginitie and Chaſtitie in Monaſteries, and in venerable Mariage,

and for our holy fathers & brethren that be exerciſed in mountaines, in caues, & holes of the earth.
               Let vs beſech our Lord,Miſſal. gottic. praying for our brethren, which haue vowed glorious Virginitie in body & minde, that the ſpirit of mercy may proſecute them euen to the conſummation of their purpoſe.
               O Lord behold ſacred Virgins, and voluntarie chaſt perſons, the pretious Margarites of thy Church, that with an equal eſtimation, they may keepe their bodies and ſpirit, with an inuiolate conſcience of chaſtitie, by Ieſus Chriſt our Lord. Amen.
               O Lord, thou haſt ſhewed vnto me,S. Thomas Apoſt. apud Abdiam l. 9. hiſtor. in S. Thoma. that I am thine, for which I neuer tooke wife, that I might wholly intend to thee, leſt the vſe of coniugal loue, might diminiſh, or cuſtome diſſolue, the grace of thy Temple.
               You Virgins,S. Ignatius ep ad Philadel. haue you only Chriſt in your praiers before your eyes, and his father, you being illuminate by the holie Ghoſt. God graunt I may enioy your ſanctitie, as of Ieſus the ſonne of Naue, as of Melchizedech, as of Elizeus, as

of Iohn Baptiſt, as of that beloued Diſciple, as of Timotheus, as of Titus, as of Euodius, as of Clement, which ended this life in puritie.
               
                  Ambroſ. l. 4. de Sacrment.O King of Virgins, and louer of chaſtitie and integritie, with the heauenly dew of thy bleſſing, quench in my body, the nuriſhment of burning luſt, that the tenure of chaſtitie of bodie and ſoule remaine in me. Mortify in my members the prickes of fleſh, & al laſciuious motions, and geue vnto me true and perpetual Chaſtity, with the reſt of thy guiftes, which pleaſe thee in truth, that I may be able to offer vnto thee the ſacrifice of praiſe, with a chaſt bodie, & cleane heart.
               Laus Deo.
               
            
         
      
   