
      
         
            
            
            
               Saint Peters Path to the Joyes
of Heauen:
WHEREIN IS DESCRIBED
THE FRAILTIE OF FLESH, THE
power of the Spirit, the labyrinth of this
life, Sathans ſubtiltie, and the
Soules ſaluation.
            As alſo the Election, Liues and Martyrdomes,
of the twelue Apostles.
            By W. B.
            
            Poenitentiae nemo nimis Cupidus.
            
            At London
Imprinted by Felix Kingston.
1598.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL
SIR RICHARD
MVLLENEX KNIGHT: ALL
health of bodie, increaſe of ioy,
with the full fruition
of perfect felicitie.
            
               RIGHT Worſhipfull, It is reported
that Althema hoping to gratifie
Alexander that famous Conquerour,
with ſome excellent piece of
workemanſhip, ſearched ſo farre in
the depth of his Arte, as ſtriuing
with cunning to be curious, his pencill
paſt beyond his skill, not being
able to make his worke perfect: who
being blamed by his friend (Pethieus) for imboldning himſelfe
ſo vnaduiſedly, anſwered, that although Arte wanted to beautifie
the worke, yet heart and good will did make perfect that
which lacke of cunning had left vnperfect: whoſe anſwere
(Right Worſhipful) as one guiltie of a greater crime, I claime
for the ſufficient excuſe of my follie, in beginning this worke
rudely, continuing raſhly, and ending rawly.
            None can expreſſe a Paſſion that he feeleth not, neither doth
the penne deliuer, but what it copieth out of the minde. This
paſſionate Diſcourſe, thought it reach not to the dignitie of Peters
repenting, yet ſhall I thinke my endeuours well apaid, if it
may 
                  〈◊〉
                ſome skilfuller penne to ſupplie in this matter my
want 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               bility, and exerciſe their happier talents in the like pie
               
                  ••
               
               ▪
I confeſſe my fault in committing theſe vnpoliſht lines to
the Preſſe, yet I craue pardon with fauourable cenſure, and thus

farre dare I anſwere for my ſelfe, that although Demoſthenes
had a plaudit for his Oration, becauſe it was curious, yet Nimius
got the Sentence for the trueth of his plaine Tale.
            This worke of S. Peters path to the ioyes of heauen, I humbly
commit to your Worſhippes protection, which if it may
pleaſe you to let this tearie Mappe paſſe vnder the countenance
and credite of your Name, and that you will deigne to reade it
ouer, and therewith ſeeme to be but pleaſed, I account my ſelfe
highly fauoured.
            
               Apelles preſented Alexander with the counterfeit of Campaſpe,
the face not fully finiſhed, becauſe hee liked the Picture;
and I offer theſe few ſtanzes vnto you, not well furniſhed, becauſe
I know you are a fauourer of vertue.
            
               Achilles made it not daintie to take the view of Phidias
homely worke, becauſe it was the Image of the God of Warre:
and I hope your Worſhip will vouchſafe the viewing of this ſilly
booke, for that it deſcribes the ſubmiſſiue mind of a penitent
Sinner, although it ſpring frō a barren ſoyle, being a diſh of ſuch
fruite as my poore orcharde can yeeld, not vnlike to Zeuxes pictures,
which ſeemed to the birds to be grapes, but being thorowly
proued, were bare ſhadowed colours, yet it may be, that
you paſſing ouer many learned works, wil at laſt view this, and
ſmile as Theodoſius did at the Pomegranate, not that he ſcorned
the fruit, but to ſee the ſimple meaning of the man that preſented
him with ſo ſlender a gift, yet I hope by your protection this
my labor ſhall find acceptance, according to the minde of the
giuer: and to haue as many fauorers as readers, & no moe readers
that miſlike the matter, then like to write ſome other
as well meant, for that it proceedes from a minde as willing to
ſhew it ſelfe thankefull, as whoſoeuer els, that commends himſelfe
by a greater preſent. Thus I humbly take my leaue, wiſhing
you all heartes content in this life, and euerlaſting happineſſe
in the World to come.
            
               Your Worſhips in all duetifull
ſeruice to commaund
WILLIAM BROXVP.
            
         
         
            
            To the courteous and
friendly Reader.
            
               GEntle Readers, although I preſent you
with this tearie Mappe of S. Peters
ſubmiſſiue Minde, yet I craue pardon
of you, as (Clinius did of Virginius)
that if you finde any thing amiſſe, you
will paſſe it ouer with fauourable cenſure:
deſiring you to reade with fauour,
correct with iudgement, and
winke at a fault.
            After I had writ theſe few lines, I ſtoode in doubt whether
I ſhould commit them to the Preſſe, let them lye obſcurely in corners,
or elſe to remaine priuately in my owne hands, but being in
doubt least any falſe copie ſhould be ſcattered abroad, & by that
meanes it ſhould come corrupt to the Print, diſguiſed in the fancies
of an other mans humor: it imboldened my weake abilitie
the more to giue it paſſage to the Preſse: yet it may be, that courteous
skill will make this reckoning, that though it bee courſe in
reſpect of exquiſite labours, yet it may entertaine indifferent
mindes, for that the ground thereof is pietie, and this commoditie
it will carie with it, that the Reader may learne the true
path to perfect Ioy, and how to humble himſelfe in the ſchoole
of repentance.
            Thus wading ouer raſhly like Gherillus I flattered my ſelfe,
yet farre from the minde of Terence, when he firſt beganne to
ſtudie Poetrie, he thought all the world would be in loue with his
writing, but if this may winne any one to a repentant minde, hee
ſhall receiue the fruites of his good worke, and I ſhall inioy the
content of my full deſire.
            
               
               Phidios founde the more fauour in ſetting out his ſimple
pictures, in that he did what he could, and I hope to find your fauourable
iudgement for this imperfect worke in that I doe what
I can. Though Cicero were eloquent, Ennius was bluntiſh, high
ſtile is not herein uſed, but a plaine Decorum touching the matter,
a worke roughly hewed out of a hard rocke, not poliſhed by
the curious hands of Artifex, yet brought to the view of the learned,
whoſe cleare ſighted iudgement may condemne me of boldneſſe,
yet this I know, that the well literate will winke at a fault,
when the captious miſliker will finde fault with euery letter, for
the one, I will honour his diſcreet fauour, for the other, I neuer
meant to pleaſe his humor.
            Thus I commit my ſelfe and my booke to your courteſies, wiſhing
the friendly Readers the fruition of all felicitie, committing
them to the protection of the celestiall powers, and this my
good will towards them, to their fauourable conſiderations.
            
               Yours to commaund in all
kindneſſe. W. B.
               
            
            
               In alios lenis eſt
                     •
                  .
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
                  THE ORDER OF THE
Euangeliſtes in laying downe the
names of the twelue Apoſtles.
                  
                      
                     1
                     Peter.
                  
                  
                     Actes 1.
                     2
                     Iames Zebedeus
                  
                  
                      
                     3
                     Iohn.
                  
                  
                      
                     4
                     Andrew.
                  
                  
                     Luke 6.
                     5
                     Philip.
                  
                  
                      
                     6
                     Thomas.
                  
                  
                      
                     7
                     Bartholomew.
                  
                  
                     Marke 3.
                     8
                     Matth.
                  
                  
                      
                     9
                     Iames Alph.
                  
                  
                      
                     10
                     Simon Zelotes.
                  
                  
                     Matth. 10.
                     11
                     Iude Iames. bro.
                  
                  
                      
                     12
                     Matthias.
                  
               
            
         
         
            THE ELECTION, LIVES
and Martyrdomes of
the twelue Apoſtles.
            
               HEre gentle Reader wee may beholde
the Saintes of God, which by great
care and entire loue, did plant the
principles of the Goſpell, not ſparing
their liues to quench the heat of fire.
            By viewing their Martyrdome, we
may comfort our ſelues with this ſaying:
Sanguis Martyrum, ſemen
Eccleſiae. The blood of the Martyrs,
is the ſeede of the Church. Chriſt himſelfe foretold, that whoſoeuer
would be his Diſciple, muſt take vp his croſſe and folow
him: theſe Apoſtles & theſe Diſciples haue done no leſſe.
            
               
               1.
               
                  PEter,
                  Matth. 4. 18. otherwiſe called Simon, the ſonne of Iona, of the Prouince
of Galile,Iohn 1. 42. & of the towne of Bethſaida, the brother of
Andrew,
                  Luke 6. 14. from a fiſherman Chriſt called him to be an Apoſtle,
commaunding him earneſtly three times to feede his ſheepe:Marke 1. 16.
three times Peter denied Chriſt:Luke 5. 10. three times Chriſt asked Peter,
if hee loued him:Marke 3. 16. and three times Peter anſwered,Matth. 16. 17. thou
knoweſt Lorde,Iohn 21. 15. I loue thee.Hieron. lib. de viris illuſtr.
               
               For denying of Chriſt, his ſubmiſſion was ſo great, that by
continual kneeling in prayer to God, his knees & elbowes were
growne thicke, numme, and hard like the hoofe of an Oxe, his
armes with leaning on them were growne crooked, his eyes
were bleard with dayly weeping, and the ſtreames of teares
which flowed from his eyes,Anton. Chro. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 4. parag. 1. made gutters in his cheekes.
               
                  Peter the Apoſtle was ye firſt Biſhop of Antioch, he continued
there ſeuen yeeres, & ſeuen yeeres about Ieruſalē & the Eaſterne
regious:Actes 12. 4. verſe 8. he was impriſoned by Herod Agrippa, and deliuered
by an Angell:Euſebius eccle. hiſt. lib. 3. ca. 9. Chriſt came to his houſe & healed his wiues mother
of a feuer:Matth. 8. 14. he preached the Goſpel of Chriſt in1. Pet. 1. Pontus, Galatia,
Cappadocia,Luke 4. 38. Bythinia, and Aſia. Peter was of that courage
& boldneſſe,Mark. 1. 31. that he walked vpon the water to go to Ieſus.
               Peter ſeeing Chriſt transfigured, talking with Moſes and Elias,
he was ſo rauiſhed with that ioyfull ſight,
                  Matth. 14. 29. 
                  that he ſaid vnto
him,
                  This was vpon Mount Thabor. Lord, here is good being for vs,Matth. 17. 2. if thou wilt, Let vs make
here 3.Marke 9 5. tabernacles, one for thee, one for Moſes, and one for Elias.
               
               
                  Chriſt did foretel Peter of his death,
                  Luke 9. 35. 
                  ſaying,
                  Iohn 21. 18. When thou waſt
young, thou girdedſt thy ſelfe and walkedſt whither thou wouldest:
but when thou ſhalt be olde, thou ſhalt stretch forth thy
handes, and another ſhall gird thee, and leade thee whither thou
wouldeſt not.
               
                  Peter was crucified at Rome,Euſeb. Eccle. hiſt. lib. 3. ca. 1. An. Chriſti 70. the third Calends of Iuly, in
the laſt yeere of Nero, with his head downewards, which kind
of death he himſelfe deſired.
               
                  
                  
                     Moritur ad terram verſo capite in cruce Petrus.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
               2.
               
                  IAmes the ſonne of Zebedeus brother to Iohn,
                  Matth. 4. 21. was a poore
fiſherman,Mark. 3. 17. and being in the ſhippe mending of his net, Ieſus
came by and called him to be an Apoſtle.
               He preached the Goſpel of Chriſt vnto the twelue diſperſed
Tribes,Clem. lib. 7. hypot. he was the next Martyr after Stephen:
                  Actes 12. 2. he was ſlaine by
the ſword in India by Herod Agrippa:
                  Pet de natal. lib. 6. cap. 133. his corps was afterward
tranſported into Compoſtella in Spaine.
            
            
               3.
               
                  IOhn the Euangeliſt was the ſonne of Zebed and brother to
Iames:
                  Mat. 4. 21. he was called from the fiſher-boate to bee an Apoſtle
of Chriſt:Policrates B. of Epheſus. he was of all other beloued of Ieſus: he leaned on the
breaſt of our Sauiour:Euſeb. lib. 3. cap. 16. An. Dom. 97. he was baniſhed by the Emperor Domitian
into the Iſle of Patmos, where hee wrote the Reuelation,
               
                  Ierome and Abdias ſaith,Ierenaeus lib. 5 Abdias. that at Rome he was throwne into
a tunne of hotte burning oyle, yet he came forth and tooke no
harme.
               Hee conuerted a Thiefe,The wordes of Iohn the Euangeliſt to the thiefe. that was Captaine of a bande of
theeues, all wholy bent to ſlaughter, murder, and extreame crueltie,
ſaying, Yet there remaineth ſome hope of ſaluation: I will
vndertake for thee with Chriſt: I will die for thee if neede be, as
Chriſt dyed for vs, I will hazard my ſoule for thine: Truſt me,
Chriſt ſent me.
               The Thiefe hearing this,Tokens of true repentance. ſtoode ſtill, ſhooke off his armour,
trembled for feare, repented and wept bitterly.
               After the death of Domitian,
                  Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 39. Cle
                        •
                     n. 
                  Iohn the Euangeliſt returned
from the Iſle of Patmos, when Nerua had raigned a little aboue
a yeere:An. dom. 99. 
                  Iohn gouerned the Churches in Aſia: and remained
at Epheſus.
               
                  Auguſtine calleth him a martyr by will:Ierome ſaith he dyed the 68 yeere after the paſſion of Chriſt. anno. 
                  Policrates Biſhop
of Epheſus, as Euſebius alleadgeth, ſticketh not to call him a
Prieſt, a martyr, and a doctor, but that which Auguſtine and
Dorotheus writeth of his end, is ſtrangeſt of all, and let the credite
thereof reſt in the choiſe of the Reader:Dom. 101. how Iohn at Epheſus

in the preſence of diuers people, went aliue into his
graue & there dyed, being an hundreth and twentie yeeres old.
            
            
               4.
               
                  ANdrew being a poore fiſherman,Mat. 4. 18. was called with his brother
Peter to bee an Apoſtle:Luk. 6. 14. hee preached the Goſpell of
Chriſt vnto the Scythians,Euſeb. lib. 3. Sogdians, and Sucians, and in the
middle of Sebaſtopilis,cap. 1. inhabited of the wilde Ethiopians: being
crucified by Aegeas King of Edeſſa the laſt of Nouember,Dorotheus Eccle. hiſt. an. Chriſti.
and buried at Pataris a citie in Achaia.
            
            
               5.
               
                  PHilip was choſen to be an Apoſtle of Chriſt,Luk. 6. 14. hee was borne
in the citie of Bethſaida,Marke 3. 18. a citie in Galile: when Chriſt demaunded
of Philip where they might buy bread to ſatisfie the
people that followed him,Iohn 6. 9. 
                  Philip anſwered him, Two hundreth
pennie worth of bread is not ſufficient for them, that euery one
may take a little: This was ſaid to proue him: Chriſt at that inſtant
fedde fiue thouſand men with fiue barly loaues and two
fiſhes,Mat. 14. 19. and when the people were ſatisfied, the diſciples filled
twelue baskets with that which remained:Actes. 8. 9. 
                  Philip preached the
Goſpell of Chriſt in Phrygia,Anton. chron. tit. 6. cap 11. pet. de natal. de ſanctis. lib. 4. cap. 107. he went to a citie in Samaria, and
there conuerted Simon Magus the ſorcerer, who had a long
time ſeduced the ſame citie with his ſorcerie & witchcraft. The
Painims crucified Philip at Hierapotalis.
            
            
               6.
               
                  THomas otherwiſe called Didymus,
                  Iohn 20. verſe 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. was one of the twelue
Apoſtles of Chriſt: hee doubting of the reſurrection of
Chriſt, ſaide vnto his fellowes which tolde him that they had
ſeene the Lord, Thomas ſaid, Except I ſee in his hands the print
of the nayles, and put my handes into his ſide, I will not beleeue.
After eight dayes, Thomas being with the diſciples, Ieſus came
againe, and ſtood in the middeſt of them ſaying, Peace be vnto

to you,
                  Agbaſus wrot an Epiſtle vnto Chriſt, acknoledging him to be the ſoone of God. & ſaid to Thomas: Put thy finger here & ſee my hands,
and thruſt forth thy hand, put it into my ſide, and be not faithleſſe,
but faithfull. Then Thomas did conceiue a full faith that
it was the Lorde, and ſaide, Thou art my Lord my God: which
confeſſion Ieſus did well accept.
               
                  Thomas ſent Thaddaeus vnto Agbarus king of Edeſſa,Chriſt writ to Agbarus againe. to
preach the Goſpell of Chriſt, and to cure Agbarus of his maladie:
Thomas the Apoſtle preached the Goſpell of Chriſt,Euſeb. lib. 1. cap. 15. vnto
the Perſians, Medes, Caramaines, Hircaines, Baſtraines, and
Magitians:Anton. chron. he was ſlaine at the heathen Kings commaundement,
with a dart in India,Abdias Apoſt, hiſt. lib. 9. and was buried at Calimina.
            
            
               7.
               
                  BArtholomew was choſen to bee an Apoſtle of Chriſt,Luk 6. 14. hee
preached to the Indians,Mark. 3. 18. and deliuered vnto them the Goſpell
of Matthew in their owne language:Mat. 10. 3. he ſuffered martyrdome
at the commaundement of Polemius king of India,Dorotheus. Abdias B. of Babilon. the
firſt day of his martyrdome he was beaten with cudgels, the ſecond
day crucified and flayne aliue,pet. de natal. lib. 7. cap. 103. his skin puld ouer his eares,
as he was faſtened to the croſſe:Anton chron. tit. 6. cap. 12. Laſt of all, while breath remained
in him, he was beheaded.
            
            
               8.
               
                  MAtthew the Euangeliſt was choſen to be an Apoſtle of
Chriſt,Mark. 3. 18. he wrote the Goſpell of our Lord Ieſus in the Hebrew
tongue,Abdias. hiſt. aspoſt. lib. 7. and deliuered it to Iames the ſonne of Alpheus:
he preached the Goſpell in Aethiopia: he was by the commandement
of Hyrtacus runne through with a ſworde.
            
            
               9.
               
                  IAmes the ſonne of Alpheus & Marie,
                  Euſeb. Eccle. hiſt. lib. 2. cap. 22. ſiſter to Marie the
Lords mother, called the brother of Chriſt, was the firſt Biſhop
of Ieruſalem,Clemen. lib. 6. he liued vertuouſly, he vſed no woollen veſture,
but wore a Syndon,Aegeſippi. s li. 5. his knees were after the guiſe of a camels

knee,Ioſeph. Antiq. benumd and bereft of the ſence of feeling by reaſon
of his continuall kneeling in ſupplication to God:lib. 20 cap. 16. he continued
Biſhop thirtie yeeres,Abd hiſt. apo. and was martyred by the Iewes,
but eſpecially by Ananias the high Prieſt,Dorotheus. who ſet him vpon a
pinackle of the Temple to preach to the people,Anton. chron. part. 1. tit. 6. cap. 8. anno Dō. 6. & threw him
downe headlong: he hauing breath after his fall, one came with
a Fullers club, knockt him on the head, and brained him.
            
            
               10.
               
                  SImon the Cananite ſonne to Cleopas,
                  Luk. 6. 15. ſurnamed Zelotes the
Lordes couſin germaine,Aegeſippus writeth that Cleopas was brother to Ioſeph. hee was choſen to bee one of the
twelue Apoſtles of Chriſt, he preached the Goſpel throughout
Mauritania, Aphricke, Aegypt, and Perſia: he returned thence
and ſucceeded Iames in the Biſhopricke of Ieruſalem: the heretickes
accuſed him that he lineally deſcended of the ſtocke of
Dauid,
                  Simon was the ſecond B. of Ieruſalem. and that he was a Chriſtian, which profeſſion they hated:
he was ſcourged for the ſpace of many dayes together, ſo
that Aticus the Iudge and his company was marueilouſly amaſed,
and marueiled,He was crucified anno. dō. 110. how that he being an hundred and twentie
yeeres old,Euſeb. lib. 3. cap. 11. 29. was able to abide that bitter torment, in the end, he
dyed a death agreeable with the paſſion of Chriſt.
            
            
               11.
               IƲde the brother of Iames called alſo Thaddeus,
                  Luk. 6. 16. was called
to be an Apoſtle:Mark. 3. 18. he preached vnto the Edeſſians, & through
all Meſopotamia:Dorotheus Eccle. hiſt. he was ſlaine at Berito in the time of Agbarus
king of Edeſſa.
            
            
               12.
               
                  MAtthias one of the ſeuentie Diſciples,Acts. 1. 26. was choſen to be
an Apoſtle in the roome of Iudas the traytor: hee preached
the Goſpell firſt in Macedonia,Pet. de natal. then in Aethiopia, about
the hauen called Hiſſus,lib. 3. cap. 149. and the riuer Phaſis, afterward he went
into India,Anton. chron. where the Iewes ſtoned him, and laſt of all he was
beheaded with an axe after the Romaine manner.tit. 6. cap. 15.
               
               Thus endeth the commemoration of the
liues and deaths of the twelue Apoſtles.
            
         
         
            
            HERE FOLLOWETH
the Election, Liues and Martyrdoms
of S. Paul, Marke
the Euangeliſt, and Stephen one
of the ſeuen Deacons.
            
               
                  PAVL,
               Act. 7. 58. which before was called
Saule,
               Act. 8. 3. was an Apoſtle of Chriſt, yet
out of the number of the twelue,Euſeb. lib. 2. cap. 1. was
borne in Iurie,Ex Hieron. lib. de viris illuſt. in a towne called Gaſcalis,
which towne beeing taken by
the Romanes, he with his parents fled
to Tharſus a towne in Cilicia, afterwards
hee was ſent vp to Ieruſalem,
and there brought vp in the knowledge
of the Law:Euſeb. lib. 2. cap. 1. at that time when Stephen ſuffered martyrdome:
Paul was a perſecutour,Act. 9. 4. in raging againſt the Church of
God,Anno Chr. 35. entring into the houſes of the faithfull, and gaue forth
precepts that both men and women ſhould be impriſoned: he
was conuerted to beleeue in Chriſt, by a voice that ſpake to him
from heauen, as he went towards Damaſcus, and from a perſecutour
he was made a profeſſor, an Apoſtle, a martyr, a witnes
of the Goſpel, and a choſen veſſell, not of men, neither by men,
but by reuelation from Ieſus Chriſt: among other his manifold
labours and trauelles in ſpreading the doctrine of Chriſt, hee
wanne Sergius Paulus the Proconſul of Ciprus to the faith of
Chriſt, whereupon his name was turned from Saul to Paul: he
began to preach the Goſpell of Chriſt at Ieruſalem,Euſeb. lib. 3. cap. 27. and went
on ſtill to Ilyricum, Italie and Spaine, his Epiſtles are extant at
this day, full of heauenly wiſedome, hee was accuſed before
the Emperour Nero,
               Abdias de viris lib. 2. for teaching a new doctrine and ſtirring
vp ſedition againſt the Empire, whereupon Nero commanded
him to declare the order of his doctrine: which was to teach all

men peace and charitie, how to loue one another; that rich men
ſhould not bee puft vp in pride,The ſumme of Paules doctrine. nor to put their truſt in their
treaſure, but in the liuing God; meane men to be content with
food and raiment, and with their preſent ſtate; poore men to reioyce
in their pouertie with hope; fathers to bring vp their children
in the feare of God; children to obay their parents; huſbands
to loue their wiues; wiues to loue their husbands; citizens
and ſubiectes to be true to their Prince. This was the ſumme of
Paules teaching, which hee receiued from Ieſus Chriſt, which
ſpake to him from heauen. When Nero had heard this, he gaue
ſentence of death, that Paul ſhould bee beheaded, vnto whoſe
executiō 
               Nero ſent two of his Eſquires,Paul condemned. 
               Feraga & Parthemius,
to bring him word of Paules death:Euſeb. lib 2. he was beheaded at Rome,
the laſt yeere of Nero,
               cap. 2. lib. 1. the third calends of Iuly, and was buried
in the way to Oſtia,cap. 1. anno in the thirtie ſixt yeere after his conuerſion,
thirtie ſeuen yeeres after the Paſſion of Chriſt.Chriſti. 70.
            
            
               MArke the Euangeliſt was the firſt Biſhop of Alexandria,Dorotheus Eccle hiſt. he
was the firſt that preached Chriſt vnto the Egyptians: in
the time of Traian hee had a cable rope tyed about his necke,
and drawne through the ſtreetes of Alexandria,Euſeb. lib 2. that his fleſh
was rent in pieces,cap. 16. cap. 25. and the ſtones coloured with blood, he was
drawne from Blocus to a place called Angels,Dorotheus. where hee was
burned to aſhes by the furious Idolaters, in the moneth of April,
and buried at Blocus.
            
               STephen was choſen to bee one of the ſeuen Deacons,Actes 6. 5. by
prayer and laying on of the Apoſtles hands,Euſeb. lib. 2. for the publike
adminiſtration of the Church affaires,cap. 1. hee was ſtoned to death
at Ieruſalem by them that ſlew the Lorde,Actes 7. 59. he was the firſt of the
triumphing Martyrs of Chriſt,Actes 8. 2. and as they ſtoned him, he ſaid:
Lord Ieſu receiue my ſpirit:
               Luke 13. 34. and kneeling downe, he cryed with
a lowde voyce:Stephen ſignifieth a crowne 
               Lord lay not this ſinne vnto their charge: and
ſo fell aſleepe in the Lord.
            
               This is to beare the croſſe of our Sauiour,
               Matth. 10. 38. 39. 
               this is to drinke of
one cuppe with Chriſt: Chriſt ſaith, He that taketh not vp his

croſse and followeth after me,Matth. 16. 24, 25. is not worthie of me, hee that will
ſaue his life, ſhall looſe it, and he that looſeth his life for my ſake,
ſhall ſaue it.Pſalm. 34. 19. Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord deliuereth him out of them all. Through many tribulations
wee haue to enter into the king dome of heauen:Matth. 10. 22. but hee that
endureth to the ende, he ſhall be ſaued.
            Infinite are the number of the Saints of God that haue ſuffered
for the teſtimonie of Chriſt, as Hierome in his Epiſtle to
Chromatius and Heliodorus, ſaith: Nullus eſſet dies quinon vltra
quin
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   millium numerum martyrum reperiri poſſet aſcriptus
excepto die kalendarum Ianuarij.
               The number of Martyrs in the primitiue Church. There is no day in the whole
yeere vnto which the number of fiue thouſand Martyrs cannot
be aſcribed, except onely the firſt day of Ianuarie.
            THus gentle Reader, not meaning to be offenſiue with long circumſtances,
I haue briefely deſcribed the liues and martyrdomes
of the twelue Apoſtles, amongst which I haue writ of
S. Peter more at large then any of the reſt: and if you deigne fauourably
to reade this ſmall enſuing Poeme to the ende: you
ſhall encourage mee hereafter to preſent you with ſome other
worke that may be more pleaſing to your kinde view.
Thus I commit thee courteous Reader
to the reading of that
which followeth.
         
         
            
            
               The Argument.
               
                  DID Peter waſh his ſilly ſoule with teares,
                  vnfainedly with true repentance weeping,
                  And yet t'was long, ere ioy bereau'd his cares,
                  Twixt ioyfull hope, and ſad deſpaire infleeting:
                  How can we then, the loathed lumpe of ſinne,
                  VVithout repentance, Ioyes celeſtiall winne?
               
               
                  For euery teare that trickled downe his cheekes,
                  From the moyst ſprings of his dimme bleared eies,
                  Ten thouſand ſinnes our ſinfull cloſet keepes,
                  VVhile hardened hearts, not one Peccaui cries:
                  His teares were infinite, and paſt recount,
                  Our teares are nothing, yet our ſinnes ſurmount.
               
               
                  Did Peter ſinne, and did he then repent,
                  Did Peter ſinne, and did he after weepe?
                  Did Peter ſinne, and for his ſinne lament?
                  Did Peter ſinne, and was his ſorrow deepe?
                  Oh, did he ſhedde whole flouds of teares for ſinne?
                  Before he could his Maſters fauour winne.
               
               
                  How dare we then preſuming hope for grace?
                  How may we hope, more ſinfull farre then he?
                  How can we hope for heauen Chriſtes reſting place?
                  VVhere none but Saints and holy Angels be?
                  Except with bleſſed Peter we repent,
                  And for our ſinnes with earnest teares lament.
               
               
                  
                     Vbi abundauit peccatum, Superabundauit & gratia.
                  
               
               FINIS.
            
            
               
               SAINT PETERS PATH
to the Ioyes of Heauen.
               
                  Luke 22. 62.
                  Peter went out and wept bitterly.
               
               
                  
                     RISE Sinfull man, looke on the heauenly
light,
                  Bee not by Sathan, to Hels Bondage
brought:
                  Let not deſpairing thoughts thy ſoule affright:
                  To ſtroy the Treaſure, Chriſt ſo deerely bought:
                  Say not with Cain, the Lorde cannot forgiue:
                  His oyle of grace will thy ſicke ſoule relieue.
               
               
                  His life preſeruing-mercy paſſeth all
                  The glorious workes, that euer he did make:
                  For whoſoeuer faithfully doth call
                  On his great Name, he neuer doth forſake,
                  Though skarlet ſinnes thy ſoule doe ouergrow,
                  Yet his ſweet blood wil waſh them white as ſnow.
               
               
                  Caſt not thy lookes againſt the ſullen ground,
                  But looke on Chriſt, faſt nayled to the Croſſe,
                  His death of life, did death and hell confound,
                  And therewithal, redeem'd thy greateſt loſſe:
                  
                     Adam wreckt our ſoules, Chriſt was ſoules life beginner,
                  His blood ſau'd thee; & me the vildeſt ſinner.
               
               
                  
                  If thy lewd heart all wicked ſinnes had wrought,
                  Or that the worlds whole ſinnes in thee did lie:
                  Yet our great GOD, that made all things of nought,
                  Can baniſh them, with one winke of his eie:
                  He can, and will, if thou in him doe truſt,
                  And make thy ſoule copartner with the Iuſt.
               
               
                  But if thou aske my Name, that is ſo bold,
                  Firmely to vrge, Heauens mercie thus to thee,
                  And Chriſts compasſion to thy heart vnfold:
                  Let thy ſicke ſoule giue healthfull eare to mee,
                  Of Chriſt's Apoſtles, I was counted one,
                  But ſinful'ſt wretch, that euer men look't on.
               
               
                  To 'this worldes ſight, was neuer man more hatefull,
                  Or that committed greater ſinne, then I,
                  Nor for Gods bleſsings, could be more vngratefull,
                  Who did my heauenly Maſter, flat denie,
                  Falſely ſwearing, I did neuer know him,
                  When diuers folks, to my dull ſight did ſhow him.
               
               
                  Then which fowle fact, what could be greater ſinne?
                  More wickedneſſe, did neuer man commit:
                  Yet true repentance did new life beginne:
                  Chriſt did forgiue, and all my ſinnes forget:
                  Repent therefore, and faithfully beleeue:
                  Then God in mercy, will thy ſinnes forgiue.
               
               
                  
                  I will declare my fowle offences ſtorie,
                  To giue true comfort to deſpairing ſoules:
                  But moſt of all, to manifeſt Gods glorie,
                  Whoſe glorious greatneſſe, Angels ſtill extols:
                  Then beare in minde, his all ſufficient might,
                  And in thy heart, engraue what I recite.
               
               
                  In launcing out the ſcumme of my fowle crimes,
                  Whoſe vlcer ſmell impoyſoneth cleereſt ſence,
                  Compare therewith thy faults, of former times
                  Then note the ſcope, twixt thine, and mine offence:
                  Flie faſt to Chriſt, and imitate my teares,
                  If ſight thereof, affright thy ſoule with feares.
               
               
                  Teares ſhed in time, doth winne a bliſſefull hower,
                  For they perfume the ſoule with luſtre ioy,
                  The more in plentie, greater is their power
                  Combind in bliſſe, from Sathans fowle annoy:
                  Then let thy teares, for ſinne in ſtreames ariſe,
                  Till death damme vp the welſprings of thy eyes.
               
               
                  Such pearled deaw, allureth God to grace,
                  Stil'd in the lymbecke of ſubmiſsiue mindes,
                  With heat of contrite heart, which brings in place,
                  The liquid iuice, that fowleſt parts refines:
                  My ſuite lay dead, and was defer'd by ſinne,
                  Til teares, (true Oratours) did my verdict winne.
               
               
                  
                  Confeſsion firſt, makes way to mercies ſeat:
                  Next true Repentance, mooues the Iudge to pittie:
                  Condemne thy ſelfe for thy offences great,
                  So on thy faultes, accuſers cannot iettie:
                  Chriſt is thy Iudge, thy Sauiour meeke and kinde,
                  Then haue no doubt, for mercie thou ſhalt finde.
               
               
                  Impious wretch, vile obiect of diſgrace,
                  The mappe of ſhame, the excrement of earth,
                  A wretched impe, the ſpring of Iones race,
                  In faire Bethſaida Citie firſt tooke breath,
                  There tooke I life, that true lifes Lord denide,
                  The mynt of lies, that trueth it ſelfe defide.
               
               
                  At mans eſtate a Fiſher I became,
                  That with hard toile maintained my ſimple charge,
                  With my poore brother, Andrew cald by name,
                  Plunged among the mounting waues at large,
                  Where we with labour, moyld, and wearied ſore,
                  For ſuccour ſayld to Galilean ſhore.
               
               
                  What time behold, on pleaſant bancke did ſtand,
                  Our ſweet Meſsias, Sauiour of mankind,
                  Whoſe heauenly voyce did call vs both to land,
                  Vnworthy men, did ſuch great fauour find:
                  
                     Come follow me, (the Prince of peace did ſay,)
                  Fiſhers of men, I'le make you both this day.
               
               
                  
                  Thus from a baſe, and ſeruile kind of life,
                  Vnto a ſacred Function were we cald,
                  Exempt from former ſorrow, care and ſtrife,
                  Whereto, before, our heauie heartes were thrald,
                  And in this holy ſeruice did we ſee
                  The power of God, and his great Maieſtie.
               
               
                  Attending on our Maſter moſt diuine,
                  Vnto a bleſſed Marriage, was he bidden,
                  There turnd he water into holeſome wine,
                  Shewing his Godhead, which before lay hidden:
                  A foule infected Leaper did he heale,
                  Who to the Prieſtes the ſame did ſoone reueale,
               
               
                  The Captaines ſeruant, that lay ſicke in bed,
                  And with the ſhaking palſie ſore was grieu'd,
                  So ſoone as Chriſt, the bleſſed word had ſaid,
                  His trembling ioints with helth were ſtraight relieu'd:
                  From men poſſeſt he threw fierce diuels away,
                  And with his word rebukt the raging ſea.
               
               
                  He did reſtore the blind vnto their ſight:
                  Lame crippled perſons, he did make to goe:
                  The dumbe to ſpeake, and by his powerfull might
                  The dead he rais'd, that long lay ſtinking ſo:
                  And with fiue loaues of bread, he did ſuffice
                  Fiue thouſand men, before my ſinfull eyes.
               
               
                  
                  Could I ſo kind and louing Lord forget?
                  That in my wants, my neede ſupplied euer,
                  Carefull he was, in paying my due debt,
                  My wiues ſicke mother, heal'd he of a feuer,
                  When I lackt coyne, great Caeſars right to pay,
                  A fiſh he forc't, to bring me ſome ſtraightway.
               
               
                  To grace me with a bleſt Apoſtles right,
                  Three times he charg'd me for to feed his ſheepe,
                  But I falſe wretch did diſobey him quight,
                  His flocke from harme, I had no care to keepe:
                  Oh, how could I, to them a Paſtor be?
                  When I my ſelfe, did ſtray ſo grieuouſlie.
               
               
                  Yet was his gracious fauour ſuch to me,
                  He tooke me vp, into the mountaine hie,
                  His Tranſfiguration for to ſee,
                  Which then appear'd, in mightie Maieſtie,
                  Where Moſes, and Elias both did walke,
                  And with out bleſſed Sauiour fell in talke.
               
               
                  Bright as the Sunne, in chiefeſt of his pride,
                  So did the glory of his face appeare,
                  His ſeameleſſe garments ſhin'de on euery ſide,
                  Like to the light, when it is found moſt cleare:
                  All this and more did I behold and ſee,
                  Yet feareleſſe fell to foule iniquitie.
               
               
                  
                  Who would againſt this bleſſed God offend?
                  Who durſt a Iudge, ſo mightie, quite denie?
                  Who would not feare, and learne his life to mend?
                  Sith ſuch a Lord, his ſecrets can diſcrie:
                  Who would not mon'th, day, minute, time, and hower,
                  Yea alwayes dread his Iuſtice, might and power.
               
               
                  Yet I tranſgreſt againſt this Prince of might,
                  Whoſe Maieſtie ſits in a glorious Throne,
                  His eyes like fire, ſhining pure and bright,
                  His face more cleere, then any precious ſtone:
                  Angels and Saints attend in his preſence,
                  Thrones, Prophets, Powers, Martyrs, Innocents.
               
               
                  Sweete Lorde, with fauour meaſure my offence,
                  Let true repentance counteruaile thine ire,
                  Let teares appeaſe, where treſpaſſe doth incenſe,
                  Let pitie moue: let humble hope deſire:
                  Lord ſcourge me not, according to deſart,
                  Let ſinners ſee how mercifull thou art.
               
               
                  The holy feaſt of Eaſter drawing nie,
                  Vnto Ieruſalem would my Sauiour goe,
                  Shewing to vs, what death he was to die,
                  As holy Prophets often did foreſhow,
                  That he thereby, might ſaue from death and hell,
                  The ſoule of man, which by tranſgreſsion fell.
               
               
                  
                  Thus Adams treſpaſſe brought a ſcourging rod,
                  His poore ſucceſſors to torment for ſinne,
                  Which pluckt from pleaſure, th' Image of our God,
                  See what deſtruction Adam did beginne?
                  His fall brought ſinne, and ſinne did death require,
                  Sinne drown'd the world, and Sodom ſet on fire.
               
               
                  Ah wretched Eue, that firſt procur'd this ſtrife,
                  By taſting of the Tree, both good and ill,
                  Which brought to vs a wofull labouring life,
                  With ſweating face, the barren earth to till:
                  For which offence, the holy Godhead ſaid,
                  Returne to earth, whereof thou firſt waſt made.
               
               
                  For this foule fact, mans ſoule was damn'd to hell,
                  And nothing could appeaſe Gods wrathfull ire,
                  But his Sonnes blood, whom he belou'd ſo well,
                  Who for our ſakes did ſhamefull death deſire:
                  We did tranſgreſſe, and he did ſuffer ſmart,
                  But then this knowledge was not in my heart.
               
               
                  Wherefore when I did vnderſtand and heare,
                  That Chriſt to faire Ieruſalem would goe,
                  The Scribes and Elders I did greatly feare,
                  Which ſutly ſought, his life to ouerthrow:
                  Then did I take my Lord aſide, and ſay,
                  Looke to thy ſelfe, Lord ſhun this bainfull way.
               
               
                  
                  But my raſh zeale, full ſore my God offended,
                  Who cald me Sathan, laying to my charge,
                  I fauour'd not his holy will intended,
                  But like a flatrer, ſlipt my wordes at large:
                  Falſe fainting zeale, ſhadow'd with good pretence,
                  No vayle can hide the ſhame of my offence.
               
               
                  Now marke the ſorrow that I ſhall vnfold,
                  When he to faire Ieruſalem was come,
                  The traytor Iudas, his good Maſter ſold,
                  For thirtie pence, God wot, a ſlender ſumme:
                  Which damned deed, although he ſought to hide
                  Chriſt knew ful well, by whom all hearts are tride.
               
               
                  Then when he had his bleſſed Supperended,
                  Vp to mount Oliuet did he ſadly goe,
                  And we vpon our heauenly Maſter tended,
                  In whoſe ſad ſoule deaths ſorrow then did grow:
                  Who ſaid to vs, when he the hill aſcended,
                  All you this night, through me ſhall be offended.
               
               
                  For it is written, and it ſhall be ſo:
                  I'le ſmite the Shepheard on the fertile plaine,
                  Then all his flocke ſhall ſcatter to and fro:
                  But when from vanquiſht death I riſe againe,
                  By mighty power and heauenly deitie,
                  I'le walke before you into Galile.
               
               
                  
                  But hereupon, this anſwere I did make,
                  And freely ſpoke, what I in heart intended,
                  My Lord and Maſter will I not forſake,
                  Though all the world, with thee ſhould be offended:
                  
                     But Ieſus ſaid, Before the cocke crow twice,
                  This night, (for feare,) thou wilt deny me thrice.
               
               
                  Vpon theſe wordes, I did my ſpeeches double,
                  And told my Lord, what euer came of me,
                  I would not ſhrinke, for any worldly trouble,
                  Reſpecting not, inforc't calamitie,
                  In all diſgraces, Peter firſt will die
                  A lingring death, ere he his Lord denie.
               
               
                  Then went my Lord himſelfe alone to pray
                  With heauy heart, and layd him on the earth,
                  
                     Who ſaid to vs, VVatch you a while and ſtay,
                  For my ſed Soule is heauie to the death.
                  But while he ſweat cold water mixt with blood,
                  We careleſſe, ſlept, and did no other good.
               
               
                  Three times came Chriſt, and found vs faſt aſleepe,
                  While he attended Iudas ſpitefull howre,
                  To thinke thereon, it makes my heart to weepe,
                  Chriſt taſting then, a bitter bleeding ſhowre:
                  Thus lay we careleſſe, while his care increaſt,
                  We ſlept, and he in praying neuer ceaſt.
               
               
                  
                  What drowſie drones were we? that had no power,
                  On Gethſeman, to watch a little ſpace,
                  Ah, could not we, forbeare one ſleeping hower?
                  While Chriſt lay praying, with a watrie face:
                  Whoſe Agony that time, was found ſo great,
                  That he all ouer bath'd in bloody ſweat.
               
               
                  Then came our Sauiour vnto vs, and ſaid:
                  Sleepe now henceforth, and euer take your rest,
                  The hower is at hand, the plot is laid,
                  That wretched ſinners muſt haue their requeſt:
                  Ariſe, ariſe, ſo drowſie doe not ſtand,
                  I ſhall be tooke, the traytour is at hand.
               
               
                  Our Sauiour had theſe wordes no ſooner ſpoken,
                  But Iudas came, with others very ſtrong,
                  The Traytour gaue a kiſſe, which was the token
                  Betraid my Lord: ſo tooke they him along:
                  O Sinne of ſinnes, what falſehood worſe then this?
                  To harbour Treaſon in a trothleſſe kiſſe.
               
               
                  My Sauiour thus abus'de, I baniſht feare,
                  At this lewd troope, I ſtraight drew out my ſword,
                  And ſmiting Malcus, I cut off his eare,
                  For which my Chriſt gaue me a checking word:
                  Then leading him away, on my reproofe,
                  With lingring ſteps I follow'd him aloofe.
               
               
                  
                  Oh Coward, here thy hollow heart beginnes,
                  I follow'd in the darke, as all vnknowne,
                  Which doth encreaſe my great and grieuous ſinnes,
                  In Calender of ſhame, my name is ſhowne:
                  I that erewhile ſuch mightie brags did make,
                  With pale-fac't feare did now begin to ſhake.
               
               
                  Falſe hearted man, and full of wicked ill,
                  Into the court of Caiphas did I goe,
                  And warm'd me there, while cold my heart did kill:
                  Coldneſſe of faith, the roote of all my woe:
                  O wretch of all men, well deſeruing hate,
                  For buying fire, at ſuch a damned rate.
               
               
                  There came to me a Wench, and thus ſhe ſaid:
                  Thou ſure art one of this Mans company,
                  For by thy countnance is the ſame bewraid:
                  But what ſhe ſaid, I ſtiffely did denie:
                  O ſinfull ſoule for this thy lacke of grace,
                  Weepe, weepe, till teares make gutters in thy face.
               
               
                  With that the quicke rebuker of my vice,
                  The wakefull cocke did then begin to crow,
                  Yet ere he crew, I did denie him thrice,
                  And ſwore I knew him not, whom I did know:
                  O ſinne of ſinnes! O excrement of earth!
                  Forgiue me Chriſt, though my deſart be death.
               
               
                  
                  Then Chriſt on me did caſt a glorious view,
                  Like to a Star that glanced in the skie,
                  Whereby behold, my foule offence I knew,
                  That my hearts thoughts were open to his eie:
                  And thereupon the Cocke againe did crow,
                  The heauie watch-word of my ouerthrow.
               
               
                  But when I ſaw his piercing eyes looke backe,
                  As I pronounſt my periurie within,
                  O how my ſoule did feele a ſudden wracke,
                  Thus ſtrooke againſt the damned rocke of ſinne:
                  Which made me ſtraight to get me out of doore,
                  And on the thirſtie earth my teares to powre.
               
               
                  And with a wofull bitter bleeding hart,
                  Thus I began to thunder out my crie:
                  Lord looke not on me, after my deſart,
                  I haue deſeru'd, eternall death to die:
                  Though I on earth haue here denyed thee,
                  Yet of thy Kingdome, Lord, deny not me.
               
               
                  Celeſtiall power, Creations ſole beginner,
                  View here thy poore Apoſtles relenting,
                  Meekely forgiue, a true repentant ſinner,
                  That with ſalt teares is euermore repenting:
                  But who? a wretch, vnworthy to be knowne,
                  A Saint? O no, not Gods, nor yet his owne.
               
               
                  
                  All weeping eyes, reſigne to me your teares.
                  From weeping will I neuer ceaſe, but weepe,
                  For why? my ſinnes haue fil'd my ſoule with feares,
                  And flouds of ſorrowes breakes my ſoundeſt ſleepe:
                  The more diſtils the liquid Oliue tree,
                  The better will the fruite in ſeaſon be.
               
               
                  And that makes me, lament my life ſo ill,
                  With ſtreaming teares, ſo long as I haue breath,
                  Leaſt ſinne and hell my ſpotted ſoule ſhould ſpill,
                  Which dayly threatens my eternall death:
                  Though death eternall be my due deſart,
                  Yet Lord forgiue my ſad repenting heart.
               
               
                  Accuſing Sathan, fils my ſoule with feares,
                  Demaunding, how I dare for mercie call?
                  A reeking voyce, from hell rings in my eares,
                  That I of force, muſt to perdition fall:
                  Whoſe foggy ſtem doth ſeeke my ſoule to blind,
                  That the true way to Chriſt I might not find.
               
               
                  Damn'd wretch (ſay they) how canſt thou hope for grace?
                  Chriſts ſacred word is precious and moſt pure,
                  Aſham'd thou waſt to know thy Maſters face,
                  Therefore aſham'd of thee, he will be ſure:
                  For feare of death, thy life for to prolong,
                  Thou ſlew'ſt thy ſoule, by raſhneſſe of thy tongue.
               
               
                  
                  Chriſt in a parable plaine, bewrayes this caſe,
                  He damn'd the ſlothfull ſeruant found aſleepe:
                  And he that to the wedding forced was:
                  The fooliſh Virgins, wanting care to keepe
                  Their lampes with oyle, when they with him ſhould go.
                  Were for this treſpaſſe throw'n to laſting woe.
               
               
                  See how ſeuerely Chriſt, doth ſinners vſe,
                  He ſpar'd not Saul, although his true annoynted,
                  But caſt him off, and did him quite refuſe
                  For ſparing Agag, otherwiſe appoynted:
                  If Chriſt ſpar'd not chiefe branches of his tree,
                  Then ſinfull ſoule, what ſhall become of thee?
               
               
                  Then bootles ſpend not thou thy loathed breath,
                  In vaine thou doſt for grace and mercie crie,
                  Thou haſt with Iudas won a traytors death,
                  He ſold his Lord, and thou doſt him denie:
                  O wretched ſoule, nay moſt accurſed deuill,
                  For none but fiends would doe ſo bad an euill.
               
               
                  Thou maske of ſhame: badge of a guiltie mind:
                  Thou mappe of ſinne: thou common foe of fame:
                  Out-caſt on earth: thou whelpe of Tygres kind:
                  God from his booke, hath▪ blotted out thy name:
                  At thy complaint, the Lord doth ſtop his eares,
                  He nought reſpects thy grones or bitter teares.
               
               
                  
                  Curſe wretched man, the time that thou waſt borne,
                  On thy birth day, ſoule ſinne imbraſte thee faſt;
                  To vanquiſh thee, and make thee thus forlorne:
                  Thereby from grace to haue thee quite out caſt.
                  What then, a ſaint, no no, a beaſt, nay worſe,
                  Abiuring Chriſt, thou haſt a laſting curſe.
               
               
                  Falſe fainting heart which feare did ouerthrow,
                  To ſaue thy life, thou didſt thy promiſe breake:
                  How canſt thou thinke, that Chriſt will mercie ſhew,
                  When as thy faith was found to him ſo weake?
                  To adde ſmall time, vnto a fleeting life,
                  Thy ſoule is fild with ſorrow, woe and ſtrife.
               
               
                  O purchaſe baſe, to length thy life by ſinne,
                  Infamous wretch, deſeruing death for meede,
                  Wouldſt thou permita womans words to winne
                  Thy loue from Chriſt, euen in his greateſt neede,
                  What fauour canſt thou finde that Chriſt deluded
                  Angels for ſinne, from Heauen were excluded.
               
               
                  Wherefore was ſuch a caytife namde a Saint,
                  Whoſe ſpeeches vowed ſpit and bitter gall,
                  That in Chriſts quarrell cowardly did faint:
                  Could an Apoſtle catch ſo fowle a fall?
                  Blacke fiends of hell hereat doe laugh and ſmile,
                  That they did Peter in ſuch ſorte beguile.
               
               
                  
                  Diſpaire and dye, rip thy foule intrals out,
                  To ſearch thy conſcience make no long delay,
                  T'is foule and guiltie therefore out of doubt:
                  T'will witnes be againſt thee at that day.
                  Both clarke and Iudge, and iurie will it bee,
                  For to condemne, but not to ſet thee free.
               
               
                  Thus ſinne and Sathan did my ſoule accuſe,
                  Setting the filth of ſinne before my eyes,
                  My heart with terror did he ſore abuſe:
                  Who ſaide that Chriſt my praiers would deſpiſe:
                  But yet defying him, though fleſh were fraile,
                  Through grace I gan my faults thus to be waile.
               
               
                  Moſt mightie Lord, ſicke is my ſoule within,
                  To thinke that I againſt my God offended:
                  Sweete Chriſt forgiue the greatnes of my ſin,
                  Saue me Lord Ieſu, elſe I am condemned.
                  Rent hart, weep eyes, & pleade thou wicked tougue,
                  Pleade thou for mercy, that did Chriſt ſuch wrong.
               
               
                  O holy ſpirit that ſeeſt my reſtles teares,
                  Reade ioyfull leſſons to my painting hart:
                  For Sathan ſpeakes of nought, but rufull feares,
                  And griefe conceales my ſoules inceſſant ſmart.
                  My guiltie eyes, that ſtill purſues my ſin,
                  Each moment doth my griefe afreſh begin.
               
               
                  
                  Looke on the thoughts of a perplexed mind,
                  Their irkſome dayes, that leades a loathſome life,
                  There is no ioy, or comforts I can find,
                  Such vaine illuſions keeps me ſtill in ſtrife:
                  O brittle life! that vadeth like a flower,
                  Vnſtable mind! oft changed in an hower.
               
               
                  This world allur'd me with deceiuing howers,
                  Liuing I find a Lab'rinth voyd of meaſure,
                  A groue of griefe, a field of blaſted flowers,
                  A ſtony ground, where growes no ſparke of pleaſure:
                  A witching phrenzie, pleaſant to the eares,
                  A dreadfulll den, a ſurging riuer of teares.
               
               
                  O ſplendent Chriſt! which ſuffred for my ſin,
                  Celeſtiall Subſtance! let me taſt thy ſweet,
                  That my poore ſoule may be refreſht within,
                  Which this falſe world doth clog with cares vnmeet,
                  The holy Ghoſt to my poore ſpirit applie,
                  That on thy mercy I may ſtill relie.
               
               
                  Behold my eyes, with dayly weeping teares
                  Are blear'd and parcht, for my offences done,
                  Thy grace I craue, my heart thy Iuſtice feares,
                  With trembling ioynts, my ſoules diſtreſſe begonne:
                  Sinne cauſeth griefe, for ſorrow is their ſhare,
                  That in the ſhop of ſhame trades periur'd ware.
               
               
                  
                  Sinnes farme I rented, with hard intreſt bought,
                  The rent my ſoule, yet all my gayne was griefe,
                  Deere was that purchaſe, which my downfal wrought
                  In Caiphas court, I loſt my ſoules reliefe:
                  O wretched men! that buyes the curſe of hell,
                  With wrecke of ſoules, the wares that diuels ſell.
               
               
                  Lord let thy mercy be the onely key,
                  To ope the doore of my afflicted hart,
                  Where my accounts in ſecret hidden lye,
                  Griping my conſcience with extremeſt ſmart:
                  And thereby let thy holy ſpirit in,
                  Which is of force to diſpoſſeſſe my ſin.
               
               
                  Lord ſeeke the ſheepe, that long hath gone aſtray:
                  The prodigall to thee his mone hath made,
                  I haue procur'd and wrought my owne decay,
                  And of damnation am I ſore afraid:
                  If thou wilt helpe, O ſweet Chriſt! helpe me now,
                  And make not Peter breake, although he bow.
               
               
                  O write my teares within the booke of life!
                  The regiſter of thine elected fold,
                  Where mercie and compaſsion ſhineth rife,
                  There Lord, let Peters name be ſure intold:
                  Protect me Lord, and free me from all feares,
                  Whoſe ſoule is drencht within a ſhowre of teares.
               
               
                  
                  With mildenes meaſure, my ſubmiſsiue minde,
                  Meekely forgiue, I craue with contrite hart
                  Let thy poore ſeruant, thy free mercie finde,
                  With ſighs I beg, releaſe of earned ſmart.
                  Bent knees, thicke ſobs, wet eyes, ſad hart begin,
                  Pleade clients pleade, Gods mercie ſweete to win.
               
               
                  Sinfull Diſciple, fall flat on thy face,
                  And warme the thirſtie earth with flowing teares:
                  Yea, riſe not vp, till thou haſt purchaſte grace
                  Ring rufull ſobs, repentant in his eares.
                  A true and contrite heauie ſoule for ſin,
                  The Lord regardes, and moſt doth ioy therein.
               
               
                  Redeeme me then with ranſome of thy loue,
                  Releaſe my bondage from ſinnes captiue gaile:
                  Let Peters true repentance pittie moue,
                  And let thy mercie be my ſoules ſure baile.
                  Tender my ſui
                        •
                     e, cancell offences great,
                  With feare I craue, with hope I doe intreat.
               
               
                  O that I had not borne ſo baſe a minde,
                  As to deny my Chriſt, that did me make:
                  But that I had, with conſtant Steuen been kinde
                  To haue been ſtoned for my maſters ſake.
                  Then had I neuer knowne this helliſh ſmart,
                  That wounds my conſcience, and doth kil my hart,
               
               
                  
                  What did produce me to this curſed crime?
                  How came I ſo ſecurelie rockt aſleepe:
                  The monſter ſinne, my wings of faith did lime,
                  I could not flie that helliſh danger deepe.
                  Blaſphemous hart, benumd with deadly colde,
                  Thou didſt my tongue, to periuries vnfolde.
               
               
                  Ah woe is me, I am that curſed Caine,
                  
                  That murdered Abel, I may iuſtlie ſay,
                  His precious blood doth iſſue out amaine,
                  And t'was my ſinnes, that did my Sauiour ſlay:
                  Had I ſo many eyes, as Starres in skie,
                  For this offence, well might I weepe them drie.
               
               
                  I doe bewaile my foule committed ſin
                  Gainſt Chriſt, redeemer of my ſoule from hell,
                  Sweete Sauiour, let my ſoule thy mercie win,
                  That I among the damned may not dwell:
                  For I confeſſe without thy mercies ſtore,
                  I ſhall be damnd in hell for euermore.
               
               
                  Ah ſeruile feare, that maskes a drooping minde,
                  Subiect to ſinne, baſe captiue vnto thrall:
                  Couldſt thou permit a ſillie woman kinde,
                  To be contriuer of thy ſhamefull fall.
                  Were now the Cocke to crow as thrice he crue,
                  No woman (though I dyde) ſhould me ſubdue.
               
               
                  
                  O haſtie raſhnes, where true faith was fled,
                  Vnſauorie tree, where fruits of ſin do grow
                  For want of faith, let floods of teares be ſhed,
                  Baptize anew, thy ſoule in ſtreames of woe:
                  Too long they liue, that liue till they be nought,
                  How cheape ſold I, what Chriſt ſo deerly bought.
               
               
                  Come idle eyes, t'is long time ſince ye wept,
                  Straine out my ſorrows, fruits of my vntruth,
                  That ſpringing ſtreams of teares may ſtill be kept,
                  To blaze with plaints the Ecchoes of my ruth:
                  Vnkind in kindnes, where faint feare tooke place,
                  To ſpit thy poyſon in thy makers face.
               
               
                  O wretched Peter, far worſe then the Iewes,
                  That hiſt at Chriſt, like poyſoned ſtinging ſnakes,
                  Whoſe ſcornfull mocks, his patience did abuſe,
                  Who notwithſtanding dyed for their ſakes:
                  My oaths were darts, my cruell tongue the ſting,
                  My God the marke, and him I did maligne.
               
               
                  With ſin, O Lord, my ſoule is ſore attainted,
                  My mind, my thoughts, my hart is clog'd with griefe,
                  Heart throbbing feare, and treaſon hath me haunted,
                  All theſe are ruines of my ſoules reliefe:
                  Inconſtancy, foule fraud, and falſe ſelfe will,
                  Theſe gaue attendance, my poore ſoule to kill.
               
               
                  
                  Diſpaire not Peter, doo not thy God forget,
                  To call for mercy doo thy beſt indeuour,
                  Neuer did he refuſe a ſinner yet:
                  Nor crau'd his death, but wiſht him life for euer.
                  All burdned ſoules come vnto me ſaith he,
                  And of your griefe you ſhall releaſed be.
               
               
                  Therefore I thinke my ſelfe thrice happie bleſt,
                  For that I hope I ſhall beholde his bliſſe,
                  Although this fleſh be fraile, full of vnreſt,
                  Againſt the ſpirit, working much amiſſe:
                  Yet Chriſt his mercie floweth like a ſpring,
                  While his woundes bleede, receiued for my ſinne.
               
               
                  I did offend thee Lord with periurde ſpeech,
                  Which wicked deed I doe from heart repent:
                  Therefore ſweete Lord I humbly doe beſeech,
                  To ſaue his ſoule that doth for ſinne lament:
                  For I beleeue, and for a truth I know,
                  My ſcarlet ſinnes thou canſt conuert to ſnow.
               
               
                  Lord clenſe me then, thy bleſsing on me ſpread,
                  With many foes my ſoule is hard beſet:
                  Be thou my ſtrength and helmet for my head;
                  And with thy treaſure pay my ſeruile debt,
                  As teares of vines foule leproſie doth cure,
                  So vlcer ſinnes, is by thy blood made pure.
               
               
                  
                  Why then my ſoule, wherefore art thou ſo ſad,
                  And why art thou diſquieted within?
                  Plucke vp thy ſelfe, be ioyfull and moſt glad,
                  Chriſt by his paſsion waſht away my ſinne:
                  Though of all men the worſt to be eſteemed,
                  Yet by my Sauiour is my ſoule redeemed.
               
               
                  Then Peter breake from that vilde tirant ſtrong,
                  Shake off his chaines, and burſt his helliſh bands:
                  Sinne hath thee kept in ſeruitude too long,
                  And run to Ieſus where he meekely ſtands,
                  Spread on the Croſſe wide open with his armes,
                  Thee to imbrace, & keepe thee from all harmes.
               
               
                  Lo thus with faith and hope ſtill did I pray:
                  Chriſt heard my ſuite, and all my ſinnes forgaue,
                  Poore ſinners ſuites no time he doth delay;
                  He came from Heauen, repenting ſoules to ſaue.
                  None can on earth a greater ſinner be,
                  Then I was found, and yet he ſaued me.
               
               
                  The wicked Iewes that halde him to the Croſſe
                  With many taunting tearmes, and hatefull ſcornes,
                  He greatly grieude their ſoules eternall loſſe,
                  While they did crowne his holy head with thornes.
                  They whipt his body, bor'd his hands and feete,
                  Yea pearſt his ſide, and did reioyce to ſee'r.
               
               
                  
                  But this Beathlemite, deare ſonne of God,
                  Which by his wiſedome could haue ſtaide this ſtrife,
                  Yet rather choſe, to feele Gods heauie rod,
                  Then we ſhould loſe the ioyes of bleſſed life:
                  For rather then we ſhould hels torment trie,
                  He ſpared not to yeelde himſelfe to die.
               
               
                  Yet curſed Scribes did take no pittie when
                  The bloody ſtreames from his goard ſides did ſinke,
                  The Souldiers Speare was the regiſtring pen,
                  His precious blood was made the ſtaining inke,
                  Whereby he did Heauens bliſſe to vs reueale,
                  And Conſummatum est was his true ſeale.
               
               
                  Why ſhould I ceaſe, poſterities to tell,
                  That Chriſt alone did worke our exaltation,
                  He raiſde vs vp, that by tranſgreſsion fell,
                  And ſuffered death with great humiliation,
                  To plucke vs from the plunging pit of ſin,
                  Or elſe we had in darkenes euer bin.
               
               
                  Stricken he was, and thereby were we healed,
                  And by his death, he brought vs laſting life,
                  In his faire hands our foule offence was ſealed,
                  That ſo we might be freede from Sathans ſtrife.
                  Our hatefull ſinnes, theſe bitter torments vrged,
                  But by his blood, our ſinnes had ne'r been purged.
               
               
                  
                  Take heede, deteſt, abhorre, flie ſinne amaine,
                  Which brought our Lord to his moſt dolefull death:
                  And ſith his wounds are now made whole againe,
                  Doe not renew them by ſin-poyſning breath:
                  O doe not mocke and offer him a teede;
                  Rub not his woundes afreſh to make them bleede.
               
               
                  Now he is crowned with eternall glorie,
                  And high inſtalled in a heauenly Throne,
                  Plucke him not downe, but for thy ſinne be ſorie,
                  Leaſt like the Iewes thou ſealeſt him in ſtone:
                  He doth more grieue at one poore ſinners loſſe,
                  Then all the panges he ſuffered on the croſſe.
               
               
                  The pricking Thornes that gorde his holy head,
                  Was ſure our ſinnes; the nailes our ſinnes alſo,
                  That pierſt his hands and feete, till he was dead;
                  Our ſinnes the ſpeare, that made the blood to flow.
                  Our ſins were thoſe, yt whipt him with ſuch ſtrife,
                  Our ſins the Croſſe, that tooke away his life.
               
               
                  If Mary mourned for our ſweete Meſsias,
                  For Beniamin, if Rachel did lament,
                  If Iſreal wept for their good King Ioſias,
                  
                  If flintie ſtones at Chriſts death did rent:
                  Then may we rent our hearts, and weepe as much,
                  That for our ſinnes Chriſts torment ſhould be ſuch.
               
               
                  
                  O be thou earneſt to ſubdue thy ſinne,
                  And ſtriue with God till he haue bleſſed thee,
                  As Iacob did; ſo he his wiſh did winne:
                  Of Iacobs race if thou wilt counted bee,
                  In faithfull ſort he did Gods fauour ſeeke,
                  Wreſtling by praier, and ſubmiſsion meeke:
               
               
                  The Oſtridge wilde, with ſwift wings cannot flie,
                  But lifts his body vp when he doth run,
                  Pricking himſelfe with ſpurres, faſter to hie,
                  And ſo his preſent danger doth he ſhun:
                  So pricke your hearts, and run from ſinne amaine,
                  The deadly danger of eternall paine.
               
               
                  Looke ſinfull ſoule, and looking view thy fill,
                  Marke in mans bodie how the Artiers runne,
                  Beating the veines, and neuer ſtand they ſtill,
                  Leaſt that the blood ſhould grow corrupt and num:
                  So beate thy hart, with praying neuer ceaſe,
                  Leaſt corrupt ſinne doth more and more increaſe.
               
               
                  And pray that thou maiſt ſee his glorious face,
                  Who is the ioy of Angels and of Saints;
                  He giues rewarde to them that aſketh grace,
                  They ſhall obtaine the bliſſe that neuer faints:
                  Who euer ſhall be ſafe from all anoy,
                  Crownde with true honor and eternall ioy.
               
               
                  
                  Bleſt is that ſoule, which hath truely warded,
                  Where Saints are Clarkes, and Ieſus is the Iudge,
                  Angels the Iurie, Innocence the Verdit,
                  Where is no fees, nor cauſe of any grudge:
                  Who would not ſhedde whole floods of teares awhile,
                  Which afterward might haue ſuch cauſe to ſmile?
               
               
                  Eſteeme the worth of true heart-grieued teares,
                  Obtayning mercy, at Gods ſacred ſeat;
                  And pleading pardon in his gracious eares,
                  Repentance true, doth hide offences great:
                  Teares tye the tongue of an accuſers grudge,
                  Softning the rigour of ſeuereſt Iudge.
               
               
                  Teares like true Aduocates won my Lords loue,
                  By teares, firſt did I fly from ſinne to grace,
                  By teares, I did my Chriſt to mercy moue,
                  By teares being waſht, Chriſt did my ſoule imbrace:
                  By teares, great plagues the Niniuites did preuent,
                  At Ionas preaching when they did lament.
               
               
                  Theſe weeping teares did quench Gods kindled ire,
                  Appeaſde his furie, winning heauens bliſſe,
                  Procur'd Gods grace, purchaſt my ſoules deſire,
                  Whereas the ſpring of life eternall is:
                  Then Chriſt by grace I found my harts direction,
                  Who then inſtal'd my ſoule with true perfection.
               
               
                  
                  Perfection pure, where ſpringes of mercie riſe,
                  Whereas the crowne of life is free from feare,
                  Where the cheer's ioy, a Kingdome is the prize,
                  Saints faithfull ſubiects, Angels are the queare:
                  Where Gods temple the Lambe of glorious light
                  Is guarded in his Throne with Angels bright.
               
               
                  Bright is his Glorie, as the pureſt Sunne,
                  Where company of Saints thou ſhalt enioy,
                  Receipt of a Diadem thy ſoule hath wonne,
                  Where lifes fee ſimple ſuffers no annoy:
                  Ioyfull Receipt, where ſoules are not diſtreſſed,
                  But liue in pleaſure, and are euer bleſſed.
               
               
                  Bleſſed? ô thrice ten times bleſſed are they,
                  Attaining ioy of heauen with mournfull teares,
                  Wher's life without impeachment or decay,
                  Where ſoules are ſetled free from former feares,:
                  O happie ſoule! thrice happie there to dwell,
                  Where ioy paſſeth conceit, for tongue to tell,
               
               
                  Sweete Ieſus take my ſoule into that place,
                  Which I ſo long time longed for to ſee,
                  Where I may view my Lords illuſtrate face,
                  And laud the greatneſſe of thy Maieſtie:
                  O ioy of ioyes! O pure celeſtiall ſight!
                  Where mercy ſhines with ſweet aboundant light.
               
               
                  
                  O ſinfull man, thinke on this bleſſed fruite,
                  Which true repentance to thy ſoule doth bring:
                  Ceaſe not to pray, till God doth graunt thy ſuite,
                  
                     Peccaui crie, with Dauid royall King.
                  Harts true contrition, is ſoules bliſſe beginner,
                  Heauen ioyes to ſee a true conuerted ſinner.
               
               
                  While ſorrow ſits with mone and caſts her count,
                  While woe and miſerie brings their muſes thither,
                  To nurſe thy griefes in numbers that amount,
                  Vſe ſighes in lieu of teares and ſobs togither:
                  By ſighes and grones rue thy diſtreſſes deepe,
                  When dried eyes denies thee teares to weepe.
               
               
                  The Lord will ſure accept thy inward cries,
                  When faith with loue, on ſpotleſſe Chriſt is plaſte,
                  Thy hart may weepe, though dried be thy eies:
                  For Adams ſighes and grones the Lord imbraſte,
                  For when ſhe vſde, nor words, nor weeping teares,
                  God ſaid, why cri'ſt thou thus within my eares.
               
               
                  Our wretched mindes beſiegde with fruitles toyes,
                  Inchainde in ſinne, and trained vnto thrall,
                  In errors lap lies luld with brittle ioyes,
                  Till griefe doth ring the ruine of our fall:
                  Which wounds our ſoules with inward bleeding ſores,
                  That ſtept in danger of deaths fatall dores.
               
               
                  
                  From woe, ſinne, and ſorrow ſhall we ne'r be free,
                  Till death to our acquittance ſets his hand,
                  Nor receiue the charter of eternitie,
                  Till our ſoules preſent at the ſealing ſtand:
                  But when death comes to put his pen to write,
                  None knowes the day, the time, the houre, or night.
               
               
                  Conſider well, all mortall fleſh is graſſe,
                  The beautie thereof fadeth like a floure:
                  All things are vaine we ſeeke to bring to paſſe,
                  Suretie of life, no creature hath one houre.
                  Then place thy ſoule, to pleaſe the Lord of light,
                  So ſhalt thou liue for euer in his ſight.
               
               
                  This life is like the ſeaſons of the yeare,
                  A harueſt that abides the reapers will:
                  Some in the ſeede, the blade, ſome in the eare,
                  Is blaſted, cropt, cut, mowne and reaped ſtill.
                  A ſhade, a breath, a blaſt, a ſpan, a flower,
                  A mornings deaw that's dried in an hower.
               
               
                  Firſt marke the ſorrowes of this wretched life,
                  And how thy ſoule ſtill clogged is with ſinne;
                  How worldly cares doe keepe thee ſtill in ſtrife,
                  The many perils thou art wrapped in.
                  Then ſhalt thou ſee this life to vs hath lent,
                  But harts vexation, griefe and diſcontent.
               
               
                  
                  Our greateſt pleaſures end in paines diſtreſſe,
                  The Elements offend vs with their heate,
                  The earth with vapours colde doth vs oppreſſe,
                  Our health is mixt with ſicknes, dangers great:
                  To be alone, alacke it grieues vs ſore,
                  And companie diſturbeth vs much more.
               
               
                  Admit the Lord hath lent thee earthly treaſure,
                  And thou enioyeſt the labour of thy hands,
                  Thy wife and children is to thee a pleaſure;
                  Thou raiſeſt ſumptuous buildings on thy lands.
                  What is all this, wert thou a Prince of power,
                  Hauing no charter of thy life one houre?
               
               
                  This life (alaſſe) is but a winke of Time,
                  And on eternitie our ioyes depend:
                  Our mortall bodies are but earth and ſlime,
                  Ordainde of God, his glorie to attend,
                  Like to a bubble, weake as brittle glaſſe,
                  Or like a ſhadow that full ſoone doth paſſe.
               
               
                  Why ſhould we ſleepe or ſlug one night in ſin,
                  Seeing that night might chance to be our laſt,
                  What grieuous danger ſhould our ſoules be in,
                  If vnpreparde ſo ſinfull hence we paſt:
                  Then euery minute waile thy ſinne with ſorrow,
                  Men here to day, are laide in earth to morrow.
               
               
                  
                  But thou wilt ſay, the world bids me delay,
                  And tels me that I neede not feare my life,
                  I ſhall liue long, and in great pleaſure ſtay:
                  And haue much time t'auoide all future ſtrife.
                  Ah thinke not ſo, the flattering world doth lie,
                  While yet thou ſpeakeſt, thou maiſt on ſuddaine die.
               
               
                  Amend thy life therefore without all let,
                  Leaſt when the time approacheth thou ſhould'ſt dye;
                  Thou doſt thy ſoules chiefe comfort quite forget,
                  When thouſand cares will leade thy thoughts awrie.
                  Repent, repent, death hath thy life in gage,
                  Repent in youth, ſtay not till crooked age.
               
               
                  O thinke what wofull ſtate thy ſoule is in,
                  When death drawes neere with terrible aſſaults:
                  That houre maiſt thou be vexed ſo with ſin,
                  So much tormented with thy filthie faults,
                  And with thy bodies paine ſo vexed bee,
                  That true repentance will be farre from thee.
               
               
                  What time thy wofull minde will chieflie run,
                  Which way thou maiſt haue eaſe of bodies ſmart;
                  And how thou maiſt thoſe bitter gripings ſhun,
                  That with ſuch ſorrow burdens thy poore hart.
                  How ill aduiſde waſt thou in fainting breath,
                  To poſt repentance to the houre of death.
               
               
                  
                  What horror then will thy poore hart indure,
                  When feare of death doth ſo afflict thy minde,
                  When phiſickes helpe cannot thy conſcience cure;
                  Nor for thy ſoule a remedie can finde,
                  When thou ſhalt ſee the diuell accuſing ſtand,
                  And gaping hell vpon the other hand.
               
               
                  But in reſpect this griefe is nought at all,
                  Touching thy ſoule, and whither it ſhall goe,
                  After ſhe leaues this fading life mortall:
                  She at Gods iudgement ſeate her ſelfe muſt ſhew,
                  Sentence to haue, and glory to obtaine,
                  Or elſe ſad ſorrow and eternall paine.
               
               
                  O thinke what torments ſinners haue in hell,
                  That's mad with paine, and there doth rore and crie;
                  In extreame torment which no tongue can tell,
                  Alwaies a dying but can neuer die:
                  O hart! ô minde! ô eyes beholde and ſee,
                  Obſerue and marke what endleſſe torments bee.
               
               
                  
                     Iudas too late doth there himſelfe excuſe,
                  Too late for Achan, to reſtore his golde,
                  
                     Gehezi doth his gifts too late refuſe,
                  And Diues all too late his faultes vnfolde.
                  Lord though with theſe we haue deſerued paine,
                  Yet to thy kingdome let our ſoules retaine.
               
               
                  
                  The ſeas ſaltnes is taſted by one drop,
                  Falſe oathes deſcribes a guiltie heart within,
                  The world wins our fleſh to a ſeruile lot:
                  Feare doth ſeduce vs vnto deadly ſin.
                  Moſt mightie Lord, therefore to thee we pray,
                  That thy true ſpirit may our conſcience ſtay.
               
               
                  Sweete Ieſu Chriſt, reſplendent in thy ſeate,
                  Which purchaſt by thy death, mans perfect ioy,
                  For my miſdeedes, thy pardon I intreate;
                  With wings of mercie ſhroude vs from anoy:
                  Thy death ſlew death, thy pains was our protectiō,
                  Thou triumphſt ouer all by glorious reſurrection.
               
               
                  It was foretolde, and truely ſpoke of thee,
                  By holy Prophets many yeares agoe,
                  Gods glorious ſonne ſhould no corruption ſee,
                  Layde dead in graue, from graue aliue ſhould goe.
                  The ſealed ſtone, the carefull watchmens eye,
                  Could not keepe downe thy mightie maieſtie.
               
               
                  But when I had my Sauiours preſence loſt,
                  Inforſte I was vnto my former trade,
                  On ſurging waues my fiſhing boate was toſt,
                  Yet of great labour little gaine I made:
                  All day I toyld, but all in vaine I wraught,
                  And all the tedious night, nothing I caught.
               
               
                  
                  But when the cheerefull mornings light appeard,
                  Vpon the ſandy ſhore my Sauiour ſtood,
                  Whoſe heauenly voice, our heauie harts ſo cheard:
                  Calling to vs, vpon the ſurging flood.
                  My friends (quoth he) what? haue you any meate?
                  We anſwered no; nor yet one bit to eate.
               
               
                  Then ſaid the Lord, that made both ſea and land,
                  Vpon the right ſide of your ſliding ſhip,
                  Caſt forth your tangling nets with nimble hand,
                  And you ſhall finde, what earſt from you did ſlip.
                  We did the ſame, whereby ſuch ſtore we got,
                  As neuer like did fall vnto our lot.
               
               
                  So full of skipping fiſh the net was found,
                  That we by all our force, our ſtrength and power,
                  Not able were to draw it from the ground,
                  Such was the ſtore we got that inſtant houre:
                  At that one draught, my ſelfe did tell and ſee,
                  An hundred mightie fiſhes fiftie three.
               
               
                  I knew not Lord thy ſacred maieſtie,
                  For ſinne and ſhame, had dulled Peter quite,
                  Till Iohn to me, thy glorie did deſcrie:
                  I quite forgot my Chriſt, the Lord of might:
                  Yet ſee my Sauiour in my greateſt neede,
                  Forſooke me not for all my hainous deede.
               
               
                  
                  This did reuiue my heauie mournfull minde,
                  A treble comfort did my ioy reſtore:
                  
                     Iohn, childe of grace, did ſoone our Sauiour finde,
                  Who ſaid, t'is Ieſus ſtandeth on the ſhore:
                  It is the Lord, vndoubted it is he,
                  As by this worke we may ſufficient ſee.
               
               
                  I hearing that, in haſt did leaue my net,
                  And to my Sauiour ſworm, whereas he ſtood,
                  Through many mounting billowes did I get,
                  For he preſern'd me in the raging flood:
                  The peacefull ſhore, when ſo I had attaind,
                  There ſaw I fire, and fiſh, and bread ordaind.
               
               
                  A heauenly dinner on the earth below,
                  New raiſed Chriſt, for vs had there preparde,
                  He ſaw our want, and did our hunger know,
                  Poore men diſtreſt, the Lord doth ſtill regarde:
                  Chriſt therefore calde, and bad vs come to dinner,
                  The righteous Lord eates with a wretched ſinner.
               
               
                  With his moſt holy hand he brake vs bread,
                  And gaue vs fiſh, our hunger to aſſwage:
                  A gracious countnance, on vs did hee ſpread,
                  Whoſe conqueſt did, both death and hell enrage.
                  And this was now, the third time truely knowne,
                  To his Diſciples, Chriſt himſelfe had ſhowne.
               
               
                  
                  Then after dinner, Chriſt tooke me aſide,
                  And thrice he askt me if I loued him:
                  Thrice I confeſt, and three times I replyde,
                  Thou knoweſt my God, my loue to thee is firme:
                  And meete it was, that thrice I ſhould replie,
                  I loued him, whom thrice I did denie.
               
               
                  Full fortie daies did Chriſt on earth remaine,
                  After his glorious riſing from the dead;
                  Shewing himſelfe to his Diſciples plaine,
                  In moſt familiar manner, breaking bread:
                  When all was done, his Godhead had intended,
                  Moſt ſuddainely the bright heauens he aſcended.
               
               
                  In faire Bethania did he leaue vs all,
                  While bleſsing vs with his aboundant grace,
                  He was tane vp with power maieſticall;
                  A glorious cloude, his body did imbrace:
                  We gazing after, did his power adore,
                  Whom Heauen incloſde, and we beheld no more.
               
               
                  On right hand of the fathers brighteſt cleare,
                  In glory great he ſitteth euery hower,
                  Till in the cloudes he ſhall againe appeare:
                  To iudge the world by his eternall power.
                  Lord ſend our ſoules, to that moſt bleſſed place,
                  To ſee the ſplendor of Iehouahs face.
               
               
                  
                  Our mightie God, as Daniel plaine doth ſhew,
                  In throne doth ſit, the Sheepe from Goats to cull;
                  His raiment all more white then winters ſnow,
                  His ſiluer hayre like to the pureſt wooll,
                  His ſeate bright ſhining like a fierie flame,
                  And thouſand thouſands, for to ſerue him came.
               
               
                  God make vs ſeruants to ſo great a Lord,
                  To know his mercie and admired loue:
                  Whoſe praiſe all Angels ſing with one accord,
                  By whom all earthly creatures liue and moue.
                  With him is life that neuer ſhall decay,
                  Soules perfect ioy doth in his preſence ſtay.
               
               
                  The wounded heart, by hatefull ſinne miſled,
                  His grace doth cure, and makes for euer ſound,
                  The bitter teares that contrite ſinners ſhed,
                  Within his citie is preſeru'd and found:
                  Sinne, death, nor hell, cannot that ſoule deſtroy,
                  Whom this moſt mighty Lord preſerues for ioy.
               
               
                  For he will lay it in a bed of peace,
                  And lap it round, with ioy on euery ſide,
                  Where is no ſorrow, mourning ſhall ſurceaſe;
                  No cauſe of griefe ſhall in that place abide.
                  It is a kingdome fraught with all delight,
                  Such as no heart can thinke, no pen can write.
               
               
                  
                  No tribulation of this mortall life,
                  No ſmart, no ſorrow that can happen here,
                  No torment, torture, no heart-killing ſtrife,
                  Is worthie of the ioy prepared there:
                  Then come all griefes, that euer eye did ſee,
                  From loue of Chriſt, they ſhall not ſep'rate mee.
               
               
                  If I doe ſuffer for Chriſt Ieſus name,
                  His deareſt Saints haue been as fore afflicted;
                  Some ſawne aſunder, ſome on ſuddaine ſlaine,
                  Impriſoned, ſtoned, and extreamely whipped:
                  But yet moſt bleſt were they, though pained ſo,
                  Heauen is their meede, where is no taſte of woe.
               
               
                  And thither is our Sauiour gone before,
                  For vs a glorious kingdome to prepare,
                  Where we ſhall liue, and raigne for euermore,
                  In heauenly pleaſure paſsing all compare:
                  Then feare no foes, to them it is damnation,
                  But vnto vs a ſigne of ſure ſaluation.
               
               
                  For why, this is a doctrine firme and ſure,
                  Worthie of all men to be ſtill imbraced,
                  Chriſt came on earth, the ſinfull ſoule to cure,
                  To ſaue all ſuch, whom Sathan hath diſgraced:
                  And when we end this life ſo tranſitorie,
                  We ſhall be crownde with euerlaſting glorie.
               
               
                  
                  Then Peter ceaſe thy ouer-mournfull dittie,
                  In higheſt heauens remaines thy greateſt treaſure,
                  And with Saint Iohn, deſcribe that holy Cittie,
                  Which is the pallace of eternall pleaſure:
                  Where Angels dwell, and Saints all clothed be,
                  In pureſt white, with palmes of victorie.
               
               
                  All pau'd with golde are thoſe Celeſtiall ſtreets,
                  With precious ſtones, and Diamonds enterlaced,
                  Twelue gates of pearles, call'd Margarets,
                  The wals foundation, preciouſlie is placed
                  With Chalcedon, Em'rald, Birle, Topaz, Iaſper,
                  
                  
                     Chriſolet, Sardonex, Amthest and Sapher.
                  
               
               
                  Chriſt in this heauenly Citie is the light,
                  In midſt whereof, his glorie doth appeare,
                  There needs no ſunne, for there is neuer night,
                  And from his ſeate, deſcends a riuer cleare,
                  Whoſe precious ſprings with chriſtall ſtreames are rife,
                  The bankes all ſet with trees of laſting life.
               
               
                  Into this Citie enters none at all,
                  But ſuch as are within the booke of life;
                  No diſcord, no aduerſitie doth fall,
                  No ſinne, no ſhame, no ſorrow, paine, or ſtrife,
                  Among thoſe ſoules which there ſo bleſſed be,
                  Nor ought that taſteth of mortalitie.
               
               
                  
                  But there is ioy and mirth without all ſadnes,
                  Reſt without labour, gaine without all loſſe,
                  Health without pain, abundance ioynde with gladnes,
                  Life without death, and cleanneſſe without droſſe?
                  All ioy vnſpeakable, in Gods moſt glorious ſight,
                  Where Saints and Angels ſing both day and night.
               
               
                  O ioy of ioyes, ioy without all meaſure,
                  Where Saints doe bathe in euerlaſting bliſſe,
                  And ſwim in ſtreames of euer during pleaſure,
                  Where all the hoaſt of noble Martyrs is,
                  Where Abraham, Iſaacke, and all Patriarkes be,
                  Singing ſweete Alleuia's of eternitie.
               
               
                  Mirth to the heart, and muſicke to the eares,
                  Is the fruition of Gods ſacred ſight,
                  Health to the ſoule, and ioy for bitter teares;
                  And to the grieued conſcience ſweet delight:
                  The crowne of ſaints, the diademe of grace,
                  Whoſe powrefull deitie rules in euery place.
               
               
                  O when ſhall I beholde this heauenly ſight?
                  When ſhall I heare my bleſſed Sauiours voyce?
                  When ſhall I enter in this glorious light?
                  When ſhall my ſoule on Syon hill reioyce?
                  Moſt mightie Lord, protector of my will,
                  Let me ſing Himnes vpon thy holy hill.
               
               
                  
                  Let all ſicke ſoules, laden with extreme ſinne,
                  Come vnto Chriſt, in faith and trembling feare,
                  Feare ioynde with loue, though they haue dazeled bin,
                  Chriſt on the Croſſe did all offences beare:
                  And then will he by his imperiall might,
                  Blot their tranſgreſsions cleane out of his ſight.
               
               
                  Stand ſtedfaſt man, and ſtriue thou to attaine
                  That high immortall Crowne of puritie:
                  Till death approach, ſtill faithfull doe remaine,
                  So ſhalt thou finde Heauens true felicitie.
                  Moſt glorious God (oh) heare my mournefull cryes,
                  With wings of mercie wipe my watrie eyes.
               
               
                  And ſo let all relenting ſinners ſay,
                  With faith and hope in this vnſtable ſtate,
                  With truſt in God, driue damnd diſpayre away,
                  And ſo come boldlie to Gods mercie gate:
                  In chriſtian armour, wreſtle, ſtriue, and venter,
                  Vntill thy ſoule the bliſſefull citie enter.
               
               
                  Wher's full fruition of thy ſoules ſaluation,
                  Where holy Angels ſtill doe ſing and laude,
                  Where Saints ſhall triumph at thy bleſt crownation,
                  And all the heauenly court thy ioyes applaude:
                  Warrant this Lord, free vs from Sathans den,
                  Forget, forgiue, ſweet Ieſus ſay Amen.
               
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   