
      
         
            
            
            A
REVELATION
OF THE HOLY
APOCALYPS. BY
HVGH BROVGHTON.
            
            The ſhips alſo ſhall come from the Coaſtes of CITTIM,
and afflict Aſſyr, and ſhall afflict Heber: and alſo he
ſhall come to deſtruction, 
            Num. 24. 24.
            And the Woman which thou ſaweſt, drunken
with the blood of the Saintes, and with the
blood of the Martyrs of IESVS, is the great
Citie ſitting on ſeauen mountaines, which
reigneth ouer the Kings of the earth: called
ſpiritually Sodom & Egypt, where our LORD
was crucified.
            
               The ſealed of God, the wiſe, will
vnderſtand.
            PRINTED 1610.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MIGHTY
PRINCE, IAMES,
BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING
OF GREAT BRITANNIE, FRANCE,
AND IERNE-LAND, DEFENDOR
OF THE FAITH, &c.
            
               MOYSES Maymonides (Gracious K.) a librarie
of both former Talmudes, the Ieruſalemy and
Babylonian, which from hard languages vnknowen
to his nation he made familiar Ebrew, ſo
that they ſay from Moyſes to Moyſes the like to
Moyſes was not, his works are exceeding profitable
to cleare the New Teſtament. For as S. Paul ſaith, he differed not
from the Iewes common graunt, but that they knew not God to be in
Christ reconciling the world vnto himſelf: So Maymonides hath infinite
much that cleareth the Apostles trueth more fitly then Greek
and Latin Fathers doe. And where the Apostles confute Phariſees: he
recordeth their doctrine, that all may ſee the holy Apostles had iust
occaſion. In this ſort he hath two ſorts which the New Teſtament battereth.
Both he recordeth in his treatiſe of repentance. One is this,
That Moyſes law ſhall ſtand for euer vnchanged, and Meſsias ſhall
come to Canaan to conquer all nations. The other is this, That all his
learned taught, all the good things ſpoken by the Prophets for Iſrael
in the dayes of Meſsias, are but for the commodities of the body. This
is the common Iewes religion, whoſe God is their belly. They which
worſhipped ſtarres, thinking they had ſoules and would enrich their

worſhippers equally made their belly their God: they who brought the
flood: and confuſion of tongues, vnto the prophane Caeſars that made
themſelues Gods, and the King of Locuſts which ſay they bee Iewes
(Rom. 2. 28. 29.) but by a Synagogue of Satan: & both are the great
dragon, Apo. 12. The new Teſt. telleth that the old ſpeaketh of Eternall
bleſsing in Chriſt his death ending Moyſes, Dan. 9. And the
Iewes ſin againſt the holy Ghoſt. For Aben Ezra could not deny this
vpon Dan. 9. that the ſeaueny ſeauents are from Daniels prayer vnto
ſealing Meſsias the holy of all holines. He endeth ſacrifice and offring:
and left bread and wine, for the fleſh and blood of beaſts: and wee all
ſweare in the Lords Supper, that ſacrifices bee ended by our Lords
death: and by that Supper, his fleſh and blood is the food of our ſoules,
and hee would deſtroy Ieruſalem, that no place of ſacrifice ſhould bee.
That S. Stephen taught (Act. 6. and 7.) faithfull vnto death, and
found the crowne of life. When Ieruſalem is deſtroyed, as the Angelique-faced
Stephen taught from the Angel Gabriel, Chriſt ſendeth
his Angel to teach Iohn of an heauenly Ieruſalem: againſt which,
Rome ſhall fight to the end of the world: firſt by open tyranny, againſt
martyrs: & when the Empire is destroyed for that, Satan will turne
himſelfe into an Angel of light: and ſet a Vicar of Chriſt with two
hornes of a Lambe, but with the lawes or mouth of the Dracon, to ſet
vp the former Empire and to be the King of Locusts: all bent to the
wealth and eaſe of this world. This Iohn teacheth: whom Chapter by
Chapter I expound, firſt briefly, by arguments vpon euery Chapter
then a ſcholion much larger: which I dedicate vnto your Maieſtie,
for the increaſe of knowledge in your people, ſtill to come out of BABYLON,
confuſion, to IERVSALEM the ſight of peace.
            
               Your Majeſties
moſt humble ſubject.
Hugh Broughton.
            
         
         
            
            THE AVTOVR
TO THE READER.
            
               IN all controuerſies men ſhould know
what both ſides graunt: & what they hold
differing. So where I turne all the Apocalyps
againſt Rome: and did ſo twelue yeres
agoe againſt the Popes champion, D. Iohannes
Pistorius, ſent to moue warres in
Zwitzerland: reaſon would for facility of ending controuerſie,
I ſhew how much they graunted me: and knew they muſt:
that if any of mine owne nation, come ſhort: and that with
Satanean malice: they be dealt with, as endeuoring to make
our Church a ſynagogue of Satan. The matter ſhalbe briefly
told.
            Doctor Iohn Pistorius holden a father of the Ieſuites, dwelling
in Friburge of Briſcouia, diſtant twēty Engliſh miles from
Baſil, was ſtird of the Pope to chalenge all our Cantons for diſputation:
that they ought to yeeld to the Pope, as the ſeauen
did: And vpon diſputation refuſed, hee would by war chalenge
his ſupremacy. This then was thought no pley. Vpon
this Syllogiſme the mayn ſtood.
            
               If the ſcripture bee corrupted, another judge
muſt be had: that is the Pope: who onely doth
chalenge that.
               But the ſcripture is moſt corrupted: as Geneva
graunteth in Rob. St. praef. to the N. T. for Ebrew

double readings (848. as Elias reckoneth them) and
Arias Montanus hath written an whole work in apparatu,
of the old Teſtament, corrupted in Babylon, in
52. yeares, in ſo many places: and Beza checketh and
vnchecketh the new, that none knoweth what to
ſtand to: and the enemies graunt, is ſtill ſtrong againſt
himſelf.
               Therefore the Pope will require by warres that
ye make him judge.
            
            A Rhoetian, brought vp at Berne, named Caſpar Clauſe-chriſti,
at Leyden ſaw my ſcripture Concent: where I defend
the old Teſtament to bee pure to euery letter by the
Maſſorites, and ſay the Apocrypha bee all lying workes or
Ironies: mackages of fooles. I taught him ſo much Engliſh:
and expounded the matter at large to him: and for reconciling
the Creed with the Goſpell. D. Fr. Iunius had
told him hee was euer of my mind: and one M. Baudertius
ſhewed my Theſeis to the Vniuerſity, and the Vniuerſity allowed
them. By this he ſaw the Pope was berest of hope
to giue a charge to vs, where he hoped of victorie: or by Gehennean
torment: as Athean a dream as his that wrote,
our Lord had gone into the ſecond death, when God raiſed him
vp, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . Diuinitie may not be handled
with reſpect of perſons: But if Quirites yeeld to me, ſo far
I will defend Rome and Mentz: and if Lacus Lemanus make
the fiſh dead: and Wintonia haue but a ſack full of wind,
which Aeolus gaue to Vliſſes, when his fellowes thought
it full of a great treaſure, and forced him to open it, and
ſo by tempeſt drowned themſelues: that cheſter wil I leaue
to the wind, to bee ſhut vp in Vliſſes ſack: and leaue Lemanus

to the ſnow water of the wild Alpes.
            
            The Rhoetian ſaw all the Popes hope gone, by the ſcripture
proued true in text: and the Apocrypha to be workes
of men that knew not Chriſt, and all in ſadnes to be fooliſh,
and the going of the ſoule to Paradiſe to bee ſpoken in the
Creed, and he told me with great aſſeueration, that if I went
to Zwitzerland, I ſhould remoue war. I went preſently to
Baſil: and Zurick and Berne heard: and vſed me with all kindnes.
Mine hoſt of Baſil, a D. of Law, D. Iacobus Henric-petri,
had occaſion to goe to Friburge to D. Piſtorius: and on a
thurſday at Supper ſpake much of me to him. Then D. Piſtorius
ſayd: The ſcholers of England be learned in the tongues:
but it were better they knew the Fathers better. On Fryday my
Doctor telleth me what he ſayd: On Saterday I gaue a Greek
reply to the Poſt: as Pistorius triumphed in Greek: to this
ſumme.
            The Greek Fathers were in eloquence vnmatchable: and in handling
of the Trinity, and Incarnation of Chriſt, and Iuſtification
by faith, and of holy ſoules paſſage hence to heauen, and of wicked
to Gehenna, they all agreed: and none euer of 1400. yeares
thought of Purgatory: as their oration in the Synode of Baſil ſhewed:
160. yeares ago: which D. Iacobus Zwinger yet hath.
And ſo much learning as their age could vſe againſt eloquent
heathen, God gaue them. But they had no occaſion to deale much
for text of ſcripture with ſuch: and therefore leſſe ſtudied it: But
for the Lords Supper, This was their common opinion: that the
Bread and Wine were Icones and Symbola, Images and Tokens
of the body and blood of Chriſt: As Origen ſpake the conſent of his
age: and Euſebius from his great Librarie, the recorder of common
graunts: And eloquent Nazianzen and others by Typi and Antitypa,
and as the moſt ſage Theodorite in ſad diſputation to clear

other matters, bringeth the ſame as a graunted common matter, to
proue douted: ſo Macarius Monachus ſheweth his dayes opinion,
calling the bread Symbolon of the body. And none wiſe could
doubt: marking vpon what prophecy the Lordes Supper ſtood. The
Angell Gabriel told holy Daniel that after 490. yeeres, Chriſt the
King by his death would end ſacrifice and offrings. And the
Iewes dated all dayes in common Epistles and conueyances, the
yeares ſince the returne from Babel: as wee the yeres of our Lord:
in whoſe last yeare, they, By Daniel, looked, the Kingdome of
heauen ſhould appeare, Luc. 19. though they knewe not in what
manner. Nowe when ſacrifice was to end at the Supper of the
Lambe: our Lord, to ſeale the end of ſacrificing, gaue, for beasts
fleſh and blood, which figured his body and blood, bread and wine,
to bee in couenant ſpeach his Body and Blood. All Graecians
knewe proper ſpeach and civill: that hee ſhould bee bad, that knew
not the place of both. In proper ſpeach a Father begetteth his Son:
in ciuill ſpeach Romulus was anceſter to Iulian Apoſtata, Baaſa to
Achab, Iechonias Salomontiades to Salathiel Nathanides.
So the token of a Kings ſeale, is called his ſeale. This all the Greeke
Fathers knewe: and tottering Theophylact, your onely, turneth
to this. And the taking of the Lords Supper, is our oth that wee beleeue
hee died in due tyme, to bury Moſes by his buriall: and that
by grace his ſpirit is with vs to ſure ſaluation: as mighty as by
his word it made the world. More is needleſſe and cannot bee, but
is wickedly forged. So farr the Fathers were rare: not alwayes in
commenting vpon the Byble: But extremely deceiued almoſt all
in honouring the Apocrypha: which Iewes kept to play for Ioſephus
againſt Appiones that denyed all the Iewes ſtory. Therefore
not to plead with them from the Law full of paradoxes, they object
failes and humane workes to buſy them for all: And they meant
litle further great matter in them. The Greeke Fathers ſawe

not this much: though Euſebius told the true law had but 22.
bookes. Nazianzen agreeth for the number: but miſſeth in regarding
one Apocryphon, for holy: Iudith, as I remember: and
Athanaſius, caſteth out holy Heſter. So we like of the fathers for
learning controverted in their age: not aey for comment. And
theſe groundes ye ſhall graunt me or combat: The Hebrew text
is kept by the Maſſorites, ſo that nothing can be corrupted to
alter one wordes ſignification. The Iewes knew their owne tongue:
and teach vs the native of it. In honour of the two tables of
613. letters, they bring all ſpeches of lawes bidding or forbidding,
into 613. And hold that all which faith or life may think
of is in them: And the New Testament never goeth further:
And no one ſyllable helpeth Rome: but Italy is expreſly curſed by
your owne tranſlation as by all Iewes expoſition, Numb. 24.
vpon which all the Apocalyps maketh a reuelation. This England
holdeth: and will not give place to Rome, but will diſpute
with D. Piſtorius Protonotary of the Pope at Baſil, one day in
Hebrew, an other in Greek: with penners of every ſyllable of our
ſpeach. Protonotarius is ſtout in theſe tongues: as he hath written
de arte Cabaliſtica: though he hath miſsed altogether: and ſayth
all Rabbins ſay Melchiſedek ſacrificed bread & wine: where none
ever thought ſo: but all hold it offred to Abrahams ſouldiers to
eat and drink, as he was a King: and bleſſed Abraham as a ſacrificer.
And for Greek Protonotarius and Pope are yet to learne how
to defend the purity of the New Teſtament, and to ſee Antique,
Septuagint Thalmudique and Apostolique dialects. And no Papist
ever could ſpeak or write Ebrew & Greek as coūtrey ſpeach. Thou
knowest if thou dare diſpute I may overthrow the Pope: Therefore
tell thine own hart, and write to him: that an Engliſh man wrote
to thee, that the chalenger will give over his chalenge: or hee bee
counted a ſhameleſſe lier.
            
               
To this effect I wrote to him a Greek oration: and ſent
R. Rubens Chananean epiſtle, which honoured England above
all nations: that he might ſee he had not to deale with
a Thraſo. Three dayes after he wrote to Zurick great commēdations
of my poor ſtudies, ſpecially of Greek eloquēce,
as native Attique: And at three monethes end, after much
combat in all Greek he writeth thus: I will not diſpute
nor have our old Religion to be called into question. Then both
ſides Cantones ſhowted, that the feare of war was gone,
ſeing the Popes chalenger putteth vp this: that the Pope hath
not one ſyllable in the Bible for his defence: But is vnvinciblie
accuſed: and hath none that dare diſpute in the holy tongues for
his defence. Now he dareth not for ſtark ſhame require ſupremacie,
being ſo broken.
            
            After this what Baſil ſpake to Engliſh of me, how for
one all England ſhould heare better while Baſil ſtood, one
Mr Brand of Londen and M. Ward of Cornewall they told me,
and belike at home: How they told Netherlanders that this
combat ended warres, and ſware ſo: they will never deny it,
& noble Danes know, and doubtleſſe told their K. how they
ſtaying for me at a ferry neare Leopoldus buriall, which they
had ſeen, and I would ſee, a Zurick hearing my name, ſayd:
wee were in great feare of war, till the Englander brake Piſtorius:
I would gladly ſee his countenance: which argueth the mind:
that in quiet words calmed boysterous preparation of warres: But
my hast cannot ſuffer ſtay.
            
            And ſo ſayd many ſtrangers at Baſil: and French were
earneſt to bring me to their King. And what will to my rare
honour, the ſtate of Baſil, Zurick, and Berne meant, I will let
them write.
            Now for Ieſuites humanity. D. Pistorius himſelf four

yeares agoe asked M. Hakewill of Oxford, at Friburge of me,
whether I was alive. He ſaid, he left me at Francfurt: then
ſaid he, I am hartily glad, and gave high good words. Now
he is dead, and I am ſory, for I hoped to turn him. Now two
Cardinalls of Rome, Caeſar Baronius, as the Ieſuites of Mentz
told me, and an other whoſe letters were intercepted at Heidelberge
(of him I heard no more) obteyned of Pope Clement
a principall Cardinalſhip for me: and dealt with Mentz
Ieſuites to perſwade me: who when they could not, Archb.
Ioh. Adami would have had me of his court, and obteyned
that in Chapter: ſaying that he reioyced more for my honouring
of him with dedication of my Greeke tranſlation
of the Prophetes, then for his late election to be Prince of
the Empire. And he ſhould by order have part of his court
Proteſtantes: and he ſpake of me, as not miſliking my religion.
But then Q. E. died, and I returned, and he died ſoone
after. None but ſhameleſſe will denie this. Now this is paſt
all deniall, that Mentz gaue me leave to print in Greeke
my owne Religion. That brake the neck of Purgatorie: beſides
other Papiſtique great poincts. Of this the beſt of Paris
wrote to Franckfurt to the Kings agent: that of nine hundred
yeeres ſo much was never obteyned of the Pope, as
that booke obteyned: Rome muſt allow what Mentz alloweth.
And if Haides have but two places, as they graunt,
Heaven and hell, Purgatory muſt give back all the land that
it wan.
            Furthermore when my book of Concent came in
Latin, Pater Baltaſar Ezelius in the hearing of his felowes
in their college at Mentz, ſpake as by common conſent:
We allow all that that book hath: This I have printed in
Latin, and I am ſure he will not deny it: and when we are

both dead, none may: ſeing in my life time it is not denyed.
So this much is graunted me of Rome: to aſſure the ſimpleſt
ſo far, how far the city is ſunk: And badnes or madnes geveth
Nabal for name, & Nabala for fame to him that will not
ſee how vpon this Rome graunt, the comment vpon the
Apocalyps is paſt reply.
            I have turned the Apocalyps into Hebrew: and ſo I
would expound it: if the Turky merchants would pay the
charges. If they refuſe, I will leaue them to try, whether
ſtrange ſhipwrack ſhall revenge them. Their agent L. Ed. Barton
gave the beginning: writing thus: If Mr. Br. may be
brought to Const. that may turne to the common good of Chriſtendome.
This he ſent to Mr. Stapers. Seing our age fleeth,
wee ſhould ſell all to buy the Pearle of heaven.
            Let the juſt be juſt ſtill.
         
         
            
            The ſumme of the Apocalyps.
            
               IOhns Apocalyps telleth, that Chriſt ſhewed the ſtate
to come, to the ende of the world; & a viſion of himſelfe:
as vnto Daniel, chap. 10. this doth hee, chap. 1.
And in ſingular ſweetnes to the ſeaven ſtarres, in the ſeaven
golden Candleſtickes, all theſe partes be applyed with addition
againſt all Arrianes, that the Eternall, the ſonne of God,
the Creator of the world, is he, that appeared vnto Daniel. So,
Iohn expoundeth Daniel, into Salvation of all Iewes of grace.
This goeth through chap. 2. & 3. in eaſie facilitie.
            Now for tymes to come, this appeareth, chap. 4. God
on a throne fitteth a iudge, like Iaſper, for Beniamins temple:
& Sardius as Ruben: to fight for the tribes. And Chriſtians,
in ſtate Perſones, are 24. Biſhops, and beſides goodly,
this in, chap. 4. Then the Lambe and Lion openeth the
Booke of ſeaven ſeales, chap. 5. then hee cometh further againſt
Caeſares, on horſe, white: with plaguing riders, vpon
red, blacke, pale; For the martyrs, who crave to deſtroy the
Empire, but are bid to expect Diocletianes perſecution. Then
ſhall their profane world be rowled vp, chap. 6. After that,
a generall apoſtaſie commeth, chap. 7. Howe that falleth
out, the ſeaventh ſeale doth ſhew. Chriſt ſtandeth at the
golden Altar, to receive all prayers, & Rome bendes a policy
againſt all this. Therevpon Chriſt, as in Ezekiel, caſteth fire
into the earth: and Angels trompetters ſound howe haile
and fire is mixt with blood: by that, Popes bee made a
mountaine: ſo a mountaine of fire caſt into the worlds ſea,

to ſet all on fire: when the ſtarre-Byſhop falleth from his heavens,
to turne the Law-waters, into wormewood and to
darken the chiefe Sunne, Moone, and Starres: comming vp
by falling, and by turning the Scriptures into gall, ſoone
darkening the third part of the Church: that three woes
are pronounced, chap. 8. By his keies of the pitt, whence he
fetched the wormwood of his haereſies, he bringeth locaſtes
of Monkes to devour all the Weſt, and able to make warres,
and becommeth King of Locuſts: and maketh warres: and ſo
becommeth a firie mountaine, to make haile and fire mixt
with blood. This was one woe. He weakned the Eaſt Empire,
to ſet vp the Saracens: and is plagued from Euphrates:
as his Idolatry and treachery turned away the Eaſt, chap. 9.
Chriſt reviveth the Goſpell, when men eate the little booke,
teaching againe, how hee is the Angell of Covenant, and
Mediator for the faithfull, chap. 10. Martyrs bring policies
to ſee what the king of Locuſts his Citie or policie is: and
he falleth, and the Goſpell is reſtored: and he falleth with
worlds ende, chap. 11. The ſame matter is repeated for Caeſares
and Pope in a dragon of Romane Armes. As it was called
Egypt, chap. 11. and Pharaoh, a Dragon, Eſai. 27. The
vpper parte of the Dragon, is ſhewed to be the Romane Empire:
one, compiled of the foure in Daniel: and the taile is
expounded to be the beaſt ariſing from the earth, chap. 11.
or King of Locuſts, chap. 9. he reuiueth the former empire, ſo,
that none can live in it, without his marke, chap. 13. His
marke is to force Chriſtians to Idolatrie. For which vilanie,
Romane Babilon is told of a fall, chap. 14. By vrging Idolatry,
he driveth from his Aegypt, the Church through a ſea of fire
and fagot, into the wilderneſſe. Where the Tabernacle built
hath a ſmoke of Gods anger, and Angels ſeaven plague
him, as hee plagued all vnder the ſeaven Trompets: (Chapter

16.) For that our holy Martyrs calling for vengeance
from vnder the Altar rowled vp alſo the Popes heaven as
a booke rowled. The Beast revived hath no difference from
the former, but in bloody color, and the daughter Rome
riding vpon it, all bloody, Chapter 17. Rome ſhall fall as
Babilon & Tyrus did, Chapter 18. It ſhall fall when all nationes
ſing Halelu-Iah vpon the deſtruction of the wicked,
with vnderſtanding. Then the WORD of GOD, will catch
the Beaſt-falſe-prophet: the whole Dragon revived, and
caſt him into a Lake burning with fire and brimſtone:
which is the ſecond death, Chapter 19. But the Romane
Dragon ſhall be tyed 1000. yeeres before the King of Locuſts
deceiveth generally. But then hee makes a new Gog and
Magog: for the old Ieruſalem: and thereupon ſhalbe deſtroied,
as the old was, by the firſt coming, ſo he by the
ſecond, of CHRIST, from a throne of iudgement: as the
old Gog and Magog was, Chapter 20. As Iohn in Patmos
ſaw the heavenly Ieruſalem: ſo Patmos the Church, toſſed
with Aegean waves ſhalbe in Gods fight ſuch, as Iſaiah,
Ezechiel, Aggei, and Zacharie ſpake of. CHRIST ſaluteth
vs poore heathen, with his owne moſt gracious voice.
            To him that loued vs, and hath waſhed vs from our ſinnes
by his blood, be all honour & glory for ever, Amen.
            Iſaie 25.
            And hee (the ETERNAL) will destroy in this mountaine
the covering, that covereth all people, and the vaile,
that is ſpread vpon all nations.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ARGVMENTS
OF THE REVELATION.
            
               THe Apocalyps may be divided into ſpeach
vnto the preſent age: and into prophecies
for time to come. Common to both are
the nations, and places, and the times.
            The nations to whom the book is commended
are cities of old Gyges kingdome
called the Land of Gog: where the Lagidae and Seleucidae had
parted Aſia the leſſer betwixt them. Ezechiel told, that when
they were overthrowen for ſcattering his people into all
quarters, God would be glorified over them: and in wrath
remember mercy. As over Antiochos: in that the Land of
Magog, Antiochia firſt bare the name of Christians. Over
both in theſe ſeven townes: whereof Philadelphia beareth
plainly the name of Ptolomie Philadelphus. Sardis was the
Court of rich Craeſus: whoſe wealth God gave to Cyrus the
great: that ſent Iſraell home from 120. nations: and built the
temple vpon his owne charges. In it the old memory of Ggy
or Gog is continued.
            The nations called are from all people. The damned for
deadly hinderance of the Goſpel is Rome, plainly deſcribed
by full many arguments vndeniable. The whip of Romes
Idolatrie be the Saracenes.
            
            The time in trope is taken from the time of Chriſt his
perſecutions: three years and an half. But therein is meant

the qualitie of ſtate, not length of yeres, that men ſhould be
afflicted the afflictions of Chriſt. So the Dragon Caeſars afflict
a yeare two yeares and halfe a yeare: and the Dragons
tayle the Pope, and the old Romane Empire, monethes 42.
and the Vicar of the Lambes hornes the king of Locuſtes,
dayes 1260. They who thinke to get any certeyntie hence,
deceyve them ſelves, and the truth is not in them. The alluſion
is moſt heavenly: calling Chriſt ſtill into mind.
            The thouſand yeares come neare proprietie: telling when
the Popes authoritie ſhould come to the higheſt.
            Theſe points may commonly be conſidered.
            
               CHAP. I.
               The preſent age is ſaluted, with narration of particular
place, and day, and viſion of Chriſt: and in ſeaven epiſtles
the partes of it be applied vnto playne experience.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Epheſus learneth how remiſſion of ſtudie loſeth the
Church. Rome continually practiſed that: ſtill ſhaking off
Greek and Hebrew, and skill in Gods word.
               
                  Smyrna is told that Iewes, not right Iewes whoſe praiſe
is of God, would ſeeme to be Iewes: but ſhould bee found
lyars. So Rome would chalenge the true Iew. Rom 2. but
they that ſeemed to ſtand, ſhall fall.
               
                  Pergamus heareth of idolatrie and fornication. Rome and
Venice be deaf.
               
                  Thyatira hath a new Iezabel, with witchcraft and whoredome
and Baal: Papiſts are full of charming: Nunnes full
wanton, and Goddes of their owne making.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Sardis the court ſheweth, how the pompe of court, hath
hardly lively religion: yet ſtill ſome be there. So Rome the
court towne ſeemed vnder Iohn alive: but had forgotten S.
Paul, Rom. 11. & 13: & 2. Theſ 2.
               
                  Philadelphia had true love, and tryeth who be the ſound
Iewes: and ſhalbe as Salomons pillers in the heavenly Ieruſalem.
Such were full many Monaſteries of learned men:
which knew well what S. P. Q. R. meant: when ſtultus populus
quaerit Romam.
               
               
                  Laodicea, followeth the common maner, neither hoat,
nor cold: but holdeth on what negligent cuſtome hath once
brought in. So antiquitie and vniverſalitie are the Papiſtes
anſwer: They never plead better skill in the Ebrew Law and
Greek Goſpell: ſo thar Turkes and Iewes may ſee how they
build not vpon a rocke by ſure grounds, but flee to cuſtome:
never allowed of God.
               This from obſcure Patmos on the Lordes day, Iohn teacheth
that the baſe corners ſhall have truth: when they receive
the holy, baniſhed: and Rome the baniſher ſhalbe left
in Satans throne, to peſter the yeare with Popes holy dayes:
honouring creatures with religion of dayes, as Rome did to
Iulius and Augustus, and as ill in March, May, Ianuary, and February,
and in all Ovids fastis.
               
               The ſtories of times which God writeth be more then yet
men would ever learne. The Lords reſurrection day, is ſurely
taught vs, and that wee ſhould keepe. But his birth day, he
would not have vs to know: and when men would after
three hundred yeeres ſeeke it out, God gave them over into
a deceived minde to miſſe 3. moneths: that of 1300. yeres

that dotage was not eſpied, vntill this age ſearched about, &
found better matter. Yet Laodicea will follow cuſtome, and
cared not for grace, from him who was, and is, & wilbe: and
from the ſeaven ſpirits: the one, Eternall that giveth ſeaven
lampes of oile to his ſervants: and from Ieſus Chriſt, that is
above all the Kings of the earth, Pſal. 89. Dan. 2. & 7. & Apoc.
6. and 19. whom Rome pearced with ſpear and nailes: But
they ſhall feel whom they pearced, and whom they crucifie
agayne: to have him counted a baſe and bare man, & not
as on Tabor when the Godhead made the humanitie ſhinelike
the Sunne. Now for times to come.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               When the voyce of Chriſt like a trumpet, making them
happy which know the ſound, Pſal. 89. behind vs calleth vs
from our owne courſe, we ſhall ſee God in the heaven of the
Church, like Beniamins Iaſper building his Church in Paules
Shebet:
                  An Ebrician muſt teach the word to the ſimple: the diſcourſe would be harſh. and like Rubens red Sardius: fighting againſt Hagarenes
for the Tribes: with the Rainebow of the covenant:
like Levies Smaragd teaching the brightnes of the Goſpell.
               Thus we ſhall ſee God ſitting vpon a throne, whē Chriſt
from obſcure Patmos ſheweth that heaven is not beſt ſeene
from great cities, which alwayes overflow in wickednes: but
from place where feweſt be to diſturbe.
               So ſhalbe ſeene 24. Biſhops or Elders: that can apply the
Patriarkes ſtorie vnto the Apoſtles Goſpell, all theſe clothed
with the iuſtice of Chriſt: being to the ſoules as white linen
is to the body. Seven lampes of oyle grace beatē with much
affliction as beaten olive: the ſeven graces of the ſpirit make
this: and the whole company be afore the throne, a ſea
Eph. 5. 27. cleare, and blameles: iuſtified freely by the grace of God.
               
                  
And the Church ſhall not want rare wightes, full of eyes,
whereof one ſhall ſee more then millions of Papiſts, full of
courage, & readines to be ſacrificed, as Timotheus at Epheſus,
and Polycarpus at Smyrna, and at Pergamus Antipas: and full
of wiſe pleading, as Paul to King Agrippa, and of high flight
into the heavens carying ſoules thither, not as in Campus
Martius, when for the Caeſars funeral a ſummer houſe is
made, and full of ſpice, and in a corner an eagle is, and when
it is ſet on fyre, the eagle is let out: and fleed high: and is
ſayd to cary the Caeſars ſoule to the Gods. Herodian. lib. 11.
Theſe have a true hight, and have ſix wings: two to cover
their face, from looking into Gods counſell aboue reach:
two to cover their feet, that their wayes be not called into
ſight: & two to flee in their courſe, as Vzielides expoundeth,
Eſ. 6. And the whole bent of theſe tendeth to honour God.
               And by their examples the common congregation acknowledgeth
the holy Trinity: and the Creator, where the
heathen have no lamp of grace, not the beſt learned of them,
not one ſpirit of ſeven. Their ſage, as Pythagoras, in tongue
confeſſed God to be one: But they knew not the trinity,
and that the Sonne would be manifeſted in the fleſh, to
come a man looking through our walles, and to come a
Iudge of all, nor that he framed the world for man, becauſe
he would dwell in a tabernacle in vs. In the heavenly policy
of the Goſpell, this muſt be proper to true Chriſtians: who
finding a victory, caſt down their crownes when they come
before God.
               The Scribes confeſſe all that we cōfeſſe: The trinity of old
confeſſed they: as their workes yet ſhew, which might have
broken the Arians necks, if Greek pride had ſubmitted them
to learne Thalmudique ſtudies. One errour in the root maketh
a million in the branches.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               The counſel of God is hid: how he will vſe the prophane
Caeſars: and how man of ſin will afterwardes exalt himſelf
in the Temple of God. Moyſes by Balaam tould but briefly,
that Italy ſhould afflict Heber, & be periſhing vnto the end.
Daniel ſpeaketh nothing of the Romans afflicting the faithfull.
But ſhewing that the Image, and four beaſtes being cō
                  ſumed
by our Lords firſt comming into the world, by implication
he ſheweth that Italy ſhould kill Chriſt, & deſtroy
Ieruſalem, and ſo breed a new Image of a beaſt. But his pictures
end in the Macedonians. Our Lord in Math. 24. only
toucheth deceit and vexation: and S. Paul 2 Theſ. 2. ſheweth
that Emperour ſhall hould on till he be taken away: & then
ſhall man of ſin ſhew himſelfe in the Temple as if he were
God Adoni kam, a Lord ſtanding ſure. But how the Emperour
ſhould be vſed, and Pope come vp and fall, that Daniel
meddled not withall, who dealt moſt of kingdomes. And
proclamation that none in heaven nor on the earth could
open the book, telleth that he medled not with Antichriſt,
nor Caeſars puniſhment.
               Iohns weping that none could open the book, telleth that
the matter is of great vſe: that they ſhall have weeping, and
gnaſhing of teeth, which contemne the matter. Now one of
the 24. Biſhops hearing the perſon of a Doctor, ſaid to him,
being in his traunſe, now as a child, that the Lyon of Iuda
ſpoken of through the Prophets and ſpecially Num. 24. how
he ſhould vnwall and ſubdue al the ſonnes of Seth, and is the
roote of David his figure, who conquered all reſiſters, & ſet
vp religion, he will tell what Eſay ſpake of his conqueſts. So
Chriſt ſtandeth at the mids of Gods throne, in a playn deſcription:

a lambe, Iohn 1. as one that had been ſlain, Mat. 27.
ſlain by Rome: vpon whom the revenge muſt goe, having
ſeven horns of power, to revenge Satan with his ſevē heads:
and ſeven eyes, which be ſeven ſpirits of his providence, ſending
Angels over the earth: as in building Ieruſalem, Zach. 1.
and 2. and 6. And he taketh the book from God, as Chap. 1. 1.
as Mediatour now: though he were in the glory of GOD:
and held it no robbery to be equall with God: and then the
rare wightes and 24. Doctours pray him to open the ſtate to
come, and all creatures ſhew that they ſhall ſerve Chriſt,
when Idolaters be deſtroyed.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               The Lyon harted, the pacient ox, the wiſe man, the high
fighted eagle, tell how by his martyrs he buildeth the
Church: and for their prayer the Caeſars ſhall have war ſtil:
bloudy warre, great famine, that corne wilbe as deare as
ſpice: that a bath, choenix, a pottle, wilbe ſold for the Romane
Denarius, about half a french crown, though GOD
ſtrike not vines and olives, but in wrath remembreth mercy.
Such warre, that bloud, death, famine and peſtilence, ſhall
make a riddance of the fourth part of men.
               This cometh in revenge of the martyrs. In Aboth Rab.
Nathan, in Moſes life, all the juſt ſoulesly vnder the throne
of glory: Here the terme Altar teacheth that by Chriſt the
Altar they have juſtice: Neyther Scribes nor Apoſtles knew
purgatory. Covetouſnes bred the teachers, ſlouth and contempt
of truth the beleevers. They are told that they muſt
have patience a while till martyrs blood be ſeed to make a
Church of a ſufficient number to have a Chriſtian empire.
               
                  
Then the prophane policies ſhall have an earthquake:
their ſun of ſtately empire ſhalbe turned to blacknes: their
moone of Princes, into blood: their ſtarres ſhall fall as olives
ſhaken: their heaven ſhalbe lapped vp as a rowl: al Ilands and
mountaines ſhalbe changed for them.
               Iohn from Eſa. 2. and 14 and 34 and Oſe. 10. ſeeth a viſion
fitted to their ſpeches, that by conſidering Iudaes fall, the ten
tribes fall, Aſſurs fall, and Daniels Image, we may be ſure of
the Caeſars fall: and he expoundeth himſelf & the Prophets:
That Kings, great men, & rich, and Coronelles, & the mighty
ſhall hide themſelves and wiſh as Samaria that mountaynes
might hide them from the anger of the Lamb. And ſo he
teach Iewes, that for contempt of Chriſt, their deſtructions
came.
               The five ſeales are not diſtinguiſhed in time, but in common
place of victory, war, famine, and both with plague, and
martyrdome, all theſe in times come ſometimes at once. The
ſixt toucheth Conſtantines dayes.
               Then an vnſpeakable riddance was made after Diocleſians
perſecution, that twelve Auguſti and Caeſars conſume
one another, till all came to the ſonne of our Helena: who in
the ends of the earth, made the poſſeſſion of Chriſt; cometh
to York to Conſtantius his Father, that had Chriſtians his chief
men, and by him is made his heyr of empire, and by them
and our nation and the neare in the end is alone the Emperour
of the world: and leaveth the Rome that crucified, (by
the Goſpell, and 2. Theſ. 2.) where in 100. yeares, the ſlothfull
Popes could not make Caeſar good: but were caught in
their lying that Peter ſhould long ſit at Rome: who expreſly
writeth that he kept about Babylon. Rome in Italy is hated
for Idolatry of Conſtantinus: and he removeth the

Empire to Byzantium: calleth it new Rome: and indueth it
with the privilegies of old Rome. Our Weſt brought him to
the Eaſt: and one of our Helena, deſpiſeth old Rome: & buildeth
new Rome near Troy, where the wicked Helena
wrought deſtruction to the houſe of Aſſaracus, that after
300. yeares old Rome ſhould begin by blood and ſpoyling.
               And this may be noted that Q. Eliſabets agent did that
in Constantinople that none of other nations could: That the
Turkes Princes and Iewes there deſired to have from England
the Goſpell preached there in Greek and Hebrew, and
the Kings royall mynd is to be commended for his bent to
allowance that way. L. Barton wrote that if N. could be gotten
thither, it were like to turne to the common good of
Chriſtendome. So God offered our nation againe glory in
the ſtatelieſt ſoyle: But Satan hindreth, by his ſervants that
can turne themſelves into Angels of light. God will look
to it.
               One libeller would perſwade, that the Iewes letter comming
in ſeverall copies and tranſlated there, and thence ſent
to Baſil and printed there: was forged there. A ſtrange dealing,
a ſtrange impudency. None learned would think that
all Chriſtendome, ſetting their wittes together could forge
ſuch a letter. The ſlaunderer could not read one line of it.
And what a barbarous vnthankfull wight is the Libeller of
theſe words: Becauſe your armes are the owles, you think you
must bring owles to Athens: and becauſe the Iew ſaluteth you as
you feigne: you think you are the onely Rabbin of the world. If
the baſe borne wight had bene of Constantinus kindred: he
had bene of an other ſpirit, but now, he could not conſider
the height of that cauſe.
               The like vnto him is he that ſayd theſe words, The knight

which ſaid the King would give 500. lib. annuitie did but flatter:
and I will ſtay the King that he ſhall give no allowance to Iewes
matters. All the Oratours that ever were, can not ſufficientlie
expreſſe the deadly hatred that theſe men have to the
truth of God.
               There is no other way to make Chriſtians readie in the
Bible, but by handling the Goſpell by Thalmudiques: to
whoſe tenour of ſtudie all the new Teſtaments ſtile is bent.
The beſt learned Ieſuits at Francfurt in the hearing of a gentleman
of England hartily requeſted this done, ſaying that
by me, they ready to cleare the new Teſtament, could ſoone
turne the Indians. The Iewes over Germanie hartely deſire
this. Princes made great promiſes, but the old ſerpent wilbe
hindring, whom the great Angel can tye in chaynes that he
deceive not, and deale with his factours as they wilbe boūd
with chaynes of darknes. To which matter I require the
cuppes of the foure wights and 24. Biſhops full of incenſe
to be powred before the Lambe: that Iannes and Iambres
may receive according to their workes: that no more regard
whence the ſixt ſeale brought on a new world: nor how the
fallen muſt be lifted vp.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               Three hundred yeares were paſſed ere that men were ſufficient
in number to have kingdomes of Chriſtianitie. Then
Schollers began to remit zeale, and Hebrew ſtudie: which
had ſoone overthrowen Arians, ſhewing GOD to bee our
Creatour, Eccleſ. 12. and Chriſt, Iehova our righteouſnes.
Yea the Apocalyps had moſt tamed Arians and Iewes: and
had been clear at the firſt by Thalmudique veine of ſtudie.
By 300. moe, Byſhops pride and ſloth made but a gaine and

ambition of the Goſpell. Antioch would have chief Patriarkſhip,
following Antiochus old pride. Alexandria would,
as Alexāder would be a God: Old Rome would, as it crucified
Chriſt: New Rome would, for the Empires ſeat. None
conſidered that the Scholers of Patmos ſhould be the ſealed:
& martyrs: whē neither North-wind roſe, nor Southwinde
blaſted, in the garden: that the ſpices might flow, &
the beloved come into the Garden, and eat of his precious
fruites, Cant. 4.
               But foure Angels held the foure windes. God favoured
Antioch, that where ſinne abounded, mercy might more abound.
That men ſhould not therefore be high minded, but
feare: in the ende Hagarenes take it. Cuſh or Abuſhini in
Keturahs houſe, had Abrahams familie, and long held well:
but in the end, held but the Goſpel and few Epiſtles, and the
Pſalmes, for all the Bible: That which Colen & Rome hath
printed. Moſcovia from Conſtantinople, held litle ſound.
Rome was the cauſe of falling to all: ſtill weakening the Eaſt
Empire, that ſhould have holp the reſt.
               So God telleth that a generall fall ſhall come, that not
the open be the true, but the hid bee the ſervantes of God:
ſuch as God ſealed. As in Ieremies dayes in Ieruſalem the ill
figs, the troupes of Ieruſalem were a Synagogue of Sathan,
when all the Levites condemned him to dy: and God in Ezekiel
ſealeth all his, whom Iſrael condemned. So here an apoſtaſie
is told, which groweth vp; 300. yeares: by many wicked
ſteps. And then commeth to the Popes ſupremacy, and
ſoon maketh the open Church, a Synagogue of Satan. That
onely men vnknowen, few to mens ſight, but many to Gods
ey, that ſeeth all, be the Church. Here the Papiſts might
have their anſwer: when they aske where our Church was.
               
                  
The tribes all have ech one twelve thowſand: Though
Dan is not named he is vnderſtood. But when Ioſephs two
ſonnes and Levi be reckoned, one is left out, as Symeon
Deu. 33. So Dan here. They be ſhallow who hence geſſe that
Antichriſt commeth of Dan. S. Paul taught Chryſoſtome,
2. Theſ. 2. that he ſhould come from Rome.
               The latter halfe of the Chapter, ſweetly expreſſeth the
poinctes wherevpon all ſtandeth, that ſalvation is from God
and the Lambe. All more in religion is from the ſerpent.
All honor to Mary & Saincts. Alſo Martyrs and their comfort
is ſweetly expreſſed. This matter in time followeth the
eight and ninth.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               Out of the ſeventh ſeal come matters more to bee ſounded,
thē ſix afore had. The Church had peace a ſmall while,
but angels ſeven are prepared to ſound wrath ariſing. Chriſt
the Mediatour, is ready to receyve prayer: he is contemned,
by Rome dallying with his mediation. Therefore hee powreth
voyces, thundrings, lightnings and earthquake. Angels
here tell it: Men in playn work.
               
                  The first common place: Warre.
                  Hayle and fire mixt with blood,In Iulian the Apoſtata. ſheweth vexation with
warre: ever ſince Conſtantines houſe fell, the Popes beſtird
them to ſtirre warres to overthrow the Eaſt Empire, and to
ſet the Weſt by the eares.
               
               
                  The ſecond common place,
The Popes ſupremacy.
                  The ariſing to be a great mountayne: became a mountayne
of fyre, when he caſt himſelfe into the ſea of nations:
That a third part of men became dead in ſin, in profane trafique
of life.
               
               
                  
                  The third common place. Corruption of Scripture
wreſted to his policie.
                  A great ſtar burning as a torch, fell from heaven, and fell
into the rivers and fountaynes of waters, & the name of the
ſtar is wormwood, &c. Angelus eccleſiae, the Doctor is a ſtar,
Ch. 1. heaven is the Church: burning as a lampe, is kindling
of wrath: the waters be the Scriptures: falling into them,
is wreſting of them to mainteyne his kingdome: ſo the ſenſe
is bitter, and the D. is wormwood: that many finde deadly
haereſies by this wormwood.
               
               
                  The fourth trumpet,
Great fall.
                  They which were principall, as the ſun, moone and ſtars
(Iacobs familie, in Ioſephs dreame) loſe much light. Gagnaeus
a Papiſt telleth, this to touch, Popes, Cardinals & Biſhops.
                  
                     A preparation to marke
triple woe vpon this.
                     An Angell flyeth in the open sky, & telleth of three woes
vpon this.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The V. common place.
                  The Angel or Doctor, falling from heaven (the Church,)
hath giuē to him not S. Peters keyes of knowledge, but keyes
of a deepe pit: to darken ſun and ayer: the office of Chriſt
and law by which we ſee him. So infinite millions of mōkes
and fryers come forth: locuſts for devouring the earth, with
ſcorpions ſtings to torment harts: when Chriſt is obſcured
and Scripture, that men find no comfort: but bee worſe for
their ſoule, then Iob for his body, Iob 3.
                  
                     
To make warres, their wealth will make many horſes: and
they have authority as Kinges with their crownes: though
they pretend to be as private men. (Dan. 7. The Chaldean
ſtript of Kingdome is ſo termed: And Antiochus having no
right to the kingdome:) and they keep within doores, as of
womens hayre: but they have Lyons teeth, to hold faſt all
forged and wringed giftes: openly forged, as Conſtantinus
donation: and wringed of kingdomes, which they help vp:
and from deceived by terrour of purgatory. They have breſt
plates of iron, to defend themſelves: and the noyſe of their
wings is like the noyſe of horſes running to warres: while ſtil
they ſet Kings by the eares: for the firſt common place: that
haile and fyre be mixed with blood. And their ſcorpion
ſtinges ſting men five moneths: till Princes compell them by
a cold winter to hide themſelves in hedges, as Nahums Locuſtes
of Ninivy, hide them by enemies.
                  An excellent name of the Pope:
THE ANGEL OF THE PIT: KING OF
LOCVSTS, ABANDDON, APOLLYON.
                  Our common name which we give the Pope is Daemon in
Greek: for Popes be Daemones in Eustathius: from the Commentaries
of old Aristarchus and Didymus, and others. His
Commentaries are from ancient Heathen, not from himſelf:
as Eraſmus well noteth in his obſervations vpon the Apocalyps.
Whereas I cited Homers Commentary followed by
S. Peter, D. B. the learned, thought that a fooliſh overſight:
as though I muſt mean Eustathius: who was of late. And he
doubteth whether S. Peter read Homer. I am out of doubt
he never read him: But the holy Ghoſt gave words of old for
S. Peters vſe afterward, by inſtinct, not by reading. And ſo
much a ſimple Doctor might have knowen.
                  
                     
B. L. ſhewed himſelf, in his vnlearned skophing moſt
Athean. And as Iannes and Iambres, Symon Magus & Elymas,
and Alexander the Copperſmyth are for eternall memorie
in the hart of the Bible, ſo deſerve ſuch for to be. Now
as wee vnawares and Papiſts call the Pope, Daemona, a Divel:
vnawares we call him ſo, GOD ruling our tongues: that is
ſpecially worthy noting. When Iulian the Apoſtata was
kild, and Libanius commended him, that he now was with
the Daemones, the Greek Doctors took him vpon his word:
and what an aſſe he was to ſpeak that which the enemy
would wiſh. D. Iohannes Pistorius the Popes chalenger, wrote
to me that IOHN CALVIN was Dactylodeictes of Antichriſt:
Who ſhewed by the finger who was Antichriſt. I took his
graunt: that ſo the Pope was. For Calvins finger aymed at
him. So the Popes chalenger overthrew the Pope. The ſame
wrote to me the Anathema. But God dealt with him as with
Balaam the ſon of Beor, in Italy pronuntiation, of Boſor, in
Chaldean, where S. Peter kept: where the Galilaean his
voice told he wrote not from Rome. The Doctours Anathema
was this, to me, I Anathematize thee, as Paul did
Barnabas. I take it, ſayd I. And ſo thou makeſt me better
then any Pope that ever was at Rome. Paul thought him of
the ſame faith, and happines: But I anathematize D. Iohn
Pistorius, as S. Paul did Anathematize Elymas Magus. Vpon
this he yeelded, as Helvetia knoweth. And to his dying day
ſpake moſt reverently, as ſome Engliſh heard, of his checker.
                  So here we muſt mark not what men call the Pope, Holy
father, and vicar of Christ, and head of the Church, and King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords: but what GOD doth call him: and
God taught Adam to give fit names. Here the Popes names
be many. One is, the Angel of the pit: as the ſtar falling had the

keyes of the Pit, to bring forth his Locuſts. And, the King of
Locuſts is the fitteſt name for him. In Ebrew, he is called
Abaddon, Num. 24. and Abdan in the Thalmud is the worſt
name. Aruch will teachBeracoth Perek, evening prayer, fol. 28. the place. Alſo he is called Abaddon
chiefly for remembrance of Num. 24. where Balaam endeth
his prophecy, in Italy going on to deſtruction: & Iohn Chap.
17. 8. 11. tranſlateth Balaam moſt properly: as D. Kimchi, in
hard Grammer: Adey obed goeth on to deſtruction. In Greek
he is another Apollo: a Divel of Delphos, deſtroying ſuch as
ſeek to him: as Apollo deſtroyed rich Craeſus: deceiving him
to war againſt Cyrus. He knew well enough that Cyrus
ſhould have the victory: Eſay had told him ſo: and though
Craeſus gave to Apollos temple, very great gifts: yet when
he asked him, whether he ſhould fight with Cyrus, he anſwered:
Craeſus paſsing over Halys, ſhall overthrow a great King.
So he did in hope of good: But overthrew his own kingdome:
and rich Craeſus became poore Irus. So the Pope
maketh but a mock of Kings. Thus one who of the ſixt ſeale,
is fully deſcribed: what the Pope is, and what he meaneth
to do, as Chap. 11. ſhall tell.
                  And this firſt of the three woes thus ſet forth, reacheth
from the Popes ſupremacy, after the yeare of our Lord, 600.
vnto Ieruſalems war ended at 1200. For which 600. yeares,
the Pope ſtill made haile and fyre to be mixed with blood.
Now the ſecond woe is in his puniſhments, by the Turk:
and by the Goſpell and Martyrs, teaching Princes to caſt
him off.
               
               
                  The ſixt trumpet and common place.
Of the Turks comming vp and dealing.
                  
                     Cedrenus and Volaterranus (in Arabia triplici) teach of the
Turks and Saracens conjunction: and ſundry others, how

they afflicted Spain and Italy. Their hiſtory I have touched
in my book of Scripture Concent: & I would any of cleane
ſpirit that rageth not againſt the Concent which GOD gave
to Scripture, & I do but ſhew, to have my beſt help, thence.
There is a full explication of the ſecond woe. Bibliander in
Chronologia ſheweth that after the Popes ſupremacie
graunted by wicked miſerable Phocas, to impudent Boniface
the third, Machumed began to be as gratious a Father
as the Pope in Rome. Machmad is in Cant. the title of Chriſt:
Graces it ſelf. And Chamudoth partaker of graces, to rare
Daniel Chap. 9. by the Angel Gabriel. Now this falſe Prophet
forging himſelf taught by the Angel Gabriel, taketh
Daniels terme in the higheſt ſenſe: Machmad delite it ſelf.
Raſhi telleth, that becauſe he humbled himſelf before GOD
in faſting and prayer, he was ſo called. But Turk and Pope
will have the holynes of Apollo: paſt repentance.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Now commeth a moſt lively deſcription of Chriſt, opening
himſelf from Eſa. 19. and 54. and Geneſ. 9. and Apoc. 4. &
Daniel 10. and Exod. 14. and Dan. 12. and Eſ. 31. and Iob, for
the thunder of his power: which is paſt vnderſtanding,
and ſhall not be perceived of the Pope, till the next trumpetter,
or common place teacher ſoundeth and endeth the
world.
               Now the Angel biddeth Iohn take from Chriſt the litle
book of the Goſpell: and to eat it: which was ſweet in his
mouth, in preaching: but bitter in affliction, and to the
enemy alſo: as Ezekiels book.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               Iohn ſheweth that the Church ſhall be built: as Ieruſalem
freed from Babel, vnder Zorobabel and Ieſus: when Zachary
ſeeth an Angel with a reed meating the length & breadth.
So Iohn hath a reed to meat the tēple and altar: that is, from
the litle book to ſhew, the breadth and length and depth and
height of the love of God in Chriſt. Chriſt himſelf is the
temple: Therefore to check Thalmudiques, which to this
day look for a third temple, as ſheweth Rambam: whom
vpon Koheleth (Salomon the oratour) I have cited and
tranſlated, to check them he ſheweth court of ſacrificing is
geven to the heathen: and Ezekiels goodly citie, is a city
of affliction: as Chriſt was afflicted 42. monethes: Zacharies
olive trees: Zorobabel with Iſrael, and IESVS with Levi:
and candelſtick of Gods fauour, Churches (Chapter 1. revived.
               Here is a new Elias: a new Moyſes: to call fyer from heaven,
and to ſtay all dew of grace and ſucceſſe: and to turne
their waters of armies into blood: & to plague their enemies
with all kind of plague. The experience followeth.
               
                  The combat of the King of
Locuſts with the Martyrs.
                  When the Martyrs begin to revive the Goſpell, the city
which is called for ſpiritual vncleannes of religion, ſpiritually
Sodoma, for cruelty againſt Iſrael, Aegypt, ſetteth fourth the
King of Locuſtes: who commeth with his Locuſtes winges
of chariots and warre horſes: and fighteth in all nations,
with theſe two captaynes of Martyrs: and killeth them:
and their caſe is playne, how they are murthered: as if a
Crowners queſt went vpon the policy that crucified Chriſt:
after his preaching 42. moneths: or dayes 1260. or yeares

three and an half. Now as Beda and Carthuſianus well note
(in three yeares and an half) all time of preaching Chriſt, in
memorie of his preaching ſo long: ſo the time of their noted
death, while their aſhes may be ſeen, and they are not put in
grave, is, in a proportion, called three dayes and an half.
                  Now that all may know that two yeare is not proper,
twiſe one: but as all the returned from Chaldea Babylon be
two, Zach. Ch. 4. and 5. So the witneſſes of truth that leave
ſpirituall Babel, all are in that ſenſe called two: and the citie
which killeth them, in peoples, tribes, tongues, and nations,
is not a building of houſes: but a building of policie. So the
two be not two men, but two companies: and the dwellers
in earth would not reioyce and ſend giftes one to another,
as Iewes againſt Haman in Eſter for two, but for the companies
of two ſorts: rare wightes full of eyes, & 24. Biſhops:
and the troupes that give glorie to God and the Lambe, and
pray onely to the Lambe, the great God and Saviour: theſe
in all nations where the king of Locuſtes tyranny reacheth,
are the two Prophets who vexe them, whoſe mindes dwell
on earth, and cannot ſee the heavenly policy of Chriſt.
                  In that ſenſe, after three dayes & an half, ſpirit of life from
God entred into them, and they ſtood vp, and feare fel vpon
their enemies: and they heard a great voice from heavē ſaying
vnto them, come vp hither, and they aſcēded vnto heaven
in a cloud, and their enemies ſaw it. Iohns viſion went
vpon two: and vpon one city: & one beaſt. But Romes policy
the king of pit keyes, with his Locuſtes: and the ſtates
that write and fight againſt them, muſt be meant: of whom
when one is dead, an other is alive, iump in the ſame veine:
as though it were the ſame man: and their enemies ſee, they
goe vp to heaven: and the beaſt which is aſcended out of

Abyſſos, that is all his corporatiō, millions of millions (theſe
viſions repreſent corporations, and vnder one, millions of
men be told) all Papiſtes goe from their Abyſſos of black
ignorance, vnto Abyſſos, Luke 8. and Zohar vpon Geneſ. 1. 2.
whither the Divels ſhall come in their time (but are yet in
this world) to be tormented for ever and ever.
                  After this teaching and fighting a great earthquake ſhaketh
a tenth part of the king of Locuſts city: which crucified
Chriſt, and prayeth to the virgin Mary, to commaund her
ſonne, the Eternall God, by the right of a mother: as though
ſhe were mother to the godhead, becauſe ſhee was mother
to the Perſon one of two natures. And they are very wiſe
who thinke the mother of God, in ſchoole phraſe, can finde
no better ſpeculation in heaven then to liſten to the Citie
that crucified the Lord of glory. Iſcariot the traitour confeſſed
his fault: yet Chriſt gave him over to hang him ſelfe.
Rome that kild Chriſt, after juſtifying him, ſinning ſo againſt
the holy Ghoſt, and ſinning more then if they had kild all
the men in the world; yet is worſe then Iſcariot, and wil not
cōfeſſe ſin, but clayme right to rule the world: becauſe once
they durſt crucifie the maker of the world: and pray to the
Virgin Marie to forgive the Popes holynes, the Vicar of
Pilate.
                  In Elias 7000. bowed not the knee to Baal: and live. In
this Citie 7000. that bow the knee to Baal dye, are kild, in
viſion 7000. in ſtorie ſeaventie millions of thouſandes, with
this 120. yeares of the Goſpell revived. And full many give
glory to God, and leave the virgin Mary alone, to be happy
as other faithfull, Bathſhebagh, Ruth, Thamar and Sarah, al
her mothers: and who more in ſin yet ſtayed vpō her ſonne,
who was then in their loynes. Thus the ſecond woe is paſt.
               
               
                  
                  The Popes fall: the ſeaventh
trumpet of common place.
                  Since Kingdomes match the Pope in ſtrength, and have
brought him that he dare not queck but be content to hold
his owne: An open voice is in kingdomes, that whereas the
Pope hath been once caſt out, and now God reigneth, wee
looke for no chaunge till the reſurrection, at 6000. by old
gueſſe. Hence at 463. For our Lord was borne at 3927. adde
1610. then now Adams ſoule and duſt hath 55, 37. at 463. the
geſſe will ſhew it ſelf. At 3000. the Arke was brought into
Salomons Temple. at 4000. exactly the Romanes deſtroyed
Zerobabels temple.
                  And as the Pope falleth by ſteppes as he came vp, & not
all at once, ſo 463. yeares may Spain and Italy holde him
vp: while Archbiſhops and Biſhops, Paſtours and Curates
have too much ſtipend and authoritie: but litle learning in
the holy booke, for wiſedome vnto life. As Agamemnon
ſayd of Neſtor, that ten ſuch would ſoone fel Priamus citie:
ſo ten Kinges that would clear the Revelation to Hebrewes,
Greekes, Latines, and all tongues might haſten the Iewes
calling: but I am afrayd none, ſaving our own, will performe
any promiſe that way: to agree with Iewes that the Arke in
the Temple is the holy man, which is golden within & without,
and hath the tables of 613. letters, to which anſwer 613.
lawes, into which all wiſedome falleth, and none fayleth,
written in his hart: and vpon the mercy ſeat all of gold ſtay
the Cherubims looke. When Chriſt is ſeene in his Temple
of humanitie, thus Papiſtry fayleth and falleth: and from the
Church dayly, till the end lightening and voices and thundrings,
and earthquake and great hayle, would make Aegypt
and Rome to quayle.
                  
                     
But few deſirous of divinitie have maintenance, and ambitious
in wealth ſpurne at ſoules health: and kings ſee how
much is ſpent in vaine, and how ſcholers bend to gaine: and
ſo courts fall at Sardis, Ch. 3. and the Pope may live yet Hebers
yeares, this preſent and 463. That this Trumpet may
then ſpeak to Ezekiels dead bones, & make them ariſe, Ch. 37.
as Apo. 20. all ariſe.
                  Thus in ſeales and Trumpets God hath once ſhewed all.
By ſeavens: ſpirits, hornes, ſeales, and trumpets, to teach the
prophane world of reſurrection. The ſame ſhal be repeated
in beaſtes ſeaven headed, and ſeaven Angells: vnto a newe
mention of the reſurrection.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               A goodly ſigne appeared in the heaven. The faithfull
company is a Woman: their abundance of grace of the gift
of juſtice in Chriſt, and regeneration in putting on Chriſt,
is a garment of the ſun: their contempt of all things vnder
the ſun, is an having of the moon vnder her feet: their doctrine
from the twelve Apoſtles, is a crowne of twelve ſtars.
Their deſire to teach Chriſt to other ſoules, is a travelling of
child. As the Sun is all bright, ſo is the ſoule iuſtified in
Chriſt, bright as the ſunne, Cant. 6. though in it ſelfe it is
black, Cant. 1. and as the Moone, often not all lightened, but
when it hath the Sunnes full light, it appeareth as the morning,
as faire as any moon, Cant. 6. Our crowne is the twelve
Apoſtles doctrine: who were all of equall truth: though S.
Paul laboured more then they all: and from Rome wrote enough
to have warned that city not to fight againſt Chriſt:
and ſo much as might teach the world that Peter was never
near Rome: but kept where God ſcattered the twelve tribes,

as the 12. moſt laboured to call the Iewes, to teach the Gentiles.
This travelling of child teacheth vs what a care wee
ſhould have to teach Chriſt: and ſo, firſt to learne GODS
book. God is our firſt Biſhop: Ioh. 20. 29. in the 70. for El, the
ebr. the Almighty.
               
               Of men, the King ſhould be beſt learned: as King Moſes
was: King Ieſus, King Samuel, King David, King Salomon,
King Ezekias: the wealthier by wiſedome, and greater then
many Kings, Daniel Belt, eſ-ſar: that brake out a flame of ſorrow
to the wicked Chaldean, who thought that Bel tas a far
Bel held wealth. Kings might ſoone be learned: who might
learne the holy words of both teſtamentes in two moneths,
and the concent of ſcripture in an houre: and might commaund
that every ſermon ſhould either abridge the whole
Bible, as S. Paul doth to the revoulting Ebrewes: or tell the
afflictions of our Lords family, as Daniel doth ſeaven times
over: or weaknes of Salomons Kinges: or how Aharons
twelve ſtones tell the tribes ſtory: or the golden chayn of
Chronicle and Iubilees: or the myſteries of Moyſes Ceremonyes:
or collations of prophecies with event: or like revolutions
to ſhew Gods facility in teaching Chriſt: or ſome
whole book: in one ſermon. So Kings without payne might
paſſe all in learning.
               And our Vniverſities might be ſo ruled: but that the
God of this world doth hinder, that our DD. ſhould ſpeak
Ebrew and Greek better then Engliſh: and be readier in the
Bible then in any other book: or from their firſt preferment
in collegies, faſt oftener then the Ieſuites do for S. Laurence
and all the Sainctes in heaven, or live without college allowance.
A Samuel would make a Naioth. And an Archbiſhop
worthy of his place, would make Daniel plaine in

one houre, and the Apocalyps in an other. It is a wonderfull
ſinn to give men honour without deſert, and to be doltiſh
ſcholers to vnlearned teachers. We travel, as Eſay ſpeaketh,
but we bring foorth onely a wynd.
               The God of this world being incarnate in the Romans, is
buſy in his generation: Pharaoh, Eſa 27. was not ſuch a Dracon,
nor the Perſian God, Dan. 6. to whom onely prayer
muſt be: The Goddes borne in Aſia: as Aeſchylus termes
them: The Dracon whom Babylon worſhip in the fable
Apocryph. Theſe were not ſuch Dragons as the Romane,
Pompey, Craſſus, Iulius, Antonius, Brutus with Caſſius,
Auguſtus with the whole Empire till it died: and the Empire
revived by Pope, theſe ſeaven heads of the Divel teach
vs to know the Churches danger, when their whole corporation
maketh a great Dracon, and their hornes ten be not as
they in Daniel then Kings of ten men, but ten kingdomes.
And the tayle, the Prophet that telleth lyes, Eſa. 9. draweth
the third part of the ſtarres to be wandring ſtarres, Iud. v. 13.
and caſt them into the earth, as Daniel 8. Antiochus made
Iewes Phariſees and Sadducees.
               When our tongues trauel of Chriſt, the Divel would by
Rome devour that: But he is taken vp into heaven, who wil
Iohn followeth the 70. moſt wiſely hiding the Eb. propriety from dull heathen. bruſe all nations with an iron rod: And the Church fled
into the wildernes, as Ioſeph and Mary with Chriſt into
Aegypt, and is nouriſhed as Chriſt in his half ſeaven, Dan. 9.
in his perſecutions, dayes 1260.
               Michael, who in the forme of God, held it no robery to
be equall with God: Michael, who in Dan. 10. is the chief of
the chief Princes the holy Angels, and defendeth Iudah
againſt the enemies; Michael & his angels the marryrs overcome
Satan & the Caeſars, that the Church ſhuts thē out of

all accompt: though Satan ſtill accuſed them to the ten Perſecuters.
               So the Dragons tayle is buſy in the Popes: But the
Church had as Iſrael, Exod. 19. two wings of an Egle to flee
from Dracon Pharaoh into the wildernes: to be again fed:
after Chriſts perſecutions: a yeare, two yeares, & half a yeare:
from Pope ſerpent: that the Thebanes borne of this ſerpents
teeth gnaſh: Where was your Church before M. Luthers
time, when the King of Locuſts, A bad one, Abaddon, a new
Apollo, had from his keyes of the pit brought a ſmoke, to
darken ſun and ayer. And although the cloyſters Idolatrous
deſerved as Iſrael in Amos to be caryed as with the river of
Aegypt: yet the Pope would ſo vſe the Church: though
heathen policy bridle him, yet Pope Dracon is fierce againſt
remnants, as in his Spaniſh Inquiſitions.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Caeſars and Popes the Dracon and his tayle are expreſſed
paſt all deniall who are meant: The empire hath armes from
the foure kindomes in Daniel. So God forceth vs to be ready
in Daniel, and to compare together the braſe of the Angelique
men. Then Greek Leopard had foure heades, that of
23. Captaynes al made Kings, all came to fower quickly, and
every one dyed a violent death, ſaving old Antipater, to
have blood for blood, as the Romanes here. The Beare had
but one head, the Lyon one, and the fourth beaſt, the parted
Macedonians but one, that beaſt is not named, becauſe it
was the ſame nation with the former, but is diſtinguiſhed
from the former by ten hornes or Kings, five Ptolemies and
five Seleuci or Antiochi, that vexed Iudah.
               
                  
From theſe the Romanes have their armes, beginning
with a beaſt with ten hornes, with this difference: Ten Diademes
betokening ſo many kingdomes. This beaſt was coloured
like a Leopard, footed like a Beare: mouthed like a Lion.
As Nab. ſaid, who can deliver you from my hande: & was
a Lucifer, and would be equall to God. So here it is ſayd,
who can warre with the beast? Alexander would be a God:
So Divi Iulij and Divi Auguſti, & ſo the Perſians. And Antiochus
Epiphanes hath a mouth ſpeaking great thinges, ſo
hath this beaſt. Now the ſixt head being as dead, ſheweth
that the Empire ſhould be dead and revived: otherwiſe five
heads were gone: and the ſeventh was not yet come. But in
a ſpeciall ſenſe one head ſeemeth as dead.
               The time of Tyrannie was 300. yet by Metonymia, meaning
the argument of perſecution, from our Lords time, it is
called three yeares and an half. Antiochus Epiphanes raged
againſt the temple properly three yeares and an halfe: as Elias
plagued Iſrael properly three yeares and an half. But the
matter ſheweth Ch. XI. and twice in the XII. and here, that
proper time cannot be meant.
               Again, I muſt adviſe the reader to learne Daniel before
he learne this booke. Twentie yeares ago I made him plain
enough, and plainer of late: though the Dragon caſt out of
his mouth, a river of water. The whole Realme by this
houre might elſe have knowne Daniel clearely. The Tyrannie
and blaſphemie of the Caeſars and their deſtructions are
knowne.
               
                  The Popes deſcription.
                  A beaſt ariſing from the earth, that is, without war: having
hornes like a Lambe, that is, Chriſtes Vicar: having

the mouth of the Devill, for diveliſh lawes: reſtoring the
Empire, and working Miracles of deceit: as though he were
Elias, a reſtorer of truth. The Ieſuites report of their miracles,
comment well on this. And the Popes endevour, (ſince
great Conſtantine left hateful Rome) to ſet it vp, by revived
Empire, & to deſtroy the Eaſt: this matter is famous in continuall
ſtories. And Canon lawe telleth that none may live
vnder the Empire, but by yeelding vnto the Popes lawes in
ſubſcribing or oth, or ſome open token: as a marke in the
forehead. And where a nūber given to a man, as the ſonnes
of Adonikam were 666. that being called the number of the
beaſt, and to a ſenſe of wiſedome, which is vſuall in notation,
A God ſtāding vp, that is Adoni-kam: this deſcribeth plainlie
the man that ſtands vp in the temple of God, as if hee
were God.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               The reviving of the Goſpell, by worſhip of God onely in
Chriſt, as on mount Sion of old: religion taught with as
great concent of law and goſpell, as any harpes can make, by
rare men of courage, patience, wiſdome and high policie, by
virgin mindes, vnſtayned by Idolatry, renued by Chriſt, and
following him, is taught, Ch. 14. as Ch. 7. & 11.
               And the Pope is told of fall, and of eternall death to all of
his bent: and the Martyrs of preſent heavens ioy, without
purgatorie. And Chriſt ſitting on a cloud at prayer of the
Church, and an Angel comming out of the Church, bid by
an Angel Lord over fire and Gods heat, with ſicles cut off
Papiſtes, that their blood would reach to the horſe bridles:
over a Land as Canaan made to a ſquare, by the Thalmud,

1600. furlongs, 400. every way. The new Teſtament ſpeaking
to Iewes, is applyed to their manner of ſpeach, & plaine
to a Thalmudique, where it is hardeſt to vs.
               The deſtruction which rebellion in Ireland wrought by
the Pope in Deſmonds countrey, if all the blood of the dead
were poured out, would a good way reach to horſe bridles:
as that alſo of Oſtend. And what would al that war, now 40.
yeares yeeld in blood of Papiſtes: going withall to eternall
deſtruction? Happie are the ſoldiers, that dye with a good
heart for the goſpell, for they reſt from their labours.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               A new viſion telleth the goſpels reſtoring, and the enimies
puniſhment: perſecution borne ſincerely, through fire
and faggot, is a ſea of glaſſe mixed with fyre: and praiſe is againſt
Romes Aegypt and Dragon Pharaoh and Romes Babylon;
from Exod. 15. and Ier. 10.
               And ſeaven Angels, clothed with pure Iuſtice, come out
of the temple in heaven. Angels repreſent what God by
men will doe vpon earth: when ſincere harted fight in his
cauſe. Theſe have golden girdles about their breſtes, as the
Sacrificers were girded. Maymoni in the holy implements,
ſweateth to prove from Ionathan vpon Ezekiel, and Kabalah,
that the Sacrificers were girded about their breſts. Iohn
made no doubt of the matter: but as a Thalmudique taught
from God, telleth reſolutely the whole truth, Chap. 1. and
here. Such poincts ſhewed would make Iewes, all learned
Iewes, confeſſe that God penned the New Teſtament.
All Chriſtians bee Kinges and Sacrificers: and ſhould
conſider that they muſt weare crownes of golde, which no
goldſmith but Chriſt maketh: to rule them ſelves in order:

and to obey all in Gods law: and the girdle of truth to bind
their hartes in ſtedfaſtnes. Now where one of the fower
wightes giveth the Angels ſeaven cuppes of Gods anger:
the learned full of eyes teach the people who are the temple
to pray vnto God for vengeance vpon Chriſts enemies: and
vpon the peoples petition, the Angels have charge to ſerve
them: as in Dan. 4 & Heb. 1. and men are fortifyed by them:
as Darius Gabriel, Dan. 11. 1.
               As the temple, Eſ. 6. was filled with a ſmoke of Chriſt his
anger: and Seraphim, the Angels which were inſtruments
of fyer did attend: ſo here the ſmoke is in all the Church:
that the enemies ſhall not perceive the truth till they be cō
                  ſumed:
having ſinned againſt the holy Ghoſt: as the Iewes,
Eſa. 6. even by Rambam his graunt, could not amend by ten
chaſtiſements: till the temple was brent.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               Vnder the ſeaven trumpets, the earth, the ſea, the fountaynes
and rivers, the ſun, the King of Locuſtes, Euphrates,
and earthquake, is celebrated. The ſeaven Angels in plagues
keep that order.
               The Popes earth or earthly hold of his poſſeſſions, is full
of boyles: that dayly ſome loſſe he hath: as he brought warres;
to be hayle and fyer mixed with blood.
               He became a mountain of fyre caſt into the ſea, to make
the third part of it bloud: ſo his nations be made all known
dead in ſin: and in ſeas of war fall from him.
               The ſtarre wormwood fell into the rivers & fountaines
of Scriptures, & made them bitter. His rivers & fountaines
of forces are turned to drink blood.
               
                  
He obſcured the ſun of juſtice: the ſun of perſecution
parcheth his.
               He got lands for Monaſteries, that the Locuſts might
make him their King. But now the throne of the beaſt is
darkened by contempt and pillage of Land.
               In the old time Virgil complayned of Romes diſtreſſe:
that Hinc movet Euphrates illinc Germania bellum: and at Euphrates,
Ch. 9. Angels were tyed, but to be looſed by ſtarts:
now the river is dry, that Turks and Saracens come even to
Germanie, and Germanie alſo looketh to freedome: that
now the king of Canaan, the ſervant of ſervantes, the falſe
prophet ſending from his mouth, three (that is many) vncleane
ſpirits to cauſe kings to war, hath no better ſucceſſe,
then Iabin by Siſera, at Mageddon: and here a faire warning
is given to watch, and integritie.
               The ayre was darkned, and earthquake ſhooke the citie,
that the tenth part of the citie fell, and Gods wrath ended
all. So here a great earthquake, and hayle greater then Ioſuahs,
falleth vpon the enemy, who can not repent, but holdeth
on to deſtruction.
               Thus men, Gods meſſengers, ſhall give the Pope meaſure
for meaſure, that he can not repent: but blaſphemie, not
knowing how far Patmos paſſeth Rome.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               As Daniel at the laſt openeth his Viſions in proper ſpeaches:
ſo here, viſion and proprietie come togeather: though
ſome knots be knit: that the wiſe may vnderſtand: and no
wicked take the paynes to ſearch. One of the ſeaven Angels
calleth Rome an harlot, ſitting vpon manie waters,

that is, people and troupes and nations and tongues (as
Daniel 3. ſpeaketh:) with which the Kings of the earth
committed ſpirituall fornication by accepting that filthy
Idolatrie, as dronck with the wine of her Idolatry. This
Angel doth in viſion that which a Doctor would in reading.
               And he carieth Iohn into a wildernes in viſion: as men
are beſt to judge when the noyſe of city troubleth not.
Now he hath another viſion for the Empire revived: a
beaſt with heades and hornes, as the former the old Empire:
and purple colour, as more in perſecution: and full
of names of blaſphemie, as accepting the Popes Canons,
and Maſſe, and Ceremonies: and a woman ſitteth vpon
this beaſt clothed in purple and ſcarlat, as drunk with the
blood of the Saincts: and golden in Gold, as old Babylon,
Eſa. 14. and brave in pearles and precious ſtones, as be the
Popes in their Copes: and their Arch-Biſhops and Cardinals,
in cloth of Gold, and Aharons ſtones: mocking
with God in apiſh imitation: as they mock with the keyes
that God gave his Apoſtles: which Saint Paul had as the
beſt: if any could be better then other: and Iohn ſpecially:
authour of Goſpell, and Epiſtles, and Apocalyps:
That Ruben might as well be chief Patriark, as Peter chief
Apoſtle. And this woman had in her hand a golden cup,
as old Babylon, full of her lothſome filthy fornication:
though Rome ſet ſoorth in gold and ſilver their crucifix
and Virgin Marie and Saincts: And in the forehead, a myſterie:
Babylon the great: the mother of the fornications and
lothſomenes of the earth. Here we ſee plainnes: that none
ſhould think that Babylon meant whence S. Peter wrote.
Rome is Babylon in a myſterie and trope: S. Peter was to

ſpeak properly, as all men, when they tell whence they write.
But viſions are in borrowed ſpeaches. Now this is ſure and
plaine, The woman is the city which hath kingdome over
Kinges of the earth.
               Now of the beaſt his body this is told: that the beaſt,
is, is not, and is. In Caeſars it was in Rome: Dead by Conſtantinus
houſe, and not being: and againe revived by the
Popes.
               The ſeaven heads are ſeaven hilles whereupon Rome was
built: famous for that: and alſo ſeaven Kings: whereof five
ruled Iudah, before our Lord came in the fleſh: Pompey,
Craſſus, Iulius, Antony, Brutus with Caſsius. Iohn and all Iewes
knew that well. Then commeth the whole Empire the old,
a ſixt head, then preſent: afterwards the Empire to be revived,
the ſeventh: and by the Pope, the eight King: as he ruleth
the Empire.
               Now the ten hornes, are Kingdomes, as they ſerve the
revived beaſt not yet ſo ſet vp: but in the Popes time it ſhalbe.
Now theſe ſhall with one mind give their power to the
Pope, and perſecute. But Chriſt and his Martyrs will overcome:
as in Chap. 7. and 10. and 11. and 12. and 14. and 15 and
16. And when Martyrs teach the truth, countreyes will revolt
from Rome, and make it deſolate: that the empire ſhall
not be prophane, nor favouring Rome: but as in new Rome,
before the Turk ruled.
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               An Angel that lighteneth all the earth by his glory, proclaymeth
that Rome is fallen, knowen to be a dwelling of
vncleane ſpirits: in all places of the policy: and the holy are

commaunded to come out of all that policy. Their Canons
and Prayers and apparrel are al bent to a blind drift: and not
fitteſt to have bene vſed in our tongue. The whole frame is
out of order. The Lords prayer is maymed: from their Latin,
Mat. 6. leaving out a moſt noble ſentence: Their Creede
is fooliſhly tranſlated: that 20. ſeverall opinions are made of
a moſt cleare phraſe of 3000. yeres vſe: of going to God: their
letany is dangerous in phraſe, praying to te Perſons ſeverally:
and is applyed vnto their doctrine of doubting of juſtification:
and in Battologie is hatefull to God: and in trifling
arguments, for ſainctes dayes: and hath lies, for the place of
Eves creation, and Archangels, & our Lords comming into
the world at midwinter. Wee ſhould come out of all theſe
follies: if our myndes put on white and clean linen: and wee
tye golden girdles about our breſtes. Specially the Diveliſh
fable of Toby is vntolerable, to be ſtill kept. Biſhops vnder
Q. E. gave leave in allowance of theſe things, to adde
in ſubſcription this, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  things may be
ſuffred.
               
               Romes fall is told from Babels, Tyrus, and Ieruſalems,
Ierem. 51. Eſa. 21. and 47. and Eſa. 23. and Ezekiell 27. and Ier. 7.
to ſhew from ſtories paſt the certainty of all this.
               And theſe reaſons are rendred: that the Roman policy killing
men for the Prophets, is guilty of their blood: as the
Scribes for Abels, Math. 23. & that the Kinges, who ſhould
be Biſhops next God, trafiqued with Pope for his confirmation
by the witchcraft of Papiſtry.
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               When people can ſing Haleluja: that is, praiſe onely God

in whom we breath: who drenched Pharoh, when Iah ſtopped
his breth, Exo. 15. (there Iah is firſt vſed:) when foure
times Aleluja is vttered from all ſorts and continually: and
all the praiſe of Chriſt: and he is ſeene riding vpon his white
horſe, and we follow in white linen of juſtice: then Chriſt
will make proclamation to all kites, as in Ezekiel 39. concerning
the Macedonians to devoure the fleſh of Papiſts ſlaine:
and will caſt the beaſt and falſe Prophet into a lake burning
with fire and brimſtone.
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               The tyme of the Popes abſolut ripenes in Sathan to deceive
generally, ſhall not be till a thouſand yeares, when the
ſmoke of his pit hideth ſun and ayre: and his locuſts have lions
teeth, and iron breſtplates, and winges of Chariots, and
war horſes. Satan was tied among Papiſts & elder prophane
1000. yeares: that many reigned heere with Chriſt for a
thouſand yeares: they of the firſt reſurrection, that is from
ſinne in this world, vpon them the ſecond death ſhall have
no power: but they ſhall reigne with Chriſt, and ſuch wilbe
for a thouſand yeares.
               But after a thouſand yeares the darknes of the pit will ſo
extend it ſelfe: that the old ſerpent ſhall trouble all the holy
Citie, and beſiege the faithfull every where: as though old
Gog and Magog were alive, and the old Ieruſalem were a new
to be defended. The Pope deceived all the Princes of Weſt,
to ſend all their force for to recover Ieruſalem, and Antioch:
and 200. yeres the greateſt warres that ever were, were made
there: That the old war of Gog & Magog was nothing like
this. And yet Chriſt had tolde that Ieruſalem ſhould be deſolate

vnto the worlds end, Mat. 24. as he cauſed Moſes to
tell, Deut. 28. But the falſe Prophet to weaken Princes, who
would be deceived, and not excell in Gods word, as they
moſt of all might do, he cauſed them to go for 200. yeares
from England; France, and all the Weſt, men, women, and
children, to recover the curſed land.
               And now God began new mercie: now firſt Rabbines
made Grammers for Hebrew: and Iarky the great D. commenteth
vpon the Bible at a thouſand yeares: now 600. agoe:
and Aben Ezra at 500. a very great Rabbin. Rabbi Sadaias
was afore him, who turned Moyſes into Arabique,
that Chriſtians might follow the truth, & not the 72. which
hid their minde, for 1600. yeares change: as I have ſhewed
in Conc. and Meſchiſedek. That hiding not ſpied hath deceived
all Arabia, Abyſſions, Graecia, Moſcovia, Englande,
vnto 1603. to breach of all Moyſes authority. Rabbi Sadaias
did enough to have holpen this. Another Rabbin put forth
a Greek tranſlation in Ebrew letters. Ramban, who at the
laſt became a Chriſtian, he wrote finely foure hūdreth yeres
agoe. Aruc a Dictionarie for the Thalmud is 600, yeares
old. Iſaak Ben Arama, and Bechaiah, both overthrow their
owne ſide, and helpe vs to tye Satan againe: & ſo doth David
Kimchi, teach vs from much Thalmudique, that the title
of the 22 Pſalme is the morning ſtar: a matter worth much
gold, for Apoc. 2. and 22. Briefly from after 1000. yeares God
pitying vs, ſtirred Iewes to teach vs Chriſt by their beſt cō
                  menting,
though them ſelves could not ſee him. Al be godles
that wiſh not all helpe to turne them: and how hath Satan
bound them that labour to hinder all the good of their
commenting for Chriſtians ſpeciall vſe and hope for them.
               Satan raged looſe 500. yeares. But now we looke for his

fall: not fearing any deceit with ſtrength. Therefore the viſion
paſſeth vnto the reſurrection.
            
            
               CHAP. XXI.
               Becauſe the Church ſhould be long in the wildernes, and
ſeeme black to men, God ſheweth the heavenly Ieruſalem,
how goodly it is, from Eſay 25. and 54. and from ſixtie to the
end: and Aggei 2. Exod. 28. Ezekiel 47. and all the Prophetes:
and how great it is, 144000. furlongs ſquare. As a thouſand
miles high building: and ſo long and broad: that if all the
elect ſince Adam, came as beaſtes into Noes Arke: a citie of
this largenes would but hold them. Here Papiſts ſhould ſee
antiquitie and vniverſalitie.
            
            
               CHAP. XXII.
               The lawes are golden, and ſtreames of life in Chriſt, the
morning ſtar. But this I have in Concent of Script. handled at
large, and elſwhere. The grace of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt
open our eyes to ſee, that to morrow we ſhall
die: that to day we may heare his voice.
Coloniae. Iu. 1610.

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            
               Gentle Reader, where you ſee this title THE ARGVMENTS,
printed above almoſt of every page, there read, OF THE REVELATION.
And where you ſee, OF THE REVELATION,
there read, THE ARGVMENTS.
               Good Reader vnderſtand, that this larger Scholion following,
in order of time, was written afore theſe Arguments:
as thou maiſt perceive in the reading.
            
         
         
            
            
            AN EXPLICATION,
OR REVELATION, OF THE
HOLY APOCALYPS.
            
               AFTER that the Romanes
had killed Chriſt, & perſequuted
his ſervants, ſtirred vp by faithles Iewes,
whoſe rebellion ouerthrew their City &
ſtate: Domitian raiſing a cruell perſecution,
and baniſhing Iohn into Patmos, Our
Lord and Sauiour reueleth the ſtate of the heauenly IERVSALEM:2. Theſſ. 2.
               how it ſhal be afflicted by the Prophane Caeſares, till they be
taken away: and, when power of ſtate returneth to Rome, a policy
all wicked ſhould be ſet vp: to deceiue if it were poſsible the very
elect: ſo mighty ſhall it be to deceiue, becauſe men would not receiue
the loue of the truth. The ſtile of the booke, is taken all
from the old Teſtament, to be plaine for learned Chriſtians:
and darke to wicked that they ſhould not ſee Gods counſels.
In my booke of Scripture Concent, I opened the tropes: and
in my Advertiſement, I applyed the XII. pretious ſtones to
their tribes: whereof Iewes called vnto Chriſt, in all Countries,
taught vs heathen the way of life. Now, my bent, is to
tell properly the ſumme of the booke. And firſt, generally,

who be the perſequutores. Heere, as often as we read, that
Christ was kill'd, as Chap. 1. and 2. and 5. we muſt ſagely conſider,
Pilate, and the Romane policy, where Chriſt was crucified:
That Rome, muſt be the ſtate heere damned: firſt for
Tyrannie, when their Ciuil lawes were good; that S. Paul
by Lyſias the humane Chiliarch; and by Festus the Proconsul;
and Iulius the noble Captaine, found Neroes auctority long
a defenſe. But, afterwardes, a ſtate all ſinfull, ſhould come to
Rome: and deceiue and vex the Church vnto the end. That
Domitian,
               Chap. 1. Chap. 2. and 3. baniſhed Iohn, Euſebius writeth it. That Satans
throne by Rome tryed in the Churches, who would in
Chriſt ouercome; the ſeauen Epiſtles teach. And where God
ſitteth vpon a throne of iudgement to builde his Temple by
S. Paul of Beniamin his Iaſper: (in Beniamin the old Temple
was buit) & to defend his folke, like the ruddy Sardius of Reüben,
               Iſai. 54. 9.
ſett a frontier againſt the Hagarenes; to teach by the rainebow
of his couenāt, the ſumme of Leuies Smaragd, & Law.
This deſcription,Chap. 4. is for terrible might againſt Rome, & their
Idolatry.Chap. 5. So the Lābe as killed, to whom all creatures (whom
Rome made Gods) promiſe ſeruice for his Chriſtians; He
being the Lion of Iuda, by that name, telleth of warrs, greater
then Dauid made: From Pſal. 18. & 45. & 110. & Iſai. 31. That
the Romanes now,
               2. Pet. 1. 
               be the enemies: they who pierced the handes, &
the feete, of the morning ſtarre: Pſ 22. by Kimchies expoſition,
from all the Thalmud: and Apoc. 2. & 22. So the Prophecie
there, for Creatures, to refuſe worſhip, is bent againſt Rome,
which ſtil would worſhip Creatures. None told ſo diſtinctly
Romes caſe: as now it is handled. Balaam, in Nu. 24. but generally:
So S. Mat. 24. S. Paul a litle more at large, for the preſent
poſseſſor, Caeſar: till he were gone: and then for new Antiochi,
frō Daniel 11. to bring al to heathen folly. But none told, that

Chriſt would plague the Caeſares infinitely more, thē euer gouernors
were plagued: & that a King of Locuſts, idle bellies deuouring
the fruites of the earth, ſhould come to reuiue the
empire. Theſe things were ſealed, for the LAMBE himſelf to
open: how he would vſe Hypocrites, Pilates, Murtherers; & yet
waſhers of handes, as innocents in depth of miſchiefe: murtherers
of the king of glory:
               Chap. 6. and yet confeſſors that Ieſus of Nazaret,
is King of the Iewes. The revenge is fitted to this cruelty
and Hypocriſie: againſt Diuos Caeſares, & a new Empire of ho
               
                  •
               ineſſe
in title; & of boldneſſe, to make Diuos, & Diuas. Chriſt
by his holy martyrs, ſheweth white, might and ſpeede: they
are a white horſe, hee gaue them crowns, as he wan a crowne;
Pſal. 21. a crowne through thornes,Pſal. 21. and thorny in this world;
but golden for the ſoule, in the world of ſoules. And he hath
a Bowe,Pſal. 45. (with arrowes ſharpe, in the heart of the kinges enimies:)
to make people fal vnder him. That is one ſealed cōmune
place.
               1. Seale. The reuenge of the Diui Caeſares is three fold: in ſpeedy
might,2. Seale. 
               a red horſe, and his rider hath a great ſword, and auctority
to take away peace, that men ſhould kil one another. The
Romane ſtories tell how miſerable the Emperors were, and
often in hazard to ouerthrow the Empire, euen at the firſt
perſecutions.3. Seale. A ſtep further, commeth in the black horſe, on
whō the rider bare a balance in his hand, to ſel corne as deere
as ſpice: ſhewing what famine ſhould come: greater then was in
Claudius dayes. Aurelius Victor ſheweth of 30. choſen Emperors,
at once: by their ſoldiers: who kill'd one another till all
came to one: and ſo in warres famine muſt be as Virgil ſaith:

                  Quippe vbi fas verſum atque nefas: tot bella per orbem.
                  Tam multae ſcelerum facies; non vllus aratro.
                  Dignus honos ſqualent abductis arua colonis.
                  Et curuae rigidum falces conflantur in enſem.
               
               
                  
                  For where right's ouerturned, and wrong takes place
                  So many warrs through th'world, ſo many a face
                  Of wickedneſs (appears:) no due regard
                  Is then vouchſaf'd the plough: the fieldes are marr'd,
                  The Husbandmen drag'd thence: now forged are
                  The crooked ſithes, into ſtiffe ſwordes for warre.
               
            
            A vehementer degree of miſerie, followeth in the fourth
common place,4. Seale. or Seale: where the ſpeedie and deadlie vengeance
of God, is a pale horſe, death ſitting vpon him: and
the gulfe of the graue, following of him, and he had power
to kill the fourth part of the earth, with ſword, famine and
peſtilence, and with the beaſtes of the earth: That, was the
puniſhment of Ieruſchalami, vnder Tzedekiah, when the
whole ſtate periſhed. The cauſe of all this vengeance is expounded
in the fift ſeale.5. Seale. In Aboth R. Nathan. The holy martyrs ſoules lay vnder
the Altar Christ our Altar, calling for vengeance. The Rabbins
vniuerſall ſway, placeth holy ſoules going hence, immediatly
as Moſes ſoule, vnder Gods throne: This ſpeach vnder
the Altar, is in matter the ſame, but diſtinctly ſheweth that
by Christ our Altar, and ſacrificing of our ſelues, wee haue
place of reſt in Paradiſe. Purgatorie, was vnknowen to Iewes
and Grecians: that, was kept for the ſtarr, that ſhould turne the
waters of Scripture into wormwood.
            
               This calling for vengeance againſt the beaſtes of the earth,
Diuos Caeſares; hath an anſwere, that they muſt be content a
while, till moo martyrs blood becommeth the ſeed of the
Church; till the greater part of the commune weale be true
Chriſtians: an Emperor fauorable, ſhould bee too much
troubled with Heretiques; as Arrians proued that true. Vnder
Martyrdome, the zeale was an white horſe: & the Church

was holy and cleere: and heretiques, holden heretiques. But
yet, now the martyrs prayer cōmeth in ſhort tyme to paſſe:
that the Emperors, and their great, and all idoll policy, is ſhaken:
their ſunnes, their moones, their ſtarres, all their heauen, as
of old, Iſai 34. come to nothing; That vnder the Goſpell by
Constantine, commeth a new world; of al Creatures ioy, that
they ſhall ſerue Christ: That ſtarres, be no more Gods: Nor Caeſares,
come of Venus, nor Ayer, be Iuno, nor Aeolus, God of
winde, nor Neptune of Sea, nor Apollo of graſse, nor Pan, of
ſheep, &c. But God ſhall be One, in holy Trinitie and Vnitie.
This went currant 300. yeares. But, that, Satan blinded euen
the learned; not to ſee the Eternall ſonne, Eternall God, Creator
of all thinges, to bein Adams ſeed, by Dauid, Nathan, Zorobabel,
Ely, Mary, Redeemer of the world, Iſcariotae in quietneſſe,
would be kicking against our Great GOD, and Sauiour,
CHRIST himſelf; therefore at the laſt he caſteth of the
outward power of the Church; and returneth all to the badneſſe
of old Rome.So the Iſraelites in Aegypt were ſealed. Exod. 12. 7. 13. 22. 13. And ſheweth that the true Church, ſhall
be hid in Gods ſealed; as in Tzedekiahs dayes, Ezeck. 4. that
the windes which in Cant. 4. 16. blew north and ſouth, vpon
the ſpices of the garden, ſhould be ſtayed in all quarters,
that the church ſhould be hid; in Gods ſealed: in all quarters;
but in men not of ſway in commune weales: obſcure in the
world: knowen to God, and brethren, holy and few. This
commune place reaching to the end of Popes glorie, is
handled before the fall of the Church, yet in time it commeth
when the Pope is full King of his Locuſts: after
Satan had beene bound after a ſort for generall deceit
1000. yeres. The commune place ſhall be handled in a ſeuerall
title.
            
               
               The fall of the Church to be hid; is handled
in Chapter VII.
               Four meſſingers of Gods juſtice; Empires wicked, ſtay the
ſpirits of grace, from blowing vpon men; to be trees which
the hand of God planted. In the Eaſt, Machmad; in North,
Tartaria, in South, Abyſsines reuolted in the Weſt, Italy ſtayeth.
The Iewes of old, were ſcattered by the Macedonians, and
Aſſyrians, South, Eaſt, North; & planted there the Goſpell;
that the reuolters vpon open ſtrēgth for the belly, ſhould be
caſt off for euer, as the builders of Babel. Daniels Image ruled
in theſe parts; & felt the power of CHRIST; the Stone that
brake the image to duſt: and ſeeing they would (to ſhake of
Weſt gouernement,) ſhake of the Goſpel alſo; thoſe Arabi
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
contreies are ſhaken of for euer, from open cleere ſway. But
the Weſt that laſt heard of GOD, ſhall haue vnder combat,
fight by ſcripture, and in all quarters Iewes and Gentiles
knowen to God, a company innumerable, ſhalbe witneſſe to
the truth; martyrs in hartes ſadneſſe, as if they had ſhead their
blood: Why Dan, is omitted, is ſhewed in Scripture Concent:
Thence, they that deſpiſe not the work, wil fetch a reſolutiō.
               
                  How in the West, the Church falleth.
                  Six ſeales, ſhewed the Romans violence, againſt CHRIST
& his ſeruants; plagued with warres, death, & peſtilence, and
ouerthrow of Empire.7. Seale. The ſeauenth ſheweth a ſinful ſtate in
al Satans might deceiuing the Weſt, wherof 7. trumpets giue
warning, which the ſealed before will take; others will not.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               AS Daniel Chap. 4. was amazed a while that Nebuchadnezar
a ſtarre, ſhould be 7. yeres a beaſt: ſo the Church,
the Heauen on Earth, is amazed, as half an houre: to

what paſſe, badneſſe of ſcholars in vnlearned ambition, will
come: & 7. trumpeters ſtanding before God, will ſound that
vnto the world: that the world ſhall haue a warning, long
afore the matters come in practiſe.
               
                  The ſumme of the Goſpell: contempt of which, cauſeth
God to cast off the open Church.
                  CHRIST,Mat. 1. 11. a ſacrificer for euer, the Angel of the couenāt,
maketh his humanity, the golden Altar, vpon which he layeth
the incenſe of our prayers,Pſal. 141. 2 receiued in a golden cenſor of
his pure mercy, & they come before the Father for the 144.
thouſand Iewes, & innumerable heathen: whereof the trumpeters
for 7. commune places: compaines of holy Doctores
be the principall. Now, becauſe Rome would teach with
forcefull deceit,Rom. 5. 
                     not to receiue the abundance of the grace, of the
gift of iustice of Christ, that by faith we ſhould be iuſtified, to
haue peace with God,
                     Epheſ. 2. 
                     to reigne with his Sonne: but muſt
ſeeke helpe from our ſelues, who bee children of wrath:
Chriſt turneth his mediation,Pſal. 22. into wrath againſt the ſeed
of the ſerpent; whoſe City pierced his handes, and feete;
and by their occaſion made others fall. As the loue of God
in Christ,
                     Epheſ. 3. 
                     for bredth, length, depth, and height, paſseth all
knowledge; ſo the contempt of the tree of life; and of the
man a little inferior to Angels,Hebr. 2. in death; but after aſcention,
crowned with glory: as to the rebellious Angels diſdayning
mans glory it gaue eternal woe, it giueth to men that follow
that company called Satan,Exod. 20. the old ſerpēt. The anger of Christ
is heare, voices, thunderings, lightnings, earthquake in ſtates;
as at the Law-giuing; Becauſe Chriſt the end of the Law is
contemned. This could neuer haue fallen out, if the Ebrew
Bible, with the Maſſoreth orthographie dictionarie, for accents
& vowels, had beene vſual in churches ouer the earth;

and the N. T. the marrow of all Greeke, and ſunnes bringhtneſſe
to the old, had beene ſcholes ſtudie alſo in all nations.
                  But ſlothful contempt, to make tranſlations from tranſlations;
bred vncertainti; and it diſdaine; it blindeneſſe; it contempt
of Chriſt; it reiection. Machmad ſoone turned away
all the Eaſt; whereof old, GOD was knowen; and God hath
for that, caſt them of for euer. The Grecians were ſo proud
of Greeke brauery; that of Origens Octaplun: of Ebrew, in
Ebrew letter, in Greeke letter, in the 70. in Aquilas, Symmachus,
Theodotion, and other two vncertaine tranſlations; they little
cared for the Ebrew, but from Greek vncertaine, they marred
their commenting, and gaue Arrius great aduantage.
And, when Arabians, Aethiopians, and Muſcouites tranſlated
the 70. not the Ebrew: the difference of 1500. (and more)
yeares exceſſe, aboue truth by the 70. in Geneſ. 5. and 11.
cauſed Greece and the other, and much of Romiſh ſoyles, to
blaſpheme the Ebrew, as corrupt: ſo diſdayning bitter
rootes, they miſſed to gather fruit of nouriſhment. This
bred the thundering anger of the Eternall Word; which was
with God aey; and made all things: and gaue words Ebrew
and Greeke, each as pearle and ſhyning Iewels: Hence vnlearned
ſcholars, turne all to Ambition and Hereſie: polititians,
to profaneneſſe.
               
               
                  Of the VII. Trumpets.
                  As one trumpeter telleth of a kinges power in milliones,
ſo heer 7. repreſent 7000. as might fall out: ſtill learned men
gaue warning: but when the roote of Ieſſai was contemned,
the waters of grace, were not ſent into vncleane hearts.
               
               
                  The first Trumpet.
                  
                     Buiſhopps, ſtroue for ſuperioritie; Monachi, fall to idleneſſe,

and extolling of Sainctes: Princes giue wealth that way:
painefull ſcholers be hated and perſequuted: their voices
make alowd trompet: Athanaſius, Chriſoſtome, Baſill, Nazianzene,
ſound out matter againſt herefies, and forged Monaſtiques,
and contempt of ſcripture: and how the poſſeſſor of
the West Empire ſhould be taken away: and a policy all ſinfull,
ſhould be erected in Rome. Andreas Caeſarienſis doth more plainly
ſhew that: being at the riſing of it: about the 600. yeares,
of Redemption. Patriarches affected ſupremacy; but the city
that crucified Chriſt; and now plagued Chriſtians, was to
afflict in the end, and to be a trapp, for all coaſtes to fall. The
contempt of learned warnings, & Romes ſupremacie, made
eaſt, ſouth, & north, fear leaſt old tyranny from Rome ſhould
be reuiued. So Machmad turned much of the world to fall
away; that haile of ſtate, as in Eſai, and fyer, and blood, of warrs
come to the world: And moſt of all Popes ſupremacie challenging
Empire, raineth haile, fyer, and blood to this day: that
men grounded as trees for the third parte: and all the weake
as graſſe fell into Gods anger. So this is a commune place of
the Popes ſupremacy. The next trumpet ſoūdeth that poinct
more fully: The ſcholars that inueighed againſt Phocas the
murderer, for erecting Boniface 3. ſupreme Papes or Father.
                  
               
               
                  Of the names, Papas and Pope.
                  The name Papas, in the Greek fathers epiſtles, is from one
to another, this much: Right Reuerend father. But when one
would haue all to himſelfe; not by learning in Ebrew or
Greeke for Gods worde; but for ſtrong hand in ſupremacy:
then the name reſted in him, but turned into Pope; which in
Homer,
                     Iliad. 3. as Euſtachius well noteth, is Damon, a Deuil. The Prouidence
of God, in mens tongues for names, fitted vnto matter,
is to be regarded much: That Pope, and Daemon is all one.
                  
                     
Add vnto this, that the Pope is called holines: Marke for
this, S. Paul; THE SINFVL MAN; THE WHOLE
ENEMIE: HE THAT EXALTETH HIMSELFE ABOVE
ALL, THAT IS CALLED GOD; OR WORSHIPPED:
A NEWE ANTIOCHVS EPIMANES:
SETTING FORTH HIMSELFE IN THE TEMPLE
OF GOD, AS IF HE WERE GOD. THIS,
AND POPE OR DAEMON, GONCVRRE. The ſecond
Angell, or Company of Scholars, ſheweth howe hee
commeth vp, for the Emperour.
               
               
                  The ſecond blast expounding the firſt.
                  
                     
                        A Mountaine, an huge one burning with fire, is caſt into the
ſea. Mountaine ſignifieth an Empire; as Babylon is a mountaine
deſtroying: Burning with fire, is, cauſing hoate warres; as in
taking the Empires land, to become a Mountaine: and caſting
himſelfe into the ſea of kingdomes, to be to this day, a
firebrand of all our warres: The ſea is politique ſtates, for
this ſea of our troubleſome life; as Tully tranſlateth Euripides:
Si mihi nunc primum tristis illuxiſſet dies, Nec tam arumnoſo
nauigaſſem ſalo: eſſet dolendi cauſſa, &c. That is, If a heavy day
had now first ſhined vnto me, neither had ſailed before ſo troubleſome
ſeas, there would be iust cauſe of ſorrow, &c. So ſea is, Dan.
7. & Apo. 12. where Empires ariſe: ſo the men of the ſeas policie,
called fiſh; ſuch as ſeemed aliue Chap. 3. Forſooke the waters,
Eſa. 55. and Eze. 48. which giue life to all where they come,
turned here to haerefie, be turned to death: and traffique of
ciuill policie is turned to corruption.
               
               
                  The third blast, expounding the ſecond.
                  The third explication of the learned great, telleth that

theChap. 1. the 7. ſtars be ſeauen ſergeants of the Church. meſſinger of the holy Synagogue, or heauen, for the
kingdome of heauen, ſhall fall from his calling to be as Babilons
king, Iſai 14. A ſtar ſetting Nemrod his houſe on fire,
will ſoone corrupt the third part of the Bible, called waters,
Iſa. 55. & Ioh. 3. and 1. Ioh. 3. and infinitely in Rabbins, Hee
ſhall turne Iuſtice of faith into Idolatry, as Ephraim in Amos.
That many men died the ſecond death (called fiſh afore) by
Idols worſhip. So the Pope turning the holy doctrine into
idolous waters, is called wormewood.
                  
               
               
                  Articles of the Popes corruption of Scriptures.
                  Firſt, He holdeth not the Hebrew and Greeke holy text
in vſe: God owne holy wordes: penned by the Eternall
Spirit: ſpeaking all of life by the SON: in dayly eſteeme:
for all in leiſure of ſtudie to know: and which all of leiſure
to ſtudie ſhould know. But in ſteed of it brought in a Latin
worke; of which tongue none is bound to haue regard: and
brought vnto ſchooles, Latin for Greeke and Ebrew.
                  II. The Apocrypha bookes were all made by Men
of Iuda: And ſpeake not a ſyllable of CHRIST: yet helpe
Ioſephus for all Iſrael, againſt Appiones, Instim, Diodorus Siculus,
& Cornelius Tacitus in madd Antiochus: and ſo far haue
their vſe. The fable of Tobi is made to buſie heathen for Aſſurs
captiuitie: which heathen neuer mention: nor Iudahs
deportation to Babel, or returne: For it Barucs forged Epiſtles;
Suſannaes allegorie, for the whole ſtate, King Ioakims
wife polluted by the Babilonian Iudges; but reuenged by
Daniel, is wittilie fabled. The enuious heathen, neuer mention
the fire quenched by Daniels moſt noble Couſins:
Therefore a Rhetoricall ſong, was formed to ſhew what in
the fyer, their cauſe might ſpeake, to Idol-ſeruers.
                  
                     
But Daniel recordeth nothing ſpoken: who knew all: and
would omitt nothing of glorie. So no heathen tell as Ieremi
of Babell Bels ſeruants, who thought Bell gaue them
kindoms, that GOD by Cyrus would take out of Bels throte,
all the kingdomes which he had deuoured: therefore the fable
of Bell mocked heathens blindneſſe. No heathen tell of
Daniel caſt into the Lions den for not worſhipping the Perſian
Emperor, or Dragon: as Pharaoh is, Iſa. 27. and mouing
the K. to renounce that: the fable of the Dragon worſhipped
in Babel, and deſtroyed, telleth of their enuy and folly. And
vpon Darius ſpeach to Daniel, that GOD in whom he belieued,
would ſaue him: and Daniel ſaid he was ſaued, becauſe
juſtice to GOD and the K. were found in him: Abbakuks ſaying;
the iust man ſhall liue by faith: is enlarged by a fable: that
Abakuk brought Daniel pottage from Iudea. The heathen
knew not Gods counſell; that God by Iewes would teach in
Babels fall, how he hated the pompe of this world; and hath
another world for ſoules Reſt, where wicked ſhal be plagued
for euer, and telleth that true happineſſe ſtandeth in the
knowledge of Christ: who gaue Cyrus all Croeſus gold, to ſend
Iewes home from all quarters: to preach of their Eternall
hope: and to confute Greeke ſages. The 3. of Eſdras, is much
true, much in fable, to ſmooch this in a greek ſtile, familiar for
heathen: and ſuch fables be the additions to Hester. The
fourth of Eſdras, was made to keepe Eſdras, (another Moſes)
from contempt amongſt heathen: who would thinke him
baſe, that handleth but Iewes genealogies, and the Temples
building, without telling the reaſon: and diuorcements:
therefore they faine for him deepe ſpeculations: as the greeks
Clem. Strom. 1. feigne all the Law was loſt: and Eſdras by
reuelation reſtored all. The Perſians for religion, were a new

                     Nebuchadnezar, their warriers, one Holophernes; Herodotus nameth
one ſo. The Iewes ſtates, Iudith. Gods juſtice againſt
Elam, Iudiths ſword. And thus, heathen that would mocke
truth, are mocked by fables.
                  Wicked Diodorus Sicul. and Tacitus, commend madde
Antiochus, for his endeuor to ouerthrow the Iewes religion.
Two workes of ſeuerall Iewes, the later very fooliſh and vnlearned;
yet good enough for prophane heathen: were receiued
to ſtop ſuch mouthes. The whole nation is of wicked
Tully termed barbarous, and ſuperſtitious, to ſtoppe ſuch
a mouth; eloquent Syracides paſſing him in ſentences, and
ſhewing all the Lawes glory; and eloquent Philo imitating
Salomons wiſedome; for mans good end, were receiued: to
check heathen; though one knew not Chriſt. Of theſe the
fable of Toby, is by the Pope made Gods word. The Thal. Ieru.
in Ros Haſana for Michael and Gabriel, make it a late fable &
wicked. For Manaſses, caried to Babel by the King of Aſſur,
ſome tryfling declamer would ſhew what one in his caſe
might ſpeake: as doth Homer for Agamemnon, Achilles, Calchas,
Nestor and ſuch: but it were a ridiculous babiſhnes, to
hold that trifling worke better then Tobies fable; A plaine fable
throughout, and no fitter to be read in ſadneſſe in the
Church, then Lucians dialogues. The Popes ioyning of theſe
to the Bible, is wormewood.
                  
                  III. Wormewood holdeth not theſe 3. principles true:
which all ſhould. 1. The text of the old Teſtam. is kept in letter
moſt ſure, by the orthographie dictionarie, or Maſſoreth:
that no letter was more nor leſſe, nor of other▪ orme in Moſes
tyme, with vowels, and accents, & margine reading expounding
the text; then we haue it at this day. 2. That the Rabbins
expound all in grammer ſenſe, well for our vſe. 3. That

all good for religion, and life is in Moſes; as the Prophets and
Apostles draw him foorth at large. IIII. The Pope in Bellarmine
and others, peruerteth or contemneth euery whit
of the Bible. V. He maketh a whole policie, wicked: againſt
all points of faith; and ciuill lawes: and would bee as a God in
the Church ſo ſet foorth, 2. Theſ. 2. Thus he is wormewood it
ſelfe. How he groweth vp to be a great mountaine, to be able
to vexe the world: that followeth in the next Trumpet,
and keyes of the deepe.
               
               
                  The fourth expounding the third.
                  
                     The fourth Angell ſounded, and the third part of the Sun,
Moone, and Starres, were ſtricken, for their third parte; & day
and night, Gen. 37. Iacob expoundeth Sun, Moone, & Starrs,
for his Church: ſo it is heere, day and night are ruled by the
ſtarres; and meane the tymes more or leſſe proſperous: ſcholars
and learned, falling away, corrupted ſcriptures, make an
eccleſiasticall mountaine; from a burning lampe, falling from
God.
               
               
                  The occaſions of the Churches fall from heauen.
                  The two Teſtaments, ſhew that CHRIST is the Angell
of the Couenant, ſtanding by his humanitie, at the Altar of
incenſe; and in his golden Mediation receyuing the prayers
of the holy, that with his incenſe, they come before God:
ſo he ſitteth a ſacrificer for euer; figured in Sem deſcribed as
God, without father, without mother, without beginning of
dayes, without ende of life: witneſſed in Moſes deſcription, that
he liueth for euer; a King of Iustice, and a King of peace, ſo S.
Paul to Scribes after their owne manner, yet extant in Zohar
and Menachem and others deſcribeth his Vicar Sem, the
great: as Rabbins terme him, to haue figured the Redeemer

to the world now, of Noahs houſe: The SON thus knowen
in our Sonne.
                  
               
               
                  How the old Testament: came turned
into wormewood.
                  Of the age before the flood, God ſaid: I repent me, that
I made man; therefore water, tooke their bodies; priſon aeternall,
their ſpirits. The tower-maſons making Gods of ſtarrs, in
contempt of SEM, the high ſacrificer; and prating daylie
againſt his faith, were cut off frō 
                     Sems tongue, to let it alone;
and in Babels captiuitie ended it from commune vſe: and
ſoone after Daniels age, from ſpeach of all, but ſchole learned;
But Moſes, by Sabbath reading was ſome what knowen to the
people. Beſides God made Sems tongue ſo hard, that a mans
whole life will hardly catch it: and left no authors of it, but
Sems prophets; to make vs ſearch how rare wordes in them,
open themſelues, (and they vſed but once) by the argument.
                  So Sems tongue is an hid pearle, of it Iob coſt me more
paines alone, then all Greeks, who now cōmeth to open iudgemēt.
Churches had no Hebrew Rabbins for grāmer of yer.
neare 1000. nor grāmars, or dictionaries; Origen did put forth
Ebrew, in Ebrew letters; and ſpell'd in Greeke, much cited in
Epiphanius; with ſix Greeke tranſlations. The 70. hid their
minde much, ſpecially in 3600. yeres alteration of liues from
Moſes truth, as thus; Adam liued 230. yeares and begate Seth.
And afterwardes 700. for 130. in Moſes, and 800. our notes
ſay, Moſes omitted 100. y. before Seths birth; they may as well
ſay he gaue 100. too many afterwardes: and ſo in 3600.
yeres. Yet though Arabique were neare Hebrew; and Aethiopian:
they tranſlate the 70. And not the Ebrew: and
Greekes with Muſcouia follow them. But if Princes had

allowed in euery land, ſo big as Canaan, 42. great Cities, for
Hebricians only; they had beene Ezdrae, for readineſſe in the
Law: and had beene Atlantes, to beare vp heauen.
                  God ſaw that his juſtice could choſe but few; and of eternitie
did ſet many to anger, and therefore gaue not Princes
that iudgement, nor to ſcholars, one of a thouſand millions,
a minde to ſuch hard paines, but to be ſuch monachos, as Nazianzenus
taunteth, giuen all to feed them ſelues, and to enuie
all paines: and Athanaſius, Gregorie, and his deare brother
Baſil, felt for the holy Trinitie. And Weſt Monachos reſted
in Ierome for text, and in S. Augustin for explication.
               
               
                  Of the New Testament.
                  The New Teſtament penned in Greeke, by the H. Spirit,
is to be eſteemed in Greeke better then all the world can euer
conceiue.
                  Part I hope to vtter: but conceiue more. The preparation
to bring Greeke ouer the world, muſt heere be knowen. To
Iapheths Iauan, God left it: and ſpread his race from Cilicia ouer
the West: that Bardi Caeſar. Cō. in France, and our Cambria
kept Greeke Philoſophi. And when God meant in open action,
to end by Babel, Sems tongue; which he kept in Canaan
500. yeares that Babilons cōfuſion hurt not the Kings houſe:
but the Chananean dialects twelue, came neare his: when
God would end this tongue, in holy Daniels age when hee
had ſhewed the ſtrict yeare and Paſcha day, of Christ his Paſcha,
who being the first from the dead, would ſhew light vnto the
world. And Aggei, Zacharie, and Eſdras Malachi, had commented
vpon holy Gabriels oration, when God would haue
no more Diuinitie written, all being ſpoken that could bee
told: he ſheweth a miraculous prouidence to fi
                        •
                     t the Greeke
tongue to the Goſpell, by Athenes and all Grecia, Piſistratus,
                     
of holy Ioſiahs time, brought noble Homers wit into more reuerence,
then Monkes the holy Goſpell: that children ſhould
learne him euery whit without booke, and parted him twice
in Iliade & Odiſſea: into Alpha, Beta, &c. (As the vnknowen
God dealt, Pſal. 25. 34. 37. 111. 112. 119. 8 tymes: 145. & Pro. 31.
Lamen. 6. tymes.) And Ariſtarchus made a commētarie vpon
his hard wordes: ſo that S. Peter by Gods reuelatiō vſeth his
noble phraſe; and him, not Euſtathius I cited, though Bil. and
Bar. would win ſpurres, to prick their owne ſides. Didimus elder
then S. Peter kept Ariſtarchus remnants, and frō 
                     Didimos,
not from Euſtathius, I brought Ariſtarchus and Homer, whom
I am ſure S. Peter neuer read, but the holy Ghoſt read him, and
led Peter. This honor to Homer, ſet on Solon to write ſentēces;
and Theognes, & Phocillides, & Minermus: that ciuill groundes
were made pleaſant in braue Greeke: to make all eloquent in
ſpeach; Then ariſe tragiques, Aeſchylus & an Heroi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , equall to
Homer, or old Corinnos of Troyes age: and P Alamedes ſcholar,
who in other warres, gaue Homer his timber. Euripides, the
painter of mans lot, and Lyriques rare, and Commediques, as
witty Ariſtophanes: Phiſitians: Hiſtoriques, from Heſters age;
Hellanicus and Herodotus, and Plato, and Aristotle, and tenn
Oratores, and Theopompus, & innumerable of all ſortes: while
Iuda was in Babilon, and vnder Perſian, taught, (Dan. 10.)
that ſoone they ſhould bee vnder Grecia, till Chriſt came in
ſome parte: and therefore they taught their children Greek:
that the 70. flaunted in ſtore: ſetting 80. ſeuerall Greek ſometime
to one Hebrew tree; as to Shub. 70. 60. 50. 40. 30. 20. 10.
and ſo to very many. Now Macedonians of Selleucus Nicatores
people being in 72. Kingdomes: Eaſt and North, were
forced to knowe Greeke: and by the Ptolomies, South learned
Greek; and the Iewes ſcattred by them, brought the 70.

ouer all: and mention of Moſes. So before our Lordes redemption
tyme, all nations (as Tully, for Archi ſaith) knew Greek,
when Latin was kept in a narrow compaſſe. And thus a fundation
was laid for elegant timber to the N. Teſtament. The
Iewes note in Ieruſalemi Megila, that Noah prophecied how
Sems houſe ſhould bring Iapheth to faith in the tongue of Iauan,
the Greeke. And Midras Rabba citeth the ſame; and in
Megilah theyſay: that no tongue but Greeke, can giue Hebrew
fitt termes. Christians ſhould vrge their owne teſtimonie,
that as a Tribe failed not from Iuda till Meſsiah came, ſo all
nations then ſpake Greek;Geneſ. 49. but not many ages after that. And
as Abben Ezra confeſſeth vpon Dan. 9. that the 70. ſeauens are
490. yeres, from Daniels prayer, to ſealing of Meſsias, the holy, of
holy; wherein not one of a hundreth thouſand millions, ſpeaketh
ſo truely for our victorie, as the ſharpeſt enimy doth. So
Ieruſalemi ſhould haue confeſſed, that the fiſhers of Gallile
were to write in Greeke from Ieruſalem, after 490. yeres. And
before it ſhould be deſtroyed, as we ſee Actor. 15.
               
               
                  Of the New Testaments elegancie.
                  The N. Teſtam. in Greeke is ſo little that by one houre,
in the morning and euening; in one weeke; one may with
eaſe, and great delite, read it ouer. Yet this booke hath more
ſeuerall wordes by the fiſhers of Galile, and the Phiſitian of
Antioch, and the tent-maker borne in Tarſus, to be the firſt
Apostle at Rome, then 100. great Greek bookes: aboue 4600.
that all old Greekes haue ſome building in it: and all extant
now, but for fragments kept, cannot ſerue it. More, in mens
names it learnedly openeth Ebrew, to rare vſe: as Boſor for

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      2. Pet. 2. by Babels pronouncing, not Italy: that any
maide of Chaldea, might ſee by the ſpeach, whence the Galilean
                     
wrote. So Talmud names come, as Lazar, for Eleazar;
whoſe natiō is fitt for any one that maketh God his ſtrength:
to feaſt in Abrahams Boſom, when the ſoule departeth hence.
Moreouer the Macedonians ſpake Greeke wordes, in eaſt &
ſouth hardly found; as, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and ſuch: ſuch
from Thalmudiques of Babell, the N. T. had: and eaſt termes,
for politique matters, from Seleucidae; as, Angareum, to poſtſeruice.
It hath aboue 50. of Syriaque, for rare vſe: And to
ſhew in what age, euē vnder the Romans empire beginning,
& Greekes end, Iewes haue Greeke names, and ſome Latin:
as Philip and Andrew and Marc Iustus, & ſuch. This checketh
the Talmud, which from the depth of Satan perſuadeth
his ſonnes, that Ieſus our Lord his dayes were long before, in
the Maccabees gouernement.
                  
                     Foure Dialests the Booke hath: Attique or commune
Greeke for matters knowen to heathen:Act. 17. 18 Attique Greeke. as, Spermologos, to
Paul at Athenes: the deadlieſt that Demosthenes there aboue
300 yeres afore beſtowed vpon Aeſchynes. So from Diphilus,
and Philemon, and Sophocles, ſome for ſpeciall vſe: and from
Epimenides Aratus & Menander, knowen teſtimonies: briefly
from al eloquent ſome: as 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      for any paſſage, & Haides, to conteine heauē & Hell Luc. 16.
& 4. and in Act. 10. tymes. Luke praeuented 15. fooliſh brawles
by Greek: But men care not kicking againſt the ſpurre, Act. 9.
& is often in Aeſchylus & Euripides; and names of maners from
all: ſo that one cūning in the N. Teſta. & Greekes ſhould frō
the one, ſtill runne to the other, in memorie: & ſee better vſe
of both. And though one had ſo many eyes as Argus in Aeſchylus
10000. all would heer be well occupied. Another Dialect
is frō the 70. whē the ſpeach is moſt to Iewes,The ſeptua: greek. as Iechonias
begate Salathiel, ſo Zedekiahs the vncle 3. yer. elder, is ſonne,

and Ioachaz firſt king, yonger 2. yeres, Ioackim is eldeſt. So Vzziah
is ſonne to Ioram his fathers great grandfather: So our
Lord is ſonne to Ioſeph (as men thought) to Ely '&c. to Adam,
to God, as ſonne of Dauid. For ſome of theſe the heathen
haue the like: ſo Iulian calleth Romulus his Anceſtor, as S.
Ma
                        •
                     h. ſpeaketh of Iechonias and Salathiel: ſo for the word,
vntill, for a matter neuer done, Math. 1. and 5. and Homers
Ili 5. in Agamemnon to Chryſes: that he ſhould not haue his
daughter vntill ſhe ſpent her age with him in Argos. So a
iudge giueth ſentence for one that oweth 10000. talents;
and hath not a peny to pay, nor can gett in priſon, that he
ſhall be in priſon, till he pay the vttermoſt farthing. The priſoner
will not plead that in tyme he muſt come out. Starres
be darkened by ignorance of Greeke, to put going to Hell
for going to Paradiſe, a breeding of Purgatorie, which Grecia
of 1200. yeares neuer held. The 70. Greeke is notable in this:
whom God rayſed vp, diſannulling the ſorrowes or hurtes of
death. Act. 2. from Pſal. 18. he that would ſay Peter ſpake of
the ſecond death, or of hell Torment, deſerueth ſmall thankes.
Briefly, many a thouſand of wordes, haue the Apostles from
the 70. calling vs to remembrance of ſo many places in the
old Teſtament: of them I haue made an Ebrew Greeke
dictionarie, and my friendes haue it in London, and they who
will giue ſecuritie for the copy, may write it out. The old
Ierom, Eraſmus, and Beza miſſed much of lightes, by not expounding
70. Greekes from their Ebrew, that ſun and ayer
were much darkened.
                     The Apoſtles Greeke. 
                     The 3. dialect is the Apostles owne:
often do they expreſſe Ebrew in a new manner; and S. Paul
the Orator of Tarſus, borne to be firſt Papas or father in Praetorio
at Rome; brought vp at Gamaliels feete, to ſhew in the
Epiſt. to the Heb. the beſt Thalmudique that euer the ſunne

ſaw; the Ebrew of Ebrewes, fathers ſide and mothers ſide:
and redieſt in genealogies, true and profitable for his ſiſters
ſonne, and other couſins three, Rom. 15. This Iaſpar of Beniamin
the firſt foundation of the heauenly Citie ſhall be cited
for clearing Moſes, Deut. 30. & the holy Goſpell: by expreſſing
Ebrew in new Greeke; What to goe vp to heauen, to bring
Chriſt downe, meaneth; What to goe downe to the deepe, to bring
Christ from the dead, meaneth. Moſes of Leui grauen in the
Smaragd, and in his Law a ſunne; (In ſolio Phoebus claris lucentis
Smaragdis) forbiddeth Iſrael, to leaue ſtudie of the
Law, as though it were high, or farre fetched in ſpeach: and
thus telleth what Smaragd-light it hath, Deu. 30. 11. This commandement
which I commaund thee this day, is not a wonder for
thee: neither is it farre off: it is not in heauen, to cauſe ſpeach, who
can goe vp vnto heauen, to take it, and preach it to vs, that wee
may do it: neither is it beyond the ſea; to cauſe ſpeach, who ſhall
goe for vs beyond the ſea, to take it, for vs, & preach it to vs, that
we may do it: But the word is verie near vnto thee, for thy mouth
& for thy heart to do it. Thus Moſes ſheweth that the Smaragd
of the Law ſhineth in the Couenant of the Rainebow, Iſai
54. for the waters of Noah. That Chriſt in Geneſis was knowen
to the Patriarkes, and all the Ceremonies went no further;
and the Ciuill lawes were moſt ſenſible, and all might
be acquainted with it: The Scribes do teach it ſitting in
Moſes chaire; without their owne workes of traditions; and
ſuch as liued in trauaile of handes might be able to judge.
Now Saint Paul giueth ſuch teſtimonie that for the Law
they were exact, as he yet was a Phariſee, but they not knowing
that God was in Christ reconciling the world vnto himſelfe,
                     2. Cor. 5.
by the death of Christ: and reſurrection, miſſed of the end
of the Law; that blinde zeale to it made them fall frō God.

Now S. Paul imitateth Moſes, whoſe whole doctrine cōmeth
to this ſumme:Moſes and Paul teach one thing. 
                     do not ſay who can goe vp to heauen in high conceite,
to bring Chriſt to dwell in our Tabernacle below: or who can
goe in beleef,
                     Rom. 10. 
                     to the deepe of the earth, to bring vp Chriſt from the
dead: But what ſaith hee? The word is neere thee, for thy mouth, and
for thy heart; This is the word of fath which we preach; for if thou
confeſſe with thy mouth, that IESVS is the Eternall: and that God
raiſed him from the dead,
                     Pſal. 71. 20 
                     thou ſhalt be ſaued. Without marking
imitation of Moſes and 70. phraſe, Pſal. 71. 20. Paul will not
be vnderſtood heere: And heere he before had allowed the
Scribes for all other Diuinity, while they ſate in Moſes chaire,
for holy Trinity, and works, and law, and paſſage of all juſt
hence to Paradiſe to perfection of ioy:Heb. 11. to the City which
they had deſired; the heauenly City which God prepared
for them. Though they had not openly the Goſpell: the perfection.
But the Scribes ſaw not that our Goſpell was the perfection
to the Law: And by that they periſh. I might bring
a volume of examples: But my digreſſion may not bee too
long.The Thalmudgreek 
                     The fourth is the Thalmudique kinde when ſpeach is
to Iewes. The olde Teſtament neuer named expreſly and
properly, place for ſoules: becauſe infidels would mocke at
that: But thus God ſaith; Leuit. 26. If yee keepe my commandements,
I will be your God, and walke amongſt you; that is ſimplie
and for euer: as God, is the good God to Abraham, Izhak and
Iacob, not to dead but to liuing. Nowe when the Prophets,
had ended all that was to be ſpoken, to open congregations:
and the faithfull were few vnder Macedonians: and Sadducees
denyed ſoules immortalitie: and reiected Prophets comments
vpon Moſes; The holy learned enacted theſe tearmes:
The Law, for all the old Teſtament. So is Pſal. 82. Ioh. 1. & 15.
ſo Eſ. 8. Rom. 9. Alſo, world to come; Paradiſe; Gehenna; Day of Iudgment;

life eternall; ſecond death, and many ſuch: which all, the
pretious Greeke Teſtament hath. And in all GOD applieth
it to mans capacitie, in infinite mercie: when the Redemptiō
manifeſted, made the profaneſt leaue mocking. Examples
of all foure come, Apo. 21. in the 12. Iewells. Rubens
Sardius is Attique & 70. Simeons Topaz is attique, and 70. Leuies
Smaragd is atti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & 70. But this by the way: Smaragd, Ex.
28. in Aharons ſhoulders holding 6. tribes on the one, and ſo
many on the other: is the Beryll of King Ioſeph: as the K. is the
ſtay of the Commune Weale: and the Emperour in Conſtantinople:
not S. Chriſoſtome, whom in Photio the Dialect deceiued:
not decerning the 70. from Attique.
                  
                     Iudahs Chalcedon in Thalmudique as in Thargum Ieruſalemi
vpon Exod. 28. for the Carbuncle: Iſachars Saphir, is Attique
and 70. Zabulons Sardonix is Apoſtoliq. Dans Hyacinth,
is Attique & 70. Neptalies Chriſophraſe, is Apoſtolique: Gads
Amethyſt is Attique and Apoſtoliq. Aſers Chriſolite is Attique
and Apoſtoliq. Ioſephs Beryll is Attique & Apoſtolique: Beniamins
Iaſper, is Apoſtolique, fitted to the Ebrew: Iſachar had
it in 70. Exod. 28. Iuda in Iſai. 54. and Apo. 21. in the firſt place:
where the walles were like Iaſper Chriſtalling. And thus glorious
is the Greeke Teſtament: which a tetractys of moſt learned
ſtudies, maketh a building all of Gold, in the ſtreetes: &
of pearle in the gates: and wainſcotted with Carbuncles: for
Promiſſes in the SON, the Sun of iuſtice: and with other
ſtates for warriers: for ſtates men: and for nauigation. I cited
many Rabbins for this placing of the ſtones to the tribes:
then I had not Arias Montanus bible by me, nor remembred
him. Otherwiſe I had made reuerend mention of his learned
paynes: as I hold it a dogged atheiſme to raue againſt trueth
for humane reſpectes.
               
               
                  
                  How the Papes of Grecia vſed the Bible: And
the Popes refuſed it.
                  The holy New Teſtament, the learned Papae, as Athanaſius;
great Cyril, and elder Origen, and Baſill, and his owne-ſoule-Gregorie,
celebrate with Attique Greeke, equall to Libanius
& Porphyrie, and the beſt heathen, that euer Athens
bred; & all Monaſteries were buſied in copying it, with ſuch
care that where paradoxa came, they left it vnchainged: and
where they had no old Teſtament but the 70. againſt enemies,
which knew not Ebrew, they were moſt readie in it:
And had alſo Origens octaplun: whence men of leiſure might
be reaſonable in Ebrew: & the Chriſtians Iewes ſynagogue
thus dealt. They read Moſes in Ebrew, and expounded him
to their townes language: So Iewes, in Maymoni, did: and S.
Paul deſcribed the like, and his diſcipline and theirs was all
one. The wealthie Iewes that brought not vp their ſonnes
in Moſes, were holden godleſſe. And of multitudes learned,
a ſufficient number were choſen by all, Elders; for al matters.
They were Eccleſia: Zakenim: Epiſcopi, ouerſeers. And one,
their beſt learned, to read the Law, with skil & choiſe of conferences:
with Prophets and Pſalmes fitted; he was choſen to
be the Meſsinger of the Congregation. He dealt for matters
that touched all. In expoſitions, the Archyſynagogue requeſted
the beſt in eſtieme to expound the Law, by another
text: or to ſome commune place. Where heathen Officers
brideled authoritie, they did excommunicate: and neuer
the chiefe, but bade him keepe houſe and ſaue his honor.
And they made Rabbies,
                     Maymo. Saned. or Doctors; two or three, laying
handes vpon him, and ſaying: Learned Rabbi, take thou authoritie
to teach what is looſe: and what is bound. And in the

Synagogues Leuy had no particular ſtroke, but went from
their 48. townes to Ieruſalemi, at their courſes: and the high
ſacrificer was not of the Sanhedrin, but as they eſteemed of
his learning. And all the Synedrion might be of Iſrael, or all
of Leuie: and many Synagogues had not a Leuite, but all
Doctores were of Iſraell. In Grecia the Greeke Biſhops caried
them as ſeruantes: ſo Policarpus martyr at Smyrna, and
all, a long time. But let vs marke The Citie that crucified Chriſt:
what corruption of Doctrine it had, with Egyptian tyrannie.
                  Firſt the Greeke new Teſtament, the ioy of mans minde,
they excluded: And brought in ſteed rude Latin, of open
lies, leauing out Mat. 6. a ſentence from Dan. 7. Of Kingdom
power and glorie: howſoeuer loiterers will excuſe this; the
golden balance of iuſtice would beare reading of Latin to
people of other ſpeach, and the babling and Babels building
in equall peiſe.
                  Secondly, Italie had Greeke commune, when S. Paule
                     
wrote to the Romans. The Papes continuing Fathers, had
brought vp youth in Gods word, not in droſſe of mans
ſpeach, to charme to men of other tongues; that muſt needes
ſtoppe their eares as deaf adders: though the charmers charmed
neuer ſo wiſely. But Popi Daemones will anſwere to their
name: and ſhew what the only curſed Citie, 2. Theſ. 2. & Apo.
11. and 17. meant to do.
                  
                  Thirdly, Becauſe Clemens and Tertullian, were Euſebius
                     
auctores, that Peter was at Rome, though Luke Act. 23. and
28. and S. Paul ſpeak in other tenour: and firſt Peter telleth,
that he was at Babilon: and might not without infinit ſinne,
vſe a metaphore to deceyue his reader: and when trueth is
a ſtorie, to Pſal. 87. that Babel ſhall haue Gods Church. Yet

Popes begged great reuenues for buildings and ſcholars, by
S. Peters name. Pauls man of ſinne will do this.
                  
                      Fourthly, The Rock eternal, Deut. 32. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      there, and Pſal.
18. and 2. Sam. 22. and often, is GOD only. And in Deut.
32. a Prophecie is laid, of the Rock, a defender againſt the
foure beaſtes that come out of the ſea: vpon which Rock
the Church ſtood, vntill the SON of Man like in body, Dan.
10. to Tharſhiſh or ſea-like ſtone, tooke part of their afflictions.
Now the WORD Eternall, that gaue all reaſon, the
onely teacher; in demaunding, teacheth to anſwere, ſaying:
Whom do men ſay, that I the Sonne of man (Dan 7. by Rabbins
generall) am? The fiſher of Galile, that heard Daniel often
read, ſaid from Dan. 9. Thou art CHRIST, and holineſſe there
of all holineſſe: and therefore (Pſal. 2.) The Son of the liuing
God. Then CHRIST calleth him to Deut. 32. ſpeaking Rock in
Iobs Ebrew, Vpon this Rock wil I build my Aſſembly, that no courts
by terrour of death ſhalbe ſtronger then it.
                     Mat. 18. compared with Rom 8. 38. &. 2. Cor. 11. 23 24. &c. & Act. 26. 21▪ 22. Chriſt is Ceph, & thou,
as all that know him to be the Rock Cepha; and as the Sanedrin
maketh Doctor, ſaying: Take thou authoritie for thy
keyes of knowledge, to teach which is looſe, & what is bound:
whom thou teacheſt that God, was in the Rocke, reconciling
the world to him ſelfe, he hath his ſinnes looſed, by thee
on earth; by the Rocke, in heauen: and who ſo beleeueth
not that, thou bindeſt his ſinnes, in earth and in heauen.
This matter is the ſumme of all: and Greekes in Photius, tell
that Andrew was the Rocke, before Symeon was. And Cephas
anſwered with all thought, as well as hee: wherefore
all had equall comfort: and ſo all godly. And becauſe this
new ſentence, hath no new Diuinitie, hee leaueth all after
confeſſion of the Rocke, as knowing him ſelfe and Theophilus,
to haue as good right to the name of Cephas. But hee by

ſenioritie was to ſpeake firſt for all, and ſo the name for all
muſt bee tolde to him: that they who builde their houſe vpon the
Rocke,
                     Mat. 7. 
                     ſhall bee ſhaken with no Windes, ſtormes, waues. The Sun
is not brighter then this meaning, for theſe wordes. Let any
who dare, trye; by a conference of holy Scriptures, as I
doe.
                  Now the Popos Daemon, denying that Rome crucified
CHRIST: as Saint Peter denyed that Chriſt ought to dye,
and was termed Sathan for that. Hee would haue this beleeued
of all, that Peter had a praerogatiue aboue all the Apoſtles:
and was at Rome: and left to the Citie that crucified
Christ, (for their good ſeruice) a ſucceſſour to pardon, or to tye
ſinnes.
                  
                  Fiftlie, Hence Landes are giuen by Princes: and ſpecially 
in waſt wilde groundes, for Monaſteries, where men before
rebelled, that Monaſteries giuing a chiefe rent, and ſuperſtitious
people being fed with hoſpitalitie, wan much in three
hundreth yeares, that after Buy-ſhop Gregorie, by Creontophonos
Phocas, helde Sathans throne, and became ſtronger then
the Emperour by this proceeding. The Bible muſt not bee
ſtudied in Ebrew. The Iewes marred it; and in Greeke haeretiques:
As though there were not moſt learned Chriſtians,
that could looke to both. And this was pretence to
pray ſtill: neuer to teach trueth: and to giue the people in
Latin Niene commandements for Tenne; And the Creed
with a tranſlation, that white was blacke: that to goe to Paradiſe,
in the Greeke Creed, ſhould be tranſlated, to deſcend
to hell; to Gehenna; in olde Chryſologus: and that the Fathers
were there. So the Popes Clyents, are the tayle of the great
Dragon. Moreouer, the Lordes prayer, for many thouſande
poundes Landes, they might haue, but maymed:

to diſgrace all auctoritie of the New Teſtament. But they
neuer taught the meaning of the Lordes prayer, that when
we pray, we pray vnto the Father, which is in heauen. That
did Pope Daemon diſannul, ſitting in the Temple of God, as if HE
were God; And he teacheth to pray to all from whoſe name
he could get any lande: to Marie, though Rome killed her
ſonne: to Peter, though Rome by auctoritie made him a martyr,
farre off to Apoſtles and other Martyrs, that Rome martyred:
as though Apoc. 6. vnder the fift ſeale all theſe did not
craue vengeance againſt the beastes of the earth, that killed
them. Moreouer, to buſie Princes, they ſay; If Popingayes
ſayd ouer Pater noster, ſo often, they ſhould haue ſo many
yeares pardon, in a new inuented fierie bath of Purgatorie:
ſtinging poore ſoules like ſcorpions, fiue hundred yeares
before their Diuels doctrine was eſpied. About the yeare
600. they tamed Eaſt proude Prelates; and goe on thus.
From Leui they will make an order, and haue an altar; and
an Aharon, with a cope, and holineſſe in the forehead: and
Levites in Linnen: and the name Prieſt: and of bread, they
can make fleſh, and of wine, blood: and they breake Abben
Ezraes rule praef. to Moſes allowed of all; that nothing
muſt be taken properly, which goeth againſt all ſenſe. So they
will not have the Lordes death to end all ſacrifice, by the
ſupper: But will make the ſupper a ſacrifice: againſt all witt
and learning; And the Pope is an Aharon: and the Prieſts
lippes will keepe knowledge, Mal. 2. where hee tells them
they did not, but ſhould; therefore the Grecians would
conſume them as ſtubble: Alſo they are flat Arrians praying
to Michael, (who holdeth it not robbery to be equall with
God) as if he were a created Angell: and not the Eternall Son,
the Angell ſtanding at the golden Altar of incenſe, his humanitie,

to receiue in the cenſor of grace, our prayers. Theſe and ſuch
other treacheries againſt all the Byble; firſt brought the third
part of ſunne, moone and ſtarres to be darkened in the third
part; but ſoone, Chriſt the true ſun, and all ayer, for brightneſſe
of Scripture. And by theſe degrees, Man of ſinne became
able, as now 600. yeares wee finde, to ſtirre haile and fire
mixed with blood, in the earth: miſſing wholy of Religion:
and not as Turkes by ignorance, but by couetous malice.
                  A crie expounding the firſt trumpets warning of fire
and blood, by ſcholars made a mountaine of fire
caſt into the ſea; by the ſtar falling from his place:
a burning torch, falling into the waters of ſcipture:
and making them bitter; to darkening the third
part of profeſſion of Chriſtianitie.
                  Iohn ſaw an Angell flying in the middes of the heauen, ſaying,
wo, wo, wo, to them that dwell in the earth, from the voyces
of the trumpet of the three Angels whoſe trumpet ſhall
be heard.
                  In the open Church, companies of godly were martyred,
for reſiſting the Locuſts, deceyuing of the world; nowe leaving
the zeale that Epheſus once had, and the firſt Doctores
in Italy; and following Smirnean Iewes haereſie, in apiſh renuing
Leuitiques, inflat Atheiſme of altar, cope, linen, prieſt,
ſacrifice: reuiuing Pergamus Balamites, who for wealth and
wantonneſſe bred Monaſteries, ioyned to Nunries: when
Thyatirean Iezabels, are with Baals Prieſts, ſetting vp a newe
Sardian dead wealth, in profane riches; and contemning Philadelphias
true loue, to ſaue ſoules: But reuiuing Laodiceas
falling to the manner of the world, neither hoat in true zeale,
nor cold, as open contemners, but Chananean hypocrites.

To this end the Popes clergie is deſcribed in a plaine painting
forth of them: and of their warres for Ieruſalem at yeeres
1100. Next are all the Turkes warres handled alone: next
reuiuing of the Goſpell againſt both; vntill the end of the
world: before which tyme neither Turke nor Pope ſhall fall.
They flatter themſelues that write otherwiſe. But as the Antiochi
who reigned about 300. yer. after 150. were ſo weake,
that they ſtood by the Romans courteſie: & ſo Lagidae in the
tutelage of Rome; till the ſet yeere of Chriſt his firſt comming;
ſo though the Pope bee weakned in many places, Italy
ſhall remaine a continuall plague: that ſhall appeare in the
ſeuenth Trumpet. But now let vs conſider the firſt Trumpet.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The 5. Trumpet ſounding out the Popes cleerly.
                  The fift Angell ſounded the trumpet: and I ſaw a ſtarre fall
from heauen, and the key of the deepe, of the Pitt, was
giuen him: and there came a ſmoke out of the deepe:
and the ſun and ayer were darkened by the ſmoke that
came out of the pitt.
                  THE haters of the Papes turned to Popes, from fathers
to Diuels; to be the wicked (Iſai 11.) Romylus, (in learned
Ionathan from Cittim: Ieroms Italy, Nu. 24. Onkelos
& Iarchi, Romans.) They be for this commune place, the
fift Trumpet in order of handling, but in an explication of
the firſt in tenor of matter. The ſtarre fallē from heauen was
in the third trumpet: the meſſinger of the cōgregation fallen
from the kingdom of heauen; & Dan. 2. Mat. 3. in Chriſt: and
by Kimchi vpon Hoſea 4. Key is power of gouernement (in
ſoules caſe) Iſai. 22. Mat. 16. Apo. 2. The deepe is darkeneſſe,

Gen. 1. 2. in Zohar cōparing viſible with inuiſible, darkeneſſe
bringing to Gehenna;
                     2. Cor. 4. 6. euen as the commanding of light to
ſhine out of darkeneſſe, is compared with ſhewing Chriſt to
our ſoules. As Rattes, ſuo indicio pereunt. Terent. ſo heere the
Pope; and all that beare his keyes. Keyes heere be damned; but
not ſuch keyes as haue Gods warrant.
               
               
                  Whence the Pope chalengeth Keyes.
                  Nothing is more commune, nor euer ſeene more impudent,
thē the Popes chalinging of Keyes; from Mat. 16. firſt ſaying
that Peter is there the Rock. 1. All holy will hold him therin
Abaddon, & Apollyon, autor of deſtruction. For the Son of man
Dan. 7. Christ the holy of all holineſſe, Daniel 9. The ſon of God
Pſal. 2. calleth himſelfe the Rock from Deut. 32. tranſlated in
the 70. God. ſix tymes in one chapter: and the Rock was Chriſt,
1. Cor. 10. & there is no Rocke but the Eternall, in Pſal. 18. and
Rock is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Creator: & S. Peter chap. 4. vſeth that terme for
God onely, teaching Papes not to be babes, nor Popes but to
know how he vnderſtood the wordes of Chriſt. yet the Pope
will make Peter to take Gods name: & to be the chiefe of the
Apoſtles; and to haue power in new ſort, to binde and looſe
ſinns: as though all that truly teach Chriſt, do not the ſame,
though they know it not. But the firſt teachers of the ſon, Pſ. 2.
were to haue the firſt commencement of Doctorſhipp, in
Thalmud knowen ſpeach:Maymo. in Hagigah. And all kinges, who ſhould read
the Law & preach, as Salomon did all his life, are the true Papae
and Epiſcopi: One appointed man ſhould be the ſergeāt of the
Church: to looke to buſineſſe ſpeciall: But all that gouerned
ſhould be & are called Epiſcopi,
                     1. Tim. 3. as well as hee: & ſhould be as
well learned. God is Epiſcopus; Iob. 20. Pakid any of charge;

as Eleazar, is Epiſcopus, communely in the 70. Iudas office was
Epiſcope. Antigonus in Diodo. was like to be Epiſcopus of all
Aſia. And when the Greeke Papae would be Epiſcopi alone,
they were neuer quiet. They had beene ſtronger, if all learned
had beene Epiſcopi with them; as at Zurick now one ruleth
none: but is chiefe ſergeant for teaching & ſacraments:
but accountable as any other, for cariage. But Pope Romane
thus goeth on, to teach: that Peter came to Rome, that he left
keyes to one: and he to ſucceſſores, that they be the Rock, to
ſitt in the Temple of God as God; to make men ſweare, otherwiſe
then any of Gods people euer heard: to allow Prieſts
after our Lords death: to reiect the Ebrew and Greeke Gods
gift: and to accept a Latin deadly falty tranſlation, Exod. 12.
Act. 7. & 13. to deny that the Bible which God gaue is extāt,
to vſe Latin in Landes of other Languages: to giue the people
no vſe free in it: But 9. of 10. commun. And Pater noſter
as to parrats: and with the laſt verſe ſtollen away; the verſe
from Dan. 7. ſhewing all Kingdom, Power, and Glory, giuen to
Chriſt. So the ſumme of faith they had, in Latin as Parrats:
& in the maine pointe; for the ſoules going vp to the Father,
a going downe to hell, with beliefe that the fathers till then
were there. Before I reckon more Popiſh, that is diueliſh,
points: I wil heere ſhew how Iewes haue diſgraced our Goſpel
by the wicked tranſlation. Deſcended to Hell; by barbarous
wreſting of Latin from the true vſe in Tullies dayes.
               
               
                  A digreſsion to ſhew a ſcandal laid to Iewes.
                  
                     Izhak Ben Arama ſaith: Behold the ſtring vpon which the
law of Chriſtians hangeth; is this, the famouſly knowen; that for
the ſin of Adam, the first death of the ſoule entred vpon all ages:

and they fell all, fathers and ſonnes, first and later, Prophets and
holy into the ſorrowes of Gehenna, vntill Christ went and redeemed
them.
Theſe be ſtrictly his wordes vpon Leui. 26. where
Moſes expreſly telleth, that the Godly ſhould goe hence to Gods
Tabernacle: and Saint Paul 2. Corint. 5. tranſlateth him in a
moſt heauenly and comfortable ſort; and telled expreſly of
Abraham and the commended, that they deſired an heauenly
Citie▪ and God prepared it for them: although they were not perfected
in this world with manifestation of the Goſpell. Some
Greekes miſtaking S. Paul, held Limbum: and wreſted Greek
from old vſe to that: as Baſill vpon Pſalm. 49. Yet he ſpake
well vpon Pſal. 15. As Maymoni, tract. poenite. That, all holy
went hence to Gods Tabernacle: and Chriſostome, though he
ſaid Chriſt opened Paradiſe to the thiefe, ſaith vpon 2. Corint.
Hom. 6. Thus Lazarus was poore: and verie poore, and he was rich
that paſſed by him, lying in the gate: now whether entred into the
Kingdom; and ioyed in the boſome of Abraham?
                      Herein Chriſoſtom
is very ſound, and laid no trap for the Iewes. Athanaſius,
Cyrill, Theodorite, and others vpon the Pſalmes, and many in
Theophilact vpon Luke. 23. And he vpon Iohan in this; I goe to
the Father: and very many in Photius library: and Hegeſsippus
vpon the Maccabees: yet Romes aduancing Latin to aboliſh
knowledge of the Greek Teſtament, cauſed old Chryſologus
to ſay: that Abraham was in Gehenna; till Chriſt went thither,
and the 3. day brought him out. So the Iew had caught
the Latin company, enemy to all the Bible for happineſſe &
Redemption: that Iewes and Philoſophers could ſpeak of Emperors
cauſes better then they. Thus for 9. cōmun in ſtead of
10. for the Lords prayer maimed, and turned to Battus infinite
repetition, againſt the Law. Eccleſ. 5. that our words before
GOD ſhould be few: and their beliefe ſtayned in the

maine, ſheweth how they of Rome taught the people, that
would not receyue the loue of the trueth, but became a great deepe
ſea of darkneſſe: that Sun & ayer; Chriſt the ſun of righteouſneſſe,
and the ſcripture by which light commeth to our eyes, were darkned:
by a ſmok of haereſies, marring in their Maſſe, al religion. The
Iewes though faithleſſe, yet they doe ſearch moſt narrowly,
and profitable, the ſpeach and ſtory of the law: and ſhew vs
Chriſt in all whom they cannot ſee: But Romulus man of ſinn
ſetting forth him ſelfe as if he were God, in his Maſſe booke, darkneth
ſunne and ayer: in ſteed of ſeruing God alone, that is,
praying to God alone; as our Lord (Mat. 6.) repeated his
Law: when ye pray, pray to your Father which is heauen. Maymony
ſheweth, vpon what Command▪ prayer dependeth, (otherwiſe
prayer were ſin) ſaith in his treatiſe for prayer; That all
the Fathers expounded the Law for ſeruice, to be prayer: And Menachem
ſaith, God forbid, that any ſhould pray, but vnto God
only: euen as Pſal. 50. Pray vnto me, in the day of trouble, & I will
heare thee, ſo thou ſhalt honour me. No holy in all the Bible, the
ayer to ſee Chriſt, did euer pray to any Angell, but the Eternall
Son, nor euer to any man departed. Therefore Romylides
liturgie in praying to infinite millions of creatures, hath infinite
ſinnes.
               
               
                  Of the Locuſtes, moſt liuely deſcribing the Popes ſubjects,
to make him King of Locuſtes: diſtinguiſhed
from all other policies that be, or euer
were in the world.
                  
                     Locusts came out of the ſmoke:
and the hoat vapours of
Lybia bred cloudes of Locustes: which by South windes flee
to Sardinia, Silicie, Spaine and Italie, as others in Ioels dayes to
Iudea: that in one night the ſlow-bellies deuoure whole valleies

of tender Corne: where it would grow otherwiſe 100
fold. This a Sardinian man tolde my ſelfe; & merchants manie,
as paſt doubt; that exorciſtes by Satans helpe were invited
to helpe the matter. Now the millions of Monkes and
Friers, and ſuch as deuoure other mens labours, void of all
actions for political vſe, are ſo fitly compared with theſe, that
we may ſay, God in the Creation made locuſte to abound in
Lybia: to ſhew in time the locuſts bred by Rome, which would
crucifie the King of glorie: and ſhould deuoure the fruites
of ſuch as had no loue to the trueth;1. Cor. 2. 8. but would Honor the Citie,
that would kill the Lord of glory: that was a greater ſinn then
the deuouring of all the fieldes in the world.
               
               
                  A distinction of theſe locuſts from the proper locuſts
in Ioel: that theſe be as ſcorpions.
                  Theſe had power as the ſcorpions in Italie, which ſleepe
vnder euery ſtone; that no common weale could be healed
of their ſting, but ſuch as make their blood pay for it, and by
them ſelues be healed.
               
               
                  A further illuſtration, of diſtinction from naturall
Locuſts & Scorpions.
                  
                     Theſe locuſts might not ſtrike the blades of the earth, nor anie
greene thing, or coleworts, nor any plant, but onely the men,
that had not the ſeale of God in the forehead, 
                     profeſſing openly
that Chriſt is the Angell of Couenant: and his Humanitie the
golden Altar: and his Mediation the Cenſer, to receiue the
prayer of them, who by the aboundance of the grace of the gift of
Iuſtice, looke to reigne by Chriſt Ieſuus.
               
               
                  A further distinction how their ſting is not of naturall
ſcorpions, but of ſpirituall.
                  Theſe kill not, but torment men fiue moneths: with a torment

as it were of ſcorpions: Heare the reade muſt marke
corporation ſpeaches; that the whole ſtate is termed by one
man. So doth Moſes ſpeake to Iſrael, for many thouſandes
of yeeres, in ſpeach, as though all were to the preſent men:
ſo Ezekiel ſpeaketh of the King of Tyrus, then liuing: as hee
was (for a King) in Salomons and Chyrams day: Salomon had
Chyrams daughter, and he was a Proſelite; and by his charges,
Chyram the workeman, wrought Salomons braſſe workes: &
ſo the king was of Eden garden: ſo, heere, men of long deſcents
bee ſtonge; and not only for a particular age. And as
ſcorpions in locuſts haue no more tyme to hurt: but hide
themſelues in winter: as Nahum telleth: ſo theſe locuſts hide
themſelues: when ſharp weather of policie commeth. The Church
ſpend neere 1000. yeeres (good Abbates as Bernard & others
full many in Flaccius Illyricus and Antilogiâ Papae, and ſuch)
telling the Daemones or Popoi, of their dealings: and Princes
reſonablie matched them ſo long: but Satan was let looſe,
after 1000. yeeres. That Popes deceiued Princes to ſpend their
ſtrength 200. yeeres, as Gods enemies, to bring the land curſed
for euer, into glory; to make God a liar: ſo Princes being
weakned, Daemones Popoi, by ſtrange forgerie of Conſtantinus
gift, became ſtrong. Conſtantinus ſonnes, knew no ſuch matter,
no Iulian that ſcoffed all that he could forge againſt his
Vncle; nor Sozimus, as bad as Iulian: nor any Grecian. Yet
the Popoi Daemones will haue their owne teſtimonie; for Empires
giuen, without States conſent. Thus the Papae or reuerend
Father, that would be a king, by his locuſts beggers the
wealth of all Countreyes.
               
               
                  Of the Scorpiones ſtinges.
                  
                      1. Popoi Daemones taught to deny this:
                     Iohn. 3. that ſo God loued the
world, that he gaue his onely ſonne, to the end, that whoſoeuer

belieue on him, ſhould not periſh, but haue life euer laſting.
                  
                      2. As the ſerpent deceyued Eue, ſo the Pope hauing the
throne of the ſerpent, deceyued many mindes from that playneſſe
which is in Chriſt: and ſo ſtong their heartes, as they
(Iob. 3.) who deſire the graue: and digge for it more then
for treaſures.
                  
                      3. And whereas, this is only the work of God, wherein a
Chriſtian is diſtinguiſhed from Ciuill ſcribes, to belieue in
him whom God hath ſent: the Pope teacheth, not to reſt
in this.
                  
                      4. He teacheth truſt in wicked workes, in giuing Landes to
Locuſtes, to auoid Purgatorie, vnknowen to Greekes: and to
hate the Bible as auctor of haereſie: & to pray to Creaturs: to
be ſure for that only, if no more ſinne were, to periſh for euer.
And he teacheth, that men ſhould doubt of their ſaluation.
So his Locuſtes haue the ſtinges of Scorpions.
               
               
                  Of the Locuſts ſtrength and auctoritie.
                  When by their forged Purgatorie, and much begging, the
Locuſts had gotten the fatt of all Countreyes: thē they were
horſes prepared to warres: that they ſett Kings to warre; as they
would. And though they would ſeeme to haue no ſecular
Power: yet their dealinges ſhewed they ware crowns like gold:
being in face as priuate men:
                     So Babell: and Antio. Daniel 7. 
                     of womans haire, in keeping in
Cloiſters; yet haue they teeth of Lions to deuoure all: and habergions
of yron to defende them ſelues: and the noiſe of their winges,
the proper noiſe of Chariots of horſes, running to warres.
Their falſe teachers that ſpeake lies, bee the tayles:
                     Iſai 9. and they
ſting and kindle warres: and they torment fiue monethes, leſſe
then halfe the tyme of the Goſpells continuance.
               
               
                  
                  Of the Locusts King.
                  A King is a chiefe perſon in a policy, bent all to the good
of that ſtate: ſo the Buyſhop of Rome got all bent to him. And
challengeth to be King of Kings: & by his owne mouth he is
condemned His policy ruleth through all ſtates: Kinges he
will excommunicate. Thal. Ieruſa. recordeth that Kinges ſhould
not be excommunicated; But in Ieroboams cauſe. The Synedrion
the Biſhops of the ſtate, would in high offenſe, tell the King
thus: keepe your houſe: and ſalue your honour. And the pelting
preachers that will be teaching ſtates, what they ſhould doe,
otherwiſe then for the ſumme of ſaluation, haue a barbarous
ſpice of Pope pride: & ruynate ſtates. Thirtie yer▪ ſtudy ſhould
a meſſinger of the aſſembly haue, to read ſcriptures with due
conference: and to be a learned orator, to ſpeake for cōmune
matters. Now an yeere or two in a common place book, will
make a bold Crier: the curſe of the world: & an Archbuiſhop
to haue the keies of deep darkneſſe, if money can buy a ſhop. this
hath the depht of papiſtri. Iethro Exod. 18. By ciuill witt telleth
Moſes what Law GOD planted in all mens hearts: that
Biſhops in all charges, muſt be of skill. If Biſhops of Kinges armies
muſt learne of Phormio, how to pitch a field: riuers will
ſoone flow with blood. As pope made hhaile and fire mixed with
blood: dayly after a thouſand yeeres.
               
               
                  Of Oathes.
                  Kinges trie men by witneſſes: and Dauid forced none to
ſweare againſt any: the hid thinges were left to God. And by this
law, vpon 2. or 3. witneſſes, euery matter ſhall ſtand: the Talmudiques
as logicall as others, cōdemned not men, vpon their
owne confeſſion: as experience telleth dayly, that many forlorne,

take vpon them matters of others: in Ireland, a poore
man; in Walter Eſſex dayes, for a ſwall ſupper, tooke vpon him
to be hanged, for other mens harme: it was perceiued: & his
cōfeſſion was not taken. And vſually men once condemned,
take other mens guiltineſſe vpon them. Man of ſin, wil charge
the Duke of Buckingham, to tell whether he euer affected the
Kingdome; and then tell it; and kill him: A policy patched
from Popois Demonijs doth this; againſt the law of linſeywolſey.
They who follow him, are like vnto him; & all who
Buy-ſhops to his Lawes.
               
               
                  Of the Popes aduancing learning.
                  
                     Papiſtes bragge, how the pope brought Ebrew and Greek
to vs: and ſo deſerueth thankes. This doing is a Kings worke:
and all kinges are ſhameleſſe, if this be true: Grecia gaue
Greekes, written ouer the world; and Iewes Talmudiques: &
Bomberbe a merchant vndone by Popes enuie; printed the
beſt Ebrew: ſo this ſpeach is from Satan; as his kingdome.
               
               
                  Of Popes blindeneſſe, in Ebrew eaſieſt matters.
                  
                     Paul diſputeth in his whole epiſtle, to the Heb. for the Doctrine
of Law & Goſpel: that perfectiō of doctrin was in the
Goſpell: & the Iewes be forelorne, which grant not that. The
Popes in the depth of Satans blindeneſſe, would make Saint Paull an
Atheiſt: againſt Leui. 26. and himſelfe, 2. Cor. 5. And for Abraham,
Iſaack, and Iacob, who went hence to the heauenly City: & they
make him ſay, the fathers had not perfect ioy: til Chriſt tooke
them frō Limbo. Arias in Arcano ſermone▪ in infernus, & Lacus:
would make the holy Apoſtle to croſſe Moſes & the Goſpel;
& to ſett Iſaac Ben Arama, as I touched, vpō the Popes treaſon,
to diſgrace the Goſpel. I do marueile that he wrote ſo: ſo learned

a man: to miſſe ſo groſſly. I thinke he was forced to ſuffer
it to paſſe vnder his name. This can a King of Locuſts doe.
Some Grecians ſtammered at S. Paules wordes; as Baſill vpon
Pſal. 49. But vpon Pſal. 15. & 73. hee called himſelfe backe:
and ſo did Chryſoſtome, and the ſway of Greekes, agree with
Moſes. Leuit 6. and with the New. Teſt. and Talmudiques,
that the faithfull went hence to perfect ioy.
               
               
                  How blindlie the Papiſts wreſt Ieroms wordes: that the
Iewes read not the 3. firſt Chap. of Geneſis;
till they were 30. yeres old.
                  
                     Ieromes Epiſtle to Paulinus, telleth that the Hebrews read
not the beginning & ending of Ezekiel, & the beginning of
Geneſes till 30. yeeres of age: Maymonie in Morek Nebuchim,
vpon Ezekiel: ſaith of him the ſame. But the terme, daraſh legere;
is to read as Doctores, not as children read: Children
read Geneſis from 7. yeer old: But vnder 30. hardly will any
comment, well vpon Gen. 1. 2. 3. Papiſts turne this to ſimple
reading: He muſt be a blind king, that would haue the Bible
to be ſo hated.
               
               
                  Of the Popes names.
                  Hee hath a name in Ebrew ABADDON: from Num.
24. THE ROMAN SHAL AFFLICT ASSVR AND
EBER: AND HE TENDETH TO DESTRVCTION.
The whole bent of the Pope is to deſtruction: his whole policie:
and his Maſſe: his Idolls; and his rules of faith. Zurick
takes a ſhort courſe: to leaue the Ciuill officer all gouernement:
and to Scholar Biſhopps only to looke to learning.
This much they ſhould add: for education of wealthie: that
both Teſtam for Greeke and Ebrew, in Thalmudique ciuill
law ſhould be knowen perfectly before 30. By 15. it might

be reaſonable: well by 20. exceeding wel by 30. This I would
ſhew to a Prince of zeale: that would vrge ſtudie: But ſlow
ſcholars, ſhall not be troubled with aduertiſement. Plantines
Bible, the Popes worke, hath offred much helpe: A Kinges
bent; if ſome had not hindered, had done much in another
ſort: that in one moneth, the New Teſtament might be learned,
euen by Talmudique maner: calling all to Moſes 613.
lawes; and they in few yer. and both tongues, by the Apoſtles
dictionary. No time will euer cleere either, by our ſtale
wandring courſe: and vnlearned flaūting ſermons: far from
holy Ebrewers manner, as farr from all reaſon; that one ſcholar
ſhould teach all, matters of Experience, in an houre or
more. If they drew ſtil all the Law to Chriſt; that by the Goſpell,
we are perfected, it were learned. But the commō ſort,
ſhall giue an heauy accompt for many idle wordes; ſpeakers
and allowers.
               
               
                  Of the Popes Greeke name.
                  APOLLYON, that is, Destroyer: is the Popes Greeke
name: Becauſe all his policy tendeth to eternall deſtruction.
The Bible till of late he litle ſuffred in the originall: and yet,
in the head of all; he fighteth againſt all for Hebrew: in
Gen. 3.1. Iohn. 3. HE SHALL BRVSE THY HEAD all the millions
of Hebrewes, to each man ſay, HE. And Iohn expoundeth
all of CHRIST: that HE ſhould deſtroy the workes of
the Diuel: ſo ſaith Onkelos, HE ſhal, &c. And ſo the Arabiq.
Sadaias: And ſo the 70. and all Greekes vpon it: Yet the
Popes tranſlation hath ſhee; againſt thriſe the maſculine gendre,
in Ebrew: & all Ebrew kinde, that euer were: to bring Mary
into Chriſt his honor, to deſtroy the Bible, & the world: So,
whereas it is a ſin moſt high, to crucifie Chriſt againe: and to
make him an open ſhame: the Crucifix through all popery,

ſheweth heere, that he is Apollyon. Pilate knew as Mary that
Chriſt was crucified; But that holpe nothing. But he could
not conſider the L. of glorie crucified. And the Crucifix cannot
expreſſe that: but leaueth only a baſe obiect. Heerein hee is an
Apollyon; and ſo in all Pointes.
               
               
                  A digreſsion to our Prayer booke, made from the Popes.
                  Our prayer booke was made when Papiſts were the more
in Parliament: and allowed by our ſide for mens infirmitie, as
Luc. 3. alloweth Cainā
                      a ſonne to Arphaxad. And Acts. 7. ſoules
75. for 70. And as S. Paul allowed circumciſion, for Timothie:
But Chriſt ſhould profit the Galathiās nothing, if they ſimply
did it allow. The whole booke is bent to the Popes veine: & if there
were nothing falſe in wordes, the frame draweth hate with it. For
weakneſſe in other, I would allow it; vntill I could perſuade
to better: But ſeeing prayer is our ſeruice to God: the Lords
prayer, and his Pſalmes learnedly choſen, for all occaſions,
ſhould ſerue the turne. Tobie, is a fable and pēned full of lies
of purpoſe: that the reader ſhould hold it no better. Yet becauſe
Antiquitie ſaw ſome vſe in the fable, ours ſuffered it, till
better light came. When ſimple put a Parliament in truſt, the
Parliaments ouerſights ſhould be no plague to the ſimple. Al
who feare God, will ſtick only to his word: & vrge no more.
I haue taught moſt vnthankfull Buyſhopps, the Creedes article,
that ſoules go vp, not downe: and the holy, to heauen, not
to hell. Archbi. Whitgift yeelded by Mr Geoffrey King: and
knew that I cared not for voices of men, ſure to periſh if they
ſtood to their error. And thirteen year agoe, I knew not of an
other liuing, of my minde; but I was ſure I could make them
worthy of Ioakims buriall: that durſt burne my writing: and
Anathema Maran Atha, while they liued, and for euer. Spedily
the beſt ouer Chriſtendome flocked to my minde; although

ſome of Geneua, Marpurg, Hanaw, for rancour, deny all helpes
for their owne victorie; & make them ſelues enimies to God,
and al good men, to make a Gehennean torment, of a going to the
moſt happy dead, in Abrahams boſome. The learned Fath. L.
T. Winton hath cleared this cauſe, & ſhewed that neither Weſtminſter
nor Rhodanus Alpin, through-flowen towne, ſhould
binde men to their witts. Our ſpeach to God, is our only cōfort
in this world, and they who will hinder vs from the beſt in this
kinde, ſhall haue their portion with profane, in weeping & gnaſhing
of teeth. Since the King came to England, the Realme might
haue had the Bible well tranſlated 5. yeares agoe, with euery
mans freedom to ſpeak for the beſt: & a table for pſalmes; for
all the ordinarie yeare; & all particular occaſions: and for reading;
Law, with Prophets, Goſpel, & Epiſtles: and both Vniuerſities,
by this day ready in both Teſtaments. But they had
rather rent one another, thē haue the peace of God to guard
their tongues, in the eloquence of Gods worde. But now let
vs returne to our Popes.
               
               
                  Of Antichrist, his Chaldy name.
                  
                     Ionathan Ben Vziel, a rare Ebrew Doctor, elder then S. Pauls
Gamaliel, expoūdeth Iſaich. xi. When he ſaith Chriſt ſhal conſume
the wicked with the ſpirit of his mouth: He ſheweth what wicked,
euen wicked RHOMILVS; he knew that Balaam made but Eaſt,
Aſſur: & Weſt, Cittim Grecia, & Grecia Maior Italy, to afflict the holy,
& therfore ſpeaketh vpon a moſt ſure groūd, that that wicked
was Rhomilus. Arias Monta. knew that heere, he brake the
Popes neck; if he came forth truly, vnder the Popes grant: &
therfore leaueth out the word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Romylus. And what
be our Papae of Croydon & other Parochies, that could neuer ſpie
this dealing. If the K. Roial vow, to the Bibles honor had not
bin hindred by Biſhops, the Ebrew with Maſſorit, & the Caldy in

true copie, had been ſeene by this day in work. But whē 
                     Buiſhopps
croſſing, hindereth the workman, what can the Kinges
money doe; when the dogges neither eat hay, nor ſuffer the
oxe: yet heere the old Prouerbe taketh place, Mendacem memorem
eſſe oportet. Boderianus, the fellow-laborer, in his Chaldie
dictionarie, he not priuie to the guile citeth the Chaldi perfect:
But ſpelleth it ſubtilly: not Romylus, which Ionathan expreſſed
moſt learnedly to any Rabbin, but he ſpelleth it Armilus:
to make nothing of it; but, Antichrist, or Antideus, or by
ſome Gog, or Magog. But Gamaliels ſcholar, who to the Hebrewes,
paſſeth in Talmudiques, all Ebrewes; that none but
by Talmudikes helpe ſhall euer vnderſtand him, ſpeciallie in
Melchitzedeke, liuing ſtill as God, whom he deſcribeth in office,
euen as they who in ſtorie knew to be SEM: this Talmudique
of Salem; Orator of Tarſus, borne to be Abba: Abba,
Papa, for Rome; as Peter, for Babell, Pſal. 87. He expoūdeth Iſai
xi. and Ionathan moſt ſoundly:2. Theſ. 2. 
                     that when the preſent gouernour
ſhould be taken away (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is any gouernour, that reſtrayneth
others, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) then, man of ſinne ſhould come. And although,
God ſtill plagued Rome, by Alaricus, Genſericus,
Thodoricus, and Totilas, ſpecially: yet the Papae ſtill begged
land; and tooke Imperiall name, as Pontifex in Sozimus: and
by wealth ouermatched Constantinus Popes: that whē no puniſhment
made Rome humble; but would haue there, the
Empire againe ſet vp; and cared not for the trueth: ſpirite of
deceit ſhould worke, to their deſtruction; that would not receyue
the loue of the trueth, to ſaluation. SO THENCE,
WAS THE REBELLION TO ARISE: MAN
OF SIN; APOLLYON, SONNE OF PERDITION;
ENIMIE; LAVLESSE; KING OF LOCVSTS; THE
NEW ANTIOCHVS, EXALTING HIM SELFE

ABOVE ALL THAT IS CALLED GOD: AND
NOT SETTING THE IDOLL OF IVPITER
OLIMPIVS IN THE TEMPLE: BVT VAVNTING
HIMSELFE, AS IF HE WERE GOD: to expound
ſcriptures; to looſe or faſten ſin: to ſett vp or depoſe States.
And to haue a people of his owne frame: and to burne the
true Temple of God.
               
               
                  The Epilogue, for the deſcription of the Pope.
                  Fiue Trumpets deſcribed the Popes greatneſſe, how it
grew to be a kingdome of Locuſts; able to ſting and to ouerrule
in warres: his laſt miſchiefes are tolde firſt, how in his
high power he bringeth haile of troubles, & fire mixed with
blood: when he is made a mountaine of Empire cast into the ſea:
from a ſtarre or Doctor of the Church, falling into Idolls
worſhip: and ſoone darkening a third part of the chiefeſt; &
in quicke proceſſe, a ſmoke of blindneſſe, darkeneth Sonne,
and Sunne, and Scripture: that the Pope is to mightie to bee
ouerthrowen. As when he ſent Princes to warre for Ieruſalem,
and to ſpend all their ſtrength there: ſince now 600. yeres
his might is high. Now follow three poinctes: Machmads
inuaſions: and martyrs fight; and laſtly Chriſtians Policies,
in warre; his match.
               
               
                  Of Machumed or Machmad, or Moamed, in
Piel, Hiphil & Hophall, the participles three
are vſed in Arabique & Rabbins.
                  The voice of Chriſt from his owne mediatiō, biddeth the
godly, as hauing power, like the Angells, Dan. 4. ouer Nabuchadnezar,
tell Machumedists, that God will frō the Eaſt ſend

them great ſucceſſe, with the Popes ſupremacy, Machmad
began: and ſoone turned away all the Contreyes of Daniels
Image, to ſhake of the Weſt yoke, hated of old vnder Greeks;
and ſtill reſiſting and rebelling. Of their comming vp, and
ſpoiling of Spaine and Italy: And ioyning with Turkes; I
ſpake in concent of Scripture. Euphrates was the old place of
fight for the Romans, as to M. Craſsus army, and the Parthians.
Old ſtories giue credite to prophecie: their armies
are infinite; and horſe many; with ſucceſſe, and lions boldneſſe:
to threaten ruine to all that yeeld not: as they haue deſtroyed
all ancient townes: Fire, blew ſmoke, and brimston;
meane that: Machmad his ſonnets of victories, the falſe prophet
maketh a taile of Lions boldneſſe. Men in the Eaſt, worſhip
the Diuel: Idols, in the Weſt; liued by theft in Arabia;
abounded in witches in Lybia, and in Europe. Hence, GOD
ſett vp Machmad, to be a plague: yet men cannot repent.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               How Chriſt helpeth his Church, by ruling warre & guile: not
to paſſe boundes: which notably appeared in our Albion:
for the Spanniſh nauy 1588. And in thoſe home-bred
Diuels, in the Gunpowder plott 1605. both ſtirred
vp, by the Dragon, and falſe prophet.
               
                  Of Angell.
                  CHRIST is an Angell, the Glory of the Father,
his Character, Exod. chap. 23. Eb. chap. 1. ſo Chap. 8.
MIGHTIE, Iſa. 9. and there in the 70. the Angell
of great Counſell.
               
               
                  
                  Comming downe from heauen, Eſai 64.
                  
                     Oh that thou wouldſt breake the heauens: wouldſt come
downe that the Mountaines might melt at thy preſence; as
fire burneth fewell, and maketh waters boile: the people
would melt at thy praeſence; when thou commeſt downe;
the Mountaines would melt at thy praeſence, 
                     Iſai. 64. So
heere Chriſt comming downe: the Mountaine of Rome
and Turke melteth.
               
               
                  Of the Cloude, Iſai. 19.
                  Behold the Eternall, rideth vpon a ſwift cloude: and ſhall come
into Egipt: and the Idols of Egipt ſhall quake at his preſence; and
the heart of Egipt ſhall melt within him; This Ancient ſpeach,
Iohn expoundeth for ſpirituall Egipt, chap. xi. and her Idols
cap. 9. So when Iſrael commeth from Egipt; God one day,
went before them in a Cloude, &c.
                  
               
               
                  And the Rainebow was about his head.
                  
                     The Rainebow is Geneſ. 9. 13. a token that the deluge
ſhall not drowne the world againe: and Iſai 54. Thus GOD
ſpeaketh: This is vnto me as the waters of Noah. For as I haue
ſworne that the waters of Noë, ſhould no more goe ouer the earth:
So I haue ſworne, that I will not be angrie with thee, nor rebuke
thee; the reaſon is in the verſ. 5. For the Eternall would become
a houſband, to vs Gentiles: and he would defend, as verſ. 17.
In this place compared with Chap. 12. where the Dragon
caſteth out waters, to ſinke the Church: this Rainebow
drieth vp thoſe waters.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the face, like the Sunne.
                  When Daniel was taught the fulneſſe of Christ, by the Angel
Gabriel, Dan. 9. in Chap. 10. he ſeeth his face as lightning:
as the Doctrine was: ſo Saint Steuen handling the ſame matter,
matter moſt cleare; had his face like the face of an Angell,
Actor. 7. So Chriſt, Apoc. 1. had his face like the Sun
in his greateſt brightneſſe. That place telleth who this Angel
is.
               
               
                  Of the feete, like a pillar of fire.
                  When the Angell of the Lord went before Iſraell, hee remoued
and ſtood behinde them: and ſo did the pillar of fire:
which went before them; and remoued and ſtood behinde
them: and came betweene the Campe of the Aegyptians, &
the campe of Iſraell. So heere CHRIST, will ſtande betwixt
Romes Egypt, and his Church.
               
               
                  Of the litle Booke opened.
                  The ſumme of the Bible is ſhort: How of Gods eternall counſell,
the world was made forman: Becauſe the ſonne of GOD by
whom he made the world, woud be a man to giue life to them that reſted
in this wiſedome. And the ſtory of 4000. yer. to Ieruſalems
fall, by Rome hath no more: and all ſhould gladly heare of
this, all their life: and ſee CHRIST his bright face ſtill to this
ſumme. The booke is open, and eaſie to be vnderſtood: This
ſumme I prefixed to Eccleſiaſtes: for ſuch as will not ſitt in
the ſeat of the ſcornefull. This Booke is oppoſite to Idoles:
that can teach nothing but baſeneſſe of the King of glory; &
crucifie him againe: and make him an open ſpectacle. The firſt

crucifying of Chriſt, coſt Rome one vtter deſtruction: that
Rome ſtandeth not where it ſtood. And the Crucifying of
him againe, hath ſent millions to eternall deſtruction. The litle
booke open in the hand of Chriſt, commanded no making of ſuch crucifix:
and it cōmandeth to doe no more, then is commanded:
They wander wickedly, from the mothers wombe, that will
aduenture their eternall ſtate, vpon mans inuentions, which
all know, may be ſpared.
               
               
                  Of the right foote, ſet vpon the ſea: and the left,
vpon the Land.
                  
                     Waters, or ſea ſignifie warre toyles: Land, quieter profaneneſſe:
CHRIST, Dan. 12. ſtood ouer the waters of ſharp ſwift
Tygris, and lift vp his right hande and his left hande; & ſware
by him that liued for euer; what tyme ſhould be for Antiochus
rage: ſo heere he telleth for Turke and Pope; that when
the 7. Trumpet hath his blaſtes ended, the world ſhall end.
Antiochi loſt all, by the firſt comming of CHRIST: and
the Pope ſhall waſt, vntill the ſecond comming: and till then
keepe ſome ſtroke.
               
               
                  Of the litle Bookes eating.
                  The voyce, like a trumpets, chap. 1. and 4. biddeth gracious
Iohn goe, & take the litle booke from the hand of CHRIST:
ſo he asketh Chriſt for it: and he biddeth him take it, & eat it.
And telleth, that it will be ſweete in the mouth; for ſtudie:
but bitter in the belly, for them that ſhall heare of it: as the
rowle that Ezechiel aete, it told the Idolatrous Ieruſalem of a
fall, which haſtened vpon them. So Iohn by his booke,

ſweet for Gods Counſell, is bitter for them which ſhall digeſt it: when he preacheth now to manie people, nations, &
tongues, and Kinges.
                  The roaring of the Lion, and ſeauen thunders,
ſhall be handled at the laſt woe.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               And a reed was giuen mee, like vnto a Rod, and the Angell ſtood
by, ſaying; Come, and meaſure the Temple of God; and the
Altar; and them that worſhip in it: But the Court which is
within the Temple, cast out, and meaſure it not, for it is giuen
to the Heathen.
               THE eating of the booke, and meaſuring of theſe matters,Eph. 3. 16▪ 17. 18. 19.
be of one tenor: when the ſoule is full of the Goſpell,
it muſt ſhew Chriſt to bee the Temple; and all
heigth and depth;1. Cor. 5. length and bredth of wiſedome to bee
therein conteyned: in that God would dwell in CHRIST,
to reconcile the world vnto him ſelfe. And in his death vpon the
Croſſe he is the Altar; and he ſacrificed him ſelfe, being as
Melchitzedek, whom Saint Paul, as former Talmudiques in
deſcription maketh a figure of the eternall wight. He as Aharon,
went through the veile of his fleſh, into the holy, from the Altar
of the Croſſe, and performed all meaſures of juſtice. That is
heere taught by meaſure (with a line) of Temple and Altar;
Matters viſible, were to expreſſe the inuiſible. So Chriſt telleth,Iohn. 2.
that he is the Temple, ſaying: Deſtroy this Temple, and
I will build it againe, in three dayes.
               
                  
This Law; Ye ſhall reuerence my Tabernacle, Leuit. chap. 19.
30. and 26. 2. Commaunded to reuerence infinitly,Heb. 9. and. 10. the Tabernacle
of Chriſt. And Ben Arama, noteth truely, vppon
Exod. Port. 52. That God ſoone did caſt off Moſes Tabernacle,
and Salomons Temple, to ſhew that he would reſt in
the Tabernacle or temple of Chriſt. Now the Iewes, to make
Chriſt Aharon, and Melchitzedek, make this death, that
Chriſt ſaid; Destroy this Temple, and in three dayes I will build it
vp againe. The highest grace for life, the ſlaues of Sathan turne to
death: whereupon, they were neither forgiuen in this world,
nor in the world to come. Profane ſtates bee commonly forgiuen
in this world; as the Epicure Luc. chap. 16. though in
the world of ſoules, they parch for euer: but the Iewes ſinning
againſt the light of the holy Spirite; and grace of ſaluation,
periſh openly in this world: ſurer of eternal woe, in Haides,
the world of ſoules; in which Abraham in Haides, in the
kingdome of heauen, will tell them: that they are not his
ſonnes. For he (in Izhak receiued from death,) ſaw the reſurrection
of Chriſt, and reioyced. But the Iewes gaue money,
to Souldiours, to haue the reſurrection of CHRIST
denied.
               
                  Of meaſuring the faithfull.
                  The Curtaines in Moſes Tabernacle, were made fitt for
the number:But when it pleaſed the Lord to make the Gentiles his people, ſaith Eſai: Make larger Curtaines, Chap. 54. 2. and the number of men aged twentie, and aboue, was thus: the ſonnes of—
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           REVBEN. 1. 46500.
                           151450. SOVTH
                           Summa totalis 603550.
                        
                        
                           Simeon 2. 59300.
                        
                        
                           Gad. 3. 45650.
                        
                        
                           IEHVDAH 4. 74600.
                           186400. EAST
                        
                        
                           Iſſachar. 5. 54400.
                        
                        
                           Zabulon 6. 57400.
                        
                        
                           EPHRAIM 7. 40500.
                           108100. WEST
                        
                        
                           Manaſſes. 8. 32200.
                        
                        
                           Beniamin. 9. 35400.
                        
                        
                           DAN 10. 62700.
                           157600. NORTH
                        
                        
                           Aſer. 11. 41500.
                        
                        
                           Nephtaly. 12. 53400.
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus God in Num. 1. and 2. twiſe reckoned his choſen;
of the XII. tribes, beſides Leui. And the Curtains were fitted
to ſuch a number. So heere Iohns Doctrine ſhall teach a certaine
number:1. Cor. 14. 22. ſuch as God hath choſen; and no more: the
other will folow the God of this world. A man by mans witt,
might maruaile why Princes, would ſuffer ſuch a deceiuer as the
Pope, to ſtand one yeere: his doctrine being altogether against all
light: and each Prince being able to caſt him from his territories.
But God hath choſen a few only, and none can come
to Chriſt, vnleſſe the Father draw him.
               
               
                  Of the Court within the Temple, to be caſt out;
in condemnation of Iudaiſme.
                  
                     Maymonides, in Bethabechica; or treatiſe of the Temple,
about 430. yeer. agoe, wrote how the Iewes yet look for returne
to Ieruſalem: and to haue a temple like Ezekiels, or Salomons.
For Ezekiels Saint Peter telleth Chap. 1. 2. Epiſt.

                     That euery Prophecie, is not to be expounded properly: becauſe the
holy men of God ſpake, as they were caried by the ſpirit of God. Now
Dan. 9. telleth, that the Iewes Temple ſhould be vtterly deſtroyed;
and all ſacrifice ended:Heb. 10. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. So by Daniell they ſhould
know, that the Meſsias ſhould be the building wherein God
would delite: as the very Iew Izhak Ben Arama noted aboue,
in Port. 52. Iohn preuenteth Iudaiſme in ſhewing that this
Temple hath no Leuites court to ſacrifice; nor ſeparation for
Iſraell. But all be heere kings and ſacrificers, and their Court
reacheth ouer all the Citie. And old Iudaiſme is now profaneneſſe.
               
               
                  A digreſsion, to compare the old Temple, or Tabernacle,
with the ſpirituall.
                  
                     The Temple of Salomon imitateth Moſes Tabernacle: and all
Ieruſalem within the walles; the ſpace within Iſraels curtaines:
as the Thalmud noteth, Chriſt is the Temple, Ioh. 3. High ſacrificer,
Heb. 3. who went through the vaile of his fleſh, by his own blood
into the Holy. He is the Arke: golden within and without: and conteyning
the Law grauen in him. And all growen into Chriſt, ſhould
haue the Law in their heart: and looke for the crowne of the Law.
                  In the outer Tabernacle or Temple, were the Candleſtick
of gold, lightned with beaten pure oile, by the high ſacrificer:
and the table of xij. loues ſet openly: & that had crowne
worke: and the Altar of incenſe, couered with golde. The
Candleſticke, the golden people: beaten pure oile; the ſpirit
of grace, that commeth by afflictions; the kindler, CHRIST
him ſelfe: Shem Tob; the Iew commeth in words thus farr;
though he knew not God to be in Chriſt. The Table,2. Cor. 5. 9 expreſſeth
the gouernor, who prouideth bread for the xij. Tribes, the

xij. monethes: And that paines findeth a crowne. So King
Ioſeph feeding Iſraell, held the xij. Tribes in his Beryll, on Aharons
ſhoulders. King Moſes, King Ieſus, King Samuel, King
David, and King Salomon, ware the Crowne for this Table.
The Altar of incenſe was proper to Aharons ſonnes; high Sacrificers,
and lower; as Zacharie of Abia, the eighth, of 24.
courses. This worke had his crowne. Now Christ is our Angell
only, to ſtande at the golden Altar, that our prayer as incenſe may
come before God. In the court, an altar was of ſacrificing; where
daylie ſacrifice, & the Paſcha of flocke beaſt, Kidd or Lambe,
a duetie to all; and voluntarie Paſcha of Oxe, and Ram voluntaire,
and of two dayes feaſt, Ioh. 18. were killed, & had their
fatt brent on the altar, and blood ſhed at the foote of the altar:
where pypes conueied it away. Chriſt is our Lambe,
Oxe, and Altar: and when he ended ſacrifice, he gaue bread
and wine, which his Diſciples did eate and drinke (in taſt like
other bread and wine) to be his body and blood, for our
ſoules. Symbolon, Typus, Antitypus, Icon, in Greekes: who durſt
not looke for a knot in a bulruſh.
               
               
                  Of the holy Synagogues.
                  The Synagogues ſauing in 48. Leuites townes, vſually were
of Iſrael & no Leuite: and they were Biſhopps all the Ancient
learned, & one, Sergeant of the cōgregation, he read the Law:
and the Archbiſhop requeſted the other in eſtieme, to ſpeak
to the Law; how all tended to MESSIAS. So a ſabbath dayes
iourney, would draw all the Law vnto Chriſt. And all were
holden wicked who being of wealth, brought not vp their
children frō 7. year. in the law. Their cōmentaries to this day
in peecemeales, agree with the marrow of the New Teſtam.
Abben Ezra is wōderful, Dan. 9. ſpeaking better for our maine
battel, thē any of ours. Where he ſaith, the 70. ſeauens, are from

the beginning of Daniels prayer, vnto the ſealing of Meſsias, the holy
of holy. Our Acadamiques might be aſhamed, that a Iew in
Rhodes now 500. year. ago, ſpake better thē they for our Goſpel.
Zohar on Gen. 1. Elohim, in theſe words, Let vs make man;
may be likened to a father, & a mother of the work. The father ſaith,
what wilt thou make man? he will rebell: and an ill ſonne will be the
ſorrow of his mother: then the Mother ſaith, his rebelliō be vpon me.
This matter is deepe for a Iew to ſpeak, The ſame ſaith vpon Gen.
49. IAH, is in Shiloh. And vpō Gen. 3. By the ſerpent, Chriſt ſhall
be kild, and many of Iſrael with him. And a rare ſaying, of God Rediemer
in a Iubilie, I graued in a braſſen abridgment of the Bibles
concent; from Zohar, vpon Leu. 25. In the Iubilie yere, God
dwelling in our tabernacle wil be remiſsion, Redemption, and ending
of Sabbath to Iſrael. fol. 53. Col. None of ours of old ſaw Iubilies,
ſitted to our Lords death: the Iewes knew it muſt be ſo.
Ours ſcoffe it being ſhewed: & after that be highly extolled.
S. Paul deſcribing Sem, in the perſon of Melchitzedeck, to be as
God, hath Rabbins phraſes: yet extāt in Zohar, for his warrant;
that he held the man, and perſon as they did. And for all that
epiſtle, Rabbins ſpeak the ſame that he doth. And Rabbins haue
bin a bridle to keepe Daniel ſound; that only holy Iewes, bee the
afflicted in him; and when the image afflicting holy Iewes ended thē
Meſsias ſhould be borne in Bethlechem. They might haue taught
vs the right meaning of Daniel. So, for ending the houſe of
Salomon in Iechonias, lalkut bringeth Gods oth: & Maimoni in
poenit. Gods decree: & ſo Barbinel & Kimchi and Iarchi vpon
Ier. 22 and vniuerſally they conclude, that the firſt Adam, the
firſt day fell: So the firſt day Chriſt is called heire of all In this
ſorte the Biſhopps of the Synagogues, taught as learnedly as
any of Leuie.
               
               
                  Of the Synedrion.
                  
                     Tha
                           •
                        . Ieruſalemy in Sanedrin ſheweth, that the Sanedrin
                     
of 70. might be all of Iſrael, without any one of Leui. And
that the high ſacrificer was not of the Sanedrin: but as another
if he were rarely learned, and ſage. And for all faltes he
was iudged and puniſhed as another: and that often they
were ſo ſimple, that the councill taught them their duety on
expiation day. The high ſacrificer might be excommunicated, but
the King might not, but in Ieroboams caſe. Where Mallachi telleth,
they ſhould aske the Law at Leui, that is; becauſe they
were alway at the Temple: and bound to be learned. But
Samuel of Korah, and Daniel of Iudah, were not inferior to
any.
               
               
                  Of Athean imitation of Aharon.
                  It was death for any of Iſrael, to meddle with Aharons
office. Samuel of Korah, and Elias, whoſe tribe is vncertaine, had
Gods diſpenſation. Otherwiſe they had neuer ſacrificed. And
nothing about the Temple might be in Iſraels houſes; no
building like the Temple, arke, candleſticke, table of bread,
Altars, or Leuites attire: yet the father of Rome, will counterfaite:
he will haue a Candleſticke, Cope, Linen garments,
precious ſtones, mitre, girdle Prieſt, ſacrifice, Altar: Sathan
taught him ſo, to dally with Gods Law. Greeke fathers began
the name Prieſt and high Prieſt, to be fitted to their Doctores,
but in the end the gangrene crept to harme vnſpeakable:
that Satan by Turke and Pope ruled the world.
               
               
                  How Biſhops were made in Iſrael.
                  
                     Maymony, in Sanedrin ſheweth how the Biſhops of the
Sanedrin made a D. to teach the people: that they called him

                     Muphla, wonderous learned, and held him ſo, firſt: then ſome
of the Sanedrin laid their handes vpon him and ſaid;Mat. 16. 
                     Rabbi,
take thou auctority to teach,Pſal. 109. 
                     what is bound, and what is looſe.
Our Lord vſeth that ſpeach in making his Apoſtles Biſhopps:
                     Act. 1.
in giuing them auctority to teach what is looſe, and what is
bound. But Iſcariot, let another take his Biſhoprike, the reſt
were faithfull Biſhops.
               
               
                  Of excommunication.
                  In King Moſes tyme, and other Kings, Ciuill puniſhments
were vſed: but when heathen ruled: then the congregation
could doe no more but remoue the party from the companie:
by open voice in their Ciuill court: Kehelah in Adams
tongue: Eccleſia in Iauans. Any of the ſeniors might excommunicate;
but if the excommunicated complayned of iniurie;
the Sanedrin examined the cauſe, and vpon iniury they
excommunicated the excommunicater.
               
               
                  A iust; but ſtrange doctrine.
                  
                     Thal. Ieruſal. in Illu Megallechim, writeth of a Rabbin, who
fell into an haunt of Iewe thieues. They took his mony from
him: he pronoūced the Anathema for them: they returned
the curſe vpon himſelfe; that amazed him: and comming
home, he asked Rabbies whether he were in danger of curſe:
doubtleſſe, ſaid they: a money matter, where Lawes be open,
giueth no Anathema: ſo the falſe Anathema, returned ſound
vpon thy ſelfe. On this he went to the thieues haunt: and
confeſſed ſinne, that for money he gaue them to Satan: and
requeſted abſolution, then ſaid the thieues, abſolue vs & wee
will: they agreed to both. There a woman commeth by a

ſcholmaiſter, beating a boy cruelly; & ſaith, thou art Anathema;
the ſcholmaiſter asked a Rabbi, whether that could binde
him frō the Synagogue the ordinary time; A mounth doubt
leſſe, ſaid the Rabbi: not the perſon, but the matter, giueth the
authoritie; go and confeſſe thy fault to the woman, and thou
art free, and ſo he did. Thus reaſon, not politique authoritie
giueth the force; and the Law, 1. Cor. 16. If any loue not the L.
Ieſus Chriſt, let him be anathema Maran atha The Pope the greateſt
murderer & Idolater in the world, he will be excommunicating
Princes. They ſhould returne the curſe vpon his
owne head, and leaue God iudge: & others may deale alike
with al of the Pops keies: and God will make knowen who be his: ſo
Moſes vſed Pharoh; ſo Elias vſed the ſoldiers; ſo Eliſeus vſed the
42. of Bethel; ſo Ieremie vſed Ieruſalem; ſo S. Paul vſed Alexander,
ſo the martyrs heere deale with the king of Locuſtes.
               
               
                  A digreſsion to expound the terme Biſhop.
                  Much ſtrife is for the Biſhop of Rome, and for others. The
manifold ſenſe of the terme muſt be opened to end the ſtrife.
In Iob, EL, the Almighty God, is tranſlated Epiſcopus. A looker to
mans dealing. In the Law PAKID, a man of charge, as Eleazar,
or the biſhop of the armie, is trāſlated Epiſcopus Iudas had
Epiſcopon, as I mentioned afore: therefore the Apoſtles were
Epiſcopi: in S. Paul, 1. Tim. the terme Epiſcopus is tranſlated in
Arabique Zeken, a ſenior, & that is the right meaning. Policarpus
the meſſinger of the congregation of Smyrna, is in Greeks
Epiſcopus. And ſo the great teachers: ſo Caluin was, and Beza
in Geneua was Biſhop: or yet Archbiſhop, though they tooke other
names, as high Paſtor, is vſually the ciuill Gouernor, and
for Moſes that is vſed, he was Meparnes to Iſrael 40. year. that
is Feeder. So Biſhop is a terme, for Lawfull calling, and commēdable:

if learning & tender care of people be to it: Otherwiſe
Ananias ſhalbe excommunicated of S. Paul as a painted
wall.
                  And they ſhall tread downe the holy Citie,
two and fouretie monethes.
                  Heere, by Citie, is meant folke, as Ebr. 12. the Citie of the liuing
God, the heauēly Ieruſalem, ſo in this chap. where the tenth
parte of the Citie falleth, people, not wall is meant. So when
the Citie is called ſpiritually Sodoma, and Egipt, & where Chriſt
was crucified: People of Religiō moſt lothſome, to chaſt truth:
and of tyrāny murtherous, and the People by whom Chriſt
was crucified; as Tiberius the Emperor; Pilate, his Deputie,
Cēturion, and the ſoldiers. So the holy Citie ſignifieth here
the heauenly Ieruſalem. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      people is once tranſlated by the
70. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Citie.
               
               
                  Of the xlij. Monethes.
                  
                     Elias ſtaid raine 42. monethes, when he was fretted by wicked
Iſrael: & Antiochus the wicked trode downe Ieruſalem 42.
moneths; as I ſhewed vpon Daniel. And our Lord preached
42. moneths: or 3. yer. & a halfe; or dayes 1260. or a tyme, two
tymes and an halfe. Euſebius, & many after him, haue ſhewed
that: Old Beda, and Beroald and others. Heere by tyme, the
manners from a like tyme is meant: the perſequuting Phariſees
manners; reuiued by the Pope. And no certaine tyme;
for Chap. 12. all rage of the Serpent is but dayes 1260. And
againe the profane Caeſares rage, which endured 300. yeares
is termed but 42. moneths.
                  And I will grant the two witneſſes of mine that they ſhall prophecy
dayes 1260. clothed in ſackcloth: theſe be the two oliues, & the
2. Candleſticks, which ſtand before the Lord of the whole earth.
                  
                     
The terme two, meaneth a ſufficient number, according
to the Law phraſe: In the mouth of two or three witneſſes, ſhall euery
matter ſtand.
                     Zach. 4. Nine and fourtie thouſand and moo, who
came from Babilon, are the two oliues that ſtood before the
Lord of the whole earth: and the two witneſſes heere be as
much. Therefore by two, may whole ſtates, and many millions
be ſignified.
               
               
                  Of Prophecying.
                  Prophecying, is taken for expounding Moyſes by ages
following, when the ſumme of Religion is ſhewed, how later
ages would follow it, or leaue it: all falſehood falleth. So whē
                     Cittim, Num. 24. is compared with Daniell xj. to know the
nation: and with Iſai xj. and the Goſpell for the crucifiers of
Chriſt: and 2. Theſſ. 2 and withall the Apoc. this prophecying
reuealeth the beaſt, that commeth out of the earth, the
king of Locuſtes: how as the profane Caeſars, had all their
diuinitie from the vncleane ſpirite; ſo hath the Pope all his:
to mke a ſpirituall moſt vncleane large commune weale: His
Idolatrie matcheth the profane Caeſars: & he making Saints
& Archangels, to pray to; and a third world of Purgatorie, &
merittes, not to reſt in CHRIST; and forbidding ſtudie in
the holy Bible, and mixing the Apocrypha, moſt fooliſh and
wicked fables, as Toby and the 2. Maca. with the moſt holy
Ebrew Bible, matcheth or ouermatcheth all the Caeſars profaneneſſe.
Therfore he cannot abide expounding of Moſes,
when he cannot abide the reading of him.
               
               
                  Of the Decalogue.
                  The holy Iewes honored the Decalogue, or Tenne ſayings,
                     
grauen by God in two great ſtones, with ſuch high & heauenly
reuerence, that, becauſe it cōteyned the ſumme of Diuinitie;
they reduced all Moſes vnto it: and as the Decalogue
had letters 613. ſo they reduced all the Commaundements,
that could be gathered out of Moſes vnto 613. And reduce
to them all that can be ſpoken in Diuinitie. And the Prophets,
and our holy New Testament goeth no further.
               
               
                  Of the Popes theft.
                  The Pope ſtole from the people this Law: Thou ſhalt not
make vnto thy ſelfe any grauen Image, &c. A Citie in Iſraell that
had ſcraped but one letter from the tables number, had been
deſtroyed. And of with infinite wickedneſſe, then muſt we
holde the Popes and Popistes to be, that ſo dare contemne the
grauen tables of all the frame of Moſes Law, contriued into
the two tables number of lettes, for lawes 613. which is by
the Popes theft, brought out of frame. And all muſt bee holden
wicked, that wiſh not his vncleane ſpirited commune
weale deſtroyed.
               
               
                  Groundes which all ſhould know, that ſoundly prophecie,
or expound Scripture.
                  Firſt, a Doctor ſhould be a grammarian, for both Teſtaments;
to know the text ſound: and the meaning plaine.
                  2. The Maſſoreth defendeth euery letter, in the Law or old
Teſtament: that no modeſt witt would wrangle.
                  3. A worke called the Glorie of Iſraell, ſpeaketh ſagely; that
the forme of letters which we haue now, were not inuented
by Ezra, but were in the two tables, and vowells & accents,

as we haue them now. The holy Ghoſt hath giuen a double
reading, a text reading and a word in the margine, to expoūd
the text: which very often ſtandeth vpon like letters, as 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      &

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      &. Now they who feigne letters, late
inuented by the forme which we haue now, ouerthrow the
authoritie of the double reading: and ſo of all.
                  4. Piſistratus, Tyrant of Athens, was elder then Ezra: hee
parted Homer into Alpha, Beta, &c. the Illiad. into 24. letters
names: and ſo Odyſsea. Hence it appeareth, that the Greeke
letters names be elder then Ezra. Moreouer, they are from
the Hebrew: Aleph, Beth, &c. and ſo later then they. And the
Ebrew names bee after the forme, in 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Therfore
theſe formes were very ancient: and all of Gods wiſedome
at the firſt. Moreouer in Noēs familie, like letters 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
gaue double names: Dodamin and Rhodamin: Diphath & Riphath:
and many ſuch, doth Dauid Kimchi note, vpon the firſt
of the Chronicles. And when the ſeptuagint tranſlated by
old dim copies, like letters; gaue them oftē occaſion to leaue
the exact ebrew, & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      turned to 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Abbak 70. & Act. 13. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      turned
to 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Amos 5. Lxxij. & Act. 7. Aedom turned to Adam,
Amos 9. Act. 15. a Prophecier wil trouble him ſelf, if he know
not theſe grounds.
                  5. The Alphabets order is celebrated of Gods wiſedom, often;
ſometimes neerly perfect, ſomtimes wholy perfect; ſomtimes
with a verſe more: ſometyme with parentheſis in the
middes, as Pſal. 37. 34. 25. 111. 112. 119. 145. Pro. 31. Ier. 1. 2.
3. 4. This ſheweth the order to be old. Beſides, the order is
conſonant to the forme and lines, as they depend one vpon
another 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . ſo the frame muſt be as old as the
order.
               
               
                  
                  Of Arias Montanus worke; of diuers readings.
                  I noted 848. double readings: both holy. Kimchi, praef. to Ioſ.
thought the text corrupt, in Babell: & amended after the returne
in Ezraes dayes. Rob. St. praef. to the new Teſta. folowed
that: and Arias Montanus; at him I marueile: & more at Kimchi,
who in particulars giueth ſounde reaſons of the double
readings. And Pagninus abridgment, refuſeth Arias his mind:
And Elias Leui. praefa. to Maſſoreth; in Moſ. ſoundly defendeth
both readings: and ſtill the text is the ſubtiler; as of curioſitie,
and not of negligence; and the margin, an helpe for
the ſimple.
               
               
                  Of Lindanus, quareling with the text, and one
Erostratus.
                  
                     Lindanus labored to breake the authoritie of Scripture;
ſlandering the text, as corrupted: and namely, Caari for Caaru,
Pſal. 22. was brought of him. Iohn Izhak the Iew paid him.
And Arias Montanus paid Eroſtratus. All Doctors ſhould bee
readie in that: to defend their ground; wherevpon all their
doctrine muſt ſtande.
               
               
                  Of Law, vowelled and vnvowelled.
                  The Law Copies were ſome vowelled, and accented:
the commune vnvowelled and vnaccented: becauſe the
tongue may by vſe be read, reaſonablie without them; but
in doubtes, to ſmall certeintie. Rabbi Iacob, the bringer of the
Maſſoreth into a Dictionarie forme, with notes, ſheweth that
Moſes gaue vowells: but the people had few vowell'd copies:
till Ezra made them commune: and Aben Ezra ſaith well.

He that ſet the vowells and accentes, was a perfect wiſe man:
for He neuer miſſed of the beſt ſenſe. But the 70. tranſlated
by vnvowelled; that they might hide their minde: when dull
heathen would quarrell with trueth.
               
               
                  Of the 70. differing: thirtie ſixe hundred of yeares
from the ſtrickt Ebrew.
                  Many blaſpheme Gods worde by the 70. differing from
it, Gen. 5. and 11. in opuſculis Patrum, one worke blameth the
Ebrew: and all Grecia ſtill followed the 70. ſo Arabia, ſo Abyſsini,
ſo Muſcouia. The text Gen. 5. faith; Adam liued 130.
yeares, and begat Seth, and liued afterwards 800. The Lxx. Adam
liued 230. yeres, and begate Seth, and liued after that but 700.
Our notes not well ſet, 1603. haue this note; Adam liued 230.
yeares, and begate Seth, wherein Moſes omitted 100. yea. &c.
This note daſheth all Moſes authoritie, if he were not true in
his narration. S. Augustine could not tell the reaſon of the difference,
Ciuit. Dei. I haue ſhewed it in Concent. Scrip. & Melchitzedeke;
though my recompenſe hath beene, but vngratefull
ſcophing of vncleane ſpirites. DD. that know not a letter,
vowell, or accent, what authoritie they haue from God: ſuch
vncleane ſpirites are good helpes for the king of Locuſtes;
when they hinder the grounds of all prophecying.
               
               
                  Of Perfection in Scripture.
                  The text hath perfect Diuinitie. The holy in all their ages
knew the Trinitie: and that Christ would be made man, of a woman;
according to our kinde, as of Mary, of Ely, of Adam. Heere Anabaptiſtes
and Lutheranes, are in an heauie caſe. All the holy

knew that mans ſoule returneth in death preſently to God:
to receyue the Aboundance of grace of the gift of Iuſtice in
Chriſt, and ioy vnder Gods throne: or Anger for their ſin,
and contempt of Gods loue in Chriſt, before Gods angrie face,
Leuit. 26. Apoc. 14. The ancients liued by the law grauen in
all hearts: ſome few they had, deliuered, tokens of redemption.
But for all life, the heart lawes ſerued, Ier. 31. Rom. 2. Iob
telleth what ſtore of lawes, hearts helde. Moſes for an whole
great nation gaue law written: but the moſt bent to Leui: &
imperfect without the Goſpell. Iob and the Apoſtles haue
no Lawes, but ſuch as wiſe heathen, all would commend.
               
               
                  Authores for tongue.
                  Chriſtians may paſſe in Ebrew, very rare Ebrewes: becauſe
the Apoſtles tranſlate much in ſpeciall elegancie. Beſides,
they allow very much in the 70. What they handle
not, ancient Hebrewes make plaine. And they who will expound
Ebrew beyonde this warrant, as ſome doe, for Hell
place, and Hell torment, in life, do not well.
               
               
                  Prayer is our ſeruice of God.
Maymoni in prayer from all Rab.
                  God forbid that any ſhould pray but to God. Menachen
vpon Gen. and Deut. 6. Mat. 4. and 6. neuer any holy prayed
to a Created Angell, or man. Men the beſt, had great
faultes; as Abraham long worſhipped creatures; Philo and
Maym. in Idoll Bechaia, ſheweth exceedeth ſinne of his, for Sarah,
for which his poſteritie ſmarted in Egypt.
               
               
                  
                  Of the New Testament.
                  The ſoundneſſe of text, & playneneſſe in foure Dialects, I
handled in our Lordes familie; againſt which booke I hope
none will raue, but for Ioakims buriall.
               
               
                  Concluſion.
                  Poperie hath no defence, by any ſound groundes of ſtudie; not to
any one article.
               
               
                  Blaſphemous groundes of Popistrie.
                  1. That they ſay, the Scripture is corrupt in text. The Maſſoreth,
or Dictionarie for euery letter, prick and accent. checketh
that for the old Teſtament. And the new Teſtamēt can
none blame, but to his ſhame; as I haue ſhewed Princes in
Latin.
                  2. That they ſay, the ſcripture is doubtfull; no booke was
euer penned ſo certeine for Lawes meaning: Viſions, Allegories,
bring no new rules; as Ezekiel and Cantica. The New
Teſtament hath not one phraſe, but the eaſieſt to learned
Iewes: not one from the beginning to the end.
                  3. That they ſay, the ſcripture is imperfect, they might as
well ſay, God made not the world perfect: But the Pope can
make moo Creatures, and better: as Archangelles, and Purgatories,
and ſoules departed, to vnderſtand our heartes: and bold to teach
God whom he ſhould pitie: and to make Mary commaund
Chriſt. Satan in his owne perſon, durſt neuer be ſo bold.
                  4. They plead from the Law of Sanedrin; where a man
muſt ſtand to their iudgement.That the Popes iudgmēt muſt ſtād The Sanedrin might be without
any Leuit, as Ieruſalemy noteth: though the Law ſpeak
of that, which moſt vſually falleth out: that Leui ſhould bee

readie in his owne profeſſion: But Eſay ſaith to them, who
was ſo blind? and Mallachi ſpeaketh to the ſame effect: & the
Leuites whole condemnation of holy Ieremie, where one of
Iſrael cleared him. But the Pope his Cardinalls, & Archbuiſhops,
haue no more to do with Leui: then apes to ſtand for
men.
                  5. The Pope maketh a ſpiritualtie,Heb. 11. By faith theſe turned to flight, the armies of the aliens & a Clergie: to tie learning
to them. Dauid had his warriers, the beſt learned in Moyſes:
that by foreſight of Christ thence; one frighted 1000. and
kill'd 800. And in Babel; Iuda in Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, and
Miſael before Ezechiel of Leui came thither, were the glorie
of men.
                  6. All wealthy ſhould be brought vp in the Bible, in frame
of art, to know it throughly: what lawes it hath; what diſputations
are vpon thoſe Lawes; what ſtories: and how the ſentences
of Iob, Dauid, and Salomon comment vpon the ſtories.
All our nation might haue ſeene this plaine, if wicked had
not hindred: by their ſpirituall keyes. And in Popes proceeding
they make him knowne to be wicked.
                  7. By Gods Law, Eccleſia, the Sanedrin court, ſhould rule in
all matters. And old Wicklife, in Walſingham, did hit the naile
vpon the head, ſaying: That if the Commune Lawes of England
might take place, the Pope ſhould haue no more to do with vs: then
any other. Yet frō Satan he will rule all: and make Eccleſia to
be not ciuill courts: but his courtes. Our commune Lawes
praemune that ſagely▪ and the lawleſſe reſiſt God.
                  8. The Pope from Rome will rule; and the Rome-free-borne.
Apoſtle; after he taught the Theſſalonians of Pope, from Rome: giueth
a charge to the Romans, to keepe euery ſoule in obedience to the
ciuill gouernement: and by Ciuill gouernement, S. Paul eſcaped
from death by Scribes traditions.
               
               
                  
                  How yong men learned in liberall artes, might be rarely
exquiſite, in the greeke new Teſtament.
                  
                     GOD perfect in wiſedome, knew that the Iewes would
marueile why the New Teſtament ſhould be all in Greeke,
and not any whitt in Ebrew. Therefore to ſhew it Gods
worke; againſt whom none may plead, he maketh one little
booke exceed for varietie and elegancie of wordes: aboue
4600. choſen wordes. Thus the booke might be made eaſie.
                  1. The wordes ſhould be all in a table: that all might read
them quicklie.
                  2. Appellatiues, and propre, ſhould be ſett in their colours.
                  3. For Appellatiues, all Attique and eloquent Speaches of
them; (as Rom. 12. 3. Paul paſſeth all Athenes) theſe ſhould all
come in their families.
                  4. Next, many thouſand frō the 70. with Ebrew to them:
and in how many God followeth the 70. departing from the
Ebrew. This would carrie the Reader through all the old
Teſtament.
                  5. Thalmudique ſpeaches be plentie,Mat. 12. and eaſie to a Rabbin:
as,Maymo. poenit. 
                     Forgiueneſſe neither in this world, nor in the world to come: and
girded about the brest:
                     Apoc. 1. 
                     ſecond death: and ſuch: theſe moſt trouble
Greekes,Maymo. and would be eaſieſt handled, in their veines:
and they be very many.Beidh.
                  
                  6. Sometimes the Apoſtles mende the 70. or ſpeake more
eloquently:Apo. 20. as in Iaſpis Apoc. 21. verſ. 19 it is Beniamins ſtone,Iſai 22. Vzielides
after the Ebrew. Exod. 28. But verſ. xj. the Carbuncle, Iſai 54.
So Sardonix for Zabulon, and Chryſophraſe for Nephtaly, are the
Apostle Iohns, paſſing in Greeke skill. And 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
Eb. 1. 3. from Iſai. 4. Tzemach Lecabod, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
From Exod. 23. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      theſe S. Paul

bringeth. All this kinde ſettled together; would bring light
and delight, to all godly learned.
               
               
                  Of propre names.
                  Many propre names be taken from the old Teſtament:
wherein the 70. is communely folowed. Sarra, will try a
ſcholar, and Phanuel: from the margine reading: and Ionanan,
Luc. 3. and the names from Iſraell in Egypt, being full
many: ſhew they knew Ptolomies Egypt ſhould fall: many cō
                     teyne,
Pſal. 89. as Zorobabelidae, Mat. 1. many other ſpeciall
ſtories; chiefly Townes full many, call to Seleucidae and Lagidae:
as Antiochia, Seleucia, Philadelphia, & ſuch. Many are cleared
by Thalm. Ieruſalemy, as Lazar, for Eleazar: and Alphai
for Chalphai a. ſ. in the fathers ſtead: and ſuch. The Greeke
and Latin in one familie; Alexander and Rufus, ſhew that the
Thalmud lieth, bringing Ieſus our Lord his dayes to the Maccabees
tymes. The name Marck and Paul, and all the Latin
termes ſhew, that, vnder the Romans Chriſt was on earth.
               
               
                  Epilogue.
                  Thus when euery word ſhould be handled alone: and
wordes toſſed in diſputatiō handled alone: the whole booke
would be ſoone eaten: and millions would be able to Prophecie:
and to defend the faith, againſt the Beaſt that commeth
out of the pitt, of Sathans deepeneſſe: & to make Seniorie of true
Biſhopps: that vnlearned pſeudo-piſcopi, ſhould no longer
pine better learned in priſon: ſage and learned be lawfull Epiſcopi,
beſtowing reuenues aright: but nobles ought, and
lower gentrie to be the beſt learned, and to keepe all in ſage

dealing. So the King of Locuſtes would ſoone looſe his
crowne. The 2. oliue trees in Zacharie, which poure oile into the
golden Candleſtick, are they, who not by might, but by Gods ſpirit,
as they vnder Aggei and Zachary built the Temple. The chiefe
ruler was holden as anointed: ſo King Ioſias, though none
but the firſt of the houſe, as Dauid, or in ſtirre as Salomon for
Adonias: and Ioaſh for Athalia, & Ioachaz for elder Ioakim, were
annointed. The high ſacrificer was of courſe: ſo both ſtates
were vnder the two oliues: and whē all be ſacrificers, Apo. 1.
Then the gouernor that prouideth for bread, and they who
labor in word, are the two oliues; that giue matter of light,
to the golden Candleſtick. Clothed in ſackcloth: in ſadneſſe
of their minde: conſidering how the gold is darkened.
               
               
                  The restorers of the Goſpell, be as Elias.
                  And if any man will hurt them, fire commeth out of their
mouthes, and eateth vp their enimies: yea, if any man will hurt
them, ſo he must be killed. Theſe haue power to ſhut vp the
heauens; that raine, raine not in the dayes of their prophecying
                  Heere, the kingdome of the beaſt ariſing from the darke
pitt, is cloſſelie compared with Iſraell, in Achabs dayes:
when Baal was worſhipped by ſo many falſe prophetes.
And Elias knewe none but him ſelfe, left of true religion in
Iſraell:1. King. 19. 10. and the Altars, which GOD tolerated extraordinarie,
were all broken downe. The Papiſtes damne themſelues
mightilie, when they caſt in our teeth: That our companie
had not open policie ſtill. Sigibertus complayneth, that at
1200. England admitted not the Popes ſupremacie: So hee anſwereth
Papiſtes. And ſtill our commune Lawes made it

treaſon, to appeale vnto the Pope: and holy Wickliffe condemned
him as freelie as any in our tymes: Wickliffe, that ſet
ouer the Bible into Engliſh: Wickliffe, that taught how the
cōmune Lawes would vtterly fall the Pope: Wickliffe, whoſe
Bible many yet haue: the Copiers of which ſhew, where the Church of
God was. Such had the ſpirit of Elias, which called for fire
from heauen into Bohemia, and Prage, and Saxonie, to burne
much of Rome: as Elias called fire from heauen to burne
two Captaines, and two fifties: ſo Eliſeus called fire from
Hazael, that brent vp Iſraell; And Iohn Baptiſt, called for fire
from heauen, that brent vp all Herodes houſe. And as Elias
ſtaide raine three yeares and an half, ſo Eliſeus ſpirit, brought
famine to Samaria: and the Chriſtians in Claudius dayes: and
the martyrs by the black horſe, bring corne to be weighed as
ſpice, for dearth: ſo ſtill God ſendeth famine for his martyrs.
               
               
                  The Martyrs be as Moſes.
                  
                     Theſe haue power to turne the waters into blood: and to ſtrike the
earth with any plague, ſo often as they will.
                  
                  This ſheweth Rome to be a new Egypt: ſtill rebelling againſt
Moſes, and therefore hath plagues to the ſame effect.
                  1. Egypt had waters turned to blood: ſo Rome, chap. 11.
and 16.
                  2. Egypt ſwarmed with frogges:
                     Rome hath all the plagues of Aegypt but two. ſo Rome, chap. 16.
                  4. Egypt was plagued with ſerpents; and all ſauage: ſo the
Locuſtes had tailes like ſcorpions: and their plaguers had horſes
with Lions mouthes: and their tailes had heads like to
ſerpentes: and the Caeſares people were ſpent by the beaſtes of
the earth.
                  5. A plague killed the beaſts of Egypt: ſo the Caeſares people,
6.
                  
                     
6. Boyles vexed Egypt: ſo the marked of the beaſt. Apo. 16
                  7. Haile Fire
vexed Egypt: ſo, Rome haile and fire mixed
with blood, chap. 6. and chap. 16. great haile.
                  8. Locustes, ate the fruites of Egypt: Locuſtes, ſtrangers
ſwarme, Apo. 9.
                  9. Darkeneſſe, vexed Egypt: the throne of the beaſt is darkned.
Thus God compareth propre Egypt: and the king
of Locuſtes Egypt: how they that folow Moyſes Law, and
Prophecie: and bid the king of Locuſtes grant freedome to
Iſrael, ſtill plague their Pharaoh.
                  And when they had ended their martyrdome, the beaſt which
ariſeth out of the deepe, ſhall make warre with them: and ſhall kill
them and their carcaſſes ſhall lie in the large Common weale:
which is called ſpiritually, Sodoma and Egypt: where alſo the Lord
was crucified.
                  
                     For doctrine of vncleane ſpirites,
                     Note, how and why Rome is called Egypt & Sodom, & Babel, ch. 18. and compare the old ſtories of the old Teſt. with Rome. 
                     they are termed, as a Citie
brent from heauen: for many plagues, by Egypt: for good
note, a broad Citie, as Romes policie was broad and large. And for a
moſt ſure note, the Citie, policie and authoritie large: in which the
Lord was crucified. This name ſtriketh the naile vpon the
head.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Citie which crucified the LORD.
                  
                     Thalmud Ieruſalemy noteth in Sanedrin, and Maymonie; that
fouretie yeares before the deſtruction of Ieruſalem; cauſes of
life and death were taken away from Iſraell: ſo they teach,
that Chriſt was not crucified in the policie of Ieruſalem, but
vnder Pontius Pilate, in the Roman policie: as the foure Evangeliſtes
record carefullie. When the Sanedrin concluded
to kill Chriſt, they brought him to Pilate: he cleared him;

yet whipped him, and deliuered him to bee crucified. And
the Romā ſoldiers ſhewed all wickedneſſe. 1. They brought
him into the Common hall. 2. They gathered the whole
band againſt him. 3. They put off his owne apparell, & put
in mockage a ſcarlat robe vppon him. 4. They platted a
crowne of thornes, and laid it vpon his head. 5. They kneeled
in mockage, and ſaid, All haile King of the Iewes: and
ſpate vpon him; & with a reed they ſtroke him on the head:
and when they had ended mocking of him, they put off the
robe, and put his owne clothes on him, and brought him to
be crucified: and pierced his handes and his feete: and pierced
his ſide with a ſpeare, and caſt lotts for his coate. Theſe
ſo great contempts from Romanes the vilest in the world, againſt the
Lord Eternall, could neuer be put vp. But that Rome ſhould bee
the miſerie in tyrannie, while the world ſtoode, Pilate kill'd
him ſelfe; and the Emperours for 300. yeres were miſerable.
And Rome, by many ſpoiled: and ſince Popes ſupremacie a
new Egypt; Now as the Iewes, who betrayed Chriſt, are ſlaues
ouer the earth: ſo Rome that went further, was to bee revealed,
to haue all curſes: the old ſerpents poyſon, chap. 12. Cains
murder of Abel, chap. 13. a Deluge, chap. 12. Biting of
tongues, chap. 16. conſumption as the curſed brent Cities,
cha. 11. Egypts miſerie told aboue: Ioſuahs haile, cha. 16. Siſeraes
fall at Mageddon, chap. 16. Iezabels miſerie from Elias,
chap. 11. Daniels beaſts miſerie, chap. 13. and the Romans miſerie
by Pompei and Iulius, Pſal. 97. handled in Appian fullie:
and as the Pope knew more then the Caeſares, ſo his ſinnes
were more ſtrong againſt the holy Ghoſt: and he ſhould be
openly Man of ſinne, to all ſage in this world. The foure Euā
                     geliſtes
might teach the ſimpleſt this much. That ſeeing
Rome grieued Chriſt, as he complayned (Iſai 49. & Pſal. 22.)

and felt too; moſt high griefe. Rome ſhould bee Sathans
throne while this world ſtood: and all reliques of theirs a
curſe.
                  And people, tribes, tongues and nations, ſhall ſee their Carcaſes
three dayes and a halfe.
                  So this Citie muſt meane a very large Common Weale,
and Kingdome: and the two in generall may be full many
thouſandes in particular. And as all the time of perſequution
of the liuing, is three yeares and a halfe: the bodie is heere
three dayes and a halfe.
                  And they ſhall not ſuffer their carcaſes to be put in graue.
                  This plainely ſheweth the burning of Martyrs, whoſe
bones and aſhes may be ſeene three dayes and a half; and are
not put in graue. So good Bucers bones in this honor, were
taken out of the graue, not to rot there; but with pure fire,
to haue conſumption: as Elias in his fierie chariot, had his
body conſumed; and our Father Henoch, that in his life matched
the dayes of the ſunne 365. was without paine diſſolued:
when God tooke his ſoule to heauen: and Moſes had
not mans buriall; God prouiding ſomewhat better for the
ancient: that they with out vs were more perfect, and for
rare honor to their perſons, though by the doctrine of the
Goſpell aboue the Law, we haue the perfecter: but no whit
to ſoules ioy. But as they with ſmaller helpes paſſed vs farre,
in following God: ſo their minde heere was infinitely fuller
of graces, then ours: though the ioy of aeternall life is aequall
to all. In not ſuffering the beſt men in the world to be
buried; the Citie that crucified Chriſt, is openly the throne
of Satan.
                  
                     
And they that dwell on the earth, ſhall reioyce ouer them
and be glad: and ſend giftes one to another: becauſe theſe
two prophetes tormented the dwellers vpon the earth.
                  The dwellers on the earth are the Locustes, & their friends
earthly minded: and feared the companies of ſound Chriſtians;
becauſe they taught Princes to hate the Popes religion,
and Pride, and Wealth, & Monaſteries. The Hypocrites
immitated the Iewes;Heſter. 9. who vpon the death of Amalekites
kept in open Townes, the xiiij. of Adar, with ioy and banquet,
and wake day, and ſending of giftes one to another.
Theſe two Doctores of Diuinitie (Prophet is heere in that
ſenſe) were ſuch a torment to the Papiſtes: as the firſt martyrs
to the prophane Caeſares: who taught that they were
not Diui, and had no religion but from vncleane ſpirites.
                  And after three dayes and an halfe, ſpirite of life from God
entred into them: and they ſtood vpon their feete, and great
feare fell vpon them that beheld them.
                  In his Viſion of the Lordes day, he hath by light and darkneſſe
three dayes & an halfe, reſembled vnto him: for viewing
of the martyrs, from the eye-ſight, to the minde: thus we
muſt turne it. When men behold the bones and aſhes of the
martyrs, they hold them not dead, but paſſed from death to
life: becauſe they died for honor to Gods plaine religion:
teaching to honor GOD onely: and to receyue aeternall
life onely by his mercie in CHRIST, the onely Rocke: and
to pray onely to GOD: and to haue a ſure faith in him: and
to lothe all proceeding that is not agreeable to Gods holy
worde; and that it hath a plaine and ſure meaning.
                  
                     
The old Martyrs for theſe groundes were in honor with the
Pope: theſe two armies of Doctores died in the ſame cauſe,
therefore their enimies heartes muſt needes confeſſe, that
they are gone to heauen: euen as if they had heard them called
vp, and ſeene to aſcend as followeth.
                  And they heard a loud voice from heauen, ſaying vnto them:
Come vp hither: and they went vp to heauen: and their enimies
ſaw them.
                  As the caſe of Elias was to the body, ſo the Martyrs is to
the ſoule: expreſſed bodily in this viſion.
               
               
                  Of all ſoules paſſage at death.
                  
                     It is appointed for all men once to die, and then cōmeth iudgement,
Eb. 9. ſo all ſoules muſt, when they leaue the bodie, returne
to God that gaue them: to iudgement for euery hid thing, good or euill,
Ecc. 12. 2. Cor. 5. ſo all aſcend, Ecc. 3. And onely the
ſoules of the beaſt deſcend.
                  The commune place is called in Greeke Haides: and the
happie part of it, is heauen to Abraham, Eb. xi. Luc. 18. And
a place of burning torment to the wicked. The faithfull
went hence to Gods eternall tabernacle, Leuit. 26. 2. Cor. 5.
Mat. 8. Luc. 13. our Lord, Ioh. 15. and 16. Luc. 23. Eb. 9.
               
               
                  Of Purgatorie.
                  The impudencie of them which would eſtabliſh Purgatorie,
is vnſpeakable. Moyſes hath not one ſyllable that way:
therefore it can not be in religion. They that wrote in Iudah
for the Maccabees ſtorie, make but two ſtates: as reſurrection
to honor, and ſhame from Dan. 12.
                  
                     
Saint Paul profeſſing difference from Scribes, but in the
incarnation and reſurrection of Chriſt: where they hold but
Paradiſe and Gehenna: concludeth, that he helde no moe
places for ſoules.1. Cor. 3. Where Saint Paul handleth a commune
place, of teachers; what doctrine will abide ſound: what fire
of iudgement will conſume as ſtubble: they that hence
would haue ſoules fier, out of this world, little regard Paul.
He taught nothing but what Moſes and the Prophetes
taught. But no Thalmudiques, who beſt knew their tongue,
could finde a purgatorie in thē: therefore Saint Paul taught
it not.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond of the Maccabees.
                  The ſecond of the Maccabees, doth the Pope muſt aeſtime,
chap. 12. for ſacrifice for the dead, but litle conſidereth
the vileneſſe of that booke. Iewes would tell him that it was
Hagada; a fable made vpon phraſes: as where they ſacrifice,
Ezr. 2. and no mention is of fire: he feigneth a moſt ridiculous
fable, of fire hid by the ſacrificers, when they were caried
to Perſia forſooth; not Babilon; and found by their poſteritie,
turned into a thicke water; which when wood and
ſacrifice was brought: Nehemias bade them annoint both
with this water: and the Sunne ſhone, and kindled a great
fire. Who would not iudge this to be a moſt ridiculous fable.
By what witt could the ſacrificers dreame of ſuch matter,
that fire could be turned into water, or by ſhun-ſhining
kindled, pleaſe God. It must be kept vnquenched. The whole
conſent of Iewes in the chaine of their Cabala ſaith, fire from
heauen kindled the ſacrifice. A man would thinke the whole
Nation in a ſenſible matter, ſhould be of more credite then
obſcure Iaſon of Cyren.
                  
                  
                     
Moreouer Zorobabel of Salathiel; not Nehemias of Chilkia, was
gouernor at the returne. But ieſters vpon phraſes, in Iarchi,
make Cyrus and Artax all one; becauſe Cyrus end is not recorded.
So in Iarchi they make Zorobabel and Nehemias to be all
one: for memorie of phraſe: that Zorobabels remoning is
not recorded. They that cannot iudge betwixt a ridiculous
fable, and a ſad ſtorie, are in great darkneſſe. So the fable,
of Ieremias, hiding the Tabernacle, and the Arke and Altar
of Incenſe in mount Choreb,Such, the Apoſt. only ſpeakes of, Tit. 1. 14. & many other places: and he writing by the ſpirite, could not croſſe the ſpirit, Rom. 15. 4. is not heard of in the Thalmud;
nor agreeable to reaſon. And the Law of the eternall God,
not to regard Iewes fables, heere taketh place: and they bee
lawleſſe that breake that Law. This much for the whole
booke, made one frō fiue of Iaſon of Cyren: that little knew
Moſes, or yet Ieruſalems ſtorie.
               
               
                  Of Iudahs ſacrifice.
                  In Iudahs ſacrifice, the Writers ſpeach doteth: Iudah
doubted not, but that they ſlept in godlineſſe, Chapter 12.
45. And what foole euer ſpake ſo ſenſeleſſe as this is; if hee
had not hoped for the reſurrection, it had beene in vaine to
pray for the dead, verſ. 44. Now, what ſenſe can bee in that
ſpeach, that ſacrifice ſhould helpe the reſurrection: The ſtorie
durſt not touch any eaſe to the ſoule, for that had ſtrouen
with all Talmudiques. Maymony ſheweth, they offred for
the dead; the heir did in Siphra Col. 31. But no otherwiſe,
then as paying a debt, which the predeceſſor ſhould haue
payed heere: And that, when they doubted not of the others
ſaluation; but honouring him in paying that which
the other ſhould haue payde. And Iaſon of Cyren harped at
ſuch a ſtring, but could not bring his minde about. Now the

Popes Purgatorie is holpen nothing hence: from a trifling
booke, and ſenceleſſe ſpeach: and wreſted beyond all religion
of the Iewes.
               
               
                  Epilogue.
                  As the two Prophetes were ſeene called vp into heauen
in viſion: ſo all faithfull ſoules by ſcripture trueth, are to be
ſeene called hence into the ioy of Chriſt.
               
               
                  What the Greeke Fathers thought of Purgatorie.
                  The Greeke Fathers ſhould bee thought to vnderſtand
the Greeke Teſtament, better then Latin: and none of
them could finde Purgatorie there; but grant all holy a paſſage
hence to the Kinglie Palaces: ſome ſtaggered at the
ſpeach Ebr. chap. xj. They without vs were not perfected. Saint
Paul in all that heauenly Epiſtle, diſputeth of the Goſpell,
perfection to the Law; and of perfection of Doctrine in this
world: and he had ſhewed in the ſame Chapter, That the
Fathers deſired the heauenly Citie, & God prepared that for them:
ſo they, who denie the Fathers perfection, by S. Paul, marke
him not well. Baſill did once, vpon Pſal. 49. but called himſelfe
backe, vpon Pſal. 15. and often. And Chryſostome, who
ſeemed to ſtagger, placed Lazarus and Abraham in the
kingdome of heauen, 2. Corinth. homil. 6. Mat. 8. Luc. cap.
13. and the principall Diuines, in Theophyl. vpon Luc. chap.
23. and vpon the Pſalmes; and in Photius Librarie, Philo in
Greekes, and Ioſephus, I haue cited, and Azarias, who turned
into Ebrew, Philoes wordes. And the Greekes bee greatly
iniuried, when Limbus Patrum, is faſtened vpon them.
                  
                     
                     Hegeſippus, and others that wrote the Maccabees martyrdome,
doubted not but that they went hence to ſaluation,
Dan. 12. And it had beene an infinite diſgrace to our Greeke
Doctores, if they could not ſee ſo much by the New Teſtament.
Now, let vs returne to the text.
                  And at that houre there was a great earth quake, and a tenth
part of the Citie fell: and there were killed by the earth quake
7000. perſons of men, and the rest were afraid: and gaue glorie
to the God of heauen.
                  When the Popes perſequution came to ripeneſſe, then
Princes by warres ſhake him off: as in Germany, Englande,
Zwitzerland and Netherland. And Chriſt heere roareth like
a Lion: and the 7. thunders tell, the thunder of his power.
In Venice, he is now a mockage; and hath but Spaine to his
ſtrength: Queene Maries perſequutiō, is now turned againſt
the Pope: and his ſtirring Iriſh to rebell, vndid Ireland; And
now his men the chiefeſt in learning, ſticke litle to him:
and ſpeake to his ouerthrow, not much leſſe then we doe.
And now the Dukedome of Cleaue, will make him weake in
Germanie; If Geneueans would leaue their Gehēnean torment;
and our ſide prophecie ſoūdly: we ſhould weakē him
more by learning then by ſtrength of ſpeare: ſeeing the beſt
learned of his owne ſide labor for vs: as Arias Montanus hath
done in much, about Plantines great Bible: & the beſt learned
Papiſtes reioyce to ſee Daniel his 7. fold comfort of Nathans
houſe: and the certen yere of the Lordes ſupper, to haue no
more the body and blood of a Lambe, his body and bloud of Couenant:
but Bread & Wine to ſhew, that no more fleſh & bloud may bee in ſacrifice.
In Ebrew, Greek & Latin they ſaw Iewes requeſt anſwered:

and were very thankfull in ſpeach and letters: and
ſhew that now they would ſoone caſt off the king of locuſts:
if they might haue good maintenance to hold vp better
truth: and liberall artes that ſerue trueths honor.
               
               
                  Of the third woe, and laſt Trumpet.
                  The ſecond woe is paſt: behold, the third woe commeth: And
the ſeuenth Angell ſounded the Trumpet: and there were
great voices in the heauen, ſaying; the Kingdomes of the
world; are now of our God; and his Chriſt: And he ſhall
reigne for euer and euer.
                  Where the kingdome of the beaſt Abyſsigena, bred from
the Pit, is gone: all the Church proclame; that CHRIST
will haue no more alterations; vntill he ſhew heauen to all
his. So the ſpeach paſſeth to the worlds end. The Prophets
communely paſſe ouer matters of cōmon ſtate: as needleſſe
to be handled ſpecially: and ſtepp from one thing of plague,
preſently to Meſsiahs kingdome: as notably in Hoſea, after
mention of Iſraels ſcattring, the kingdom of Meſsias is ioyned.
So wen Eſay had ſpoken of Babels fall, after Sanecheribs; then
he ſteppeth thence to CHRIST his preaching, By the voice
of a crier in the wilderneſſe. So Daniel telleth of his kingdomes,
their comming vp: their vrging of Idolatrie: their chaſtiſement:
their ouerthrow, omitting matters of ordinarie courſe;
where the preſent age would looke to it ſelfe. So Apoca. 6.
handleth the prophane Caeſares: and thence, omitteth the
Churches ſliding away, till it come to an abſolute fall. And
then telleth of tyranny: and after tyrannies end; ſteppeth to
the worldes end.
                  
                     
The third woe, is the plague of the enimies: by Kings of
good religion: continually vnto the end.
               
               
                  The ſumme of the Bible.
                  
                     Great voices, expreſſe the voice of whole nations: and the
Kingdome of God & Christ, the matter of all the Bible. Adam
had that theme, to preach 930. yeares. Sem the great, by S. Paul
and Gamalies likened to the eternal author of iuſtice & peace,
figured this matter: and confirmed Abraham in this, 75. year.
& reioyced in Elam, troden downe by Abraham: And all the
large writings breathed by the holy Trinitie, teach no other
matter but this: and puniſhments for contempt of this: and
nothing ſhould be ſuffred in the Church, but to this ſumme.
In the prayer which our Lord preſcribed for a cōmon forme
to the whole Congregation; this conteyneth all: Thy Kingdome
come: thy will be done on earth as it is in heauen. So when
Iohn Baptiſt opened the kingdome of Chriſt: when the Leuiticall
policie was to ceaſe: and all nations ſhould ſerue God
by Lawes writtē in the heart, Rom. 2. Ier. 31. Then the kingdome
of heauen is ſaid to come, when men humble themſelues
to receiue the iuſtice of Chriſt; and to be clothed with
the SVN. The fulneſſe of kingdome cōmeth when the holy
ſoule 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      leaueth this world, & goeth to God,
and there reigneth for euer: and ſeeth the Locuſts pitt-bred,
in Haides torment, fryed in fire for euer and euer. The pitt-bred
beaſts had ſunne and aire much darkened: when they
knew not, whether mans ſoule aſcendeth or deſcendeth: and
whither the holy goeth, to heauen or to hell. This ſaying,
Catercheſthaeis haidon, is neither more nor leſſe, then to goe to

God: when the godly, haue a light place of ioye: and the
godleſſe, a darke place of torment. And this expoſition cutteth
off at the leaſt fifteene bad opinions, direct bad for this
article: by conſequents fifteene ſcore. The Kingdome
heere ſpoken off is termed Haides in the Creede: and wee
may not put Hell for Heauen; nor deſcending, for going to
God. Purgatorie falleth when Haides hath but two partes:
Heauen and Hell; and with it all Poperie: Satan entred into
many vnthankefull Caytifes: that could not ſuffer the holy
ſoules going into the kingdome, to be moſt eloquentlie ſpoken
in the Greeke Creede: if they deſcend not to Hell as
our Lord did in the Creede; they ſhall aſcend vp, and before
Gods throne haue an hell for euer and euer.
                  And the 24. Elders, which ſate on their thrones before
God, fell vpon their faces; and worſhipped God, ſaying:
Wee praiſe thee, O Eternall, who is, and who was, and who
will bee; that thou takeſt vpon thee, thy great power, and
doeſt reigne. As the Nations haue kept a ſtirre, thine anger
is come, and the tyme of the dead to be iudged; and to giue
rewardes to thy ſeruants the Prophetes, and to the holy, and to
ſuch as feare thy name.
                  The Elders be the Gouernors of Gods people in all offices:
& ſpecially in ſage vſage of Scripture, on aſſembly dayes:
all learned in the ſcriptures, and able to giue faithfull exhortatiō
out of it; and all borne in wealth, are brought vp amiſſe,
that are not gronuded in yong yeares, to read with delite in
the holy Booke. Albion ſeeth, who hath opened that way: and
faithleſſe Iewes cōfeſſe: though Atheā
                      pāches for enuy burſt.

Theſe haue thrones before God: not Buyſhops and Archbuyſhops
of Papiſts; But choſen of the holy congregation:
to teach what God telleth: but as Moſes gaue no commandement
of his owne head; nor Chriſt in the fleſh, but as he
taught in Moſes: ſo theſe ſpeake all frō ſcripture: few wordes
by old playne warrant: and yet in few lines ſhake of all poperie
& all errores. In number they be 24. as knowing the XII.
tribes ſtory; how the tribe ſhould not depart from Iudah, till his
childe came: and how the XII. Apoſtles gathered the XII.
tribes, to make them the foundation, of the heauenly Ieruſalem.
Theſe are not many: but 24. yet a reſonable good number.
Many nobles in Albion and others, that liue by their
owne reuenues, ſtudie the Bible, with as good dexterity, as
any feed-men: and know it better then ſome: after 42000.
Brabant Gilders charges, & againe 40000 crownes charges:
ſuch be humble and know Iehouah, who is, who was, who will bee
ſtill, the ſame, to rule all ages to one ſumme of ſaluation in
Chriſt: how in him, GOD, was manifeſted in the fleſh, and
taken vp in glory, and the ſaluation of all ages. Enoſh age, the
flood, Babel, Ieroboam, felt the price of deſpiſing this life.
And after the great ſaluation begun by the Lord himſelfe to
be ſpoken, and confirmed by his hearers, with all guiftes of
the ſpirit: for contempt, the world was ſoone giuen ouer: to
Arius, Pope, and Turke, yet God ſealed a few, and at length
placeth them in open kingdomes to be ſeene: though ſtil the
greater part in open policy, careth but for this life: as in Salomons
dayes, all were of great ſhew: but ſoone after his death,
Ephraim turned all but Iuda; to worſhip calues, not God. So
great Conſtantinus holpe Chriſtians, but few of his men cared
for God. So heere, Popes Idols, & murder of the ſaincts,
cauſe God to ſhake him to duſt: as he ſhoke the Macedonians
                     
after Antiochus Epiphanes perſequution: That the Iewes receiued
their owne kingdome, vnder the Maccabees: and
that meanes the pſalmes, 97. and 99. and others about them;
howe the power of Chriſt breaketh Idoll kingdomes; that
God ſhould take the protection of all into his owne handes.
So heere Elders ſhewe Popes ſtrength caſt of; that others be
ſo ſtrong as hee: But as vnder the Maccabees new corruption,
left ſcant any in faith for Chriſt his firſt comming: ſo it will
bee for the ſecond: that ſcant faith will bee found in the earth:
The true Elders complaine not for mens negligence: but
looke for Chriſt his ſecond comming: vpon the Popes full
fall; as vpon his firſt comming the Macedonians had not a
foote of ground.
               
               
                  Of the Worldes end.
                  No man can tell, when the world ſhall ende, nor when
the Pope ſhall bee vtterly conſumed by the ſpirite of Chriſt
his mouth: But that many hundreth yeeres remaine yet; we
haue many arguments of likely-hood.
               
               
                  Of the Iewes calling.
                  S. Paul ſheweth that the Iewes ſhall firſt be called, Rom. 12.
But Chriſtians in name, are miraculouſly bent againſt that:
very neere open Atheiſme: ſo their calling cannot bee yet:
when Chriſtian ſtates ſwear to hinder that. Agent Barton,
moued a Iewe, to requeſt an explication of the newe Teſtament;
how it is the perfection to the old. Two copies of one
Epiſtle from a Rabbi, the beſt learned in the Eaſt, came to
England; in a ſtrange Character: ſuch as was neuer ſeene in
the Weſt, & in ſtile, vnlike all Chriſtians veine. And in date,

and particular circumſtances; ſo, for the writers occaſions,
that all the wittes in the world, of the Weſt, could not feigne
ſuch a Character, ſtyle, and particular matter. From England,
after long viewing, theſe copies were ſent to Baſill, to
the partie for whoſe worke they were written. The Epiſtle is
printed: and the ſumme, (as requeſt was made) commeth
forth in Engliſh. Now marke the recompence, from a moſt
thankfull nation. Libellers the impudenteſt that euer were
in the world, that ſcoffe a Concluſion of their owne auctores
allowed ſillogiſme; a moſt learned worke that brake
Gehennean torment; (the cauſe is well knowen) theſe raue
againſt him, whom the Q. Agent made the Iew belieue to
be the ableſt of all Chriſtians, to handle our Goſpell in Hebrew
veine: And this ſcoffe, from a moſt vnlearned wight: is
allowed by the Buyſhops.
                  Becauſe, your armes be the owles, you thinke you must bring owles to
Athenes: and becauſe, the Rabbin ſaluteth you, as you feigne,
you thinke you are the onely Thalmudique of the world.
                  The ſimple people were perſuaded, that the Epiſtle was
forged: thinking, that, no ſlaue of Satan, durſt euer be ſo impudent,
as to borrow the princes authority, to a ſlander: and
ſeing two impreſſions, of the Libel were ſoone ſold vnder authority;
they held not (as they ought) the ſlanderers, to be
Anathema Maran Atha: but ſuppoſed they ſpake true, and
ioyned with them to ſerue Satan. Now Chriſtians ſhould
haue the firſt benefite, in ſhewing the Harmony of both Teſtaments:
and where Chriſtians hinder their owne good;
GOD will giue them no honor for Iewes. The like prank,
one of Geneua plaid; being aduertiſed of the Iewes petitiō,

and being requeſted to lend Sadaias Arabique Moſes, kept
a coile as though the matter was forged: that many marueiled,
and gaue information of him: and when the Senate gaue
leaue, to printe the Iewes Epiſtle, and anſwere; he by one
Grinetus forbad to vſe the Senates leaue: and bred much
coile. Thereupon a Greeke oration, accuſing him of machmadiſme,
is ſent to the Senate. They call him to his anſwere.
Then he ſaith, he thought the Iewes Epiſtle was forged.
The Libell from England cited him, and hardned him in
that. And others in Germany kept a ſtirre; (that, therupon
I called his diuinity to accompt) and altered Princes from
great promiſſes, towards Ebrew opening of the Bibles Harmonie.
               
               
                  Of our Kinges rare bent: to the honor of the Bible.
                  Our King vowed, to the Bibles honor (ſo that the partie
would, and might conueniently, take the worke in hande)
1596. a thouſand poundes a yeare; after that he reigned in
England. Satan hindred the workeman, by one that made
Gehennea torment, of going to Paradiſe, in the Creede:
And blamed the workeman, as deceiued: vntill he cleared
himſelfe; no modeſty would requeſt the Kings penſion; nor
no wiſedome grant it. The more religious promiſſes bee
made; the more circumſpection is to be had, to the worke
of their ground, which failing the Promiſſe is no Promiſſe.
Alſo the BB. would take the Bibles clearing in hand: for
which worke much of the old purpoſe began: ſo the workman
was cōtent to be freed. After queſtions were cleared, a
cold letter moueth the king, with mention of old bent. The
King moſt redily telleth by a Knight, of a royall penſion, to
open the Bible againſt Iewes: the offer is accepted: a booke is

printed: chiefe obiections are diſſolued, and after nobles, an
high preferred Clerke, hath a copy. He denieth the Kinges
meſſage: and ſaid he would ſtay the King from allowance to
Ebrew clearing of the Bible: where the King was ſo willing:
and a Clerke ſo croſſe: A learned man wrot vnto mee, that
God meaneth not yet, to call the Iewes. But of duty, I haue
now 12. yer. celebrated the Kinges redy bent: and moſt conſtant
faith. And I ſee that God ſtirreth vnlearned ſcholars, to
force a calling of them to accompt. Now by Ebrew, and
Greeke, Iewes muſt be taught: and Zwitzerland would perſuade
mee, that they knew none by ſtory of my ſtudy that
way: and I thinke ſome hundred of yeares will paſſe, before
another of like paines will ariſe to call them.
               
               
                  Of the Popes ſcholars.
                  The Popes ſcholars in Latin, Greeke, and Ebrew; are terrible
to ours: as D. Piſtorius, of Friburge was: & they ſo play
vpon our errores: that they haue turned millions ſo from vs.
Geneueans checking of the Greeke Teſtament, makes Ieſuites
vſe the Latin, & reiect the Greeke: many armies would
not ſo much help them: Beſides raſh termes: as Deus agit, excitat,
impellit, mouet peccatores. Theſe giue Ieſuites victorie.
God, leadeth them into temptation, to ſhew his iudgement:
but in light of cōſcience warneth againſt ill. But the wicked
rebell againſt light. Againe theſe; aſyſtate, ſtand not together.
Deus operatur omnia in ominibus; in good and bad: and Deus
non agit in malis: Beza hath both: And this no better: Deus
agit in impiis deſerendo. This trifling of vnlearned diſputing,
increaſeth papiſtry exceedingly. So; this cānot be denyed:
God hath ſet vnto anger, all that he calleth not to faith: But

he furthereth not by inward inſtinct, their deſtruction. He
hardeneth by patience, or too great affliction. This ſpeach, he
praedeſtineth men to deſtructiō, is not from God. For that terme
is vſed in furthering the meanes; as in the godly, for ſaluation.
So one raſh terme of a weake ſchole, will turne many
away.
               
               
                  Of Daniel.
                  Long did Beza roare in french homilies againſt the Pope,
from Daniel: Ieſuites reply, that no ſyllable there medleth
with him: ſo all their powder without pellet is loſt: till Lemanus-lake-fiſhers emend their nettes, they ſhall not catch
153. great Fiſhes: and they muſt launch on the right ſide.
               
               
                  Of the poore Indians calling.
                  Of loctan, Gen. 10. come the Eaſt-Indians, their names famous
in heathen; for nationes, mountaines and riuers, tell
that; Their contempt of Godly teaching Chriſt was great,
Noe, Sem, Arphaxad, Selah, Eber, Phaleg, brother to Ioctan,
hath caſt thē of hitherto. The Weſt-Indians ſeeme to come
of the Eaſt: as both ſpeake ſome Ebrew. Now God driueth
vs to both Indians, not for Pepper and Tobacho: but in
tyme, to ſhew his name. And the Ieſuites in teaching the
holy Trinity, Perſon, and Iuſtice of Chriſt, may ſaue many:
and the Pope ſhall haue an outward reward of longer ſucceſſe,
and ſome hundreths of yeares muſt be ſpent this way.
               
               
                  Of the old opinion of 6000. yeares.
                  God hath caſt old ages into a pleaſant frame of meaſures:
of them for Iewes, and from Iewes, I dedicated an Ebrew

worke to the Landtgraue of Heſſia. Now thouſandes I will
touch. In 3000. exactly, the Temple was fully furniſhed:
euen to the Arke. In 4000. exactly the Romanes deſtroyed
the ſeconde Temple: if without it Meſſias dayes haue 2000.
yeares from the yeare of Chriſt 1609. of Adam 5536. One as
Heber may come to the worlds end, by 464. yer. The trueth
God only knoweth: reaſon telleth affaires in worke require
ſuch tyme: But no particular perſon is ſure of one day: but
all ſhould watch, when the Bridegrome commeth.
               
               
                  And to deſtroy them, that deſtroy the earth.
                  Although no Creature but Angells and men know God:
yet the cloſe bent of all Creatures is framed to ſerue man for
Chriſt: God bending them ſo. And in that ſenſe, euery thing
is weary of their toyle, Eccl. 1. and groneth looking for the
Redemtion of the Children of God. Rom. 8. and being turned
to ſeruice of Idolls grone in Gods eſtieme, as corrupted:
ſuch was the old world in corrupting their wayes: ſuch were
Babel builders, till heathen came to God: and almoſt all to
this day. And Apoc. 5. All creatures giue glory to the Lambe,
in ſeruice of Chriſtians. But alas, men to this day would neuer
ſearch Gods word, the wealthie, and principall of ſtate,
but remit that ouer vnto others: as a baſe worke, for themſelues
to regard; whereby God caſt off the world.
                  And the Temple of God was open in the heauen: and the Arke of
his Couenant, was ſeene in his Temple: and there were lightnings
& voices & thunders, & earthquake & great haile.
                  After papiſtries ouerthrow, Chriſt who is the Temple,

and the Arke, who hath the Law within him: & is the mercy
ſeat, ſhall be opened to the few ſaued: and God will pay Papiſts
with warres, for the haile and fire that they mixed with
blood: troubleſome meteores eloquently expreſſe troubles of
ſtate: as before our Lordes firſt comming, the Romans miſeries,
deſtroying themſelues, were a wonder to hiſtoriques:
becauſe Craſſus robbed the Temple: and Pompei afore made
Iſrael ſerue Rome; and Brutus with Caſsius; and Antonius with
Cleopatra: and againe Iulius: ſo Rome that ſtill will crucifie
Chriſt, ſhall haue as great ſtirrs to warne them of vtter ruine.
But by warres, profaneſſe breedeth; to all ſides: that when the
SON OF MAN commeth, he ſhall ſcant finde faith vpon
the earth. The beſt way, to keepe faith is to exerciſe our vniuerſities
in the Ebrew and Greeke Teſtament: and to leaue
ciuill gouernement to ſage courtes fitt for it: as Zuricke in
Zuitzerland doth; that, Scholars tyrannie make not new papiſtrie.
And thus once, all is reueiled vnto the end. New viſions
tell the ſame matter: for better clearneſſe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               A deſcription of the Church.
               AND, a great ſigne was ſeene in the heauen: a woman clothed
with the ſun. With the moone vnder her feet: and a crowne of
12. ſtarres vpon her head: and beeing with child, cried in
trauaile; and peigned to beare child.
               THE woman is the church, through the ſong of ſonges,New Viſions opening the former.
and there pure as the ſun, heere, clothed with Chriſt the
Sunne of Iuſtice: And the ſtate of the faithfull, is called

through this booke, heauen; and they are a great ſigne to the
profane world, to wonder at. The Moone, and all vnder the
Sunne, is contemned of the faithfull: and the doctrine which
the 12. Apoſtles, equall in knowled and authoritie, deliuered
to the world, is the Crowne, and they be 12 ſtarres: Iudas Iſcariot
fell;a ſtarre from heauen; and Matthias became a ſonne
of conſolation in his ſtead; to keepe ſtill the number of XII.
for the XII tribes: and as S. Paul trauailed of the Galathians,
that is; of Chriſt, to be formed in them; that they fruſtrate not
the Goſpell, by holding circumciſion, nowe abrogated: So
the faithfull trauailed in ſoule, to haue Chriſt brought forth
to heathens knowledge: that all might knowe, that all this
world was made obedient to a man, At the firſt, which man
fell from God,Gen. 3. his firſt day,1 Iohn 1. 1. & 3. 8. & 5. 20. and then God opened his Counſell,
that the Sonne Eternall would be made man of a woman,
to deſtroy the workes of the Angels that fell: who all are collectiuely,
ſatan, the enemie. Satan brought Adam to loſe the life
of his ſoule:
                  Eph. 2. 1. 
                  and his body to death; and duſt: and all this world to
corruption; Chriſt kindled light in Adams ſoule; and after 930.
yeares heauineſſe, for ſin tooke it to his ioy, and will raiſe vp the body,
and make a new world:
                  Rom. 5. 
                  that all men who will receiue the abundance
of grace, of the gift of iustice, may reigne by Chriſt: and all who will
not regard this mercy, ſo cleare as the ſunne: they all by Adams fall
dead in ſin; ſhalbe damned for euer with the Diuils; This is the
trauaile of the Chriſtian minde. Speach of this is in all books
of the Old Teſtament, in Adams tongue; in all the newe, in
Greeke; made moſt common for this Goſpell. And Lawe
with Goſpell, expounded by groundes of art, which enemies
grant; ſhould bee the trauaile of our minde. And if Academies,
had brought vp their ſcholars in Ebrew and Greek exerciſes,
for the holy eternall Trinitie in Vnitie: and for kiſſing

the SON to happineſſe: Pſal. 2. By likely-hood of mans reaſon,
the world had benefull of true Chriſtians, where as now
our Papes, Archbuyſhopps, and Buyſhopps; know not one
letter, prick, accent, of the Law; what authoritie it hath from
God. A pitifull matter; that ſuch blinde, ſhould bee leaders.
But the blinde will no other leaders: So God cannot pittie
them; who will make knowen them that be his: and deſpiſe
them that deſpiſe him: that they poore Caytifes ſhall periſh
for euer: and feele the aeternall wrath of him, whoſe mercy
they haue deſpiſed: while they counted the mercies offred
in Chriſt, to be but folly.
               
                  Of the Prophane Caeſar: and Pope reuiuing of him,
both compriſed in the body, and taile,
of one Dragon.
                  Another ſigne was ſeene in the heauen. For beholde,
there was a great ruddie Dragon; with 7. heades and ten
hornes: and vpon his heades ſeauen diademes. And his
taile draweth a third part of the Starres of heauen, and caſt
them vnto the earth.
                  Iohn ſaw with his eyes in Viſion; that which hee and all
the Apoſtles: as S. Paul. 2. Theſſ. 2. ſaw in their minde. That
from Rome, the Ruler, ſhould rule; till hee were taken away: After,
thence man of ſin ſhould ariſe. Both be heere in one dragon:
which the profane Caeſares and the Popes can not perceiue.
They who be of the heauenly ſtate, they all, do ſee, the Dragon
is the Diuill, or accuſar of God: the great is the Diuells
power by Rome: the ruddy bloodie perſecution. His ſeauen
heades, are ſeauē ſtates of Rome, ouer THE FAITHFVL:

as the Iewes knew their ſtory full well: Pompei by Rome was
an Emperour in the Eaſt:The ſeauē heads afflicting the Church. But periſhed neere: in the land of
Cham. So in Iudah, M. Craſſus was after him, armed ouer
Iudah as a King, for Rome, who robbed the Temple of Salem,
of Abrahams houſe; but at Abrahams Charan, he and
his army had a moſt famous deſtruction. Iulius Caeſar made
Cleopatra Lady of Iudah, who periſhed in Capitolio for that.
Brutus & Caſsius force, after was a King for Rome: They by
Antoni periſh. Antoni hath the Eaſt and marieth Cleopatra,
and ruleth Iuda, and both periſh. So fiue diademes of
the Dragon periſh. The 6. ſtate is the wholle power which crucified
Chriſt; and his members: till our Helenaes ſonne, left
Rome:Rome is condemned both in theſe, & the other; of Kinges, Conſuls, Decemvires, Dictatores, Triumuires, &c. and New Troy; to be a pillage to Alaricus, Giezerichus,,
Theodoricus, & Totilas for old perſecuting of martyrs.
The ſeuenth is the Popes wealth, getting landes by S. Peters
forged ſupremacy: and ſetting vp the Empire in the Weſt.
Theſe be the ſeauen diademes; ſpoken, to the Iewes plaine
vnderſtanding. Heathen ſtories may fitt Romes 7. other
ſtates. The more fall out fitt: (as often many do to one
ſpeach) the more Rome (that crucified Chriſt) is condemned:
when GOD turneth continuall reuolution to haue
Rome called into minde. Moreouer the alluſion is to Daniels
foure beaſtes, which had 7. heades. The Lion, one; the
Beare, one; the Leopard foure; the fourth beaſt, one. The
Roman ſtate winning all thoſe contreyes of the Eaſt, are fitly
noted by their armes: And ſpecially by the then hornes.
The Seleucidae by fiue kinges vexed Iudah by warres, againſt
Lagidae: and Lagidae by ſo many againe, waſted Iuda: So that
Greeke beaſt in one parted Kingdome, had 10. hornes:
From that beaſt, the Roman beaſt hath alſo, ten Kingdomes,
at the leaſt: and vnder Auguſtus, and vnder the Pope, rekoned

to that number, Strabo 17. Steuch. contra Vallum. Lib. 2. ſo,
theſe matters be all, moſt plaine.
               
               
                  Of the tayle.
                  The prophane Caeſares perſecution, moued few Chriſtians,
the ſtarres of heauen, to fall. But the taile of the Empire,
the falſe prophet, that ſpeaketh lies, he as Antiochus, Daniel
8. maketh many fall from heauen: praetending religion, with
much praetenſe and no ſubſtance.
               
               
                  The combat of the Roman Empire,
with the Church.
                  And the Dragon ſtood before the woman, beeing in trauaile;
that when ſhe bore her childe, he might deuour it: And
ſhe bare a manly ſonne, which will rule all nations, with a
ſceptre of yron. And the child was taken vp to God: and to
his throne.
                  The alluſion is from the dayes of Chriſt, borne in Bethleem:
when Satan by Herodes ſwords, would haue deuoured him:
but his mother fled with him to Egypt: & after that Satā hoped
to deuour him in the graue, he was taken vp into heauē:
ſo when Chriſtians ſoules trauailed to breed Chriſt: the Emperors
ſtormed;pſalm. 2. to deuour that doctrine as Dauid told, Pſ. 2.
But they brought forth into the light of the world: the SON
would bruſe all nation-with an yron ſceptre; as he did bruſe the
image in Daniel. And ſhewed that his throne is in heauen,
being taken vp, vnto the aeternall King. And the Chriſtians
fled into the wilderneſſe; as CHRIST did in the tyme

of his preaching, or halfe ſeauen, Dan. 9. and often handled
in the Goſpell: in Euſebius handled: and of Beda, who cited
the Apoc. alluſions. M. Scaliger and others that make mo
yeares of our Lordes preaching, ſpent ill, good houres. All
tyme of affliction, is ſweetly termed by our Lords affliction,
to be as his, of dayes 1260. though it were of 300. yer. vnder
Caeſares reſiſtance: and 600. vnder Popes: enimies to Iohns
Apocalyps. The ſpeach is full of comfort: calling vs vnto the
afflictions of Chriſt himſelfe; who reckoned all his owne
dayes: and will haue all our teares in his bottle: and pay all
dogges and Doegs for Cerberean barking.
               
               
                  A Commentary vpon the former viſion.
                  And there was warre in heauen: MICHAEL and his Angells
made warre with the Dragon: and the Dragon and his
Angells made warre: but held not ſtrength: neither was there
place found any more for them in the heauen. And the great
Dragon: the old Serpent, called the Diuell and Satan, who
deceiueth the wholle world, he was cast out: againe I ſay, he was
cast and his Angels were caſt with him, into the earth.
                  The ſtate of the faithfull, heere, is ſweetly called hēauen:
to ſhew our certeinty of hope, for the propre heauen: as the
word of Law and Goſpell is as ſure to vs, as if we ſaw the
third heauen; that, aboue the ayer, and aboue the ſtarres, as
S. Paul did, at his firſt calling, to a comfort againſt all his following
afflictions: ſo the holy Daniel, that in one image
made abridge from the end of the old Teſtament, vnto the
beginning of the new, called the ſtate after abrogation of
Moiſes, the Kingome of heauen. Iohn Baptiſt doth begin

with his tongue. The kinddome of heauen is come. And the
aeternall WORLD, the eſſentiall WORDE, who ſpake and all was
made, he confirmeth the ſame ſpeach, to ſhew that Daniels
Image was ended: and the GOD of heauen ſetteth vp a kingdome,
that cannot be corrupted: The obſeruation of this ſpeach, had
kept Daniel in a cleare meaning: and not brought the Weſt
Empire of Chriſtians, for Eaſt Greeke, Seleuco-Lagides athean.
Nor tymes after Chriſt, for ſtories teaching when he would
come. The termes of the Bible be pearles; & ſtill beate vpon
the open ſtory, for nobleſt matters. So Saint Paul Ebrew. XI.
ſpeaking of the Maccabees martyrs, famous in the Talmudiques,
and after his dayes, hiſtoried by Greeke Iewes, ſaith
from Daniels laſt ſpeaches, of double reſurrection; That they
would not be deliuered becauſe they looked for the better
reſurrection. So he ſheweth that Antiochus perſequutions
were the laſt mentioned in Daniel. The Romans hindred
not the Iewes holy religion, till by the Phariſees they vexed
our Lord himſelfe: when he opened the kingdom of heauen,
dayes 1260. They who without knowledge of Daniel, would
know the Goſpel, are as men that would goe from one Land
to another parted by great waters without a ſhipp. All that
care for the kingdome of heauen, will care for him: And
my paines in a third commentary, an Engliſh, a Latin, a ſhorter
in Engliſh, came forth by my care and charges. By the
third milliones of our ſimple might haue knowen, the Prophets
whole heart. But that Bargulus Illyricus, would caſt him
into the Lions den: If Lions rent not his bones; I will commende
him to the God of Daniel: and the firy flames ſtreaming
from his throne, for his fighting for the dragon againſt
MICAEL and his Angells.
               
               
                  
                  Of MICAEL.
                  
                     Michael and Gabriel, are the only holy ſpirites, which
haue names in the Law. And they only, in heauenly Daniel,
called Son of man: as admitted vnto Angells company: ſo
Ezekiel; and only they two. From Daniel chap. 8. and 9. Gabriel
is brought, to Luc. 1. For moſt rare vſe: The wiſe will vnderſtand
it: but the wicked will neuer vnderſtand: Dan. 12. Michael
is vſed thriſe in Daniel: twice, chap. 10. and one chap.
12. Dan. 10. verſ. 13. Beholde MICHA-EL, the principall,
or only of the chiefe Princes, is come to aide me. Daniel
ſaw a glorious viſion of Chriſt: before which he fell as dead:
then an Angel in the forme of a man, that is, Gabriel ſpeaketh
how Chriſt ſhewed his aſſiſtance; againſt Cambiſes inhibition
of the Temples building: and giueth him a notation:
Hee that is in the forme of God: from Exod. 23. The Angell
which hath the name of God in him: The character or forme of Gods
perſon. Ebr. 1. 3. That doth MICAEL ſignifie. In our Lords
wordes, Ioh. 10. from Dan. 12. The Father, and I, am one. As
I haue ſhewed vpon Dan. 12. In Dan. 10. verſ. laſt: the matter
is playner: in theſe wordes: there is none ſtrong for you in
theſe affaires: but MICHA-EL, YOVR PRINCE. Daniel
acknowledged; no creature of ſpirites, his PRINCE:
therefore Micha-el muſt bee the Son of GOD. So he is called
chap. 12. in the ſame Angells ſpeach: Michael the great Prince,
that ſtandeth vp for his people. No created ſpirite dare chalenge,
a princehood ouer people: ſo here, in the expoſition of praiſe,
MICHAEL is expounded Chriſt.
               
               
                  
                  Of Tobies fable.
                  The Iewes, as I haue written; in Ieruſalemi, vpon Dan. 8.
ſay▪ their Fathers brought with them Angells names from
Babilon, Michael, and Gabriel. Then if Angells had no names
before: Tobie, that bringeth Aſmodaeus for a ſpirite, muſt bee
a late fable. Neither Thalmud Ieruſalemy, nor Babilonian
hath that name: Only late Rabbines. Yet the fable of Tobie,
cited by Clemens of Alexandria is elder, then the compiled
Talmudes. But they are made from Writers, all, Elder then
Tobies fable. Thargum, Eccl. is a late worke: and eldeſt
Iew for record of Aſmodai, the Prince of Diuells: The Phariſees
had, Beelzebub Prince of Diuells: And later Iewes
made Prince of Diuells, Ben Tzirgha, ſonne of Leproſie.
To diſgrace our faith of the SON; Prince, among the holy
Angells. The wicked Rabbines, feigne a Prince among wicked
ſpirites. But wee make no created, Angell, Prince: the
Eternall Sonne Creator of all, is the only Angell, Prince: And
hee is the Arch-angell, that could not ſuffer Satan, to ſpeake
bad ſpeach of Moſes, the firſt King in Iſrael. But Iehouah, before
Iehouah: ſaid, The Eternall rebuke thee, Satan. The Iewes
in Midras Rabba. Deut. chap. 33. feigne, pleading from Satan,
before God, for Moſes: and in Abboth Rabbi Nathan.
S. Iude telling Rabbins that they would deſtroy the Nation
by reſiſting rule: bringeth their owne commentary, how
Michael the Archangel checked Satan, for contempt of Moſes
King of Iſrael: and giueth him the high checke from
Zach. chap. 3. The Eternall rebuke thee Satan So the Eternall
Sonne before the Father, ſpake in Zacharie: what in Iudes
Rabbins in a like cauſe Michael the Arch-angell ſpeaketh:

and Zohar, Gen. col. 46. ſaith, Where Michael is head of the
holy Angells, there Gods maieſtie is meant. This hath Zohar.
And we ſhould not fauor Arias more, then our enemies
would. Tobies fable diſturbing Scriptures glory, where euen
Rabbins ſpeake for it, ſhould no more come among holy
workes: then a worke of Beelzebub, Aſmodaus, or Ben Tzirgha:
being a leprous wicked worke; from the principall miſchiefe
of the Diuel.
               
               
                  Of Michaels Angells.
                  All the true Chriſtians are called Michaels Angells, they
fight by the two edged ſword of Gods word: which originally,
in the Ebrew and Greeke new Teſtament; is pure in
writ: cleare in meaning: and perfect to diſcuſſe all ſage matters.
Caeſares Diui were ſoone confuted: becauſe all knew their
profaneſſe: they were ſoone by all ſides excluded, from all
mens regard: for any hope of happy ſtate: But the great fight
here is with the King of Locuſtes: and his garriſons, Satans
Angells: that they may be knowen, not to be the People of
God. Here is a ſore combate: that of the two Prophets, ch. XI.
               
               
                  Of the wicked ſpirites names.
                  
                     Dragon, old Serpent, Diuel, Satan, bee the names of the
wicked ſpirites companie. King Pharaoh, Eſa. 27. is a Dragon,
as old Pharaoh; who, for all Moſes Rod, would bee but
a Serpent: So the king of Madai and Paras worſhipped in Babel,
that for a moneth none ſhould pray but vnto him, is in
the Apocrypha fable, a Dragon, worſhipped in Babilon: So
the Roman Diui Caeſares, and the Pope, ſhewing himſelf, in the

Temple of God, as if he were God, make a Dragon: as the old enimie
worketh in them.
               
               
                  Of old Serpent.
                  The old Rabbins as Zohar: and Aben Ezra, and many
moo, confeſſe, that the Angells which fell, ſpake in the old
Serpent. And that company is called the old Serpent or Tempter:
as Adam gaue the Serpent from his nature, the name,
Tempter: The Rabbins whom I haue cited, (in an Hebrew
treatiſe of fitting Iubilees to the yeare of our Lordes death;)
ſo terme the Tempter: & later Aben Ezra; though late wicked
Iewes turne all to fables of a naturall Serpent: who may
be muſſelled by their owne ancient.
               
               
                  Of Diuell.
                  
                     Diabolos, in Greeke is the commune name of any ſlanderer;
but applied by Iobs tranſlater, chap. 1. to the Ebrew
Satan, enimie; where our enimie the falſe accuſer, goeth about
like a roaring Lion, ſeeking whom hee may deuour.
There Diabolos expreſſeth enimie, by occaſion taken from
Satan ſlandering of Iob. Saint Pet. 1. 5. taketh both names.
The Zohar telleth vpon Gen. 3. howe the Diuell accuſeth
each one, from his comming into the world, all his life. So
by the Iewes, hee accuſed Chriſt as an enemie to Caeſar; and
made him pay for robbery. Pſal. 69. though it was not robbery
for him, to ſay, hee was the Sonne of GOD. Chriſt held it no
robbery to bee eaquall to God; but the Diuell the Slanderer made
Caiphas vrge this as a deadly matter: ſo the Chriſtians, were
ſlandered to the Caeſares, as athean; and the reformed now

are haeretiques to Papiſtes; ſome trapps we lay in their way:
wherby Gods iuſtice doth whipp vs by their tongues.
               
               
                  Of trapps laid by our ſelues.
                  Whereas, Catelthein eis haidon, in the godly: is all one as to
remoue hence to the father: Geneua denying Chriſt a paſſe,
Catelthein eis haidon: denieth in tongue, that he went to the
Father: And ſo denieth all religion. Likewiſe Lutherans
by Vbiquity, for the humanity of Chriſt, wound all the doctrine
of incarnation: wherein the humanity is according to
our kinde, ſin onely excepted: Beſides, we grant to the Papiſts,
that text of both Teſtaments is corrupt: and ſo wee weaken
the auctority of ſcripture; and make no end of checking the
holy Greek Teſtam. that the Ieſuits binde not it, but Ieromes
Latin with Ebrew in octauo. Alſo where the Apoſtles ſpeake
plainly to all learned Iewes: wee expound them as if they
had coined Phraſes, to new vexation of our ſpirits: and make
the word ſeeme a noſe of wax. Thus, we hinder our owne
fight, but ſome ſtill hold the truth, that the accuſation cannot
be generall. The reſt ſhould be wiſe with them.
                  The Diuell and his Angels,The Angell of his praeſence ſaued thē Iſai 63. by MICAEL that ſtandeth
vp for his people, who be his Angels; are baniſhed from
the Church: and knowen to be vnclean ſpirits.
               
               
                  A ſecond and playner expoſition, of the
Dragons warre.
                  And I heard a great voice ſaying in the heauen, now is come the
ſaluation, and power, and Kingdome of our GOD, and the
auctority of his CHRIST, becauſe the accuſar of our brethren,

who accuſeth them before GOD day and night, is
cast downe; And they haue ouercome by the blood of the
Lambe, and by the word of his Teſtimony; and deſpiſed
their liues vnto death. Therefore reioyce yee heauens, and
they who dwell in them: wo be vnto them which dwell in
the Land and the Sea: becauſe the Diuell is come to you,
hauing great wrath, knowing that he hath but a litle
while.
                  Where a company by Martyrdome ſhew that ſaluation
commeth onely by the death of CHRIST, and are conſtant
in that Teſtimony: then troupes that make the heauens
kingdom heere, proteſt they know how ſaluation cōmeth: &
know Gods power, that falleth the mighty ſtate of the Pope,
and know wherein the Kingdome of God ſtandeth: And
the auctority of Chriſt: where the Pope had a Kingdome of
Satan in his policy, through all partes, of all common weales:
euen from ruling Emperours, to the pooreſt that had but a
chimney, to pay a Peter-peny. The holy Teſtament playnelie
ſhewing our Creatores: And how the ſpirit of CHRIST flootereth
vpon all the waters of both Teſtaments, and cleared the holy ſtory:
And cleareth our hearts, to call vpon GOD, with a good heart,
this ſheweth in this plaine ſum, what the Kingdome of God
and auctority of CHRIST is. Gouernement ſtandeth
vpon plaine rules. The wealthy that know CHRIST,
Kinges, Dukes, Earles, Barons, Knights, will ſtudy to excell in
Diuinity, to be true Biſhopps and Elders, to eate vp the
Booke of the Goſpell, and to ſee all miſcariage ſagely reſtreined:
being thoſe that Saint Paul and the Talmudiques
meant by Paſtors. And will ſee how by Church lands an infinite

company may be made cunning in tongues, and ſenſe
of both Teſtaments. That the Angelos Eccleſiae, and daylie
Seniores, may be ſo taught in Diuinity, as men are in liberall
artes: to know the wholle facultie, and the propre vſe, of
euery holy booke. And what concent all the ſcripture hath;
and where one error putteth all out of tune, but may ſoone
be remoued: ſo a faithfull minde, will often in a day runne
ouer all the Bible: and ſee all ages faithfull, as trees planted
by waters: and all wicked as duſt ſcattred by the winde. And
ſuch will be true Biſhopps; as, Cucullus non facit monachum:
ſo a courtiers fauor, and title; maketh not a Biſhopp for ſaluation,
and power, and kingdome of God, and authority of
Chriſt. Buy-ſhopps mocke with GOD: but all Mordecaies
will vſe them as Agagites: and as leprous to the Church. So
when all Gouerners in ſtate; be learned Biſhopps, ioy will
be in the Church; that the Diuell muſt goe to Land, or
quiet ſtate of the Pope, or ſea warres of Emperors bad: to
ſeeke whom he can deuour. The learned dealers for the
Church, will finde for it, meanes in perſequution to be protected:
Yea and to make the Land or Papiſticall ſtate, as
King H. VIII. did, drie vp the riuers of the Popes perſequution.
In the middle of Papiſtry he ouerthrew the Pope
by Papiſtes. Who were content to buy the Abbeies that
fed Idolatrous Locuſts, & could not for ſtarke ſhame denie,
a common prayer booke made from the maſſe booke, turned
to Engliſh: ſo, ſo much was choſen from the maſſe
booke, to be in Engliſh, as ſeemed not directly to fight with
Gods trueth, and ſubſcription for allowance to that, was no
further meant, but that the Papiſts could finde no fault with
it: Vnder K. E. 6. and Q. E. the beſt Biſhopps allowed the
communion booke, no further; and gaue others leaue to

expreſſe that, how they bare with it, vntill fitt tyme of
amendement.
               
               
                  Of the Dragons ſhort tyme.
                  This ſpeach ſheweth the tyme, neere the ſeauenth trumpet
for the worlds end, by the Dragons tayle; the Pope
heere meant: in his perſecution: that the Diuell is fierce,
knowing that he ſhall not be long the God of this world.
And the Pope feareth leaſt his Kingdome ſhall ſoone fall.
And our Buyſhopps that vrge his canons damned by our common
Lawes, are now in rumores, that they incenſe ſome to begge all
Buyſhopps lands. Leiceſter went farre: to chaing 40000. lib.
for rack rent: but more harme is bred by Buyſhopps tyranny
now. Biſhopps vnder King Edw. haue beene ſuch, as none
(but of Satans ſpirite) would deny them to bee lawfull
Biſhops. And ſuch as agreed well with Nobles, Gentry, and
all. The name troubleth none but the Barbarous. They who
hold the place without teaching the people the trueth; and
with tyranny: breake the cōmon lawes of the realme: which
ſtand with reaſon: that is, the Law of God: ſuch ſhould
chainge their minde: and obey the Goſpell, leſt their ſhort
tyme be for Sarans ſeruice and for euer.
                  And when the Dragon ſaw that he was cast into the earth, he
perſequuted the woman, which brought forth the male child.
                  This common place toucheth all the Popes perſequutions,
though it be vttered as at one tyme. The Pope had
ſtill ready cruell torment: for all of his that deſcried wickedneſſe,
in his religion.
                  
                     
And to the woman were giuen two winges of an eagle, to flee
into the wilderneſſe; into her owne place: to bee nouriſhed
there a tyme, and tymes, and halue a tyme, from the praeſenſe
of the Serpent.
                  The Pope driueth the Church into the Wilderneſſe, as
Pharaoh droue Iſrael: Saul, Dauid: Antiochus, the holy
Iewes: the Phariſees, he Lord of glory for a tyme, two tymes
and halfe a tyme: three yeeres and an halfe: and, as I ſhewed;
all tyme of perſecution, is called in remembrance of our
Lordes: a perſecution of dayes 1260. as chap. XI. or of a tyme,
two tymes, and halfe a tyme: As Beda, and Carthuſianus, well
noted. In Exo. 19. God ſaith, hee brought Iſrael from Egypt, as
with eagles winges: ſo the perſecutor heere is a newe Pharaoh:
and Rome is Egypt ſpiritually, as in chap. XI. And the Dragon
Pharaoh; is heere, a new Dragon. And the Pope; which
will bee worſhipped, for a God: is as Darius, Dan. 6. and in
the fable vpon that: as the Dragon, which the Chaldeans
worſhipped. The Phraſe of the fable, folowed a true ſtorie.
               
               
                  Of the tyme of theſe perſequutions.
                  And the Dragon did cast after the woman out of his mouth,
water, like a riuer: to make her riuer-caried: But the earth
holpe the woman; and the earth opened her mouth, and
dranke vp the riuer, which the Dracon caſt out of his mouth.
And the Dracon was angry with the woman, and went to
make warre with the reſt or her ſeede: which keepe the Commaundement
of God: and holde the testimonie of IESVS
CHRIST.
                  
                     
The Popes power (when Satan was let looſe, to deceiue;
that Kinges gaue their ſtrength to Pſeudo-Petre) driueth the
Church not to be ſeene: for certaine hundreths of yeres; before
Martyr, Zuinglius at Zuricke, in the Church which Charles
the Great built, ſhewed that he was the taile of the great
Dracon, which drew the ſtarres of heauen from their place.
And now they comment beſt vpon this place: aſking where
was our Church; before M. Lutheres tyme? I will aſke where
was it not? Milliones in England opened themſelues praeſent:
when valiant K. Henry the VIII. ſhooke off the Pope:
and the beſt learned of the Popes pay: were leaſt enimies to
vs: as Cuthbert Tonstall; who at London and Dureſme, ſtill bare
with the Proteſtants workes: and would ſweare by his Fathers
ſoule (therein faulty) that neither the accuſares, nor he
could amend them: full many moo were of that vein: as they
who gaue harbor cloſely to the teachers of the holy Goſpell:
and what learned haue the papiſtes bred; till our ſide forced
them to ſtudie. And at this houre their beſt grant, that wee
ouer-reach them in the teſtaments tongues; and clearneſſ; &
defenſe of the pureneſſe of the text. Our greateſt hinderance
commeth by our Buyſhops, that are voide of loyalty, & full
of cruelty: I ſpeake not againſt Biſhops, ſage and learned: but
Buyſhops ſauage & vnlearned. Waters of trouble, they helpe
the Dragon to caſt from the mouth of his canons: that no
praemunire will ſerue their turne: and if any would keepe
them from hell, will burne ſuch papers. And when common
Lawes of earth policie, drinke vp and drie the K. of Locuſts
waters: yet if the reſt of vnaduiſed zeale giue them aduantage;
Cerberus ſhall barke ſo: that they may bee forth comming,
but not comming forth. The maine of the Church in
Albion, Almany, France, & Zuitzerland, the confederate prouinces,
                     
and Denmarke, haue made the earth to drie the Popes Riuers
of Belial, (as 2. Sam. 22. ſpeaketh.) But yet in Spaine holy
Martyrs dayly finde the 42. moneth like affliction: to bee
conformed to the ſufferings of Chriſt, becauſe they worſhip
God only: That is, as all Iewes expound the phraſe, pray only
vnto him: and reſt in the abundance of grace of the guift of
iuſtice, to reigne by Chriſt. What authoritie on earth maketh
this Dragon; the chap. 13. following will tell plainely:
and the 14. how for Idolatry reiected, the taile of the Dragon
maketh Martyrs.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               And I ſtood vpon the ſand of the Sea; and I ſaw a beaſt comming
out of the Sea, hauing ſeauen heades, and ten hornes: and
vpon his hornes ten crownes, and vpon his heades a name
of Blaſphemie.
               THIS holy Reuelation, ſpeaking of matters to come,
borroweth ſpeaches from matters paſt: which is the
ſure way to giue a ſound Iudgement. Daniel comforteth
the family of Nathan, by Gods vengeance vpon great
Kinges, ariſing great from ſeas of troublous warres. The firſt
was not Aſſur, but Babel: the Lion, with NABV. his mouth:
who can deliuer you from my handes, chap. 3. The ſecond was a
Beare, from Madai & Paras; the Eaſt deuouring North, West,
South, as hauing 3. ribbes in the mouth. And by two mighty
kingdomes, Medes and Perſans, ſet vp one gouernement:
Theſe two, had but two heades, as all of the kinde: the third,
was a Leopard with foure heades: Alexander Macedon, and
his foure chiefe: which in 40. yer. brought all his dominion

parted into 23. Captaines, and many Kinges afore, holding
their owne, into the Power of foure. The fourth was no new
Beaſt: but the ſame nation of the Greekes: in a parted kingdome:
in Seluchus who gate ſeuentie two kingdomes: and
Ptolomie Lagides in Aegypt.
               
                  Of two ſpeciall points to be noted heere.
                  They who make the Romans one of Daniels Beaſts, do
pleaſure the Iewes highly: concluding that Caeſar and Rex Romanorum:
and our Conſtantine and his ſucceſſores went to eternall
flames. Euſebius began it, as Oecolampidius citeth his
fragment: good Caluin folowed that Atheiſme: and good
Beza too: thence thundering with powder without pellet againſt
the Pope; and not marking how ſeauen tymes ouer,
gracious Daniel, teacheth that Greekes be the laſt that afflict
holy Iewes in his pictures. And Iewes vpon Dan. 8. confeſſe
as Ralbag, and Seror Hamor of Abr. Sebagh, that Greekes bee
Daniels laſt pictured. And our error is duller then the Iewes:
they confeſſe; for our Goſpell, that Greekes be the laſt afflicters:
When the matter forceth them to ſpeake trueth: wee
relinquiſh their grant, to our Goſpells ſtrength: and folow
them in a lye, to our Goſpells ouerthrow. Heere we haue no
better to ſay; then, that Satan hath deceaued vs. Polichronius
the learned Greeke Father of old, ſaw the trueth, and wicked
Porphyri confeſſeth the ſame. And Sebaſtian Munſter, at
Baſill reuiued a touch of the trueth: and Polyhiſtor Bodinus,
Tremelius: and our learned Whitaker; and D. Iohn Reignold, in
dayly ſpeach; and M. Rollock: and Geneua the zealous towne,
in their laſt french, reiect all notes damning Rome and the
Pope; The Iewes ouer the world were broken, if all the Popes

ſide, for their owne cauſe, would do the ſame: and the Iewes
broken, would breake the Turkes Machumed.
               
               
                  The ſecond Poincte.
                  The goodneſſe of God was infinite, in breaking Salomons
kingdome; and ſending Iewes to Babell, to preach God, that
made the world: and to ſhew the wickedneſſe of the towres
building, forworſhipp of ſtarres. So the power of the great
God, appeared in extolling baſe Babell, to fell Aſſur and all
kingdomes, and to fall in ſeauenty yeeres: that Cyrus might
ſay: The God of heauen gaue him all the Kingdomes of the world:
and when Daniel had taught of the redemption by Chriſt:
after ſeuen ſeuenties: & Iewes went home from 120. nations
to Ieruſalem in that hope: God made fooliſh the wiſedome
of Plato & Aristotle, for their dreamed happineſſe. And this
aboue all, is a miracle of miracles, that the Greeke tongue
knowen in the Weſt ouer, was conueied by Greeke ſoldiers
ouer North, Eaſt and South, by Seleucidae and Lagidae. So that,
in three hundred yeares, Greeke was made common ouer all
the world. And Homer, was turned into the Greeke tongue, as
Fr. Portus, praef. in Hom. writeth; doubtleſſe by ſome Macedonians,
for increaſing Greeke in their Colonies. By this
meanes, the Greeke tongue was made commune, ouer the
world: that commune ſaluation might be written in Greeke.
Alſo, the Macedonian Kinges ſetted in Aegypt, and they of
Syria: both clayming Iudea, and ſtill fighting for it, as they became
victores, ſcattered Iewes into all partes: that they abide
ſcattered there yet: AndCommentarie or Regiſter. 
                     Itinerarium Rabbi Beniamin
ſheweth: euen through the furtheſt India. So the Apoſtles
might ſpeake in the Greeke tongue to the old law. And thus
the 4. Kingdomes tyranny, holpe much to ſaue others, by
their owne deſtruction.
               
               
                  
                  How the Romanes armes, are taken from the
Kingdomes in Daniel.
                  The ten hornes are from the Seleucolaegidae, in ten hornes:
fiue of each ſide vexing Iuda. But there were tenne particular
Kinges; heere Kingdomes: noted by a crowne vpon euery
horne. Now exactly, fiue Seleucidae, are not notable: but fiue
Lagidae bee. So for the ſtrict number God would not haue all
the world vexed: in men not worthy ſtrict regard of ſtorie.
But aboueX. Kinges of old Kingdomes now be noted. And
Strabo lib. 17. noteth, that Augustus diuided all Proconſulſhips
into X. And Steuchus againſt Vallu. diuideth the Popes,
in the ſame ſort. As I haue in Con. Scr. ſhewed. The color of
Leopard, is from Alexander: Beares foote, from Paras: Lions
mouth, from Babell: Hornes, color, feete, mouth; meane all
tyranny; demeanour, courſe, & lawes alike. As Babel deified
the Image, Dan. 2. Paras, their King: Alexander, would bee
a God. And Antiochus, would haue Iupiter Olympius: So the
Caeſares, would ſtill be Diui: And termed the Chriſtians
Atheiſts: as when martyrs were moued to abiure Chriſt; this
was the recantation; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . That is, away with the
Atheists. As a ſpeach vnto Caeſar: to hold Chriſtians
Atheiſts: and to requeſt their deſtruction. Euſ. Eccl. Hiſtor.
In this ſort the Caeſar hath a name of blaſphemy, holding
Gods ſeruants, whoſe conuerſation is in heauen, to be not
Gods ſeruants, but wicked men: as the text will ſhew anon.
                  And the beast which I ſaw was like a Leopard: and his feete as a
Beares: and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: & the Dragon
gaue him his owne power: and his owne throne: and great auctoritie.
                  Heere we ſee, why Satan bare armes, from the Romanes

armes. Euen becauſe Satans autority was executed by them.
The god of this world had ſuch auctority giuen, to trye the
elect: that the Goſpell might be knowne, to be hid to none,
but to whom the God of this world blinded vnderſtanding.
                     2. Cor. 4. 3 This
farre reacheth the profane Empire: which our great Constanſtine
made dead: when he left old Rome, and made Bizantiū
new Rome. By the death of one head, the expoſition following
ſheweth the whole beaſt once dead. Pompei with Romes
 force oppreſſed Gods people: there Iuda felt one head: and
he periſhed in Aegypt. M. Graſſus with Romes army made

                     another head, and robbed the Temple of Abrahams ſonnes;
who came from Charran or Carrae.
                     The ſeauē heades afflicting. At Carrae the Parthians
ouerthrew his whole army: to the aeternall ſhame of the Empire.
Iulius Caeſar tamed Aegypt: and diſpoſed Cleopatraes Gouernement;
 to haue Iudae vnder a toe of that legge: a third
head: he was kild in the Senate houſe. Brutus & Caſsius, the
chiefeſt of his murtherers, their Romane hoſt oppreſſed Iuda;
 and they made a fourth head. Antonius, he with the Romane
force being made a mighty King in the Eaſt, maried
Cleopatra, and made Herod for Her, King of Iuda: that Daniels
Image might haue ſome remembrance till Chriſt came.
 He as Pompei periſhed in Aegypt; a fift head. Then came the
ſtate of Rome to one Perſon: and ſo continued one head from Auguſtus,
vnto great Conſtantine. And in that head when he left
curſed Rome, the beaſt there was dead. So the ſixt head had
                     
                     beene, and was not: and yet was reſtored; to be a ſeauenth head:
                      and the Pope is in that head, with all his power: and alſo will
 be a ſeuerall power aboue all: and make alſo an eight head,
chap. 17. That is heere once told.
                  And I ſaw one of his heades, as ſlaine vnto death: and his deadly
ſtroke was healed: that admiration was through the whole

earth, after the beast: & they worſhipped the Dragon, which
gaue his power vnto the beaſt: and they worſhipped the beaſt
ſaying, who is like to the beast? Who can warre with him?
And a mouth was giuen him ſpeaking great thinges: and
blaſphemies: and auctority was giuen him to be doing 42.
moneths: and he opened his mouth to blaſphemy againſt
God: to blaſpheme his name: and his Tabernacle: and them
whoſe Tabernacle is in heauen: And it was giuen him to
make warres with the ſainctes, and to ouercome them. And
power was giuen him ouer euery tribe, tongue, and nation:
That all who dwell in the earth, ſhould worſhip him, they
whoſe names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb,
which was ſlaine fromt the beginning of the world.
                  Heere the tyrannie of the profane Caeſares, caried by the
ſpirite of Diuell is fully deſcribed: well knowen by Diuus
Nero, Diuus Domitian, and the reſt of Diui or Diuels, vnto Diocletian.
That Chriſtians reading this, might looke, for ſuch
troubles, as the holy in Daniel ſuſteined. This needeth no expoſition:
but it ſelfe expoundeth, chap. 12. for the vpper part
of the Dragon. And as Dan. 7. God ſate vpon a fiery throne;
ſhewing a reueng vpon all the afflicters of his people. So
Apoc. 6. warre, bloody, black, and pale, and a gulfe of a graue was
opened: ſhewing how the Caeſares warred and periſhed miſerably
300. year. with their great armies. The Romane ſtories
tell all, moſt plentifully: and Rome, after their deſtruction
felt it, by Alaricus, in Zozimus, by Giezricke, in the Eccleſ.
ſtory: from Lybia a new Hanniball, by Theodoricus, & Totilas:
THAT AS STEVCHVS CONFESSETH, ROME
HAD BEENE MADE A MOST FILTHY LODGE,
OF OXEN AND HOGGES, BVT FOR THE
POPES. Now the Caeſares puniſhment followeth, with a

ſeuere taunt of dulneſſe, to them that will not marke ſtately
ſpeaches: From Mat. 13. and Apoc. 2. and 3.
                  If any man haue an eare, let him heare, Hee that carieth captiuitie
ſhall goe into captiuitie (Abb. 1. 2. for the Chaldean)
if any kill with ſword, hee ſhall bee killed with ſword, Gen. 9.
                  When Antiochus the vile ſlew Iewes faithfull to God,
& had affinitie with Egypt: God plagued both houſes more
notablie then any families that euer were before. Heathen
did note it, though they knew not, that they made a cōmentary
to make Daniel, a moſt cleare booke: ſo Aurelus Victor
commonly read with Iuſtine in Grammar ſcholes, ſheweth
howe the Caeſares were plagued to the aſtoniſhment of the
world: ſince Rome crucifyed the Lord of Glory. And Herodian
handleth an Iliad of their plagues for 70. yer. how the Emperores
were ſo vile as dogges. Sozimus ſheweth litle better ſucceſſe.
And before our Lordes dayes in the fleſhe, when their
Empire made an head ouer Iuda; Pompei, Craſſus, Iulius, Brutus,
Antonius, and their Ciuill warres, were wonders of miſery.
And Plini recordeth, what miſeries made Auguſtus weary of
his life, full often. Theſe rules ſhould be a bridle for Buyſhopps
of Rome, and all of their Caius.
                  
               
               
                  Heere is the faith and conſtancie of the holy.
                  Our gratious aeternall Spirite here meeteth with the weak:
that they ſhould not iudge of Gods fauor, by proſperitie in
this world, From Cain, to Tuualcain, (or heathen ſmith Vulcain)
the wicked bare ſway: Which Spirite went and preached in
the dayes of Noe, to them that are now Spirits in Priſon. Nemrod

the Rebel had firſt dominion; and Niniueh and Babel at the
laſt, Nemrods houſe: and in Dan. 11. 35. and 12. 10. the faithfull
are told what God meant, to let wicked Magog ſo afflict
his: euen to trie them in the fire, to purifie them, & to whitten them.
Twiſe the very ſame termes be told. Heere, is the ſame matter.
That God would trie the pacience, as Dan. 12. of the holy:
Holy Peter writing from Babylon to the Iewes ſcattred,
telleth them of their happineſſe, in belieuing in Chriſt, whoſe
kingdome tryeth his,1. Pet. 1. as gold is tryed. The witty wicked Poet
could tell ſo much: as Menander, Epimenides, and Aratus other
poinctes.
                  
                     Scilicet vt fuluum ſpectatur in ignibus aurum,
                     Tempore ſic duro eſt inſpicienda fides.
                  
                  That is,

                        As yellow Gold in fier men doe trie,
                        So Faith is prou'd in miſerie.
                     
                  
                  Euery trueth hath Gods warrant, whoſoeuer doth ſpeake
it. Now the Popes religion ſtandeth in proſperiti; & no common
weale hath their wealth and quietneſſe. Therefore they
are not of S. Peters faith: who from Babylon wrote to the
neere ſcattred Iewes, of affliction. Although at the firſt ſome
Doctores of Rome were afflicted, and martyrs is too. But after
quietneſſe, they ſtill labored, to bring home from the Eaſt to
old Rome; and pleaded from the Iewes manner of Fables,
that the firſt called Apoſtle was in the Principall Citie:
to make him a moſt wicked man: that (foreſeeing (as a
Prophet) combatts where hee hath beene,) would not in
his owne tyme, make that matter paſt all doubt. As Saint
Paul Biſhoppe of Rome: and Saint Luke of Antioh, maketh
it paſt all doubt, that Peter was neuer neare Rome:

                     Clemens and Tertullian made Euſebius, write that he was: And
all who folow them haue but rumores auctoritie. And he is
curſed that makes mans auctoritie his arme: and Melchior Canus
a Rhomiſt, maketh a ſounde common place, that our
Churches ſtories of men are weake teſtimonies: In the 300.
yer. perſequution, it was not ſafe for any to write of others:
becauſe enemies by ſuch would ſearch out more, how to perſequute
Chriſtians. Paul of Romane name, borne free in
Rome, who would not build in others fundations, who was
carefull for to ſtrengthen the Romans, as not hauing yet an
Apoſtle, who firſt told the Synagogue, Acts 28. whereupon
the Goſpell ſtood, ſheweth that HEE brought the name of
Chriſt, to Caeſares pallace, Phil. 1. and was told Act. 23. that
hee ſhould ſo doe. And ſaluting 25. Rom. 16. neuer giueth
token of one word touching Peter: but cleane otherwiſe,
Gal. 2. and Peter telleth expreſly that from Babylon he wrote
his firſt Epiſtle, chap. 5. whereby all maner of ſpeach, all men
would require proprietie: that the moſt knowen Babylon
ſhould be there meant. Yet as Pindarus ſaith that men belieue
fables more then trueth: ſo experience of ſage men
prooue that true: men otherwiſe ſage, hold that true; that
Peter was in Italy: as the Chaldi Iob ſaith hee was at Conſtantinople,
and the forged Ben Vziel vpon Num. 24. and millions
of milliones after them: whereas we deſpiſe Iewes: Iewes
equally deſpiſe Romiſts: where any could not miſſe to haue
knowen the trueth: if Peter had euer bene at Rome. They
who ſay by Babylon he meant Rome, would make him a
ſimple Fiſher: that knewe not where a trope would make a
wickedlie: and afflict all ages: where men neuer date cōmon
bookes for all Ages, from a miſnamed place; where the Reader
would count the ſpeaker a lyer: ſo the 2. Epiſtle was written

from Chaldea where the letter 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      was an S. in Boſor.
Beor in the 70. and that, S. Peter would haue folowed liuing
in Greeke landes.
                  And I ſaw another Beaſt, comming vp from the earth, which
had two hornes like a lambe, and ſpake as a Dragon: and practiſed
all auctority of the first beast; before him: and cauſeth
the earth and them that dwell in it, to worſhip the firſt
beaſt: whoſe wound to his death, was healed, &c. to the end
of the Chap.
                  A moſt plaine deſcription of the Pope. 1. by the beaſt ariſing
from the earth.
                  Firſt his ſtate is a beaſt: as all armes of ſtate are figured, by
beaſts & ſuch. So the King of Locuſts, ch. 9. is a beaſt cōming
out of the earth, ch. 11. earth oppoſition to the ſea, ſignifieth
a quiet ſtate. So the Pope by quietneſſe gate lands, to be
aboue all Emperours; yet Ceph, the Rocke aeternall, would be
a ſeruant. And Peter Cephas, a fiſher: but the vnlikeſt vnder
their name, would be the vnlikeſt: next the Diuell, the God
of this world: ſo his, a great ſtate vpon the earth; in the City
which crucifyed Chriſt.
               
               
                  By the Lambes two hornes.
                  The Lambe, ſignifieth the S. of God; Iohan. 1. & Apoc 5.
Hornes, power, Pſalm. 18. & Dan. 8. So he that chalengeth to
be in ſteade of Chriſt, and to haue double power from him,
Eccleſiaſticall and Temporall, in Ebrew, ADONIKAM.
My Lord is ſet vp, he is heere deſcribed. He ſo ſheweth himſelfe,
in the Temple of God: as if he were God: among many millions

who knewe him to bee the wicked man. But as in old Babel
men were of Angells match, the three nobles that quenched
the fier▪ (and made Nemrods ſonne confeſſe their God.) and
gracious Daniel admitted to familiaritie with Chriſt, and his
Angells: and Ezechiel, and Ezra, and men like Angells: ſo
where the Diuel had his Chappell, God had and hath his
Church; to tell how Satan ruleth the Pope: and hath ſtrong
worke in error.
               
               
                  OF ONE ERROR IN THE POPE: WHICH MAKETH
HIM NEXT THE DIVEL: WHERE THE DIVEL
WOVLD TREMBLE; TO BEE SO IMPVDENT OPENLY.
                  The ground of our ſaluation ſtandeth, in belieuing this,
of the womans ſeede, a deſtroyer of Satans workes, Gen. 3. HEE,
ſhall bruiſe thy head:1▪ Ioh. 3. that is ſpoken twiſe, in Adams tongue,
in the maſculine gender. Some late Popes I thinke, knewe ſo
much Ebrew: though of old few did: when they made firſt
the tranſlation, called S. Ieromes, to be ignorant of this. So,
not SHEE is meant, but HEE. The aeternall God, as the Zoar,
from Iewes, there note: God in Christ, and againe, and againe,
thou Serpent, ſhall bruiſe HIS foote-stepp: and not HER foote-stepp:
yet the Popes tranſlation corrupteth that which they
call S. Ieromes: and ſay; ſhee, ſhall bruiſe thy head.
                  1. So the Latin called S. Ieromes goeth; though Arias Mō
                     tanus
had a better Conſcience: & put forth the true Ebrew.
                  2. Of all Ebrew copies, that euer haue bene heard of: none
herein was noted to differ: as by them full many, (which we
read) wee may iudge of the reſt: who would not paſſe ouer
difference in Silence if any difference had bene.
                  
                     
3. All Greekes vniverſally, follow the Ebrew: yet againſt
all, the Pope would haue: not HE: but SHEE: Marie, in his
tranſlations: & in a treatiſe foiſted into Plantines great Bible.
                  4. Satan is broken thus: he brought Adams ſoule to death
by ſinne: the reſtorer muſt giue it iuſtice.
                  5. Satan brought mans body to corruption; that HE, muſt
reſtore it in reſurrection.
                  6. Satan by Adams fall brought all this world to corruption▪
the reſtorer, muſt bee able to make a newe world. But an
HE, not a SHEE, muſt doe this: wherfore, this error, conuicteth
the Pope of wickedneſſe, as high as the Diuels can goe.
Yet all, that goe vnder Papiſts names, are not of this minde
nor Giltineſſe: but all well charged with error here, are gilty
without good change of mind. While this ſtandeth, & honor
to Mary aboue her place. The Popes throne & Satans be all
one. For this maine poinct, would I gladly haue, a learned Papiſt
to reply: that all might ſee, what can be ſpoken againſt the
trueth.
               
               
                  Of the Dragons ſpeach.
                  Lawes be the ſpeach of a Policy: and the Popes decretals
ouerruling ſtates, are wicked, commonly; though all cannot
be ſenſleſſe: yet by vnlawfull men vrged they are all wicked.
Seeing the Pope can haue no more right; thē a Teacher, if he
were learned: al frō him is like an hand blackened with pitch.
And S. Paul taught the Romans; that euery ſoule ſhould ſubmitt
himſelfe to the higher power. Nero was then in place:
and S. Paul appealed vnto him. And Nero the wicked man;
in politie ſenſible, from natiue witt, was S. Pauls gard, & the
good of the world: againſt the Scribes Synedrion: to which all
muſt ſtande, Deut. 17. prouided alwayes, that they ſpeake

ſenſibly, from the Law: otherwiſe all their right was loſt: and
when they perſequuted Chriſt. He gaue the Romanes their
auctority for life and death: that Iewes might not kill any
40. yeares before Ieruſalem fell. So the heathen Lawes giuen
for mans ciuill good, be the earth that drinketh vp, the riuer
caſt out of the Dragons mouth, to drowne the Church.
               
               
                  Of the two hornes, counterfaiting the Lambes.
                  The Pope praetendeth to folow Aharon, and the Leuites:
and thence commeth his ſpirituall ſword: and he will without
all color of warrant; be a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
His wickedneſſe in the firſt being detected, ſhould ſhew that
the Dragon ſpeaketh in him. Aharon had no more to doe
with gouernemēt then any other man, nor any of his ſonnes:
and it was death for any to meddle with his trade: that was
not of his ſeede: that his houſe ſhould be diſtinct, till Christ
of Iudah ſacrificed himſelfe: & through the veile of his fleſh
went not into the Limbum, as the deceiued hold, but into the
very heauens: after this, Leuies office was wholly ended:
though Mr. Eduward Liuely be commended, for his Perſian
Chronologie:
                     In Bar. his booke, for D. Bil. ſyll. 
                     Which maketh ſacrifices of Gods houſe hindred in Emporour
Veſpaſians dayes: that they could not be done, by whom they
ought to be done, or not ſo diligently, as they ought. He and his
commēders miſſed ſtrangely of Chriſtianity, vnto the depth
of Satans badneſſe: and next them the Pope. Aharons ſonnes
for ſtrange fier were preſently killed; and were not forgiuen
in this world, but were in the world to come: But the Pope
blaſpheming the Holy Ghoſt, and the plaine trueth of Gods
ſpirite, ſhall neither be forgiuē in this world, nor in the world
to come: but as Iſcariot in this world is giuen ouer from ſin

to ſin: that he cannot come to the iuſtice of God: and is expreſly
condemned to aeternall flames for the world to come:
Chap. 19.
               
               
                  Of the Popes ſucceſsion.
                  The Popes brag of ſucceſſion, euer ſince S. Peters dayes,
in vaine. S. Peter was no Priest; nor of Leui: But an Elder:
1. Pet. 5. and hauing no more honorable faith then thoſe Elders.
Elders neuer had particular ſucceſſion: though he
Thalmud in Aboth to proue wicked traditions feigne ſucceſſion,
howe one deliuered ouer, Lawe by mouth. May. praef.
Tom. 1. Gamaliel had S. Paul S. Paul Timothie, and millions:
who kept the Bible to this day. And Chriſtian Princes who
truely knew God: left ſucceſſion in ſome of their policie: and
ſtill there were ſome Apoſtolie, or Angelie Eccleſiae: that ſagely
read the Bible: and Baptized: and brake bread: the Communion
of the body of Chriſt: and gaue the Cupp. his New Testa. blood.
The high Councill made Doctores: and they were all either
learned in Diuinitie; or, in great blame before God: and one
skilfull might make thouſandes, in few year. that men ſhould
not brag of ſucceſſion, from one: to know both Teſtaments
pure in write: ſure for meaning; by auctores of the tongue:
where enimies and friendes, vſe language alike: and praeceptiue,
for all that ought to bee knowen: this dutie, a Doctor
ſhould performe: to ſhew the face of Chriſt, to ſhine like the
ſunne, through all the Bible. But neuer Pope to this day, could
doe this much. Therefore, they ſhould not clayme the ſpirituall
horne. As holy Paul wiſhed K. Agrippa, and all the aſſemblie,
equall to himſelfe, ſauing his bondes. And S. Luke ioyed,
to pen S. Paules infinite witte, therein: and what an
Aſſe he made of Tertullus: ſo, true Papae, would haue reioyced

to haue made all Princes that gaue them reuerence, perfect
in the word of God. But they had not S. Ieromes ſpirite,
to goe by might to learne of a Iewe, the Ebrew tongue: and
to write till, 91. to open Gods worde. Hee alone, did more
then euer were in Rome Papae. Therefore hee deſerued more
reuerence then they all: and the ſlow bellies ſhould be aſhamed,
to be ſuch Kinges of Locuſts in the world: and all Cardinals
& Buyſhopps that croſſe that croſſe the common Lawes of nations:
And People muſt needes be wicked, that honor the prelate,
in Iudgement. Eſai. 32. repeteth Moyſes law, and ſaith for the
Goſpell: that vnder it; Nabal, ſhall not be called Nadib. The
foole ſhall not be called most reuerend, or right reuerend; But hee
ſhalbe ſuch whoſe ſtudie ſtandeth, in moſt reuerend or right
reuerend matters. I now tranſlate Nadib, a generall terme of
high title; Iſai. 13. to particular ſpeciall vſe. euery commandement
of God hath his Maieſtie, which created the World:
and they breed Monſters, that make croſſe lawes.
               
               
                  Of the ancient facilitie, in teaching the Law.
                  The holy Iewes did, as all men ſhould; honor the finger of
God in the two tables: wherein all wiſedome of faith & manners
is conteined. And a late worke, Tiphereth (glory) of Iſrael,
telleth that Ebrew letters, vowels▪ prickes, accents, are at this day,
as God ſet in the two tables. All Popes Academies deny this,
their owne glory: and would make mans witt auctor of theſe
three; that all ſhould bee accurſed, who make man their
ſtrength. So wiſe is the Church that cannot erre; as to deny the
pillar of truth. But ſtill God kept in the company of ſome,
that belonged to the Church, the ground of trueth. This being
ſetled, wee may go on; to ſhew how the godly did honor

the tables of God. There they reckon letters 613. And becauſe
the ten Commandements, for faith and workes conteine
all Diuinitie; the holy Scribes; drew all Lawes of Moſes,
into the number of 613. They might haue made them moo
or fewer. But by Gods ſpirite in honor of Gods writing, they
bring them to his letter 613. to ſhew Gods care in the Law,
that one Iod or prick ſhould not periſh: ſo wee ſee that God
honoreth the Alphabet order: pſalmes 25. & 34. & 37. & 111.
& 112. & 119. & 145. Prou. 31. Lam. 6. tymes: to ſtirre all to
ſpend their life, in the word of life. That euery thing heere,
might teach how God inviteth all to ſaluation. And the very
Geometrical forme of Aleph, Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Heb, Vau, Zain,
&c. ſheweth that when God, gaue them, their order; he gaue
them alſo the forme, which wee haue now: and the Ebrewe
name is from the forme which we now haue: and the Ebrew
named Alphabet is followed in the Greeke Alphabet; old in
the dayes of Phiſistratus when Ariſtarchus diuided Homers Iliad
and Odyſſea, by Alpha, Beta, Gamma, &c. Now this was
old, before Ezra was borne: and later then the Ebrew Alphabet:
& that was later then the formes of Ebrew letters, which
wee now haue: therefore Ezra inuented them not: as Popes
would perſuade: but they are as God gaue them in the Tables:
& be 613. there: whēce the Lawes 613. haue their order.
248. bidding cōmandements, telling what we ſhould belieue
or do: 365. forbidding euil. The Iewes ſay the bones in a man
well anatomed, be 248. which all ſhould work what God cō
                     mādeth.
That rule is only giuen for memory: & hath no further
myſtery: the 365. call Henoch into mind, that as a ſon walked
with God, & had his yeeres, as the dayes of the ſuns yeer.
and ſo ſhall they that walke with God: as Meſsias, pſal. 72. To
theſe cōmandemēts all diſputations are called: & all the N. T.

The Law, thou ſhalt make a King, that commandement, is for
Meſſias chieflie: handled in Maymonie Tom. 4. Nowe the
Scribes knewe not, that Meſſias was to bee God. Therefore
this Law; IEHOVAH, our God, IEHOVAH, is One. is vrged
vpon the Phariſes: that Meſſias muſt not only be Dauids ſon:
but alſo his aeternall Lord, from Pſal. 110. and ſo Mat. 1. ſheweth
a golden Candleſticke of 42. notes: and Emanuell and
chap. 2. MESSIAS the holy of all holineſſe, is ſought for: the
K. of the Iewes. And all the 613. Lawes are called into his
life. The N. Teſta. beeing ſo handled, might bee laid in one
view, to make Princes admire it at the firſt: when the yeares
and promiſes of Chriſt: and puniſhments for contempt: and
Oeconomie of ſtates, are laide in one light: and children when
they firſt read, were taught to read his familie: and the end
of Salomons houſe: and are taught the afflictiones, of Sorobabilidae
in Daniel, ſeuen tymes ouer. Thus an vnſpeakeable loue
of the Goſpell, would flame in Princes heartes; when they
ſhould ſee euery thing that can bee diſputed, brought to this
Law. And the Law for the King, that he muſt write a copie
of Moſes. And once a yeere read it himſelfe. So ſtates could
neuer be deceiued: & millions might be skilfull in ſpeaches
of the holy Trinitie: and in the ſtorie of them, from whoſe
feede CHRIST was made after the fleſh; the bleſſed God in
the Diuine ſpirite: and ſo great God and Sauiour. Moyſes made
three crownes; one for the arke; which kept the Law: which
for knowledge, euery man ſhould weare in heart; and the oratores
of the Congregations, alſo in tongue: to bring all the Bible to
ſhort ſpeach; as Matth. 1. Luc. 3. Act. 7. and the epiſtle to the
Hebrewes doth, to a readie minde.
                  The Table with ſhew-bread; remembreth the King of care,
to feed all his xii. tribes: ſo Moſes was King, and ſtill craving of

God, what the people wanted; ſo Ioſuah: ſo Dauid: ſo Daniel
made rich by wiſedome, chap. 2. praeferred his zealous
nobles, hoater for Gods glory then the fier: who kept their
nation from further danger of Idolatrie. And by Daniels
wealth, the returned, aboue 49000. were inabled to reſtore
their policie. And God gaue Cyrus Croeſus gold, to bee abler
to ſend the Iwes home, to teach the houre of true happines
by our Lordes death: in Iubilie 28. ſuch men weare the
crowne: no leſſe learned then the ſacrificer: and theſe exalted
the horne of Chriſt: as much as hee that by the Crowne
of the Altar of incenſe: morning and euening brent perfume.
                  The third Crowne was on the Altar of incenſe; touched
now: and honorable in zeale and skill of praying to God: &
Zacharie father to Iohn Baptiſt,1. Chronic. 24. 10 not high ſacrificer, but of
the eighth courſe of 24. had a Crowne of praiſe for his cariage
in that office.
                  Nowe for theſe Crownes, euery man ſhould knowe the
Arkes meaning, the mercie ſeat; the Cherubim: and know
who would beare this Law, in a minde golden within and
without. But skill of ſpeaking, ſhould be required only of the
practiſed vnto ripe yeares; not bearing of the Arke, be laide
vpon ſhoulders of Beaſtes.
                  To the maintenance of all by bread; belonged gouernement:
for all offences: That the court of all tribes vſed; when
heathen tooke away capitall cauſes; then excommunication,
was all that could be done. Otherwiſe hee that kept his Fathers
wife, had felt death at once. Princes were neuer excommunicated.
Ieruſal, Sane. The high ſacrificer was whipped, &
in all ſortes iudged as any other man. ibid. Leuies tribe was
bound to be ready to anſweare to all demandes; for applying
Ceremonies to their ſpirituall meaning: But they were often

worſt, as in condemnation of Ieremie, and Elies Sonnes,
and Iehoſuahs in Nehemiah, and Zacharie and Malachie.
               
               
                  An application of the Popes calling to this.
                  It was death for any of Iſrael to meddle with Leuies
propre dutie, when his office is quite extinguiſhed, it is a moſt
high contemt of God to reuiue it, by imitation from mans
braine; ſo all the Popes Prieſthood and Maſſe is curſed. As
Archiſynagogus was choſen for the beſt learned: ſo where
many learned bee, one to bee chiefe; reaſon and practiſe allway
ſuffred this: but ſo that he ſhould not ouerrule: or doe
any thing of his owne head. Reuenues altered not the caſe:
which Lawes and reaſon require to bee ſpent for Chriſtian
good: and not for purchaſe to idleneſſe. Numius Eccleſiae, Sheliah
Zibbur, The Talmud terme, is now the office of a Biſhop,
or Elder: and none can bee fitt that way, without rare and
chargeable education. And neuer yet any Pope was ſo learned,
as with skill of the holy ſpeaches, to make a true narration,
for the ſtrength of the Goſpell. They make their Cathedrals,
dennes of thieues, when profeſſing to teach ſaluation;
blinde leade the blinde into the ditch.
                  They who wreſt S. Matt. 20. Marc. 10. Luc. 22. for condemning
of Gouernours of nations, deale moſt wickedly.
Our Lord. Prou. 8. that hee giueth Princes wiſdome to gouerne:
and ſtories, ſhew that heathen gouerned for this life, and ciuill
commoditie, as well as euer anyother. Neither any terme
vſed of the three Euāgeliſts meaneth tyranny, but as in the 70
anſwereth to ordinary Ebrew. And Zebedes ſonnes Mother
requeſted not place of tyranny: but of ciuill auctoritie; as for
to be great in Iuda. And our Lord would neuer anſwere

beſide the Qu. Their barbarous blindneſſe is vnſpeakeable,
who wreſt holy wordes, to maintaine Buyſhopps ſauage,
and more then hagarene tyranny: and how can ſuch eſcape
the fier of Gehenna?
               
               
                  A doubt for the manner of policie now: what
way is beſt to be taken.
                  Seeing the common ſort of welthy are bent to this world,
to bee rich in kinges ſeruice; or Law; or merchandize: that
many cannot be fitt Teachers; but men bent altogether that
way: what is the ſoundeſt remedy, heere? Seeing the world
will not admitt great chaing: and great learning ſhould bee
plentifull: before great change would be to any good.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  The Vniuerſities ſhould vrge, great practiſe of the Hebrew
Prophets & Greek Apoſtles, vſing all helpes of Thalmudiques
and Heathen: by choſen guides: & all of skilfull actes, ſhould
haue good recompence: And after certaine yeeres, none
ſhould haue any praeferment, but of ſpeciall redineſſe in the
trueth of holy ſtorie: where error troubleth as haereſie: & the
people ſhould haue a moſt exact tranſlation; to which all the
Realme ſhould haue their conſent: & ſo Scholars all ſhould
haue a voice in Biſhopps proceedings: & reuenues: & be the
only ſeniores in matters of learning: but for al Court matters,
ſhould haue common Lawyers: & other officers in Societie
with thē: & by learned ſermons ſhould make al of good conceipt;
though not of learning to teach others. But all that the
ſcholar ſhould do, is to be Angelus eccleſ. & to kepe him within

that compaſſe. Some as in Geneua, bare ſcholars would in
wickedneſſe, ouerrule the Senate: more then any Pope was
euer knowen to doe. Men that will teach and ſpeak not precious
matter, will be the deſtruction of the Goſpell. The zealous
without knowledge, haue in this kinde done much
harme; and when an vnlearned ſcholar is highly praeferred,
and not brideled, he will hardly be kept from doing vnſpeakable
miſchiefes: Ciuill auctority ſhould make a wall before
ſuch, that they ſhould haue no whit of Popes auctority:
where the Ciuill horne belongeth to the King: and only the
horne for the heart, to Sheliach Zibbur, or orator of the congregation;
So the Popes hornes be broken, as the Seleucians,
& Ptolomeans when they tyrannized ouer the holy.
               
               
                  What may wee thinke of Buyſhopps, of which ſort many
Popes and Cardinales bee.
                  The Talmud in Sanedrin concludeth, that if any giue
money to be a Senior, they ſhould hold him, as an whipp for
an aſſe. Maym. fol. the People, be the aſſe, that ſuffre him; and
he is a ſcourge from GOD, for ſome badneſſe of theirs.
AndThis word ſignifieth, an earneſt preſſing of men in ſuing for offices: and bribing thē. 
                     Ambitus in Tulli was hated: and, Lege Iulia. And
from Act. 8. called, Simonia: and one ſuch man may cauſe
God to be openly angry with many; that he will not forgiue
them in this world; but ſend open puniſhment vpon them;
though ciuill wicked haue their open reward heere: and the
puniſhment reſerued, to the world to come: that is the meaning
of the phraſe: forgiueneſſe in this world, and in the world to
come. Math. 12. and Maymoni. tome. 1. Poenit. Perek. I haue
knowen mighty mightily plagued; for Buyſhopps; ſome by
their owne ſtrange death: ſome by many Children: and Sanedrin
                     
ſaith, others ſhould not be quiet, till they remoue ſuch
from their ſocietie. And the wordes; thou ſhalt not make
thee Elohim (Iudges) of Siluer or Gold: are of the Thalm.
applyed hither wittily. And ſuch Buyſhopps in Diuinity be
moſt high contemners of God, and they cannot ſpeake from
God but from the Dracon.
               
               
                  Of the Pope, King of Kings.
                  And the auctority of the firſt, he practiſeth all before him.
                  
                     L. Inter Claras C. de ſumma Trin. ſo all the Emperors now
are confirmed of the Popes: which right in old tyme, Emperores
vſed ouer Popes, As reaſon would: though a D. of a
great towne as Rome, had great reuenues: to be hoſpitall,
and to breed many learned, that was the intent of Princes in
their great Liberalitie.
                  And he cauſeth the earth, and ſuch as dwell in it to worſhipp the
firſt beaſt: whoſe wound vnto death was healed.
                  In his confirmation of Emperours, he giueth them S. Peters
bleſſing: and men worſhip them with title of Diui; when
the Empire was once dead in Rome: and tranſlated to Bizantium,
called new Rome: ſo that old Rome had continued a most
filthy habitation of hoggs and oxen, but for the Popes ſupremacie:
when he was worſhipped, as the old Caeſares. As Steuchus
confeſſeth againſt Valla; lib. 2. BVT WHEN THE PONTIFICALITY
WAS SET VP IN ROME; THAT
ALL NATIONS, FROM EAST TO WEST, DID
WORSHIPP THE POPE, NO OTHERWISE

THEN OF OLD THE PROFANE CAESARES: He
taketh autoritie to confirme the Emperors; & to make them
of better eſtieme, with ſuperſtitious ſimple people. That is
here plainly fore-told.
               
               
                  How long the Popes, the Starres falling; could not become
mountaines of fire, to caſt themſelues into the ſea of
the Empire.
                  Before Chriſtianitie came in policie to Rome, the People,
and Doctores choſe the Father, as the Iewes did the Archiſynagogue:
as all ſhould bee and were vnder heathen gouernement.
And they ſhould bee of the Dragons poiſon, that
would make any more adoe for their autoritie. When Chriſtians

                        •
                     eld the Empire; and Conſtantine lothing Rome that
Crucified Chriſt, and the vnlearned Popes, that could not
bring the Pallace to Chriſtianitie in 300. yeares. When holy
Paul ſoone made Narciſſus bad folke, the beſt; and Peter if euer
he had come there had done as much. So when Conſtantine
remoued to Bizantium; his houſe and lieuetenant of Rauenna,
confirmed the Popes, whoſe election ſhould bee authenticall:
ſo when Charles the great after the ouerthrow of
Deſiderius, king of the Lombardes; and of that kingdome, and
came to Rome; Adrian the Father, (when Charles the great
confirmed with greater priuileges, all that Pipinus had giuen
to Gregory the third) to requite the benefites of Charles,
calling an hundred and fiftie Biſhopps, maketh a Perpetuall decree.
Nullum poſthac fore,
                     Adri. 63. diſtinct. 
                     neque aliorum Templorum
Antistitem, niſi quem Carolus, ſucceſſoreſque eius ſciuerint & iuſſerint;
                     Auentinus lib. 4.
                     refragantes huìuſmodi patrum, decreto, diris deuoti, eſt niſi
reſipuerint adiecta proſcriptio.
                  
                  
                     That is:
                  That there ſhould bee no B. of Rome, nor of other
Churches, except him whom Charles and his Succeſſores
ſhould know and command (to be ſo.) They that withſtand
ſuch a decree of the Fathers, are curſed; and vnleſſe they
repent, a proſcription is added.
                  This conſtitution ſubtile Popes, in great diſſentions of
Princes, brake: yet in the yeere 1314. Loduike Bauaras, reſtored
the Empires right (much blotted) vnto his whiteneſſe:Or Auentinus lib. 7. & ſeq. & Naud. & others.
againſt Iohn 12. for when hee was excommunicated of the
Pope. for entring into Italy with an army: and for ſetting
Gouetners ouer Villages and Townes againſt his will. And
becauſe he praeſumed as ſoone as hee was choſen, before hee
was commanded of the Pope, to take vpon him the name &
right of the Empire; Hee with the Counſell of his Nobles
made one Petrum Corbarienſen, a minorite, Pope: vſing his anceſtores
autoritie & manner. And aſſembling men that knew
diuine and humane Lawes, ſheweth that the Pope hath no
right aboue Caeſare: But cleane contrary, the Pope with all
ſpirituall high & low, ſhould be ſubiect to the higher power.
Thus dealt this good Emperor; mild enough; or rather, too
milde. And S. Paul borne to be a Biſhop of Rome, in Tarſus,
free in Rome, told the ſame, Rom. 13. as he told from, 2 Theſ.
2. howe thence man of ſin would ariſe. If 2 Theſ. 2. had bene
read of all Children, ſince S. Paul wrote, aged, moo then the
Starres of Heauen, a million for a Starre, had knowen what
the Pope is, and equall giltie, Cardinales; And our Archbuyſhopps
in his canones, damned by common Lawes, following
the light of Gods engrauement in ſoules. All Scholars
that will bee ouerruling Ciuill matters, vnable to ſhewe
skill in the Lawe, of one Iod or Prick, as our Lordes ſpeach

requireth. Mat. 5. and will Archbuiſhopps be, and vrge athean
othes, and impriſon better lettered by many yeares ſtudie
then themſelues: and pine in Priſon vnto death, full many
which hold the trueth of redemtion in trades life better then
they; are, in the Popes Giltineſſe heere: and ſpeake from the
Dragon: And are ſure to goe with both into aeternall flames.
The learned know that they to whom I now giue the Anathema
Maran Atha, will ſooner goe to Bantam to fetch pepper,
then replie. And as Ouid. ſpeaketh, that while the Romane
Empire ſtandeth, his fables ſhould ſtand: ſo while the world
ſtandeth, our reuiuers of Dracons bloody lawes, & others to
profane God; ſhall ſtand, in this my blame, in my defence for
our King and nations integritie.
                  Si quid habent veri vatum praeſagia.
               
               
                  By what Iudaique curſedly reuiued Ceremonie, the chiefe diuinitie
D. of Rome, bewitched Emperors: to giue a ſpice of countenance,
that the Pope was aboue the Emperor.
                  In Iudah; Kinges were annointed with oyle, praeſcribed
by God, to Moſes: and it was death to imitate that oyle. The
Thal. hath a full treatiſe of that. Thence all of witt will fetch
it: No King was euer annointed with this, but Kings in hazard;
King Moſes was not, King Ieſus was not, King Samuel was
not, Saul not accepted was, Dauid not accepted was, Salomon
in hazard by Adonijah was, and Ioaſh for Athalias ſtirre was.
All this God alloweth. By the Peoples autoritie wicked Ioachaz,
two yeares yonger then his brother, more wicked Ioakim,
was: all theſe, to auoid diſſention. So annointment was
ſtill the token, of a perſon doubted: whether the people

ſhould accept him, or not. Now the Patriarke of Conſtantine:
beginning annointement, of Emperours: as in Iustinius, the
vncle of Iustinian, fame goeth; chalenged heerein no ſuperioritie,
but would haue the Emperores that requeſted the Churches
fauor, If they were ſtayned in open blame, to want that
good will, till open repentance came. This had zeale and
mans witt: but God forbiddeth to imitate Aharons ceremonies:
namely in oinctments. No cheſt, might bee made like
the Arke: no candleſticke; no Table; no curtaine; no building,
like the holy. Touching our manner in England,
thinke it began in token of freedome: as not vnder the Emperor,
but equall. But ſeeing Prieſts were the annointers, Locuſts
NOW in flames aeternall: it ſhould, with ſacrifice, Aharons
cope, Leuites linen, and name of Prieſt be left off: If
my poore opinion were worthie of accompt: if quietly they
might: otherwiſe ceremonies of force were broken: as in
Dauids eating of the ſhew-bread: and beeing deadly for
vſe: as circumciſion for Galatians; yet in Timothie was repeted.
So the wicked bookes of the Apocrypha whereof none
haue one ſyllable of Chriſt: (though Galatinus would bring
Baruc to him: In, God will bee ſeene vpon earth) becauſe the fables
ſpake of Iewes ſtories (whoſe trueth heathen denied)
were receiued for mens weakneſſe. But when Greeks would
make iarring ſayinges, true diuinitie: Iewes told Hagarenes
their iudgement was weake: and ſo there the Goſpell found
contemt: ſince the Pope annointed Emperores of weake autoritie:
after hee deceiued the Empire: For 200. yea. warre
that weakened Weſt Kinges, the oinctment was pleaded for
a token of ſuperioritie; that the beaſt comming out the earth,
might haue two hornes like Chriſts.
                  
                     
And he doth great ſignes, that he cauſeth fire to come downe
from heauen, into the earth, before men: and he deceiueth
the dwellers on the earth before the beaſt.
                  When Iſraels ſtate came farre badd; holy Elias made fier
come downe from heauen: In memorie of that ſtorie; Iohn
ſaw in his viſion fire come downe from heauen: betokening
thereby any ſignes. Saint Paul told this in proprietie, that by
falſe ſignes wicked Romylus, (Eſai 11. in the Venice Chaldy)
ſhould deceiue, if poſſible, the very elect: becauſe they would not
receine the loue of the trueth: as Salomon warneth Ephraim,
Prov. 3. the Emperors ſtrife was with the Popes for Auctority,
litle or nothing for Diuinity, where they ſhould haue beene
of beſt iudgement: as Charles the great was of great iudgement;
that the Popes for feare of fall, by reſiſting a learned
Emperor, decreed for him and his ſucceſſors, (as I ſhewed,)
confirmation of Popes, that ſhould ſerue in Rome.
               
               
                  Of Papists miracles.
                  Neuer any commented vpon any text, Bible, or Law, as
the Papiſts doe vpon their Miracles. The Ieſuites in the Indianes
doe ſuch ſtrange Miracles, that Lucian de vera hiſtoria,
would as well ſeeme true: as noble learned Saddeel nippeth
Turrianus. And at dinners and ſuppers in ſtead of the Bible,
they read the ſtories of their owne Miracles. So the Lady of
Hales, made Iustus Lipſius, of a quicker ſpirite to his ſtile: as
Bacchus made Ennius. And creeples come to Hales: but goe
away leaping: So at Colen in a ſtage play, creeples came to S.

Laurence, and went a way leaping. So in Walſingam: The
Host was caried in Cambrige ouer the market place, in a
coffer by two ſtrong men: and praeſently became ſo heauie,
that both they could not cary it alone. And when they put
drakes freſh blood to the wine: all (but Heretiques) may ſee the
very wine, liuely blood. That men ſware by the blood of
Hales: I heard a man, (in the ende; of true faith, and fatherlie
cariage Rich. Meneuenſis) ſay: how his conſcience
pricked him, when to Maſſe he vſed drakes blood. I know
not but by confeſſion, whether this be true or noe. At
Mentz townes end Eaſtward, in the brim of the fieldes,
ſtandeth a lowe croſſe of ſtone: That way I walked with
two Ieſuites, and a proſelyte, whoſe commendation from
the Pope to the Biſhop; and they then ſitting with mee
on a greene, deſired to read from Latin to Ebrew, for to
plead for a principall Cardinalſhip. Of that ſtone croſſe,
Pater Nicolaus Serarius ſaid, thus: Once a man drunke, armed
with a ſword ſtroke this croſſe: and it poured out
blood: and purſuite was made after the man: and hee was
executed.
                  Then ſaid I; let the Biſhop, and all his Canons, that be
not Lutherans (I know they will not try) take ſwordes and
ſtrike all the croſſe, and if it ſhed one drop to my ſight:
I will accept the Cardinalſhip offred: and be of your faith:
as I am of Saint Peters faith already: and belieue no more
then Epiphanius, that hee was euer at Rome: as he cared
no more for Clemens Alexand. then did Patriarch Photius:
and leſſe of Tertullian, hurt by Montanus. The
onely auctores that Euſebius could bring for Peter to
haue beene at Rome. And that ſtrength beeing broken,

all further teſtimonies are but winde. The Thalmud in San▪
                     
requireth in teſtimonie eye-ſight. And for the newe Moone
(though they knewe the Mathematiques) they vſed two
mens teſtimonie that they ſaw the Moone (vnleſſe cloudes
hindered) before they ordeyned the feaſts celebration: ſo
God would haue the People to hold their eye-ſight iudge: as
all ſimple muſt pleade ſure faith. So, ſtrike you this croſſe and
make blood come forth to two witneſſes: which by Moſes
Law muſt be my warrant: and then I will be of S. Peters faith
in your ſenſe. Of the Catholike faith I am, and of the ancient
faith, which holy Paul of Tarſus, Gygs land; and holy Luke
of Magogs land, in Syria, taught and wrote from Moſes and
the Prophets. Ep. 2. 20. Make blood come out of this ſtone,
to my ſight and I will bee a Pſeudo-Catholique as yee are: vpon
this we turned to read the proſelytes letters: For whoſe teſtimony
that I might haue had a Cardinalſhip principal at Rome.
One Mr. Murton of Yorkeſhiere, deſired me to goe to Mentz,
with him to heare that asked: and tooke occaſion in ſpeach
of Cardinales, to aske what mine had bene worth: then ſaid
hee, about 18000. french Crownes. But I ſhewed that Gods
word was plaine, to all of the tongues ſtudie: and pure in all
rules, to conuert any well meaning heart: & perfect to guide,
through the whole courſe of life. I wiſhe others to belieue
their miracles as I doe, who know that God made ſenſe a diuine
teſtimonie: that a man conuicted vpon two witneſſes,
conuicted to worſhip bread and wine, ſhould dye the death.
The Goſpell thriſe, and S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. tell that IESVS
gaue bread and wine, and that the Diſciples dranke what hee gaue.
That no miracle was heere, but the natiue manner of a Couenant.
And if the Apoſtles or Greeke Fathers had ſaid; The
Bread and Wine were altered, from their taſt, or nature, for ſo

much: heathen would haue ſworne, the world neuer bare
wickedder Magicians: nor worthier of death by Moſes Law:
which Christ gaue, as aeternall God, and came as man, to bee
iudged of man, how hee did performe all: ſo that the natiue
power of reaſon which he planted in all ſoules, ſhould iudge
of him; that he performed all iuſtice, to plaine capacitie of all
nations: and required none to belieue further then logique
common; to euery man, would require aſſent: or tell of open
rebellion againſt the trueth.
                  This alſo was a great miracle that Emperor Henry the
VII. next Albertus; in ſeditions, comming to Italy where
60. yer. Emperores abſence,Naucler Gene. 44. gaue the Pope much auctoritie,
when the king of Sicilie, Robert; made ſtirres: and the Pope Clement,
V. fauored him, as a vaſſall, of the Church; and then
kept at Auinion: he commanded both by the othe of fidelitie,
to keepe the peace. He anſwering that he would take no ſuch
othe: yet (by perſuaſion) would take the crowne of him, was
ſoone after of Cardinales, by Dominican Bernehard poyſoning
the Hoſtia,
                     A Miracle of the Popes: tranſubſtantiating the bread into Poyſon. or the Sacrament of the Altar, ſent to Haides: becauſe
he would be boūd to no man. The beaſt with two hornes,
like a Lambe, in trueth the Dragon let looſe, after 1000. yea. Apoc.
20. did this miracle: The like was done to our K. Iohn, who
ſhewed in the Abbot of Glaſsimbury, litle good will, to make
Popes too fatt. And their dayly miracle told afore, of the Sacrament
of the Altar, that men muſt belieue they haue no
ſenſe; this Simon-Magus-bewitching of men; by Moſes Lawe
ſhould put them to death: howe they would make their Images
ſweate; by a fier and water, hid behinde them, in the
Veſtrie, and tell how the ſainctes were angry, that men had no
more zeale to offre to them; theſe were commonly knowen
to them, that liued in our Fathers dayes: before valiant King

Henry VIII. brake both the Popes hornes, and ate the fleſh
of the beaſt. If Eraſmus Roterodamus, had liued to this houre,
he could neuer haue ieſted ynough, with the Popes falſe
miracles: as Saint Paul termeth them. Yet to this day euery
where Papiſts brag of their religion, as proued by miracles:
and ſo, they prooue their doctrine to be new. Miracles are to
bee wrought at the firſt deliuery of doctrine. When Adam
firſt ſacrificed, fire from heauen kindled it: and Abels ſacrifice
reſpected of God, (are in Octaplo,) were fired by God.
That fire was kept vntill the flood. Then againe, Noes ſacrifice
was kindled from heauen: And that fire was kept by
great SEM, or Melchitzedeke. Abraham ſacrificing, had
fire firſt (in recorde) from heauen: and in Moſes & Salomon,
that is expreſly told, and thence gathered to the former: ſo
when the Iewes came home from Babylon, they ſacrificed:
no mention is made of their fire. Their priuate ſtorie,
Salſeleth, Hakabala ſaith, they had fire form heauen. The
abridgement of the ſenſeleſſe writer Iaſon of Cyren, called
the ſecond of Maccabees: telleth an old wiues tale, of fire,
turned as vnto ſalt, and ſet againſt the ſunne, and ſo brought
to inflame the ſacrifice.Theſe fables God hated, and forbiddeth. Tit. 1. 14. 1. Timoth. 1. 4. and 4. 7. and ſo his people will. 
                     Archimedes fire that ſet Roman
ſhips on flame, at Syracuſa, with a Chriſtall Glaſſe of narrow
paſſage for the ſunne beames, ſhould haue beene as holy a
fire, as that of Iaſons fable: yet the Pope maketh great accompt
of this inuention: as being ſo true as his miracles:
whereby he would prooue new ſacrifice. Before the flood,
Adam liuing longe to teach the truth, and the creation being
all miraculous, we haue no properly told miracle, but our
father Henochs aſſumption. Abraham reuiuing the world, did
miracles: ſo Moſes beginning a new ſtate: and IESVS in his

noble conqueſt, in ſtaying Sunne and Moone: and Samuel at
Sauls inſtallation. Ezekias in great fall of tenne Tribes captiued,
had the ſunne turned backe tenne degrees. To Babell
the fire was quenched, Dan. 3. and the King made as a beaſt,
chap. 4. Daniel ſtoppeth Lions mouths: and an handwriting
damning the ſtate, chap. 5. Thus to nations firſt motion, or fall
miracles are giuen: but to confirme no other religion, then
agreeth with Adams. But the Pope will dayly tranſubſtantiate,
and make a Lynceus belieue he cannot tell whether he ſee
Bread and Wine: and ſo make a ſacrifice, as calling fire from
heauen: which muſt kindle euery ſacrifice. And whereas
eye-ſight is Gods Teſtimony by Creation, law, and allowed
euer, euen in the ſeale of the Couenant, which may conteine
no matter litigious; He breedeth warres, to make haile & fire
mixed with blood. All this Doctrine is from the mouth of
the Dragon.
                  Saying to them that dwell in the earth to make an Image to the
beast, which hath the ſtroke of the ſword, and is reuiued.
                  The earth, is the profane common world, oppoſite to the
Church: The Image reſpecteth, Dan. 2. as the beaſt looked to
Dan. 7. So the Pope ſhall challenge power to make Imperiall
ſtate; termed Image, Daniel. 2. Padeuicius lib. 3. Capter 10.
In Lotharius ſaxo, handled a plaine ſtory for this prophecie.
Lotharius ſaxo, by perſuaſion, or ſuperſtition, caſt himſelfe
at the Popes feete, as hee tooke the Crowne. The Romiſtes
to make this a matter praeiudiciall to other Emperors,
ſet vp a picture, when Lotharius was gone with this inſcription.

                        
                        Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores,
                        Poſt homo fit Papa: ſumit quo dante Coronam.
                     
That is,

                        The King before the doores doth come;
                        The Cities honors firſt hee ſweares:
                        That done; the Popes man he is made,
                        Of whom he takes the Crowne he weares.
                     
                  
                  
                     Frederick the firſt was angry; ſaying, To bee the Popes man,
was all one, as to be his ſeruant, or ſubiect: The Pope once tooke
away the Picture: but ſoone after fearing, leſt the Emperours
courage would wholy ſhake him off: thought to bridle him
at the firſt; and vpon ſtrife, by letters, he warned him, that he
ſhould haue before his eyes, how hee had receaued the enſigne
of the Imperiall Crowne from him. And a ſtirre riſing
againſt this one of the Legates ſaid;
Romanum imperium à Grecis tranſlatum est ad Alamannos: vt
Rex Teutonicorum, non antequam, ab Apostolico coronaretur,
Imperator vocaretur. Ante conſecrationem, Rex, post,
Imperator. Vnde igitur habet imperium, niſi a Papa? Ex
electione ſuorum principum habet nomen regis: ex conſecratione
Papae habet nomen Imperatoris, & Augusti, & Caeſaeris.
Ergo per Papam imperat: Recolite antiqua. Zacharias
promouit Carolum Magnum, fecit ei nomen grande, vt eſſet
Imperator. & vt posthac perpetuò rex Teutonicus eſſet Imperator,
& aduocatus ſedis Apoſtaticae: vt Romano Epiſcopo
Apulia, per eum pacata eſſet. Subiecta, quae Papae, cum Vrbe
Romanae eſt, non Imperatoris: Roma, Papae ſedes est. Imperatoris

eſt Aquis in Arduenna, quae eſt ſylua Galliae. Imperator
quod habet, totum habet à Papa: ſicut Zacharias tranſtulit
Imperium à Graecis ad Teutonicos; Ita Papa poteſt
iam transferre ab Alemannis, ad Grecos. Ecce in poteſtate
eius eſt, vt det illud cui vult, propterea conſtitutus à Deo,
ſuper gentes & regna, vt aedificet & deſtruat, plantet &
euellat.
That is:
                  The Romane Empire was tranſlated from the Greeks to
the Almanies: that the King of the Germanes, ſhould not
be called the Emperor, before that he was crowned by one
Apoſtolique. Before the conſecration he was King; after, Emperor:
whence then hath he his Empire, but from the Pope? By
the election of his Princes, he hath the name of King: by the
conſecration of the Pope, he hath the name of Emperor, and
Auguſtus, and Caeſar: Therefore by the Pope he rules: ſearch
antiquities. Zachary promoted Charles the Great, he gaue him
the name of Grande, that he might be Emperor: and that euer
after, the German King ſhould bee Emperor; and aduocate of
the Apoſtatique ſea. That Apulia, brought to peace by him,
ſhould be ſubiect to the Romane Biſhop, which is the Popes
together with the Citie of Rome, & not the Emperors. Rome
is the Popes ſeat: The Emperours ſeat is Aquis in Arduenna,
which is a wood in France. That which the Emperor hath,
he hath wholy from the Pope: as Zachary tranſlated the Empire
from the Greekes, to the Germans, ſo now the Pope can
tranſlate it from the Almaines to the Greekes. Lo, it is in his
power, that hee may giue it to whom hee will: and for that
cauſe hee is ordeyned by God aboue nations, and Kingdomes,
that he may build and pull downe, plant & root out.
                  
                     
This Oration of the Popes Legate, maketh a moſt liuelie
commentarie vpon the text following.
                  And it was giuen him to giue ſpirite, to the Image of the Beaſt,
that the image of the Beaſt ſhould ſpeake: and cauſe
that all who would not worſhip the Image of the Beaſt,
ſhould be kill'd.
                  He quickneth the Empire, to haue power of life and death
againſt the reiecters of his allowed Emperour: till he depoſe
him, and ſet vp others.
               
               
                  Of ſubiection in all matters to the Pope.
                  And he cauſeth all both ſmall and great, both rich and poore,
both free and ſeruants, that hee may giue them a marke on
their right hande, or their forehead, and that no man may
buy nor ſell, but he that hath the marke, or the name of the
beaſt; or the number of his name.
                  Marke, in the hand; is oth of fidelitie, and ſubſcribing to
his Supremacy.Naucl. Gen. 44. When Emperor Henry VII. refuſed to take
oth of fidelitie, to obey Clement VII. he was ſoone after poyſoned
in the hoast,
                     C. 1. de Iure, Iure. in Clem. 
                     tranſſubſtantiated from wholeſome bread into
poyſon. Becauſe he called great Aſſemblies and Scribes; and
anſwered, that this was a new matter: and not ſeene in his
praedeceſſors age; That the Prince of princes, and Lord of
the world, ſhould be bound by an oth of fidelitie, to the ſeruant
of ſeruants. The vicar, of the Dragon who was a murtherer
from the beginning, ſhewed all his conſcience; that pretending
to giue Chriſt our life, gaue death. After Henries

death, Clemens being terrible, that Emperours ſhould bee
redier, to ſweare vnto fidelitie to the Bridgemaker of Rome,
putteth foorth the contents of that oth.
                  
                     Vt Caeſar Eccleſiam Romanam defendat, Haereticos exterminet,
neque cum impijs vllum commercium habeat, vt privilegia
quondam Romanae Eccleſiae conſeſſa quocunque tempore conſeruet:
in primis, ea quae profecta ſunt à Conſtantino, Carolo
Magno, Henrico, Othone IIII. Frederico ſecundo, Rodolpho,
nequid Iuris in illas Eccleſiae Romanae facultates, atque
poſſeſsiones, quocunque titulo ſibi vendicot, vt reliquas etiam
vbiuis, Ecceſias earumque libertatem, ac Iura protegat &c.
in Clementius ſub Tit. de Iure.
                  
                  That is:
                  That Caeſar defend the Romane Church, expell haeretiques,
nor haue any commerce with vngodly men, that hee ſhould
preſerue the priuileges once granted to the Romane Church,
at what tyme ſoeuer; and eſpecially thoſe, which proceeded
from Conſtantine, Charles the Great, Henri, Otho 4. Frederik the
ſecund, Rodolph: and that he chalenge not any right or power,
vpon any tytle ouer thoſe priuileges and poſſeſſions of the
Church of Rome. That alſo he defend the reſt of the Churches
wherſoeuer, their liberties, their lawes, &c. In Clem. ſub
Tit. de iure.
                  Thus Emperors muſt defend all Popes Lawes: by which all
his foes and haeretiques, cannot buy nor ſell. And all muſt
haue auricular confeſſion: and all houſekeepers muſt pay a
rickſ-penny for euery chimney: and Prieſts be the exchequer
men: & Chauncelors for eccleſiaſticall praefermēts; Buyſhoprickes,
Abbeies, &c. that Kings and Emperours ſhould haue

but ſmall force. And the Locusts ſhould haue the Lions teeth, to
hold fast all that they caught: and ſhould be like Horſes praepared
to warres: and ſhould haue Crownes vpon their head,
thought their King called himſelfe, the ſeruant of ſeruants: and
bare the face of a milde priuate man: the Locusts had winges
of Camps, and the breſt plates of yron, to command warre &
peace as they would: that none ſhould be in the Commune
Weale, but of their marke, by othe, & ſubſcription, or whole
profeſſion.
               
               
                  Of the marke in the forehead.
                  Aharon his garments conteined the ſumme of religion:
whereof one part, was a plate of gold in his bonnet, thus ingrauen:
HOLYNESSE FOR THE ETERNALL. That
is expounded, chap. 14. where the Chriſtians hating Idolatry,
haue the name of God written in their forehead. As God will
make knowen who be his: and all who call vpon GOD must depart
from wickedneſſe. So heere the hauing of his name in the forehead,
is the profeſſion of his decrees. The ſaying of Aue Marie,
went ouer all, to the poore beggars: and reuerence to the
Croſſe: and comming to their moſt wicked Maſſe: and refraining
from reading Gods Booke, but for licenced: and auricular
confeſſion: briefly, all differing from their Dracoes
lawes, was an heretique, and might neither buy nor ſell.
               
               
                  Of the name of the beast, and the number of his name.
                  That is, his owne name: So vſuall in ſtates, the Antecedent
is for the relatiue; as Daniel chap. 9. The Gouernor ſhall destroy,
the Gouernor owne people: for his owne. Through the Bible,

the names giuen by the holy, abridge the ſumme of their life,
God called the firſt man ADAM: which is alſo our commune
name, MAN: to tell vs euery moment, that duſt wee
are: and to duſt we muſt returne. Seth bare a warning, that
onely ſome of his ſhould be ſetled, when the flood made a
moode of all the earth. Enoſh telleth of ſorrow: (that profaneneſſe
ſprang inſtead of calling vpon the name of God:) Cainan
telleth of Lamentation due for that; Mahal-el, how the
Almighty bringeth a mixture by water, vpon all. Iared how all
goeth downe: He nameth his ſonne Enoch conſecrated to
God, to be an onely man in the curſed world: and he told in
his ſonnes name, when God would ſend the flood, Methu-Schelach;
when he is deadp, reſently God ſendeth it. Lamech,
borne in tyme of all ſorrowes, in his dayes the fathers died:
and all to euery ſoule that called vpon God: and looked to
ſaue their life by the Arke; els they had come to Noë: to haue
gone into the Arke. Noë is conforter. All theſe be fathers to all
in the world; and all degenerate, who deſire not to know the
reaſons of their names. So through the old Teſtament the
faithfull printed faith and ſtory in their childrens names. And
the Booke of numbers, hath vnder propre names moo ſentences
of faith then would make a great volume. So that
without Ebrew much of the Bible wilbe vnknowen. So before
the Captiuity of Babell the Godly gaue names to their
ſonns, ſhewing hope of their defenſe, and helpe by Elam, of
whom came Cyrus: one long before called his ſonne, Elam,
another alſo calleth his ſonne, Elam: for inſtruction that
Elam ſhould ſend the Iewes home. And God bleſſeth theſe
two with moſt iſſue, Ezra. 2. Another calleth his ſonne Bagoas:
by a famous Perſian name. Another calleth his ſonne
Adonikam: God ſtandeth aboue all. Now the ſonnes of Adonikam

were 666. God then meant to apply that to further matter: as
ſeauens in the Bible call into minde the firſt Sabbath, reſted in
hope of Chriſt; ſo ſixes, are commonly a memory of the ſad
fall, and vſed in ſorrow. Holy Lamech liued yeares 777. then
he reſted. In the ſix hundreth of Noë, the flood came. Nabuchadnezar
his curſed Image, was in height, 60. cubites, In breadth
6. cubites. The gold brought from Ophir to Salomon, was
666. talents: as no long bleſſing, when after his death, Syſac
King of Aegypt, hath all of the Temple for a ſpoyle. Now,
Adonikam his ſonnes, 666. might ſhew that God would vſe
that text to ſome ſad matter. Let vs now examine the words
of the Text.
                  Heere is wiſedome. Let him that hath wiſedome, reckon the number
of the Beaſt. For it is a number attributed vnto a man.
And his number is, ſix hundred, ſixty ſix.
                  
                     Adams wiſedome is ſhewed equall to Angells, in giuing
names to beaſtes and foules, according to their nature: ſo that
mans firſt wiſedome appeared how his ſoule bare the image
of God, in fit names. His holy ſonnes folowed that: and all of
wiſedome will examine what names they haue giuen: and
ſee which of all them will fit the beaſt heere: the mans name
may ſoone be found by 666. for onely ADONIKAM of a
man hath that number. Now the wiſedome ſtandeth in the
nation of Adonikam: how the beaſt that hath hornes like a
Lambe is fitted to that. Let vs haue our ſtories, to ſhew how
the Pope is fitted to this.Abbas Vſp. Naucl. Gene. 44. 
                     Innocentius the third bragged to
Emperor Philip, that he would take from him the Diademe
of the King, or he ſhould take from him, the Apoſtolicall

(Apoſtaticall) enſigne. Christ ſaith; by him, Kings reigne
and Princes decree iuſtice. And he is truly ADONIKAM:
Lord, ſtanding vp ſure; for defenſe of his. And Innocentius
of Adam, the earthly, of Enoſh the ſorrowfull: he will be
ADONIKAM: ſimply, a Lord ſtanding ſure: and haue
two hornes of the Lambe, though he ſpeake like the Dragon.
Marke another; when Albertus ſon to Rodulph, following
his fathers Example, ſought by entreaters the confirmation
of his election of Boniface the eight, which bragged
that he was Lord of the whole world; Then Boniface
comming forth girded with a ſword, and wearing the
Imperiall Crowne,Cuſpinianus in vitae Alberti. Naucl. Genet. 44. cryeth with a tyrannicall voice: EGO,
SVM CAESAR ET PONTIFEX: and in a
chafe he reiecteth the election, which was made without
his Authoritie, as of no force, and friuolous, and refuſeth
the confirmation: and called the Emperour a murtherer:
ſo this Boniface had as braſen a face as Boniface the third,
which bought ſupremacie of the murtherer Phocas: and
vaunting that he is, TOTIVS MVNDI DOMINVS,
LORD OF THE WHOLE WORLD,
the name of the MAN which hath 666. attributed,
ADONIKAM, wilbe his name; with the two hornes of
the Lambe.
                  
               
               
                  A repetition of the terme Rocke.
                  Speciallie, the terme Rocke, claymed of the Pope, to
be his name, proueth him to haue this name, or notation
of ADONIKAM. In this Conceit thus hee reaſoneth.
                  
                     
                     Peter is the Rock,
                     The Pope is as Peter. Therefore
                     
                     The Pope is the Rocke.
                  
                  So the Pope maketh himſelfe God, who only ſtandeth
ſure: ADONICAM.
                  A digreſſion to a diſputation at Mentz, in the Promotion
of a graduat in their commencement. 1601.
                  At Mentz in ſaluation yeere named, a commencer gaue
the queſtion. I then printing in their owne Towne, a Greeke
Oration of all my groundes in Religion, was requeſted by
Pater Nicol. Serarius their D. principall, to come to the cōmencement.
There they requeſted mee moſt vehemently to diſpute:
that Rector made ſhorte the firſt reply. And I tooke the
ſecond. This was the queſtion.
                  
                     Romana Eccleſia est vera Eccleſia
                     
                        Reply. Quae facit hominem ex patris ſemine immediate
                     Petram dici, eſt hoſtis Dei.
                     At Roma facit hoc: ergo, eſt hoſtis Dei.
                  
                  Promotus. I deny the aſſumption:
                  Reply. The terme Rocke is neuer vſed in commendation,
of Holineſſe and Conſtancie, but in God only: and is in the
Law Deut. 32. ſix times tranſlated 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : But the Greeke Lxx.
durſt not tranſlate it ſo, leſt the Heathen ſhould ſay: The Iewes
worſhip a Rocke for God: as the Iewes in Ieruſalemy in Abodazara,
charge Heathen to make Godds of Rockes. So the Greek
tranſlation deceiued the Greekes: and they hold all faithfull,

                     Petres; and Andrew before Peter, was Petra. In Photij Bibliotheca.
But ſaid I, Petra is God; Petros is one, that is made 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
to Chriſt, that is, godly. But in all the ſcripture, PETRA,
is prayſe of holy Conſtancie, vnſpeakeable, which is neuer
beſtowed vpon a Creature. For the ground of Iſraell as quarry
whence they came, as cut out: Abraham and Sarach is
made the quarry: as of one quarry yeelding many. This tendeth
onely to multiplication: as of Deucalion, and Pyrrha, caſt
ſtones ouer their head.
                  
                     Vnde homines nati, duram genus.
                     Thence men ſprong vp, an hard (and ſtonie) ſtocke.
                  
                  But touching Abraham, excepting faith, how much hee
miſſed in duty towardes God; Rabbi Bechaia, doth ſo handle
his weakneſſe in leauing Sarah to ſhame, that for that, all the
harme of his ſeede leauing God, and afflicted in Aegypt did
proceede. So no man may plead the terme Rocke, any commendation
to them two. Otherwiſe it is neuer ſpoken of any
bare Creature.
               
               
                  Anſwere. It is.
                  Reply. The text will neuer be brought forth, while the
ſunne ſhineth, heere he was dumme: conuicted vpon, nihil
dicit. Then he ſaid, God communicateth his proprieties with
vs. As God is good, and men ſome.
                  Reply. Neuer is this in one, onely. The Angels are called
the ſonnes of God: But neuer one particular: ſo the faithfull
are the ſonnes of God:Pſalm. 2. But no particular man, But, the ſonne
aeternall, in whom they that truſt are happy. So your condemnation

is ſure, that yee are Gods enemies: in making Peter God,
and your Pope. God beeing only MICHA-EL: and a man.
Michael. as Michaelis, belonging to God, Adonikam as in
the poſſeſſiue: belonging to God which ſtandeth ſure: But
ſeeing you haue miſſed herein: I will try you in an other argument.
                  
                     If Rome crucified Chriſt: it is impoſsible for his vnchangeable
iuſtice, not to plague Rome, while the world ſtandeth:
though Pilate waſhed his handes: in the end hee kill'd
himſelfe▪ and Pilates Vicars that waſh themſelues in
titles of holineſſe, they runne to aeternall deſtruction.
                     But Rome crucified Chriſt.
                     Therefore it is impoſsible for Chriſt, to bleſſe Rome with any praerogatiue.
                  
                  In wrath hee remembreth mercy in euery place: but the
mayne of iuſtice ſtill abideth. Ioctans ſonnes yeelded to Nemrod,
to build Babel, for worſhipp to ſtarres. When all theſe
holy Fathers were aliue to diſſuade them, Noë, Sem, Arphaxad,
Selah, Heber: other faithleſſe had not ſo many holy to diſſuade;
Nemrod, had but Cham and Chuſh, both wicked So of
Cham by the Mother, all Iſraell and our Lord commeth.
And for the Centurion, Math. 27. that acknowledged Chriſt
to bee the Sonne of God. And the Centurion, in Capernaum,
Luc. 7 who built the Iewes a Synagogue, and loued the nation,
and paſſed all Iſraell in faith, Math. 8. And Cornelius, in
Caeſarea that feared God with all his houſe, Act. 10. And for
Sergius Paulus in Paphos, which ſent for Barnabas and Paul, and

deſired to heare the worde of God, and belieued. Acts 13.
And for Lyſias in Ieruſalem, Act. 23. And for Iulius the Captaine
was ſo carefull for S. Paul, that for his ſake, the life of the
priſoners were ſpared. Act. 27. God would not record this,
but to ſaue millions of millions of Romes Clients for S. Paul:
but for the vnthankfull to S. Paul, and forgets that Peter was
at Rome, (who neuer came neere it) he ſtill reſerued Pilates
holineſſe; that Popes ſelfe-murther, ſhould bee the reward.
To this effect I ſpake.
                  
                     
                        Anſwere, I diſtinguiſh, as Rome is the ſeate of the Empire, it
is curſed: But as it is the ſeate of the Pope, it is
Eccleſia.
                     
                        Reply. Vbi Lex non diſtinguit, ibi neque tu debes diſtinguere;
ſed, quod das, accipimus: quatenus est ſedes imperij
eſt maledicta: Atque Papa eſt Caeſar & Pontifex &
mundi Dominus.
                     Ergo est maxime inuiſus Deo, & vos omnes
estis pares.
                     Et quicquid ſcelerum Apocalypſis praedicit: diſcriminati ab
religione Anglicana (multa veſtra & nobis ingrata)
vos cauſam ſuſtinebitis, omnium: & in nostro deſceſſ
                           •
                        
ab vobis, Geneuae c
                           •
                        uſſam ſuſtinebo: Geneuae ſenatus proba
                           •
                        t mea. Deinceps ad theſeis non ad Caluinum diſputabitis.
                  
                  That is: Where the LAW, diſtinguiſheth not, you ought
not to diſtinguiſh: but wee take that, which you grant. As it
is the feare of the Empire it is curſed. But the Pope is Caeſar,

and chiefe Biſhopp, and Lord of the world. Ergo, he is moſt
of all deteſted of God, and yee are all alike. And whatſoeuer
wickedneſſes the Apocal. doth foretell; ye beeing ſeparated
from our Engliſh Religion, many (of thoſe wickedneſſes) are
yours and vnpleaſing to vs, ye ſhall maintayne the cauſe of
all thoſe. And in our departure from you, I will maintaine
the cauſe of Geneua. The Senate of Geneua hath approued my
writinges. Henceforward, ye ſhall diſpute to your poſitions,
not to Calvin.
                  
                  Theſe arguments fitted to this queſtion I had: which
the Ieſuites void of enuie, celebrated ouer Europe. But Midae
Therſitae Satyroſcoptae Ptoliporthi, marred ſucceſſe, beeing amazed
to heare that all Papiſts and Proteſtants who granted
not, that the Creede ſpeaketh of the holy ſoules paſſage to
the holy: be Atheiſts. The Ieſuites gaue me leaue to print
all my religion, & allowed my Latin Concent: ſpecially vpon
Daniel chapter 9. So for ADONICAM, they grant all,
or in reply muſt combat: which to doe, D. Iahannes Piſtorius
refuſed beeing a chalenger. So as none is the ROCK but
Chriſt: and ADONICAM but Chriſt. The Pope chalenging
to bee the Rock, and to ſtand vp Lord of all; is in
wiſedome giltie of chalenging, the name with the attribute
666. clayming the hornes of the LAMBE: which is all one
as to bee ADONICAM. Thus Iohn ſpeaketh plainely,
to the Iewes nation: which in their names conteined the
ſumme of their ſtorie.
                  Theſe two Chapters well read, had made the Pope well
knowen, to be Pilates ſucceſſor, not Pauls: Peters he could not
bee; that neuer came neere any part of Greeke land. How
God hated Rome, it may appeare: that S. Paul being willing
of a long tyme, to confirme the Chriſtians there, hauing no

Chriſtian Synagogue, and yet famous ouer the world. God
would not, till the Iewes came to all extreamitie of ſhame,
ſuffer Paul to goe to Rome: & Pauls warning that he ſhould
bring Chriſts name before Caeſar, and his deſire to builde
where none laid foundation, & to confirme them of Rome,
and writing an Epiſtle to teach the firſt Principles: and his
mention of bringing Chriſts name into the Palace, as not
knowen there before: and the ignorance of the Synagogue,
Acts. 28. that knew not what the Goſpell meant, but that it
was in euery place gaineſaid. This ſheweth that Peter was
neuer at Rome. And Saint Pauls iourney telleth Rome that
God hated them. If he had not beene ſought to bee killed,
Lyſias had not ſent him to Caeſarea: and if the Iewes had not
againe there ſought to haue killed him, hee had not appealed
to Caeſar. God would not that hee ſhould come to Rome,
but vpon extreamities. So the iourney thither (ſhewed that
Chriſt hated the Citie that crucified him) was ſtrange in calamities:
and Paul was brought thither as a priſoner, and kept
in priſon, though ſomewhat free.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER XIIII.
               And I ſaw, and behold a Lambe ſtood vpon mount Syon, and an
hundred fourty foure thouſand, were with him, hauing
the name of their father written in their forehead.
               THEY which were called afore two Prophets, are now
144000. hauing the name of God written in their forehead:
the ſame number is ſaid before to be ſealed: ch. 7.
by a ſpeach from Ezekiel, ch. 9. 4. There in the 70. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
the terme of chap. 13. in Kimchy, a ſigne or writing. S. Paul

expoundeth the ſpeach, that God will make them knowen who be
his that they who profeſſe the name of God ſhall depart from wickedneſſe.
So they who haue Gods name, are made knowen who
bee his: and expound his word: and follow trueth of worſhip
due to him: bearing a marke, in open profeſſion, as ſacrificers,
ſuch as Aharon had. In this ſort the holy Church ſtill
had ſome nūber, to profeſſe the ſumme of ſaluation; though
on mount Sion a ſmall hill, for the mountaines of the world:
& not one to a million of ADONIKAM and his Children
of three fold, as ſtorie 666. that number chap. 13. to beare the
number of his name, was vſed for any number of Apoſtatique
profeſſion. So heere the 144000. twelue tymes twelue
is vſed for any Company that truſteth in Chriſt, as the Patriarches
did.
               And I heard a voice out of heauen, as the voice of many waters,
and as the voice of a great thunder: and I heard the
voice of harpers harping with their harpes, and they ſing
as it were a new ſong, before the throne, and before the
foure liuely wightes and the Elders.
               The heauen, commonly in this booke, is the Church; waters
voice, is continuall; ſo heere continuall ſinging is meant:
harpes ſignifie, ſong with agreement: the new ſong is for
mans praeſeruation euery day. The foure wightes are the
rare, as Daniel, Ananias, Azarias and Miſael: and all the Euangeliſtes
and S. Paul: full of courage of Lions: ſo were all the
Apoſtles, of rare patience: ready to be ſacrificed euery day:
and they were the true Philoſophers, thinking what ſhould befall
them after death; and they were the Eagles of high flight
& ſight. The Elders are the Biſhops, or Teachers: the ſage in

gouernement and skill in the holy Hebrew and Greek Teſtaments.
The ſong none could vnderſtand but the 144000. as
no Papiſt ſoundly thinketh of all things, made for Gods glorie
in Chriſt, and how by him wholy iuſtice commeth, and
he onely muſt be worſhipped. When this is told them, they
are like vnto men that dreame, and know not who they are
that are bought from the earth: not what their religion
meaneth. Thereupon it is written.
               And none could vnderſtand the ſong but the hundred fourty
and foure thouſand, which were bought from the earth.
               
                  What this ſonge was.
                  Through the whole ſcripture this ſong is one and the
ſame: that IEHOVAH, our GOD, IEHOVAH is
ONE: The FATHER, the SON, the Holy Spirite,
be one, Coaeternall and Coeſſentiall: the SON is called the
WORD; by the WORD the Father made the World,
and by the Spirite beautified the heauens. And becauſe the
WORD would become fleſh, the World was made to
ſerue once Adam the firſt. The Angells that grudged at that,
fell for euer: and deceiued Adam: and made him dead in ſin:
and brought him to be turning dayly to duſt vntill he dyed,
and for him the whole frame of the Creature, was pronunced
corrupt. But he belieued that Chriſt, made of a woman,
made vnder the Law, God being in him to reconcile the
World to himſelfe: ſhould giue Adams ſoule iuſtice by faith,
ſhould raiſe vp his Bodie, and make a new World: by his
power, whereby hee can ſubdue all things to himſelfe. This
is the ſumme of the ſong; tolde through all Bookes of the
Bible.
               
               
                  
                  A Digreſsion to ſhew the Concent of all the
holy Bookes.The Concent of all the holy Bookes, Geneſes.
                  
                  Geneſes ſheweth, how by the WORD of IEHOVAH,
the heauens were made, and all the ſettled army of them, by the
Spirite of his mouth:
                     1. Iohn. 1. 1. & 3. 8. and when man fell; the WORD telling,
that to deſtroy the workes of Satan, he would be made
fleſh, and haue a Tabernacle in vs. In which point, the Fathers
faith, vnto the charge of Ioſephs bones to bee caried
vnto the Land, wherein our Lordes reſurrection ſhould be a
Teſtimony of a new World: taught by Ioſeph in his bones,
long after his death.Heb. 11. By faith, he taught by his dead bones, of
the new world: and therein Geneſes end, hath a new Geneſes.
All ſimple, ſhould learne CHRIST from the Goſpell of
Geneſes: where his Godhead ſo familiarly, delited in the holy,
Prov. 8. and ſhewed in appearances, that he would be man.
All yong men brought vp to be Biſhops of the Kings armies,
or Church: would reioyce to haue learned Geneſes in Ebrew
by heart. In old age they ſhould gather the fruit.
               
               
                  Obiection of them, that are not bought from the earth.
                  S. Ierome ſaith: Iewes read not the three firſt chapters of
Geneſes, till they be 30. yeeres old.
                  Anſwere. None ſhould cite Ierome to make him a foole,
or to win the Whetſtone. Maymony, in Morch Nebuchim hath
this ſentence, that none, did Daraſh, read (as a Doctor expoundeth)
Geneſ. 1. and 2. and 3. and Ezech. 1. before he was
aged 30. So S. Ierom meant. Iewes all teach their Children,
from ſeauen to read all Moyſes. It were better that Rome,
                     
were with Helice and Bura, then Popes ſhould be ſuffred, ſo to
bring moſt wickedly the word of life into a deadly hatred.
               
               
                  Of Iob.
                  Iob, is a booke for all holy to take notice of; for inſtructing
their families in the knowlede of Chriſt: which Abraham carefully
did, as God teſtifieth; the comfort of it their poſterity
ſhall finde: as the booke ſetteth forth the faith and loue (the
effects of the Goſpell. 1. Theſ. 1.) of his poſterity; euen before
the Lawe was giuen; to ſhewe that the godly had alwaies
the Law written in their hearts, 2. Cor. 3. Ier. 32. Rom. 2. Iob,
is a patron to all the faithfull; in proſperitie, for loue, compaſſion,
iuſtice and equity, &c. in his afflictions, his faith and
hope in the Redeemer the ſeed promiſed, whom he knew
would take our nature vpon him to dy for him, and by his
Godhead rayſe himſelfe from death, and that by his reſurrection,
he ſhould be rayſed in the laſt day, & be made like his
glorious body; and that he euer liued to make interceſſion for
him: theſe thinges were his comfort in his greateſt miſeries:
and patience and conſtancie, the fruite of his hope, he ſhewed
Rom. 5. and commended to vs Iam. 5. And in Iob, God
deſcribeth the ſtate of the Church, nowe floriſhing, nowe
wholly afflicted: yet by faith in the Redeemer finde recouery
vnto eternall life. Briefly, the whole booke is a diuine commentary
on Geneſes, both for Creation and Redemption.
               
               
                  Of Exodus.
                  
                     Exodus ſheweth how God performed promiſſe to Abraham
of multiplying his ſeed:Exodu
                           •
                        
                      of their affliction in Aegypt: (for his
hainous ſin as Rabbi Bechai ſaith, in giuing Sarah to Pharaoh) of
reuenging Aegypt: of bringing Iſrael thence, by the blood of
the Lambe: & drowning Pharaoh, wher they ſang the ſong of
the Lambe.Exo. 15. The Tables with letters 613. Vowels & Accents,

as we haue this day, in the ſame forme in the firſt Law, teach
how we come from the Aegypt of this World: and the Tabernacle,
how the WORD would haue his Tabernacle
in vs.
               
               
                  Romes error againſt this ſong of the Lambe: barbarous.
                  Their Latin ſayth The dwelling of the Children of Iſraell while
they dwelt in Egypt, was 430. year. yet Cohach came with Iacob,
Gen. 46. and liued but 133. year. Amram 137. Exod. 6. Moſes
120. Deut. 33. all in extremity maketh but 390. year. So Moſes
muſt be buried 40. year. before he receiued the Law. So the
Pope maketh all the Old Teſtam. nothing worth. Saint Paul
maketh it but 430. year. from the Promiſſe, Gen. 12. vnto the
Law, Gall. 3. 17. So the Pope would make both Teſtaments,
of small force: as his knightes, in Gen. 3. ſay, ſhee ſhall bruſe
thy head, to be the ground of hope: that ſo, the Virgin Marie
might lawfully be worſhipped.
               
               
                  Error Athean.
                  The heauy Commandement, Thou ſhalt not make vnto thy
ſelfe any grauen Image: in the Popes decalogue is left out. The
Chaldean who deſtroyed the Temple, that all of Gold was caryed
to Babel: ſo the couering of the Arke, and the reſt of the
Gold: that the timber, and Tables ſeeme broken by the wicked:
thoſe wicked are not more wicked then the other Babylon
in a myſterie, which to receiue Idolatry, would take away
one commandement from the tenne.
               
               
                  Of Leuiticus.Leuiticus.
                  
                  When the Tabernacle was ſett vp, the voice of Chriſt, which
was terrible on the mountaine, ſpeaketh ſoftly to Moſes how
Leui ſhould cōtriue all the Law by ſacrifice hither: that when

the Iewes had deſtroyed Chriſt his Tabernacle,Ioh. 2. hee would
rayſe it againe the third day: and end Leuies trade: and the
Angell commenting vpon Leuit. 26. telleth the very houre
when Chriſt by death would end ſacrifice and offring.
               
               
                  How the Pope diſannulleth all Leuiticus.
                  The Pope will haue Prieſt, Altar, Cope, Leuitique linnen, fleſh
of Bread and Blood of Wine, to be for ſacrifice; againſt all the
light that Chriſt planted in ſoules, for ſenſe of eye ſight, tast,
feeling, ſmelling and hearing of wordes: and common reaſon,
when words of poſſeſſions muſt be expounded, lawyerlike:
not in naturall ſorte. He that ſhould vrge naturall proprietie
in this. Iechonias begate Salathiel, ſhould bring infinite abſurdities
vpon the genealogie. He is more ſenſeleſſe that knoweth
not ſpeaches of a couenant, how the thing ſignifying, hath the
name of the ſignified. Typus, antitypus, ſimbolon, Icones, old greeks
Dionyſius the forged, Origen, Euſebius, Nazianzene, Theodoret.
&c. could terme the Bread and Wine, ſeales of ending Moſes Policie, which had the auctority of God, equall in wiſedome
to his wiſedome in the Creation of the World. Now where
God endeth all ſacrifice, and Moyſes policie, performing by
our Lords death and teſtifying by S. Stephens martyrdome.
Thence the beaſt ariſing from the profane earth, would with
the mouth of the Dragon, erect a policie ouer the World; to
make by Satan imitation of Moſes policie, to turne all Common
weales to apiſh mockage, of the ſage wiſedome in Moſes:
vnto the deceite of Satan, who tranſformeth him ſelfe into an
Angell of light. Thus the harpes on Mount Syon, will not
agree with the Popes Policy, by Leuiticus.
               
               
                  Of Numery.Numbers▪ Act. 26. 22. 23.
                  
                  When Moſes had ſhewed in figures, that Christ was to ſuffer,

and being the first from the dead ſhould ſhew light vnto the World:
the people were to trye, whether by this faith, they would
conquer Chanaan, & not by mans ſtrength. They are numbred
in perſons, a miraculous number; to proceed in 215. yer.
(whence onely 70. male ſoules aroſe in 215. yeares) 603550.
men of warre beſides Women and Children. But they miſbelieue
and ſo come ſhort.
               
               
                  The Like.
                  
                     Popery teacheth, that merits of ſainctes, muſt be helpes to
conquer the Land of Reſt. And truſt not to the Promiſſe giuen
to Abraham.
               
               
                  Of Deuteronomie.
                  
                     Deuteronomie,
                     Deutero. repeateth to the ſonnes the fathers religion:
in an abridgement: ſhewing that all ages ſhould doe ſoe: and
giueth an expreſſe Law, that fathers ſhould teach their Children
the Law. And ſo, many pſalmes, and many places of the
New Teſtament, abridge the heauenly wiſedome of God,
for all former doctrine.
               
               
                  The Contrarie.
                  No Cardinales of Rome, nor Princes that gaue them honor,
knew this much. Therefore their gold is in high gilt.
               
               
                  Of Ieſus.
                  The booke of IESVS,
                     Ioſua. ſheweth how IESVS conquered
the Land by a leſſer number then the firſt, that man ſhould
not haue the prayſe, but only God. Pſal. 44. And their towns
324. as ſome reckon them, in Chananean names, ſhew all commodities
of ſoyle for a land.
               
               
                  
                  The Contrarie.
                  The Iewes were told by Dauid,
                     Pſal. 95. that IESVS ſettled not
the people in the true reſt: but biddeth them enter into a Reſt
from mans Ceremonies: where Baptiſme for Circumciſion, and
Bread with Wine, (tokens as ſtronge as the worlds frame,
vpon Gods word, of life to faithfull receiuers) are all that religious
policie requireth, that wee haue a Rest from the infinite
toyle of Moſes Policie. But the City that crucified Chriſt,
denyeth this Reſt: and bringeth from mans wicked braine,
wicked toyes innumerable, to be religiouſly obſerued: wherof
the leaſt were as bad as the ſtrange fire that Aharons ſonnes
did kindle.
               
               
                  Of the Booke of the Iudges.
                  
                     Ioſeph in his Beryll,
                     Iudges. bare the XI I. Patriarches names: as a
King and ſtay of the common Weale: when the people fell
away, other tribes: Iuda, Beniamin, Iſachar, Zabulon, Nepthaly
and Dan in part, and Leui to alteration, vpon ouerthrow, in
Elies ſonnes. The 70. for a ſpeciall reaſon, ſet in Greeke for
Ioſephs Beryll, the Emerauld of Leui, that heathen might not
ſay: the God of Iſraell did not foreſee what would come to
paſſe. Ioſeph bare the ſway: and Ephraim of Ioſeph caried (except
Iuda) all tribes landed away. Vpon the Greek tranſlation
Chryſoſtome, ſharper witted then skillfull in the originall, in
Photius liberary, would make the high ſacrificer the ſtay of the
ſtate: where his office was for the World to come; and vpon
this the Patriarkes would be checking not teaching the Emperor,
till both came to nought: as Elie his ſonnes, ouerthrew
all the glorie of the ſtates vnder the Iudges. The Pope paſſeth
all Greeke Patriarches ouer Kings; by whom they ſtand, and
by whoſe guiftes they had means to ſtudy the word of God,

If they had grace, and to helpe many landes ſo to doe: that
in the Pope (as in Elies ſonnes,) a fall extreeme ſhall be.
               
               
                  Of Samuel, &c.
                  When God haſtening to ſhewe CHRIST from Iuda,Samuel.
gaue Iſrael a minde to chooſe a King: hee would giue one of
Beniamin, that Rachel ſhould be aequall to Leah: but ſoone remoue
him:Pſalmes. then commeth DAVID of Iuda: Dauid rare for
faith and all humanitie: whoſe Pſalmes tell of Chriſt all that
can be known: from Stories paſt, and in Prophecies for the
ſtate following. That all men, high and low, rich and poore,
ſhould ſtill ſing his pſalmes. And to him, is promiſed an aeternall
throne in Chriſt. Now to prooue, that this throne is not
for this World. Salomon hath all wiſedome, proſperitie, and
pleaſure, and writeth a ſong of ſonges, that is all in continued
allegories of true ſoules following Chriſt:Canticles. and Prouerbes, to
warne Ephraim from Idolls:
                     Prouerbes Eccleſiaaſtes. and Eccleſiſtes to tell that all vnder
the ſunne was vanitie. To the ſame effect the hiſtorie of
poore Ruth,
                     Ruth. of Lot, leauing Countrey, kinſ folke and fathers
houſe, conteineth a ſage hope in the ſonge for the Lambe.
And Salomons Temple is ſoone caſt off, to be deſpyſed, and
the Kings of his ſeede;1. and 2. Kings. in 1. and 2. of the Kings; to ſhew that
a King of Nathan Salomons brother, ſhould be the true King;
when Salomons Kings ſhould cauſe captiuity to Babel, and
ouerthrow of all.Chronicles. The Books of Kings, and Chronicles, ſhew
that in euent. Then Daniel, ſheweth 7. tymes ouer, how vnder
Kings Iuda ſhall bee in affliction,Daniel. till the King of Kings
commeth.Hoſea. In Prophecie, Hoſea telleth of his ſaluation, how
he ſhall be called from Egypt, and deſtroy death, and aryſe the third
day,
                     Ionas. which matter Ionas in figure experienced before. This
ſaluation Oſee teacheth and how Lo-Ammi, ſhould be Ammi,
                     
and Lo-Ruchamah,
                     Ioel. ſhould be Ruchamach. Ioel, ſheweth Gods
fauor for the ſpirite vpon all fleſh, to ſpeake of the reſurrection,
chapter 2. and ſharpe iudgement cited in this Chapter.
And Amos,
                     Amos. of erecting Dauids Tabernacle. Iſaiah, is an
Euangeliſt from chapter 40. ſpecially chapter 53. and where
not:Iſaiah. and who is like to Michah,
                     Michah. telling Herod of Bethlechem,
where the ſonne of Dauid ſhould be borne.Nahum. 
                     Nahum, comforteth
the true Iew with the faire feete of them that ſhew
peace: and ſayth: Aggie Aggeicha: feſtiue thy feſtiuities;
though Niniueh ſcattred Iſrael, yet Iuda ſhould be built. The
name of Aggei the Prophet calleth that into minde.Habba. 
                     Abbakuk,
embraceth the people with comfort againſt Babel, and
leaueth a meſſe of potage for Daniel, and all good: that, the
iuſt ſhall liue by faith.
                     Ieremie. 
                     Ieremie, 40. year. telleth Iudah their
Ceremonies cannot turne their heartes from ſtrange Gods:
But Babell ſhal bee their dwelling to conſume the wicked, &
to ſhew Gods glorie, where the Towre brought ſhame to all
nations, built to worſhip Creatures, and to forget the Creator.
Tzephain, telleth that (Tze-phan Iah) the aeternall hath
ſealed vp iudgement for deſpyſing the Redeemer, (taught
by the Paſſouer in Ioſiahs dayes) therefore he will viſite the
Kings Children for cloſe Idolatry, the rulers for cruelty, the
falſe Prophets for lying vanities, ouerthrow the ſtate & cary
them to Babell, but after confeſſion of their ſin, he will leaue
a poore and humble people, that ſhall truſt in Meſſiah the
Lord. Obadiah, telleth Edom, that for helping Babell to deſtroy
Ieruſalem; by Babell they ſhould be deſtroyd: yet in
tyme Sauiours (that is Apoſtles) ſhall come from Syon to
conquer and iudge them (Luc. 22. 30.) that is, to bring them
to the faith, and that, of that Kingdome Chriſt ſhall be King.
Ezechiel ſheweth the ſonne of man glorious aboue the Cherub,
                     Ezechiel.
                     
Chap. 1. and from 40. a new Ieruſalem: and chap. 38. ſheweth
to the eye the reſurrection: touching his Ieruſalem: S. Peter
tuneth the Harpe on Mount Sion, that: euery prophecie of
ſcripture is not to bee expouded properly: becauſe the holy
men of God ſpake caried by the holy Ghoſt.Daniel. 
                     Daniel, expoundeth
him, that the death of Chriſt ſhall bring all nations to
be an heauenly Ieruſalem: Of Daniel I haue written more
then any ſince Daniel wrote, how his holy Goſpell, ſheweth
Chriſt vnto Children. The Copies of my laſt edition hee
that vſeth, as the Perſians the Prophete, ſhall be commended
of mee to the God of Daniel, whom hee knoweth not. For if
he had knowen him, he would not ſo haue crucified againe
the Lord of glory. So deſcribed king of the Iewes, and firſt
named CHRIST, meere properly in Daniel. Ages folowing
ſhall enquire how God will deale with the men.Aggei. 
                     Aggei, anſwering
in name (as was ſhewed) to Nahums words, ſheweth
that of Zorobabel, the SIGNET ſhall come: who ſhall ſhake
the heauen of the Iewes policie;Zacharic. and the profane earth. Zachary
and Malachy,
                     Malachie. with him, ſhewe what Zachary & Malachy
Luc. 1. ſhould learne to begin the New Teſtament, by the
Angell Gabriel,Ezra. on whom they comment: Ezra, and Nehemias,
                     Nehemias.
alſo record his trueth, and celebrate the names of the
chiefe returned, and the number of all. And Mordecai, in
Eſther,Eſther. 
                     telleth how by faith in Chriſt they eſcaped the edge of the
ſword: Thus vpon Mount Sion of old, they tuned their harps,
in the ſtrang land of this world: knowing that God would receiue
them hence into his Ourano polin: yet they were not perfected
in their muſique heere, to ſee and feele as 1. Ioh. 1. the
word of life. S. Peter writing to poore Iewes 2 Pet. 1. commendeth
the reading of the old harpes, as a light ſhining in a
darke place, till the morning ſtarre (Pſal. 22. Apo. 2. & 21. and

Dauid Kimchi vpon Pſal. 22.) ariſe in our hearts.
               
               
                  The Popes contrarietie.
                  
                     S. Peters moſt deadly enimie the Pope, which would make
him the Rock, or God: and will not learne how he expoundeth
Rock: to be the Creator. 1. Pet. 4. from 2. Sam. 22. will not ſuffre
the people to read the Law: a Pope or Daemon, openly bent
againſt the goodneſſe of God.
               
               
                  Of the New Teſtaments muſique. The Goſpell.
                  The holy Publican maketh in his firſt Chapter,Matthew. a ſtately
porch to the new Temple; ſhewing from Abraham to Dauid,
that the Fathers of Chriſt, were all afflicted in this world: and
knew the holy Trinitie, and foreſaw Christ, and his kingdom,
which ariſeth from David by Nathan: not from Salomon:
whoſe houſe would not be vpright with God. 2. Sam. 23. All
be faltie: but Ioakim ſo wicked: that becauſe hee ouerthrew
the ſtate; the Iewes enacted, not to name him, in their narrations:
and ſo S. Matthew left him out: Now when Nathans
houſe commeth in, for whom all Daniels Viſions ſpeake, in
them wee ſee heauen opened: and howe God ſate vpon a
Throne, as if he were like Iaſper and Rubi, with the Rainebow
like Moſes Smaragd about the Throne: and his harpe hath all
tunes of Law,Marke. till Chriſt be taken vp. So Marke playeth vpon
Gabriels harpe,Luke. Dan. 9. till CHRIST is King in heauen. Luke.
playeth firſt vpon the laſt ſtring of Malachie: and the ſame
tunes as the other two. The Sonne of thunder beginneth from
before the beginning,Iohn. ſhewing that by the SON, God made
the world: and harpeth moſt vpon that ſtring: and teacheth
the Pope, that hee, not Peter was the beſt beloued: and needed

not a threefold incouragement to feed the ſheepe. Thus
the man Leui; the Lion, Marke. The Oxe, Luke; Eagle Iohn, play
all Dauids tunes: That mighty Theophilus ſaw in euery one,
Man, Lion, Oxe, Eagle; as Ezekiel chap. 1.
               
               
                  Of the Actes.
                  The Actes telleth that S. Luke was full of eyes,Acts. ſpecially
for depth of Ebrew skill. Act. 7. and 13. as in his Goſpell ch. 4.
which poinctes I touch in a Latin Epiſtle to PP. of Germany,
and to our K. Maieſtie. The Antiochian ſheweth how Antiochia
firſt had Chriſtian name: to ſhew that Chriſt would
be great ouer Magog, Ezek. 39. and he alone was a miracle of
Gods mercy: But Nicolaus ſtood not ſound: as Antioch by
Pride had a fall. Though Peter were there, and an heauenly
company: of which if Rome might haue bragged, a 1000.
Martin Luthers, and Zuinglians, and Martyrs & Bucers, ſhould
not haue ſhaken the Popes pride: who ſwelleth that Paul
comforteth the ſmall Company, who had no Apoſtles to
ſtrengthen, that yet their faith was ſounded ouer the world.
And S. Luke endeth in Paules ſpeach vnto Iewes, who knew
not what the Goſpell meant, till hee came thither: that the
Pope might be aſhamed to ſay that S. Peter was there: whoſe
writing is all in Iewes veine; and if hee had bene there, but
one day, the Synagogue had heard what the Goſpell was.
In that he telleth how S. Paul was borne free in Rome, and
thereby found great protection, and freedome, and how Ieſus
our Sauiour told, that he ſhould bee the Apoſtle to bring his
name before Caeſar, & of the famous courſe, by appeale from
Feſtus to Caeſar, known to king Agrippa, by famous nauigation
and miracles: theſe ſhew the Popes badneſſe, that would

put all this out of tune: to beg landes to match Emperors,
by a lye that S. Peter ſhould be at Rome: whereof God hath
not giuen one ſyllable of found. The Teſtimonie of Origen,
Clemens, Alexandrine, Tertullian, Euſebius, all vnſound and nothing
worth, without teſtimonie from them that ſhould ſee
him there. The Pope muſt cut of all the ſtringes of S. Lukes
harpe, on mount Sion, and vſe Poliphemus muſique to Galatea,
from Aetna, if hee will ſtand in his old forgery. Epiphanius
would not ſtay vpon that fable: though Latin writers to glory
of the Weſt, could foſter the fable.
               
               
                  Of the Epiſtle to the Romanes.
                  As the ſtringes of the Wolfes entralles,Romanes. will neuer haue
concordes with the ſheepes, the muſicall: ſo the fable from
the Pope that belieueth not that Chriſt, is the only Rocke. Pſal.
18. will neuer agree with the ſtringes of S. Paules epiſtle. It Catechiſeth
men, as needy of ſtay: and telleth of a long deſire that
way: and giueth expreſſe Law, that euery ſoule ſhould obey Caeſar,
in matters of gouernement: as to Iewes not taught in that.
And Modeſtly ſheweth his reaſons of rules fitt for ſimple:
though he was perſuaded they could teach one another. He
had not paſſed ouer S. Peter if hee had taught them. And hee
pleadeth for his Biſhoprick charge ouer the Gentils from Ieruſalem
to Illyrico, all ready gone ouer: and the Romanes to be of
his Biſhopricke where the name of Chriſt had not bene ſounded
by any Apoſtle. And in ſalutations to fiue and twentie,
not one ſyllable ſoundeth toward that S. Peter had bene, or
euer ſhould bee at Rome. If the Pope had knowen IAH IEHOVAH,
THE ROCKE OF ALL AGES, this epiſtle
had taught him the Ebrews ſonge: and to auoide them that
ſhould make ſedition and ſcandala from this doctrine.
               
               
                  
                  Of the first to the Corinthians.
                  This teacheth that the authority of Cephas,
                     1. Corint. 
                     Paul, Apollos (the
cunning lawyer,) might not be of auctority: But with expreſſe
doctrine of Ceph to Rocke: whereupon they that build
be Cephae ſet vpon the Rocke. And for excommunication, he
followeth the Synagogues ſage manner: That the open
Court, not Angelus Eccleſiae ſhould practiſe it. Though the
Pope will be excōmunicating kings: which thing Thal. Ieru.
in Sanedrin, holdeth neuer vſed nor lawfull. Other Thalmudique
queſtions he decideth, many: and for the Lords ſupper,
putteth tranſſubſtantiation out of tune: and ſheweth how all
the Church ſhould be as one body, full of charitie and goodneſſe,
and exhorteth all to haue skill in the Bible.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond to the Corinth.
                  It continueth in the ſame tenor:2. Corint. and that afflictions be the
adiunctes, to teachers of ſaluation, not the Popes eaſe and
quietneſſe:2. Cor. 4. and that the Goſpell ſhineth to all, whom the
god of this World blindeth not, though ignorance be the
mother of the Popes holy deuotion.
               
               
                  Against Purgatorie.
                  
                     Where he ſayth: we know that if this earthly houſe of tabernack
hath an end, we haue a building from GOD, an houſe not made with
hands, euerlaſting in the heauens: The Rock Leuit. 26. powreth
water of that Doctrine to Moyſes: So Haides to all godly is
heauen.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the Epiſt. to Gal.
                  
                     Galatae barbarous Canniballs in Strabo,
                     Galatians are brought by S.
Paul to the Rocke of ſaluation: by faith without workes of the
Law, and if they ſtick to any one of them as Circumciſion,
Chriſt profiteth nothing. By this Epiſtle Martin Luther ſhewed
the Pope to be an enimy to ſaluation. And where he ſaith
after many yeares he found Peter at Ieruſalem, and that Peter
was the Iewes Apoſtle, to ſaue whom hee could before the
nation ſhould be ſcattred. And ſo he was for Greeks. This
water from the Rocke ſhould waſh away the Popes lies. And
the whole Epiſtle might tell him that he might as well repete
Circumciſion as Prieſt, high Prieſt, Mitre, Cope, Linen, ſacrifice.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Epiſtle to the Epheſians.
                  The Epiſtle to the Epheſians conteineth a perfect doctrine
of all faith:Epheſ. penned eaſie for all to learne: and daſhing all
popery.
                  
               
               
                  The Philippians.
                  Are taught to reioyce in afflictions:Philippi. as the martyrs by
Rome Apoc. chap. 1. and 7. and 11. and 12. and 14. and 15.
and 17. and Pauls afflictions brought the name of Chriſt into
Caeſars pallace.
               
               
                  Coloſsians.
                  
                     Epaphras brought the Coloſsians to the Rocke:
                     Coloſſi. the ſon of
God of whoſe aeternity and dignity S. Paul ſpeaketh heauenly:

and to their building into all riches of full vnderſtanding in
the myſterie of Chriſt: about deceit of Philoſophie, & Iewes
Ceremonies for meate; the Pope in both matters is buſie:
that his Wolfes ſtringes make no muſique, but where Lupa
gaue milke to Rome builders.
               
               
                  Of the firſt to the Theſſ.
                  They in affliction be an example for the Martyrs in Spaine
haters of the Popes idolls.1. Theſſ. The laſt glorious comming of
Chriſt will be their comforts.
               
               
                  Second Theſſ.
                  They ſhould not looke that the laſt dayes were come to
the World,2. Theſſ. as to the Iewes Common weale: in Prophets,
Geneſ. chap. 49. Dan. 2. and Ebr. chap. 1. Becauſe not onely
open tyrannie ſhall try Lions and Oxen: but alſo mighty deceite
(that they which receiue not the loue of trueth, may be
damned for loue to lies) ſhall try man, and eagle: and who be
full of eyes. From this place Greekes tell Antichriſt ſhould
ariſe from Rome: ſee chapter 2. Th. 2. he maketh the matter
plaine. So at the firſt he ſhewed his care for Rome. And as
Daniel chapter 2. calleth the Counſell of God in the afflicters
wicked, a mysterie: eloquent Paul taketh his terme
thence, teaching that as thoſe matters had a moſt ſure euent,
euen to Antiochus figure of Antichriſt, exalting himſelfe
aboue all religion. So when the Emperour ſhould fall: The
Papae or Diuinity fathers of Rome ſhould be 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,
with all force of Satan. That text is an abridgement of the
Apocalyps.
               
               
                  
                  Firſt and 2. Timothie, and Titus.
                  
                     Paul in Timothie telleth all,1. and 2. Timot. what great learning they ſhould
haue, which ſhould gouerne others: euery man of charge is
Pakid 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Adams tongue 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in the LXX. Elders
Acts. 2. and Titus 3. In vertues of regeneration they ſhould
be rare: and by ſtudy they ſhould be learned. Exod. chap. 18.
is the ground Sanedrin, Maymonie, an explication. Of theſe
the King chiefly was Doctor, Maymonie Hagigah. And Archyſynagogus
and the reſt choſe one of their company, to be Sheliach
Zibbur,
Orator of the congregation: he read the Law:
and dealt in exhortation; and all prophecied; and none
ſhould rule ouerthe people but in mildeneſſe, 1. Pet. 5. Maymon
in Sanedrin whoſe words for our Athean tyrany, in BB.
forcing othes, &c. I wrote in my Booke to I. C. of reuerend,
memory.Titus. 
                     Titus is taught the ſame. Now an ape is liker a man,
then the Pope Pauls Biſhop; in 2. Theſ. 2. 1. Tim. 2. Tim. Tit.
The opening of S. Paul by the Talmudiques ſitting in Moyſes
chaire, would cleere him more then all others. He in Greeke
abridgeth them writing to Timothie and Titus, who knew
them at large. Geneua doth well this farre: that all ſhould bee
kept in order: in excommunication farr from S. Paul: and in
letting the raines to Preachers to be Rome Popes.
                  
               
               
                  Of Philemon.
                  After he had deſcribed the gouerners,Philemon. learned, and louers
of the people: he handleth the cauſe of Seruants: from Exod.
21. and Iſrael ſeruant in Egypt, Exod. cha. 20. whence in Talmudiques,
a long common place is of ſeruants. The marrow of all

which Gamaliels Scholar contriueth to one ſhort epiſtle. And
heere the gracious prouidence of Christ, in the notation of
Philemon and Oneſimus conteyneth the duty of Maiſter and
Seruant: ſo wiſeing al to learne Pauls tongue. Philemon is louing:
ſo ſhould euery Maister be to his ſeruant, Eph. 6. knowing that
they haue a Maister in Heauen. A famous Greek Poet, much cited
for Haides, Heauen and Hell, from Sophocles, Herodotus with
Menander and Diphilus, was called Philemon. Oneſimus is by
interpretation profitable: ſuch ſhould all ſeruants bee to their
maiſters. Not in ey-ſeruice as men pleaſers but as ſeruing the Lord.
The poore Daughter of Iſrael in Naamans houſe, cauſed him
to ſeeke Eliſeus, and GOD: and when hee tooke peper in the
noſe, for Iordan: his ſeruants ouerruled him, as Oneſimus to
ſaluation. The name Oneſimus is in Lyſias the Attique: as vſuall
in Greekes, Oneſiphorus S. Pauls great helper, is of the ſame
notation.
               
               
                  How the Seruant of Seruants is
Concordant.
                  The Seruant of Seruants is ſuch an Oneſimus, that he bringeth
all to pouertie by his treachery: and by his Peter-Pence
for Chimineies, made millions of eyes dimme with ſmoke:
and can forge Conſtantinus donation for the kingdoms of the
Weſt. If Iulian had heard any ſuch matter: he had ſet that among
the chiefe ſchoffs for his Vncle: But neither hee nor
any Greekes could heare of ſuch a matter: which all the
world had knowen in Conſtantines dayes, if it had beene true.
The robber thus recompenced Conſtantine for bringing in
Chriſtian politie: to deſtroy new Rome, and to roote out
from the Eaſt the holy Goſpell.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Of the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes.
                  From Rome S. Paul the moſt reuerend Papas,Hebrews. that euer
was in Rome, (and S. Luke next him) the Ebrew of Ebrewes
telleth the Ebrewes, that were vpon reuolt: that all Moyſes
Policie ended in Chriſt: and that no further ſacrificer muſt
be on the earth: and that faith giueth true commendation,
from the Creation to the Maccabees dayes, who in Dan. 12.
hoped in the better reſurrection. In this Epiſt. S. Paul abridgeth
all the Bible.
               
               
                  The Popes Contrarietie.
                  The Popes whole doctrine, as I ſhewed, would make a new
policie ouer the World by imitation of Aharon: ſo that he
commeth to the height of ſin: and denieth the whole doctrine
of iuſtification by faith: and that Abraham and the reſt
went hence to heauen; againſt S. Pauls expreſſed words, praetending,
chap. XI. II. vlt. Where he ſpeaketh, as through the
Epiſtle, of perfection in the Doctrine: which the Goſpell
hath aboue the Law, and not a word, hee nor any of reward
in the World of ſoules. Alſo Auguſtinus Nabienſis writeth
wickedly, that the Greeke is a tranſlation: and faulty, in, thou
hast made him a little inferior to Angells. He would haue it:
A litle inferior to God, yet Chriſt could ſay how in humanity
deſpiſed he was a worme; as infinitely inferior to his
Godhead, though both together make the Perſon great
GOD.
               
               
                  Of the Epistle of Iames.
                  S. Iames frameth his ſpeach to Iewes,Iames. who knew that no

Biſhops of Elder, could be aboue another: and bringeth a
Law not to praeferre any before the rich in knowledge: and
where Iewes then and yet holde that beliefe in the trueth of
the Law, and reuerence to it, iuſtifieth: as Abr. Sabung in Zeror,
writeth of ſome; and Moſes de Kotzi, praef. in Talm. Hee
telleth ſuch a faith is a dead faith: regeneration muſt follow:
as all teach.
               
               
                  Of the first and 2. of Peter.
                  Both Peters epiſtles,1. and 2. Pet. are written in Iewes veine, that by
affliction, (not by the Popes pompe) we get heauen: and that
Chriſt tooke that courſe beeing kill'd in the humanitie, and
made aliue by the ſpirite (the holy Spirit in the Ethiopian and
Oecumenius) in which hee went (ten tymes is that ſpeach of
God in the Law) and preached to them which are now ſpirites in
priſon: becauſe they belieued not when Christ preached in the dayes
of Noë. And, he biddeth vs commend our ſoules to the faitfull Rock,
chap. 4. teaching the Pope how hee vnderſtood the terme
Rock, to bee all one as Creator: where the Pope (as I often
told) chalenging that name, ſheweth himſelfe in the Temple of
God, as if he were God. And chap 5. he telleth expreſly that the
choſen Church in Babilon ſaluted them and Marke. And all ſpeakers
bee wicked deceiuers that vſe not proprietie, where all
mindes require proprietie: and otherwiſe the whole world
ſhould be deceiued. And in the ſecond, Boſor, with S. for Y,
vſed onely in Arabia, and Chaldea, telleth where he kept.
               
               
                  Of the 1. & 2. & 3. of Iohn.
                  Theſe be wholy for contempt of this world:1. 2. and 3. Iohn. and cleane
contrarie to the Popes doctrine: as his Apocalyps.
               
               
                  
                  Of Iude.
                  Hee in teaching of Iewes fall by the Rebels in the wilderneſſe,Iude.
by the Angells that fell, and by the vncleane Cities,
brent from heauen: warneth not to bragg that the Church
cannot erre. And where Iewes thought gouernement, a tyranny:
he ſheweth from Talmudique vpon Moſes Buriall Midras
Rabba, Aboth Rabbi Nathan and others, that MICHAEL
the Archangell, could not ſuffer Satan to ſpeak ſlander of king
Moyſes: So hee will not ſuffer Popes to blaſpheme Kinges.
But the Popes vnderſtand not ſo much as Iudes text: to know
MICHAEL to bee IEHOVA: but make him a created
Spirit: ſuch blinde batts they be. And thus all the ſcripture
agreeth as harpes to follow the LAMBE: whoſe doctrine
the Pope ſtayneth by idolatrie: that none can vnderſtand
the drift of the Scripture, but the hundred forty and foure
thouſand.
                  Theſe be they which haue not beene defiled by women. For they
bee Virgins.
                  
                     This ſpeach is taken from the ſong of ſonges: which ſaith,
O that he would kiſſe mee with the kiſſes of his lippes, for thy loue is
better then wine. Thy name is oynctment poured out, therefore the
Virgins loue thee. Draw mee, and wee will runne after thee. None
may thinke that mariage is a pollution. But this ſpeach is a
trope for the virginitie of the minde: free from Idolatry,
which is ſpirituall whoordome.
                  
                  Theſe follow the LAMBE which way ſoeuer hee goeth, being
the firſt fruite for God and the Lambe: and there is

no guile found in their mouth, for they are ſyncere before
God and the Lambe.
                  
                  They follow the warrant of Gods word for euery thing,
and bee bought from men, the firſt fruites for God and the
Lambe, which was a ſmall part of the whole: and they hold
no haereſie: but hold them only happy whoſe ſinne is forgiuen,
and whoſe iniquitie is couered: as Pſal. 32. & be iuſt before God,
in the iuſtice of Chriſt.
               
               
                  The Combat of the 144000.
                  And I ſaw another Angell fleeing in the sky hauing the aeternall
Goſpell, to preach to them that dwell vpon the earth: & euery
nation, and tribe, and tongue and people. Saying with a
great voice. Feare God, and giue him glory: for the houre of
his iudgment is come▪ & worſhip him, which made the heauen
and the earth & the ſea:Ier. 10. and the fountaines of water.
                  In the ſeuenth chap, Martyrdome was ſhewed, but without
telling by whom. In chap. XI. the Perſecuter was told, and
the perſecuted were called two prophets: and chap. 12. the Perſecuter
is double, the vpper part of the Dragon, and the taile:
and the perſecuted is the woman, clothed with the ſun: but the
cauſe of perſecution is not told: chap. 13. deſcribeth the Dragon
by ſure ſtate, ſpecially in the Empire reuiued by the
Pope: and how no man could liue in the Empire, without
his profeſſion. Now that it ſtandeth manifeſtly in Idolatrie,
that is heere told: and perſecution is for preaching, that God
onely muſt be worſhipped, and not the Empire, or Pope, and
Idolls. For now God will defend his flock which of long

tyme he ſuffred to be deceiued. Now he will iudge and defend
their cauſe. The Popes Idolatry is in worſhip to Mary
and creatures, called ſaintes, and in prayer to them: due only
to God: creator of all things: of whoſe power, creatures put
vs in minde, and he will not our inuention. Now of Idolatry,
the next Angell telleth, how God will reuenge the Citie.
                  And another Angell followed,Iſai. 21. ſaying BABYLON the great
City is fallen,Ier. 51. is fallen: Becauſe ſhe hath made all nations
drinke of the Wine of the anger of her fornication.
                  The old BABYLON now had no auctority to force
Idolatrie: while it was vnder the Greeke Empire, or Turke
which hateth Idolls. But now Rome beareth ſway; ſo ſhaken
from tongue of ſcripture, as old Babylon from Adams tongue:
which remayned in the houſe of Heber, and farre paſſed
the old Babel in Idolatrie. Therefore ruyne is ſpoken, to
be ſure for it, as fell by Iſaiah 21. and Ierem. 51. vpon the old
Babel.
                  
                  And a third Angell followed them, ſaying, with a great voice:
if any worſhip the beaſt and his Image,Pſal. 75 that is, taketh a
marke on his forehead, or hand, he alſo ſhall drinke of the
Wine,Pſal. 21 of the anger of God; the Wine mixed in the cuppe
of his anger,Eſa. 34. and ſhalbe tormented in fire and brimston,
before the holy Angells, and before the Lambe: and the
ſmoke of their torment aſcendeth for euer and euer.
And they haue no reſt day nor night, if any worſhip the
beaſt and his Image, that is, if any take the marke of
his name. Heere is the pacience of the ſaintes tried:

heere are they tryed which keepe the commandements of God,
and the faith of IESVS.
                  Patience in this ſorte heere, and faith of the ſainctes was
equally ſpoken of in the profane Caeſares dayes, heere greater
terror is ſet downe: and fit warning againſt the ſubtile
work of Satan by man of ſin, to deceiue, if it were poſsible, the elect.
One poinct heere is to be noted, that Gehenna is on high, no
leſſe then Paradiſe, as in Leui. cha. 26. before the angry face of
God. So the Iewes in Cether Malcuth folio 11. hold: that on
high, place of torment is, no leſſe then place of ioy: They
who thinke that ſoules deſcend, and that the holy were
in Hell: and after warning hold this, ſhould feare the puniſhment
heere deſcribed. And the reformed Churches
as Zurick, take the wiſeſt order, that deſtroy all the Popes
markes: and moſt ſtraitly looke to ſcholars cariage twiſe in
the yeare, and referre all puniſhments to the Conſul: and
Synedrion ſuch was the Apoſtles doctrine, and the Synagogues
of old. Great reuenues are now moſt needfull: to
breede learned to deale with Papiſt and Iewes. But Simon
Magus Buyſhopps, ſhould haue no place in the Church, following
the Buy-ſhopps of Rome, As Ananias the painted
wall, and Eleazar his ſonne (in Raba) cauſed Ieruſalem
to bee deſtroyed. So one like may bring an whole nation
vnder curſe.
                  And I heard a voice from heauen, ſaying to mee write:
Bleſſed are the dead that die in the Lord, from this praeſent.
Euen ſo ſaith the Spirit, to reſt from their labours: and
their workes follow with them.
                  Becauſe in tyme of blindneſſe, none could buy nor ſell in

Popes Kingdome, but of his profeſſion; other were killed:
heere is a ſure comfort to ſtrengthen the martyrs: God who
knoweth all, being the ſpeaker from heauen: that praeſentlie
after death they are fully happy, which dy for Gods truth, or
in faith: to reſt from the labours of this life: and their workes
follow with them: their open profeſſion: that God onely is
to be worſhipped; and their carefull life: teaching all, to
conſider ſtill: as all muſt dy: ſo praeſently followeth iudgement.
               
               
                  Compariſons of phraſes, for holy ſoules
departed.
                  When the fift ſeale was opened, chapter 6. Iohn ſaw the
ſoules of them which were killed for the Word of GOD, and
for the teſtimonie which they had, he ſaw them vnder the
Altar: who is Christ. The Thalmud of Rabbi Nathan, in Moyſes,
ſaith, that his ſoule and all the iuſt, are vnder the throne
of God. So as Saint Paul ſaith, Rom. chap. 10. The Apoſtles
doctrine is confirmed by Thalmudiques directly in all thinges,
ſauing the Perſon and office of Meſſias.
                  Chap. 7. The martyrs haue white garments, and palmes
in their hands: they be before the throne of God, &c.
                  Chap. 11. They are called vp into heauen: and their enimies
ſee them, going vp in a cloud. Hence purgatorie is confuted:
which hath no ground from the old Teſtament: as
any Talmudique did euer expound it. For Leuit. 26. telleth,
that hence men goe to Gods tabernacle to ioy, or before his
throne to feele aeternall anger.
               
               
                  
                  Reuenge: for Christ his Iuſtice.
                  And I ſaw and behold a white Cloud: and one rode on the Cloud,
like the SON OF MAN, hauing on his head a Crowne
of gold: and in his hand a ſharpe ſickle.
                  The cloud is Gods chariot, Iſaiah 19. as I told chap. 1. and
this place telleth what Perſon was there deſcribed. Heere he
hath a crowne of gold, as in Pſalm. 20. a token of victorie by
death: ſo, chap. 6. In Maym. Poenit. the iuſt haue Crownes in
the World of ſoules. So to Talmudiques, the New Teſtam.
would bee cleare.Ioel 3. 13. The ſharp ſickle, in Ioel, is Gods vengeance
vpon Iudahs enimies; Aſſur, the Image, yea and the Image of
the beaſt, heere. For he ſpeaketh of all enimies. The roaring
like a Lion, and the 7. thunders tell the ſame thing: and chapter
X. and the earthquake: and deſtroying of them that deſtroyed
the earth.
               
               
                  Reuenge for the prayers of the Church.
                  Another Angell came forth from the Temple; crying with a great
voice, to him that road vpon the Cloud: cast fourth thy ſickle
and reape, tyme is come to reape: for the harueſt of the earth is
ripe.
                  The Church be the faithfull: the Angell is the repreſenter
of their ſtate. So Nebuchadnezar ſaw one watchfull and
holy. Who telleth that his puniſhment of 7. yer. beaſtlineſſe,
came by the prayers of the iuſt: Spaine perceiued in the Low
Coūtries the force of this: & is like to feele as good at home.

What ſhall befall our Buuy-ſhop that vrgeth better learned to
othe then himſelfe, neuer heard of in Iuda by either Teſtament,Againſt the law of nature & againſt the lawe of England.
and impriſoneth better learned then himſelfe, that will
not profane the name of God: & pineth vnto death in cruel
priſon, them who deny him to be lawfull Buy-ſhop, and put
by Teachers of ſaluation from their maintenance 400. What
ſhall become of this man: from whom the heart of a man
hath bene taken 7. yer. Nabuchad. dyed two yeares after hee
came to himſelfe, ſo may this man. How prayers of the iuſt
be heard, the next verſe telleth.
                  And he that roade vpon the cloud caſt forth, his ſickle into the
earth: and the earth was reaped.
                  So the crye of the poore aſcendeth into the eares of the
Lord of Hoſtes.
               
               
                  Reuenge by the iniuried themſelues.
                  And an other Angell came out of the Temple which is in heauen:
hauing alſo a ſharpe ſickle.
                  The faithfull heere haue equall ſtrength: and try combat
with Pope: as this yeare for Clieue: and Iuliaque: All the
Proteſtāts againſt the Pope. Oh that our Albion would thruſt
in the ſickle of good Laws againſt thoſe Popoi; leſt they be ſtill
prickes in our eyes, & thornes in our ſides; as they haue bene.
                  And an other Angell came forth from the altar, hauing authoritie
vpon the fire: and cried with a great voice to him
that had the ſharpe ſickle, ſaying: Caſt forth thy ſickle, &
cut the clusters of thr earth: for her grapes be ripe.
                  
                     
In Daniel, the Angell telleth, chap XI. that in the firſt
yeere of Darius the Mede, chap. 5. hee was a ſtrength and
might to him: Iacob had a campe of Angells: which ſtory Dauid
turneth to all faithfull. One paid Sanacharib: one ſtrengthneth
our Lord: One ſaued Peter, Act. 12. So heere the liuely
ſpeach of the Angell, is an open token of aſſiſtance from the
Angells of Chriſt: as they be all ministring ſpirites ſent foorth to
ſeruice, for them that ſhall inherite ſaluation. Angells rule fire: as
that which brent Sodom, Gen. 19. and Babel in Xenophon compared
with Dan. XI. And water in S. Pauls voiage. So all anger
from God is fire: and Angells, his ſeruants.
               
               
                  The ſure euent.
                  So the Angell did caſt his ſharpe ſickle into the earth; and ſnapt
off the Vine of the earth, and caſt it into the great winepreſſe
of the anger of God, and the wine-preſſe was troden
out of the Citie: and the blood came forth from the wine-preſſe
vnto the horſe bridles ouer ſtadia, (furlongs) a
thouſand ſix hundred.
                  The Citie is the aſſembly of the holy, the place out of it
is the dwelling of the faithleſſe: The ſtadia or furlongs 1600.
are taken from the quantitie of Chanaan: which Talmudiques
calling to a ſquare: make Ris, that is Stadion; euery way. The
place I haue cited in my Concent: where I abridge the Apocalyps.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               A plaine expoſition of the Womans fleeing
into the wilderneſſe.
               And I ſaw, another great and maruelous ſigne; ſeauen Angells
hauing ſeauen the laſt plagues; for in them the wrath
of God is finiſhed.
               Chap. 6. expoundeth this: and how when the Church
hath a ſeate in the wilderneſſe, and their Citie there: they
make the wine-preſſe of Gods anger out of the Citie.
               And I ſaw, as it were a ſea of glaſſe, mixed with fire, and them
which ouercome, from the beaſt, and from his image, and
from his marke, and the number of his name, ſtanding by
the ſea of glaſſe, hauing the harpes of God, and they ſing
the ſong of Moyſes the ſeruant of God, and the ſong of the
Lambe, ſaying: great and wonderfull are thy workes, O ETERNAL,
the God of Hoſtes, iuſt and vpright are thy
wages: O King of ſaints: who would not feare thee, O Lord,
and giue glory vnto thy name, for thou only art gratious,
for all nations, ſhall come, and worſhip before thee, for thy
iudgements are manifeſted.
               Sea,Rome cō
                     pared to Aegypt: the old Iſrael with the Spirituall. ſignifieth troubles, as Dan. 7. glaſſe clearly conſidered
of God: the alluſion, is to the Red ſea: at which Iſrael was
perſequuted by Pharaoh: The addition by fire is an open
diſtinction, for the Popes ſea of fire and faggott: the ſong of
Moyſes Exod. 15. is a thankeſgiuening for deliuerance from

Pharaoh by the blood of the Lambe: and the ſonge of the
Lambe conteyneth all the ſonges in the Bible.This ſong is more fully deſcribed, chap. 19. But moſt directly
they of his incarnation, and ſoules paſſage from the body
to heauen, and reſurrection, and ſitting on the right hand of
God. The workes of God be great and wonderfull: that the
wicked whom he hath ſett vnto wrath, beare ſway heere for
a tyme: but ſoone come to aeternall flames. And they who in
ſhort affliction profeſſe his name cary away an aeternall peiſe
of glory:2. Cor. 4. wicked Babel worſhipping creatures had a great
reigne: that Gods ſeruants might teach there the trueth of
ſaluation. That which Ierem. ſpeaketh chap. X. of our Gods
prayſe againſt idolls is heere repeated. That Egypt and Babel
teach the Pope what to look for. Thus the holy proteſt their
honor to God, and labor to increaſe the Church, that all nations
may come and worſhip him.
               And afterwardes I ſaw, and behold the Temple of the Tabernacle
of Couenant was opened in the heauen: and the ſeauen
Angells came forth (hauing the ſeauen plagues) from the
Temple: and they were clothed with cleane and pure
linen: and girded about the breast with golden girdles.
               As Angells help Gods ſeruants to victories, ſo proper
Angells conſidered with men, whom they ſtrengthen may
heere be meant. Their clothing ſignifie ſyncere holineſſe:
which men ſhould deſire: and the golden girdle about the
breſt, ſignifieth the binding of the minde, in golden ſyncerity
of heart. Maymo. in Beth Bechira handling Aharons garment:
citeth traditions from them that ſaw the high ſacrificers
manner, that Aharon was girded about the breſt,
that ſheweth Iohn to ſpeake moſt learnedly, chapter 1. and

heere, 15. and wiſer then any, who would forge a booke,
could doe.
               And one of the foure liue-wights, gaue to the ſeauen Angells,
ſeauen golden cupps, full of the anger of God, who liueth for
euer and euer.
               The liuely wight is heere as orator of the whole Church:
and after the acknowledging of Gods goodneſſe: by Gods
charge the Angells take in hand to poure Gods wrath vpon
his enimies: viſibly, by men: but vnſeene: as the armie that
guarded Eliſaeus. So, as I told, the puniſhment of Nabuchadnezar,
Daniel chap. 4. commeth by the decree of the watchfull,
and the petition of the holy. What the Angells deſire in
reuenge for the Church: God appointeth them to help forward
in aſſiſting men that be the fighters. So millions of millions
waite vpon Gods throne: to rule the foure beaſts: that
the houſe of Zorobabell afflicted ſhould know, that the heauens
ruled: and tyrants ſhould ſoone be tamed by them. The
Pope ſhould from Dan. 7. learne this, and from Apo. chap. 6.
where the profane Caeſares be deſtroyed: and know that after
long angring of God, hee muſt haue full payment. Mortall
Princes ſoone fade as a floure. But God is euerlaſting

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   Daniel 7. 9. and liuing for euer, Dan, cha. 12.
and Apoc. X. and XV. who becauſe men did not receiue the
loue of the trueth, to be ſaued, ſendeth workfull error: that
they belieue falſhood, that all may be condemned, which
belieue not the trueth, but delite in badneſſe. This Booke
was penned in ſuch a ſtyle, that it openeth not onely it
ſelfe, but alſo teacheth how all the old Teſtament, belongeth
to Chriſt.
               
                  
And the Temple was filled with a ſmoke of the glory of God:
and of his power: and none could goe into the Temple, till the
ſeauen plagues of the 7. Angells were finiſhed.
               When the Tabernacle of Moyſes, and the Temple of Salomon
were conſecrated, then Moyſes and the Leuites could not goe
in while the glory of God filled them. Here a cloud of Gods
anger filled with defenſe the Church in the wilderneſſe:
that God will not giue the wicked grace to ioyne with them,
vntill they be cōſumed: the ſturdy wicked who fight againſt
open light, and be of the 666. ſonnes of Adoni-kam: which
had rather haue 666. talents of Cethem from Ophir, then all
the knowledge of Iohns Reuelation: ſuch that ſtriue againſt
the light, ſhall neither be forgiuen in this world, nor in the
world to come: but heere haue a conſcience ſtinged as by
ſcorpions, and in the world of ſoules, death aeternall.
            
            
               CHAPTER XVI.
               As the Popes manner of riſing plagued the World, in a
like manner God conſumeth him.
               As the Popes
ariſinge, plagued
the
world, vnder
Angells
Trumpets:
as

                     1. The earth.
                     2. The Sea.
                     3. Fountaines of waters.
                     4. The Sun.
                     5. By kingdom of Locuſts
                     6. By raiſing vp the Turk
                     7. By earthquake.
                  
               
               So to him
plagues
come vnder
the ſame
terms:
but in another
ſignification,
as
                     1. His earth hath boyles.
                     2. Sea, blood.
                     3. Fountains blood.
                     4. Susnn parching perſecution.
                     5. By darkned throne, of ſpoile.
                     6. By Euphrates, by Turke.
                     7. By whole, earthquake.
                  
               
               And I heard a great voice from the Temple, ſaying: goe, & poure
out the cupps of the anger of God into the earth.
               
                  
In the heauen Chriſt is the Temple: and the Church
by him. By his commandement; and the Churches care,
the Popes world is plagued: ſpirits, being Gods meſſengers
inuiſiblie; men viſiblie.
               And the first went, and poured his cup into the earth, and there
came boiles ſore and painefull, vpon ſuch as hath the marke
of the beast, and worſhipped his image.
               The plague of Egypt vnder Iannes and Iambres reſiſting
Moyſes, is now vpon the minds of Papiſts: which reſiſt Law
and Goſpell: the diſcouery of which Idolatry becommeth a
ſound meanes for Kings, (that made the beaſt a King of Locuſts)
to eate vp the fleſh of the beaſt. The Weſt Kings made
the Pope mighty, to ouerthrow the Eaſt: weakned ſo, that
Machmad and Turcke ouerhtrew it. And euer ſince the Pope
came to be mighty, he became auctor of haile and troubles:
and brought haile and fire of warre to be mixed with blood.
So now he looſeth many Countreies, vpon Martyrs, telling
that he held Satans throne: and vpon diligent ſcholes detecting
him in euery part: & bringing the Apocalyps to be dayly
read, and all the eloquent N. Teſtament in Greeke founteine
of heauenly water, to baptiſe the minde by the ſpirit into the
kingdome of heauen.
               And the ſecond Angell poured his cuppe on the ſea: and it became
blood, as of the dead: & euery liuing ſoule dyed in the
ſea.
               When the poore father of Rome, forging. S. Peters being
there, became by Saint Peters name, of low and poore, an

high mountaine: he became fiery: and caſt himſelfe into the
ſea of Empires: that by all his warres: a third part of the liuing
in one age, were kill'd and deſtroyed. Till a thouſand
yeeres, hee became not a full mountaine; till then Satan was
tyed: but in Ieruſalems warre, he was looſe; that 200. y. warres,
turned the third part of politicall ſea and ſhipps into blood
and deſtruction: And what warrs haue bene ſince in Europe,
which the Pope hath not kindled? So he payeth for it: ſo hee
looſeth whole countreies, as Netherland, with the blood of
40. yeeres warres: and waſt of the Spaniſh nation. That ſcant
a third part eſcaped death: in them that could warre: for his
killing of K. Philips ſonne bent to heale the boyles of his religious.
This did they, dead in blindneſſe: and known to be
ſuch.
               And a third Angell poured his Cup into the riuers and fountaines
of waters: and blood came of it.
               Heere leſſer waters, are leſſe forces: that continually he
hath bad ſucceſſe: and great loſſe. The yeare 1588. gaue him
an open token of wrath in this ſort: and Flanders 1600. And
if he had gone forward; Venice had taught the ſame: and Iuliaque
will 1610. if he goe forward: dayly litle riuers of 700.
600. and 400. as they would meete are cut off. When he corrupted
the Riuers and Fountaines of Scriptures,Ion. 3. the waters
from which he that is not borne, cannot enter into the kingdome of
heauen:
                  1 Cor. 15. 29. he made a third part dead in ſinne. Since the Goſpell is
preached to the dead,
                  Rom. 6. 2. they that knowe themſelues dead in the
fleſh, but liue to God in Spirite, pay the worme-wood-ſtarre,
for bittering the waters of life:Coll. 3. 3. and wreſting all that is ſpoken
of the true Church, into protection for his Synagogue
of Satan. And all together, bee one Angell that poure their

cupps into the fountaines to make them blood: and to ſhew
that they puniſh the dead in ſinne.
               And I heard the Angell of the waters ſay: luſt art thou O Lord,
who is, and who was, and the gratious, in iudging thus:
becauſe they ſhed the blood of the holy and Prophets: and
thou haſt giuen them blood to drink. For they are worthy.
               The ſtate that plagueth the Pope proſperouſly, acknowledgeth
that the ſucceſſe commeth from God, the vnchangeable;
who is, as he was: and alwaies gracious. Pharaoh by
waters deſtroyed Iſraels children: innocent blood. His waters
alſo God turned to blood: and againe, to oppreſſe his
blood and his armies. So becauſe the Diueliſh (popiſh) Pope
ſhed the blood of the holy & Preachers: God gaue thē blood
to drinke.A myracle. How died Popes? full many by poyſon: ſince the
Monke poyſoned the Emperor, by tranſubſtantiating bread into
poyſon. Poyſon hath bene ſtill practiſed ſtill in Rome: Queene
Mary, the bloody, ſped ill. And the bloody French dyed
in bleeding: God as hee was, ſo he is, and will be alwayes iuſt.
               And I heard an other from the Altar, ſaying: euen ſo, O Lord
the God of Hoſtes, vpright and iuſt are thy Iudgements.
               For confirmation of this matter, it is repeated, from the
auctority of Chriſt the Altar, by wordes often vſed in Scripture.
               And the fourth Angell poured his Cup, on the Sunne, and it
was giuen him to burne men in the fire. And men were
brent with a great burning.
               
                  
When the fourth Trumpet ſounded, the third part of the
Sunne was darkened. There brightneſſe of knowledge in
the Church was meaned. Heere perſecution, as Mat. 13. In
England this fell out. Queene Mary perſecuted. Prieſt
borne in the Realme finde the ſame, and Papiſts: meaſure
for meaſure▪ and yet they being ſcholars, cannot ſee the iuſt
iudgement of God, as followeth.
               And they blaſphemed the name of GOD, which had
authoritie ouer theſe plagues, and repented not to giue him
glorie.
               The Law in England had perfect iuſtice of God. The
Prince is ſupreame Biſhop, and defendor of the Faith. Hee
giueth all leaue to read the holy Hebrew and Greeke text, to expound
the Hebrew by the Apoſtles Greeke, and the tongue
of the New by Greekes, the Diuinitie by plaine reaſon. And
all muſt confeſſe that Gods worke is perfect: and the man
which will adde, ſheweth himſelfe in the Temple of God, as if hee
were God: extolling himſelfe aboue all Religion. Now the
Prieſts preach the Pope King of England, as Irus was King of
Lydia. Irus had as good a right to Ithaca with Croeſus land, as
the Pope to any Chimney-ſmoake in England for a Peter-penny.
They turne Subiects to refuſe the Bible, the Church,
obedience to the King: and Papiſts haue endeauoured by
Powder, to deſtroy the King, and his Houſe, and the Gentry
of Parliament: a treaſon ſo barbarous, inhumane, diueliſh,
Popiſh: this ſheweth that the Pope hath the ſpirit of the former
Beaſt: reuiued in all cruelty, and deceit, and all this fight
is openly againſt God, for Satans throne. Campian and other

the Popes Martyrs, making the wicked Apocrypha part of
the holy Bible, and deſtroying faith and policy, ſhould not
haue blaſphemed God, but haue repented, and giuen God
glory for iuſtice. Biſhop Tonſtall vnder Queene Mary, fauoured
the Goſpell in London and Dureſmē: and although D.
Bancroft let Prieſt Watſon print Popery in his houſe, and receiued
foure Prieſts from Rome, yet he repented, and ſent the
Prieſt to Tiburne, and is become a M. R. F. Better ſhould
all Papiſtes come to God the ſhade.
               And the fift Angell poured his Cup on the throne of the Beast,
and his kingdome became darkened: and they did bite
their tongues for paine, and they blaſphemed the God of
Heauen for their panges, and boyles, but repented not of
their workes.
               The fift Angels Trumpet could not ſtay the Starre of
Rome from ſeeking Supremacy and badneſſe, but by increaſe
of Locuſts he would be a King, or a Beaſt comming out of the
Earth: and with his keyes of the kingdome of darkeneſſe he
could bring a ſmoake of hereſies, that darkened all Sunne
and ayre. Machmad after, Lucian the dogge ſay well for the
whetſtone, but both thoſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   are nothing to his ſpirits.
As they haue both their portion in the lake, burning with
fire and brimſtone, & Lucian was not forgiuen in this world;
ſo the Popes ſtates ſhall haue his throne darkened openly in
this world, by valiant and holy people: ſtrengthened by Angels.
Darkneſſe, is vſuall for a diſtreſſed ſtate in Iob, and Dauid,
and Iſai. Albion with Denmarke, is wholy gone from
him: halfe Zuitzerland, Netherland, Germany. And the poore

ſchole of Geneua ſaid wel to him: though it agreeth with him,
to ſlander the pure Text of Scripture. Where Beza doth ſay:
Deus non agit in malis, he calleth backe thoſe errors of his and
Calvines, whereby they ſeemed to make God auctor of ſin.
The Senates religion, as they gaue mee leaue to expreſſe it, I
dare defend, againſt Turke, and Iew, and Pope; while my hand
can guide the warbling pen. And where Bodinus ſaith, that
Calvin ſhould ſay of the Apocalyps: Miror quid tam obſcurus
ſcriptor velit; it is not credible: that one of his iudgement,
to ſhake off all the Popes traſh, would ſpeake ſo, of a booke
penned by the Father of light. And Bodinus himſelfe, ſhould
haue told the prayſe of God, for the light of ſaluation, by this
booke. God told him, that they were happy that read and
marke the things written heere, chap. 1. As Daniel calleth to
him all ſtories heathen for 600. yer. ſo Iohn for 1600. And as
Daniel telleth the ſame things ſeauen tymes ouer to infinite
delite. So doth Iohn, repeate, & as pleaſantly. The Popes Diuines
ſeeing his throne fall, and decay, they chew their tongues,
in ſpeach not fitted to matter. But ſnapping at ſyllables
of the learned: and aeſchrologia godleſſe from vncleane ſpirits:
and in all this they cannot repent them of fighting againſt all
plaine truth. When fight is for popery by the Goſpell, the
Goſpell ſhould be anſwered: and not diſcourſes made to
Zwinglius, Luther, P. Martyr, Bucer, Caluin, Beza; Many
others match the beſt of them: and learning would try the
Law by Ebrew, the Greek Teſtament by Greeks and Iewes:
and ſo the waters would runne cleere: which now the ſtarrworme-wood
maketh bitter.
               And the ſixt Angell poured his cup vpon the great riuer Euphrates:
to praepare a way for the Kings from the ſun riſing.
               
                  
The ſame matter of Machmad and Turke ariſing from
Euphrates and vexing the Weſt, was vnder the ſixt Angells
Trompet. Geball All Tarik is a memorie, how Machmadistes,
vexed thence Spaine and Italie. But rather for a ſcourge
then to hold long poſſeſſion; of old, Euphrates ſtayed Parthians
from the Empire. But for Popes Idolatry euen Germanie
is troubled by Hagarenes: that Virgill might well ſay of
both, for Rome:
               Hinc mouet Euphrates illinc Germania bellum.
               
                  On this ſide, Euphrates (begins to iarre)
                  On that ſide, Germany doth menace warre.
               
               And for Ciuil warres, I may continue the verſes following,
in the Poet; for the words following in Iohn.
               
                  Vicinae ruptis inter ſe legibus vrbes,
                  Arma ferunt: ſaeuit toto Mars impius orbe.
               
               
                  The neighbour Cities hauing broke their lawes,
                  Each againſt other vp in Armes ariſe:
                  And wicked Mars through all coaſts of the world.
                  Acts (mercileſſe, moſt cruell) Tragedies.
               
               And I ſaw that from the mouth of the Dragon, and from
the mouth of the beaſt, and from the mouth of the falſe
Prophet, three vncleane ſpirits like vnto froggs (for
they be ſpirits of Diuels working ſignes) goe foorth vn
to the Kings of the earth, to gather them into battel of the
great day of the God of hoſtes. Behold I come as a thiefe.

Bleſſed is he that watcheth, and keepeth his garments, that hee
walke not naked, that men ſee not his ſhame. And hee gathered
them into a place called in Ebrew Armageddon.
               The Dracon is the company of the ſpirits that fell of old:
the beaſt, the ſtarre that fell from heauen, chap, 8. 9. and 11. 13.
Prophecie is to teach the Goſpell, chap. 11. So falſe prophet is
the troupe of falſe teachers: three, is exceeding many: as cha.
xi. two make many thouſandes, for Zach. chap. 4. Their ſpirites
bee vncleane for doctrine of Diuells, from the froggie
puddles of ſlimie doctrine: truth reſteth in this. HE ſhall bruſe
the old ſerpents head, Rom. 16. God 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  ſhall tread Satan
vnder your feete: God in CHRIST deſtroyeth the workes of the Deuill:
and the verie Zohar vpon Gen. 3. ſaith, HV. HE, is the
holy and bleſſed Eternall. But the old ſerpent deceiueth the
Woman, that ſitteth on Rome beaſt, to ſay, that SHEE ſhall
bruſe the head of the ſerpent: ſo their Latin goeth, ſo their tranſlations,
ſo their checking of the Hebrew text: Thriſe hauing
the maſculine gendre: ſo againſt all Hebrewes and Greekes:
ſo againſt all prophets and Goſpell: and Gods creation that
the woman ſhould doe more then the man. So to make
this idle: that God ſhould be in Christ, reconciling the World vnto
himſelfe: if a woman could doe more then man, and
God in man. Their writings are ſo plentifull vpon this
poinct, that they can deny nothing: and ſo they croſſe all
the Bible, which is but a commentarie vpon this place: and
all popery is a fight with this place, and Satan conquering
them for this maine caſtell, hath conquered them for all
the Bible. That they haue againſt all religion Satans ſpirit,
Popes ſpirit: and his Academies, ſeruing the Pope. Theſe
be the three vncleane ſpirits, going againſt all holineſſe of

the Bible: moſt euidently in deifying Creatures, and their
made ſainctes; and Bread with Wine, which they would
make better then all the world. A ſeale of moſt high matters,
is moſt highly to bee eſtiemed: But none without
athean madneſſe will ſay, the ſeale is the King: the Kings
auctority it ſhould haue, to bee as himſelfe: as Tully ſaith
to his brother. But none of witt would make it the King
him ſelfe.
               All their doctrine is ſuch, that their Temples, Maſſe, and
dayly profeſſion in all things is from the vncleane ſpirite;
ſo that no man conuerſant in the Bible, can abide their
Diuinitie.
               For Liberall artes, Law and Phiſique, they hold the
principles of nations: They ſhould as well for the Bible:
and the Thalmudiques agreed with Saint Paul, but for the
incarnation and reſurrection. And in that the Pope granteth
the ſtorie. But in all his proper differeth from all men, therefore
hee muſt haue a ſpirite from the vncleane Diuels.
The threatning of comming as a thiefe in the night, is from
Obadiah, telling of Idumeans deſtruction ſuddenly: who
beeing of Izhaks houſe, yet were cloſe enimies to the truth.
The commandement of watching was vſed, Math. chap. 24.
And the apparell of the minde teacheth from care to our
bodie, what care we ſhould haue to apparell our ſoule:
That faith regenerating trimme it. The alluſion to Armageddon,
where Barake of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   fought the combats
of GOD, that Mageddon was a mountaine of men cut in
pieces: that Iabin King of Chanaan was fully broken there;
this ſheweth extreeme breaking of the enimie. And when
the world was not worthy of good Ioſias, GOD would
plague Iuda at Mageddon.
               
               
                  
So the name of it is fit to expreſſe a full ouerthrow, by God
from heauen: Barak and the People did litle, but God from
heauen: by the ſtarres, Auctors of weather fought from the
ſtorehouſe of haile, and raine: that his mighty hand was Auctor
of victorie. The next Cupp expoundeth that plainely,
alluding further to the victorie of Ioſuah: where haile ſlew
more then the men did.
               And the ſeauenth Angell poured out his Cup on the aire, and
there came forth a great voice from heauen, ſaying: it is
done: and there came a great voice from the Temple in heauen
from the throne, ſaying, it is done; and there were voyces,
and thunders, and lightnings, and a great earthquake:
ſuch as had not bene ſince men were vpon the earth: ſo
huge an earthquake, ſo great.
               Haile and fire mixed with blood, were Pharaohs open
puniſhments; and thunderings: and at the Law giuing, was
thunder, lightnings; and heauy cloude. The Pope to come
by ſupremacy, weakning Greece by all meanes: and begging
landes: and hauing Princes helpe to further his forgery of
Constantinus donation, made ſuch warres and troubles, that
by Scripture phraſe, haile and fire was mixed with blood.
Then Princes thought, the Turke, getting Grecia, ſhould neuer
plague them: But now, that they ſee him the cauſe of the
Turks greatneſſe; and by Idolatry (as Apoc. 9. told) the cauſe
of that ſucceſſe, and whole hinderance to ſaluation: they requit
him with taking from him, what they gaue him. He obſcured
ſun and ayer: all kind of learning: Ebrew, Greeke, Latin,
hee aboliſhed: hiſtories hee obſcured: that none of his applied
well, Greeks to Daniel, the bridge to both Teſtaments:

Rhetorique tropes, which Sacraments require: hee turnes to
propriety: as in, This is my body: and, This is my blood: wherein
all Couenants the ſigne, hath the name of the thing ſignified;
Logique he turneth to ſophiſtry: To patch an whole art
and policie ouer mighty kingdomes by ſophiſtry, moſt ridiculouſly
when it is examined. Not he, but martyrs made the
Goſpell knowen: which ſtirreth Princes againſt him: that as
to ouertrow New Rome or Conſtantina, they gaue their authoritie
to old Rome, and atchieued their counſell, but to their
owne great miſchiefe: ſo Princes ſeeing that the former age
by the Pope, brought in the Turke to the hazard of the Weſt:
and ſee that he knoweth not one letter, in the LAW: and is
blinde in euery part of it: and cannot make his owne cauſe
good, againſt the Turke or Iew; they forſake him: the ſeruant
of ſeruants: as God left the Chananites to bee conquered of
Dauid: So he is Chanaan: they be Dauid: and in his warre, he
ſhall be Iabin: and by Siſera, fall at Mageddon: and bee no
more able to reſiſt.
               And the great Citie became into three partes: and the Cities of
the nations fell: and Babylon the Great, was remembred
before God, to giue her the Cup of the Wine of the
heate of his anger: and euery Iland fled: and the mountaines
were not found: and great haile, talent bigge, deſcended
from heauen vpon the men: and men blaſphemed
God for the ſtroke of the haile, becauſe the ſtroke of
it was exceeding great.
               By the Citie, meane the policie: and by three partes,
great diuiſion: that it hath but a third part: becauſe the policies
of nations fall from it: and God remembred his anger

told, chap. 14. and as vnder the Caeſares: Ilands and Mountaines
were moued from their place, that is, into another policy:
ſo heere, alteration of policie is meant; haile of a talent,
is great ouerthrowes, by Gods hand: the alluſion being taken
from plaguing the Chanaanites, Ioſ. chapter 10. where
haile killed more then ſword: So the Spaniſh fleete hath often
had great ſhipwrake, by the extraordinarie hand of GOD,
ſpecially 1588. And, what an infinite maſſe of money; and
millions of men hath Netherland conſumed to him? And
lately, Venice ſhewed his weakneſſe, that he durſt not goe
forward to warre, and ſpecially Iuliaque: where Leopoldu
                        •
                     ,
Emperour, Spanie, Pope, wiſh they had neuer begon. Touching
the quantity of haile, in countreies neere the Alpes, wee
ſee this ſpeach to keepe neere propriety: without a great
hyperbole. At Zurick my learned friend M. Caſpar Weſſerus,
told me of haile lately there: that one ſtone was brought
from a field ſomewhat farre off to the Conſull, and muſt
melt in cariage: yet beeing weighed, it peiſed a wax
pound.
               
                  Chanaan and Egypt haue greater haile, that trees and
beaſts be ſtricken to deſtruction by it. And in all this the Papiſts
repent not: but thinke God to fauor the wicked ſide,
and ſo blaſpheme, and keepe their old Idolatrie, and locuſts
of all profeſſions, as before. It is hard for men to repent,
which will not learne from the word of God, how their caſe
ſtandeth. Their falſe ground that Peter was the chiefe Apoſtle,
and at Rome, and the Rocke, and that hee had auctoritie, to
binde and looſe, more then others; and could leaue that to
Doctores of the Citie, which crucified Chriſt, as though they
beſt deſerued that; and the fables of their miracles, as though
they were true; theſe harden them, that they cannot come

into the Church, till the anger of God conſumeth the Pharaohs,
as chap. 15. verſ. vlt. told.
            
            
               CHAPTER XVII.
               Iohn like Daniel.
               And one of the ſeauen Angels which had the ſeauen Cupp
                     •
                  
came,This Chap. is a plaine ſpeach opening all the former Viſions. and ſpake with mee, ſaying to mee, come: I will
ſhew thee the Iudgement of the great Whoore: which
ſitteth vpon many waters, with whom the Kings of the
earth committed fornication: and they which dwelt in
the earth, were drunke by the Wine of her fornication.
               THe wiſe God maketh the Cloud of his word light
to Iſrael, and darke to Pharaoh. That the wicked ſhall
not be ouer buſie with it: he ſpeaketh to them in Viſions,
that they cannot ſee whither they tend: becauſe they
know not the ground. Beſides, commorations ſeeme vnto
them new matter, and not a commentarie vpon former. So
to them that be out of the Church, all things are in parables.
But they that know the grounds ſhall ſee all eaſie. Ieremiah
taught Iſrael in the playneſt propriety of wordes that might
bee. Ezekiel ſweetneth the ſame with allegories: when both
are compared together, all is plaine. Daniel telleth how Iudah
ſhould bee afflicted: by enemies likened to the proportion
of a mans body: fiſt ſo, generally: that heathen would
not marke the perſecuted: But the Iewes knew: And if at
the firſt they had bene told of great affliction, they would
haue gone before captiuitie into Countries of Grecia.

But when they were in Babel, and neere returne: their enimies
are beaſts comming out of the ſea, and terrible: but yet
reuenged, as the image was by ſtrok from a ſtone; ſo they by
fire. But the perſecuters and perſecuted, neither be named:
In a new viſion they are expreſly named, what the Ram and
Buck meane: and the perſequutour, aboue all that ſhould
goe before him, is plainely deſcribed. And laſt of all, a proper
ſpeach, expoundeth the Image, expoundeth the ſea beaſtes,
expoundeth the Land beaſt. That no booke was euer plainer
then Daniel.Iohn like Daniel. Iohn is like him: He telleth, chapter 6. of great
plagues to a ſtate; but telleth not to what ſtate. Then he telleth
of a falling away, but telleth not by whoſe occaſion;
Then he deſcribeth the occaſioner, vnder ſeauen trumpets;
but hideth from the profane world, what policie hee would
haue marked: After this, he bringeth the old Caeſares, and
Pope with late into one ſerpent: After this he diuideth the
ſerpent into two beaſts, with reſonable plaine notes: and
ſheweth that the former beaſt cōming out of the ſea ſhould
be reuiued, by that which came vp out of the Land: Now
that reuiued beaſt, after his particular doings and ſuffrings,
is heere to bee ſeene, with the reuiuer. The Angell teacheth
Iohn in viſion, the learned men be Angeli Eccleſiae.
               
               The great whoore, is the great Idolatrous City: the many
waters, the harlot ſitteth on, be people troupes, nations, and
tongues: Kings ſociety, in Idolatry, is the fornication: the
dwellers on the earth,Phll. 1. 27. are the Idolous, whoſe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  or cariage is not in heauen.
               
               And he caried me into the wilderneſſe in the ſpirit.
               As the Church was driuen into the wilderneſſe: to haue a

policie vnmixed with Rome: ſo Iohn ſheweth, that they
muſt not be of Romes part, that will condemne her: but abſolute
free from her. In Aegypt God could not giue lawes
for Iſrael: but they muſt be ſeparated from other policies: ſo
God brought them into the wilderneſſe. And when God
would teach Iuda, that Moyſes Ceremonies were but poore
elements, and to praepare them for the reſt of Chriſt, he carieth
them into the wilderneſſe of the heathen: And when
Iohn Baptiſt praepared a way for the reſt of Chriſt, and calling
of the heathen, who in the dayes of Dauid and Salomon were
not circumciſed, but baptized: Rambam Aſure Bia. Per. 13.
So we muſt goe into a wilderneſſe, & ſimply iudge by Gods
word, not by rumors of antiquity and vniuerſality, what is to
be iudged of Rome.
               And I ſaw a woman ſitting vpon a ſcarlat beast full of names of
blaſphemy, hauing 7. heades and 10. hornes.
               So Satan, being incarnate in the Empire of Rome, had
ſeauen heades and tenne hornes: and vpon his head ſeauen
Crownes: becauſe ſo many ſtates of Rome afflicted Gods
people. In chap. 13. Tenne hornes, had tenne Crownes: to
ſhew that ſo many kingdoms, not ſeuerall kings, as in Daniel
for Aegypt and Syria belonged to the Empire.
               And the woman was clothed in Purple and Scarlat, and golden
in Gold, and pretious ſtones, & pearles: hauing a golden Cup
in her hand: full of abominations, and vncleanneſſe of her
fornication, and vpon her forehead, a name written, A
MYSTERIE: Babylon the great, the mother of fornications,
and the abominations of the earth.
               
                  
Red color, is vſuall for blood: and Lycurgus or Dracoes
lawes: and moſt fit for Romulus towne, where hee embrued
his handes in the blood of his brother: but moſt of all for
the Popes perſequution. The gold reuiueth Babel, and the
very phraſe is taken from it, Iſai. 14. And the ſtory is in Dan.
3. where the King made an Image of gold; ſixtie cubites high,
ſix cubites broad. So they amazed, fooliſh, with the coſt of
the matter: but of Chriſt we are to buy the true gold, Apo. 3.
and 21. The golden rules of Faith and Trueth: and not to
eſteeme of a crucifix of gold: to crucifie Chriſt againe for the
matter. So the picture of Mary, is in diuers places trimmed
with chaines of gold, and pretious ſtones: and their Copes
wickedly following Aharon, bee of cloth of gold. So the 3.
Kings of Colone, that returned from Ieruſalem to their countrey:
and were but Perſian ſages, and no Kinges, nor any
Perſian that would be called Baltaſar; they are ſaid to be trimmed
at ſolemne times, with chaines of great Iewels: I would
not ſee it, becauſe I would not goe bare-head into their
Temple.
               A golden Cup had Babel, to make nations drunke with
Idols: making Gods of their Starres: and was ful of lothſome
things,Rome paſſeth al the enemies of the Church in cruelty and Idolatrie. and vncleane fornications: So is Rome manifeſtlie; Colon,
and Spaine: as if Babylon, a myſtery; were written in the
forehead. As the learning of Daniel could doe no good to
Babel, but ſtill it would keepe the old Gods; till Cyrus tooke
their kingdome: ſo Rome is ſo deepe in Idolatrie, that no
learning will make men leaue their places: Pharaoh. & Nebuchadnezar,
were neuer ſo hardened. And theſe paſſe all that
euer were,So Antio. tooke away Moſes Law. for crueltie in perſecution. The profane Caeſares
did not ſo ſtrictly hinder all vſe of religion. They hindred
not the reading of Gods word, as the Pope doth, though

they feared, leſt the Kingdome of Chriſt ſhould be a bridle
to them Romes cruelty told, chap. 11. & 12. & 13. & 14. & 15.
is now plainely handled.
               And I ſaw the woman dronk with the blood of the ſaincts: and
with the blood of the martyrs of IESVS. And when I ſaw
her, I marueiled; with great marueile.
               Heere the blinde may ſee, that ſince the Empire was reuiued
in the Weſt, the perſecutions of them, who ſay, Chriſt
freely iuſtifieth, and only heareth prayer, and will haue the Idole
of him ſelfe (as Plato ſpeaketh of vertue) to bee fetched
from his word, were bloody againſt the Saintes and Martyrs
of Ieſus. When the Pope contemneth a thouſand times better
learned then himſelfe: how can hee looke to eſcape the
wrath of God? Iohn marueiled to ſee a womā dronke with
blood, therefore the Angel calleth him to conſider the chapters
afore, as eſpecially the thirteenth chapter.
               And the Angell ſaid to mee: why doeſt thou marueile? I will tell
thee the Myſterie of the woman, & of the beaſt which beareth
her: which hath ſeauen heades and tenne hornes.
               A more perticular deſcription foloweth then was cha. 13.
But any may ſee this to be a commentarie vpon that place:
as God is a perfect expounder of his owne worde.
               The beaſt which thou ſawest, was, and is not: and hee ſhall aſcend
out of the Pit.
               The Empire was, and againe is made dead: by the remouing
to Bizantium, and it ſhall aſcend out of the Pit, chapt. 9.
when the locuſt and their king come out of the pit.
               
                  
And ſhall go to deſtruction.
               This ſpeach is part of Balaams for Italy, Num. 24. which
ſhould afflict Heber; that is, the faithfull, and hold on to deſtruction.
The ſame he ſpake of Amalek: that he ſhould go on
to deſtruction: that was neere a thouſand yeares after Balaam
ſpake: that was Amalek was deſtroyed by Iſrael. As a thouſand
yeeres, are but as one day with God: ſo Satan was tyed
1000. yea. before the king of Locuſts had the winges of horſes
and chariots to vexe the Church, the true Ieruſalem; for
the Low to the ruyne of the Weſt.
               And they who dwell on the earth will marueile, (whoſe names
are not written in the booke of life, from the beginning
of the world) when they behold the beaſt that was, and is
not, and yet is. Heere is a meaning that hath wiſdome.
               The naturall man obſerueth not that when countreyes
fall, they riſe no more; Aegypt, Aram, Aſſur, Paras, Graecia: that
none would thinke Rome beeing once deſtroyed, ſhould raiſe
againe. But the taught of God, ſee a plaine reaſon. That the
Weſt in the end ſhould afflict, firſt by ſtrength; and next by
ſubtiltie in religion: that Chriſt his ſeruants ſhould be tried,
both for body and minde: and he pay the City that crucified
him: both with horſe, as chap. 6. and by the ſpirit of his
mouth: and diligent ſearching of the Prophets. So for eaſier
memory of ſtory, Chriſt would haue Rome, that crucified
the king of glory, once to bee plagued through their Emperors,
and the Empire to be taken away, and the Citie to bee
deſtroyed: as by Gothes: and by Lybians, by Giezerichus, a new
Annibal. And then an enemie to God in all trueth, to ſhewe

himſelfe in the Temple of God, as if he were God: to be conſumed
by ſtudy about the Bible: by the word and ſword that commeth
from CHRIST his mouth: So the beaſt was, & againe is
not, and yet is: God ſpeaketh in the praeſent tempus for things
to come, becauſe all things with him are praeſent. This is a
meaning that hath wiſedome; as Iobs caſe, and Daniels Image.
Therefore wee ſhould flee to God to be the expounder:
who openeth what is in darkneſſe: and with whom light
doth dwell.
               The ſeauen heades are ſeauen mountaines, vpon which the woman
ſitteth: alſo they be ſeauen Kings: fiue are fallen, and the principall
is: the other is not yet come: and when he is come, he
must tary but a litle while.
               The Iewes felt Pompei heauy: that made Iuda prouince to 
                  Rome. M. Craſſus was heauy: that ſpoyled the temple of much 
gold. Iulius Caeſar was alſo heany, who ſtrengthned Cleopatra,
                  
ouer Iudea long loſt, to ſet vp Herod at the laſt. Brutus and 
                  Caſsius were alſo heauy, with their army. Antonius who 
married Cleopatra,
                  The ſeauē heades afflicting. (and holpe in Capitolio, Herod to be King)
was alſo heauy: all theſe came to deſtruction: for medling
with Gods people: and all their ſtate by Ciuill warres: So
fiue Kings are fallen: and the principall, is Auguſtus: and the 
other is not yet come: the Empire reuiued: But at 1000. yer.
will the Pope be ſitting vpon the Empire: by litle and litle.
And England at 1200. yer. would not grant him ſupremacy:
Sigibert. And good father WICKLIFE, now 200. yeares
ago preached, that if the commune lawes of England might ſtand:
the Pope ſhould haue no ſtroke in England.
                  Walſingham. And good Lady
Margareth, a pearle for a woman, the mother to K. Henry

the ſeauenth, when ſhe built Chriſts Colledge & S. Iohns,
in both which I was fellow: and owe them this dutie: ſhe in
thoſe dayes made lawes to aduance knowledge: to ruinate
the Pope. And the valiant Henry VIII. truſt him out, from
being head or taile in our Church: ſo the Empire, ridden by
the Pope, ſtood but a litle while, in ſundrie places. And all
the while of the ariſing, the Grecians; as, Chryſoſtome, Andreas,
Oecumenius, taught that the Romane Empire would be reuiued:
though in Greek ſtories, Syſimus and the eccleſiaſticall,
Alaricus & Giezerichus wrought much harme: and there Antichrist
ſhould reigne: And if the Greeke old Doctores had
bene well known: the Pope had neuer gotten peny by his
Maſſe. Areopagita taketh the worde in the Law ſenſe, the token
of the body: ſo Euſebius, the Image and Symbolon: and ſo
elder Origene; and later Nazianzene: Antitypes and later Theodorit
in a full diſputation: and Macarius the Greeke Monke,
calleth it Symbolum: and full many moo. Then the Pope had
no auctoritie for turning bread into the body of Chriſt: to
make him haue 1000. bodies: and to make Religion a ſtage to
Angels and men. This long warning of the Popes ariſing
was a warning to all ages: that they ſhould not ſuffer the ſtarr
falling to make bitter the waters of the Law; nor darken the
ſtarrs: and in all ages he had gaineſayers. And both, Princes
and People, who contemned the warning of this book, were
worthie to be giuen ouer to all force of error.
               And the Beast which was, and is not, the ſame is alſo the eight:
and one of the ſeauenth.
               The Pope ſhall be the eight, & chaleng place aboue all, &
follow all heathen ſuperſtitiō in name, ſtaffe, apparel of Caeſares:
and Temples: ſetting but a face of Chriſtianity vpon them.
               
                  
                  A plaine deſcription of the Popes comming vp.
                  And the tenne hornes which thou ſaweſt, are tenne Kings
which haue not yet receiued the kingdome: but receiue
auctoritie as kings one houre, with the beaſt. Theſe haue
one minde, and ſhall part their power and auctoritie, to
the Beaſt. Theſe ſhall make warre with the Lambe: and
the Lambe ſhall ouercome them for he is Lord, of Lordes,
and King of Kings: and they which are with him, are
called, and choſen, and faithfull.
                  
                     Steuchus againſt Valla reckoning the Countries, which
held of the Pope, bringeth them to ten. But we muſt know,
that ten, vſually is a great number, about ten, fewer or moo:
Theſe kingdoms vnder the firſt Caeſares were not ſo parted:
as when Iulian the Apostata kept at Paris: who neuer heard
that his Fathers brother, the great Emperor Conſtantine, gaue
the Weſt to the Pope: and if any ſuch matter had bene, it
could neuer be hid from him. But when the Pope of Rome,
by long begging for S. Peter: and ſo for Monaſteries in many
Countreies, had gotten much wealth: and ready good wills
in Rome and the Weſt, to ſet vp againe the Empire at Rome.
He picketh quarrels with the Patriarch of Conſtantinople: for
proceſsion of the holy Ghost, and Paſcha day, and ſupremacy: & ſtill
of old labored to extinguiſh the Greek tongue: and puritie
of Latin: and weakneth the Eaſt Empire, that barbarous Gothes
reigned: whom to ouerthrow, Princes gladly ioyne with
him: and he with them ſtill for great Countreyes: that in the
end they ſweare to helpe him to hold Conſtantinus donation:

and to bring the Eaſt, the Greeke, to agree with Rome. And
after 1000. yea. the king of Locuſtes hath Satans throne in
ſuch power, that his winges bee chariots and horſes to cauſe
kinges to doe what hee will. As, for Ieruſalem warrs; to ouerthrow
all their kingdomes. And in theſe tymes Satan bare
ſway, that ſcant any learned were in the Weſt. But Monaſteries
and Collegies were built to fortifie haereſie: that Greeke
was vnknowen till our age: and Ebrew to this houre, for skill
in the tongue able to hold water: and to make a tranſlation
of good warrant, to all learned iudgements. In this blindneſſe,
ſtill ſome Abates and ſuch fought well by pen: and at
the laſt by Martyrs: whom the Pope damned; and the ſecular
power put to death. But in the end, Chriſt by his martyrs
roareth like a Lion; and ſeauen thunders tell his anger: &
ſeauen Angels poure it out: and men eate the little booke of
Scripture: and preach to nations and kinges, to bethinke
them, how they did ſet vp Rome.
                  And hee ſaith to mee: The waters which thou ſaweſt, where
the Where ſitteth, are people, and folke: and nations, and
tongues.
                  The phraſe is from Babel, Ierem. 51. O thou which ſittest
vpon many waters:
                     Pſalm. 19. and from Dan. 3. Theſe phraſes teach the
ſimple how plaine Gods Law is, lightning the eyes: to call
old matters into minde: and to teach by old euents, howe other
matters will fall out. Moreouer, this open ſpeach of manie
waters, to meane people and nations, would (making
a commentarie in the margin, vpon many places of the old
Teſtament) inlighten much.
               
               
                  
                  Of the Popes fall.
                  And the tenne hornes which thou ſaweſt vpon the Beaſt, theſe
ſhall hate the Whoore: and make her deſolate and naked:
and eate her fleſh: and ſhall burne her in the fire.
                  The ſame kingdomes which cleaued to the Pope for profite
or deceipt: when they ſee all profit gone: and how he by
terror of forged purgatorie gate Princes great lands, wil alter
their minde to hate the Pope: Many millions in England, hate
his keies in Canterburies armes: as a mockage to the true keies
of knowledge: ſo they hate the title grace, in Scotland, as doth
the learned M. Meluin; others, hate Leuies Linen, Cope, Prieſt;
and Kneeling at receiuing bread, which ſhould bee receiued
with moſt holy iudgement, not in the Popes geſture: others,
hate the Leproſie of the Apocrypha books: the writers of which
ſhew no more faith in Chriſt then did Flauius Ioſephus, nor ſo
much. Others, hate the Popes forme of prayer: patched vp
for his vſe, to content the people, not to ſpend that tyme in
requiring of them opening of the Bible: And many would
haue our Biſhops caught in praemunire to looſe all. Others,
make great ſute to haue their lands. Now if in England, most
reuerend & right reuerend fathers, ſo learned as they take vpon
them to bee, bee ſo hated, for remnant of Papiſtrie; what hatred
ſhall open Popery haue, where the Pope dareth excommunicate
kinges? Thal. Ieruſal. noteth, that the King might
not be excommunicated, nor any chiefe Ruler. But be ſagely
warned, to keepe his houſe for a time, and to ſaue his honor.
But the high Sacrificer was whipped with as many ſtripes as
any other, for his faultes, Ieruſ. in Sanedrin. But our Pope will
bee excommunicating kinges, without all color of warrant

from God: & ſhew himſelfe in the temple of God as if he were God:
beeing in all policie ſinfull, and blaſpeming true teachers: ſo
he muſt needes be hated of Princes, that euery one will draw
from him all that they can: That is, to eate the fleſh of the
Idolatrous towne: and burning it in the fire.
                  For God hath giuen it vnto their heartes, to doe his minde:
and to doe one minde: and to giue their kingdom to the
beaſt, vntill the wordes of God be brought about.
                  
                     Becauſe they did not receiue the loue of the trueth, vnto right
happineſſe, to ſtudie the Lawes of God day and night; God
gaue thē ouer to a fooliſh minde to pull downe the Eaſt Empire,
and to ſet vp one in the Weſt: and to ſet the Synagogue
of Rome, aboue all: to rule all Empire and Kingdomes. And
to this day, that curſed blindneſſe abideth in men, that they
thinke it a ſhame for a King to be learned: or for Noble men.
True Kingdome, ſtandeth in knowledge of the kingdome of
heauen: and Princes of cunning education, might know
both Teſtaments in Greek and Hebrew; and veine of ſtorie,
in yong yeeres: that their hearts might a thouſand times in a
day runne ouer the heauenly frame of Gods booke: and ſee
their Anceſtors, from Adam to Noë, the pillars of the world.
Then, the noble warrierIſa. 41. 2. 3 
                     Abraham, King Moſes, King Ioſuah,
King Samuel, King David, King Salomon: and noble Daniel, the
mightieſt (ſubiect) in the world, and greateſt warrior; & beſt
learned. And his noble Couſins that quenched the fire, refuſing
Idols, ſhould haue taught nobles, to haue in equal ſort
hated Babeliſh idolatrie of curſed Rome, that crucified Chriſt,
and by the ſerpents biting pierced his footeſtepp and handes:
                     Pſalm. 22. and
would naile faſt all feete and handes, from walking in Gods
wayes: and working in his trueth. What a ſhame is it for

Kings, that they know not the familie of David, penned of
purpoſe to make kings wiſe. David & Salomō
                      both wiſe began
the glorie: Ioakim & Ioachin, both vnwiſe, ended the glorie: all
betwixt are a glaſſe for Kings to ſee their owne caſe. Againe
the pompe of this world is eminēt in Daniels Image: afflicting
the holy houſe of Nathā, but beatē to pouder for their paines:
& that madneſſe of Counſell is expreſſed in Nebuchadnezars
open madneſſe. His open madneſſe of ſeauen yeres, was not
ſo madd as the Perſians, or Alexander that made themſelues
Gods: and the parted Macedonians are a patron of ſlauery to
Satan. Heere in one Image all Greek and Latin to Liuie is cō
                     teyned:
and Kings might make their teachers, to bring ſuch
ſtately matter into commune knowledge, to make a Bridge
from the fall of Salomons houſe, vnto the ſetting vp of Nathans.
Nabuchadnezar honored Daniel to Iudahs good; For
chiefe heads of this matter: Kings further called, ſhould further
delite in this kinde. So, for the Image of the beaſt, Apoc.
13. if Kinges had bene happy, they had learned from ſtorie
what Iohn foretold: but becauſe they deſpiſed Gods exhortation
to read the Booke: God gaue it into their hearts to giue
their kingdome to the beaſt: if they would make their people
learned in this Booke: the fleſh of the harlot ſhould ſoone be
eaten. All true ſoldiers, ſhould be Doctores of Diuinity: ſuch
all will conquer with ſmall loſſe, as Iſrael vnder Ioſua, which
ſtudied Moſes 40. yer. And Dauids Capteins by knowlede of
Moſes, were mighty in battell. Doctors in bare title; the Popes,
and ours, deſerue ſo much reuerence, as ſo many apes, and all
that put any truſt in them, are like vnto them.
               
               
                  Now commeth a plaine condemnation of Rome.
                  The woman which thou ſaweſt is the great Citie, which hath the
Kingdome, ouer the Kings of the earth.
                  
                     
All be paſt ſhame, that ſee not Rome heere damned vnto
the end of wrath.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER XVIII.
               The King is Angelus to cauſe the word to be ſounded.
               After this I ſaw an Angell, comming downe from heauen:
hauing great auctority: and the earth was lightned by his
glorie: and he cried mightily with a great voice, ſaying:
BABYLON the great City is fallen, is fallen, and is become
a dwelling of Diuells, and a priſon of euery vncleane ſpirit,
and a priſon of euery vncleane and hatefull bird, becauſe
ſhe hath cauſed all nations to drinke of the wine of the anger
of her fornication, and the Kings of the earth committed
fornication with her, and the merchants of the earth
became rich by the might of her wealth, &c.
               THE like ſpeach is in Ezekiel, chap. 47. where the glorie
of the Goſpell ſhineth from Chriſt, and waters of
doctrine flow with life: And the Angels glorie lightned
the whole earth, cha. 10. taught this ſame matter:
where Iohn eateth the litle booke. And Chriſt is the Angell,
he cōmeth downe, when he ſetteth vp the light of his word,
by which hee ſhineth ouer the earth. Though in viſion ſundry
Angels expreſſe him. And when Ieruſalem is builded, Babylon
muſt needes fall: and where the mighty Goſpell is taught
of millions, there Chriſt ſpeaketh with a great voice. Anabaptistes,
be the chiefe helpe that the Papiſts haue to diſpute, that
it is dangerous for the common people to medle with Gods
word. But a learned officer, would with ſageneſſe ſoone

teach them how they miſſe burning in fire the obſtinat in
haereſie. Maymo. in the treatiſe, Chagigah. Perek III. ſheweth
how the King ſhould read the Law, before the people in the
feaſt of Tabernacles: and in what ſage reuerence. A pulpit of
wood was made for him, in the court where all might come,
men and women, and the ſynagogue keeper, brought forth
the booke of the Law, & gaue it to the Archiſynagogue: and
he to Sagan of the Temple: Strategos, Act. chap. 4. 1. Chancelor,
we may terme him: he to the high ſacrificer: and hee
to the King, and hee read Deuteronomie, and of the King he
ſaith:

                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
That is:
The King is Angelus to cauſe the word of GOD to be ſounded.
               
               If the Iew, could thus honor the Law: and ſhew the
Kings duty; which Iew ſaw not the true glorie of it by the
SON of GOD: how much more ſhould wee bring vp our
Kings to honor the holy Goſpell: to read ſpeciall places: as
the firſt of Saint Matthew of 1800. yer. ſtory: and 3. Luke of
3957. or Act. 7. or 2. Theſſ. 2. or ſome ſpeciall place: to ſtirre
nobles, a learned reading would be as good as a commentarie.
And chapters expounding one another: and Pſalmes
might ſo be choſen, that by bare reading great light would
come. So millions would ſay that Babylon the great is fallen:
and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   and Daemones be all one, and Rome is a dwelling
of Diuels: and Cardinals bee vncleane ſpirits and Archbuy-ſhopps
be vncleane and hatefull birdes, and their keies be
keies of the pit: and their Idolatry making Peter the Rock
againſt this,2. Sam▪ 22. THERE IS NO ROCK BVT THE
ETERNALL, had made the Kings of the earth madde

in Idols: from one error; that the gates of death, ſhall not praeuaile
againſt Rome: where the ſpeach meant, that terror of Romes
perſecution, ſhould not ſtay the building vpon Chriſt the
Rock.
               
                  Buy-ſhopps ſhould be knowen how wickedly the merchants
become wealthy, blinde leaders of the blinde, vnto eternall
deſtruction. Vncleane ſpirits, and hatefull birdes: if Eſay 13.
14. 21. 23. 47. and Ier. 51. & Ezek. 27. and againe Ier. 7. ſhould
bee read, comparing old traffique with the Popes ritches
and ruyne; this chapter would haue great light: which of it
ſelfe needeth not further expoſition: For the next cha. telleth
how Rome falleth,The Goſpell is the ioy of the godly. by the ioy of the godly, which in order of
tyme handleth matter, whence the ruyne of Rome cōmeth.
The terme witchcraft, beſtowed vpon the Popes doctrine, is
to be noted: They who ſay, bread after wordes ſpoken, is no
longer bread, would haue men bewitched, and ſo for the
wine. Senſe is a diuine teſtimony, and if two men ſhould witneſſe,
that others did worſhippe bread or wine: no hypocriſie
ſhould ſaue them. Chriſt gaue the Law in Moyſes, and
will not the tokens to bee worſhipped: that muſt be kept for
God onely. Where Rome killed men for the Prophets doctrine,
and holy Apoſtles: they are as gilty, as if they had killed
them: and all holy in the ſame faith. All the holy ſpake of
Chriſt, and Rome by Pilate killing him, was worthy to haue
for Popes, neither forgiueneſſe in this world, nor in the world to
come: but heere, to be openly curſed as Iſcariot, and in the
world to come, eternall flames. This kind of ſpeach troubled
great Doctors: I wil therefore digreſſe a litle; to this phraſe:
Maymoni, in treatiſe of repentance, ſaith: there is a ſin,
whereof ſentence paſſeth; that he ſhall be puniſhed in the
world to come, & no harme paſſeth ouer him in this world,

and there is a ſin: which is puniſhed in this world, and in the
world to come: as be the Iewes that betrayed Chriſt, & the
Romans that crucified him. The Iewes are plagued with
blindeneſſe and ſlauery, and Rome with horrible Idolatries,
and tyrannies, and warres, and blood.
            
            
               CHAPTER XVIIII.As old Iſratel prayſed the Eternall IAH for their deliuerāce frō Aegypt Canaars; Babel, Antiochus & all their enemies; ſo heere the holy doe, for deliuerāce frō Rome, which is called and compared with Aegypt, &c. becauſe that the cruelty & Idolatr of all the enimies the the Goſpel ſince the beginning was in Rome.
               
               I ſay Ieremy and Ezekiell compared with this ch. bring great light.
               And after this I heard a great voice of much people in heauen;
ſaying, Allelu-iah, ſaluation, and glorie, and honor, and
power, belongeth to the Lord our God: for his iudgements
are right and iust: becauſe hee hath iudged the great
whoore, which corrupted the earth by her fornication, and
reuenged the blood of his ſeruants out of her hand: And
againe they ſaid Allelu-iah: And her ſmoke aſcended
for euer and euer, &c.
               WHEN the Angell filled the earth with his glorie,
then much people prayſeth GOD, for reuenge
againſt Rome, and the 24. Biſhopps, ſage learned,
and the ſpeciall rare, the foure wightes full of eyes, and tell of
the Lambs ſupper, and his mariage with the Church: which
matter, Pſalm. 45. and Cantic. directly handleth, and all
the ſcripture runneth vpon that. Now for the terme,
Hallelu-iah. It is vſed firſt in Pſalm. 104. where the verſe
afore, wiſheth the wicked to bee deſtroyed out of the
earth. And the old Hebrewes turne that ſpeach of the
Pſalm, to haue beene the preaching in the dayes of Noë;
when the flood came: and Midras Tillin noteth, that
Allelu-iah was neuer vſed till Pſal. 104. after prayer that the

wicked ſhould be taken away, out of the earth. The auctoritie
of the book is litle, but the peiſe of the argument is much.
So in the New Teſt. Aleluiah, is neuer vſed, till ſpeach commeth
of the Popes deſtruction. The ſinfull, to haue Pyrrha
the wife of Deucalion. The fable which made Noë Deucalion,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   & his wife 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   conteined a fable which
Ouid hath.
               
                  Eſſe quoque in fatis reminiſcitur affore tempus
                  Quo mare, quo tellus, immenſa
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      regia coeli
                  Ardeat, & mundi moles operoſa labores.
               
               That is,

                     
                        Iupiter bethought him, how tyme ſhould come,
                     When Sea and Land and great Heauens pallace
                     Should burne, & the worlds workemanſhip decay.
                  
               
               As once, the world periſhed by water: ſo it ſhould by
fire. Sem and Iaphet taught that, in ſadneſſe. But their ſonnes
turned it into a fable: yet S. Pet. 2 Epi. 3. reſtoreth the matter
vnto old trueth: And as the Midras turneth in fable
Halelu-iah, to be vſed at holy preaching, in Zohar vpon Gen.
6. by the argument: and firſt, Pſal. 104. vpon the deſtruction
of the wicked: ſo heere, firſt vpon the deſtruction of the man
of ſinne, the word is vſed: And that, foure tymes.
               
                  Of the Hebrew terme.
                  God, only wiſe, contriued the world vnto Macedonian
victories, and reigne of 300. yea. from Weſt, vnto all partes:

that Greeke was made common ouer all the world, by the
tyme that the Apoſtles were to write the Goſpell: that in the
Greeke tongue, and only in the Greeke tongue, they might
write it for all nations. Yet God would haue the tongue,
which Adam ſpake and Heber kept: and that in which the
Law was penned, to be ſtill ſtudied. Therefore, the N. Teſt.
hath many, yea full many wordes, that require Ebers helpe:
and in expreſſed letters about 50. And whereas, Eſai. 19. telleth,
that in Egypt they ſhall ſpeake the tongue of Chanaan: he
meaneth, that with the Goſpell, they ſhall haue the Hebrew
tongue: and Origens Octaplun, eightfold worke, in Epiphanius
Ancorato, had Hebrew in Hebrew letters, and the ſame ſpelled
in Greeke: and ſix Greeke tranſlations: ſo here, the ſtudie of
the Hebrew Prophetes, to open the Goſpell, doth fell the
Pope: and the Pope is cloſely touched by the word, Allelu-iah;
                     Pſal. 135.
                     Praiſe God, in whom wee breath: and not Idoles which
haue no breath in their noſtrills.
               
               
                  Of the beſt way to ouerthrow the Pope.
                  The Turkes Princes moued Q. Elizabeths agent, L. Barton,
of godly memory, to the known way, by common witt,
to open the trueth; in cauſing a Rabbin to demand a proofe
of the New. Teſt. by Ebrewes. The Apoſtles proued all by
Ebrews: & ſo ſhould all expounders of them: And the Pope
vnable therin falleth, and all his Cardinales, and Archbuyſhops.
And our King tooke once a noble courſe that way: the hinderer,
ſhall abide iudgement: and that a moſt heauy: & ſhall
not haue his ſhame forgiuen in this world, nor in the world
to come. An Ebrew explication of the N. Teſt. by ſayings
granted of Iewes, would moue Iewes & Gētiles to hold one

truth. My Hebrew explicatiō of Nathans houſe, Mat. 1. & Luc.
3. from Dan. 7. fold ſhield, and the Hebrew chayning of the
Chronicle, hath moued Salem and Rome: though Nazaret
would bring the auctor to the top of a Rock. This matter is
worthie of record: that Gods vengeance may bee marked
while the world ſtandeth, how he will deale with ſo gratefull
babes. But now let vs abridge the text: People, Biſhops, rare
godly praiſe God, for calling to the Mariage: that the Church
is married to Chriſt: and clothed in white iuſtice: and Chriſt
warreth, to ouerthrow Rome.
                  Amen, Aleluiah: And a voice came from the throne, ſaying:
praiſe our God all his ſeruants, and they that feare him
both ſmall and great.
                  This ſhort ſumme of Diuinitie, diſtinguiſheth vs from
Papiſts, who make Gods of Creatures: and giue praiſe to
them where God only will be feared.
                  And I heard the voice of a great multitude: and as the voice of
many waters, & as the voice of ſtrong thunders, ſaying, Halelu-iah:
for the Lord God of hoſtes doth reigne: let vs reioyce
and be glad: and let vs giue him glory. For the mariage
of the Lambe is come: and the wife hath praepared her ſelfe:
and it was giuen her to put on white linen, pure and ſhining.
For the linen is the iuſtice of the ſainctes.
                  When whole kingdomes call vpon God: and fight for the
Goſpell with ſucceſſe, it is fitted to continual noiſe of waters:
as Ezekiel 1. 24. the kingdomes that made Gods iudgements
knowen:Pſal. 136. 9. 15. 24. are likened to much water: & the thunder of Gods
power, is well expreſſed, by thunder of the ayer, Pſalm. 29.
All tendeth to Aleluiah;
                     Pſal. 78. 
                     Praiſe God in whom wee breath, for reſcuing

vs from Satan, with manifeſtation of his kingdome:
And let not England forget the goodneſſe of the Lord: but
acy remember it: and not hide it from their children: but to
the generation to come to ſhewe the prayſes of the Eternall,
his power alſo, & his wonderfull workes that he hath done.
The light of the Goſpell now theſe hundred yea. hath bene
exceeding great, & to greater knowledge, then euer ſince the
Apoſtles tymes the Church had. And all reformed Countreies
flow with learned men. And ſage cariage is heere laid
out to the eye; in white linen. This ſhort rule muſt alwayes
hold:2 Tim. 2. 
                     God will make known who bee his: and all muſt depart from
ſinne that call vpon the name of God.
                  
                  And he ſaith vnto mee, write: Bleſſed are they that are called to
the ſupper of the mariage of the Lambe.
                  This ſhould be written in all hearts: that they only be happie,
which in the Lords Supper, proteſt the aboundance of
grace of the gift of iuſtice. The bread bare, & wine bare, taken
in the ſage vſe: that our ſoules feed vpon his incarnation and
redemptiō; is as ſtrong, as the frame of the world, to ſtay vs in
Chriſt. The auctority of the ſpeaker, who made the world by
his word, muſt be looked vnto: and as our eyes, iudge of the
frame of the world; and our minde, to what inuiſible vſe all
was made ſubiect to a man: ſo our eyes, muſt iudge of bread
& wine, & our minds, that Chriſt ſuffring for vs, ended ſacrifice
& offring. By ſeale of things without life: by bread and
blood of the grape: by the terme ſupper: the whole tenor of
Chriſtianity is meant: but the acceptation of the ſeale is an open
action, to diſtinguiſh vs frō others. The Pope corrupted,
from the playneſſe that is in Chriſt: and making Prieſt & ſacrifice:
hath miſſed wholy of the trueth in Chriſt: as Iannes

                        •
                     nd Iambres reſiſted Moſes.
                  
                     
Papiſts would make fooles belieue, that Calvin bread this;
ſymbolum corporis: and in other matters, if Calvin hath 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
a raſh word: they vrge that vpon whole Churches.
Their eyes might tell, that the ancient Grecians neuer made
queſtion heere: neither had combat with haeretiques heere:
Euſebius after Origen, recorder of the whole Churches opinion,
in praep. calleth Bread and Wine, Icones, & ſymbola. Neither
did any after him, ſtriue againſt that: but full many followed
him. God is light: and all the Bible is ſo plaine, to a
ſound ſtudent, that none can moue doubt, but to his plague.
The Papiſts cary in a ſiluer cheſt, a wafer of meale, as the bodie
of Chriſt: making themſelues a ſcoffe to God and his
Angels: and the barbarous thinke by vnlearned prating, to
make their cauſe good. They come 40. yer. ſhort of learning,
to defende the common groundes, againſt a ſubtill Iew, or
Turke, as to this ſyllogiſme of Machmad.
                  If the ſcripture be corrupted, another iudge muſt be had
(The Pope not only granteth, but vrgeth alſo this: & this.)
                  But the ſcripture is corrupted.
                  Therefore another iudge muſt be had.
                  I will ioyne with Turke, Iew and Pope, to grant the Prepoſition.
But againſt Turke, Iew and Pope, & our ſide; I deny
the aſſumption: and hold the text pure. This no Romiſt yet
euer ſaw. Therefore their ſtudies muſt bee holden vnfitt to
rule in Diuinity.
                  And he ſaith to mee: theſe words of God be true.
                  By reaſon that the carnall man cannot ſee the glorie of the
wiſedome, which is in the couenant of CHRIST, in plaine
ſimplicitie full of heauenly trueth: The Angell ſtayeth

vpon this doctrine, as oppoſite to Rome: & working Romes
fall: handled chap. 18.
                  And I fell downe at his feete, to haue worſhipped him: & he ſaith
to me, do not. For I am fellow ſeruant to thee, & to thy brethren
which haue the teſtimonie of IESVS: Worſhip God:
for the ſpirite of prophecie is the teſtimonie of IESVS.
                  Heere, Iohn ſheweth mans weakneſſe to Idol-ſeruice, in
his tranſe, ready to worſhip the Angel. And telleth, that, Angells
be miniſtring ſpirites for our ſaluation: God only muſt bee
worſhipped. The ſpirites that teach, teach of Chriſt: that he
only muſt bee worſhipped: In the old Teſtament, Chriſt is
called an Angel: and is worſhipped; but no created Angel is
worſhipped.
               
               
                  The warres of Chriſt and Chriſtians: againſt
the Empire and Pope.
                  And I ſaw the heauen opened: and behold a white horſe, and hee
that ſate vpon him, was called faithfull and true: and in
Iuſtice doth he iudge & war. And his eyes were like a flame
of fire: & he had vpon his head many Diademes: hauing a
name written, which none knew but himſelfe: and clothed
in a garment dipped in blood: and his name is called the
WORD OF GOD.
                  The heauen opened, ſheweth what ſhall be opened in the
Church: the white horſe, is ſincere might: the Ryder is called
faithfull and true, to aſſure vs of victory againſt mighty ſtates:
and he iudgeth & warreth in righteouſneſſe, vnable to abide
ſinne, ſtill to reigne: his eyes bee a flame of fire, ſearching in

iuſtice to the bottome:This is made famous in 1588. and 1605. for our Albion. as Daniel 10. for the ouerthrowe of
Xerxes armie: and Apo. 1. and 2. And his many Diademes,
ſheweth that he will rule Kinges in many Countreyes. And
the name written which none knoweth but himſelfe, ſignifieth
the Godhead, dwelling in light that none can come to.
                  His garment dipped in blood, is expounded Eſai. 63.
ſhewing, that the enemies blood ſhall make him known, as
vnder old Aſſur and Cittim. And his name is the WORD
OF GOD: as in Iohn the firſt: and infinitely in Onkelos.
Iehouah, is the WORD of IEHOVAH. Theſe mightie titles
comfort the Church: that they ſhall bee ſure of a victorie.
Reigne ſtill, O King MESSIAS, for we reſt on thee: reigne
ſtill, O King of Sainctes, and wee will folow after thee.
                  And the armies, in the heauen folow him, vpon white horſes,
clothed in linen, white and cleane.
                  The valiant Chriſtians with ſpeed and courage folow
Chriſt: and in ſynceritie of truth: though Lutherans Vbiquitie,
and others iourney to hell, be great ſpotts: yet many are free
from theſe: and mo wil be in tyme.
                  And out of his mouth commeth a ſharpe ſword: to ſtrike the
nationes with it: and hee ſhall bruiſe them with an yron
Sceptre.
                  The ſword of his word, hath in all ages told; that, euery
treſpas ſhould receiue iuſt recompence: and by ſtories paſt
wee ſhould aſſure vs, of them that be to come: and the yron
Sceptre,
                     Pſalm. 2. taught by Dauid, how Chriſt his enemies ſhould fall.
And the Image beaten to duſt, Dan. 2. and the Romane ciuill

warres taught them, what it was to meddle with the Iewes:
and with Tully to ſay: Barbara Iudaeorum ſuperstitio: Gens nata
ſeruituti. So Diui Caeſares for 300. yeares were bruſed: and
now the Pope for 400. to come, may ſtill looke to bee plagued,
that by 6000. yeeres of the world he ſhall be as the Macedonians
at our Lords birth, voyd of all authoritie.
                  This ſhort viſion may endure a long time, as that in Ezekiel,
of Gog and Magog, 38. and 39. contayned matter of 300.
yeeres.
                  And hee treadeth the preſſe of the wine of the anger and indignation
of God of hoſtes, and hee hath vpon his garment and
vpon his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS,
AND LORD OF LORDS.
                  Eſay 63. telling of the winepreſſe, teacheth now by ſtory,
of old euents: and the other Attributes, Nabuchad. Dan. 2.
giueth to Daniels God: and the ſtories ſhew the works. And
ſtudents of iudgement, would bee ready in heathen which
open the holy Bookes, from the firſt Greek ſtories to the laſt.
By garment, and thigh written vpon: open dealings of Chriſt,
teach men to contemne his mediation: and to feele that hee
ruleth all.
               
               
                  An open proclamation of the Popes destruction.
                  And I ſaw an Angell ſtanding in the ſun; and hee cried with a
great voice: ſaying to all the birds that flee in the ayer: come
and aſſemble vnto the ſupper of the great God: to eate the
fleſh of Kings: and the fleſh of Coronels: and the fleſh of the
Mighty and the fleſh of horſes, and of their Riders, and the
fleſh of all free and bound.
                  
                     
This ſpeach Ezekiel vſed, ch. 38. ſpeaking of Macedonians,
that ſhould afflict Iuda: ſpecially, vnder Antiochus Epiphanes,
after whom, that Kingdome fell dayly, more and more,
with horrible deſtruction. And as the ſpeach in Ezekiel is
caried hither, ſo the names of Gog and Magog, be in the
next Chapter: where the Popes chiefe ripeneſſe commeth
to let Satan looſe.
                  And I ſaw the beaſt and the Kings of the earth, and their armies
to make warre, with him that ſate vpon the horſe,
and with his armie.
                  This ſhort prophecie telleth, that the Pope and Empire
ſhall fight againſt the Reſtorers of the Goſpell: and ſtill haue
the worſe. Albion and Ierne haue ſhaked him off: and much
of Germanie: and Netherland: and halfe Zwitzerland: and all
Denmarke: and his murthering of the French King, will haue
reuenge. In Ireland his ſtirring of Papiſts, vnder Deſmond, to
rebell, made greater death, then kites, wolues & doggs could
deuoure, or men bury: or riuers waſh without poyſoning
their fiſh. And Brabant, now 40. yer. hath ſeene great ſlaughters,
and the Kinges putting of his owne ſon to death, was
more loſſe to his houſe, then many millions: And his owne
death, was of a ſtrange ſickneſſe: So many French that perſecuted
the Goſpell, had ſtrange death. And one after another,
while they fight againſt Chriſt, ſhall haue ſtrange ſucceſſe: as
the Popes haue ſtrange deaths, and boyles at home.
               
               
                  An abridgement of all Gods iudgements in one.
                  And the beast was caught, and with him the falſe prophet: which
worketh ſignes before him, by which he deceiueth them that

receiue the marke of the beaſt, and worſhippeth his image:
Both were cast aliue into the lake, burning with fire and
brimstone.
                  
                     Andreas, vpon chap. 13. teacheth plainely, that Antichriſt
ſetting vp the Empire, is there meant: So Pope & Emperor,
muſt needes be meant heere, to as euident deſtruction, as if
they were caſt aliue into eternall flames: this ſhould be a faire
warning, for men to come out of Babel, to vſe no garments,
no prayers, no lawes, of the Popes making.
                  And the reſt were killed with the ſword of him which ſate vpon
the horſe, which went out of his mouth, and all the foules
were filled with their fleſh.
                  The principall had open terrible miſerie: the others, in viſion,
had but death. So, in Daniel chap. 7. the fourth beaſt,
was caſt into the fire: and the common ſort in Ezek. are eat
of foules.
               
            
            
               CHAPTER XX.
               The Diuells are not ſimply bound.
               And I ſaw an Angell comming downe from heauen hauing the
key of the Pit, and a great chaine in his hand, and he laid
hold vpon the Dracon, the old Serpent, which is the Diuell
and Satan, and he bound him a thouſand yeeres, and cast
him into the Pit, and ſhut him vp, and ſealed vpon him,
that he ſhould not deceiue the nations any more vntill the
thouſand yeeres were ended: Afterwards he muſt be looſed
a litle while.
               
                  
THAT the Diuels are not ſimply bound, one houre,
Iob. 1. and 1. Pet. 5. teach vs: when they fell the ſixt
day: miſliking the charge of care ouer man: the
darke ayer wherin we breath, a black Tartarus, without
ſtarre-light, is their lodging: in chaines of Gods prouidence,
as if they were in priſon. So, wee may not thinke that
the Diuels were euer ſimply bound: but they were in the Pit,
whence at the laſt the locuſts came foorth: among the company
of the profance: that they deceiued not the great number
ſealed, chap. 7. and former martyrs, ch. 6. But for a thouſand
yeeres, ſome reigned in all ages with Chriſt, and many
were martyred, and moo vndeceiued, to worſhippe the beaſt
and his Image, & to take the marke in the forehead or hand.
They liued the true life by the Goſpell: where all faithleſſe
aliue,
                  1. Tim. 5. 6. 
                  be dead (in ſinne) as S. Peter ſaith: and Zeror Hamor, infinitely.
The Apoſtles in their ages liued & reigned with Chriſt,
and Iuſtine Martyr and Athenagoras, and ſuch in their ages:
Athanaſius and many of his tyme, and ſo others in their ages:
liued heere the Chriſtian life, and reigned as Kinges; ſacrificing
their owne affections, chap. 1. Some in all partes of the
thouſand yeeres, not altogether a thouſand yeeres. The reſt
of the dead, did not reuiue, vntill the thouſand yeeres were
ended: as the profane Caeſares, and Idolatrous Locuſts: who
had great occaſion offred to the firſt reſurrectiō, with Chriſt,
Rom. 6. Eph. 2. But they being dead in ſin, deſpiſed the truth, and
reuiued not. The firſt reſurrection is by faith, to be riſen with
Chriſt. He is happy and holy that hath his portion in the firſt reſurrection.
The ſecond death ſhall haue no power ouer them: but they
ſhalbe ſacrificers of God, and of Chriſt, and there ſhall be ſuch, to
reigne with him for a thouſand yeares.
               
               From Adam, of 1000. yer. Satan deceiued not generally

while the Fathers liued: that the flood was denounced, in the
old world, & in the world now of 900. Chanaans ſinne was
growing to ripenes: Amalek of 1000. came not to Amans
pride: as Iſrael bred not Sadducees of 1000. yer. nor Rome
gate rule to deceiue whole ſtates, of a thouſand yeres. Now
the text will be cleare.
               
                  The Pope deceiued not generally till, 1000. yerees.
                  And I ſaw thrones, on which men ſate: and iudgement was giuen
to them, and the ſoules of them that were beheaded for the
testimony of IESVS, and for the word of God, and which
worſhipped not the beaſt, nor his Image: nor tooke the marke
in their forehead, or vpon their hand: but they liued and
reigned with CHRIST, the 1000. year. The rest of the
dead did not reuiue of the 1000. year. This is the firſt reſurrection.
Bleſſed and holy is he that hath part in the firſt reſurrection.
The ſecond death hath no power ouer them:
but they ſhalbe ſacrificers of GOD and CHRIST: and
reigne with him a 1000. year.
                  Heere then, be martyrs, and holy for 1000. year. But the
ſtarre-worme-wood, and the darkened ſtarres, and the locuſts
they continued, in profane heathen lot: and the Diuels were
in their pit, helping them to ſett him looſe: to vex the holy
Church: for the old Ieruſalem: which Chriſt pronunced, that
it ſhould be Iebus, or troden downe for euer.
                  And when the thouſand yeres are finiſhed, Satan ſhall be let looſe
out of the Priſon: and ſhall goe foorth to deceiue the nations,
ouer the foure corners of the earth: Gog and Magog, togather
them vnto warres: whoſe nūber is as the ſand of the ſea.
                  
                     
The Pope to weaken Princes did ſet them on, to recouer
the holy land, which God would haue to abide curſed: that
Iewes might ſee their ſinne; killing Chriſt: this would the
Pope haue recouered: and Rome in a thouſand yeeres, could
not learne this one chapter, nor remember old Gog and Magog:
how the Pope now reuiueth that warre, in my Concent, I
haue ſhewed the termes meaning. Thence the Reader may
fetch it. The Iewes Ieruſalem was holy: but now the Chriſtian
Church is the beloued Citie, and the tents of the holy,
which, to beſiege and weaken, hee ſtirred this warres for deſolate
Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  The Pope weakened the Weſt in ſuperſtition, prouoking
to warre, for (as he termed it) the
holy Land.
                  And they aſcended ouer the breadth of the earth: and compaſſed
the Tent of the holy, and the beloued Citie.
                  All the ſtrength of the Weſt was deceiued by ſuperſtition,
to goe fight in the Eaſt for Antioch: in the land of Magog:
and other ſoiles neere Ieruſalem: and all the force of
Machmad, from the Eaſt aſſembled: and 200. yea. the poore
Church was afflicted: that afterwards Popes might ſet Kings
vp and down, as they would. And Machmad ſtill ſince hath
vexed the Weſt: and the king of Locuſts now hath 300. yeares,
beeing a new Gog and Magog, vexed the Church.
                  And a fire came downe from heauen, and ate them vp.
                  As Satan dealth with Iobs ſheepe, he dealth with the Popes
ſheepe, to eate them vp with fire. Euen thence to the worlds

end, chap. 19. which matter is heere briefly repeated: and in
that which followeth.
               
               
                  The Pope is a Beast of Empire by his might.
                  And the Diuell which deceiued them, was caſt into the lake of
fire and brimſtone: where the Beast, and falſe prophet, and
they, ſhall be tormented day and night for euer and euer.
                  The Pope is a Beaſt of Empire by his might, and ſo the
eight is alſo the ſeauenth: and hee with his Clergie is alſo the
falſe prophet. Heere Papiſts may ſee what ſhall become of
them.
               
               
                  A liuely deſcription of the latter Iudgement.
                  And I ſaw a great white throne, and one ſitting vpon it: from
whoſe preſence the Earth and the Heauen fled, and no place was
found for them: and I ſaw the dead, ſmall and great ſtanding
before God, and bookes were opened.
                  All mens doings are in record before God, as written in
bookes, the like ſpeech is in Daniel, chap. 7.
                  And another Booke was opened, which is of life: and the dead
were iudged by the things written in the bookes, according
to their workes.
                  All that put not on Chriſt, are condemned for their works.
                  Now the ſea had giuen vp her dead: and death and the graue

had giuen vp her dead. And they were iudged euery one according
to his workes: and death and Haides 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      were caſt
into the lake of fire: this is the ſecond death.
                  Death and Haides, are expounded in Arethas, ſenſible:
Men which commit matter worthie of death & deſtruction.
                  And if any were not found written in the booke of life: hee
was caſt into the lake of fire.
                  This ſheweth that only the choſen in Chriſt haue life euerlaſting:
and what there companie is: euen the heauenly
Ieruſalem in this world; the chapters folowing doe ſhew.
                  And I ſaw a new heauen and a new earth: for the first heauen
and the first earth paſſed: and the ſea is no more.
                  This ſpeach may well be referred to the new world: which
for vs to ſearch of what ſort it ſhall bee: the Law, Deut. 29.
(to leaue hid things to the Lord our God) forbiddeth vs to
ſearch curiouſly. Of the heauenly Ieruſalem, I haue made a
treatiſe in Greeke alone: at large, which I made turne to
other tongues.
               
            
            
               This worke is made to conuict Rome to be damned through
all: and I hastened in the beginning to that: and I would not
draw the Readers minde from that. The laſt end may bee
handled best ſeuerally. So this paines ſhall heere haue an end.
            
         
         
            
            AN EXPLICATION
OF THE HEAVENLY IERVSALEM,
SHEWED APOCAL.
CHAPTER 21. AND 22.
            BEING of larger diſcourſe then the
former Commentarie made by the ſame
auctor, to ſhew Romes condemnation: and
with ſmall ſtrife againſt Rome: and ſuch as
Rome will not refuſe to reade.
            By H. Br.
            
               
                  After the deſtruction of Babylon:
                  Let vs behold the ſaluation of Sion.
               
            
            
               A Commentary vpon the Apocalyps,
Chapter 21. and 22.
            
               CHAPTER XXI.
               The ſecond diſcourſe of 21. and 22. Chapters.
               And I ſaw a new heauen and a new earth: for the firſt heauen
and the firſt earth paſſed away: and the ſea was no more.
               
                  ISAIAH, chap. 66. compareth the Goſpell
hauing the reſt of Chriſt for the Iewes
Ceremonies: vnto a new heauen: and the
earthly heathen ſtate called to the church,
a new earth: as God will make indeed a
new world. And ioyneth the doctrine of
both, together: So heere, after mention of heauen and earth
paſſed: the wordes import the new world: and praeſentlie
turne to the Goſpell: in ſaying, the ſea ſhall be no more: that
is, a troubled ſtate ſhall be no more. For, the peace of God which
paſſeth all vnderſtanding, guardeth our heartes in the loue of Christ,
that no ſufferings for him is a griefe or trouble: and we read,
chap. 16. that his Angels haue ſeauen cups of wrath, to poure
vpon the helhounds that bite his ſeruants: they ſhall not care
for the ſea, whence the Romane beaſt ariſeth.
               And I Iohn, ſaw the holy City Ieruſalem, new; comming downe
from God: from heauen: as a bride praepared; for her huſband
trimmed.
               Iohn began the New Teſtament: Iohn endeth it. The

terme ſoundeth grace or mercy: fitt for the argument: So in
Zachary, at the building of the Temple, acclamation ſhould
bee; Grace, Grace, be to it. And none, but a Iohn in heart, one
that is made gracious, Eph. 1. (the Hebrew to that, is Iehonan,
and Iohn & Iochanan) can ſee the holy Ieruſalem. The worldly
doe looke to worldly pompe: as the Pope to rule princes: in
deed euery teacher ſhould rule Princes, by ſage aduiſe, not
by auctority.
               
                  Of Iohn.
                  
                     Iehoiadah, the ſtately high ſacrificer, is called alſo Iohn: and
ſundry others, and that name is in the 70. Ionan, and one of
our Lords fathers is called by that name, & others too: Ianna,
and Ioanna bee of the ſame notation: Grace: giuen by fathers
that ſtill looked to the grace of God, in Chriſt, and all ſhould
in heart bee. So euery one ſhould be in heart Petros building
vpon Petra, the Rock: Eli Tzur & Tzuri-ſhadday, Num. 1. 5. 6.
teach that. My God is the Rock: My Rock is God. One word of
Hebrew, had broken the Popes keies: as the Phariſees keies
of the Kindome of heauen, and all take a fooliſh courſe for
Diuinity, which ſeeke it from Latines rather then from
Ebrew.
               
               
                  Of Ieruſalem.
                  Of Ieruſalem, I wrote at large in my treatiſe of Melchitzedek,
where alſo I ſhewed, why the 70. altered the Hebrew,
36. hundred of yeres, adding to the Patriarkes at fatherhood,
to many, 100. As Adam at 230. begate Seth, where Moſes proper
truth wrote 130. Our note 1603. hath flat atheiſme, ſaying,
that Moſes omitted 100. yer. ſo the note might haue ſaid
for Seth, Enoſh, Caynan, Mahalaleel, Enoch, Arphaxad, and all to
Nachor, and that he gaue many hundreds too much, to their

ends. It is trange, that moſt reuerened FF. and right reuerend FF.
after plaine demonſtration of trueth will be ſuch fooles as to
vtter ſuch athean lies to the people: and, it is more ſtrange,
that the people giue them any regard, after their vtterance of
ſuch blindneſſe. Theſe teachers are not for Ieruſalem, the ſight
of peace; but for Abyſſus, whence the king of Locuſts and his
ſwarmes came. Salem, was the townes name in Sems dayes:
and the place where Izhak was offred, was called by Abraham
lireh▪
                      and of that famous action the towne inlarged, was
called IERVSALEM: the ſight of peace.
                  
                  
                     Maymony writeth in Bethbechira, the choſen houſe, or
place where the Temple was built: as, by hiſtorie Iſaack was
offred there: ſo, by tradition, Adam and Habell offred there,
and Noë cōming out of the Arke, and that may well be: for
God troubleth not his people with many places: but contriueth
all points for helpe of memory: and for like matter for
our dulneſſe. As for Rome that crucified Chriſt, God would
not plague another Citie: but would haue Rome once deſtroyed:
to ſhew his anger vpon it: & reuiued to be a throne
of Satan, to plague them that cared not for his warning: but
would haue all to depend vpon it.
               
               
                  Of Melchi-Tzedek and Izhak: cauſing glory to
Ieruſchalaim.
                  
                     Sem, the great, in the title of iuſt King, and King of peace, deſcribed
as God: (as the very Rabbines note) and Saint Paul
vpon their grant, draweth all vnto Chriſt, in his humanitie:
how the ſacrificer is taken from men: and ſo reſembleth not Iehouah,
Michael, in heauen barely; but as he ſhould come to his
office on the earth: being the SEM, the great: Sem heere conteyneth
all; with Iſaack receiued from death, and their ſtory

crieth out vnto all Iewes, that they ſhould know; that God
was in Chriſt, reconciling the world vnto himſelfe: and that Chriſt
was to ſuffer: and being the first from the dead, ſhould ſhew light
vnto the world. S. Paul moſt eloquently draweth Moſes ſpeach
hither,Rom. 10. Deut. 29. Say not in thine heart, who can goe vp into heauē,
for to bring Chriſt downe: or, who can goe to the deepe to bring Chriſt
from the dead? but if thou confeſſe with thy mouth,
                     Paul taught nothing but Moſes and the Prophets, Act. 26. 
                     that IESVS is the
ETERNAL: and belieue in thy heart that God hath raiſed him
from death, thou ſhalt be ſaued. So Melchi-Tzedek and Izhack, in
their ſtory teach all, that God giueth the ſight of peace: to make
the City of God vpon the earth; For heathen, in Abraham
our father: as hee and wee belieue that God raiſeth Chriſt
from death:Rom. 4. 22. 23. 24▪
                      and that matter is ſweetly told in calling Chriſtian
Policy, Ieruſalem. So Zachary, ſaith, Ieruſalem ſhalbe built
in Ieruſchalaim; The ſight of peace, ſhalbe taught in the ſoile
where SEM dwelt, and Iſaack was receiued as by a reſurrection.
The low Ieruſalem, is called holy, when our Lord was
baptized & tempted: and when after his reſurrection, many
Izhaks aroſe: and were ſeene of many. But after our Lord his
aſcenſion, the terme is not beſtowed vpon it: though in Pentecoſt,
the ſpirit came plentifull, to teach Iewes and Proſelytes
of all nations: the reſurrection.
               
               
                  Of S. Pauls heauenly Ieruſalem.
                  S. Paul in his Epiſtle to Ieruſalem, telleth them that the earth
which breedeth briers and brambles: ſhall come to be brent vp: that
ſo, the Low Ieruſalem ſhould haue an end: And, that, we are
come to the heauenly Ieruſalem, &c.
                     Heb. 12. In that terme, he expoundeth
the Prophet Iſay for his Ieruſalem.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Iewes error to this day.
                  
                     Maymony, and all the vnbelieuing Iewes, to this day, expect

a returne to Mount Sion, to reſtore a Citie there. Maymonie,
may be read in Ebrew and Engliſh vpon Eccleſiaſtes: & in my
diſputations from Iſaiah with them, they ſaid, hee ſpeaketh
for the world to come; in higher matter: then that which
touched building of ſtone. And they be guilty of S. Steuens
blood to this day, holding it blaſphemie to ſay: that, Ieſus of
Nazaret ſhould end Moyſes Law, and ſacrifice. Maymony, in the
fundations of the Law, writeth the Iewes common error,
thus: it is a matter plaine and expounded in the Law: that it is a
commandement: which ſtandeth for euer, yea for euer and euer. To
teach them better vnderſtanding of Moyſes, God brought
them to Babel, with loſſe of all Ceremonies, ſauing circumciſion:
and before he brought them home, hee told them to
the laſt yeere, when God would end their Ceremonies, which
made the heathen to hate them: and told that their Citie
ſhould bee deſtroyed. This matter S. Paul vrgeth through all
the Epiſtle to Ieruſalem. And I ſhould haue had occaſion, to
haue examined all Talmudiques vpon Moſes 613. Lawes:
and to ſhew how all the Ceremonies God hath aboliſhed:
and giuen in the New Teſt. Lawes, written in all hearts: moo
then 613. That we neede not come to Talmudique. This argument,
would require all opened, in the New Teſtament,
to which of Moyſes 613. each thing belonged: and would
ſhewe all wherein Talmudiques yeeld to the Apoſtles: and
teach Iewes and Greekes, how all the New Teſt tranſlateth
Hebrewes. He that threatned to ſtay the king from alowance
this way, ſhall in fame bee buried with the buriall of an Aſſe.
There is no ſtudie ſo good as this: nor ſo much deſired of all
ſortes. Hee knew neither the Low nor High Ieruſalem, that
would threaten to hinder this ſtudie: and is worthy to be recorded
foreuer: for an example to others. The treatiſe of

                     Dauids family, and Nathans comforted through all Daniel: &
of the Rome-Beaſt, one made of foure; ſauage vnto Conſtantinus
the great: This ſhewed more thē any Academique in Ebrew
and Greek, or either euer, the way to the heauenly Ieruſalem.
The right honorable Sr. Iohn Forteſcue, reading the workes,
told the bearer, thus: Tell the auctor I will obtaine of the
King, a very great ſtipend for him. The honorable Gentleman
knew what a priuy Counſellor ſhould doe: death praeuented
him: yet, as it ſeemeth from his motion, the Kinges
kingly promiſe came: and for Ieruſalem, his memory ſhall not
die.
                  Dreſſed as a Bride, trimmed for her husband.
                  The Citie for a ruler is trimmed, as a Woman (to be married)
for her husband. Eſai. 52. Rules of ſaluation are a greater
trimming for the minde, then any outward trimming can
bee for the body. The holy Prophets wordes haue all trimneſſe
that ſpeach can conteyne in language: The promiſes
of Chriſt all trimneſſe of ſharpe wiſedome: the ſtories of
contemners endleſſe to deſtruction; and of Embracers, few
to ſaluation, all trimneſſe of ſtorie: and ſo the New Teſt. for
the age heere meant, all trimneſſe of wiſedome, and learning,
and cariage: rules of faith haue wiſedom paſſing all heathen:
and Chriſtian true policie is more ciuill then all heathens. So
the Citie is trimmed for a Citie, as a bride for the bridegrom.
                  And I heard a great voice from the heauen, ſaying: Beholde, the
tabernacle of God is with men: & he ſhall dwell with them:
and they ſhall be his people: and God himſelfe will bee with
them their God: and God will wipe all teares from their
eyes: and death ſhall be no more, nor mourning, nor crye, nor
paine ſhall be any more: for the firſt thinges are paſt.
                  
                     
In Leuiticus 26. God telleth, that if they keepe his Lawes,
God will haue his Tabernacle with them: and they ſhall be his people,
and he ſhall be their God. So before the captiuitie of Babel, they
that conquered the lande, with Ioſuah, and the Iudges, and
vnder Dauid and his houſe many were:& Ier. 10. 11. And Ezekiel telleth
that after they haue bene in Babylon, to teach the Creation
of the world: and returne from Babel in the hope of Meſſias,
they ſhould be the people of God: and the ſame is heere
ſpoken for vs heathen, comming vnto CHRIST. And now,
that men be taught of Chriſt plainly: no affliction will make
them weepe: as in Babylon they wept, at the Riuer ſides, Pſal.
137. not knowing cleerly Gods counſel: how the Lord ſent
them thither, to teach by Babels puniſhment, that ONE, the
God of heauen ruled all: and when men ſee the death of
Chriſt, to giue life: that they who belieue in him die not, but
paſſe from death to life: then death, mourning, cry & paine,
will be nothing: as the firſt caſe is altered. Andrew was Petros
before Symeon, in Photius: becauſe he firſt acknowledged Petram:
& all who do ſo, are ſure; that the courtes (to kill Chriſtians)
the gates of Haides ſhall not preuaile againſt them.
When they knew that in Haides, God hath Paradiſe for the
Godly. So Athanaſius telleth that the Martyrs feared not

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The going to 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     .
                  And he that ſate vpon the throne, ſaid: Behold, I make all things
new, Iſai 43. and 2. Cor. 5.
                  Turne this to a new life heere: and in that ſenſe Chriſt about
fourteene yeares after Ieruſalems fall, ſpake to Iohn in
this viſion: that although the Church in the ſight of the
world, ſhould be baſe: it ſhould be a new heauē. The Iewes

ſee a new light in Moyſes: and the new Teſtament calleth
vs from the toile of Moſes, to the reſt in Chriſt: that Daniel,
chap. 9. 24. ſhineth as Saint Stephens face, as the face of an
Angell: and the minde which by the new Teſtament doeth
ſee the old, ſeeth a new world: aboue that which was ſeene
in Poperie: Where Bellarmine and his, labor to diſgrace the
ſcripture:Ioh. 3. the waters from which they that be not baptized by the
ſpirit, ſhall not enter into the kingdome of heauen.
                  And he ſaith vnto me, write: for theſe wordes bee true and
ſure.
                  When the Apoſtles were all dead,The of God is not boūd: conſider the A post. ſpeach, 
                           •
                         Rō. 15. 19. and the
                           •
                         Lord gaue great victorie. but Iohn: and the
Diſciples were in great affliction, and the God of this world
was mightie in perſequution, the naturall man would thinke
it harde, to looke that the Bible, ſhould bring a new world:
Therefore the WORD, who made this worlde: and will
make a new world: would haue this written, that in this
world firſt he will make a new world.
                  And he ſaith vnto mee, it is done: I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end.
                  The learned note; Ebrewes, as Kimchi, and Greekes, as
Euſebius, that the Prophets ſpake in the praeterperfect temps,
for things to come, becauſe with God, all is praeſent: and
as ſure as thinges paſt. So, ſhould men haue regarded this
booke, that all in it (though ſtrange) ſhould come to paſſe.
That the Romane Emperours ſhould bee plagued to ouerthrow:
that a new Rome ſhould bee built for Empire,

neere old Troy: that a beggerly ſcholar by lies and falſe miracles
ſhould ſet vp an Empire; making himſelfe as if he were
God: and deceiue the world: men feared not this. But Chriſt
what hee ſpake in the beginning bringeth it to paſſe in the
end.
               
               
                  Of ALPHA and OMEGA.
                  In that Chriſt nameth himſefe by the Greeke letters, the
first, and the laſt, he giueth great honor to the Greek tongue,
that they who ſeeke not from his words, but from barbarous
Latin his wiſedome, ſhould be guilty. Many Latin termes
haue greatly deceiued: as, ſacramentum, for myſterion: diſpenſator,
for Oeconomus; Deſcendere ad inferos, for Cateltheim eis
Haidon; and ſuch: hence come ſeauen ſacraments: diſpenſing
with Gods word: and going downe to Hell. Briefly, the
ſmoke from the Pit, is bred by wreſted Latin: as that an
Image may be worſhipped, not an Idoll. When Papae, Cardinales,
Arch-buyſhopps and Buyſhopps, rule the ſheepe, ignorant
of Gods words, they become wolfes: and the moſt deadlie
enimies to the truth. The Pope hath an auctor, in opuſculis
patrum, which by the LXXII. reiecteth the Ebrew truth, adding
an hundred of yeeres, more then Moyſes gaue at Seths
birth: and he allowed this blaſphemie: That Moyſes omitted
an hundred of yeeres. His notes for ſoules 75. Act. 7. teach by
Gregorie Martyn, that either the old Teſtament, or New faileth,
and his tranſlation not the Septuagint, taught; that the
dwelling of Iſrael which they dwelt in Aegypt, was 430. year.
And their tranſlation checking S. Pauls Greeke, for 450. after
a ſort, made Beza and our BB. after Bibliander and others hold
the text corrupt, and their rude tranſlation made Achaziah
two yeeres elder then his father, and 20. yeer. elder then

himſelfe. And their barbarouſneſſe not knowing Paſcha Bouis
and Arietis, as a peace offring, to endure for eating for the
night of the Lambe, (a day and a night further,) bred the wicked
note: againſt expreſſed words of Saint Marke: that the
Lord praeuented the Iewes in the day of the Paſſeouer, where ſo his
Paſſeouer could not bee kill'd in the Temple: where not to
kill it on the due day, it was death: and their tranſlation
taught theſe lies, Act. chap. 7. Iacob died in Egypt and the Patriarkes,
and they were caried to Sychem. And they were put in the
graue, which Abraham bought for money of the ſonnes of Emor the
Sychemite. Where Iacob was not buried in Sychem, but in Hebron:
And Abraham bought nothing in Sychem: neither was
the purchaſe there for money but for Lambes. Thus with a
falſe tranſlation, they brake the peoples heart: that they were
diſcouraged from the Bible. Alſo they blaſphemed the Hebrew,
as Steuchus doth: and praeferre their barbarous Latin
to it.
               
               
                  Of ignorance in Alpha, how it bred deadly
errors.
                  They hold from a father, well knowen: that Ezra inuented
the Law Characters, which now we haue. Alpha Beta,
&c.
be Greek names from the Chaldy: and old in Greece, as
referred to old Cadmus: which from Sidon built Thebes in
Grecia, Piſistratus was elder then Ezra: Hee by Ariſtarchus diuided
Homers Iliad and Odyſſea into Alpha, Beta, &c. named
from the Chaldy, expreſſing the Hebrew forme: therefore the
letters were an old inuention; Diphath and Riphath: Dodanim
and Rodanim, Geneſ. 10. and 1. Chro. 1. are acknowledged of
grammarians to come ſeuerall names for one Perſon, in Noës
tyme, by the ſimilitude of the Letters, which wee now haue.
                  
                     
Therefore, their antiquity is from the beginning. Now the
order of letters is ſettled by God, Pſal. 25. 34. 37. 111. 112. 119.
145. Prov. 31. in Lament. Chap. 1. once: the 2. once: the third,
thriſe: the 4. once. And the ſpeach ſheweth, that God hath a
ſure order in his wayes: as in the letters, whereby hee doth
teach vs of his wayes. Moreouer, the Geometrie of the Characters,
is agreeable to their ſituation: as all that marke them,
may know. So the Popes ignorance, greatly diſgraceth Gods
word: by not knowing one letter in the Greekor Hebrew.
Alſo their expoſition for 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Tau, in Ezekiel to make it a Croſſe
from T. in Greeke, that is ſenſleſſe. Tau, there is, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in
the 70. a marke: as the Pope in his wickedneſſe hath to his.
Tau or 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . The Hebrew laſt letter is, Thaiu in grammarians,
with diſtinction from Tau, the Marke.
               
               
                  OF VOWELS.
                  The Papiſts bee more hurtfull in teaching that Ebrew
vowells, were not from the beginning. Heere ſome Iewes
helpe them, and our ſide, and ſo they inferre, that the text is
vncertaine. Their concluſion is Athean, and the helpe to
their aſſumption godles. Very many words in Ebrew, differ
from ordinary grammar, without difference in ſenſe, and
none but the firſt writers would haue laid them ſo. Accentes
be of the ſame tenor of antiquitie.
               
               
                  Of Tiphereth Iſrael.
                  A moſt learned grammaticall worke, called, Tiphereth Iſrael:
the glory of Iſrael; affirmeth that letters, vowells and accents
were written by God in the tables as now we haue thē.
And that is moſt ſenſible. For, Gods worke muſt needes bee

perfect: and who can adde to that which he hath done? And
Abben Ezra ſpeaketh moſt ſenſibly, that none euer was ſo
wiſe as the auctor of the accents: for hee neuer miſſeth
to direct to the beſt ſenſe. Now the Popes ignorance, in
A and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Alpha and Omega; ſheweth that he is ignorant of
the whole glory of the Bible.
               
               
                  Of Cethib and Kery.
                  Tymes 848. God teacheth vs elegancie of the tongue, or
ſenſe of the text, by ſetting a word in the margine, to adorne
the text, and this paſſeth the witt of man, and muſt needs be
knowen, to bee the worke of God: and commonly for like
Characters, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Iod: and ſome tyme to note the coniugation and mode, for
the commō Bibles vnvowelled: and to 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      the margine
hath a terme of arte, to note Hophal: 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     make thou
ſtreight my wayes. Pſal. 5. 9. leſt Dauid ſeeme to ſay: My way is
ſtreight. So in ſubſtantiue the text, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Ioſ. 18. 24. might
bee read Ammoni, but to ſhew Patach vnder Iod, the margine
hath Ammonah 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Sometimes, vnciuil words as Rabſaketh,
Iſay. 36. are read in the margine by cleaner: Now Aria
                           •
                        
Montanus hath made a whole worke of this, in apparatus:
ſhewing the text to bee corrupted in Babel: wheras copies
would endure 1000. yer. And Daniel rich, holy, wiſe, would
keepe his pure. And ſome double readings be after the Captiuity,
as in Daniel, and Daniels former had beenethat is, perfected. amended
by himſelfe. This opinion of Arias, Kimchibred: Praef.
ad Ioſ. & Elias praef. ad Maſſ. Bibl. & Barbiner ad Ezek. confuteth
him mightily.
                  Now Plantines great Bible is printed without the margine
reading: and a Cypher is ouer the text word, noting

it to be corrupt. So that worke would teach that the Bible is
moſt corrupt. It is ſtrange, that the Papiſts ſhould be ſo blind,
as not to ſee this: or ſo bad, as to perſwade it.
               
               
                  Of their inter linearia.
                  Their interlinearia, ſometymes putteth the text in the
margine; and the margine in the text, to breed confuſion.
               
               
                  Of a moſt wicked ſlander.
                  One writeth to the interlineall, a poiſon full treatiſe to Geneſ.
3. That for, HE SHAL BRVISE: the Hebrew ſhould
be, SHEE ſhall bruiſe: that the Virgine Mary, not Chriſt, ſhould
deſtroy the works of Satan. And the text thriſe, hath the maſculine
gender: and no Ebrew is euident, or mentioned, to haue
taken it otherwiſe: & the Zohar ſaith, vpon HV: This is the
bleſſed God. So for Alpha and Omega they would make the late
daughter of Eli the auctor of all. Here, their Latin & their trāſlations
out of it place SHEE for HEE: and at Colon on
D. Sauerrinus meeting with me, fell into ſudden talke, would
know my religion, by aſſent or diſſent heerein: and I made
my minde plaine: and that all Ebrewes, Greekes and diuinity reiected
SHEE.
               
               
                  Of Cetib and not Kery: and Cery: and not Cerib.
                  When two Prophets haue the like phraſe, ſauing one
word, as Eſai. 16. and Ier. 51. the word which aboundeth, is
left vnvowelled: ſo Idroc, is twiſe, in Ier. 51. once, in Eſai 16.
in memorie of that, left vnvowelled. Sanctus Pagninus, knew
not the reaſon of this: therefore he left the word vntranſlated.

But Alpha will not like of this doctrine. So, when a ſtorie
is repeated, as the ſpeach of Rabſaketh: if a word be more in
the one; the other hath the vowells of that in memorie of the
difference: that the Reader may read it. Thus Alpha, is as curious
in his word, as in the frame of the world: and requireth
due reuerence to it: and they are in great danger, whoſe
profeſſion
of life ſhould be skilfull in it: and will deale with
it, with vnwaſhed handes.
               
               
                  Of Iod not contemned.
                  The Iewes, to ſhew Gods care ouer euery letter in the Bible,
bring in the Law cōplayning, of looſing Iod, with humble
cry, before God: thus: O Lord of the world: this is thy
rule: that a Teſtament which faileth in a letter, faileth in all.
Now in Sarai I had 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Iod, when ſhee is Sarah, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Iod is gone, &
the auctority of the Law is loſt. God anſwereth, thou haſt no
loſſe: Iod was in the end of a foeminine, and I ſet it in the beginning
of a maſculine, when Hoſhea was called Iehoſchuah
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  Thus they marke narrowly, that which our Lord telleth:
one 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Iod of the Law ſhall not periſh: he that is Aleph and Tau:
will keepe all the letters from Aleph to Thau: More of this,
is in Thal. Ieruſalemie, in San fol. 20.
               
               
                  Of OMEGA.
                  
                     He, that nameth himſelfe 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     mega, will require that his new
Teſtament ſhalbe regarded in due kinde; to defende trueth
of Copy, & elegancy of ſpeach. I defended trueth of Copie,
againſt Rhemiſtes tranſlating, Act. chap. 13. from the Latin,

in yeeres, not about, but after a ſort, 450. yet a thankfull Pſeudographus,
wrote that I defended the 70. & became a ſcorne:
none of 1200. yer held the 72. pure: Satan was ſtrong in him,
that would belieue a diſputation for ſinceritie of their copy:
and if euer any ſhould bee thought to know the 72. hee that
tranſlated the Prophets a new into Greek, ſhould be thought
to vſe all the 72. copies eaſie to be had. But 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
in all vnthankfulneſſe would be ſtill curſed in lies. The firſt
aduiſer of him ſped ill.
               
               
                  Of Greeke ſtile.
                  Becauſe none afore me, haue noted Gods counſell in making
Greeke common: I will often handle that, to haue it
better vnderſtood: when God firſt deſtroyed Iudahs kingdome,
and ſpeach: hee ſtirred Greekes, firſt to ſet vp theirs.
Then Piſistratus ſet Homer in honor: that children learned
him by heart. Plato in Timao mentioneth one ſuch. Thence
of 200. yea. all kindes ſtudy, to make braue Greeke: that it
came to perfection. Then God ſendeth Greekes to rule Gog
or Gyges land, and Magog with all Aſsiria, and 72. kingdomes
in the Eaſt, and North, and South, to fill all. 300. ye. with Greek
Armies and Colonies: That Tully noted in his dayes, the
Greek to be common ouer all the world. Now the Bible, was
by Iewes tranſlated into Greeke, and ſo read in all nations.
And the Iewes beeing caryed by the Macedonians into all
quarters, when the Apoſtles came to teach, granted all: ſaving,
God in Chriſt gaue life to all ſoules, that did eate his fleſh and
drinke his blood: feeding continually in ſoule vpon this: and
were baptiſed with the water of the Lawe. So the Greeke
tongue by O MEGA, the ETERNALL, taught Iapheth,
                     
to dwell in the houſe of Sem. Ieruſal. in Megilah & Midr Rabba'
Gen. 9. And the Iewes confeſſe in Megilah, that no tongue
but the Greeke, hath words to expound the Hebrew. So he,
that termeth himſelfe by the Greeke, and Hebrew Alphabet,
is much deſpiſed, when Babell baniſheth both tongues, to a
pedlers Latin, in ſo much, that the true Latin auctores, were
out of requeſt.
               
               
                  Of 4. Dialects in the holy Greeke.
                  Of neceſſitie, the Apoſtles were to ſpeake to heathen, in
Heathen or Attique Greeke: as all, that will mooue others,
ſpeake to their capacitie: and they bee ridiculous and citizens
of Babel, not of the heauenly Ieruſalē, that will this deny.
When the Apoſtles tell ſtories of Ieruſalem, to the Church,
they were to ſpeake in the 72. language: And all, of wit and
conſcience, would ſo expound their wordes. When diſputations
are had with Iewes, the Talmudiques ſpecially; the
Iewes ſchole-phraſe, doth our Lord vſe and his diſciples: and
when none of theſe three anſwere the Hebrew fitly, then the
WORD taketh heathen generall termes, to apply vnto ſpeciall
Hebrew. Reaſon, forced theſe foure Dialects: and they
who confound theſe foure are fitter for Babel, then for Ieruſalem:
for confuſion; then ſight of peace.
               
               
                  Of the Attique Greeke.
                  
                     Haides, in S. Luke 16. conteyneth the lodge of Abraham
in heauen, and the lodge of the rich Epicure in Gehenna.
Saint Luke an Heathen, wrote to Prince Theophilus an Heathen.
And Heathen would iudge whether the Phiſition

of Antioch, of Magog, knew Greek in fit ſenſe to teach Gog,
in Epheſus or Gyges Countrey, and Magog in Siria, that
Chriſt in their owne language now doth conquer them, ſo
farr, as to haue the firſt Chriſtians named of Antiochia, and
S. Luke to bee the glory aeternall thence: though God had
no other occaſion to honor his enemies towne, but to ſhew
that where ſinne abounded, there grace ſhould once, more abound:
But not often: Nicolas the proſelyte falling away, taught, that
the towne, deſerued as much ſupremacie, as Rome, that crucified
Chriſt: or Alexandria, for that Alexander would bee
made a God. So Haides, conteining heauen and hell, and nothing
els in proprietie; Old Chryſologus, who placed Abraham
in Gehenna, and is toſſed of Iſaack Ben Arama, fol. 205.
and Purgatory, and many opinions moo are confuted. If
Haides, haue but Heauen and Hell, Purgatory is gone: which
maketh a third place: ſo the firſt Dialect, in one word, telleth
the Pope, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Let Greeks
ſeeke to Euſtathius, what meaning is plaine for theſe wordes.

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , 2 Peter. 2. is of heathen Greek, in Homers commentary:
Iliad. Of this I ſpake in Catechizing the modeſt
Archbi. Whitg. which yeelded and ſent Mr. Geoffrey King
ouer ſea, to confeſſe his error: I ſpake generally of Homers
commenter: and ſhould meane, the principall, Aristarchus,
from whom old Didymos made his commentary: and Euſtathius
from both, and many moo ancient: and though hee
were late: his commentaries are made from theſe two and
old heathen. Two Petifoggers in Greeke, would ſcoph, as
though I cited Eustathius to be followed of Peter, far elder.
Such Midae bee fitter for Babel, then Ieruſalem: Their further
equalling of error to Lybian ſandes: ſhew an ill bent.
               
               
                  
                  Of the Lxxij.
                  The Greeke of the 72. commeth often: notably; Act. 2.
in this; whom God raiſed vp, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     diſannulling
all paines that death brought. The matter is taken from
Pſal. 18. And thence, would the Sadducees expound S. Peters
word: to proue him a wicked Sophiſter: if hee had meant
more. They who proue the ſecond death hence, know not
O Mega: the auctor of ſpeach.
               
               
                  Of the Thalmudizinge.
                  Theſe be Talmudique ſpeaches. The dead, for the profane,
often in Zeror, once in S. Peter, 1 Epi. chap. 4. In S. Paul the
dead in ſin, Eph. 2. ſuch is, Gehenna: and the ſecond death. Chryſologus
miſſed groſſly, for Gehenna, that Abraham ſhould bee
there: whom expreſly S. Paul, Ebr. XI. after the Goſpell
Mat. 8. and Luc. 13. and all Talmudiques, from Leui. 26. placeth
in heauen. N. N. and his commenders miſſed moſt atheanly,
more then anyeuer, ſince the Diuel deceiued Adam,
to ſay, that our Lord was in the ſecond death. The Diuells trembled
till their time, to ſpeak ſo blaſphemouſly: he may brag,
he at the laſt hath made them next himſelfe, and more open.
               
               
                  Of forgiueneſſe in this world: what Talmudiques
meane.
                  
                     Maymonides, cited by me, in poenit. Perek. 6. ſaith, there be
ſinnes, whereof iudgement determineth, that puniſhment
ſhall bee taken for a man in this world, in his body, or in his
wealth, or in his yong children, which are his poſſeſſion: and

there is a ſinne whereof puniſhment is taken, in the world to
come: And there is a ſinne which is puniſhed in this world,
& in the world to come. This was an old Ebrew ſpeach: and
to the Scribes our Lord ſpeaketh, in their owne phraſe, that
they ſinning against the Holy Ghoſt, ſhould not bee forgiuen in this
world, nor in the world to come. Old and late who hence, breed
Purgatorie, ſhew that from Babel, not from Salem they ſpeak.
The ſame ſin is ſaid, in ſinning wilfully, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     : as Core,
Dathan, & Abiram did: whom the earth ſwalowed: and heat
of fire conſumed their remnant. That puniſhment haue the
Iewes to this day, for ſinning againſt the holy Ghoſt; in betraying
of Chriſt: and now a dayes many reſiſt the trueth: as
Iannes and lambres reſisted Moyſes. Such neuer knew him who
is O MEGA, bringer of all things to paſſe.
               
               
                  Of the Apostles pecular Greeke.
                  The Apoſtles peculiar Greeke, is wonderfull: as in the
Lords prayer, Giue vs this day 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , bread, neither
in ſuperfluitie, nor wanting. The terme was made by the holy
Ghoſt by the frame of Greekes, to Pro. 30. in Agur the ſonne
of Iakeh. Giue me 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      bread fitlie meaſured for me.
                  
               
               
                  Of Saint Paulls moſt eloquent expreſsing of Moſes: to
ſhew a ſhort way, to expound the new Teſt.
                  
                     S. Paul ſaith, that he differeth in nothing from the Iewes
generallie, but, in not doubting of the incarnation and reſurrection.
In his ſpeach he foloweth, Deut. 30. and doubteth not,
what minde can goe to heauen, to bring Chriſt downe: or what mind
can deſcende to the deepe (of the earth, Pſal 71) to bring Chriſt from

the dead. But he confeſſed with his tongue, that Ieſus was the Eternall,
and beleeued in his heart that God raiſed him from death: and
aſſured him ſelfe and others of a ſound way, to truth by this.
                  
               
               
                  Of Thalmudiques agreement, with the new Teſtament.
                  Neither the holy Goſpell, nor holy Epistles, teach any thing
for Eccleſiaſticall gouernement, but as the holy Synagogues
did: many ſuperfluities of ambition, the Scribes and Phariſees
had: as they had in right ſort, al that the Apoſtles held, taught
of old, by them, and godlier, ſitting in Moſes chaire. So that,
by olde grantes, all Diuinitie queſtions might bee ſoone ended.
And this doth Paul (in his imitation of Ebrew) ſpeak:
Gamaliels ſcholar at Ieruſalem: and the Greeke orator bred in
Tarſus, free in Rome: that none other Apoſtle ſhould be Papas
of Rome but he, ſo called rarely of God; and tendered
by Coronel Iulius, Sergius Paulus, and the Proconſull of Melita:
and the barbarians for a proſperous iourney to Rome, to
which, and of which, he wrote more from God, then anie,
ſauing Saint Luke, Act. 23. and 28. And if Saint Peter had
bene there, hee knowing the ſtate to come, would haue left
monumēts of his being there: & would haue cōmented vpō
S. Paul, 2. Theſ. 2. as he cōmented vpon all his Epiſt. 2. Pet. 3.
                  And thus, Christ by taking the name from Alpha, and O
Mega, requireth knowledge in the tongues wherein hee ſpeaketh.
The direct and proper vſe, calleth vs to an higher matter.
The beginning, and the end. He created all thinges: and
they were very good. And created Angells, that when man
ſhould bee created, they ſhould take care of him: miſliked
mans ſuperioritie: & were condemned to Tartarus, & are kept
in chaines in the blacke aire, vnto the iudgement of the great day:
                     
he hath an end for them: that although they ſinned of infinite
pride and vnthankfulneſſe, and euery whit from their
owne motion, yet they ouer raught not the decree of Chriſt;
who told the day of their fall,Heb. 2. 89. and Adams fall, that in humanitie
he would bee a litle inferior to Angells,1 Cor. 15. 27. by ſuffring of
death: but would haue all things ſubdued vnto him. In
Adams fall, all were to be borne dead in ſin: that all ſhould
for euer periſh;Act. 14. & 17. but for further mercie. All, hee inuiteth to
ſeeke vnto God, that they might feele him: but al being dead
in ſinne,Eph. 2. only they whom he quickneth belieue in him: hee
ſtill inuiteth the wicked to goodneſſe, but they rebell againſt
his ſpirit:;1 Cor. 1. thinking his wiſedom fooliſhneſſe: yet hee ruleth
them, that their ſinne ſhall not haue the rayne to open miſchiefe,
but as he wil. And one open iudgement he ſhewed in
Noës dayes: an other he will ſhew in fire, Apoca. 20. And all
whom he hath not choſen of eternitie,2 Pet. 3. & called in due time,
and quickned from dead, and ſanctified by his ſpirit, he condemneth
for their wicked works: and this helpeth them nothing,
that they doe his decree: they did not that which hee
telleth plainlie by doing, they ſhould liue: and their owne
conſcience damneth them,Rom. 2. that they iuſtly periſh for euer.
And in their ſtubburneſſe, after long patiēce, he ſheweth his
power.Rom. 11. And theſe his wayes bee vnſearcheable. But as the
letters from Aleph to Tau, haue all their forme and ſound in
ſpeciall vſe, order: and not two the ſame. So, from the beginning
to the end, he ruleth the world in a moſt wiſe courſe: to
ſhew his iudgement and mercie; wherein, this laſt booke calling
old ſpeaches to new matter; goeth through the Alphabet
of all ages: and ſheweth how Iapheth hath fellowſhip with
Sems houſe,Gen. 9. and Cittim or Italie, ſhall bee periſhing when
they afflict Heber, that he may be ſeene to ioyne firſt & laſt

in wiſe order. The Concent which is in Moyſes and the Prophets,
and New Teſt. is wonderfull in places, tymes, and families:
I wiſhe all Preachers to follow the holy mens veine:
but the tongues and ſtories require much tyme: that for Diuinitie,
the moſt vſe commoration of plaine Ethiques known
naturally: and litle ſtudie how the Prophetes comment vpon
Moſes: S. Paul vpon the Goſpell: and how all foure haue their
harmonie. And if Daniel and Iohns Apoc. ſhould bee made
plaine ouer a kingdome: that paynes would kill millions of
papiſts. The one, I haue made plaine, in my laſt edition: by
which, ſince it was printed: many might haue ſeene light:
But, the God of this world darkened ſome mindes, to hinder
that; not regarding the lake which burneth with fire and
brimſtone.
                  To him that is a thirſtie, I will giue of the fountaine of the water
of life freely.
                  Heere all excuſe is cut off from the wicked: that they are
called to the waters of life, but refuſe: Rome begging landes,
thirſted not to haue the waters of the Lawe to refreſh the
ſoule; but made them bitter: Therefore their condemnation
is iuſt. And for theſe waters be our fightes: from Tiberius, to
this day: ſince Ieruſalem came from heauen.
                  He that ouercommeth, ſhall poſſeſſe all thinges: and I wilbe his
God: and he ſhall bee my ſonne.
                  Heere is a valiant combat. The waters of life of the Hebrew
and Greeke Teſtament, are drawen from a deepe well:
many fadom of yeeres deepe: and policies ſtill will haue

will haue their owne deuices: and beſtow death on ſuch as
offer men life: Heere the faithfull vnto death, ſhall haue a
kingdome; as the Sonnes of God.
                  But the cowards, and the faithleſſe, and the lothſome, and murtherers,
and fornicators, and witches; and Idolaters, and
all the falſe: ſhall haue their portion in the lake burning
with fire and brimſtone.
                  
                     They who take not vp their croſſe, and felow Christ, are not worthie
of him: they who belieue not the Goſpell are not worthie
of him: certaine beaſts, foules, fiſh, forbid to Iewes, to
diſtinguiſh them in diet, from heathen are called vncleane,
or lothſome, ſo be all without the Goſpell, in their high learning:
as Socrates, Plato, Cicero, Varro, Plutarch, and the ciuileſt:
Murtherers of the Martyrs, ſpecially: wherein the Spaniſh
Inquiſition is the deepeſt. Fornicators, in Rome, Venice, and
all Italy, haue open freedome: and of old Horace age and all
epicures ſtill,1 Pet. 4. 3. as Turkes wallow in that: and therfore S. Peter
to the Iewes of Arabia giueth ſharp warning againſt that: and
witches in all common Weales are hated: and the ſubtileſt
witchcraft is that, of the Popes TRANS-SVB-STAN-TIA-TION:
a monſtrous terme, for a monſtrous matter: beſides
all other their coniurations.
               
               
                  Of Idolaters.
                  Idolaters be the Papiſts, the groſſeſt that euer were: and
where Chriſt had infinite griefe to bee ſeene on the Croſſe:
though in glory he darkened the Sun, and ſhooke the earth,
and rent the ſtones: yet Papiſts think, that gold, as in Nebuchadnezar
                     
his Image; Daniel chap. 2. or ſiluer, or Alablaſter,
or ſtone, or wood, is a goodly worſhip: Chriſt (in whom is
hid all the treaſures of wiſdome and knowledge) could haue
commanded that, if he had liked of it: and we ſhould not be
better learned then Alpha and Omega.
                  
               
               
                  The Popes brabarous Anſwere.
                  An Idol is heatheniſh; and vnlawfull: an Image is lawfull:
as no man ſaith, the Idole of God, but may ſay, the Image
of God.
               
               
                  Anſwere.
                  Neither Attique Greek, tranſlated by Tulli; nor 70. Greek:
nor the Apoſtles Greeke, nor any Talmudique will ſuffer this
diſtinction, therefore it is for Witches, not for Doctores. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
in Aratus, is Cor
                           •
                        i, Imago, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      in Plato
is forma & ſpecies, in Tulli offi. 1. Idolum Dei, is in Apian:
Imago, ſimulachrum, 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      Chal. Imago, figura,
corporea vel incorporea, & Targ. idem, and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      is in Num.
33. 52. and the ſame is in Gen. 1. 26. 2 Kin. 11. 18. 2 Chron.
23. 17. Dan. 3. 2. Iſai. 40. be all vnlawfull. They who would
haue People, to adventure their aeernall ſtate vpon ſuch
quirks: againſt all teachers of ſpeach, are peſtilent witches,
and moſt impudent teachers. He that cannot remember Chriſt
by all thinges made ours, for Chriſt, is no Chriſtian: The ſtarres
ſerue Man, for CHRIST: the Ayer, Lande, Sea, Plantes,
Beaſtes, Foule, Fiſh, and what neede wee an Image? which
can repreſent but a baſe man, in baſe ſort. No Iewe, for
Ebrewe; no Attique, for Greeke, will cleare the Pope:

therefore he is Popes, and teacheth doctrine of Deuils, and
Rome is a meere Babel: confuſion to holy ſpeach. And all liars
haue their portion in the lake: all who miſſe of Gods
trueth, are liars, and periſh. The Thalmudiques who agreed
with Paul, for all iuſtice of the Law, Rom. 10. yet miſſing of
Chriſt, loſt all. Now the Papiſtes be moſt impudent in lying:
as when they teach to vſe Latin, for Hebrew, in the Law, and
for the Greeke in the Goſpell: their lies be of infinite number:
in their Purgatorie, and where Haides hath but heauen and
hell: in the bread and wine, againſt eiſight, the witneſſes of
God, and their whole policie is a lie: therefore, chap. 19. the
beaſt and falſe prophet was caſt into the fire.
               
               
                  The ſecond death.
                  The phraſe ſecond death, is a Talmudique, vſed in Onkelos, vpon
Deut. 33. and Ionathan vpon Iſai 22. and in Zohar and later,
infinitelie. And no ſoule goeth to it, but periſheth for euer.
Of this, I wrote vpon great occaſion in an Epiſtle to Doct.
Whitg. to which he gaue great teſtimonie: though one vnlearned
brent the Copies, after his death: which flame may
bring him and is very like, to the fiery water, Dan. 7. and
heere.
                  And there came to mee one of the ſeauen Angells, which had
the ſeauen Cuppes full of the ſeauen last plagues: and hee
ſpake with me, ſaying: Come, I will ſhew thee the Bride
of the Lambe.
                  The ſame art it is, to plague Rome; and to build Ieruſalem:
and in viſion an Angell doeth this: viſibly, learned trueth:

wherein Iohn him ſelfe is the principal Angell. The Church
hath heere a goodly name: warning to be carefull of a wiſe
& holy ſoule: the Bride of the Lambe: All the ſong of ſongs
goeth vpon this and the end of Iſai. Such Concent of Scripture,
Bellarmine and all that Brackmunim that would not haue
all to know, may looke for fire and brimſtone, to bee their
portion. All be bound to praiſe God: and to doe that skilfully.
And his word teacheth, that the Pope and each ſuch, is
a Buy-ſhop from Satan,
                     Col. 3. 1 not a Biſhop from God, which would
not haue the word of God to dwell richly in vs.
                  And he caried mee in the ſpirit into a mountayne, great and
high: and he ſhewed me the Citie, the great: the holy Ieruſalem
deſcending from heauen from God, and hauing the
glorie of God.
                  This expreſſeth that, which Ezekiel wrote of old, concerning
the building of the Church, vnder Chriſt. The Iewes to
this day, looke for a building in Chanaan. Againſt that, Saint
Peter giueth this rule: That euery Prophecie of Scripture is not to
bee expounded properly: becauſe the holy men of God ſpake, as they
were caried by the ſpirit of God. This place ſtrengthneth Saint
Peter: and ſo expoundeth Ezekiel, that all Iewes 
                        •
                     ight ſee,
Chriſt ſpake by the fiſher of Galilee the deare to Chriſt: Ezekiel
was brought to an high mountaine: ſo Iohn: and our
Lord, Math. 17. when he would ſhew his glory, tooke Peter,
Iames and Iohn, and caried them into an high mountaine, alone.
Viſions muſt agree with ſpirituall matter. Buildings
of Princes, be vpon mountaines, ſtately to behold: and hard
to be come to, by enimies to vex: And wicked Rome braggeth
twiſe in Virgill.
                  
                     
Septem quae vna ſibi muro circumdedit arces.
                  
                     This Rome alone (which mongſt the Cities all)
                     Hath ſeauen hills encompaſs'd with a wall.Virg.
                        Georg.
                        Lib. 2.
                     
                  
                  And Ovid is playner.
                  
                     Quae de ſeptem totum circumſpicit orbem:
                     Collibus, Imperij Roma Deum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         locus.
                  
                  
                     Of Empire, and of godds, Rome is the place:
                     Which from ſeau'n hills all the world doth outface.
                  
                  
                     Propertius, and Galen in Aphoriſ. Hipp. and they who name
the mountaines, may be ſpared; All ſerue Apo. 17. Now God
that is One, he from one mountaine will fight againſt ſeaven
Pſal. 68. will tell what Mount Zion is. The church hath high
matter: vnto whoſe height of ſtudie the prophane cannot
climme. Alexander could match Porus, vpon his high rock:
But he durſt not medle with mount Tzion. So Philoſophers
can ſpeak much, to the height of heauen: but vnto Paradiſe
aboue the heauens, no thought of theirs could euer come.
And as heathen were amazed at ſtarres, & worſhipped them:
ſo Papiſts are amazed at Martyrs, and worſhip them. The
Pope ſhould ſtudie the Bible, and cauſe all ſcholars to do the
ſame; in Ebrew, Greeke, and conference of ſtories, to paſſe all
Martyrs ſauing the Apoſtles age taught from God, without
ſtudie: & ſhould confirme in open ſtudie the doctrine which
Chriſt ſealed by his blood. So he had made an holy Citie.
But Rome begun with bloodſhed of brother, when Romulus
killed Rhemus, (not as Salem with Sem and Izhak in peace &

redemtion) would ende with bloodſhed of brethren: and to
goe to heauen as Romulus, and Iulian the Apostata: in ſomnio
Scipionis, and in Sozimus, and Apolline Delphico. And as Libanius
ſaid, that Iulian was with the Daemones: and the Greeke
Doctores granted that, with heart and good will: So we will
grant with heart and good will, that the Pope, and his Martyrs
ſhall be together.
               
               
                  Of the great Citie Ieruſalem.
                  Though Nympha, the Church in ſong of SS. hide it ſelfe
as a doue in cliffes of rockes, as few: yet when all of all ages
are put togeather, they make a great Citie. And this Citie
ſhould haue holy Lawes, to worſhip God in ſpirit and truth:
all ſent from heauen, and hauing the glory of God.
                  And the light of it was like a moſt pretious ſtone: as the Carbuncle
ſtone glittering.
                  The 70. in Iſai, chap. 54. 12. for 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Codcod. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , and
in Thargum Ieruſalemy, Nophec the ſtone of Iuda is 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
and for 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      
                     Chriſtallos. Thence Saint Iohn hath his matter:
and he that marketh not that, teach, that Iohn bringeth
matter without warrant: which he neuer doth thorough his
booke: but ſtill confirmeth his matters from olde ſpeaches.
So the ſtone of Iuda maketh the windowes that the ſunne of
iuſtice may ſhine in: and the gates ſhalbe of flaming ſtones; cleere
Doctrine, that may call all vnto Chriſt: And all thy borders,
ſhall bee pleaſant ſtones: for thy children ſhall bee taught of the
Eternall: ſo the taught of God, be the precious ſtones: ſuch
was Moſes, and Ioſua: ſuch were Iſai, Ieremy, Ezekiel, Daniel:
ſuch were Paul, and all the holy Apoſtles: and all that

ſincerely know and cleaue to their Doctrine: But no Bellarmine
that would diſgrace the wit & writ of the ſcriptures. No
ſuch, ſhall be any ſtones heere: but be as common ſandes:
parching in heat, and dangerous in winde: & ſtill fruitleſſe.
                  And it had a wall great and high: hauing xij gates: and vpon
the gates xij. Angels, and names written, which are
of the 12. tribes of the ſonnes of Iſrael.
                  The wall is the defence by Chriſt, as followeth, anon:
that the inner building of the wall was 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ,This is the ancient faith: this is that which the Apoſtle ſaith, Eph. 2. 20. Carbuncle.
The gates haue Angels to conduct them that ſhall be ſaued:
and the true ſtorie of the XII. tribes, taught heere by their
names, teach others a paſſage into the citie. This matter expreſſeth
Ezekiel 47. where the names of the tribes of Iſrael be
vpon the gates: and the gates 3. to each of the foure corners
of the world.
                  From the Eaſt three gates; from the North 3. gates; from the
South 3. gates; from the Weſt 3. gates.
                  Ezekiel beeing in Babel, North from the East of Iſraell,
began that men ſhould come to the holy Citie from the
North; where Iſrael was ſcattred. But for vs in the Weſt where
the Church is beſt, in our ends of the earth the poſſeſſion of
Chriſt: Ieruſalem beeing Eaſt was firſt to be named: and next
the North for holy Daniels ſake, the light of the world, whom
moo in Albion vnderſtand, then in the world beſides; and I
hope moo ſhall by my inlargement nowe comming forth:
teaching how the new Teſtament commenteth vpon him.
                  Then the ordinary courſe, the coaſt ioyned to the Eaſt, the

                     South where the Iewes were ſcattred by the Ptolomies: and a
long tyme Alexandria bare Patriarches: Athanaſius a wonder
for holy Diuinity, and Greeke eloquence: and great Cyrill,
great, though not equall to Athanaſius: whoſe long commentarie
vpon Iſai in Greek, I haue and wiſh it printed: Thence,
D. B. may ſee vpon Iſai 38. what he meant by, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      to
ſtrengthen his owne moſt learned Syllogiſme: which breaketh
the necke of Purgatory: when Haides is knowen to haue but
Heauen and Hell. Alexandria in the South had glorie: as Antioch
North. That, whereſin abounded, grace ſhould more abound: Antiochi
deſerued no ſuch fauor, the head of Magog in Siria.
But God promiſſed, Eze. 39. to glorifie his name about Magog.
And therfore would haue Chriſtians to beare the name
firſt from the place moſt hatefull, and next Alexandria, the
next hatefull, to bee high: and Rome that crucified Chriſt,
yet for ſome helpe they had ſhewed the Maccabees, and certaine
good captaines, Math. 8. and 27. and Act. 10. and 23. and
27. God would pity that curſed towne: Though Conſtantinus
new Rome bare ſway a great while: but the Buy-ſhop of Rome
ſtill worked to ouerthrow Bizantium: that he might haue the
throne of Satan in higher meaſure. And Bizantium had not
medled with Gods people, and long had no occaſion of high
throne for God to ſhew later anger: But had farre more learned
then Rome euer: and ſcant euer acknowledged Romes
purgatorie: And to the Weſt from Chanaan; in the Land
Gyges or Gog: as Croeſus wealth enabled Cyrus, when hee
tooke Sardis, to ſend Iſrael home from 120. nations; So, God
by Iohn gaue Sardis his Apocalyps: that it kept religion farre
longer then Rome. Now, as God placed the tribes about the
Arke, three nobles of Leah Eaſtward; the blemiſhed to parching
ſun: and the baſeſt Northward; and the laſt borne and

deareſt towardes Sun-ſet: to ſhew that his mercy reacheth
moſt to the furtheſt off: Of theſe the Pſal. 80. ſpeaketh: before
Ephraim, Beniamin, and Manaſſes: ſtir vp thy ſtrength, & come
and helpe vs. That is, as (Shem Tob well noteth) at the Sunſet
of our ſtate, and our laſt birth, as Ioſeph and Beniamin
were moſt tendered; ſhew O Lord now, the fathers fauour
to the children.
                  Paul, the Hebrew of Hebrewes, of Beniamin, he chalengeth
for him ſelfe and his kinſmen, Rom. 15. and his companie,
al Grecia and the Weſt: and nameth expreſlie Spaine. And
beſides Ioſeph of Arimathea, Pauls ſcholar might teach our
Weſt, the endes of the earth, to be the poſſeſsion of Chriſt, That Albion,
Frāce, & martyrs of Spaine, haue now 3. gates in extreme
Weſt: that the Ebrew and Greeke Teſtaments were neuer ſo
much ſtudied, as in Albion, and France & Germany. Cambridge,
Dureſme, Yorke, London, will beare one record, that thirtie
yeares he cleered the Reuelation, that Papiſtes made great
meanes to be further taught: By the Maior of Dureſme, & by
others at London: offring as good as a Biſhoprike, if without
danger in further matter they might. And I know there had
beene but few Papiſtes in England, if a few had opened the
old Teſtament by the new: as the Apoſtles veine required.
And if the new Teſtamēt were tranſlated into ſuch Hebrew
as the Apoſtles made Greeke: and the Old into perfect ſenſe
in Greeke, all nations would ſweare, that our endes of the
earth are the poſſeſſion of Chriſt.
                  And the walles of the Citie had twelue foundations: and in them
the names of the Lambes twelue Apoſtles.
                  Theſe foundations, are the 12. precious ſtones which folow▪
in which, Exod. 28, the xij. Tribes are named: So the verie

ſtones ingrauen inferre the Tribes, from Exod. 28. And
heere the Apoſtles names ſhew that they taught no new doctrine,
but the ſame which the Tribes had of old.
                  And he that ſpake with me had a golden reede to meaſure the
Citie, and the gates of it: and the wall of it: and the Citie
ſtandeth ſquare: and the length of it is ſo much as the
breath: and he meaſured the Citie with the reede in furlonges
twelue thouſand: and the length, and bredth, and
height of it, be equall.
                  When the Iewes came home from Babylon, the like reſtoring
of the Citie, Zach. 2. is expreſſed by an Angell hauing a
reed. So, the reſtoring of the high Ieruſalem, after the Citie
which crucified Chriſt, had made it low: is expreſſed by an
Angel hauing a reede. Now twelue thouſand furlongs, make
(as we may ſuppoſe) 1500. Engliſh miles. A Citie ſo high, ſo
long, and ſo broad, would hold an infinite companie of men:
and ſince Satan was bound from ſupreme rage. The firſt 300.
year. by martyrs, bred an infinite company of millions, & in
quiet long after, moo: and when Angells held the foure
windes 144000. of Iſrael, and ſo many heathen, as none could
number: & now after reſtoring, when mo in number profeſſe
ſaluation in Chriſt (by breaking bread: and pray onely to
Chriſt for iuſtice by his gift) then papiſts be in nūber; it muſt
be a great Citie that ſhall hold all: If all old holy bee taken
in alſo. And if ſome by enuie had not hindred opening of
both Teſtaments in Ebrew and Greeke, in the Talmudique
veine, which others might tranſlate into many tongues, manie
poore Iewes and Turkes had ſeene the xij. tribes over our
gates; & the Apoſt. doctrine to be faſtened in Aharons Iewels,
                     
and had taken Chambers, in the large building of our ſquare
Ieruſalem, 1500. miles high: and ſo ſquare. When Chriſt
taught Noë to make the Arke, of 300. cubites length; and 50.
cubites breadth, the ſixt of the length: and thirtie high, the
tenth to the length: hee ſhewed Noë, hee had all beaſtes and
foules and their fodder in meaſure. So hee, that weigheth
all the duſt of the earth: knoweth how many ſoules hee hath
choſen: and how large his heauenly Citie ſhall bee, and how
many hee was to reiect, that their carcaſes ſhould bee fewell
for Gehenna.
               
               
                  The Citie was ſquare.
                  This, alludeth vnto the Tabernacle and Temple: where
Dabir the Arkes place was ſquare: and now we all haue the
Law in the Tables of our hearts: and ſee the Cherub, as hauing
ſeauen cuppes of wrath fighting for vs: & know Chriſt
to bee the mercy-ſeate: and golden Altar: and wee are all
ſacrificers to make our owne prayer of incenſe: and the lifting
vp of our handes to be the euening offering: and we our ſelues to
bee the golden Candleſticke: and our hope is the anchor of the
ſoule ſure and fast,
                     Heb. 6. 
                     going within the vaile: whither IESVS our
forerunner is gone: being a ſacrificer for euer, after the order of Melchitzedek:
So we leaue imitation of Aharon, in Linnen, Cope,
Mitre, Altar, Fleſh and Blood ſubſtantiated, Prieſt and Sacrifice,
to them that will toy with imitation of Aharon, and remember
not the fire that brent Nadab and Abihu for ſtrang
fire. The Popes fire is a thouſand tymes ſtranger. Therefore
an whole lake of fire and brimſtone, remaineth for
him.
               
               
                  
                  Of Arias Montanus, placing in Altar of Incenſe
in the most holy.
                  
                     Arias Montanus knewe well enough, that the Altar of
incenſe was ſet in the outer holy: yet in Apparatu, hee doth
place it in the holy. It is marueile why he durſt ſpare a trueth:
This I gueſſe; that the ſimple papiſts, ſhould not ſee the birth
of Chriſt caſt out of courſe. This I will but touch. I tolde
Iewes, that his conception and his birth is all one for treueth
of ſaluation. And Chriſt would haue neithe exactly known:
becauſe it would trouble the Mathematicians of the world too
much. As of late double rekonnings made. Turke and Iewe
thinke wee haue no trueth of ſtorie. Seeing, annus ſalutis, commeth
as well from Conception in December, as from birth in
September: the old accompt may bee well kept. But wee
ſhould haue no lies in our heauenly Ieruſalem, though men
eſtieme more of cuſtome, then of him, whoſe eyes are a flame
of fier: Eighteene weightie arguments one learned man, a
Ciuilian hath brought, to ſettle the tyme better. Becauſe
Iewes ſhould not gather abſurdities, from our Goſpell: that
a wiſe fauorable Prince (taking order, that all mens wealth
ſhould be rated: that Soldiers pill'd not any, but reſted in ſet
portion:) ſhould cauſe euery one to repaire to his natiue
towne at midwinter; in my booke to the Landt-Graue, I place
the conception in December. That as their Midras Rabba, in
Deuter, telleth the MESSIAS ſhould come in Tiſri: and redeeme,
on friday. by Bechai, fol. 12. ſo he did: and then Iohns
trumpet proclamed him: and at Paſcha, became our Paſcha:
and at Pentecoſt, gaue a firie law. The old teſtam. is ſo ſtrong
for Chriſt: that the very Iewes ſpeake thence the ſame that
the new Teſtament doeth.
                  
                     
And he meaſured the wall of it: an hundred fourtie foure cubites:
the meaſure of a mans, which the Angels was. And
the inner building of the wall was Carbuncle.
                  A wall, is a defenſe: and ſo thicke a wall muſt needes
bee a ſtrong defenſe: and beeing of ſhining Carbuncle; it
ſheweth the Citie to be of glory and trueth inuincible. Such
is Diuinitie: being skilfully handled.
               
               
                  Of Prayer.
                  The Place. whither the people mett to prayer in Salomons
Temple, is called in Ebrew, Azara, Strength: and in
Greeke 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      the mercy-place, Now, ſeeing Prayer and
Gods mercy bee our wall: this ſhould bee made of the Carbuncle
of his: that the Pſalmes and holy ſcriptures ſhould be
our prayers. Athanaſius ſheweth vſe in them for all life:
and to euery part of holy ſtory, certein Pſalmes might fitly
be quoted. The prayers wich wee haue from the Pope,
were penned for his drifte in Diuinity: and offer great hold
of blame in euery point: and no wight full of eyes wilbe
taught but by God, to what prayer hee ſhall ſay, Amen.
The Prayer which the Lord gaue is commended to be the
common-prayer of the Church aſſembled. But without
Battalogie or often repetitions. And for it, Math. chap. 6. the
Pope corrupteth the Greek text: filching away, the ſentence
of greateſt light: Thine is the Kingdome, Power and Glory, for
euer and euer: which calleth, Daniel chap. 7. and all Daniel
thither: To bee a Carbuncle-wall to the Sermon. If the
Biſhopps tranſlate the Bible well: and add tables, for skilfull

reading, of Conference in Places. This will beſt build walls
of Carbuncle: when all pray as their heart and God beſt
liketh.
                  And the Citie was of pure gold, like to pure glaſſe.
                  By the Citie, is meant, the whole lawes of policy: which
ſhould be as pure as gold: and as cleare as glaſſe. Tyrannicall
and ſuperſtitious, anger God: and where the policy is diſputable,
it is fooliſh.
                  
                  And the foundations of the wall, were trimmed with euery pretious
ſtone.
                  Before, I ſhewed vpon ch. 7. how the Tribes were fitted to
their ſtones; and more largely in my aduertiſement of errors,
in our handling of religion. How the warriers, the frontiers,
were two noble of Lea; but of ſome blemiſh, Reuben and Simeon;
and of each handmaid, Dan and Gad: had ſtones of
color for a warriers coate. The water men, likewiſe fit colored
ſtones, & fit notationed, Iſachar, Zabulon, Aſer, Nephtaly. &
the noble ſtateſmen, alſo fit Leuy, Iuda, Ioſeph, Beniamin. So
that the dum ſtones aſſuring Iſrael of the Land; when they
misbelieued; argued them to be but common ſand.
               
               
                  The order of the Tribes, Apoc. 21.
                  Sundry orders (very many) be of the tribes, in the old Teſtament;
to ſhew that one is not better then another: but
that in ſome points, the meane is as the beſt. Heere, they are
placed in ſpeciall regard of ſtorie.
                  
                     
                     Beniamin, not Reuben, nor yet Ioſeph firſt.
                  
                     Iſſachar, not Simeon ſecond.
                  Becauſe Leui, and Iuda, held themſelues all wayes better.
                  Then Iuda, third, not Leui.
                  
                  Then Leui, in Iudahs old place.
                  Then Zabulon, fift: as next to Iſachar.
                  
                  Then Reuben, ſixt: to come before the handmaides S.
                  Then Aſer,
                     Luc 2. 49. the handmaides ſon: Anceſtor to Anna: the
Dau. of Phanuel.
                  
                  Then Ioſeph, the eighth.
                  Then Simeon, to come before the reſt baſer borne.
                  Then Nephtali: of the firſt bearing handmaid, before
Dan his elder brother.
                  Then Dan before the later bearing handmaides S.
                  And Gad, in the place left.
                  This ſituation, commeth not from Iohns witt: as hee nameth
the tribes, chapter 7. but from eyeſight of a building, ſet
by God.
               
               
                  Reaſon of their order.
                  
                     Reuben, loſt his glory: firſt falling from the land: Then, by
Ciuill right, Ioſeph ſhould haue had it. For in Iacobs purpoſe
he was eldeſt: and had the birthright. But Ieroboam after ſeauen
defenders, falling and felling ten tribes, caſt him to the
eight place. For that cauſe: his Beryll in Aharons ſhoulders,
holding ſix Tribes on the one, and ſix on the other: is tranſlated
of the 70. Smaragdus: becauſe heathen could not ſee, why
God ſhould plague proud Ephraim, Ioſeph, bearing vp all in
Aegypt and in Ioſuah. So the Sardius of Reuben, is not in the
firſt place: not the Beryll of Ioſeph: But the Iaſper, of Beniamin:
                     
Ioſeps brother: by ciuill right. As the Temple was built in
the tribe of Beniamin, whereby halfe Beniamin claue to Iudah:
and Beniamin, by Ester Atoſſa, and Mordecai, repreſſed
the decree of deſtruction, from Aman of Amaleke: and Esther
became the mother of great Darius Artaxerxes, bringeth the
Perſian King, that built the Temple, to be of Beniamin; and all
his ſeed: and cauſed fauor to the Iewes vnder Perſia: Whereby
doubtleſſe many of Beniamin, before S. Paul & his ſiſters
ſonnes, and the named, Rom. 15. were great pillars of the
Church. And S. Paul alone, building three gates of Ieruſalem,
Weſtward, is ynough to make Beniamins Iaſpar, the firſt
foundation: ſeeing he filled all frō Ieruſalem to Illyrico with
the Goſpel of Chriſt: & after to Rome, where he firſt taught
the Synagogue; what the Goſpell was, Act. 28. and Caeſars
Pallace, Phil. 1. and taught two yeares, without let: and went to
Spaine: for he ſpake from God that he would ſo doe: and from
wicked Rome that crucified Chriſt, hee built many Churches
by others: ſending Creſcens into France, and Titus into
Dalmatia: and calling Marke from the East, who had beene
with Peter at Babylon: & keeping deere Luke the Phiſitian with
him, to make many Princes, Theophilos. And in his beginning
of Epiſtles, he warned, 2. Theſſ. 2. that curſed policie of
the world ſhould come: and Rom. 13. warned them, not to
take ſuperioritie ouer the Ciuill Officer: and recording matters
ſmall, and many perſons; neuer hath one ſyllable that
Peter ſhould euer be at Rome. But being a Prophet, as Saint
Luke hath arguments innumerable, and inuincible that hee
neuer was there: What a companie doth he reckon in the Epiſtle
to the Romanes, without any mention that Peter had
been there: but of his owne deſire, to build where others had
not laid a foundation. And from Rome to the Galathians,

he telleth expreſly, that Peters charge was for the Iewes ſcattred
by captiuitie: to whom the twelue Apoſtles were charged
chiefly to goe: and to iudge the 12. Tribes. To the Epheſians
he mentioneth Tychicos, whom he ſent to them: but nothing
of Peter. And to the Philippians, he mentioneth, that the Goſpell
by his bondes was manifeſted in Caeſars pallace. It had
bene a ſtale newes, if another had done that afore: and if Peter,
had turned any of Caeſars houſe, which to record, it toucheth
the glory of Chriſt, he had as well mentioned that. And
S. Luke, who enuied not S. Peter, (in the Actes) but told
high glory, had not hid his praiſe in Rome, if deſert had bene.
And he telleth the Colloſsians, that Luke was with him, without
mention of more: or token that Peter euer had beene
there. And in the ſecond to Timothie, he nameth many, Demas
leauing of him: Creſcens and Titus, as I told: and Lucas
only to bee with him: and that Marke who was in Chaldea,
1. Pet. 5. ſhould be brought to him. Alſo he mentioneth Eubulus,
Pudens and Linus: and where hee left Trophimus ſicke:
and how Alexander the Copper-ſmith hindred him: and if
ſainct Peter had laid any fundation in Rome to his helpe, hee
had neuer hid that: And when Timothie came to Rome: and
was ſent from him, he telleth the Hebrewes of him: but becauſe
they knew howe Paul many yeeres after his calling, agreed
with Peter, to biſhop the Eaſt: he mentioneth nothing
of him. That by Beniamins Iaſper, S. Paul ſhould be the fundation
of the heathen, borne among heathen: and borne
Citizen, of the chiefe Weſt town: and a perſecutor, to comfort
the Citie that crucified Chriſt: that as he found mercy:
ſo they might ſuffring as hee did. And this much, for the
Iaſper, the ſtone. But for the Greeke terme I muſt ſpeake
more.
               
               
                  
                  Of the terme Iaſper in the third place. Apoc. 21.
                  Foure Dialects, the holy Apoſtles haue: which matter, telleth
a ſound reader to diſtinguiſh: and a D. ignorant heerin,
will worke much diſturbance. To Attique or common Greeke
they were to ſtand, when they wrote to heathen: and were
not forced to peculiar (Greeke) Dialect. So to Theophilus the
heathen, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Luc. 16. is vſed, for heauen and hell: as having
both places and no moo: and Catelthein, for paſſage, as the
iourney ſtandeth, without regard of vp or downe. Luc. 4. and
ten times, in the Acts, as I mentioned: So 70. Greek: ſo Talmudiques
and Apoſtles proper. Colyrion, in Ioh. ch. 3. is Talmudique:
and that the Sacrificer was girded about his breſt, as Chriſt,
Apoc. 1. Maymony proueth from Vzielides and common tradition,
in treatiſe of holy apparell, Perek. 10. Iohns owne vſe
of Greeke is in Chalcolibanus, Apoc. 1. to Dan. 10. and in white
ſtone, to Deut. 27. and in Iaſpis cha. 4. for Iaſpeh the Hebrew;
and heere: In the 70. Exo. 28 Sabulon is grauen in it: for which
Iohn firſt applieth Sardonix, and as I told twiſe before, in this
chap. Iaſpis muſt be referred to the Ebrew Carbuncle; Codcedona,
in the Thargum Ieruſal▪
                      as Kimchi, vpon Iſai. 54. well noted.
But heere Lawe will tell: the Hebrew Iaſpeh calleth the
Greeke vnto it. He that marketh not this, ſhall confound all
this matter. And this much for the firſt foundation: wherein
Paul not Peter is ſurely meant.
               
               
                  Of the ſecond foundation.
                  
                     Simeſn, in Aharons choſen HAMISPAT, or vertue of Iudgment,
was grauen in the ſecond ſtone: by birthright: but he
as Reuben by cariage, not with right of iudgement, loſt natiue
dignitie. Sichem, and Ioſeph, and Madianique, Num. 24. brake
                     
his dignitie: that gaue him no defender, iudge: only againſt
Arabians in Ezekias dayes, hee gate grounde: and held it a
while. But for his owne people, he did nothing extraordinarie.
Therefore, becauſe Iacob bleſſed all his ſonnes, ſome Darſhan
deſcanter, framed Iudiths fable for Simeons helpe: if that
had been a true ſtorie, the builder of Ieruſalem had left Symeon
his Topaz in the ſecond place. For Iſſachar in Thola, was not
ſuch a conqueror, as Iudith: if it were not a fable. God hath
plagued Grecia, for Iudith, that would giue an whole booke
to the glorie of Symeon: where God giueth ſcant a line; he cā plague
vs as well, and we be as well aduiſed.
               
               
                  Of the Carbunck.
                  
                     Leui in Aharon, third in birth, had the third place; and the
Smaragd to be for Moſes: as the ſung Ouid Metamor.
                  
                  In ſolio Meyſes claris lucente Smaragdis.
                  That ſtone telleth, that they be blinde, that thinke the Law
darke: all Moyſes deſcribeth Christ of Iudah, to bee the true ſacrificer:
who aboliſhing Leuies Office, taketh Leuies place. And
as in Iacobs ſonnes, not the firſt was beſt, nor the ſecond, but the third better, and Iudah the fourth beſt: ſo, Peter moſt miſſed, and needed moſt comfort: and Andrew found the Rocke
before him: and Iames ſacrificed him ſelf (not at Compostella,
but) vnder Herod: and Iohn paſſeth all they both of Iudah: &
Chriſt now changeth places, as ending ſacrifice: that Leui ſhal
teach of an eternall ſacrificer. So, the Carbuncle is in the
third Place.
               
               
                  The Smaragde.
                  The Rainebow of Couenant, Iſa. 54. and Gen. 9. Like the

                     Smaragde, is about Gods throne: to ſpeake of the Couenant
and Kingdome: therefore it is next Chriſt.
               
               
                  Of the Sardonix.
                  Sabalon ſhould be next, by order of matter: and Sardonix
his Iahalom, Exod. 28. a terme ſo applied by S. Iohn. In Plato
Phoed. Sardius, and laſpis, and Sardonix, are vſed to repreſent
high ioy, for the iuſt in Haides: therefore Sardonix is of high
price. Elon was a Iudge of Zabulon: and in the land of Zabulon
the calling of Diſciples began. And as Zebed in Leahs
tongue, for ſocietie, to be from her husband ſure: ſo Zebedaeus,
had the terme in his name: the father of Iames & Iohn.
               
               
                  Of the Sardius.
                  
                     Ruben deſerued much pitie. For he would haue ſaued Ioſephs
life: and he was a frontier againſt the enimies: & therefore
his Sardius, a war color, was in Gods glorie defending
his Church: ch. 4. and hath his place before any of the handmaides
S.
               
               
                  Of the Chriſolite.
                  
                     Lea, pronounced her ſelfe happy, when her maide bare
Aſer. and God gaue him an happy ſoile, to haue the ſea, and
other tribes, as barres and lockes to him: and continuall
ſtrength, and oliue woodes: and much good, Deut. 33. And
whē 
                     Ezekiel telleth the King of Tyrus, by termes frō the tribes
ſtones, what dignitie he had in old ſocietie, with Dauid and
Salomon in Iſraell: he reckoneth all Leahs ſix, and Rachels two:
But none of the handmaids, ſauing Aſer, bordered next him:

and fellow to the ſea with him. He had no iudge all his dayes:
but gracious Anna,
                     Luc. 2. 37 that kept her a widow about 84. yeares:
praying and faſting at the Temple, & prophecying of Chriſt:
and teaching from Dan. 9. 457. yeares after the returne: that,
that yeare Chriſt muſt be borne: and, ſeeing God face to face.
The daughter of Phannel, ſeeing God face to face, being of
the happy Tribe of Aſer, ſheweth the Sonne of God, to all
that looked for Redemption in Iſrael. Therefore, though of
the laſt borne of the handmaides ſonnes, for this Godlineſſe
hath the ſeauenth Place.
               
               
                  Of the Beryll.
                  
                     Ioſeph that bare all, is now bare of glorie. His Beryll bare
all the Patriarches: aequall in Letters, as Gods prouidence
did caſt them, 25. in one Beryll, and 25. in another. Thus Maymoni
doth caſt them, in Celi Mikdas Perek 9.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                        
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                           
                              
                                 〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Thus Gods care, doth teach
what a precious thing, beliefe
in Chriſt is: that, for Abrahams
faith he ſhould ſo play with Iacob,
for his mariages: for the
wiues aemulation for Children:
for wiſedome to giue names to
them: as their lot ſhould fall
out, and time of their birth: that
Iacob ſhould bleſſe them according lie. Now Ioſeph bare ſway
about 600. yeares: But too long dignitie, bred pride to contemne
all hope in Chriſt: that Ioſeph bare not vp, but bare
away the Tribes. The wiſedome of God, who knoweth how

the Angels deſpiſed his counſell, and Chriſt, and periſhed for
euer: doth ſhew matter, (ſmall to a carnall minde) wiſedome
to aſtoniſh Angell: that euery worde of this booke, ſhould
haue a myſterie. Theſe defendours of the people, came of Ioſeph:
King Ioſuah, Deborah, Gedeon, Abimelech, Ieptha, Abdon,
halfe the tribe of Manaſſeh in Iair, with Reuben, & Gad in Sauls
dayes. But Ieroboam the eight, did marr all. So manifold, and
vnſearchable is the wiſedome of God. The Iewes, ſeeing Ioſeph gone for Ieroboam: might feare, leſt Iuda ſhould fall more
for killing of Chriſt: that now, only Saint Pauls Biſhopricke
of the Weſt is beſt, in Chriſtianitie: & he foretold how Rome
would deceiue, and bad them not to be proud, but feare: and
not ouerrule the ciuill officer; but be ſubiect: all this is vaine;
to many. Ioſephs Beryll, the glorie of Paradiſe is now abiect.
               
               
                  Of the Topaz.
                  
                     Simeon hath the ninth place, to be very baſe, yet afore manie
of the handmaides children.
               
               
                  Of the Chryſophraſe.
                  The Chryſophraſe is a white Achate, with a golden lace, and
part greene. Achate ſimply is in Exod. 28. for Nephtaly: Iohn
giueth the trimmeſt of Achates, as God ſhewed him: And
Nephtali, is ſet before Dan: becauſe Dan firſt fell away.
               
               
                  Of the Hyacinth.
                  
                     Leſhem, was Dan his ſtone: and in notation it is, Folow
God: and in the partition of the lande: Leſhem, the Towne
was giuen to Dan, as prophecied in the name of his ſtone.

though it were farre from the other ſoile of his, where Samſon
dwelt.Iarchi vpō Iud. 18. from the Thal. 
                     Semel is an idole. Alpha and 
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        mega, gaue him warning
that he turned not the Letters. But none can ſtand longer
than God ſtayed him. Ionathan the ſome of Manaſſes
of Gerſon, of Moſes (who would thinke it) he and his houſe
were Prieſts to the idole, till the remouing of the glorie from
Ephraim: and Ieroboam (regarding not that) ſet vp a Calfe in
Dan. The Antichriſt, by imitation of idoles, is Dans childe.
Barbarous Rome cannot auoid that, but by a ridiculous diſtinction, of Idole and Image.
                  
               
               
                  Of Gads Amethyſt.
                  
                     God, of ordinarie courſe, ſhould folow Dan, and Aſer, the
yonger, being ſet before him; for Anna the daughter of
Phanuel.
                  
                  Thus, Iohn comforteth the 12. tribes in their owne veine
of ſpeach, calling all their ſtories of 1700. yeeres, often reuolued
in the ſame deſert, to ſhew the Conſtancie of God: to
encourage the 12. tribes, not to be amazed, that Rome hath
crucified Chriſt, and deſtroyed the lowe Ieruſalem: but to
know, that it alſo ſhall be deſtroyed: after vnwilling furthering
of the Goſpell by martyring: and when eaſe and wealth
bringeth blindneſſe, and error: it ſhall vnder praetenſe of holineſſe,
and by perſequution cauſe more ſtudy of Law, then
all former ages had. The Iewes ſoone would climme into the
mountaine of Tab
                           •
                        r in minde: to acknowledge this deſcription,
to be all from the Prophets: and moſt eaſie to vnderſtand.
And, this, cutteth off all Iudaiſme, which the Rabbins
haue to this houre: who from Ezekiel, 40. looke ſtill for a
returne to Canaan. But againſt that, S. Peter told them, that

euery Prophecie of Scripture, is not to bee expounded properlie.
                  And the twelue gates were twelue pearles: euery one ſeuerall
gate was of a pearle.
                  The wordes of the holy Apoſtles, open the way into the
Citie, and the ſpirit of God ſpake in them, and no one could
be aboue the other, but euery one ſtood a foundation vpon
the Rocke. By them which haue written, we know that the
others had wordes alſo as pearles. When the Pope buried
the ſtile of the Apoſtles, and brought in Romes tongue: and
neither that pure: then the pearles loſt their gayneſſe.
                  And the ſtreet of the Citie was pure gold, as cleere glaſſe.
                  The open lawes are agreeable to the ſoules frame in iudgment,
from God: and rules of faith bee cleere. Rome hath
ſcant one rule of either. But their lawes croſſe commune reaſon:
and their ſpeaches of faith be either falſe, or litigious.
                  And a Temple I ſaw not in it: for the Lord God of hoſtes is the
Temple and the Lambe.
                  Earthly buildings profit not: as all S. Stephens oration telleth:
and the faithleſſe Iew Izhak Ben. Arama, Port. 52. ſhewing,
how the Tabernacle thriſe deſcribed, and ſet vp; did litle
helpe, they preſently miſbelieuing. And Salomons Temple
after his death, was robbed by Shiſak King of Egypt: and rejected
of the tenne Tribes. And this (as the Iew confeſſeth)
to ſhew, that God reſted in CHRIST, a goodlier Temple,
the heauen and the earth: whoſe tēple, when it ſhould be once

pull'd downe, he would raiſe it vp the third day. Moyſes Law; ye
ſhall ſtand in reuerence of my Tabernacle: tooke effect for puniſhment
in Ephraim, for Elies ſonnes defiling of women, waiting
there; that God foreſooke his Tabernacle in Shiloh: and
Ephraim fell in the day of battel, 34000. 1. Sam. chap. 4. and
Pſal. 78. Nabuchadnezar that deſtroyed the Temple: was ſo
many yeeres like a beaſt, as the Temple was in building. And
his Babell, for the holy Temple, was deſtroyed. The carnall
Iewes, vrged Moyſes Law, againſt Chriſt, as to death: That he
ſaid, deſtroy this Temple: and I will build it againe in three dayes.
He ſpake of his owne Temple. For which, the Law of Moſes
was made: and the Tabernacle, and the frame of the world:
and becauſe they ſtood not in reuerence of his Temple, hee
deſtroyed them. By the former Law, as they martyred S. Stephen:
for ſaying, Ieſus of Nazareth would deſtroy the Temple.
And they meant as much, for S. Paul, for ſpeaking & teaching
againſt the Temple: and they thought he had brought Trophimus
a grecian of Epheſus into the Temple: and ſo polluted
it. But the true Temple they ſaw not: till theirs was deſtroyed.
And here Iohn expoundeth Moſes: That God, the Lord
of hoſtes, (the Angels, and goodly frame of the world) That
CHRIST in whom all fullneſſe it ſelfe dwelleth, is the Temple.
And they that crucifie a picture, as his, making him vile:
or worſhip a piece of bread, as his body, being a mockage
to Angells and men, ſhall finde no place in Ieruſalem.
The Temple of the Lambe muſt be vſed as hee teacheth. It
ſitteth in ſhining light in heauen, and may not be made baſe
in this darke ayer, by our fooliſh inuentions: his owne commanded
works, as Salomons Temple, cannot conteine God.
1. King. 8. & Act. 7. & Eſai. 66. This one rule; ouerthroweth all
Talmudiques by the Prophets: whoſe words they reuerēce.
               
               
                  
                  A plaine concluſion, from Eſai. 60. and 51. and Ezeck 47.
of the Gentiles Ieruſalem.
                  And the Citie ſhall haue no neede of the ſun, to giue light in it:
for the glory of God lightneth it: and the Candle of it is the
LAMBE.
                  
                     Iſai. 60. Ariſe be lightned, for thy light is come, and the light of the
ETERNAL riseth ouer thee. Ephes. 4. He ſaith, ariſe thou that ſleepeſt,
and ſtand vp from the dead, and Christ ſhall ſhine to thee.
Many Rabbines, as S. Paul, draw Eſaies words to Chriſt: and
when Iohn wrote, 144000. Iewes faithfull would ſo take it.
Iſai. 60. The Sun ſhalbe no more thy light on the day, and the brightneſſe
of the Moone, ſhall not giue light vnto thee: But the ETERNAL
ſhalbe thy continuall light: and thy GOD ſhall bee thy honor.
Thy Sun ſhall no more ſett: and thy moone ſhall not be hid: for the
Eternall will be thy continuall light: and the dayes of thy mourning
ſhall be gone: worldly ioy ſhall not bee thy comfort, but the
ioy of God. As Iohn, baniſhed into Patmos, hath in one day,
the Lordes day, more ioy then all the world is worth: when
darkeneſſe couered Caeſares, and obſcuritie, nations: But
God ſhined ouer him, and the glory of Chriſt was ſeene to
him, to ſhew him in wilderneſſe the ſtate of the Church. If
he had not beene baniſhed from Epheſus, he ſhould not haue
had theſe viſiones. But now his comfort is the greater. As
one, farre from his Countrey, may ſtudy more in ſix yeeres,
then in 12. among much acquaintance at home, and be leſſe
grieued from quarrelling of the wicked.
                  Now Iohn applying Eſai vnto the LAMBE, ſheweth that
all his comfortes cary vnto Chriſt.Act. 2 20 And all the Prophets doe
the ſame: ſo this booke teacheth all the Myriades of Iewes

that belieued, to expound all the Bible. So doe S. Pauls Epiſtles,
expounding all the Law and Prophetes how they ſpeak
of Chriſt.Iſai. 61. 1. And the chap. 61. ver. 1. is plainly by our L. Luc.
4. of him ſelfe.
                  And the nations, the ſaued ſhall walke in her light: and Kings
ſhall bring their glorie and honor into her.
                  Iſai 60. And nations ſhall walke in thy light: and Kings in thy
brightneſſe, that ariſeth to thee (And her gates ſhall not bee ſhut in
the day, for night is not there) that they may bring the glory & honor
of nations vnto her. And they ſhall open thy gates continuallie,
day and night: they ſhall not be ſhut, that men may bring vnto thee
the wealth of nations: alſo their Kings ſhall be brought. Thus God
comforteth the xij. Tribes, from their knowen prophecies, to
goe forward to winne at the laſt ſo many as would furniſh a
Citie: Fifteene hundred miles ſquare, in two thouſand year.
Though the ten Tribes were ſcattred, yet Hoſea telleth them
that as HE raiſeth vp the dead, ſo he can call them backe: &
Cyrus called them from 120. nations vpon his owne charges:
and ſome of all Iſrael, returned to haue hope in Chriſt: at
490. yeares, by holy Daniel. And from all nations, ſome were
at Ieruſalem the laſt yeare: and men, 120. receiued ſpirit to be
sufficient to teach all nations, & many thouſandes were turned:
and of them euery one would turne many thouſand.
And Iohn ſtirreth vp their hope.
                  And there entreth not into it, any common: and practiſing
lothſomeneſſe, and lies: But the written in the booke
of life of the Lambe.
                  Prophane infidels, vncleane in ſoule: and lying in iudgements,

as all Papiſtes bee; and old heathen, eſtranged from
Chriſt, are not of this: but they whom Chriſt hath choſen,
called, and ſanctified. This matter is eloquently expreſſed,
by Manaſſes-ſaw-martyr, chap 52. Ariſe, ariſe, put on thy glorie,
put on thy trimme apparell, Ieruſalem the holy Citie; for no vncircumciſed
and vncleane, ſhall come any more vnto thee.
                  
                  This ſheweth, that they who be truely of the Church,
haue their minde brauely clothed: and will haue none profane
of their companie, nor auctores of vntrueth; vnfit for
the Carbuncle walles of Ieruſalem: as the Apocrypha lies
are with the Bible: a meere leprous ſorte, whereby Papiſtes
terme all the Bible lies: yet they that can not read one word
of the Law, as a profeſſor ſhould; will fight to keepe thoſe
wicked bookes with the holy: and fight to hinder explaning
of both Teſtaments, in Saint Iohns Carbuncle veine: and
in Pauls Iaſpers. As none can be ſaued, vnleſſe hee be borne
againe of water,Iohn. 3 Iſai, chapter 55. ſo puddles of filthy pooles,
will marre thoſe waters. It is marueile, that any dare chirpe,
to hinder the light of Gods worde: ſeeing God is able and
readie to reuenge. The Pope putteth the wicked fable of
Tobie, in the heart of the holy Bible. But it had beene better,
a milſtone had beene hanged about his necke: and that
he had beene caſt into the mayne Sea. It is better to bee a
dore-keeper in the holy Ieruſalem, then in Emperors Palaces
in ſuch mixture, to the pure waters of Gods worde. Iohn and
Ezechiel ſhalbe iudge.
               
            
            
               
               CHAPTER XXII.
               And he ſhewed me a pure Riuer of water of life: ſo cleere as Chriſtall:
iſſuing from the throne of God and of the LAMBE.
               IN the ſong of ſongs, liuely waters of CHRIST flow
from Libanus: they be waters of life, Ioh. 7. to teach others
life: and the true MESSIAS commeth by waters,
blood, and ſpirite. 1 Iohn 4. Water of cleere doctrine: blood
of ſuffring: and miracles of ſpirite. And if a man bee not regenerated
of this Water and Spirite: he ſhall not ſee life. And
thus ſpeaketh Ezekiel.
               
                  And he brought mee vnto the brim of a riuer:
                  Ezek. 47. 
                  and at the brim of
the Riuer, was much ſtore of trees, on both ſides: and hee ſaid vnto
mee: theſe waters goe forth into Galile, the firſt: and deſcend to the
plaine: (to ſea of Tiberias) then vnto another ſea: (Lacus Aſphaltites)
to the Ocean: and thoſe waters are made holeſome: And ſurely,
euery liuing ſoule, which can creepe into any place, where
theſe Riuers come, ſhall be liuely: and the fiſh ſhall be great.
Thus Ezekiel telleth whence Chriſt ſhall begin to teach, in
Galilee. And the Zohar vpon Geneſes, doth note that. And
Iohn ſaw the euent of this: for at the ſea of Galilee, was hee,
and Iames, and Peter, and Andrew, called to bee fiſhers of
men. And after the reſurrection, Ioh. chap. 21. at the ſea of
Tiberias Chriſt appeared to many of his Diſciples, fiſhing;
and all night they had taken nothing. And in the morning
the Lord commeth to the water ſide, vnknowen, and asketh
whether they had any thing to eate: they ſaid, No. Becauſe
they had taken nothing all night. Then hee made them caſt
into the right partes: and they make a draught of 153. great

fiſhes,2. Chron. 2. 17. whoſe ſpaume, might match the 353000. Proſelites in
Chanaan. Olde and late, Prophecie and ſtorie, are thus contriued,
to make eaſie and ſure the doctrine of life. And God
muſt needes hate the Pope, that bent not all his wealth, to
haue ſo many as he could, ready in the Law: as were the Fiſhers
of Galilee. The Diſciple whom IESVS loued, hath
now, Apoc. 21. a third ſight of Ezekiels prophecie. In Iohn,
from the throne of God and the Lambe, cometh the water:
In Ezekiel, from the Temple: ſo, the Lord of Hoſtes, and
the Lambe, bee the Temple.
               In the middle of the ſtreete of it, and of the Riuer, was a Tree
of life, bearing twelue fruites, bearing his fruite euery
moneth, and the leaues of the tree, did heale the nations.
               Ezekiel chap. 47. And by the Riuer came forth, at his
brim, on either ſide, all kinde of trees for meate: the leafe
of none faded: nor the fruite failed: euery moneth they
brought forth newe. For the waters came forth from the
Temple: and the fruite was for meate: and the leafe to heale.
The firſt pſalme, expoundeth this: that the ſtudie of the Law
findeth Chriſt: the tree of life: and maketh others fruitfull
trees to feede and heale.
               
                  An expoſition followeth heere, Chap. 22.
                  And no Catanathema (giuen ouer as curſed) ſhall bee any
more: But the throne of God; and the Lambe ſhall bee in
it: and his ſeruants ſhall ſerue him: and ſhall ſee his face,
and his Name ſhall be in their forehead.
                  
                     
They that were curſed, are healed by the waters of repentance,
and by the leaues of the tree of life: and their ſeruice
to God only, and ſight of his fauor, is meat and drinke to
them: and they haue Gods marke in forehead: as Papiſtes
haue theirs: They Gods worde, and Baptiſme, and breaking
of bread: Papiſt prayers to ſaintes and images: and profaner
theirs.
                  And night ſhall be, not there: neither ſhall they neede candle,
nor light of the Sunne: for the Lord God lightneth them:
and they ſhall reigne for euer and euer.
                  They who know God in Chriſt, ſhall not bee to fearch
Philoſophi, for better happineſſe, in natiue ſtudie: nor Iewes,
Talmudique ſtudie, wherein they aduenture their ſoule. But
ſeeing Chriſt, they ſee all: and reigne with Chriſt, firſt heere,
and ſhall reigne for euer.
               
               
                  The Epilogue.
                  The Angells ſpeach.
                  And he ſaith vnto me: Theſe wordes be faithfull and true: The
Lord God of the holy Prophetes, hath ſent his Angell, to
ſhew what is to come quicklie.
                  Becauſe this booke applieth all the Prophets vnto Chriſt,
and taketh away all couering from their meaning: he calleth
the Lord, the God of the holy Prophetes. This conuicteth all to
be godleſſe, who contemne to know the Prophetes: and to
make them plaine by Iohn.
               
               
                  
                  How the Reuelation would force any Iew or Gentile of
learning, without rancor, to yeeld vnto faith.
                  Firſt the learned ſtile of Iohn ſhould be ſhewed: and infinite
fulneſſe of eyes: howe euery phraſe from firſt to laſt, is
couched with circumſpection admirable: for common Greeke:
for readineſſe in expreſsing the 70. for ouermatching Talmudiques
in their kinde: and prouing the Goſpel by their grant: and viſions
paſſing mans wit: expreſſing plaine matter, from 2. Theſ.
2. by all plaineſſe and maieſtie, that heauen can affoord. This
beeing granted the ſequel foloweth.
               
               
                  The ſequel, by any Iewes grant.
                  When the viſions are ſeene to paſſe the wit of men: as Eſai.
chap. 60. as Ezekiels, as Daniels, and Zacharies, and all drawn
to Chriſt, with a commentary from God: Iohn being a ſimple
fiſher, and in tranſe: no Iew nor Gentile could denie,
but that this booke hath Gods authoritie: and expoundeth
it ſelfe: and ſheweth how all the old Teſt. ſpeaketh of Chriſt.
               
               
                  A Digreſsion to Iewes deſire, to know the proofe
of the New Teſt. by the Law.
                  Twentie yeeres ago, I diſputed in Francfurt Synagogue,
with a Rabbin, the Iewes choſen for ſkill: with this promiſe,
that I would make him confeſſe that Moyſes draweth vnto
Chriſt, or ſpeake againſt his conſcience: and we both agreed:
to call God to ſtrike him preſently, that ſpake vntruely: I requiring
nothing of him, but that which I well knew he perceived:

and might iudge all paſt denyall. He was content and
neuer croſſed mee: But deſired a large treatiſe: And ten yer.
agoe at Baſill, requeſted a full treatiſe: and all the New Teſt.
tranſlated in ſuch Hebrew as I ſpake to him: and the Apocalyps,
applied in order of bookes to all the old Teſt. Alſo hee
moued the Iewes of Germanie, to requeſt the ſame: who haue
made him their Orator (they of Hanau) that if hee yeeld, they
all will. And the Iewes of Wormes, and Mentz: beeing commanded
by the Biſhops to read my Books, ſaid that they could
deny nothing: But requeſted Moyſes & the Prophets, opened at
large: to full meaſure of their 613. Lawes, ſhewing which
ſtand ſtill for all nations and ages: and which were giuen as
vnto children, to be remoued in riper knowledge. The Rabbi,
my friend, chiefe requeſter of Catecheſe, & their Orator
is called Rabbi Eliah. Why nowe I accompliſh not requeſt, I
will tell: omitting their particular iniuries: becauſe when all
this age is dead: this deſcription of Ieruſalem may ſtand.
               
               
                  The greatneſſe of the Iewes requeſt, in due articles.
                  1. The tranſlating of the New Teſtament into Ebrewe,
ſhould haue with it a Dictionary of foure Dialectes: and I
ſhould haue many Scribes learned, who by direction, may
helpe me much to ſpeed.
                  2. Faire Copiers of my tranſlation, and learned Printers
will require States helpe.
                  3. A treatiſe of MESSIAS, from Gen. 3. to the end of
Malachi from all Rabbins, of whom often I neede but line
out, what I would haue copied: that would require much
money for learned Scribes.
                  4. The compariſon of all Moſes 613. making a commentary

from the New Teſtament vpon them: and a table from
them to the New Teſt. this will bee of greater paynes, then
my goodly recompenſe can heartely take in hande.
                  5. Iewes requeſt me to require our owne ſide, firſt to yeeld
to mee: which I could make them doe: or refuſe with ſhame
enough. But that I cannot force ſuperiors to iuſtice.
                  6. To theſe poſitions, I muſt require conſent: that the
text of both Teſt, is pure: that of the tongue, the enemies
may beſt be made iudges; to their ouerthrow, and our victorie.
For all ſpeaches hard in the New Teſt. to vs, are eaſie to
them. That for gouernement of the Church (to make many
learned in the Law) they and the Apoſtle haue yet to eyeſight
the ſame rules.
                  7. As the Iewes grant all that I haue yet printed in Ebrew;
I would requeſt Princes to force their Scholars: to yeeld
from their croſſing of their owne Goſpell: or to combat with
me brieflie.
                  8. Becauſe vnlearned wightes, ſhall not prate againſt any
thing; but that many nations may iudge: I would haue abilitie
for helpers, to turne all that I doe, into other tongues
many.
                  Princes helping in this, I would haſten the workes, and
till then, I leaue all hinderers, as murtherers of ſoules, out of
Ieruſalem the holy Citie.
               
               
                  The ſpeach of Chriſt.
                  Behold I come quickly, &c. vnto, &c. The grace of our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt bee with you all, Amen. Chap. 1. 23. needed no comment:
nor the chap. 18. nor this Epilogue. Therefore I may
not with idle wordes weary the Reader.
                  Τέλος.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE TABLE
FOR THE MORE READY FINDING
of the Chapters in their pages, and ſome
principall matters in the ſame Chapters
handled.
            
               THE 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. Chapters
are handled in the
53. 54. 55. 56. 57. 58.
pages.
               The 8. Chap. beginneth to be handled
in the 59. page conteyning
theſe things principall as foloweth.
               The ſum of the Bible: contempt of
which, cauſed God to caſt off the
open Church 59.
               Of the 7. Trumpets generally 60.
               The first Trumpet there handled
ibidem.
               Of the names, Papas and Pope: handled
61
               The ſecond trumpet, expounding the
firſt 62
               The third trumpet, expounding the
ſecond ibid.
               Articles of the Popes corruption of
ſcriptures. 63
               The 4. trumpet expounding the third
pag. 66.
               The occaſions of the Churches fall
from heauen. ibid.
               How the old Teſtament, came turned
into wormewood 67
               Of the new Teſtam. 68
               Of the new Teſtam▪ elegancie. 70
               How the Papes of Graecia, vſed the
Bible: and the Popes refuſed it
pag. 76
               A Cry expounding the firſt trumpets
warning of fire and blood, by ſcholars
made a mountaine of fire,
caſt into the ſea, by the ſtarr falne
from his place, &c. 81
            
            
               The 9. Chap. pag. 82.
               THe fift Trumpet ſounding out
the Popes cleerely. ibid.
               Whence the Pope chalengeth keies.
pag. 83.
               
                  
A digreſsion, to shew a ſcandall laid
to Iewes 84
               Of the Locusts: most liuely deſcribing
the Popes ſubiects, to make him
King of Locusts: diſtinguished
from all other policies, that be, &c.
pag. 86
               A distinction of thoſe Loc. from the
proper Locuſts in Ioel, that theſe
be as ſcorpions 87
               A further illustration, of diſtinction,
from naturall Locuſts: and ſcorpions
ibidem
               A further distinction, how their ſting
is not of naturall ſcorpions, but of
ſpirituall ibidem.
               Of the ſcorpions ſtings 88
               Of the Locusts ſtrength and auctority
89
               Of the Loc. King. 90
               Of Oathes ibidem
               Of the Popes aduancing learning
pag. 91
               Of Popes blindeneſſe in Ebrew, eaſieſt
matters ibidem
               How blindely the Papiſts, wreſt Ieroms
words: that &c. 92
               Of the Popes names ibidem
               Of the Popes Greek name 93
               A digreſsion to our prayer booke,
made from the Popes 94
               Of Antic. his Chaldy name 95
               The Epilogue, for the deſcription of
the Pope 97
               Of Machumed, or Machmad, or Moamed:
in Piel, Hiphil, and Hophal:
the participles three are vſed in
Arabique and Rabbins. 98
            
            
               Chapter 10. ibid.
               HOw Christ helpeth his Church
by ruling warr and guile:
not to paſſe boūds, &c. ibid.
               Of Angell, Chriſt ibidem
               Comming downe from heauen 99
               Of the cloud ibidem
               Of the rainebow, about his head ibid.
               Of the face of Christ like the ſunne:
pag. 100
               Of his feete like a pillar of fire ibid.
               Of the litle booke opened ibid.
               Of the right foote ſet vpon the ſea,
and the left vpon the Land 101
               Of the little bookes eating. ibidem.
            
            
               The XI. Chap. pag. 102.
               THe meaſuring of the Temple
pag. 102
               Of meaſuring the faithfull 103
               Of the Court within the Temple, to
bee caſt out, in condemnation of
Iudaiſme 104
               A digreſsion, to compare the old Temple
or Tabernacle, with the ſpirituall
105
               Of the holy Synagogues 106
               Of the Synedrion 107
               Of Athean imitation of Aaron 108
               
                  
How BB. were made in Iſrael ibid.
               Of Excommunication 109
               A iuſt, but ſtrang doctrin. ibidem
               A digreſsion to expound the terme
Bishop 110
               Of the 42. mone. 111
               Of Prophecying 112
               Of the Decalogoue ibid.
               Of the Popes theft 113
               Grounds which all should know that
ſoundly prophecie, or expound
ſcripture ibid.
               Of Arias Montanus works, of diuers
readings 115
               Of Lindanus quarreling with the
text and one Erostratus ibid.
               Of Law vowelled, and vnvowelled
ibid.
               Of the Lxxij. differing 3600. yeares
from the ſtrict Ebrew 116
               Of Perfection of ſcript. ibid.
               Autores for the tongue 117
               Prayer is our ſeruice of God ibidem
               Of the New Testam. 118
               Concluſion ibid.
               Blaſphemous groundes of Popery
pag. ibid.
               How yong men learned in liberall
artes, might be rarely exquiſite in
the Greek N. Testam. 120
               Of Poper names 121
               The Epilogue ibidem
               The reſtorers of the Goſpell, be as
Elias 122
               The Martyrs be as Moſes 123
               Of the Citie which crucified our
Lord 124
               Of all ſouls paſſage at death 128
               Of Purgatorie ibid.
               Of the 2. Macca. 129
               Of Iudahs ſacrifice 130
               The Concluſion 131
               VVhat the Greeke Fathers thought
of Purgatorie ibidem
               Of the third wo, and laſt trumpet
pag. 133
               The ſum of the Bible 134
               Of the worldes end 137
               Of the Iewes calling ibid.
               Of our Kings rare bent to the honour
of the Bible 139
               Of the Popes ſcholars 140
               Of Daniel 141
               Of the poore Indians calling ibid.
               Of the old Opinion of 6000. yeares
pag. ibidem.
            
            
               Chap. xij. pag. 143.
               
                  A Deſcription of the Church ibid.
               Of the profane Caeſar, & Pope
reuiuing of him both compriſed in
the body and taile of one Dracon.
pag. 145
               Of the taile 147
               The combat of the Romane Empire
with the Church ibid.
               A Commentary of the former viſion
of MICA-EL, defending the
Church 148
               Of MICA-EL. 150.
               
                  
Of Tobies fable. 151
               Of Michaels Angels 152
               Of wicked ſpirits names ibid.
               Of old Serpent 153
               Of Diuel ibid.
               Of trapps laid by our ſelues. 154
               The Diuell and his Angels, by Michael
are banished from the Church.
pag. ibidem.
               A plainer expoſition of the Dragons
war. ibid.
               Of the Dragons short tyme 157
               Of the tyme of the perſecutions, by
the Dragon. 158
            
            
               Chap. 13. pag. 160.
               OF two ſpeciall points to be noted.
161
               The ſecond point. 162
               How the Romans armes are taken
from the Kingdomes in Daniel
pag. 163
               A moſt plaine deſcription of the Pope:
by the beaſt ariſing from the earth
pag. 169
               Of the Lambes two hornes. ibid.
               Of one error in the Pope, which maketh
him next the Diuell, where
the Diuell would tremble to bee ſo
impudent openly. 170
               Of the Dragons ſpeach. 171
               Of the two hornes, counterfaiting
the Lambe 172
               Of the Popes ſucceſsion. 173
               Of the Ancient facility in teaching
the Law 174
               An application of the Popes calling to
that 178
               A doubt for the manner of policy, now
what way is best to be taken 179
               The anſwere ibidem.
               What may we thinke of BB. of which
ſort many Popes, and Cardinales
bee 180
               Of the Pope King of Kings 181
               How long the Popes, the ſtarres falling,
could not become mountaines
of fire, to cast themſelues into the
ſea of Empire 182
               By what Iudaique curſedly reuiued
Ceremonie, the chiefe Diuinitie
D. of Rome, bewitched Emperors
184
               Of Papiſts Miracles 186
               An oration of the Popes Legate, very
remarkeable 194
               Of ſubiection in all matters to the
Pope ibidem.
               Of the marke in the forehead 196
               Of the name of the beast and Number
of his name ibidem.
               A repetition of the terme Rock 199
               A Digreſsion to a diſputation at
Mentz. 200.
            
            
               Chap. 14. pag. 205.
               THe heauen, cōmonly in the Apoſignifieth

the Chruch 206
               What the ſong of the rediemed
was 207
               A Digreſsion to shew the Concent
of all the holy bookes, and firſt
of Geneſes 208
               Obiections of them, that are not rediemed
from the earth, againſt
that ibid.
               Of Iob 209
               Of Exodus ibid.
               Romes error againſt the ſong of the
Lambe barbarous 210
               Error Athean ibid.
               Of Leuiticus ibid.
               How the Pope diſannulleth all
Leuiticus 211
               Of Numeri ibid.
               The Contradiction of the Pope
againſt that book 212
               Of Deutero. ibidem
               The Contrarie alſo ibid.
               Of Ieſus (ſon of Num.) ibid.
               The Popes contrarie 213
               Of the booke of Iudges ibid.
               Of Samuel, &c. 214
               The Popes Contrariety 217
               Of the N. Teſtaments muſique:
the Goſpell ibid.
               Of the Acts 218
               Of the Ep. Romanes 219
               Of the 1. Corint. 220
               Of the 2. ibid.
               Againſt Purgatoris ibid.
               Of the Epiſt. to the Galat. 221
               To the Epheſians ibidem
               To the Philippians ibidem
               To the Colloſſ. ibidem
               To the Theſſ. 1. and 2. Epist. 222
               To Timothie 1. and 2. Epiſt. 213
               To Philemon ibidem
               How the ſeruant of ſeruants is concordant
to Oneſimus 224
               Of the Epiſtle to the Hebrews 225
               The Popes contrarietie ibidem
               Of the Epiſt-Iames ibidem
               Of 1. and 2. Pet. 226
               Of 1. 2. and 3. of Iohn ibidem
               Of Iude 227
               Of the Combat of 144000. 228
               Compariſons of Phraſes for holy
ſoules departed 231
               Reuenge for Chriſt his iuſtice 232
               Reuenge for the prayers of the
Church ibid.
               Reuenge by the iniuried themſelues
233
               The ſure euent of Gods iudgements.
234
            
            
               The 15. Chap. pag. 235.
               
                  A Plaine expoſition of the woman,
fleeing in the wilderneſſe
ibid.
            
            
               The Chap. 16. pag. 238.
               AS the Popes manner of riſing
plagued the world: in a like

manner God conſumeth him ibid.
            
            
               Chap. 17. pag. 251.
               IOhn like Daniel ibidem
               A plaine deſcription of the Popes
comming vp 259
               Of the Popes fall 261
               A plaine condemnation of Rome
pag. 263
            
            
               Chap. 18. pag. 264
               THE King is Angelus to cauſe
the word to be ſounded
pag. ibid.
            
            
               Chap. 19. pag. 267.
               ISai, Ieremy, and Ezekiel compared
with this chap. bring great
light ibid.
               Of the Hebrew terme of HalleluIah
268
               Of the beſt way to ouerthrow the
Pope 269
               The warres of Christ and Chriſtians
against the Empire and Pope 273
               An open proclamation of the Popes
destruction 275
               An abridgement of all Gods iudgements
in one 276
            
            
               Chap. 20. pag. 277.
               THE Diuells are not ſimply
bound ibid.
               The Pope deceiued not generally
till, 1000. yeares. 279
               The Pope weakned the Weſt, in ſuperſtition
prouoking to warre,
for the holy Land. 280
               The Pope is a Beaſt of Empire by
his might 281
               A liuely deſcription of the latter
Iudgement ibid.
            
            
               Chap. 21. pag. 284.
               THE ſecond diſcourſe vpon the
21. and 22. Chapters,
of the Apocalyps ibid.
               Iohn began the N. Testam. and he
likewiſe ended it ibid.
               Of Iohn 285
               Of Ieruſalem ibidem
               Of Melchitzedeke and Iſaack cauſing
glory to Ieruſalem. 286
               Of Saint Pauls heauenly Ieruſalem
287
               Of the Iewes error to this day ibid.
               Of Alpha and Omega 292
               Of ignorance in Alpha how it bred
daylie error 293
               Of Vowells 294
               Of Tiphereth Iſrael ibid.
               Of Cethib and Kery 295
               Of the Papiſts interlinear. Bible
296
               Of a moſt wicked ſlander ibid.
               Of Cetib, and not Kery and Cery
and not Cetib ibid.
               Of Iod not condemned. 297
               
                  
Of Omega ibid.
               Of Greeke ſtile 298
               Of 4. Dialects in the Greeke 299
               Of Attique Greeke ibidem
               Of the 72. Greeke 301
               Of the Thalmu. Greeke ibidem
               Of forgiueneſſe in this world: what
Talmudiques meane ibid.
               Of the Apostles peculiar Greeke
pag. 302
               Of S. Pauls most eloquent expreſſing
Moſes ibid.
               Of the Talmudique agreement
with the N. Testam. 303
               Of Idolaters 306
               Of the Popes barbarous Anſwere
pag. 307
               An anſwere to his ibidem
               Concerning the ſecond death 308
               Of the great City Ieruſalem 311
               Of Arias Montanus placing the Altar
of incenſe, in the moſt holy 317
               Of Prayer 318
               The order of the Tribes 319
               Reaſon of their order 320
               Of the terme Iaſper in the third
place 323
               Of the ſecond fundation ibidem
               Of the Carbuncle 324
               Of the Smaragde ibidem
               Of Sardomix 325
               Of Sardius ibidem
               Of Chriſolite ibidem
               Of Beryll 326
               Of Topax 327
               Of Chryſophraſe ibidem
               Of Hyacinth ibidem
               Of Amethyst 328
               A plaine concluſion from Eſai 6.
and 51. and Ezeck. 47. of the
Gentiles Ieruſalem 331
            
            
               Chap. 22. pag. 334.
               THE Epilogue, the Angells
ſpeach 336
               How the Apoc. would force any
Iew, &c. to yeeld, &c. 337
               A ſequell by any Iewes grant ibid.
               A digreſsion to Iewes deſire ibidem
               The greatneſſe of the Iewes requeſt
pag. 338
               The ſpeach of Chriſt: To whom be
Kingdome, power, and glorie,
for euer and euer, Amen. 339.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   